AE D mp aa onte i on À I onl M te T. ue I bay ed = Ne ^4 um
Z : t x > di ^ LINE


. . n
0 er Ames pf mm hv ee T GRR my
BE — -


LC
es
mn -


"OP. M : 8 —


La = wai * -


&
A


Bohn Adams
Aibrary,


INS tiie CUSTODY OF ThE
BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY


E SHELF Ne


15
MOST


OF THE INSTITVTES
OF THE LAWES OF
ENGLAND.
OR, - T
A COMMENTARIE © |


vpon LiT TLE TO 5, not


the name of a Lawyer oncly,
but of the Law it felfe.


MARTIAL.


Suid te vanainusat mifere ludibria Carte,
Hoclege,quod poſſis dicere iure mexmeft.


CICERO,


B Maior bereditas venit vnicuiq; aofirum & Init;
e Legibus, quam a Parentibus.


nL, Hac ego grandzuus pofui tibi candide le&or.
à Authore EDW. COKE Ailite.


LONDON,


Printed for the Societie of
Stationers,


e
Le


—


Proemium.


^


*$ V R Author,a gentleman of an antient and faire de-

> {cended Familie de Littleton, tooke his name of a

Towne fo called, as that famous chiefe Iuftice Sir

à Iobs de Markham and divers of our profeffion and

X others haue done.

» Thomas de Littleton Lord of Frankley, had iffue
Elizabeth his only childe, and did beare the Armes
of his Anceftours, viz. Argent, a Cheuronbe-

tweene three Efcalop fhelles Sable. The bearing hereof is verie anti-

entand honourable, for the Senators of Rome did weare bracelets of

Efcalop fhelles about their armes , and the knights of the honourable

Order of Saint Michaell in France doe were a coller of gold in the

forme of Efcalop fhelles at this day. Hereof much more might be faid,

but it belongs vnto others. ARMES
With this Elizabeth married Thomas Weftcore Efquire, the Kings fer-

uant in Court, a Gentleman antiently defcended, who bare Argent, a
Bend betweenetwo Coriffes Sable, a Bordure engrayled Gules,Be-

gantie. : 4

But fhebeeing faire and of aneble fpirit;and hauing large poffeffions
and inheritance from her Anceftors de Littleton, and from her Mother
the daughter & heire of Richard de Quatermains, and other her anceftors

(ready meanes in time to worke her owne defire ) refolued to continue
the honor of her name(as did the daughter and heire of Charleton with
one of the fonsof Ksighiley and diuers others) And therfore prudently,
whileft it was in her owne power, prouided by Weffcotes affent before
marriage, that her iffue inheritable fhould be called by the name of de

^ | 3 Littleton.


mil |
Urt
I | 8
The name and degree)»,
of our Author. D^ on
B3
| pus
Mie
EAE
Md
* ^ #
His Armes,
—9
Let


Inftituted by Lewis |
the eleuenth, King

of France, 9.£.4s
1469.


Thomas weficote,


f


Pur Author bare his
others fürname.


| | Camden.


| Pfalm.o3.1 ». The iuft
fhall flourish like the
Palme trec, and


© fpread abroad like the


Cedars in Libanus.


| * Thebeft kind of


quartcring of Armes.
Of the Inner Temple.
His Reading.

Seriant.


Kings Scriant
Rot.Pat. 33.H.6. Parte
1.44.16,
Mich.34.H.6.fo. at.
Iudge of thc Common
Pleas,Rot.Pat.6-E.4,
Parte 1.24.15.

Knight of the Bath
15.E.4.

When he wrote this
Booke,

14,E 4051 .Garranty.s.
Lir.Sell.6g1,729.
732.


The deceafes of his
Contemporanes.


| (a)Hedied 27.H.6.
| (b)He died $9.H.6,


(c)Died 11.E.4.


\ | (d) Died 16.H.7.
| {(c)Dicd7.E.4.


l


(F )Ouerliued our
Author.

(g)Suruiued him alfo.
(h)Died.25.H.6.
(i)Suruiued our
Author.

(k) Died 3 3.H.6.
(I)Died 18.7.6.
(m)Diel 10. H.6-

( i) Remoued LEM.


* (0$) Remoucd $.E.4.


Cp) Died 24. E. 4.


escis L '


5


The Preface.


cittleton. Theferwo had iffue foure fonnes, Thomas, Nicholas, Edmnnd,
and Gwy,and foure daughters. 5.

Thomas the eldeftwas our Auhor, who bare his fathers Chriftian
name Thomas, and his mothers furname,de Littleton, and the armes de
Littleton al(o ; and fo doth his pofteritie beare both name and armes to
thisday.

—— in his Britania faith thus, Thomas Litsleton alias Weficote the
famous Lawyer, to whofe treatife of Tenures the Students of the
Common Law are no leffe beholding , than the Ciuilians to Isfinians


' Inftitutes.


The dignitie of this faire defcended Familie de Listleton,hath grown
vp together, and {pred it felfe abroad by matches with many other an-
tient and honourable Families, to many worthy and fruitfull branches,
whofe pofteritie flourifhat this day, and quartereth many faire Coates,
* and enioyeth fruitfull and opulent inheritances thereby.

He was of the Inner Temple, and read learnedly vponthe Statute
of W.2. Dedonis conditionalibus, which wehaue. He was afterward cal-
led Ad flatum & gradum Sernientisad legem, and was Steward of the’
Court ofthe Marfhalfey of the Kings houfhold, and for his worthineffe
was made by King H.6. his Seriant, and rode Iuftice of Affife the Nor-
therne Circuit,which places he held vnder King £.4.vntil he inthe fixe
yeare of his raigne conftituted him one of the Iudges of the Court of
Common Pleas, and then he rode Northamtonfhire Circuit, The fame
King inthe 15.yeare of his raigne, with the Prince,& other Noblesand
Gent. of antient blood,honored him with Knighthood of the Bath,

He compiled this Booke when hee was Tudge , after the fourteenth
yeare of the raigne of King £.4. but the certaine time we cannot yet at-
taine vnto, but (as we conceiue)it was not longbefore his death,becaufe
it wanted his laft hand, for that Tenant by Elegit,Statute Merchant, and
Staple,were in the table of the firft printed Booke, and yet hee neuer


. wrote of them.


Our Author in compofing this worke had great furtherance, in that
hee flourifhed in the time of many famous and expert Sages of the Law.
(a) Sir Richard Newton, (b) Sir Iebn Prifot, (c) Sir Robert Danby, (d) Sir
Thomas Brian, (c) Sir Pierce Arderne ; (£)Six Richard Choke , (g) Walter
Moyle, (h) William Paston, (i) Robert Danuers, (k) William A fiongh,*
and other Juftites of the Court of Common pleas. And of the Kings
Bench, (1) Sir eb Iune, (m) Sit Toba Hody, (n) Sir Iobn Fortefcne, (o) Sir
Iobn «Markham , (p) Sir Thomas Billing : and other excellent men
flourifhed in histime. :

And of worldly bleffings Iaccount it notthe leaft,that in the begin-
ning of my ftudy of the Lawes of this Realme , the Courts of Iuftice,
both of Equitie and of Law , were furnifhed with menof excellent


Tudgement,Grauitie,and Wifedome ; As inthe Chancerie Sir Nicholas
Bacon,


The Preface.
Bacon, and after him Sir Thomas Broméey. In the Exchequer Chamber
the Lord Burghley, Lord high Treafurer of England, and Sir Walter
» eMildemay Chancellour of the Exchequer. In the Kings Bench, Sir
Chriftopher Wray,and after him Sir John Popham. In the Common Pleas
^ Sirlames Dyer , and after him Sir Edmund Anderfon, In the Court of
Exchequer,Sir Edward Saunders,after him Sir Iohn lefferey,and after him
Sir Roger 74 amwoode,men famous (amongft many others) in their feue-
tall places, and flourifhed,and were all honoured and preferred by that
- thrice noble and vertuous Queene Elizabeth of euer bleffed memorie.
Of thefe reuerend Iudges,and others theiraflociates,I muft ingenioufly
confefle,that in her raigne I learned many things, which inthefe Infti-
tutes Ihaue publifhed ; And of this Queene I may fay that as the Rofe
is the queene of flowers, and fmelleth more fwectely when it is pluckt
from the branch: fo I may fay andiuftifie, that (hee by iuft defert was
the Queene of Qucens,and of Kings alfo,for Religion, Pietie,Magnani-
mitie,and Iuftice ; who now by rememberance thereof, fince Almigh-
tie God gathered herto himfelfe, is of greater honour and renowne,
than when fhee was liuing inthis World. You cannot queftion what
Rofe I meane : For takethe Red orthe White , fhee was not onely by
royall pier inherent Birthright,but by Rofial Beautie alfo,heire
to both.

And though we wifh by our labours ( which are but Canabula Legis,
the cradles of the Law ) Delight and Profit to all the Studients of the
Law, intheir beginning of their ftudie (to whome the firft part of the
Inftitutes is intended)yet principally tomy louing friends,the Studients

. of the honourable and worthie Societies of the Inner Temple, and

Cliffords Inne, and of Lyons Inne alfo,where I was fometime Reader.
And yet of them more particularly to fuch as haue bin of that famous
Vniuerfitie of Cambridge,a/mamea matre. Andto my much honoured
and beloued Allies and Friends of the Counties of Norffolke,my dearc
and natiue Countrie ; and of Suffolke,where I paffed my middle age;
and of Buckinghamfhire, where in my old age I liue. In which Coun-
ties, we outof former Collections compiled thefe Inftitutes. But now
returne we againe to our Author,

He married with foha» one of the daughters and cohcires of William
Burley of Broomeicroft Caftle in the County of Salop,a Gentleman of
antient defcent, and bare the Armes of his Family, Argent, a Feffe
Checkie Or and Azure , vpona Lyon Rampant Sable, armed Gules.
And by her had three fonnes, Sit William, Richardthe Lawyer, and
Thomas.

In his lifetime, he as a louing Father & a wife man,prouided matches
for theſe three fonnes,in vertuous and antient Families (that is to fay)

for his forine Sit William, Ellen Daughter and Cohcire of Thomas Weil}
Efquite , whoby her had iffüe Iohas hisonely childe , married to Sir
x Iebn


Queene Elizabeth.


Inner Tempie;
Cliffords Inne,
Lyons Inne.


His marriage.


His Iſſue.


The eftablifiment of
his pofteritic,by the
matches of his three
fo: nes, with Vertue,
and good Blood.


£g


Ms


i —“


He gaue poffeffions of


inheritance to his yon-
E fonnes for their
etter aduance-
ment,
|


dislat Will,


ais Exccutors.


2 HisSuperuifor.


Mis Age.
Mis Departure.


pn


LH.7. fol.27.
24H.7. fol. 32.b.


H!.2.2. tap.1a.
* Sec Littletoa
Set. 749.


His Sepulchre,


The Preface.


Iehn Afton of Tixall Knight: And forthe fecond wife of Sir William,
Mary the Daughter of William Whitsington Efquire, whofe pofteritiein
Worcefterthire flourith to this day. For Rschard Listlesow his fecond —
fonne(to whome he gane good poffeffions of inheritance) Alice daugh-
cer & heire of Wikiam Winsbury of Pillecon-hall in the County of Staf-
ford, Efquire,whofe pofterity profper in Stafford(hireto this day. And
for Thomas his third fonne(to whom he gaue good poffeffions of inheri-
tance) Anne daughter and heire of Iohn Batreawx Efquire , whole po-
fteritie in Shropfhire continue profperoufly to thisday. Thus aduan-
ced he his pofteritie,and his pofteritie by imitation of his Vertues haue


honoured him.

Hee made his laft Will and Teftamentthe two and twentieth day of.
Auguft in the one and twentieth yeare of the raigne of King Edward
the fourth, whereof he made his three Sonnes,a Parfon,a Viccar, anda
Seruant of his executors,& canftituted füperuiforthereof, his true and
faithfull friend Jehs Alcoske Doctor of Law, of the famous Vni.
uerfitie of.Cambridge,then Bifhop of Worcefter (aman of fingular
Pietie,Deuotion, Chaftitie, Temperance , and holineffe of life) who
amongft other of his pious and charitable workes, founded Iefus Col-
ledge in Cambridge , a fitand faft friend to our honourable and Vertu-
ous Judge.

He left this lifein his great and good age, on the three and twentieth
day of the month of Auguft, inthe fayd one & twentieth yere of the
raigne of King Edwardthe tourth;For it isobferued fora fpeciall blef-
fing of Almightie God, that few or none of that profeffion dye Intefta-
tus & improles, Without Will and without Childe;which laft Will was
proued the Eightof Nouember following in the Prerogatiue Court
of Canturburie, for that hehad Bena netabiliain diuers Dioceffes. But
yetour Author liueth ftill in ere essmium inris prudentium. |

Littleton is named in 1.H.7. and in 21.H.7. Some doc hold,that it is
no erroreither inthe Reporter or Printer; but that it was Richard the
fonne of our Author, who in thofe daies profeffed the Law, & had read
vponthe Statute of W.2. quia multi per malitiam, and * vnto whom his
Father dea. cated his Booke , And this Richard died at Pilleton-hall in
‘Staffordfhire, in 9.4.8.

The bodie of our Author is honourably interred in the Cathedral!
Church of Worcefter, vnder a faire Tombe of Marble, with his
ftatue or portrature vpon it,together with his owne match,and the mat-
ches of fome of his Anceftors, and with a memoriall of his principall
Titles ; and out of the mouth of his ftatue proceedeth this prayer, Fili
Dei miférere mei, which he himfelfe caufedto be made and finifhed in
his life time,and remaineth to this day. His wife Zehan Lady Littleton
furniyed him, and lefta great inheritance of her Father, and E//em


her Mother( Daughter and heire of John Grendon Efquire)and aet her
nce-


-—


The Preface.
Anceftorsto Sir William Littleton her fonne.

This worke was not publifhed in Print, either by our Authot
himfelfe,or Richard his {onne,or any other, vntill after the decea-
fes both of our Author,and of Richardhis fonne. For I finditnot
cited in any Booke or Report, before Sir Anthony Fstzherbert ci-
ted him in his Natura breuisms ; who publifhed that Booke of his
Natara Breuium in 26.H.8. Which worke of our Author in res
{pect of the excellencie thereof ( by all probabilitie) fhould haue
bin cited inthe Reports of the raignes of E.5. R.5.H.7.0r H.8.or
by S. Jermyn in his booke of the Do&or and Studient (which he
publifhed inthe three & twentieth yere of H.8.) ifin thofe dayes
our Authors Booke had binprinted. And yet you fhall obferue,
that time doth euer giue greater authoritie to Workes and
Writings,thatare of great and profound learning,thanatthe firft
they had. The firftimpreffionthat I find of our Authors Booke
was at Roane in France, by William le Tailier (for that it was writ-
tenin French) 4d inflantiam Richardi Pinſon, at the inftance of Ri-
chard Pinfonthe Printer of King H. 8. before the faid Booke of
Natura Brenium was publifhed;& therefore vpon thefe and other
things, that we haue feen,we are of opinion, that it was firft printed
about the foure and twentieth yeare of the raigne of King H.8.
fince whichtime he hath beene commonly cited , and (as he de-
ferues)more and more highly efteemed.

Hee that is defirous to fee his picture, may inthe Churches of
Frankley & Hales Owen fee the graue and reuerend countenance
of our Author,the outward man,but hee hath left this Booke, asa
figure of thathigher and nobler part (thatis) of the excellent and
rare endowments of his minde,efpecially inthe profound know-
ledge of the fundamentall Laws of this Realm.He that diligently
reads this his excellent Worke, fhall behold the child & figure of
his mind, which the more often he beholds inthe vifiall line,and
well obferues him, the more fhall he iuftly admire the iudgement
ofour Author,and increafe his owne. This only is defired,that he
had written of other parts of the Law,and {pecially of the rules of
good pleading (the heart-ftring of the Common Law ) wherein
he excelled, for of him might the faying of our Englifh Poet be
verified :

There to he could indite and maken a thing,

There was no Wight conld pinch at his writing.

So farre fromexception, as none could pinchatit. Thisskill ej
goo


When this Worke
was publifhed,


F,N.B. 333,6


Nota,


Whenthis Worke wa!


firft imprinted,


His Pi&ure,


The figure of his
Mind. *


Chaucer,


Good Pleading:


|


Logicke.


Seneca.


The commendation of


^C his Worke,
( Lib.2.f0,67.


Epifi.Yo«li-10.


Cicero,


Ariftotle.


The Preface.


good pleading he highly in this Worke commended to his fonne,
and vader his name to all other Studients fons of his Law.He was
learnedalfo in that Art, which is fo neceffary to a compleat
Lawyer(I mean) Logicke,as you fhal perceiue by reading of thefe
Inftitutes, wherein are obferued his Sillogifmes, Inductions , ‘and
other arguments; & his Definitions, Defcriptions,Diuifions,Ety-
mologies, Deriuations,Significations,& the like. Certain it is chat
when a great learned man(who is long in making) dyeth, much
learning dyeth with him.

That which we haue formerly written, that this Booke isthe
ornament of the Common Law , and the moft perfect and abío-
lute Worke that cuer was written in any humane Science : and
inanother place, that which [affirmed and tooke vpon mee to
maintaine againft all oppofites whatfoeuer , that itis a Worke of
as abfolute perfe&ionin his kind, andas free from errour, as any
Booke that I haue knowne tobe written of any humane learning,
fhall to the diligent and obferuing Reader of thefe Inftitutes, be
made manifeft,and we by them (which is but a Commentary vp-
on him) bee deemed to haue fully fatisfied that, which wee in
former times haue fo confidently affirmed and aflumed. His grea-
teft commendation, becaufe it is of greateft profit to vs, is, chat
by this excellent Worke , which hee had ftudioufly learned of
others, he faithfully taught all the profeffors of the Law in fuc-
ceedingages. The Victory isnot great to ouerthrow his oppo-
fites,for there was neuer any learned maninthe Law, that vnder-
ftoodour Author, but concurred with me in his commendation.
Habet enim iuflam venerationem quisquid excellit , For whatfoeuer
excelleth hath iuft honour duetoit. Such, as in words haue en-
deauoured to offer him difgrace,neuervnderftood him,and ther-
fore wee lea ue them in their ignorance,and with that by thefe our
Labours,they may know the truth and be conuerted. But herein
wee willproceedeno further. For Staltum eff abfurdas opiniones
4ccuratius refellere, It ismeere folly to confuteabfürd opinions
with too much curiofitie.

Andalbeit, our Author in his three Bookes cites not many Au-
thorities,yet he holdeth no opinion in any of them, but is proued
and approoued by thefe two faithfull witneffes in matter of Law,
Authority,and Reafon. Certaine it is, when he raifeth any que-
ftion,and fheweth the reafon on both fides, the latter opinion is
his owne, and is confonant to Law. Wee haue knowne many of

his


The Preface.


his cafes drawne in queftion, but neuer could find any iudgement
giuenagain(t any of them,which wee cannot affirme of any other
Booke or Edition of our law. Inthe raigne of our late Soueraign
Lord King James of famous and euer bleffed memory , It came
in queftiô vpona demurrer in Law, whether the releasto one tref-
pañer fhould be auaileable orno, tohiscompanion. Sir Henrie
Hobart that honourable Iudge, and great Sage of the Law, and
thofe reuerend and learned Iudges Warbsrton, Wynch, and Nichols
his companions, gaue iudgement according to the opinion of
our Author,and openly fayd, That they owed fo great reuerence
to Littleton, as they would not haue his Cafe difputed orqueftio:
ned, and the like you fhall find in this part of the Inftirutes. Thus
much (though not fo muchas is due)haue wefpoken of him,both
to fet out his life,becaufe he is our Author, and forthe imitation
of him by others of our profeffion.

We haue in thefe Inftitutes endeauoured to open the true fence
of cuery of his particular cafes, & the extent of euery ofthe fame
either in expreffe words,or by implication, and where any of
them are altered by any latter A& of Parliament, to obferue the
fame,and wherein the alteration confifteth : Certaine ir is that
there is neuera period nor(for the moft part) a word,nor an (&c.)
but affordeth excellent matter of learning. Butthe module of a
Preface cannot expreffe the obferuations, that are made inthis
worke , of the deepe Iudgement and notable Inuention of our
Author. Wee haue by comparifonof thelate and moderne im-
preffions with the originall print,vindicated our Author from
two iniuries; firft from diuers corruptions inthe late and moderne
prints,and reítored our Authorto hisowne. Secondly, Fromall
additions,and incroachments vpon him, that nothing might ap»

eare in his worke but his owne.

Our hope is, that che yong Studicnt,who heretofore meeting at
the firft, and wraftling with as difficult termes and matter, as in
many yeares after, was at the firft difcouraged (as many haue bin)
may by reading thefe Inftitutes , haue the diíficultie and darke-
neffe both of the Matterand of the Termes and Words of Art
in the beginnings of his Studie facilitated, and explained vnto
him, totheend hee may proceedin his Studie cheerefully , and
with delight ; aad therefore Ehaue tearmed them Inftitutes , be-
caufe my defire is, they fhould inftitute,and inftru&the ftudious,
and guid him inareadie way to the knowledge of the nationall
Lawes of England. TS 2 This


Nota,


Mich.13. lac. in Cóm-
muni Banc inter Cock
& Ilnours


What is indeauoured
by thefe Inftitutes,


The benefit of the
Inftitutes.


Wkerefore called Ins
flicuces,


Ree
Wherefore publifhed ~
in Englifh.
dy |
Regula.
36.E-3.04p. 15.
.
Regula.


Our Authouss kind of
French.


36.E;5. vbi f up ‘he


The Preface.


This part wee haue (and not without prefident ) publifhed in
Englifh, for that they are an introduétion to the knowledge
of the nationall Lawes of the Realme; a worke neceffarie,
and yet heeretofore not vndertaken by any , albeit in all other
profeffions there are the like. We haue left our Authorto fpeake
his owne language, and haue tranflated him into Englifh, tothe
end that any of the Nobilitie,or Gentrie of this Realme,or of any
other eftate,or profeffion whatfoeuer,that will be pleafed to read
him andthefe Inftitutes, may vnderftand the language wherein
they are written.

I cannot coniecture that the generall communicating of thefe
Lawes inthe Englifh tongue can worke any inconuenience,but in-
troduce great profit,feeing that Ignorantia iuris non excafat, Igno-
rance of the Law excufeth not.

And heerein I amiuftified by the Wifedome of a Parliament


- the words whereof be, That the Lawes and Cuflomes of this Realme


therather fhould bee reafonably perceiued and knowne , and better vn-
deritood by the tongue vied inthis Realme, andby fo much enery man
might the better gouerne himfelfewithout offending of the Law, and the
better keepe, (aue, and defend bis heritage andpoffefions. And in di-
ners Regions and Countries wherethe King , the Nobles, and other of the
fayd Realme bane beene, good gouer nanee aud full right is done to euerie
man, becaufe that the Lawesand Cuftomes bec learned and vſed inthe
Tongue of the Countrey: asmoreat large by the faid Act, and the


. puruiew thereof may appeare,Et neminem oportet eſſe fapientiorem


Legibus , Noman ought to bee wiferthanthe Law.

And true it is that our Bookes of Reports and ftatutes in aunti-
ent times were written in fuch French,as in thofe times was com-
monly fpoken and written by the French themfelues. Butthis
kind of French that our Author haue vied is moft commonly
written and read,and very rarely {poken,and therefore cannot be
either pure,or well pronounced. Yet the changethereof(hauing
beene fo long accuftomed) fhould bee without any profit,but not
without great danger and difficultie: For fo many antient Termes
and Words drawne from that legall French , are growne to bee
Vocabula artis, Vocables of Art, fo apt and fignificant to exprefle
the true fence of the Laws,and are fo wouen into the Laws them-
felues, as itisin a manner impoffibleto change them, neither
ought legall Termes tobe changed.

In Schoole Diuinitie , and amongft the Gloffographers and

Inter-


The Preface.


Interpreters of the Ciuileand Cannon Lawes , in Logicke and
in other liberal! Sciences, you fhall meet with a whole Armie of
words, which cannot defend themfíelues in Belle Grammatisali,
inthe Grammaticall Warre, and yet are more fignificant , com-
pendious, and effectuall to exprefle the true fence of the matter,
than if they were exprefled in pure Latine.

Tnis Worke we haue called The firft part of the Inftitutes,
for two caufes : Firft, For that our Author is the firft Booke that
our Studient taketh in hand. Secondly , Forthatthereare fome
other parts of Inftitutes not yet publifhed,(viz.) The fecond part
being a Commentary vpon the Stat. of Magna Carta, Weffm.1.
and other old Statutes. The third part treateth of Criminall cau-
fes and Pleas of the Crowne : which three parts we haue by the
goodneffe of Almightie God alreadie finifhed. The fourth part
we haue purpofed to be of the Iurifdiction of Courts ; but here-
of wee haue onely collected fome materialls towards the raifing
of fo great and honourable a Building. Wee haue by thegood-
neffe and affiftance of Almightie God brought this twelfth
Worke to an end : Inthe eleuen Bookes of our Reports we haue
related the opinions and iudgements of.others ; but herein wee
haue fet downe our owne.

Before Ientred into any of thefe parts of our Inftitutes, I ac-
knowledging myne owne weakeneffe and want of iudgement to
vndertake fo great Workes, directed my humble Suite and
Prayer to the Authour of all Goodnefle and Wifedome,
out of the Booke of Wi/edome, Pater & Deus Miftricordia, Da mibi
ſedium tuarum affistricem fapicntiam , mitte eam de Calis fanctis tais
Ga fede magnitudinis tha, ut mecum fit, e mecum laboret ,vi (ci.
am quid asceptum fit 4pud te; Oh Fatherand God of Mercie ,
giue mee Wifedome , the Affiftant of thy Seates; Oh, fend
her out of thy holy Heauens, and from the Seate of thy
Greatnefle, that thee may bee prefent with mee , and la-
bour with mee , that I may know what is pleafing vnto
thee, Amen. !

Our Authour hath diuided his whole Worke into three


Bookes : In his firt hee hath diuided Eftates in Lands and


Tenements , in this manner; For, Res per diuiſionem melins
aperinntnr.


ef


Wherefore called the
firft part.


Li.Sap.ca.9. vas. 4410,


Bratton.


A Figure of the diuifion
of Poſſeßions.


C Inberi- > ple. !
tance Generall
Fee tile "
: [Into the Fpecia |
flate of Tenant in taile after poſibi-
Freehola litie Iſſue extincẽ
Tenant by the Curtefie
ec (1 By the Com-
For terme of life - | mon Law.
| ef tbe Tenant 1 5 2 By the Cu
rZ term tome.

By the | of life Tenat in| 3 Adoftium
Bemmon ADower 4? Ecclefiz.
Law 4 Ex affenfu

For serme of life Patris.
d | of another 5 De la pluis
| t À Beale.
Eus < Tenant for yeares or
Vader
| halfe a yeare, &c.
the flate E
c -Expreffed
of Free- 7) 7
held Tenant at wi.
Implied


C €
By Cuffome, thefe may be fo dinided, as
C. Eflates baue bin by the Common Law.


Our Authour dealt onely with the Eftates and termes
aboue fayd ; Somewhat Wee fhall fpeake of Eftates by
force of certaine Statutes, as of Statute Merchant, Sta-
tute Staple, and Elegit, (whereof our Authour intended
to haue written) andlikewifeto Executours to whome
lands are deuifed for payment of Debts, and the
like.


Aad


The Preface. |
And when the Reader fhall in any part of this Worke finde
no perfect fence, or the Cafe apparantly againft Law, or mif-
quotations , orincongrue Latyne, or falfe Orthographie, or
the like ; I fhall defire of him three things :

Firft, Before hee enter (vponthe firft apprehenfion there-
of) into any euill conceit, That hee would aduifedly perufe
ouer the Errata in the end of this Booke, & correct his booke
accordingly, and then I am perfuaded he (hall in many things
receiue fatisfa&ion,

Secondly, That he will impute no more or greater faults to
the Printer, than he deferues, in refpect I was inthe Countrey
during all the time of the impreffion hereof, and for that hee.
might eafily miftake my hand writing, beeing in many places
not eafie to be read but by him that was well acquainted there-
with : and therather, becaufe che Errata be not fuch, (fauing a
verie few) but that the iudicious Reader vpon the Context
and other parts of this Worke, will eafily vnderftand my
meaning.

Thirdly, Thatthe learned Reader will ure —— any pi
opinion againft any part of this painefull and large Volume, , 7577
vill he (hal haue zh ifedly read ouer the whole, aud diligent- pere ipis —
ly fearched outand well confidered of the feuerall Authori- *egmredeen indicare.
ties, Proofes, and Reafons which wee haue cited and fet
downe for warrant and confirmation of our opinions through-
out this whole Worke. |

Myne aduice tothe Studient is, That before hee read any
part of our Commentaries vpon any Section , that firft hee
read againe andagaine our Authour himfelfe in that Section,
and doe his beft endeauours, firft of himfelfe, and then
by conference with others , (whichis the life of Studie) to
vnderftand it,and then to read our Commentarie thereupon,
and no more atany onetime,than hee is able with delight to
beare away, andafter to meditate thereon, which is the life of
reading. But of this Argument we haue forthe better directi-
on of our Studient in his Studie, fpokenin our Epiftle to our
firft Booke of Reports.

And albeit the Reader fhall not atany one day (doe what he
can) reach to the meaning ofour Author, or of our Commen-
: taries,


| The Preface.

taries, yet let him no way difcourage himfelfe, but proceed ;
for on fome other day,in fome other place,that doubt willbee

cleared. Our Laboures herein are drawne out to this
great Volume, for that our Author is twice re-
peated, once in French , and againe
in Englifh.
IDE


Bia Of Fee fimple. Seti à. :


diarios-ad plaeita foreftarum quas idem Frater nofter habet ex dono domini Regis Henrici patris

noftri fecundum afi’ foreftz tenend,&c. In this caſe the granteandhisheires hav aperíos — 4

nau inheritance in making of a requeſt to aue Letters patents of Commiffion tu haue Juſti⸗
«cg alfigned to Him to heare and determine, of the pleas of the forrefts, and concerneth netther

lands oz tenements, And fo (t is tf an Annuity be grantedtoa man and big hetres, It is a fee

fimpie perfenall, & (ic de (imilibus. And laſtly hereditaments mixt both ofthe realty and pct-

fonaity, As the Abbot of whitbye in the Countp of Porkehauing a fozreft of the gtft o£ Wil-

liam of Percye founder of that Phby, and bp the Charters of king lohn and of other big »

progenitors, Bing Henry the third did graunt Abbati & conuentuide Whitbye quod ipii & co* Ko.Dat.es 47. H.3;
rum fucceffores imperpetuü habeant viridarios füos proprios de libertate fua de Whitbye eligen: Z/. Pickering. 8.8.35
de cetero in pleno com Eborum prout moris eft ad celponfiones & prefentationes,faciend de ^*^
tranfgreffionibus quas amodo fieri continget de venatione infra metas foreftæ fux de Whitbye

quam babent ex donatione Willi.de Percey & Alanide Percey,filijeius & redditione & concefs

fione domini Iobanis quondam regis Angliæ patrisnoftri,& confirmatione noftra coram Iufli-

. €iarijs noftris itinerantibusad placita fereftz in partibus illis & non alibi ficut viridarij foreftæ

noftra huiufimodirefponfiones & prefentationes facere debent & confuc veruat. Et ficontingat

aliquos forinficos qui non funt de libertate predi&orum Abbatis & cónuentus tranfgreffionem
faceic de venationeinfra metas forefta predicte. quos prediéti viridarij attachiare non poffunt.

Volumus & có. edimus pro nobis & heredibus noftris quod huiufmodi tranfgreffores;per Iufticia-

rios foreftx noftræ vltra Trentam attachientur ad prefentationem viridariorü predict ad refpone

dend ü inde coram Iufliciarijs noftris itinerantibus ad placita foreftæ noftrae in partibus illiscum

ibid. ad placitandum venerint prout fecundum affifam & confuitudinem foreſtæ noftre fuer fazi- |

end. which Charter Wag pleaded bpon the Clayme made by the Abbot of Whitbye before

Willoughby, Hungerford, and Hanbury, 3luffíceg in Eire tn the korreſt of 39íckeríng, which

Gire began Anno 8. E.3. Bndthefebefoze them were allowed, And Mhenthe King createth

an Earle of fuch a County o2 other place, To hold that Dignity to bin andhis heires, Chis

Dignity ts perfonall, and alfo concerneth lands and tenements, Wut of thig matter moze

thalbe fatd in the next Chapter, Sect.14.& 15.


: : LE Biaci lib. 4.cap.9 fo. 263.
@ Et eff appelen Latine feodum fimplex quia feodu idem eff quod hereditas. Meis E
Pere Lirtleron himlelfe teacheth the fignificatton of feodum, accogding to that which hath bene po Papier of werde
faid, Which onlp is tobe applied to fe imple pare and abfolute Bnd this anball his other in pig seat oo 8.05.156.1195
terpaetatíong of woꝛds and Etpmologics throughout all bte thee bakes ( Wherein the ſtudi⸗ 435.154.1764. 174.184.186.
oug reader Will obferue many } are perfpicuous, and euer per notiora & nunquam ignotunt 154.204: 234.267.258.332.
perignotius, and are molt neceflarp, foꝛ ignoratis terminis ignoratur & ars. 337-424-520.592- 645.689.


. . . . m n 7375
qp Sipsplex idem eft quod legittimum vel pari, hereof he treateth onlp 2.2.2... 91625.
fn this place. Bnd Litt: faith Dell, that Simplex idemeft quod purum. Simplex eaim dicitur — —
quia fine plicis & purũ dicitur, quod eft merü & folum fincadditione. Simplex donatio & pura PRES
eft vbi nulla addita eft conditio five modus, fimplexenim datur quod nullo additamento datur,


"Britt.ca.34.
Q Hereditas legitima vel hereditas pura. And therefore it is vocl (ain,
quod donationü alia fimplex & pura, que nullo iure civili vel naturali cogente, nullo precedente Fleta,lib. 5.24.2.
metu vel interveniente ex mera gratiutaque libertate donantis procedit, & vbi nullo cafü velit do:
nator ad fe reuerti quod dedit, alia fub modo conditione vel ob caufam,in quibuscafibus non pro. ==
pric fit, donatio ,cum donator id ad fe reuerti velit, fed quedam potius feodalis dimiffio, alia
abfoluta & larga, alia ftriéta, & coarétata, ficut certis heredibus quibufdam a fuccefforibus ex-
clufis, &c. Bnd therefore ferina Fee imple tg hereditas legittima vel pura, it plainlp confirmeth,
that the diutGon of Fee is by his Buthozity rather to be diuided ag is afozefatd then fee Gimple.
And he faith Wel in the diſiunctiue legittima vel pura,foz euery Fee Gimplc is no$ legittimum. fog
a dDiffetfor,abatoz,intruder,vfurper, <c.haue a fee imple, but it ts not a lawful fee. Ho ag euerg
man that hath a fee fimple, hath tt cither bpríabt o bp wꝛong. Be bp right,then he hath ít either
b» purchafe,or difcent. Ft bp Swiong,then cither bp difleiGn,intruGon,abatement blarpation,tcs
In this Chapter betreateth oni? of a lawtull fee (imple, and deutdeth the fame ag te afozelatd,


«| Car fi home purchafe. Perſons capable of purchaſe are of tivo
forts. perfong naturall created of God, ag I.S. I.N.&c. and petfons incozpozate e» politique
treated bp the policic of man ( and therefore thepare called bodies politique ) and thefe be of
two fozts,viz either fole,oz aggregate of manp : againe aggregate of many, etther ofall perſons
Capable, 8? of onc perfon capable, andthe tc(E incapable oz Dead in law, ag im the chapter of
Difcontinuance, 5c&.57.fball be hewed, Some men bauc capacitie to purchafebut notability —^— «7.52.7.
te hold, Some capacttic to purchafe and abilitie to hold o» not te hold, atthe election of them 02 be haue abilisse ro grant.
others, Somecapacitietotakcandto hold. Some neither capacitie ta tabe noꝛ to hold. And Perens capable of purchnfa.
fome {pectallp diſabled to take fome particular thing, 11.Eli¢. Dier.283e

- Jan alien Chiiſtian oz infidel purchate y Lands, tenementa, 02 hereditaments to pie 11.H.4.20. & 26,
2 and 7.514.290


Lib (apr. Of Fee fimple. Sets.


and big heires, albeit he can fauc no heires, pet he is of capacític to take & fee imple but not to
© polo, ro; bpon an office Found, the bing fball haue it bp bts prerogative of whom focucr the land.

igholden, Bnd foit (a if the alten Doth purchafeland and die, the law doth caft theifreehoid,and

inheritance bpon the Ring, It an alten purchafe any eftate of freehold in houſes, lands, tene=

mentg, o2 hereditaments, the ing bpon office found fhall hauethem, FE an alten bo made

Denizen and purchalelands, and die without iſſue, the 1020 of tbe fee (ball hauc the efcheat,and

33.4.6.23.Pl.om4g;. not the Ring. Wutasto a leafe fo? peares, there is a Dinerfitte betweene a leafe oz peares of a
« houfe fez the habitation of a merchant ranger being analicn, Sbofe Ling ts in league With

goMar.Brait/DesiQn 23, OUTS, anda leafe £02 pearcg oflands, meadows, paſtures, Woods, andthelike. Jro t£ hetake
a lcafe Fox peares of lands, meadows, «c. bpon office found, the King fhall bauc tt, Wut of a

boufc fo? habitation he map take aleaft foꝛ peares ag incident to Commercery, fox without ha⸗

bitatíon he cannot mercljanbísc 02 trade. Wut it be depart o2 relinquifh the realme, the Ring

fball haue theleafe. So it is fhe die poſſeſled thereof neither hig Executoꝛs o» Pominittratorg

fball haue tt but the ing, foz he had tt only for habitatton ag neceflary to bis trade oz traffique,

and not forthe benefit of bte Executos 0? aomíniffratoz, Wut tf the alien be nomerchant, cher

the King fhall baue tbeleafe Fox peares, albeit tt were foz his habitation, and fo itis (£e be ar

ae EIE vin Sir Tamer alien enemie. Bud allthis was fo refolucd by the Judges allembiedtogether for that purpofe
a. — tn the caſe of Sir lames Croft, Pafch.29, of theraigne of Qucene Elizabeth. Alſo ik a man
, Commit felonpe, and after purchaſe lands, and after is attainted, he bab capacity to purchafe,

but not to hold tt, fos in that cafe the 1,020 of the fee (ball haue the Œfcixat, Andif a man be

attainted of felony, pet be hath capacitie to purchafeto him and to bis hetres, albett he can baue

, 10 bcíre, but hecannot hold tt, fox in that cafe the Hing (ball haue itby his prerogative, and mot

the Lozd of the fe, fora man attaínteo hath no capacitie to purchafe ( being a man civiliter

i mortuus ) but onlp £02 the benefit of the Ting, nomozethen the alien ne hath, Ff anpfole Coꝛ⸗
* eo Es religio 16. pozation oz aggregate of many, either Eccleũaſticall o2 tempozall ( for the woꝛds of the ftatute.
WiauEA B be Si quisreligiofus vel alius ) purchafe Lands o2 Œencments in fee, thep hauccapacitp to take
.H.8,c4.10, but not to rctayne, ( vnleſſe they baue a fufficient Licence in that behalfe ) Foz within the peare


1$. R.2. 04.5.23
39. Eli x ca. 5. after the alienation, the next 3020 of the fee may enter, and ik he Doe nor, then the next imme=
23-H.3.4f- 436. Diate 1020 from time to time to haue balfe a peare, and for default of all the mefne Loꝛds, then


Mad re the Klag to auc the land fo alíenco for cucr, which ig tobe vnderſtood of fuch inberitance ag
19 .£ .2.tit Vil.3 4. tay be holden. But of fuch tnhcritances ag are not holden ag Milleins, rents-charges, com=
29.E.3.Jbid.13.21.€.3.5. mong, andthe like, the King ſhall aue them prclentlp bp a fauourable tnterpzeration of the
an * ed da d 2 ,"(latute. Bn Annuitp arauncco totbem ig not moꝛtmaine, becaufe it chargeth the perfon onip.
1 Hay. 19H 6.6,, Dome banc fafothat it ts called moptmatne Manus mortua, quia poffeísio corum eft immorta-
y.€ 4.14. lis, manuspro poffefsione, & mortua proimmortali, and the rather foz that bp tbe lawes and
FL.Com.ig3.nWraclge — ftatuteg of tc realme,all Eccleſiaſticall perfons are reftratned to alien, Others fap tt ts called
«js. manus mortua per Antiphrafin, becaufcbodies politique and cozpogate newer dic, Others fap
that ít (s called Moꝛtmaine by refemblance to the holding of a mans hand that is reabp to die,
for that he then holdeth be lettcth not goe till he be dead. Theſe and fucl) others are framed out
of wit and inucntion, v the Sus fent of Pam ano ie meant Prob mas taken from
joi the effects, ag it to expected tn the (Latute itfelfe, per quod qua ferviua ex huiufmodi fcodis de.
| coop ER tit bentur, & que ad B chin regniab initio me fa Mdh indebite fübtrahuntur & capitales
domini efchaetas fuas amittunt; fo ag the lands Were fato to come to Dead Hands as to the
Loꝛds, for that by alienation in Moꝛtmaine, they loft whollp their efcheats, and in effect their
knights {eruices £02 the defence of the Realme, toards, Warriages, Reltefes, andthe like, and

therefore Was called a Dead hand, foz that a Dead hand peeldeth no feruice.
J pale oucr Willen s 02 Wondmen, Who haue power to purchafelands, but not to retepne
them againtt their Lords, becaufe por Mall reade at largeofthem inthetr proper place in the

Chapter o£ Gillenage.

An inkant oz minor ( Whom we call any that ig bnder the age of 21. ycares) haue without
confent of any other,capacitieto purchafe, fozit ts intended foz his benefit, and at hig full age,
he map cither agree thereunto, and perfect it, 02 Without anp caufeto be alleaged, w atue 02 difas
grectuthe purchale, and fo map bis hetres after him, ik he agreed not thereunto after his full age,

20 man of rion fane memozp may Without the confent of any other purchafe lands, but bee
himfelfe cannot toatue it, but {€ he dic in bis madnefle, 02 after big meimozíe recouered Without
agreement thereunto, hts hetre map Watucand diſagree to the (Fate; Sithout any caufe (head,
andfo of an Ideot. Wut tf the man of non fane memozp recoucr his memozy, and aaree onto ft,
{tts bnauopdable,

4j Af 9-33. FE an Abbot purchale lands tobím and big fuccellors Without the confent of bts drouent, be

: himfelfecannot waiue tt, but hisfucceffoz map bpon tuff caufe fheiwed, ag if a greater rent were
referucd thereupon then the baluc of the land, oꝛ thelike,but be cannot waiue tt onic(Tc it be vpon
tuft caufe, & fic de fimilibus prælatus Ecclefia fuæ coditione meliorare potett,deteriorare nequite


Bnd ín another place hefatth, Eft enim Eccle(iaciufdem conditionis, quz fungitur vice minoris:
re


"Rrelf. hb. 3.fo. 12. dr. 32.


Lib.t. Of Fee fimple, Seti. c. 3


Wut no Amille bofog fn enery thing, accorbíng to the antient faping, Nullum fimile quatuor
pedibus currit. An Bermophzadite map purchafe accozding to that Sere Which prcuatleth, '.17.7-'6.7. 8.4.17.
A feme Couert cannot take any thing of the atft of her bufband, but ts of capacitie to purchafe * a : my i a 3+3@>
of others Without the confent of her bufband, Bnd of this opinion Sas Littleton in our bog, 244109744
and ín this boke Scé}.677. but her hufband map difagree thercunto,and deueſt the whole eftate,
but it He neither agree noz vilagree, the Durchale is good, but after his death, albeit her bufband
agreed thereunto, pet he map without any caufe tu be alleaged twatuc the fame, and fo map her ®
heires allo, i£ after the deccafe of her huſband the her felfe agreed not thereunto, on
-. a9 iwife, ( Vxor) ig a goodnamme of Purchale Withouta Chꝛiſtian name, and fo (t ts, tf a tl Nee ae i,
Cbaiftian name be added and miftaken, ag Em fo? Emelyn,&c fog vtileper inutile non vitiatur. Mein 1 fie
Aut the Queene, the confort of the Ring of England, is an exempt perfor from the king bp 39-38... ,
the Common law, anb íg of. ability, andcapacitic to Purchale and grant Without the king, 175431945.
MD € Which fee more at large, Sect-206. E36 -3- Efeppelia ji.
Œhc Darihioners oz Fnbabitantg, 02 probi hominesof Dale, oz the ChurchWardens, are — 974
not capable to Purchafelands, but goods they arc, bnlefle tt Sere in anctent time when fuc 12757-25137. /.6. 30.
grants Sere allowed. I a
Bn ancient grant bp the Losdtothe Commoners in fuch a waſte, that a Swap Icading to 32. E. 3.larre 261
their common Mould notbe (ireígbteneb, spas good, but other wile it ts of fuch a grant at this 33-£-3-gran 85.
Day. And foin ancient time a grant made to a 3,020, & hominibus furs tam liberi» quam nativis 13-5.3.50.12. 7/73 f.
€; the like Was gqood,but thep are not of capacitic to Purchaſe bp fuch a name at this Dap.Wrue '$7:6:12: 34-7 Pt
vetat this dap tthe Ring arant £o aman to haue te goods and chattels de hominibus fuis, 47:4 4 Lea
02 de tenentibus (uis, 99 de refidentibus infra fcodum,& c. tt is qood,foz therethep are not named Britten fols E Ur —
as purchafers 02 takers, but fozansther mang benefit, who hath capacitic to purchaſe oz take, 315.378: 35-E.5.43.
And regularly it is requiGite that the Purchaler be named bp the name of Waptilme and hig 264-5: 30-40-16.
farname, and thatfpeciall heed betakento the name of Waptifine, for that a man cannet haue 157 2,735317
twonames of Baprilme as he may fauc diuers furnamce, And it is not fafe in waits, pleas 0.4.6. — sigh
Dings, grants, éc. to tranfatefurnames (nto Latine, As (£tbefurnamcof one be Firzwilliam, 11.7.4. 27. 9.1.4. 19.
02 Wiliiamfon, tf bctran(late him to filius Willi. it in truth bis father bad anp other Chaittic 5 É:4-46-65. 14. H.7. 11.
an naine then William, the Wꝛit, xc. thallabate,foz Fitzwilliam 62 Williamion íg bis furnamc RARE
Sobatfocucr Chriftéan name bis father had, therefore the Lawyer neuer tranflates furnames, 1.4.4. 325636.
Bnd pet in fone cafes, though the name of Waptilme be mifkaken, ( ag in the cafe before put of (9.H.6.37
the Wife ) the avant ts good. 34- H.6. 19. g. E. 4:5 5e
Soit is if Lands begiuento Robert Earle of Pembꝛoke where his name is Henry, to pai RE R
George Bithop of Norwich, Where his name is Lohn, and foof an Abbet,z. for in thele s.7. 217. 77 par
and the like cafes there can be but one of that Dignity oz name, And thercfoic {uch a grant ig v4.5.9. eta
good, albeit thename of Baptiſme be miftaken, Ff by Licence lands be giuen to the Deane 4°-E-3-22.F ir? willis,
and Chapter of the holp and indiuidod Crinitte of Noꝛwich, this ts qoo, although the Deane Ea 3:64. Eur Ib.
benot namco bp his proper name, tf therc Sverea Deane at the time o£ the grant, but in pleas op ee rere.
Ding bc mutt The his proper name, Andfo on the other Ade, 16 the Deane and Chapter male 18.E. 3.2 tae Edi
a Leafe without naming the Deane bp his proper name the Leaſe is wood, tf there Soerc a 14-4-7.31.32- 13 €.4.8.
Deane at the time of the Leafe, but tn pleading,the proper nainc of the Deane mult be Mec, 5:À.1-Vour.179.
nnb fo is the Bookeof 18.E.4. to be intended, for the fame Judges in 15.E-4. held the grant EE He petes
good toa Watoz, Aldermen, and Commonaitte, albeit the Wath: Wags not named by bis pꝛo⸗ PT
per name, but in pleading tt muft be ſhewed, as tt (s there alfo holden. Fifa man bee baptized
by the name of Thomzs, and after at his Confirmation by the Wiſhop he {3 named Iohn, hee
may purchafe bp the name of bis Confirmation. And this wags thecafe of Str Francis Gaw-
dye, late chtefe Juſtice of the Court of Common-picas, whofe name of baptifine Wags Thomas,
and bis name of Confirmation Francis, and that name of Francisbp the aduice of all the Jud⸗ Y
ges in Anno36.H 8. he did bearc,andafter vſed in all Wis purchafcs and crante. Bnd thie 2 de
Doth agree With our antíent bookcg, where it (s holden that a man may hauc Divers names at MES em à r
diucrs times, butnot diners Chaiftian names, Andthe Court fai, that it may be that a Wee 3.H.6.16.34.H. 6.19.
man Mas baptized by the name of Anable, and 40. peares after (hee Was Confirmed bp the '-4-7-29.5.€.3. 56.741.
name of Douce, and then her naine was changed, and after fhe Wag to be named Douce, and !* 77:11
that ail purchafes,¢c, made bp her bp the name of Waptiſme befoze her Confirmation remaine 17-©-3.29.18-E. 3.59.
good, a matter not much (n ble, noz requifite to be put (n be, but pet neceflarp to be knosone, 107318 11-8.
Wut Purchales atc good in many cafes by a knoÿone nate, 02 by a certaine defcription of the 4/635; E Io ade
perfon Soithont either Surname, o? name of 2Baptifme, ag Vxoii l.S ag hath bee fatd, C3 Pes de vou. 15.3 prs
primogenito filio, 92 fecundo genito filio, &c, 02 filio natu minimo I. S, 02 (eniori puero, 9p om- 37.H.6.30. 11.£.4.2.


nibus filijs 02 filiabus I.S. oy omnibus liberis feu exitibus of I.S. 02 to tbe right hetres of 1.5. 7.H.a. 5-40.E.3.9.
But (£ a man boc infranchife a Villeine, cum tota fequela fua, that is not futficíent to in⸗ A ———


franchife his childzen boꝛne before, foztheincertaintie of the woꝛd ſequela. But regulerly ttt 8.5.5. 457. 29. E. 3.44
Wits, the demandant 02 tenant is to be named by his Chiiſtian Nauie ano Sirnanic, vnieſſe 19-54-11: 21.6.4.19.
it bec ín caſes of ſome Coꝛpoꝛations oꝛ bodies politique, 7416.29»

3


Lii. Capa  OfFeefimplé Sed.


39: E.3.11.24. 17.E. 3.42,
35-4 [[.13.41.£ .3.19.


Vid, Se8.188.
So it was refelued. M.38.£7
39-Eli?. m Bre. deerrore. fa
land in Partington in com.
Sale.


39.E. 3.11.1435. fe 136
41,6.3.19:17.€.5.41.


8. E.a.tit. offic. & officer.
B.48.Vinters cafe.
5-Mar.Dier.fe.i5o.
Seroggs cafe.


M.4o.dr. 41. Eli( in the
Kings bench Letw.ene Scam-
fer and Walters.
Lib.11.fo.2. $n Auditor
Gales cafe

"Ud. Se. 378.

Y. H.7.5)-
Braff. lib. 5. fo. 421.
415.B-itt.c4.22.39.


~ Flets.lsb.5.ca.41.


T.£.3.9.44. €.3.4.

3.H 6,24. 21. R . 2. tud eement
261.7. H.4 2.14. H.8.16,
Dell. & Siua. 141.


Pl. com, fa. 47. Brit.ea. 33.


27. E lif .cd ^

23.Eliz.€ 5.

Li. sf Bo. 82:83 Twines.
Cale Libs fi.62.Geoches
eafe. lib.6.fe.7 2. Bur eli eafe,
Ti^. vi. fo.74. ;
"Tafch.2.Ia. Inter. Tonei.p '.
and Si Rich.Groobham def.
in ciectuo ie firme in euidenee
«al In te,


Hil. 18.E.3.cora m Rege
in thefaur,

37. H.8.cap. 6:
13-Elix.ca.8.hb s.
e.69.Burtms cafe. esdern,


bib .fo.7.( leptons afe,


21 Waftard haning gotten a nameby reputation map purtbafe by bis reputed o? knowne
name to bim ant bie heties, although be can have no heire, 2 man makea Leafcto B. foz life,
remainder to the doeft (fiuc male of B. andthe heires males of big ee i B. hath tue a baſtard
fonne, he thai! not take theremainder, becaufe in la$» he is not his tffue, foz qui ex damnato coi-
tu nafcuntur intei liberos non ccmputentur, Zinbag Littleton faith, 28 baftard {9 quafi nullius
filiu: anb can fauc no name of reputation as foone as heisboyne. So it is it man make a


® Lrafe for life to 8. the remainder tothe elocft fue male of B to be begotten ofthe body of lanc S.


Wwyhether the fame iſſue be legitimate, o2 illegitimate. B. hath {luc a baftard on the boop of lane
S. thig fonne o iſſue ſhall not takc the remainder, for ( as (t hath beene fato ) by tbe name of
iffue, tfthere had beene no other Swords he could not take,and (ag it hath beene alfofatd ) a Ba⸗
ftard cannot take, but after he hath gained a name by reputation, that he is thefonne of B. & c.
And therefore he can take no remainder limítteb before he be bozne, but after he be borne, and
that he hath gained by time a reputation to be knowne by the name of afonne, then a remainder
limittco to him bp the name of the fonne of his reputed father ts good, Wut it he rannot take
the remainder bp the name of iſſue at the time when be is bone be (ball neucr take it. And fo
ít femctb, and for the lame cauſe, if after the birth of the ilue B. had married lanc S. foag he.
became Leftard ctgne, and had a peflibilttie to interit, pet be Dall not take the remainder.

Perlons vefouucd hauing humanc fhape, tdeots, madmen, leapers; baftards, deafc, vumbe,
and blinde, minozs, and all other rcafonable creatures haue power to purchafe and retcyne
Lands 0: Cenements, Wu: the Common law doth difabic fome men to take anp cftate in tome
particularthings, Ws tfan office cither of the grant of the ing o0» Sublet Winch concerne
theadminiftration, procecding, ozerecution of Juſtice, oz the Rings Reuenue, oꝛ the Common=
Svcalth, oz the tnterett, benefit, 03 fafetie of the fi.biect, oꝛ theitke ; tf thefe, o? anp of them be
granted to a man that is vnexpert, and bath no ſkull and ſcience to crercife 0? crecute the fame,the
grant (e meercly vopde, and the partie Dtladicd by law, anb incapable to take the fame, pre co-
modo regis & populi; foz only men of (hil, knowledge, and abilitie to cxerciſe the fare are caz
pable of thefameto ferae the king and bis people Wn ut(ant of mino) ts not capable of an ofz
fice of Stewaroſhip of the Cowie 9E a Mannoꝛ etther in polellion oz reuerfion, No man
though neuer ſoſkilfull and expert, tg capable of atuoictalloffice in reucrfon, but muft crpedt
bntill i£ fall in poiledion, And fee Sct 378. Whercbargaining oz giuing of monp o2 anp man=
ner of reward, tc, fo2 offices there mentioned, foall make fuch a purchafcr incapable thereof,
Swhich is worthy to be knotone, but moze Weathyp to be put in Duc execution,

Some are capable of certaine things £02 Lome {pectall purpote, but not to ble 02 exercife {uch
things themfaues. Asthe Ring is capable of an office, not to bfc butto grant, ee.

A monfter bonne Within Liwfull matrimonie, that hath not humane fhape cannot purchafe,
much Ic(Ie reteine anp thing. . € be fame lato tg de profeílis & mo:tuisfeculo, fox thep are civile
ter mortui, Whereof pou Mail reade at large inhis proper place, Scét.200.


«r Purchafc.. Fn Latin perquifitum of the betbe perquirere, Little-
ton difertbeth itin the end of this chapter in this manner, Item, purchafe eft appel le poſſeſſion
detrés ou tenements que homead per fon fait, ou per fon agreement, a quel poifeflion il ne a:
vient per title de lifcent de nul de fes ancefters, ou de fes cofens per fon fait dem. £yoag F take
tt, a purchafe ig to be taken, when one commeth to lands bp conuepance o? title, and that diſſei⸗
fong, abatements, mtrafiong, vfuzpattong, andfuch likecltates gained bp wzong, arenot fato,
ín la&o purchales, but oppꝛeſſions and'inturies,

§2 ote that purchrfe: e of lands, tenements, leafes, and hereditaments for good and baluable
confideration, Mail auoide all fogmer fraudulent and couinoug conueyances, eſtates, grants
charges and Itmitationg of vſes, of o? out of thefame, by a Statute made fince | itt: Wrote,
whereof pou map platnelp and plentifullp reade ín mp reports, to Which F Will adde this cafe,
1 C. had a Leafe of certaine lands fo? Go, peares t€ he liued ſo long, and fozged a leafe for 90,
pearcs abfolutcip,and he bp Indenture rectting the forged Leafe fo? baluable conGideratton barz
gained, au foto the forged 1 cafe: and all his intereft ín the Land to R G. Fe ſeemed tome that
K.G. ag no purchater within the fkatute of 27 Eliz for hecontraced not fo2 the true and laiw=
full intercft, £o2 that $oas not kno%ne to him, for then perhaps he would not batte Dealt fog it,
and the bifible and knowne tearme was forged, and although bp generall Wozds the truc tnte=
reft paffed, notwitbftanding he gaue no baluable confideration nozcontracted fog it, And ofthig
opinion Mere all the Judges in Heriants inne in Fletitreete,

Gn Ancient time When a man made a fraudulent foffement tt was faid, quod pofuit terram
illam in brugam, Shere brugam doth Gantfie wzangle, contencion, o2 intricacp, foz fraub ts the
mother of them all. Bnd on the other fioc, purchafes, eflatcs, and contrats map bee abopded
fince Litleron wꝛote by certaine Des of Parliameut againſt Vſurie aboue ten in the hundzed,
ín fucb manner and forme ag bp thofe Mag (t ts prontded. which ftatutes are Well erpounded
in mp bookes of reports which map be rcad there, AK o tbein that lend monep mp cautat ts, eR

be


Lib.t. Of Fee fimple. Fect.i. 4


‘Diredip nop indirectly, by art,oz canning inuention, they take abone Ten in the handzed,
fo; they that * by fleíabt to creepe ont of theſe Statutes, Will Decetue themfelucs, and re⸗
en ; t


«p Purchafe terres. Lirtlet, ere and in many other places putteth £222 menm de
ands but fo; an crample, oz bis rule ertendeth te Gegntozies, rents, abuoxofong.commong, £
eftouers, and other hereditaments of bat kind o2 nature focuer.


«| Terre. Terra, Land in thelegall fignification compachenDeth 866 rois
any ground, foile o1 cart! whatloeuer, as meadows, paltures, Woods, moozes, Waters mariſhes, & 151.
farfes and heath, terra eft nomen generaliffimü, & comprehendit omnes fpecies terre,but pꝛo⸗ 4-87. Lurterels capt.


Herp cerra dicitur a terendo,quia vomere teritur,¢ ancientip (t $vag wꝛitten With a fingle r. and 4 E3161. 67 6:8 ,3.385.


8.E.3.377-
th tat fenfc (t includeth whatſoeuer map be plowed, and is all one Sith arvü ab arando. Ft le⸗ ut d Jire.811.


gally includeth alfo ati caftles,houtes,¢ other butldings : foꝛ caſtles,houſes, æc.conſiſt bpon tio 28.4.8. Dier 47.
things,viz.land op ground, ag the foundatton and ftructure thereupon,foas palling the land o2
nd, the ſtructure or bntlotng therupon pafleth therewith, Land ts ancientip called Fleth,but Eu €. * Rege
andbutlded ts moze Worthy then other land, becaufe tt ts £o2 the habitation of man,andin thar Vine
refped hath the precedencte to be Demanded in the frit place ina præcipe, ag hereafter fhall be
fad. Bnd therefore this clement of the earth is preferred before the other elements; firit and prin:
cipally, becaufe tt is for the habitation and refting place of man, foz man cannot reft in any of
the other elements, neither tn the Matcr,apze o2 ire. Foꝛ as the heauens are the habitation of
Bimightic God, fo the cart!) hath be appointedas the fubburbs of heaven to be the habitation
of man ; Coelum coeli domino,terram autem dedit filijs hominum. All the Whole heating aro 7/3011545.
the Lozds, the earth hath he given to the chtlozen of men. Beũdes, euctp thing ag tt ferneth
moze immediatly 02 moze meerelp foz the food and tfe of man (ag fballbe fato hereafter ) hath
the precedent dignitie before any other. And thts dott the carth, fozout of the earth commeth
mans foode, and bzcad that ſtrengthens mans heart, Confirmat cor hominis, and Wine that pr 104.15.
gladdeth the heart of man, and ople that makes bim a cherefull countenance, Bnd therefore
terra olim ops mater dicta eft quia omnia hacopus habeantad viuendum. And the Diuine a⸗


greeth horewith, for Hefaith, Patriam tibi & nutricem, & matrem, & menfam, & domum po- (hsfalF.bom.30.


fuit terram deus, fed & fepulchrum tibi honc eindem dedit, Blfothe waters that verlo fif) £o»
the foode and fuftenance of man are not bp tbat name Demaundable ít a Precipe, but the land
whereupon the Water floxoctl) oz ſtandeth (& Demandable ( ag £02 crample ) viginti acf tfe aqua
coopert, and befides the earth doth furnilh man with many other necclaries for his ble, ag itis
replentthed With Hidden treafureg, natmelp, With gold, fuer, bralle, Fron, tpnne, leade, and
other mettalg, and alfo with great bartetie of prettous ſtones, and manp other things £o» gros
fit, oꝛnament andpleafure. Bnd laftlp, the earth hath tn law a great extent vpwards, not onip
of Water as hath benc fato, but of apzeand all other things eucn bp to heaven, fozcuiuseft fo-
lum eius eft víque ad coelum; ag (t ig holden, 14 H.8,fo.r2, 22,H, 5,59, 10, E, 4,14, Regiftr.origi-
nall,and in other bookcg,
+ Bnd albcít land Whereofour Authoꝛ bere fpcaketh, bec tbe moft firme and fired tnheritance,
and therefore is called folum, quia eft folidum, andfee fimpic the mott highef and abfolute eftate V4.4. 59-whare in shis cafe
that a man can fauc, pet may thefame at fenerail times be moucable, fometime in one perfor, 2 P4! be made.
ano alternis vicibus fn another, nap fometime in one place, and fometime fn another. As for
example, tf there be So, acres of meadow Which haue beene feb tfine out of mtnde of man, to
be deuided betwenecertatne perſons, and thata certainenumber of acres appcrtaine to eucrp
of thefe perfons, ag fox erample, to A. 13,actes to be peercip aſſigned and lotted ont, foasfomcs — viz sig ous.
time the 13.acreg Tíc in one place, and ſometime {n another, and fo cf the ref, ^ hath a moueable How ros 13.ecresmaybs
fe (imple tr 13.acres,and may be parcel of bis mannoz, albeit thep hauc no certaine place, but charzed.
pearelp fct out in feucratl places, fo as the number onip ts certaine, andthe particular acres op Y
gee — thepite after the pearcincertaine, Bnd fo wag ít adtudged in the Kings Wench 3
on an efpectall verdict. *Brderwaierih haste
^F a partition be made betweene two coparcenerg of onc and the felfe-fame land, that the Ree:
one ſhall haucthe land fram (after ontill Lammag and to her heires, and the other Mall aue (f Teme:.€.1-2i0. partition
from Lammas till Eaſter to ber and her hetres, o2 the onc thail haue ít the fir peare, and the ^ F- N62
other thefecond peare alternis vicibus,&c. there tt is onc ſelfe ſame land Swbercin two perfong
haue ſeuerall inheritances at feucrall times. So it is (£ two coparcencrs banc tio fenerall F.N-2.62.K,
mannozs by difcent and thep make particton, that the one thall bauc the one mannoz fo? a peare,
andthe other the other mannoz foz the fame peare, and after that peare, then ſhe that had the one
marmo; hall haue the other, & ficalternis vicibus fog ener, andalbett the mannoꝛs be feucrall,
pet are they certatne,and therefore (Eronger then Bridgewaters cafe, fo ag this doth make a di⸗
utfion of ftates of inheritances of lands,viz. Certaine oy vnmoueable Whercof Littleton hore vid. Sei. 194. where anem-
{peaketh and incertaine and moneable, hereof thefe thꝛee cafes for examples bane beens put, /?v,drc.mey be appendone
Therein tt (2 to be noted, that the poffeffion is not onlp fencrall, but the inheritance ac —
t


Lib.t. Cab. Of Fee fimple. Sei,


By what names érc.landi. dre. It neceſſarp to befeens bp what names lands thalpalle, Ita man hath 20.acres of land,
— dd aide — to más — heires vefturam terra maketh liuery of ſeilin fecun-
Ann dum formam carta, the land tt felfe (ball not patte, becaufc hehath a particular right inthe land,
ieu fotbn 1 not hauethe houtes, timber-træs, mines, andother reall things parcell of
o.H.724.11.H.7:3:.  fostherebp he ſhall not haue , t
14. H.7.4.6. 23. H.7.36.37- but he (bati bauc the vefture of the land, (that is) the corne, grafle, briberoob,
4.H.7.4 736.37. theinheritance, butt) C
94H.6.52.37.H.6.55. {Wepage, and the like, and he hall haue an adton oftrefpatle, quare claufum fregit, Æhefame
EESTI ua. Lai, fa man grant herbagium ter, hehath a like particular rghtín the anb, anb thal! have
tion 56.4,E-3.48. 8.€.3-13. an Acton quarum claufum fregit, but by aranttbercof and iiuerp made, thefoile (all not palle
D Apres as isaforelaid, Fea — el *w bi — wey all federe ín
Brat. fo.222. tenure, pofleffion, 02 occupation of B. , 02 B. particular poffef-
17-E:3,73.39.H.6.38. d anb écepation, Sobtch is fufficient inthis cafe, and fottsvag refolucb. So ifa man be
— Deckwray feifed of a Riuer, and bp deed doc grant feperalem pilcariam in thefaine, and maketh livery of
Point: sn ewdenceal. Jury {cin fecuneum formam carte, thefotle bothnot pallenoz the Swater, for the qrantoz map take
€ )
in Bante le Rey. Swater there, and ik the riuer become date, he may takethe benefit of the foile, for there paſſed
Vid Selt.279. tothe grantee but a particular right, and the ltuerp being made lecundum formam carte, Cane
peels jura comics,  Notenlargethegrant, Foꝛ the fame reafon, tf a man grant aquam fuam, the fotle (ball not
10.H.7.24.28.7.H.7.15.  patle, but the pifcharie within the Sater patleth therewith. Bnd land covered Sith Svater {hall
18.H.6.29.34.1.6.43- be Demaunded by the nameof fo manp acres aqua cooperr, Sohereby ít appeareth that thep are
30.4.6.4.18-€.4.4 diftinc things. So ifa mangrant,toanother to dig turues in histand, and to carrp them at
oe eel bis will and pleafure, the land ſhall not palle, becaufe but part o£. the profit (s gtnen, fos
22.£.4. Jarre.116. trees, míneg,ac, (ball nct pafle, But it a man feífco of lands (n fee by his ded granteth to ano-
12.H3..A-427-34-4 11 ther the profits of thofelands, to haue mod ud to Apud pr bi Aeg! — *
13. €.3.tit.entrie. S77 cundum tormam cartæ, the whole land it {clfe doth palle, foz what is and, profits
DES Bre G5 52-034. Hh oveok For thercbp Uietkure, herbage, tres, mines, and all Whatlocucr parcel of that land
Tri R.2.5h trns.ntent ym- ? ? ? ? >
imeene abridge 11.H.7.4. doth pafle,
n 4 342. a3. in By the grant of the Woilloury of Salt, itis fato that the ſoile fhall paff, fo? ít (s the Xobole
o i E profit o£ the ſoile. And this ts called RR j^ “ur inte — LE Ls pb "n pou
E s EOD pene may rcabe de Saliua in Domefday anb Selda, ſigni e fame thing:an t pou ſhall rcate
d Mn in Kecoꝛds de lacerta in profunditate aque falic there lacerta fiqnificth a fathom, A man ſeiſed of
12.E.3.D-wer.90. Diuers acres of Wood, grants to another omnes bofcos fuos, all his wods, not onip the wods
2-Af-p.12.9.€.3.443.466. growing bpon the land pelle, but the lano it felfe, and bp the fame name fbalbe recoucreb ina
c Ru fins in Thefiur. Pre ipe, fo bofcus doth not only inc lude the trees, but the land alfoSobereupon they grow.
Toe inqui fru 1 Mt Œbe famclasp fa man in that cafe grant omnes bofcos fuos crefcentes,&c. pet the land tt
felfe ſhall paffe, ag tt hath beenc adiudged * fraffetum fignificth a $0002, 02 ground that is wo⸗


ume.6.£.1.m thefaur.


SMicka.H.s.cmam Ree die, FE à manbath a où of Cider trees contapning 20. acres, and granteth to another 20,


noo. acras Alneti (Sith an N not a V ) the woDof Eiders, and the fofle thereof fball pafle, but
Fr fist 5 no other kinde of wods fball pale bp tbat name, Alnetum eft vbi alni arbores ccefcunt, * Bnd
14. H.8.1.46.E. 3.22. fullings are taken for elders, Salicetü doth fgnific a a wod of willows, vbi falices crefcunt,
28. H. 8. Dier. 19. thefe tres in ont boks arecalled Sawces.Sclda, ig a $0000 of falloftocg, Swillowes 02 withtes
32. H.8. Br.referuat. 35. À bꝛakie ground ts called filecetum, vbi filicescrefcunt. A Wod of Alhes ts called fraxinetü,
Hero. vbi fraxini crefcunt, and pafleth bp that name, and lupulicecum where hoppes growe, and A-


* Glanuil.lib.8.cap.3.
Demefiey Regife FN. B.2. rundinerum ‘where reeds growe. Home fay that Denc 0) Dennc, Whereof Dena commeth, is


8.E.2.Wafl.111. pioperlp a ballep o? Dale, Dena filuæ, and the like, ag drofden,ozdrufden, 0? druden, figntfieth
FAS 8-11. ATP13- gtbíchct of wood fn a ballep, kod druf, og dru ,Ggntfieth a thicket of Somd, and ig often mentioned
dL ee coum ttt Domeíday. Bnd fomctime Dena 02 Denna Gignificth,as villa and denne, a towne,

Rege 2 om fhefaur. Cope Gantfieth a bill, and fo doth Lawe, ag Stanlawe is faxeuscollis, Howe alfo fignificth a
* Inter inquifit.apud Lane. Hill, Bnd hope combe, and Stow are ballepeg, and fo doth clough. Bnd Dunum oz Duna, fig=
iine E er due. nifieth a hfll ot bigher ground, and therefore commonly the townes that end in Dun, have hills
ber eee of higher grounds inthem, Sohich wecall Doswng, Ft commeth of the old French Woed Dun,


mr c d e. jin our Latin a wood ig called bofcus,Graua fignificth a little wod, in old Deeds, and Hirft og
Camden. 460.151. Hurft a Wood, and fo doth Holand Shawc, Twaite fignífiotl) a $000 grubbed bp, and turned
poi E. 3.eeram to errable. Steche op S tede, betokencth properly a banke of a riuer, and manp tímcga place, ag
Hill. — crams doth, and Wic, a place pon the Sca hone, o2 bpon a Kiuer. Lea o2 Ley fignificth
Rege in Thefaur. pallure. v

Cain Pw. FE aman doth grant all bis pattures, pafturas, the land it felfe imploped to the feeding of


ret -parl.38.E.x. 8. beafts doth pa(Tc, and alfofuch paſtures o; feedings, as he hath in another mang fotle, Letwes
Euthinede Carlilercafe. — ey efues ig a Syaton 50020, aud fignífictl pattures. Betweene paftura and palcuum, thelegall


Pl.com.149.4. f 4
PO) aie Difference is that paftura in one figntfication contatneth, the qround tt felfc called pafture, and bp
3-E. : . $646.41. that name íg to be Demanded, Pa(cuü ferding,is Whereſoeuet cattell are fed, of bat nature ſoeuer
27. H.8.12. the ground tg, and cannot bc Demanded in a præcipe bp that name. .

30. [AP g^ Fla man grant omnia prâta fua, all his meadowes, the land ít fclfe of that kinde pale, & di-


Cae © citur pratum quafi paratum, becaufe tt groweth fponte Mithont manurance, A man grant om-
Dome/isy.F.N.B.2.Regild. nesbrucras fuas, the foyle Shere heath voth grow palleth, and may be Demanded be that oe


Lib.t. Of Fee fimple. Sed NECS
in a præcipe,it tg deriued from bruyer a french woꝛd tor heath, and it is called Ros in the Brit⸗


Roncaria 02 Runcaria,fignificth land full of bzambleg and bz(erg,anb is derived of Roucier the
French $9020, Which Fqnifictl tbe fame, and as mnchag Centicerum. 256p the grant of omnes Regif.1-B.3.4. F.N.E, 2-
Auncarias 9 joncarias, the foile where rufbeg boe grow, doth pale foz Ionc im French is a Ruſh, 19-479. Regier.
Sphereof Loncaria commeth, Bman atantomnes Rufcarias fuas, the ſolle where rufci.r, kne⸗
Holme,oz butchers pꝛicks 02 brome doe grow, (ball pafle, and fo in the verfein the Kegiſter it
dg called, but in F.N.B. fol.z. ín tbe verfe Pifcharia, ig putin ſtead of itufcaria, Bnd lampna lampna.
tomimett) (of Ionc, and nower) a wateriſh place, and is all one in effect With loncaria, He that ;
granteth omnes marifcos fuos, all hig fennes o marífl) grounds doe paſſe. Marifcus {g deriued si baton a a Rege
of the french $0070 mares 08 marets ; the Latpn $0020 fog it, is palus. gg locus paludofus. Mora Medien ls 1.Waliegferd,
ig deriueo of the Englilh Word Doze, and fignifieth a’ moze barren and bnpaofitable ground Nerr. Solon, Lane. 6 e.
then marſhes, dangerous for any cattell to goe there, in refpect of nipete and moozifh fofle, nop- 77m. 33.6.1, coram Rete in

ferucg tt £02 getting of turues there : you {ball rcabe ín 18ecogb, that fucha matt perquitiuie 129 de Hu ring m.

trefcent. acr. maretti,& c. this $0920 marettum is deriued of marethe fea, and tego, anb proper= Ted Bacay te)
lp ügnífictl) a moorifh and grauellp around, Svbich the fea doth coner and oucrfloww at a full fea, oo. -p.6o. 7
and ipeth betweene the high $vater marke and the lowe water marke, infra luxum & refluxum 6.E.3.56.47.€.321. boner
maris. 15p grant of thele particular kindes, the lands of thefe particular kindes onlp Doo “?‘#er<l-49.€ .3 4-bonm de
gaflc, but as bath bene fato bp the grant of land general, all thefe particular Kindes and fome 25, 2/5677 364.
others doe pale. Non mihi fi centü linguz fint oraq; centum, omnia terrarum percurrere nomina FN 8. — —
poſſem. Bnd therefoge let og turne our epe to generall woꝛds, Which doe include lands offenez de Meric. 5.E.4.129.7.H.
ralifostand qualitics. 1By tbe name ofan honor, Which a fubtet map baue, diuers mannozs, £-39-1-2-3.4- de.


andiands map paíle, So bp the name ofan Fe infula, many mannozs,\andg and tenements — ree


map patie. 14. H. a. mre longe.
Holme.og Hulmus fignifieth an Iſſe oꝛ fenny ground. * A Commoteis agreat Segntopic,and ——

wiap include one ordiuers mannozs; By the name of a caſtle, onc o2 moze mannoꝛs map becons 3-74 E.4.16.

ueped,& à conucrío. bp tfe name of a marinos ac.a caſtle map paſſe. In Domeſday J reade,Co- ge 3l fili 3 3.

mcs Alanus habet in fuo caftellatu 206. maneria,&c. preter caftellariam habet 45, manena, and Aro 3:15:
inthat boe a caſtle is called caftellum, and caftrum, and domus defenfibilis, and manfus mu- Braff fo, 414.1,£: 3:0)
ralis, But note bythe Way, that no ſubiect can build a cattle o; boufe of ftrength (mbattele 57.7.5. 3.E. 2. ny 188
led, &c. ot other fotrelle pefenüble, called í Law bp the names afozefaid, and fometimes domus 37, 75:25. 18. Hen.
kernellate,oz Carnellata,imbattellatz, tenellata, machecollatæ, mefe carnelet, & c. Without the patie on i
licence of the Ling £02 the danger which might enfue, (f euerp man at bis pleafure might doe tt. Cap.< T Wet fe163.
Bnd they be called imbattlements, becaufe thep are defences agatnft battele in aſſaults. Te- Brttenc.20,
nellareggtanellare, (g to make holes 02 iopes tn $valleto ſhote out agatnt the PMatlants, Ma- q^ Tarliam.as.E. 3.70. 34
checollare 93 machecoulare, fe to makea Warlike beutce ower a mate o2 other paflage like to a a ee LE Ete Is
grate, through Svbich ſcalding Water, o1 ponderous, oz offenfiue things map bee calt bpon the pers. sans | bar evn
alfaplantg, But to returne to the matter from Svbence bpon this occafion Swe atc fatten, 22.E.1.2.pari. 1 home

157 the name of a tone Villa, a mannos map pale, In Domefday, Alodium (ina large en ge.

fence ) Ggnifetha free mannoz, and Alodiarij 03 Alodarij, 10208 of the fame, and Lannemanni ia
there Gignifie 1020s of a mannoz, hauing ſocam & facam de tenentibn« & homipibus fuis. And TL.Com. ves -Regiff à
by the name ofa Mannoz, divers tosoneg may paffe, quod olim dicebatur fundusnunc mane- /.e&. fima. aT
rium dicitur, bp the name ef a ferme oz fearme firma, houſes, lands and tenements map gaffe, !7-P-3//*9. s. E. pag.
and firma is dertued ofthe Saxon $9020 feormian, to fede o» releeuc, fox in ancient time thep — —
reſerued vpon their Leaſes, cattell and other victuall and pꝛouiſion for theit ſuſtenance. Note a 4.€. DRAN 3-283.
fearme in the Mozth parts ig called a (Lacke, in Lancafbire a Fermeholt, in Eller a tithe. 2-5. 5.5. 35.4.6.29.
Wut the $0025 fearme, is the generati $9020, and ancientlp fundus fignifieda fearme and fomes ^^ Cei, 7.47.8.


timeland, Lands making a Knights f _ Ti.
—— B g ghts fa, ball paſſe bp the grant ofa a Knights fee de vno feo — fe. Hyde &


Vnum folinum, 93 folinusterræ in Domeſday bookc contepneth two plow lands and fome= Clanusl.lib-ca. Demefi y.
Sobat leffe then an halfc, £o2 there ít is fate Septem Solini,ozSolinz terre funt 17. cafucat. Vna 228.05. 2.04.26.27.
Hida feu carucata terre, Which tg all dne ag a plow-land,viz. afmuch ag a plough can til, iful- Ca jt 50.434. Regff.7 1.
leryc alfo fignifieth a plo w land.Vna virgata terræ;a par land, the Saxons called tt Zirdland, a z 55 2 s 3-8-3.
anb now the G. ig turned to a Y. ag ín fore Countries xo in fome 20. fome 24. (tt fore 30.60, 4.€. Ware: 8.2.9. 397-
Vna bouata terre, anorgange, 02. an orgate of land, (s ag much ag an ore catt till. Wut caruca- r8 ful. 180.269. 4 31.
taterrz, and bovata terre, are 5600209 compound, and may contepne meadow, pafture, and > -H, 3. Dreit.66,T 1. Com.
Spcob, neceflarp for uch tillage. Iugam terre in Domefday, contepneth balfe a plowan,and | Eos Greer a E
bp all thefe names inthe ratane of R.1, lands were vlually demanded and long after. a ENT MS

By thenameof a Orange, grangia a houſe o; edtfice, not only where coane is ſtoꝛed p like cow.158.
agin barnes, but neceflary places foy bufband2p alfo, ag (tables for hay and hoꝛſes, and ſtables 7 ^em-169. Lorwond.

. and flpes for other cattell, anda curtilage, and the clofe Soberein it Standeth Chall palle, and tt is f 5^ capra fans
8 French $0025, anb Ggnificth tbe fame, as Wwe take tt, 39 PLE.) Fermé,
Stagnum, tn &nglí( à pole doth conſiſt of — land, and therefoxe bp tbe name o£ 14.771:


Stagnum


»


Lib (Capa. Of Fee fimple. Jeël.r.


Ys E. 3.4.4.E.2-143-
8.£.1.38.. (0. E. 5. 482.
T3. E. 3. entry 57.
F.N.B. ioi.h.
Demefás]


Tempi.£ i. bro 861.
4-£.3.5.10.H. 7.30.
45.6.3.13.43. E. 3. 94.
35. H. 6.55.5. H. 6.3.
"Demef1ay, Bratton.
lib. 4. fa. 3.35.

Tnt. adiultcar ceram Rege.
pias €. 3. Up. i fi 9 S.
Jbef ur.


40. 38.4. H.6.14.
35.5 1.ca. 6.
Anno 10.R, 1. inter finer t»
Thefaur.Ferlingus terra centi-
31.acra;.
Dome(daj.
Fruftrums.\6.£. 3.tit.
emon 9.
Mich 8. H. z. in cipien. 9.
Coram "Rete-Warr. Ro.6.
Virg-eglog.1.4.
Brak. 211.233.22-E.4.tras.
¥40.pl.com,1 68.171.
23.H.8,Br.feffments 53.
9. f p.21.35.H.6..44.
pl.com. 169.
Demefiay.
Pafch. 30. E. v esrarn Rege
Kane.in Thefaur.


dratut, de extent mauri


Int.placita coram demine Rege
Mich, 10, E. 3 , Rer. 216.


Larnb.expo[it verb Thanys-


Lib. Rub.cap. 1 5. & ctp. 41.
Qr 76.W.1.c. 46.
7-H. 4.38.
Ls) .dentries tit, Aff.
oops pol.2.
D


7.H.4.38.
Flava lib,3,ca.35.


"Dorhefday.
10, R. 1 Inter fines.


9. E.3.39. Temps. E. 1.
br. 866. Mich, 30. E, 1.
eram RegeGloc.in Tbefaur,


Bratt. fa. 377.431.431. 3.27
Regülfe.r. 94.248.249.
I


7 Kt nter fies Engen,


Stagnum op a pole, the Water and land fhall pac alſo. Inthe fame manner Gurges, a deepe pit
of water, a goꝛs 02 guife confilteth of water andiand, and therefore by the grant thereof bp that
naut, theforie otl) vaſſe, anb a præcipe Doth ipethercof, and ſhalllay hie cípleeg in taking of
fithes, as Bꝛeames and Roches, Jn Domeiday ít (s called guort, gort & gors plurallp, ag
fo example, de 3.gorz mille anguille,

Hott is of a Foret, Parke, d afe viuarye, and warren in mans osonc ground, bp the
grant of any of them, not onlp the pꝛiutledge, but the lanb it felfepalle, for thep are compound,
In the bobe of Domefday, thatig called leuuad anb leuga, and leuncd, and leuuc, Swhich in
Latyn ig called leuca,

Stadium, 03 ferlingus five ferlingum, oꝛ quarentena terra, is a furlong of land, anb is ag
much az to fap, a furrow long, which tn ancient time was the eight part of a tuile, and iand
will paffc by that name, Bnd fome hold, that by that name land map be demanded. Bnd de
ferlingis & quarentenis, pott (ball reade Diners times in the boke of Domefday, and there pou
fball reade,In infula Rex habetvnü fruftrü terre vnde exeunt fex vomeres, Nota Fruftri,figntfieth
a parcell, Wareétum 0} wareccum, 92 varc&um, Doth fignifie fallow; Terra jacet ad Warcetü,
the land Ipeth fallow: but in truth the $5020 is vervactum, quafi veré novo victü feu füba&um,
terra novalis feu requieta quia alternis annis requiefcat,Tam culta novalia. 25p the grant of &
mefluage, o2 houfe mefuagium, the ozchard, garden, anb curtilage boe paffe, and fo an acre 02
moze map pafle bp the name of a boufe, It (a deriued of the french $0070 mefe, Jn Domefday,
a boufe in a Citie os urrough, ig called haga ; other houfes are called there manfionss, man
furæ & domus, and in an anctent plea concerning Feuerſham in ent, hawes are interpzeted
to fignific manfiones, Jn Noꝛmans French ít is called mefiul 62 mefuil : Bye fignificth a
Divelling, bye an habitation, andbyantodwell. — , '

It tg to be noted, that in Domefdav there be often named bordari feu borduanni, cofces,
cofcet, cotucami cotarij, are all in effect bozes oz bufbandmen, o? cotagers, fauing that bordarij,
which commeth of the French Word bordc for a cottage fignifieth, there boxes holding a little
boufe Sith fome land of hufbandzy bigger then a cottage, and coterelli are mare cottagerg, qui
cotag a & curtilagia tenent, !

Villani in Domefday (often named) are not taken there for bondmen, but had their name
de villis, becaufethep had fermeg, and there did woꝛke of hufbandete foz the 1ozd, and thep were
ever named befoze bordarij,&c, and fuchag are bondmen are called there fervi.

Colcberti often allo named in Domefday, fignífictl) G enantg in free forage bp free rent, and
foit is crpounded of recoꝛd Radmans and Radchemittres, ( Rad, o? rede, figntfieth firme and fax
bic) there alfo often named, thefe are liberi tenentes qui arabant & herciebant ad curiam domi-
ni, feu falcabant, aut metiebant, becaufe their eftates are firme and ftable, and they are manp
tímeg called Sochemans and fokemanni, becatife of their plough feruice,

Dreuchs fignifieth freetenants of a Mannoꝛ there alfo named, Taini 0% thaini mediocres
Swere Freehglders, and fometime called milites regis, and their land called Tainland, and there tt
1g laid, hzc terra T RE, fuit Tainland, fed poftea converfa in Reueland. Wutthainus revis is
taken fora Baron, fo? (t ig faidin an ancient Buthoz, Thainus regis proximus comiticft, &
ibidem mediocris thainus, & alibi Baro fivethainus. Berqualia 02 Bercaria, commeth of Berc,
an olo Saxon Sword, tfc at this bap foz barkes o2rindes of trees, andfigntficth a Gr anboufe,
02 à heath boufe, where barkes 0? tindes of tres are laid to tanne Softball, and Berquarij are
mentioned in Domefday.

U5 p Vaccaria in lao, (e ignified a Datrp houfe, deriued of vacca thecow, In Latpn tt tg,
Ladtar um 0g Laétitium, and vaccarius íg mentioned in Domefday, Bnd Fleta maketh alfa
mention of porcaría a ſwineſtpe.

KE bc content of an Acre (e knowne, the name fg common to the Œnglifh, German, and
French. In legall Latyn tt ts called, Acra, Which the Latiniſts calliugerum, In Domefday
it is called Arpeu prati, ſilvæ, &cc 1c, R.1, interfinesacra, ít CozneWall, continet 40, perticatas
in longitudine & 4.in latitudine & quelibet perticata de 16, pedibus in longitudine,

By the arant ofa Selion of land, Sclio terra, a ridge of land, Which contatneth no certatn=
ty, for feme be greater and fome be ieffer, and bp the grant devna porca, a ridge doth palle:
Sclio tg deriued of the French woꝛd Scllon Foz a ridge.

y the grant de centum libratis terra, og So.libratisterræ,02 centum folidatis terre, &c. Tanb
of that balnepafleth, and fo of moze o2 telle, and inanctent time by that name (t might hane bene
demanded. And many things map palle bp a name, that bp thefamename cannot bee Deman=
Ded bp apræcipe ( fox that Doth require moze prefcript forme ) but Sohatfoeucr map be Demanded
bp a precipe, may pafTe by the fame name by Swap of grant.

Frythe is a plaine betweene Swmdg, and fo ig land op lotmb, Combe, hope, dene, glyr,
hawgh, howgh fignifietha Wally, Howe hoo, knol law peu, and cope a fll, Ey, Iug and


worth fignifieth a &vatrp place oz Water, Falefia te a banke oz hill by the fea fide, tt commeth of


falaize, whieh Agntfieth the fame : of all tbefe yon {hail reade in ancient bakes, —
an


Lib.t. Of Fee fimple. Seit. 6


anb records, anb tothe end that our ſtudient ſhould not be diſcouraged For ant o£ knowledge
Shen he mectes Sith them ( nefcit enim generofamens ignorantiam pati) Swe have armed him
Sith the Ganification of them, to the end he map proceed in bis reading with alacrítíe; and fet
bpor, and know how to Swogke into, With Delight. tbefe rough mines of hidden trealure. : :

(m Wy the name of Minera 0? fodina plumbi ;&c4lje land (t felfe ſhall poffe in a grant it liuery (m)r.£.57.4:.63314


be made, and alfo be recouered in an affífe, & fic de imilibus, Regifl- 65.10 :H.7.212
15p the grant of a foulocourfe op the like lands anb tenements map taffe, (n ) Tenementü,& e- 770777751195.


nement ts a large 39020 to palle, not onlp lands, and other inheritances which are holden, but (5 46.3 vum
alfo offices, rents, commons, profits appzender out of lands and the like, wherein a mam hath 35.£.3.¢ranr.102. ^
any franktenement, ano whereof be is feifed, vt de libero tenemento, Wut herecitamentumy hes 11.0.6.22.27. 14.£.4.4.
reditament, is the largett Word of all inthat Binde, for Whatfoener may be inherited is an here= 297 79. |—
Ditament, be ít cozpozeall oztucozpozeall, reall ot perfonall oz mixt. AVE PRET
Co )# man feifed of lands in fe atl) divers Charters,deds,and eutdences,and maketh afeoffz nso: Buckburfscac. =
ment in fe, either without Warranty, o2 With warranty onip againk hin € his heires,the put 44-E;3- 11.5.39. E. 3.17.4:
chafer ſhal haue all the Charters, deeds and euidences, as inctdentto the lands, and ratione terre, 19-7 P m ip Deas
totheend he may the better defendthe land himfclfe,hauing no warranty to recouer ín vaiuesfor ares à
the eutoences are ag it Were the Ginewes of the land, and the feoffoꝛ betna not bound to warran⸗ 5
tic, hath no ble of tem. Wut tf che feoffor be bound'to warranty, fo that he (d beundto render
in balue,then ig the defence of the title at hig pertll,and therefore the keoffee tn that cafe fall baue
no deeds that comprehend warranty, bercoË the feoffos map take-aduantage, Allo hee (ball
haue fact) Charters ag map ſerue him to Deratgne the Warrantic paramount; fo hee thalt
haue all Deeds and eutdences, which are material for the matntenance of the title of the land,
rhe * euidences which concerne the poſſeſſion, and not the title o£ the land, the fcoffæ (bail
uethem.


«| Aaser cy tener. Theſe two voords doe in this place proue a
Double Ggníficatiut viz. a auer.to pate an eftate of inheritance of lands diſcendible to his heires
and tenci to Dolo the fame of ſome ſuperioꝛ lozd.

There haue beene eight foꝛmall oz ozocrlp parts of à deede of feoffment,viz. 1, the premiffes oF V:4.548.4o.d».570.57 1:
the deed implied bp Littleton, 2.the habendum Swbere Littl, herefpeaticth, 3. the tenendum inen- 777 pu dr egi
tionedbp Litt, 4, the Reddendum, s,fjo claufe ofwarrantic, 6.the In cuius rei teftimonium, PADS PAR
Comprehending the fealing, 7. The date ofthe deede contayning the dap, the moncth, thepeare, Bratton hi. c. fe.396.4:
and ftile of the King, o2 ofthe pearc of our Loꝛd. (a) Laftiy, the claufe of bijste(tibus, and pet 329-38.H.6.32.36.
all thefeparts Were contained in verp few and figntficant Swords, (b) Hæc fuit candida illius tr) hd 3: cafà fo. o6;
etatis fides & fimplicitas, que pauculislineisomnia fidei firmamenta pofuerunt, ; IRA. Tram enL enfe,

Che office of the premitles of the drede is twofold. fir rightly to name the fcoffoz andthe (b) L1).6.f0.43. im Sir —
feoffer. And {econdip to compꝛehend the certainty of the lands og tenements te be conueped by the bon] Mitdentayes ease:
fcoffment, either by expreſſe words, oz Which map bp reference be reduced to a certainty; £02, id
certum eft quod certum reddi poteft, Æbe habendum hath alfa two partg,viz, firft,to name az 145-228
gaíne the feoffer, andfccondip to limit the certaintic ofthe eftate, & be Tenendum at thts dap
Sbere the fee (imple pale, mult be ofthe chiefelozd of the fee. And of the Reddeadum moze
fbalbe fato in pts proper place inthe chapter of Rents; Df the claufe of warrantie moye fball be
{aid (n the chapter of warranties, In Cuiusrei teftimonium figillum meum appofiui wag ade Pri#rfd.1or:
ded, for the Seale ig of the eflentiall part ofthe ded. The date of the dede many times Antiqui⸗
tie omitted, andthereafon thereot wag fo? that the limitation of pꝛeſcription o2 time of memozp
did often in pzocelle of time change, and the law was then holden that a deede, bearing date, be⸗

Fore the limitted time of paefcríption was not pleadabie, and therefore thep made thelr Deedes (p ) Lamb. expofit.vorb.
Swithout date, to the end thep might alleage them within the time of prefcription, Bnd the date reraex.feripto.
of the Deedes Was commonly added intheraigneof E,z.andE.3.andfocucrGnce, ——— Vid.Eorte(ewe.ciR-3 x:

And fomctimes antiquitic added a place, ag Datum apud D, which Was in diſaduantage of [Ah fertmdport rhe
the feoffer,foz being in gencrall, be map allcage tbe deede to be made where he Wil, And laffip, E. 2 pus the fécond >
Antiquitie did adde, hijs teftibus (3 the continent of the becoc after the In cuius rei teftimonium, part of the snsfitures, Maribr.
wꝛitten ith the fame handthat the deede was, Which Wwitnelles Socre called, the Dede read, ««P.6-6 cap 14.
and then thett names entreb, (p ) And this tg called charter land, and accozatnalp the Saxons (a) —* — 5.108.
called it Bockland, as it were bokeland which claufcof hijs teftibus in fubiets deeds ContttiN= & 47 > paces
ed vntill and in theratgne of H.8 but now is wholly omitted, And ttappearcth bp the ancient 3.7.3 spreces,210.
Authors and Authouties of the Law ; that before the Statute of 12,E,2,ca,2, Pꝛocclſſe ſhould 4-E.2gird 119.
beawarded againt the toitnelles named (n the Devde, teftesin carta nominatos, ( a ) andthat ( b) Mirror cap. 4. $ di
thefame Statute was bat am affirmance of the Common law, Sobíc not being Well vnder * ER
fon, bath caufed varietie of opinions th our bookcs. Wut the delap therein Was (o great, AND rad L2. ; fo. 2 88 293.
fometiines (though rarely ) bp exceptions againt thofe witneſſes, Which being found true, thep Brit fo.134-135.101-
Socte not to be ſworne at all, neither to be topnedtothe Jury, nozas Switnelles ; (b) ag it the Fiera 652r


Witnefle Were infamous, for crampie,tfhe beattainted c faift verdict, oꝛ o£ a confpiracie a£ the "i ia 21 6j 14°
i futte


4


e


we


fu


Lib Capa. Of Fee fimple. Setd.r.


43.2.3. Confpir. 11.
27-59.
33.H.6.66. 21. H. 6.36.
(c) Feriefcu.cap. 26.
"Pat. 5$. H.3.m, 3-
Stan PL (er.174.8


(d), Fertefeue.ca.15.


(e) 22.4f12.& 41.
$14.11.
19.E.3.tit. Af-4o9-


(f) 34.E.1. Preces. 108.


(a) 34.£ tit proces 308.
11. ff pig. 20.12.72 ff.p.1.
13.41.18. f.p. 11.

33 4[[15.23 71-1 $-
40-4]: 13.48. 4f: p. 5-
z1.N.6.30.


fuite of the Thing, op conntded of perinrp, o of a Pꝛemunire, oꝛ of foꝛgerie byon the Sta tute of
5. Eliz-cap.14.and nct bpon the Statute of 1.H.s.cap.s-02€onuíd of felony, o» by tub gement
loft his eareg, oz (tob bpon tbe pillozy, o2 tumbꝛell, ez b&ne ftigmaticus bganded, 02 tbt like,
whereby they become infamous foz (ome offences, quæ {unt minorisculpa funt maioris infa-
mix. (c) fa champion in a Writ of right become recreant 02 coward, hee therebp looſeth
liberamlegem and thereby becomes infamougs,and cannot bea Switnefle,fop regularly hee that
Ioofcth liberam legem, becommeth infamous and can be mo Wwitnelle, <D 21€ the witnelle be an
infidell, o2 ££ non fanc memory, o» not of difcrction, oz a partie interefled 02 the like. (d) But
often times a man may bechallenged to be of a Furp, chat cannot be challenged to be a Wit
nefle ; andtherefoze though the witneſſe be of the neerclt alliance, o2 kindzed, o» of councell, oz
tenant, o» feruant to either partic, (02 anp other exception that maketh him not infamous, oꝛ to
Svant buderftanding, oz Difcretton, 02 a partic in interett ) though it be pzoucd true, fball not
exclude the Wwitnelletobeefworns (€) bathee fhall bee fwoine, and bis credit tpon the
exceptions taken again® him left to tbofe of the 3iurp , who are trpers of the fact, infomuch
agfome bokes aue fato that though the witnefle named in the Dede be named a Dilleifog
in the tozit, yet he ſhalbe ſwoꝛne ag a Swttnelle to the decde,(f ) A witnelle amongſt others na
med in a Ded Wag outlawed, € no 1320ccg Wag awarded agaínft him bp the Statute,becaufe
he Wagextra lege”, and an outlawed perfon cannotbe an Auditor. And the Court in fome
boks hance fatd, that thep bauc not feene witnelles challonged, Which is regularip to be vnder⸗
tod, With thelimttattons abeuc-fato, but fuch as are returned to be of a Fury, arcto bee chal-
lenged foz the caufes afozefatd fox outlawꝛie, and bíucrg ether caufeg (forthe which a Wwitnefle
cannot bechallenged ) and fuch proces againtt witneſſes vantthed. But feing the witneſſes
named (n a Deede (ball betopnedto the Inqueſt, and (ball tn fome tort iopne alfo tn the verdict
Cin which cafe (£ Jury and witneſſes finde the Dede that is dented to bee the Dede of the
partic, the aduers partie ts barred of his attaint, becaufe there tg moze then 12. that affirine
the verdict.) 3t is reafon that in that caíc of topning,fuch exception fpall bee taken againſt the
Witnelle ag againft one of the 3lurp, becaufe he ts in the nature ofa Juror. (a) And therefore
to put one ccample (f bcc be outlawed in a perfonall action hee cannot bec topned to the Furie,
but pet thatis no exception agatnft him to exclude ttm tobe ſwoꝛne as a witneſſe to the Jurp.
Bnd the reafon of ail thts ig, for that tf he Mitl others ſhould topnein berdia With she Jury
in affirmance of the Dede, the partie ſhould be barred of his Attaint. Wut note there muſt be
moze then onc Soítnc(Tc, that Mall be topned to the Inqueſt. And albett tbep fopne With the
Jury, and finde it not his Desde, not withſtanding this topnina, the partie {ball haue bis at-


(6) 48.2.3.30.12.H.6.fe 6.4 taint, foritis a martine tn Law,(b) Chat witnelles cannot teftífie a negatíue, butan affirma⸗


§0.€. 3-16.43.E.3.32.
¥2-H.4.9-19.E.2-— 7-408.
"Tafth.Va. E, 3.ceram Rege
Dewn.in. Tiefaur,
Fleta.lis.6.cap.6.
Fitz. N.B.106. H*dr 97.6.
(6) Mirrors. 5.

( ewm. fo. 1o.
Brad ish, 5. fo. 406.


Fetal. 6.44.33.
8.£,3.390. 32. E. 3.21.9.


Glomil.lib.r0.c4.1 2-
Fletalib.6.ca- 3 y.


Daſch. go. Ta.im. Com.banes
epo the Gtat:of Bankronts,


(d) Plena lib 2 44.44.

1 3E. Y.rit Vi!l:3ó 37.
19. F.2 Ibid 32.

Ce) Tr.8.1a tn Com.banee
Smith: (Cafe.


tiue, Bud (onc of the Witnelles named in the Deedebe onc of the panell, he thalbe put out of
the panel, and all thefe fecretg of lam, Doc notablp appeare in our bokes.

To but dp thts point, (t is to be knee, (c). that ben a trpallis bp witneſſes, regularly
the affirmatiue ought to be proucd by two o2 three witneſſes, as to pzouc a fummons of the te=
nant, oz thechallenge of a Juroꝛ, andthe like, But Sobhen the trpallig bp berbíd of 12.men,
there the tudgement ig not giuen opon Switnefles, oz other Kinde of eutdence, but bpon the ber=
Did and bpon fuc) euidencẽ ag fg giuen to tbe Jury thep giue their verdict. Bnd Braon faith,
theretg probatio duplex,viz. viua, ag by Witnelles viua voce, and mortua, ag bp Deedes, wꝛi⸗
tings, and inffruments. And manp times Juries, together With other matter, are much in=
duced by prefumptions, whereof there bethzeefogts,v z. otolent,probable,and itaht oz teimeraríe,
Violenta prefumptio fg manp times plena probatio, ag (f one be runnethozo the body With a
150020 in aboufc, Whereof bc inftantip dicth, and a man (g ferme to comeont of that houſe ith
a blcody ſword, and no other man Wag at that timein the houfe, preſumptio probabilis moucth .
littie,but,Prefiumptio levis feu temeraria,moneth notat all. So it te in thecafe of a Charter of
feoffinent,ifalithe Sitnelles to the Dede be dead( ag no man can beepe his Wwitnelles aliue,and
time weareth out all men) then bíolent prefumption which ffanog Fos a profe is continual anb
quiet poſſeſſion, foꝛ cx diuturnitate temporis omnia prefumuntur folenniter effc acta, alſo the Ded
tray recetue credit, per collationem figillorum, (cripturæ,&c. & fuper fidem cartarum mortuis
teftibus erit, ad patriam de neceffitate recurrendum,

Note, ít hath beenerefolned bp the Juſtices, that a Swifecannot be pꝛoduced cither agaínft oz
for her hufband, quia funt duæ anima in carne vna, anditmight beacaufe of implacable diſ⸗
coꝛd ano Ddiffention betweene tbe hufband and the-wife, and a meane of great inconnentence, but
(d) in fone cafes women are bp Taxo wholly excluded to beare teftimonp, ag to prone a man to
be a Villeine, mulieres ad probationem ftatus hominis admitti nondebent. It was alfoagred
by the whole Court (e) that tran Jnformation bpon the ſtatute of Wfurte, the partie to the
blurious contract hail not be admitted to be a witneſſe again the Qifurer, forin effet hee


in extderce pen an iufo ſhould be teftisin propria cauſa, and ſhould avotde bis one bonds and affnranceg, and diſ⸗


am upon the ftarute of 'Ufwry
‘Britt fe.s 34.


' charge himlelte of tbe monep boꝛrowed, and, though he commonly raífe bp an Bnformer to ex⸗


hibite the 3intormatíon, pet in rei veritace he ig the partie, Bnd herewith in effet agræth Erit-


ton,


Liba. Of Fee fimple. iue. cca


ton, that he that challengeth a right in thething, in Demand cannot be à So(tneffe, for that be ts
a in intereſt. Wut now let vs returne to that from the Which bp Swap of diqreflion (ope
on this occafion ) Swe arc fallen,

And the ancient Charters of the King Which palled away anp franchife o3 renenne of any
eftate of inheritance had ener this clanfe of hijs ceftibus;of the greateft men of the kingdome, ag
the Charters of creation of Mobility, pethane at this dap: when hijs teftibus Mag omittcd,and
Soben celte me ipfo came in into the Rings grants, vou (ball reade in the {econd part of the In⸗
ftutes magna charta,ca.3 8.3] hauc tearmed thefatd parte of the esd, tosmall 02 orderlp parts,
fox that they be not of the cflence of a Deede of Feffment, for (tfucb a Deede be Without premil-


fes, habendum tenendum, reddendum claufe of warrantie, the Claufe of 1n culus rei teftimoni-


um, the Date. anb the elaufc of his teftibus, pet tbe Derde is gus, (£) Foꝛ if a man bp Dee (6)


Jte cs 1.6.6. &


giue lands toanother, and to his heires without moze faping, this de gad, the put bis Seale «s S 1-
to the Dede, deliuer it,and make líuerp accozbínglp, ( 9 )So (t ig tf A, glue lands, to haue Gleoillib.vo care


and to hold, to B.an his heires, this to good, albeit tbc feoffoc (s not named in the premiles, pret —— fo 66.
Bnd pct no Weil aduifed man will trak to ſuch Deedes, Which law bp conflrucion maketh (y) Vid sea mes of the law,


god vt res magis valeat; but When foꝛme and ſubſtance concurre,then is the Deede fatte and abs verb. fairs.


pi The fealing of Charters, and Deeds (s much moze ancient then fome, ont of er= id Glow ; es mm
timagíneb; £02 the Charter of the King Edwy n, bgother of Hing Edgar, bearing date 7 "09493: 0 Pie


ror, ba


Anno Domini,9$6. made of the land called lecklea in the Ifle of Ely, wag not only fealed with Ben a PAR.
big one Seale ( Swhich appeareth bp theſe words, Ego Edwinus gratia dei totius britannicæ the, ate of, TN 7
L


telluris rex meum donum proprio figillo confirmavi ) butalfo the Biſhop of Winchefter pat to
bis Seale, Ego Ælfwinus Winton Ecclefiz divinus fpeculator propritt figillü impreſſi. Bnd the
Charter ot Ring Offs, Wherebp he gaue the 19 cter-pence, doth pet rematne Dunder Heale, But
no King of England, bcfozc, os ince tbe Conqueft, fcaled With anp feale of Armes, before King
R.1. butthe Scale was the king Gtting in a chaire on the one fioc of the Seale, and on hoꝛſe⸗
backe on the other fioc in Diners formes. And King R.1. fealed Sith a Scale of twa pong,
fo; the Conqueroz for England bare two Lpons,and King Iohn tn the right of Noꝛmandp
( the Duke Whereof bare one Upon ) was the irk that bare thee 3 pong, and made his Seale
accordingly, and allthe Kings fince haus Followed him, And King E-3. fu anno 13. of hig
taíqne, did quarter the Armes of France With his thee Lyons, andtoke vpon him the title of
ing of France, and all his fuccellozs bauc followed him therein,

Bn ancient Charters of fcoffment there Sas never mention made of the delinerp of the Ded
0? anp liucrp of feifin indoꝛſed, fo, certainly the witnelles named tn the Dede, Were Witnelles
ofboth sand witneſſes cither of delivery of the Deede, oz of liuerp of ſeilin by erpesile tearmes

_ Swag but of latter tines, and the reafon was in refpect of the notoztetie of the feoffinent, And 3l
fauc knowne fome ancient Deedes of fcoffinent hauing liuerx of feifin tndozled fufpedco, and
after Detected of fozgeric. Bs (£a Dede in the ftile of the King name him Defenfor fidei befoze


13.H.8. 02 fupreame head before 20.H.8. at bat time hee Swag firft acknowledged fupreame 2122 863,16.


dead bp the Ciearate, albert the King feb notthe ffíle of fupreame head in His Wharters,ec.
tí(l22.H.8. 02 King of Ireland, befoze 33-H.8. at which time he aſſumed the title of the King of
Ireland, being beforethatcalicd 3,020 of Ireland, ít (s certainly toꝛged, & fic de fimilibus.


And fome haue obferned, that Grace was attributed to ting H.4. Excellentgrace to WANG pig 2.H.4.ca,1 5. nhere Ropa
H.6.Maicftieto ing H.8. and before the ing was called, Soucraigne Lord,Liege Lord ,High- all Maielly wattribused te
neffe, and Kingly Highnefle which in Latpn in legall proceedings ts called regia celfitudo, ag ^:
the beginning of the etition of right tothe Xing tg, humilime fupplicauit veftræ celfitudini Mai


Fens,


regie,&c. and the like. And bpon this occafion tt fball notbe (mpertínent5 Ceíng tt te pare of Y
the formal Deede, to fct downe the feuerall files of the kings of England ince the Conqueſt.

William the Conqueror commonly Spied bímfelte Willielmus rex, ano fometimes Willielm.
ae haa Bnd the like dtd William Rufus, and fometimes Williclmus dei gratia rex
Anglorum,

Henry the firft, Henricus rex Anglorum. and ſometimes Henricus dei gratia rex Anglorum,

Mawde thefole daughter and heire of H.i.wzote Matildis imperatrix Henrici regis filia &
Anglorum domina. Diuers of whofe creations and avant 3| auc fene,

King Stephen vſed tbe ftile that ing H.1,0f0,

Henry the 2, Fitz emprice omitted dei gracia, and feb this ftíle, Henricus rex Angliæ, dux
Normanniæ, & Aquitaniæ, & comes Andegauia, hee bauíng the Dutchie of Aquitaine, anb
Garledome of Poitiers in the right of Elianor hig ifcbetre to both: Bnd the Earledome of A-
niowe Tournic and Maine, agfonne and beíre to letfery Plantagenet bp the fatü Mawde hie
Wife, daughter and fole heire of King H.1. She Wag fir matríco to Henry the Emperour,
anb after his death tothe fa(o Ieffery Plantagenct. Which Dutchie of Aquitaine Voth include,
Gafcoigncand Guian.

King R.r.bfep the ft(le that H.2. his father Did, pet wag be Hing of Cyprus, and after ef Ie-
ruíalem, but neuer feo either of thers, à; d

5 3 King


King. and Crimen lefe
e


atfs is farre more


Lib. n


Vid. Rot.Parllam.ann⸗o x. H.6.


15. be was fHled Rex
Francie & Anglia & domi-
au Fame ^


Linery of feifín incident tea
Seaffisent. Vid.SeB.59.


«Mirr.24.2.6.1 4,
Bratt. lib, 2.72.62. 5.
Flet.iib.6.ca. 1. dr 54
dr Ith v. ca. 13.
Glamalllib.7.¢a.t.
& 64.13. 13,


(3) Brat. lb. 6. fo. 435.
438. Britt. ca.65.f0.167.
dr ea.83.

Fleta lib. 1.ca.5.


Cap. I.


Of Fee finiple: Sefl.t


King Iohn bfed that ftile, but Swith this addition Dominus Hibetnizand pet all thathe had
in Ircland was conquered bp his father Bing H.z. which tytle of Deminus Hibernia, Hæaf-
fumed, ag annexed to the Crowne, albeit his father, in the 23, peare of Hig raigne, bad created
bim King of Freland tn his lifetime,

King H.3. ftileb bimfrlte ag bis father ing Lohn did, vntillthe 44. peare of big ratgne,” and
then he left out of hig (File Dux Normanniz, & comes Audegauiæ,and Sprotc onlp Rex Anglia
dominus Hibernix, & dux Aquitaniæ. i ;

King E.1. ſtiled bimfeife in ithe manner ag Zing H.3. hig father did, Rex Anglie dominus
Hiberniæ,& dux Aquitaniz. Ænofo did King E.2. during all his ratgne. Bnd King E.s. feb
the felfcfame file bntítl the 13.peare of hig raigne, and then be filed bfmfelfe (n this foune
Edwardus dei gratia Rex Anglia & Franciæ, & dominus Hiberniz, leauing out of bis file dux
Aquitania. He was Ring of france, as fonne and heire-of Iſabell Wife of Hing E.2. daughter
and beireof Philip la beau Ring of France, he ſirſt quartered the French armopyes Swith the
€nalítb in his great Seale, Annodomini 1338. & regni fui 14.

King R.2 and King H.4. bfed tbefame ftíletbat King E.3.010. Bnd King H.s. tntíll the
8. pearc of bis raigne continued thefame ftile, anb then wꝛote himfelfe, Rex Anglix hares &
regens Franciæ, & dominus Hiberniæ, and fo continued during big life,

King H,6. gote, Henricus dei gratia Rex Anglie & Francie, & dominus Hibernie ; this
King being crowned in Paris King of France feo the ſaid ſtyle 3 o.peares, till he was diſpoſ⸗
ſeſſed of the Crowne bp King E.4. whoatter bc had ra(gneb alfo about tenne peares, King H.o.
Swag reftozed to the Crowne againe, and then wꝛote, Henricus dci gratia rex Angliæ & Francie,
& dominus Hibernia ab in choatione rcgni fui 49. & recaptionis regiæ potettatis primo.

King E,4,R.3, and H.7. tiled themiciues, Rex Anglie & Francix, & dominus Hiberniæ.

King H.8. vſed the fame (tile till the tenth peare of big ratane,and then hee added this Word
( O&avus ) ag Henricus oftavus dci gratia, xc. Ju the 13. pearcof his ratane he added to his
ſtile fidei Defenfor, Inthe 22. peare of his ra(gne, in the end of his tile hee added fupremum
caput Ecclefia Anglicane. Bnd in the 33, pearc of bis vaigne he ttiled himfelfe thug Henricus
octavus dei gratia Angliz, Francie & Hiberniz rex fidei defenfor,&c. & in terra Ecclefie An-
glicanz & Hiberniæ fupremum caput.

King E.6. feb thefame ftile, and fo did Queene Mary fn the beginning of her raigne, and by
that name ſummoned her firft Parliament, but fone after omitted lupremum caput. Bnd after
her nrarriage Sith King Philip, tbe ſtile notwithftanvding that omílTion ag the longeft that
€ucr Wag,viz. Philipand Mary by the grace of God King and Queene of England and France,
Naples, Ierufalem and Ireland Defendors of the Faith, Princes of Spaine and Cicihe, Archdukes
of Auftria, Dukesof Millaine, Burgundic,and Brabant, Countees of Hasburgh, Flanders and
Tyroll. And this (ie continued t(ll the fourth and fift peare of King Philipand Qucene Ma-
ry, and then Naples Mas put out, and in place thereof both the Cicills putin, and foít continu=


- ed all the life of Queene Mary.


3 ned not mention the {tile of Zane Elizabeth, ing lames, noz ef our Soneraigne
3,020 King Charles, becaufe they arcfo well knowne, and 3| feare J hauebesnc to iongcon=
cerning this point, which certatnelp is not bnneceflarp to be knowne foꝛ many refpects, Wut
to thew thecaufes and reafong of thefe alterations Would afke a trcatífe of ít ſelfe, and doth
not fot to the end, that 3] haucapmedat. Bnd now ict bs returne to the learning of Char=
ters and deeds of Jrcoffmentg and Grants,

Uerp necellary it (g,tbat witneſſes fhoulb be vnderwzitten 02 indoz{ed,for the better ſtreng⸗
thening of Deedes, and their names ( f£ tbey can “write ) Swzitten Soítl) their one hands.
Foz Liuerp of ſeiũn. Scehereafter Sc&.so. and for Deedes, Sect.c6. and of condictonail
Deedes. Se our Authoꝛ in his Chapter of conditions, Bud now let be proceede to the other


Swords of our Buthoz,
a Alyy e a (es beires. Heres, in the legall vnderſtanding of the


Common Law, tmpipeth that he (9 ex iuftis nuptijs procreatus, fo? Heres legittimus eft quem
nuptiz demonftrant,and ig he to whom lands, tenements,02 hereditaments bp the act of God,
and right of biod boc difcend of fame eftate of inheritance, fot folus Deus haeredem facere poteft
non homo: dicunturaurem hereditas & heres ab harendo,quod eft arctè infidendo,nam qui he-
reseft heret, vel dicitur ab hærendo quia hæreditas fibi hzret, licet nonnulli heredem di&um vc-
lint quod hzres fuit,hoc eft dominusterrarum,&c. que ad eum perueniunt.

B monter which hath not the thape of man kinbe, cannot be hetre o2 inherit any land, albeit
it be bꝛought forth within marrtage, (a ) but although be hath defosmitic in anp part of big bo-
die, pet (£ he hath humane fhape he map be etre, Hij qui contra formam humani generis cone
uerfo more procreantur, vt fi mulier monftrofum, vel prodigiofum enixa, inter liberos non com-
putentur partus tamen, cui natura aliquantulum ampliaucrit vel diminuerit, non tamen fuper-


abundantur (vt fi fex digitos vel nifi quatuor habuerit) bene debet inter liberos connumcrari.
$i


Libs. Of Fee fimple. "eu Bi


Si invtilia natura reddidit, ut i membra, tortuofa habuerit, non tamen is partus monftrofus.
Znocher faith, ampliatio (eu diminutio membrorum uon nocet. (b) A Wattard cannot bee (b jV1d. $e8.188.359.
dire, £9 ( as hath beenc faid before ) quiexdamnaro coir nafcuntur inter liberos non com- Pye if 2 [hot Bronte,
putentur. Œucrp heire is citer a maie, oz female, op an Soermoplyabite, chat ig both male AND 14/7. p «5 zen.
female, And an Hermophzadite ( which is alſo called A ndrogynus ) {ball bee heire, either ag cong.;8.
male, 03 femalr, according to that kinde of thefere Swbich doth prcuatle. Hermophradita, tam
maículo, quam feminæ comparatur, fecundum prævalefcentiam fexus in calefcentis. Bnd ace
cordinglp ít ought to be baptized. See more of this matter, Set 35. ad

(c) Biman teífeb of lands tn fee hath (Tucan Blien that te borncout of the Kings lMgeance, (© —
he cannot be heire,propter detectum fubicétionis,albeit he be vorn Soíthía latofull mariage, Be zeca-lt.s f» 42g.
made Denizen bp the Rings Letters patents, pet cannot he inherite tobís father os anp other. gri fo zo. Fleta lis. 6.
But orheriwife tg ít, tf he be naturalized by act of Parliament, fog then bec ts not accounted in «747-13 E. ;.br.677- )


Jas alienigena, but indigena. But after one bee made Denizen, the {ue that bec hath after= as. E.3.denatis ultra mare.


Sards thalbe beirc to im, butno tue that be had before, JE an Biien cometh into England 2777 78, se.
and bath iſſue two fonnes ,thefe two ſonnes are indigenz ſubiects borse, becaufetbep atebogne 14.11.4.19.20. 3.H.6.55.
within tbc realme, And yet fonc of them purchaſe lande in fe, and dieth without iſſue, big 227.6559 E «7.
brarber (alt * inte beire, for * Sas nouer any inberitable bled bet weene the father and I7 Can caf.
them, agp Where thefonnes by no p ftiito can be bete tothe father, the one of t ot
be heireto the other, See moze at large of this matter, Scé.198. hat ries sinned sie

Fa man bc attatnted of treafon, ozfclonp,although hee bebozne Swithin wedlocke, bec can .-. Boas. 3:93!
bebeire tono man, nozany man boire to him propter deli&um, fo? that bp bis attaindoz bis 3.E.2.dient.Br.64.
bind is corrupted: And this coꝛruption of bindts fohigh, as it cannotabfelutelp bee falued, 31.£ 1.4 enr.17-
and reſtored but bp Act of Parliament, kor albeit the perfon attainted obtaine his Charter of 1765 Dewin 2
pardon, pet that doth not make any tobe hetre Whole blood was coꝛrupted at tbe time of theat= .. eee 19. Fat.
tainder, cither Downward o2 vpward. (d) Ag ifa manbatbíffuc a fonne before Dig attainer 9.7.5.9. —
and obtaineth his pardon, and after the pardon hath tſſue anotherfenne, atthe time of the at= (d)Stanf-pl.cor.195.196,
tainder the blaxo of the cldelt was copupted anb therefore bc cannot be heire. Wut it bec die liz 770: 310137.
níng his father the pounger fonnethall ber heire, foz peSvag not in cffe at tho time of the ate 12; 7, 2... seine
tainder, and the pardon reftogedthe bind ag to all lues begotten afterwards. But in that caſe Fiera di. 1.02.28.
f£ the eldeſt ſonne had furuiued the father, the poungerfonne cannot be hetre, becauſe he hath an
elder bzꝛother which by polibilitic might aue inherited. but tf the elder brother had beene an
Alien the pounger fonne ſhouid bee heire, fo? that the alien neuer had anp inberitable blo tn
bün. See moꝛe plentifullp of this matter, Sect 646.547.

FE aman bath uc two fonnes, and after te attainted of treafon, o2 felony, and onc of the
fonnes purchafe lands and dieth without iſſue, the other bzotber fhall be bis betre, for the at= « p, she EFxchequer Mich.s0.
tainder of the father cozrupteth thelineall blo® only, and not the collaterali bled betweene the 6-21. £la inte Cafe con
bzethꝛen, Which Was belted in them befozethe attatnder, and cachof them by pellibilitío might Hey.
haue bene beíre to the father, and fo hath tt beene adiudged, ( *) but otherwile tn the cafe of c ) Bratton lib. 3.fel. 130.
the alien ne» as bath beene fato, («) Wutfome auc holden that (£a man after bebcattainteD ren 17, «e
of treafon oꝛ felony baue iffuctivofonnes that the one of themcannot bee heire to the other be- (+) Bradf.lib.5.fo.421.
caufe they could not be heireto the father, fo? chat thep neucr had any fnberítableblo in them, 430.434. lé. a. fe. 12.

(f) Due that ts bozne deafe and bumbe map be heire to another, albeit tt was otherwile Flr«.!.6.04.39-47-
Holden inancienttine, inbfoíf borne deafe, vumbeandbitnde, forin hoc cali, vitio parci- 14-73-6877 3% 25
tur naturali, bnt contrac tbcp cannot, Jldcots, leapers, madmen, outlawesin Debt, trefpasies, 5$ 7. 57.5; 6.5. Ley 49-
* the like ; perſons excommunicated,men attainted in a præmunire, oꝛconuicted of bereüe, map ;


(g) ifa man hath a Wife, and dieth, anb within a berp lhort time after the Wife marrieth es MADE renta
agaíne, and Within 9. vie vd hath a chtide, fo ag tt may bethe childe of the onc op of the other, 485.¢-c.Opus eximm^ 48.6.
Some baue fat, That in this cafe thechtide map chofe big father, quia in hoc cafu filiatio Lemberd deyrtfais Anglorum
non poteft probari, anbfo is the boke to be intended, fo? anopring of Which queftion and other Vin ave
inconnentences, this was the Law befozethe Conqueft; Sit omnis vidua fine marito duodecim 5, 36, 8. — ———
menfibus, & fi maritauerit perdat dotem. Fleta.lib.6.06.1. —

Ch) 2 man by the Common Law cannot bebeire to gods op chattels,foz hares dicitur ab hæ · ·i.
reditate. (i) ifa man buy divers fithes, ag Carps, Breames, Conches,ec, and put them fn (D 7/6366 mcr
his Pondanddieth, inthis cafe the beire thal bane them and not the Œrecutozs, but they shall 73, —
qoc With the inheritance, becauſe they were at libertie anb could mot bec gotten Without indu⸗ Srenfordas.b.18.E.4.8.
rie ag by nets, and other ingines, otherwife tt ts (£tbep were in a trunke op the like, Like⸗ 22.~4g-25-18-11.8-2.
Swife Dercin a Parke, contes (a toarren, and Doues in a doue houſe young and old fball (k) 138.3113 5.339
gocto the etre. (k) But of ancient time the heite Mas permitted to haue an action of debt by= ; 5. T ipe ——
ane made to his Auncefkoz and bis hetres, but the law te not fo helven at this Day. f.48.26.€ 3.
Seti 2, V dforan heireleme j
- (1) Ftis to benotedthat onecannot be heice till after the death of his aumceEop, he is callen beredisermm etrinepals


apparens, heire apparant, 3 AREE
"5


a


Lib. — (Capa. Of Feefimple. Seéf.t.
3


n ott olde beokes and records tbere (s mention made of another heire,viz, hares aftrarius,

focalico of A (trc chat is an barthof a boufe, becaufe the awncefter bp conuepance hath fet big

, betreapparant, and bts Eamilp in a boufe anb lining in bis life time,of whom Braéton faith thus;

(a) Bral.lib.2.fo.8 q . (a) Item efto quod haves fit aftrarius, vel quod aliquis anteceffor reftiruat hzredi in vita fua
v one 80. hzreditatem, & fe dimiferit, videtur quod nullo tempore iacebit haereditas, & ideo quod nec
— relevari poffit, nec debet necrelevium dari. (b) Foʒthe benefit, and fafctít of right heites contra


Mirrer.cap. à. 6.18. : :

Cordi, s " partus fuppofitos, the Law hath pzoufbeD remedy by the tozít de ventre infpiciendo, whereof

(b) Reniftr. fo. 337. the rnit in tbe 1Regifter is thts ; Nota fi quis habenshæreditatem duxeritaliquam in vxorem &

jen ai poftea moriatur ille fine harede de corpore fuo exeunte; per quod haereditas illa fratri ipfius de-

— fun&i defcendere debeat, & vxor dicit ſe eſſe pregrantem de ipfo defunéto cum non fit, habeas
E. .- frater & hæres breve de ventreinfpiciendo, It feemeth bp Bracton and Fleta Which followed


him, that this wait doth lye, Vbi vxoralicuiusin vita viri fui fe pregnantem fccit cum non fit,
vel poft mortem viri fun fe pregnantem fecit cum non fit ad exherzdationem veri haredis,&c. ad
quærelam veri hæredis per preceptum domini regis, &c, Which ig to bebnderftmd according to


»
the rule of the Kegiſter: when a man hauing lande in fee imple dieth, and bis Soífe fone after
marricth agatne, and faine her felfe Soith chtlde by her former hufband, (m this cafe though thee
be married, the wait de ventre infpiciendo Deth ipe for the heire. WWutif a man fcífeo of lands
int Fee ( £02 example ) hath iſſue daughter, who is heire apparant, fhe in the life of her father
cannot hauethis wꝛit for diners caufes ; firft becaufe the is not heive, but here apparant, for
as hath benc faid nemo cft heres viventis, andthts 102tt is given to the beire to Sobom the land
tg diftended. And both BraGon and Fleta faith, that this watt lieth ad quærelam veri hæredis,
Swhich cannot be in the lifeofhis ancefter, and here with agræcth Britton and the Kegiſter.

Britten, fo. 65.h. SHecondip,thetaking of a bufband in the cafe afozefaio being her oone act, cannot barre the
Kæict. vbi fupra. heire of hts lawluil action once veſted in him. Thirdlp, the Law doth not giue the heire appa-
rant any tait, fos (t ig not certaine whither he fball be betre, folus deus facit hæredes Fourth⸗

i Ip, the inconuentence Sere too great if heires apparant in tbe life of their ancefter fhould baue

Dto: a. {uch a wꝛit to examine and trie a mang lawtull Swtfcinfuch fort as the Wꝛit de ventre infpici-
dr Fes wifi... endo doth appoint, and it ſhe ſhould befound to be With chile, oz fufpect, then thee matt be re-
Reztfte.vbi fapra. moucd to a Cattle and there fafelp kept ontill her deliuery, andfoanp mang Sotfe might bee
Bratton and F leta taken from him again the lawes of Godand man.

vbi fupra kane Che Words of the Wzitdeventrei:fpiciendo make this eutdent, Rex vic: falutem, monftrauit
Cad axheradationcm. ) nobis A. quod.cum R. que fuit vxor Clementis B. pregnans non (it, ipfa falsó dicit fe effe preg-


nantem de codem Clemente,adexheredationem ipfius A, deficut terra quæ fuit eiufdem C. ad
"AMfum A. ire hereditario diftendere debeat tanquam ad fratrem e» heredemipfius C. fi prædict R.
prolem de eo non habuerit, &c. but this rather belongs to tbe treatife of opiginall 1P2its, and

(4) Lib. s.f.96.97.Brit-fo. thereforethue much heretn (ball fuffice.
38.H.8. Dic. And (tía to be obferued that encrp $0020 of Littl: is woꝛthy of obferuation, firft ( Heires) in
ju e» fe. thepluralinumber, fog (£a man gíuclanb to a man anb tobís beircin the fingulecnumber, beg
esp feos s ‘hath but anefkate for life, for bte hetre cannot take a fee (imple by difcent, becaufe ye is but one,


b. Brit.ca.39.f¢ 99.6.
Fictalibece idee anb therefoze in that cafo hts hetre ſhall tabe nothing, Alſo obferuable is thts condunctine (Ec),


RE 2. Foꝛ it a man giuethlandsto one, To haue « to hold to himoz big heres, be hath but an effate
a : Er fop life forthe vncertaintie. (Scs,fuis) ifa man gtue land bnto two, Co haue anb to hold
a-E.6. p eem 26. to them two & haredibus (c) omitting fuis, tbep have but an eſtate fop life £o: the oncertatntp,
(E) Vid. Se 413. Sobercof moze hereafter inthis Section, Wut it is fatd {Eland be ginento one man & hærcdi-
d » COEM bus, omitting fuis, that not withſtanding a fe (impie palleth, but tt (g fafc to follow Littleton.
abr « (d) Etfés afffignes. Affignec, commeth of the berbe affigno. And
ert — note there beaflignes in Beede, and aflignes in La, whereof fo more ín thechapter of iDar-
(h) Tl. Com.242.Segnior tantíe, Sect. 733. ;

Berkleys cafe «| Ceux parolx ( fes heires ) tantfolement font leflate denberitance en touts


9 Een feoffments & grants. (e) Si autem fa&ta effet donatio,vt fi dicam, do tibi talem terram; ifta dos
33-.6,23.10.H.7.13.14. natio non extendit ad hxredes {edad vitam donatoris,&c, (f ) HereLittleton treateth of pur-
—2 ENS: chafes by naturall perfong, and not of bodtes politique og coꝛpoꝛate; (g) foriflanbg bee giuen
dd des gia.  t0.afole bobp politique oz corporate, ( as to a Withep, Parton, Gifcar, matker of an Bofpl-
4o. Aff.11. tall, tc. ) there to give him an eftate of inberitance tn big politique ez coꝛpoꝛate capacttie, he mutt
Tr. 5.€.3.Ror.4. in Scaccarie, habe theſe Words, To bang and to hold to him and his fuccellozs, for Without thele Words Suc-
3.5.3337. E. xm. ceffors inthofe cafes thers palleth no inheritance, foxas the befre Doth inberite to the anceftoz,
ue eae sop. fothefuccelfoz doth fucceed tothe prebecefTo? and the erecutor to the teſtator (h) But (t appea-
5.E.4.121638:E 3.4. roth here by Littleton that (£a man atthis dap give lands to 1,S and bis fucce(fozg, thie crea-
Lib.9.fe.28.im Cafe. de teth no fee fimple in bin, fos Littleton fpeaktng of naturall perfons faítb that tbefe Swords ( big
Abb de Strata Marcelle. Detreg ) make an eftate of inheritance (n all Feoſfments anb rants Swberebp bo excludeth theſe
(ie H.67.21:H.619-— Sods ( bigfncceílong ) (1) And pot tf ít be in an ancient grantit muft bee erpounded ag the


— emi — Law was taken at tho time of the grant. (k) A Chantrp pꝛieſt incoꝛpoꝛate tooke a — 2


Lib. Of Fee fimple. Seël.r. 9


him anb his ſucceſlors £02 a handzed peares, and after tooke a releafe frein the Leafos to him and
bis iucceitors, and (t was adiudged that bp thereleafe he had but an eftate fog life, for he had the
3Lcafe in his naturall capacitic £02 it could net goe in fuccellion, and ( his ſucceſſoꝛs) gane him
no eftate of inheritance fox want of thefe words ( His betreg. ) (1) Bethe Hing bp his Letters (1) i9 5.6 des
patents giueth lands Decano & Capitulo, habendem fibi & heredibus & fuccefforibus fuis, In adiudg.
this cafe albeit thep bc perfona (n their naturallcapacitic tothem and their hetres, pet becaufe
the Grant is made to them in their politique capacttte, tt hall enure to them and their ſucceſſoꝛs·
And fo tf the King doe grant landg to 1.5. Habendum fibi & fuccefforibus fiue hæredibus fuis;
this grant ſhall enure to himand bis heires. AUR
(m) B. hauiug diners fonnes and daughters A. gineth lands to B. & Liberis fuis & alour (m) 15.E s.t. Counter
heires, the father and all hig children doe take a fee fimple toputlp by force of ticle words ( their aris exons p.
beires ) but it he aono chic at the time o£ tbc fcoffment the childe borne afterward fhall 7 7030000
nottake,
hele Swords (his heires) doe not onlp extend to his immediate heires, but to his heires E ^
remote, and moft remote bone and to be bogne, (n ) Sub quibus vocabulis (hæredibusfuis) om- (n) Fleralib.3.ea. 8.
nesharedes propiuqui comprebenduntur, & remoti, nati, & nafcituri, Bnd hæredum a ppella-
tione veniunt haeredes heredum in infinitum. 20nb tbe reafon, wherefore the Law is fo precife 777 Cem. 163.
to pacícríbe certaine $00205 to create an eftate of inheritance, (g foz auopoina of bucertainty, the
mother of contention and confufion.
There be many Words fo appropatated, ag that thep cannot be Icgallp expꝛeſſed by anp other
Sword, 02 by any periphraſis, oz circumlocution: Some to eftates of lands, ac. as here and in
(a) other places of our Author. In this place thele words rantfvlement, mot folement alone; (D p poa) B.
"but tantfolement all onip; .i.folummodo, cz duntaxar, arcto be obferurd; (b) Some to (o sea Y 161.
tenures; (c) Some to períong,(d ) Some to offences; (e) Some to formes of oʒiginall toits (d) 5. (20.194.746.
epther foz recouery of right, oz remouing, 0? redzefle of Mong; (F) Some to warrantie oF (c) d<é.9.67.194.204 234:
Land. Œbefe haue 3| touchcd fox cramples, 3| leauc others to the ſtudious reader to obferue, £6 pbi 5 “478; à
and adde holding this fo an vndoubted berity;tljat thereis no knowledge, caſe, oꝛ point tn Law, on LER 45:620. TAG
feme it of neuer fo little account, but ill and our ſtudtent in (ead at one time oz other, and (i ) 52.755.
therefore, in reading, nothing to be pzetermitted.


« Font leflate.. Status dicitura ftando, becaufe it is fired, and pet-
manent. Œbelileof Man, whtch is no part ofthe kingdome, but a diftinc territorte of (t fcfe;
hath beene granted bp the great Seale to diuers fubiets and thetr bcíreg, (o) Bt was reſol⸗ (2) Tr. 40.Flizinle Coun
ued by the Low Chancciioz, the tive chicfe Juſtices and chicfe Waron, that the fame is an jede Pu du ue
eſtate difcendible according to the courfe ofthe Common lao, for Whatloeuer ftatc of (nberís ices i. 7f Baron. ;
tance pafle bnder the Great Seale of England, it (all be diſcendible according to the rules,and
courte of the Common Lain of England,


dT En touts feoffments & grants. Were hee giucth the feoffinent the
firft place, as the ancient and the moſt neceſſary conuepance, both fo? that it is ſolemne and pub⸗
lique, and therefoze beſt remembzed and proued, (¢) and alfo for that ít cleareth all diffeifing, (2) Ui2.5.5. 59.7 6.
abatements, intrufions, and other wronglull o» defeafble eftates, Swbere the entrp of the (04 Kea: 28.15.67 ei.
feoffoz is iaiwfull, which neither fine, recouerp, nopbargaine andfale bp Derde indented and — Tet Des B
inrolled Doth, Bnd bercís implped a btuifion of fee, oz inberitance,viz, (h) into corpozcall (ag 4.3.35. 5r Sa. Spa.
Lands and cenements which Ipeinituerp ) compachended in this 50010 fcotfment, and map cf 63.101 103 141. 122.
gaffe bp tinerp by Ded, 01 Without Ded, Whtch of fome (e called hxreditas corporata, and in- 77? ried Com.
corporeal, Which ipe in grant,and cannot pale by liuerp,but bp deede,(as Aduo wſons, Con-⸗ 177° ^ e grae:
mong, ec. and of ſome is called haereditas incorporata) and, by the delinerpof the Deed, the kree⸗
hold, and inheritance of fuch inheritance, ag doe lye in grant, doth palle ) comprehended ín this
$0010 Grant. And the Deede of incozpozreate inheritances doth equall the linerp of conpozeat, —
Bnd therefore Littleton faith, in all Areoffmente and Grants. Hereditas, alia corporalis; alia — Sr.
urere: Corporalis eft, qua: tangi poteft & videri, incorporalis que tangi non poteft, "^4 3^
nec videri. :

Fcoffment íg derived of the $0025 of att feodum, quia eft donatio feodi, fo the ancient Mꝛi⸗ Forrhe Antiguirie of Foif-
ters of the Law called a feoffinent donatio, of the berbe do 07 dedi, Which is the aptelt Word of mentr.See rhe facond part of
feoffinent. Bnd that $5070 Ephron feb, When he enfeoffeb Abraham, faping, 3 gine thee rtr?
the field of Machpclah oticr againſt Mamre, and the Cane therein 3 giue thee, andallthe tres ne —

(it the field and the borders roundabout, all which Sere made fnre onto Abraham for & poffefz * Gmefi; 23.
fion. in the pzcfence of many Svitnefles. i

ya SFeofkment the cozporeate fer ts conucped, € tt pꝛoperly betokeneth a conuepance in tee as « pid. set. 59.
our Æuthoz himicife hereafter faith, * in his chapter e£ Cenant foa life, Bnd pet fomettme im⸗ Brirr.ca. 34.
properly it is calicd a fcoffment hen an cftate of freehoid only doth palle,Donc eft nofme gene- 44.4-3-4%-
rall plus que neft feoffment, car done eft generall a tours chofes moebles & nient moebles, feoff- 5,, more of feoffment Sc. eo.
ment eft riens for(que del foyle. Bnd note there is a Difference inter cartam & fadtii,fopcarta is See of Faltum. 528.255,

€ entended


Liba.: Capa " Of Fee ſinple. Sed.


entended a Charter which Doth tonch inheritance, and fo (s not fa&um vnlelleit hath lome other
addition M avra |
Lit. fo-63.inLincelne Grant, Concefie, ig properip of things (ncorpotcall Sobícb ( ag hath beene faib ) cannot paffe


Colle 'gecafe. - Suítlout Dede. And Dtreít ts tobe obferuen ( that J map fpeake once fot all ) that eucrp
)  Periodof our Authoꝛ in all his thee bakes containe matter of excellent learning, neceflarily to

. be collected by implication, o2 confequence, fo2 ecample hee faith here, that thetc woꝛds ( his

Naw -  —heires ) makeart eftate of inberitance in all £coffmentg aub grants, he expreffing teoffinents and
ee — Am. grants, neceltar ily ünplpetb, that this rule extendeth not, fir(E ta Laft wills and teffaments,
AE — Efiates.By.78. fo thereby, (1) ag be himfelfe after faith, an eftate. of inheritance map pale Without theſe words
39 H 8.Teflaments 18. C bis betres ) (k) As {fa man dentfe 20, acres to another, and that he fball pap to bis executors
22. Eli "Digr 371. fos the fastie tenne pound, hereby the deuiſee hath a Fez imple by the intent of the deuifoz, albeit ít


Temps H.8 sit. Confoenc® be not tothe baluc of thetand, (1) Sottis tfa man denifeiands to a man imperpetuum, 9z to
(Ka csntra Hrs. Gite, and to fell, oz in fcodo fimplici, 02 to him and to hts aflignes fozener, In thefe cafes a fee
19. H.8.9. li^. 3 fv. 21.inBora- imple Doth patfc by the intent of the Deutfor, but it the deutfe bee to a man and his AL

fons cafellib. 6.fe.15.17-46. ſignes Swithoutfaping ( forener ) the Deuiſee bath but am eftateforitfe, (m) £a man


aM fis A. 385 deuife land to ono & fanguini fuo that is a feefimple, but f£ (t be femini fuo, tt ig an eftate


bdo D ANELT > valle ; ;

RE T (n) Secondip, that (t ectendeth mot to a fine fur conuſans de droit come ced qve il ad de fon
Caterby admmdre.Sreeke st. done, bp which a fec alfo map pafle without this word (hetres) in refpect of the height of that
taile Bou ME fine, and that cherebp is implyed that there Wag a precedent attt in fee,

C ers Ba Bo Œbiroly, Mort cerrein Relea‘es, and that three manner of apes, ( o)firft when an eftate of
Me 1456 22.6. inheritance paileth and continnet),as it there be thzx coparconers o topntenants, & one of tent
PL (em.248. rsleafe to the other tx00,02 to one of then gencraliy Without this Word(Heires by Littsoion opi-
(0) List.th.2-ca.tenant nion thep baue a £o füürple ag appeareth hereatter, Sccondly,by rcleafe (p)Soljen an cftate of ine
* M — heritance paſſeth & continueth not, but ts ertinsutthed,as Where the Low reicafes to the tenant
se »-Elig. 263. k oꝛ the grantec of a rent,æc. releafe to the tenant of rhe land generalip all his right,tc. bercbp the
(p) Lite Ub.3.ca. Rees, Heigntozie,rent, tc. ars extinguiſhed fos eucr, without tbcfc words (hetres ) Chirdip (q) hen a
Seét.479. 480. barevight tg releaſed, as when the difletfee relcafe to the diſſeiſoz all his right he neednot faith ouz


(2) Car x ead 7* Author manother place ſpeake of his heires.Wut o£ ali thefe, and the like cafes, moze ſhall be
La. MM treated inthetr proper places, onrtblp,nozto a Recouery,A. ſeiſed of land fuffereth B, to reco-
* wer the land againſt him by a common recouery where the iudgement ig quod prædictus B.recu-
paret vérfus praed. A tenemenra prædicta cum percin, pot D. recouereth a fee fimple without theſe
Words (hettes ) for regularly cuerp recoucrozvecouercth a tee (imple, Jr(ttlp, nozto a creation of
Nobilitie by wrt, fog When a man 18 calledto the vpper houfe of Parliament by woꝛit, bec is a
Waron and hath inheritance therein Without the word (heires ) pet map the King limit the
general Tate of inheritance created bp the Law and cuſtome of the 15 calme to the heires males,
aig.H.6.Lo.Vefüerese. or generall, of his body bythe toptt, ag he did to Bromflete WHotn 27. H,6. Wag called to Par⸗
líament by the name of the Lo: Ve cve,&c. With the limitation in 102ít to hin and the betres
inales of bis body, but tf bebe created by patent, he muſt of neceflitie baue theſe words ( hts
hetres ) o2 the beires males of his bobp, o1 the heires of hig body, ec. otheriwtle he hath no in=
heritance. he firft creation of a Waron by patent that 3| Snide Swag of Iohn Beauchampe o£
Holte created Baron by patent in 11.R.z. for Barons before that time Were calied bp Wait,
And ít ig to be obferuen, that of ancient times Carles, tc. were created by atrding them With a
Sword, and nominating him Earle, ¢.offuch a County 02 placeandthis With a calling of Him
to Daritament bp Writ, bp that name Was a fafficient creation of inheritance,
Wut out of this rule of our Authoꝛ the Law doth make divers exceptions ( & exceptio
probar regulam) fop fomettine bp a feoffment a fe Gmpie fall pafle Without hele words ( big


() 39-AF-12.4..E.3.t8. Poires, ). Foꝛ example, rft, (r) (f tbe father infeoffethefonne, Œo hauc an to hold to him ana
Feoffments dr faits 254.


DE SLE: to his hetres, and the fonne infcoffctb the father ag fully as the father enteofíeo Him, by this the
eves — father bath a fer fimple, quia verba relata hoc maxim operantur per referentiam vt in effeviden- _
(f) Vid.Sed.vz. tur. (f) Secondly, tn refpect of the confideration, a fee Gmple had paſſed at the Common Law


12. H.4.1 9. in — Without this $0020 (hetres) and at this dap an eftate of inheritance tn tayle, as (f a man had
€ Ve MAT ^. ih given land toa man With bis Daughter in Francko martíage generally, a Se Ginple had
BB" palled Without this Word (beíres) for there is mo confiberatíon fo much rcfpetco in Law,
ag the confiocvatíon of marrtage, in refpect of Wiliance, and pollerity, (0 Chirdip, if a fcoff-

ment 02 Grant be made by Der toa Wapor and commonality or any other Cozpozation ag-

gregate ofmanp perfons capable, they hauc a fee fimple without the Sword ( Succellors) bc-

(9) 19.H.6.74:20-H.6.36- çaufe fn tudgement of the Law thep never dic. (u) Sourthip, incale of a fole corporation a Fe
. fimple fball fomctíme pate Without this Wora(fuccellozs as tf a fcoffment in fee be made of land

to a Wifhop, Tohaue and to hold to him in libera clic mofina, a fe Gmple doth pale Without

Gr) Plcom. Le Baklges > £híg $5070 ( Huceefiors ) (w) And fo f£ a man gius lande tothe Ling bp Dede ínrolleb. a fee
Cafe. fimple doth pale without tbefe words( ſucceſſoꝛs 02 beires )bccaufe in indgement of Law the
Ring mener dieth. Filtip, in Grants fometimesan Inheritance hail palle without is $0020


(hetres)


FAR Of Fee fimple. Sella. ^ to


» , "

(heires) as f£ partition be made betweene et Lands {n fee Uumple, and fox oMectp (x)29. 4/2). 15. H.7. 14.
of tene grant a rent to tbe other generalip, the grantee (al haves fee fimple without 2 £7. 5-11-4-4:5-
- this ord (Veireg ) becaufe the grantor hath a fee imple in conGderation Snberot he granted the 283-12
rent, ip(e etenim leges cupiunt vt jure regantur. Sigtip,bp the Foꝛreſt law tf an a(Tart be gran⸗
ted by the king at a Juſtice ſcat( which map be bone without Charter to another Habendum
& tenendü fibi impe: petuü He hatha fee (imple Without this Wozd(Hheires )(v)£on there te a ſpe⸗
ciall Law of the Foꝛreſt, as there is a lao Marſhall fox wars, and a Marine law foꝛ the ſeas. (y )40.H.7.7.
(z)Andthis rule of our Authoꝛ extendeth to the palling of eftates of inheritances in exchanges, (x). 22. E. 5:3. 45. 8.3.30.
releafes,oz confirmations that enure bp ap of erilargementof eftates, Warranties, bargaine 2 jai At
and fales by Deed indented € inrolicd,€ tbe like in which this word (heires) fs alfo neceflarp p dd ; — —*
fo? they voc tant amounttoa fcoffment os grant oꝛ ſtand vpon th efame reaſon that a feoffment 10H 6.15.22.
0; grant doth, for like realon Doth make like law, vbi cadem ratio,ibi idem jus. And this ts t0 be 17.€.2.garr.2 5.
oblerued throughout ali thefe thace books, that where other cafes fall within the fame reafon,our
Buthoz doth put his cafe but For example, £o? fo our Authoꝛ himleife in another place explas * SA 301.
nethit faping, Et memorandi q en touts auters cafes coment que ne font icy expreffement moves
& {pecifies fi font en femblablereafon fonten femblable ley, Bnd here our Author ts to bee vn⸗
derſtod to ſpeake of heires When shep are inberitable bp diſcent, for they ave capable of land alfo
bp purchafe,and then thecourie of difcent (s fometime altered, ae if lands of thenature of Gauil-
kinde be giuento b. aud his heires Dautng iſſue diucrs fonneg, ail his fonnes after his deceafe
wall tnherite, but tf a teafe £o? life be made, the rematnder to the right heires of B. and B. dieth,
big eldeſt fonne only (bail inherite, for he only totake by purchafe ia right heirc bp the Common
ia, Sonotea diuerhtic betwene a purchafe anda difcent, but Shere the rematnder Was li⸗
mitted to the right hetres of B. tt ned not to be fato and to their heires, fo? being plurallp limit⸗
ted (t includeth a fee imple, and pet it refteth but in one by purchafe. i

Dut of that Which hath benc laid (t (g to be obferucd, that a man map purchafelands to him
and bis heites bp Ten manner of conuepances, (for 3l {peate not here of eftoppelis.) Firſt bp
Feokuent, ſecondly by Grant ( of Which two our Author here {peaketh.) Chiroip by Fine
Swhich és a fcoffment of recozd, frouttblp bp common 1Recoucrp Swbichds a common conveyance
an? íg innature of a Fcofment of record. Fiftly bp Cechange which ig in nature of a grant.
Dirtip, by Keleaſe to a particular tenant. Seuenthlp bp Confirmation toa particular tenant
both Which are in nature of Grants. Cighthip, by grant of arcuerfion op remainder With at= »». p 8.06 16.
toznmont of the particular tenant, of all hich our Authoꝛ ſpeaketh hereafter. Minthly, bp bar 32 H.8.c«.2.
gaine andfaic bp Deede indented and inrolled ozdained by ſtatute fince Littleton Wwzote, Tenth= 54-505.
ip, bp deuife by cuftome of forme particular place, ag he ſheweth hereafter, and ince he wꝛote, by
ill in Writing generally bp authority of Paritament,

What Words are apt Words for a fcoffrient op grant Vid.¢.531.Dur Author ſpeaketh of feoff- 5. $i

ments anb grants, wherbp (c (mplpco lawtull conucpances,e therfore this rule extendeth notto ;7..25.p.8.58. 4/7)».
differing, abatements o: intrufions (nto landsoꝛ tenements o2 to vſurpations toabuoutong, tc, 12.6.4. 9. dc.
in Which cafes cltates in fee Gmple are gained bp the act and Swzong of the difleifozs, abators,
intruders and vſurpers, and (Ea diſſeiſin abatement os (ntrufion be made to the bfe of another if
céy que fe agreectb thereunto in pays by this bare agraiment be gaineth a fe fimple Wwithous
anp iluery of ſeiſin oz other cercraony.


Section 2.
Œ (& bonc Nd if a man @. tleton cheweth
pᷣchaſe tres purchafe land ^ fete dte, ume
en fee Cinpt in fee fimple © fee ümple, fo: hee


& Dcup fang iffue and die ine 2 entendeth not this cafe of an


i Li abiit ft
chefcun Geft fon pꝛo⸗ hee which is hi Sfau bens of to Shue ti


chine colin collateral cofen collaterall of fos that extendeth wot to e-


Del entire fanke, De the whole blood, how f4tes in aile ss thall bee fato
quel pluíg long de- farre fo euer hee bee dione, ee Se


Gree Gil foit, poct in⸗ fiom him in degree, — €J Prochein cofin col-
beriter & auer im la mayinherit &hauethe laterall. Pepther eva


; 2 ke Iudeth be b fitters,
fre come heive a lup. land as heireto him. Forse allure aor cafe


concerning them in this chapter, ſSect.5. and (n bis — of gatcentrg, but this (g oe
2 ete


Libao (Cap Of Fee fimple. 5 Sed.3.


1 purchafe lands and icti without (rue; anb Dant tt noz fifter,then
lenit und ^ ^ C&pho euer (bali firtt tisherit, ) anb il, C boxe to inberite foy default of lincall) Fog —
ratf. lib. 2.04.10. fe.6 5.


in Difcents it is a maxime tn law quod.]inea recta (emper prefertur tranfnerfali. ALineall difcent
is contiepco downward tn aright 1imesag From tbe grandfather to the father, fromthe father ta
thefonne,gc. Collateral difcent (g-Derfueb from the Gde of the lincall, ag, grandfathers bzo-
ther, fathers brother,¢¢. Prochein coufin-collatérallenheriera Doth: gíue a certaine Direction ta


Britt.ca 119.
F etalib.6.cap. 1. dr 2.


Braff lth 3.e4,30 f. 64.


Fletalib. $e 5 Gy the next cofin tothe fonne, and tberefeze the fathers baotber and big poíteritp (ball inberite be-
Nen e i. es he — — and his pofferítp, Ec (ic de ceteris, foy propinquior. excludit pro-
—— pinquum & propinquus remetum, & remotus remotiorem. ing : 8

F4 19e a A Upon thts word (Prochein) J pu£ tbíg cafe. Due hath iſſue two ſonnes A and B.and dieth,


* B. hath twofonnes C. and D. and dieth. C. theeldeſt fonne hath iſſue and dieth: A. purchaleth
lanog in kee Gmpleand:dteth without iſſue, P.ighis next couſin, and yet (ball not inherite, but
the (tue of C. for he that is inhexitable is accounted in Tato next of bimd, And therefore ere te
vnderſtood a diuiſion of nextyviz. next, iure reprae(entationis,anU nex jure propinquiatis, that tg,
bprightof repsefentation and by rightofpropinquitie, Bnd Littleton meanctt) of the right of
repzctentation, foꝛ legally incourfe of diſcents he (s next of bleod inheritable. And the tílue of
C. doth reprefencthe perfon of C. and it C : bad liued he had beene legally next of blu, And
Svbenfoener the father t£ he hadiined, fboulo haue inherited, his lineall beire bp right of repꝛe⸗
fentation thall inberite before any other, another be iure propinqu tatis neerer of blood.
And therefore Littleron tntendeth his cafe of next cofinof bla immediatelyp inheritabic, Soag
this produceth another diuiſion of next.of blod,viz. immediatly inberitable, as the iſſue of C.and
mediatly ínberítable ag. D. £f the iſſue of C. die without (Tuc, fox the tuc of C. and all thas
line be thep neuer fo remote ſhall inbertte before D> op his tine, and therefore Littleron- faith Weli
de quel pluis long degreeque il foit. And here arifeth a diuerũty in lao betweene next of blo
inherttabic bp difcent, and next ot blod capable bp purcbafe, And therefore in the cafe before
mentioned (£ a Leaſe Fozitfe were made to A. the remainder to his nectofbindinfe, In thts
cafe ag bath benefatd D, Mall take therematnder, becaufe he is next of blood and capable bp
purchafe, though be be not legalip next to take ag boire bp diſcent.
not Dai |


~ Seélion 3.


19 R2 tit. gar 120,


304 p.37.


Vtif there bee fa-


y. E. 6.tit. Adminiftr, By.47.
Ratcliffes cafe ubi fupra.

See after inthe shaprer of
Sacase,


(p) Pl.Com,29 3.6,
Osborn: en 7.


ll J Nore le pier eft
plus prochein
 defanke. AND
therefore fome Doe hold opor
thefe words of Lirtlcton that
{fa Leaſe foz life Swere made
tothe fonne the remainder to
big next of bind that the fa-
ther fhonid take the rematn-
derby purchafe, and not the
bnicle,fo2 that Littleton fatth
the father tg nextof bid, and
pet the oncle is heire, Bs if a
inan Hath iffuc t$oo fonnes,
andthe eldeſt fonne hath iſſue
à fonne and dic, a remainder
ts limited to the next of bis
bind, the pounger fonnc. hail
take tt, pet the other ts bishetre
«(p Eff vn Max-
ime en le Ley que enheri-
tance poet linealment di-
feender mes nemy afcen-
der.
Maxime 1. 20 fure founda⸗
ton oꝛ ground of art, and a


CK AEs fi foit
IT pier « fits, ther & fon, & the

; & le pier ad father hath a bro-
btt freve que eft vncle ther that is vncleto the
ale fits.tle fits put- fon,&the fon purchafe
chafe tre en fee ſimpł land in fee fimple, and
& mot fang iffue vi⸗ die without iffue, Ji-
uant fon pier, luncle uing his father, the vn-
aucca la terre come cle thal haue theland as
heite al fits a nemy le heiretothe fon, & not
piet,bncorele pier eft the father, yer the fa-
pluis prochein De ther is ‘neerer of
fatils ; pur ceo que eff blood ; becaufe it isa
vn maxime en le Iep, maxime in law, That
Que enberitäce poct inheritance may line-
lincalment difcender, ally difcend, but not
mes nép afcender, afcend. Yet if the fon
Uncoẽ file fits entíel in chis cafe die with-
cafe mot fans iſſue, out iflue, and ‘his vn-
&fon once entra en cle enter into the
lative come beire ale land as heire to the


conclufion


Libs. | OfFeefunple Ss n
fits (ff come il deuoit fonne ( as by law hee. cendufios of reafon fo catio


gl) sapie ux. ought) aid aes the SN" tea age, ri
, j


4 m v without if- que qd peni omnibus

piuant le pier, Dongs fue, lining the Father, probes fo fare aud bear

le pier auera la terre the facher fall hau marta ean, v) Bn () 5 ts
À Heive al bncle, & the land as heire to the eat sbbích our Buthop here


pcôe heire a for vucle,& notas heire ro Marine, Hecatter beca a


fits, pur ceo que tf his fon, for chat hee: @eincipic, and (t ($ all one
heigne al tette p col= commeth to the land 3969. a Rules a. common
; 4 i ground, Poftulatum 03 attAxi-

laterali Difcent & nẽy by collateral difcent & ome,and tt Sere too much cu-
plineallafcention, not by lineall afcent, reste — TM |
Swellfaidin our bokes, ([) neft my a difputer lancientprinciplesdelley. 3| nener read amp (f) 12.5.4.
opinion ín anp boke old 02 neo againt this Maxime butonip (n lib.rub. Where (t te fato, (c) fi Clamul/tb. 7...
quis fine liberisdifcefferit pater sut. mater. eius in-hæreditatem füccedat, vel frater. & foror fi 514442. cap.29.
pater & mater defing, fi nec hos habeat, foror patris vel matris & deinceps qui propinquiores in (D ic eee
parentela fuerint hæreditario fuccedant, & dum virilis fexus extiterit, & Hereditas abinde fit,
femina nonhereditat’. But all our ancient Authors andthe conftant opinion euer ſince Doc
affirme the maxime. |
> Wy thts maxime and tbeconclufion of his cafe, only lineallafcention in the tight line is pꝛo⸗
hibited, anb not ín the collaterall, (u) Quæliber hæreditas naturaliter quidem ad heredes hære- B62::c4.119.
ditabiliter difcendit, nunquam quidem naturaliter afcendit, difcendit itaque jus quafi pondero- Fleta lib. Sich T,
fum quod cadens deorfum reéta linea vel tranfuerfali, & nunquam reafcenditea via qua difcen- Price
dit poft mortem antecefforum, à latere tamen afcenditalicui propter defe&um hæredum inferi- A Fe
us prouenientium ; foag the lineall afcent is prohibited bp law, and net the collateral, ‘nd in
prohibiting the lineall afcent, the Common Law (e alſſiſted with the Law of the :,2.tableg.

ere our Wuthoz £02 the confirmation of bíg opinion dꝛaweth a reaſon anda pꝛcofe ( es pott
haue perceiued ) from one of the maximes ofthe Commontlamw: $205 that 3| map here obferne
ít once forall, bis profes and arguments, (n tbefe his thre bokes, map bee gencralty deutded
tntotwo partg,viz. fromthe Common law andfrom Statutes, of both Which, and of their
ſeuerall branches 3| ſhall gius the ſtudious reader fore fe% cramples andicaue the reft to big
diligent obferuation.

From the Common Law his profes andarguments arc ozaxone from z0,fouerall fountatnes (4) 577. 5.8.92.56. 52. 53.
0 places. - ; 57:59:65 99. 139:146.156.
(a) Furſt from the Marimes, Principles, Rules, Jntendment, and Reaſon of the Com⸗


169.17 8237, 293: 352,352,
609.376.377.396.
mon La, Which inderde is the Rule of the Law ag here; and in other places our Buthoz m ing


both tfc. : i (b) Se¥. 20. where a number
(b) Secondly, from the bokes, records, and other authorities otXLaxo cited bp him, Ab au. #7 crcqwret
thoritate, & pronunciatis, da * 7 T a 72.234.
(c) QE bíirolp, from oztginall watts in the Regiſter, arefcriptisvalet argumentum. ~ (d JE STORE EX
- (d) Feurthip, from the forme of good pleading. Ce) Seff.248.249. °°


- (e) dfiftip, from the right entry of ludgement (F) 46.88.74. 6.145.532.
a (f) Sixtly, præcedentibus ap uy pꝛoued Precedents and qife, pes:
(2) S»cuentbjlp, a non vfu, fro [23 À À Se. 170.264. 283.302.


(h) Œigbtly, ab artificialibus afgumentis,confequentibus & conclufionibus, artíficíall argue "bis 629.631:686.


mente confcquente and fions. 340. 418.61 3.686.739.
Ninthiy, (i) acommilni opinione jurifprudentum, from tbe common opinion of the fages 4 + Ws 697. 59.124.288.


the Law. Fec. 87. wher
&& entbly, (k) ab inconuenienti, from that Which is inconuen lent. — d
«£icuentbly, (c) a diuifione from a diuiſion vel ab caumeratione partium from the enume⸗ (1) Se.13.where mary mere
tation of the parts. " ri ASE a chiefiy,
- Mwelfthip, (m) a maiore ad minus, fromthe greater to the leller, 0 (n) From the eller £0 the (5; 5.5. 438.439.441-
Greater, (0) a fimili, (p) a pari. (n) Seé.18.(0)301.¢¢.
13, (p)ab impoffibili from that which is impoſſible. (p) 291-298. 40. érc.
14. (q) A fine from the end. ope


15, (*) Ab vtili vel inutili from that Which is profitable oz oupzofitable, F Self.360-
16. (r) Ex abfurdo fo? that thereupon fhouid follow an absurdity quafi à furdo prolatum; (5) 544. 722.
becaufc ít is repugnant to vnderſtanding · and reafon, (f) Set. 114.223. 129»


Y7.(() A natura et ordine nature, from mature oz the courte of naturt. 211.197.161.
& 3 i 8,()Ab


Libi, (Capa. Of Feefimple. . _


(t) ef. 302. 18. (t) Abordinereligionis, from theozder of Religion, — 5. 218
SA — 19. (u) A communi præfumptionc from acommon pocfurnption, * pes:
rs de 20. (w) Alc&ionibus iurifprudentium, from the readings of learned men of Zak. *
Self. 31.692.635.683.447- From S»tatutcs his argum ents anb profes are dꝛawne; 93
123.193.154.140.2. 1: (x) jfitom tix Py ent amd be ratte ut ' "in
— 2. Wp the bodic of the Law Dtuerflp interp E

2) Sril.238 605 Syomctime bp other parts of the fame Staats Mwyich is benedicta expoñirio , Sc ex vie


Lens.
—— — ihe


— Reg fp inte
25-€.3.cap. vod — (y) Sometimeby thereafon of the Common Law, But euct the generall Words are to ‘be


Tora regia 61

( ®) — Spoken of’ intended of a lawtull At, (2 ) and ſuch interpꝛetation mutt euer be made of ail Statutes, that

for Es ay. cu. the innocent oz be (n Sohom there te no default map not be Damnificd,

syle cafe "PI eom. Sharingtons Œ En /4 ley [here bee diuers Lawes within the Realnte of
* England. As firſt, (a) Lex Coronx, the Law of the Crowne.


€ b
(4) pme m . (b) Lex & confactudo parliamenti. 1fta lex eft ab omnibus quarenda, à multis ignorata, ;


(e) Thef are vf recordin R_Us à pos cognita.
of Parliament. . (c) Lex nature, the La of nature.
CE) Whereaf you fall reatein 4 (43 Communislex Anglice the Common Law of England fometime called Lex serait


—— iig diete tended bp our Author ín this and the ithe places.

13.R.2 ca. 2. s, (e) Statute Law, Lawes eftablifhen by authozitie of Patliament.

¢h) Lib.7.Cawdicseafear'i- 6, (f) Confuetudines. Œuftomes rcafonable,

e — Ags A di C p Ius pan CThe Law of Armes, warre, and Chiualrie, in publi maxim? confer-
Ew uanda funt iura belli.

D out ee pers ed the &, (h) Ecclefia(ticall or Canon Law in Courts in certaine Cafes.

esres f the Forefts. 9, (i) Ciuill Law fncertatne cafes not onip in Courts ŒccleGalticall, but inthe Courts of

AES LE gom 1751.02:33« the Conftableand 9parfbatl and of tbc Pomiraltic, in Which Court of the Pomiraitic ts ob⸗

s ) Miror des Taflie ca. 3: Fort la ley Olyron, ango 5. 0f Richard the firft, ſo called, becaufe it was publifhed in the Mile

yron.


Bratt. 334.444-
Fleta. lib. 2.ca. §1-52-€°¢- 10, (k) Lexfereftæ, Foreſt Law,


5-€ 3.11.38.E.3-7. 11, (1) The law of Marque o? remifall,

ri E i n — 1°, (m) Lex iircaterid REPRE ac.

Ret. parl.6. H.4.nu. 43e 13, (n) The Lawesand Cuftomes of the tiles of lerfey, Gernefey and Man. 1
Elo. H.7.16.47.£.5 14, (0) TheLaw and paiuiledge of the Stanneries.

30.E.r. Account 12 27. 15, (p) The Lawesot the Eaft Weft, and middle Marches which arc now absocated, '

Cartamecateria31.€.1. Wut hereof this little taſte for our Stuvtent,that he map bee capable of that &obích hee {halt


(0) Mich 41, E. 3.coramrege Yeade Concerning thefeand others in Records, aub in our Boks, and orderly obferuc them, fait
in rhefaur, 1.E.3.fol.7.12. Tuffice,


tiny Caigmcniice. €] Et fon vncleenter enla terre. For if the bncle in this cafe doth
Repif.fol.32. not enter into the land, then cannot the father inherite the land, £o? there ig another marime (tt
(o) 50.E.3.Rot.parl. la herein implped: (q) & fata man that clapmeth ag hetre in Ceo imple to any man by dif>
pie —— ur, Cnt, muft make bimfelfo hetre to him that wag laft fetfeo of the actual freehold and inheritance.
G@irHasroagzr. ambit the Uncle in this cafe doth not enter, then had he but a frboto in Law , anb no acuail
34-aff. p.20. frechold, but the laft that was feifed of the actuall freehold Swag tbe fonne to whom the father
19.E.2.quarimped.177. — Cannot make himfelfe hetre, And therefoze Littleton faith, Et fon vncleenter en la tie (ficome de-


— "a uoit per la ley) to make the father to inberit, ag heire to the oncle, (r) Note that truc it (e that
t5 i a pe. the once in this cafe ts heire, but y heire, foz (after the difcent tohim the father
Dai. dr Stud.12.6. hath iſſue a fonne o2 Daughter, that ttv vp vncle. (C) Bnd fo it is tf a man
32.H.6.35. hath iſſue a fonnc and a daughter, the tonne purchafeth tn fec and dieth Swithout iſſue, the
(o 14H. 6.61. daughter fbail inberit the land,butifthe father hath afterward iſſue a ſonne this fonne Mall en⸗


tct into the Land ag beire to his brother, and f£ he hath iſſue a Daughter and nofonne, fhe halbe
coperconer Swith ber Gfter,

€ Sicome sl deuoit per la ley. [hele words asa key Doc open
the fecrets of the Law, for hereupon itis concluded, that where the oncle cannot get an actuall
pofleffion by entrte oz otberswtfe, there the father (n this cafe cannot inherit. Bnd therefore ikan
Aduowlon be granted to the fonne and his hetres, and the fonne dic, and this difcend to the vn⸗
cle, and he die before he Doth os can prefent tothe Church, the father Mall not inherit, becant: he
ſhould make himfcife etre to the fonne which he cannot doe, Bnd fo of a Went and the lie. Wut
f£ the oncle had prefentedto the Church, o? tao feífin of the rent there the father ſhould have in⸗
berited, Foꝛ Littleton putteth bis cafe ofan entrie into Land;but foz an erample, E the fonne
take a Leaſe foz life, and die Without ((Tac, and the reuerfion Difcend to the oncle, and be die, the
rcucrüon (hall not diftend to the father, becaufein that cafe hee mut make bímfelfe boire tothe
fonne. A, infeoffethe formo with warrantie to him and big heires, thefonne dice , the vncle en⸗


vera into the Land and dies, the father (£ he bee tmpleaded ſhall not take adanntage of this *
ranties


Lib.


rantie, fos then hee mft vouch A. ag
Svarrantíe Dífcenbeb to the bncle ,
father by Littletons (deuoit) cannot
that Svarrantícg, (ball difcend to him that


Of Fee fimple.


beire to big foune , Which hee cannot doc,
ks the tncle leaueth ít, ag bec found tt :

c aduantage of if, Sop Littleton Se&ione 603, fattl 57.603.718.
is beire by the Common Law, and Seét.7 18 he fa


Seét.4.


fog albert the
> and then the


12


that cucrp Svarrantíc which difcends, doth difcend to bim that is heire to him %bich made the


Swarrantic by the Common Law, which proucth
rantic made bp the fonne , foz that the father
Svarrantic. Bnd a Warrantte fall not aoc With tenements,
fpccíaii heire,but alwapes to the betre at the Common Law,
of certaine lands, anb is difletfed , the fonne releafeto the d


cannot bee


that the father Dail not be bound bp the Swar=

beíteto tbe fonne, that made the | ,
Spbereunto (t is anncrco to any e= ¥i4-Sel.73 5.036.937.
And therefore tf the oncle be fetfeo
illeiloz With Soarvantíc, and die


Svitiyont iffue, this (ball bind she oncle, but (f the ncle die Without iue, the father may enter

fo; the Warrantie cannot difcend bpon bin. So it the fonne concluneth bimfelfe bp sa 35-H.6.33-Iolra Crockes cafe.
concerning the tenure and feruices of certaine lands, this [bati bind the vncle, bnt if the oncle

. bíc Wit ont iMue, this lhall not bind the father, becaufe he cannot be hetre to thefonne, and


confequentip not to the eftoppell ut that


land, then it is otherwife,


€ ET entiel cate,
lou le fits put-

chafe terre en fee ſim⸗
ple, a ocute fauns t=
fue, ceux De fon ſan⸗
ke De part fon pier
enheriteront cóc bei-
‘res alup, deuant at-
cun De (anke de pt fa
mere: mes Gi nad al-
cuti Dette De part fon
pier, Donques la Cre
Difcendera ales hei⸗
res De part lamere,
Mes fí home pacut
enberitrir Des tres
en fec (imple. qur ont
iffue fits, & Deutont,
ale fits enter en ies
tenements, coe fits
& bettc a fa mere, a
puis Dente fang ifs
fue, les heires de
part la mere Dofent
enheriter les te-
nemts € ianmes
les beires De part
le pier, Et fil np ad
afcun beire De part la
mere, bonique le ſeig⸗
nioz , De que la terre
eft tenus, aucra la


Section À.


AN incafe,where

the fonne purcha-
feth land in fee fim-
ple, and dies with-
out iffue , they of his
bloud on the fathers
fide fhall inherit as
heiresto him, before
any of thebloud, on
the mothers fide. But
if hehath no heire on
the part of his father,
then the land (hall dif-
cend to the heires on
the part of the mo-
ther. But ifa man mar-
rieth an inheritrix of
lands in fee fimple,
who haue iffue afon,
and die,and the fonne
enter into the tene-
ments, as fonne and
heire to nis mother ,
and after dies without
iffuc, the heires ofthe
part of his mother
ought to inherit, and
not the heires of the
part of the father. And
if hee hath no heire
onthe part of the mo-
ther , then the Lord


cafe; but if (t befuch am eftoppeli ag runneth with the


€ B2 thía (t appeareth, Vid. Se. 35 4.4 exeehens
that our autboz veut /"^"-
deth hetres into hetres
of the part of the father, and
into betres of the part of the
mother,(a) And note, it tg (2) 74.55 Edward Cle-
an olde, and true SDarímc im "^^ 177
e jue uet xd Dali inhe⸗
anp lands ag here, but ons ,
ip the bloud of the Girt purs (7,55 67^ Tage
chañer, £0 * scfert à quo fiat PA ERE ee n
perquifitum, Ag fot example, 24-£. 3.50.39.E.3.29.30.38
Robert Coke taketh g 49-£-3-12.
Daughter of Knightley to wite . 4-12-6414.
and purchafeth lands to him Weenie: WE
and to big heires, and bp 24.E.3.24.37 eff 4.
Kuighrley hath {Tue Edward, 40.E.3.9442-E.3.10.
none of the bloud of the 272 Kelas
Knightleys though tiep be of 5,47... 65.
the bloud of Edward {bal in⸗ 3.521. Hg. 33-
berit, albett hee had no kine 4476. ;
Daed but them , becanfe they Ratcliffs cafe lib.3. fel. 42.
were not of the bioud of the
Afi porte, viz. of Robert
cc.


¶ (b) Ceux del fank de
Britten.ca 118.119.


part fon prr. Here it pl.com. 445 .Cleres cafe.
igto bec vnderſtod, that the Tr.19.€.1. imbance Rot. 25.
father hath two immediate Lincoln. Will. Seels cafe.
blonde inbim, viz..theblouo

of hig father, and the blond

of bis — , both ee

bloubg are of the part of the —

father. (c) Bnd this made (rue a
ancient Buthors fay, that. t€ pl.cors.445.446.6¢-

a man be fetfeo of lands inthe Clererosfe


(b) Bratton. vbi fupra.
Fleta. vbi fupra,


Hight of bis Mife, anb is at=


tainted of felonte , and after
hath (fiuc, this iſſue ſhould not
inherit hig. mother, fo2 that he
could deriue ne bloud inher
table from the father. Bnd
both thefe blouds of the paré
of the father mutt bee fpent

before


Libby, (Capa.


(d ) ra- R.2. gerr 100.


Britton.ca. 118.119.
Fleta.li5.c.c«. 2.


s. H.5.24.


(ri) 7. H.6


4
Lsb.1. fol.100.Shelyes cafe,


(n) §.€.2.ti9,auewry.207-


(o) 5.2.2. «ww 207


before the boire of the bloud
of the part of the mother
hail inherit, Mhercin ener the
line of the male of the part of
the father, (that is) the po-
ſteritie of fuch male, beethep
malcoz female (Who ever in
bifcents are preferred) mutt
faíle before the line of the mo⸗
ther fbail invert, (d ) an the
reafon of all this ts foz that
fhe bioud of the part of the fa=
ther ig morc Worthp and moze
nere in iudgement of ia,
than the blouo of the partof
the mother.

Deuant afcun del
fanke del part del mere.
Bnd it is tobe obferucd, that
the mother hath alfo two im⸗
medtate bloudg in her ( viz.)
her fathers bloud, and ber
mothers bloud, sow to il⸗
luftrate all thig bp erampie.
Robert Fairefield fomne of
Iohn Fairefield and lane San-
die, take to Swife Anne Boyes
daughter of lohn Boyes and
Jane Bewpree and hath íffuc
William Fairefield Soho pur=
chafeth lands ín fee, Bere
William Fairefield hath foure
immediate blonds in him,two
of the part of big father, viz.
the bloud of the Fairefields,
and the bloud of the Sandyes,
and two of the part of his
mother, viz. the bloud of the
Boyfes, and the bloub of the
Bewprees, and fo fm both


Of Fee fimple: |


terre per Cfcbeat.
Œn mefme le mans


ner eft , fi tencmts


Difcendont a le fits
Depart le pier, a fl
enter a puis moguft
fang iffue , cel terre
diſcendra as Heires
De patt ie pier, &
nép as beiteg De
part là mere, Œt
fil np ad afcun
bete De part le
pier, donques le ſeig⸗
nioz , De gue là
terre eft tenus, à-
uera là terre per
Œfcheat, E: fic vi-
de ciucrfitatem , Tou
le fits purchafe ter=
res ou tenements,
en fee fimple , &
lou il vient. eins
a tídg terres ou
tenements per Dif-
cent de part fa me⸗
re ou De part fon
picr,


Sec. 4.
of whom the land is
holden , fhall haue the
land by Efcheate. In
the fame manner it is,
if lands difcend to the
fonne, of the part of
the father, and hee en-
treth, and afterwards
dies without iffue,this
land fhall difcend to
the heires onthe part
of the father , and not
to the heires on the
pat of the mother,
And if there bee no
heire of the part of
the father, the Lord
of whom the Landis
holden fhall haue the
land by Efcheate.And
fo wee fec the diuerfi-
tie, where the fonne
purchafe lands or te-
nements in fee fimple,
and where hee com-
meth tothem by dif-
cent on the part of his
mother,or on the part
of his father.


cafes vpward in infinitum. 42055 admit that William Fairefeld ote Swithont (ffe; firff
the bioud of the part of bis father, viz. of the Fairefie'ds, and fo; Swant thereof the bioud of
the Sandyes(fo2 both thefe are of the part of the father )if both thele fatle, then the beíreg of the
part of the mother of William Fairefield fhaïl tnbertt, viz. firft the bleu of the Boyfes, and fog
Default thereof the bloud of the Bewprees.


Ft is neceflarp to be knowne in bat ca


fee the heire of the part of the mother fall inhertte,


anb where not. FE aman be ſetſed of lands ag hetre of the part of bis mother and maketh a
fcoffment in fee, and taketh backe an eftate to him and to his hetres, this is a new purchafe,
and (f he dicth without iſſue, the heres of the part of the father ſhall &rft inherite. Ifa man fo
feifed maketh a feoffment in fe vpon condition, and die, the boire of the part of the father Which
ig the heire at the Common law thail enter for the condition bꝛoken, bat the heire of part of the
mother (ball enter bpon him, and eniey theland. (m ) A man fo feifed maketh a fcoffment in fee
referning a rent to him, and to bis heires, this rent ſhall goe to the hetres of tbe part of the fa-
ther ; but, (n if he bab made a gift tn tatle,oz a leaſe foz life referuing a rent,the beire ofthe part
of the mother fati haue the renerfion, and the rentalfo, ae incident thereunto, fhall palTe with tt,
but the beire of the part ofthe mother fat! not take adnantage of a condition annexed to the
fame, becanfe it tg not incident tothe reuerfion noz cam pate therewith, ( 0) Pf aman had bene
(etfed of a mannoz ag heire on the part of his mother, and before the ftatute of Quia emptores
terrarum had madea feoffment in fee of parcell to bolo of him by rent and feruíce, albeit they be

neSwlp created, pet fo? that they are parcell of the Mannoz,thep ball with tbereft of the mannoz

diſcend to the heire of the part of the mother, quia mulra tran eunr cum yniverfitate quz per fe
non tranfeunt. It a man hath a rent feche of thepart of big mother, and the tenant of the ian’


gran⸗


E C Of Fee firnple: | Sett.4.. ag


granteth a diſtreſſe to him and bis hetres, andthe grantee dieth the bíffreffe Chall aoc With tbe
rent to the hetre of the part of the mother ag ineident 02 appurtenant to the rent, for noo (g the
rentfecke become a iRent charge. isi !

(pO Æ mam fo feífeo ag bcire on the part of bis mother maketh a Feoſtment in fe to ud Ei 4-4 -lib.1. fol.100.
the tfc of him and his beítes , the fc being a thing (m trutkand confibence (hall infuc the na= 2777.7. Dhskotbans
ture of the land, and (Dall difcend to the hetve on the part ofthe mother, (q ) A man hath a fcig cao. 32.1.8 era. onte. oi.
nop as heire of the part of his mother, and the tenancy doth efcheate, tt fall goe to the heite of 13.H.7.6.
the part ofthe mother. Fé the heire of the part of the mother of lanb hereunto a Warranty, ta (9) 16.8.3. «ge. 46.
annexed is fmpleanco and Wouche; and tudgement (g given againtt him, and kor him to recover 9
fn value, anb dicth befogc execution. Cr) tbe beire of the part of the mother fall fue execution to n dis TA 5 Armut
haue in balue againtt the Wouches, £o the effet ought to purfuethe caufe, and the recompence is. SEA
fhall cnfuc the toffe,

Je a man giueth iands to a matt, to have and to hold to him and bis heires on the part of
' big mother, pet the heires o£ the part of the father [ball inher it, Fo no man catt inflitute a nexo
Kind of inheritance not allowed bp the Law, and the Words (of the part of his mother) arc
boide, ag in the Cafe that Littleton putteth in this Chapter, FE a man giucth lands toa mar
to him anu his heives males, the Law retecteth this word males, becaule there (8 no luch kind
ofinberitance, whereof pou (fall reade moze tn big proper place,

A man hath iſſue a fonne, and dicth, and the Wife dteth alfo, Lands ave letten for life, the
remainder to the heires o£ the Wife, the fonne dieth Without ifluc, the heires of the part of the
father {ball interit, and not the heires of the part of the mother, becaufe (t befted in. the fonne
agaj9urcbafer. Anotbcrule of Littleton holderh aſwell in other kind of Inheritances, ag
in Lands and Teneinents. (C) And therefore (E there be 3,020, fem mefne,andtenaritjand tie (1) 38.6.5.15;

Mefne bind ver felfe and her heires bp her deed to the acquitall of the tenant, tye Meſne take
bufband, the Cenant by his Dedgranteth to the bufband and bis hetres, that he obhig
beires ball not be bound to acquitall, the bufband and Wife auc iſſue, and Die, this iſſue, bes
tng bound as heire to big mother, (ball not tabe benefit of tbc fato grant of diſcharge, for that
extends to the heives of te part of the father, € not to the heives of the part of the mother, and
therefore the heire of the part of the mother Was bound tothe Acquitall, And thus much for
the better vnderſtanding of Littletons Cafes concerning the heireot the part of the mother
Shall fuffice, ; ) ig;E.$ FE
Mes fi home prist feme inheritrix cc. Peeve there is another C) de piod
marime, (t) Chat whenſoeuer Lands voc difcend froin the part of the motier, the hewes of
the part of the father {all neuer inherit. And likewile when Lands difcend from the part of
the father, the heires of the part of the mother [ball newer inherit. Et fic paterna. paternis, & à
conuerfo,materna maternis. Foꝛ moze mantfcfkation hereof, and of that which hereafter ſhall
bc fato touching Difcents, feo a Cablein theendof this Chapter, k (a) DA EAE

€ Auerala terre per Efcheat. (u) Efcheat, Efchaeta (g à $0920 OF 5022.
art, and deriued from the french $0020 Efchear (id eft) cadere , excidere oz accidere , and fignt= — ————
ficth pzoperlp Shen by accident the Lands fall to the 1Lo2D of Shon they are holoen, in Wijich pop 9, PS
Cale we fay the fee ig efcheated. Bnd therefore, of fome,Efcheats atc calledexcadentia Op terrae. Bisron.ce. 37. gr caps 19.
excadentiales. (w_) Dominus vero capitalis loco heredis habetur quoties per defect veldelidum F.2,5:00. — —
extinguitur farguis fui tenentis loco hæredis & haberi poterit nifi per modum donationis fit 77: 9:06 bance For. 25.
rcueríio cuiufcuque tenementi. And Ockam (Who &v1otcín the raigne of Henry the fecond) Eee — if
treating of tenures of the king, fatth, Porro efchaetae vulgo dicuntur , quz decedentibus hijs sur. gc. a o
quz de Rcge tenent &c.cum non exiftit ratione fanguinis heresad fifcum relabuntur. (x) £0 (x) Com. D .me Hales caf:
ag an Efcheat doe happert two manner of Wayes, aut per defe&tum fanguinis .i. for default of
heire, aut per deli&um tenentis.i. fo? felonte, and that (g bp indgement three manner of waies
aut quia fufpenfus per collum, aut quia abiurauit regnum, aut quia vilegatuseft, And therefore,
thep Which atc hanged bp martial Law, in furore belli fozfcit no Lands: and fo in like Cafes
Cicheats bp the Ciuilians are called Caduca.

(Cy) Che father ig ſeiſed of Lands tn fee holden of 1.5. the fonne ts attainted of high trea⸗ (y) PL. Cots. in Wishes cafe.
fon,the father dieth the Land ſhall cfcbeat to T. S.propter defectum fanguinis, fox that the father
Dicth Without heire, And the ing cannot hauethe Land becaufe the fonne neuct had anp
thing to forfeit, Wut the king (ball hauc the efcheatcof all the Lands whereol the perfor
attainted of high treafon was feifed, of Shomfocucr thep Were holden.

(z) Finan Appeale of Death o? other Felonie, tc. proceffe is awarded agaínft the deten⸗ ¢ z) at B.3.f6.37.30.H 6.5.
bant,and hangirig the procelle the defendant conuepeth away the Land,and after fg ontlawer,
the Conuepanceis god and ſhall defeat the 3.020 o£ his cfcheate,but (Fa man beindited of Hee 155 diues fiio was ir refed i
loníc, and hanging the proccſſe againft htm , he conucpcth axoap the Land, and after ig out⸗ 5.6.6. ass appearcth by my
lawed, the Conucpance ſhall not in that cafe preuent the Loꝛd of bis cfcheate. And the reaſon Lord Vier Hainuferipr.

Of this diucrhtic ig manikeſt Foz in tte cate of the ars the ait contatneth no tine a
e


(2) -Mirrer.ea v. S. 5.
$1. H.3. fatuum de Seac.


5
Regiff. yo1.bis Oath 18.E .1.
Ro.Parl, Paæl.ir.E 3.


Ret.1,19.€.1. (lar. de 5/cbea- And afterwards by the flatute of 14. E
toribus,14.€ .3.ca. 8. 28.F.1.


(Capitula Ffchaetria in V ef,


magna carta fs. 160,161.67. Efcheater, Wut now let bg heare What our Authour will further fap bnto bs.


© Solf.1 47.149.148.


Fi, -B.33.9.E.3.26.
. seg Mm A — {the Abbot and all the Couent die fo that the bodte politique is dillolucd,the Donde Mall fane


Capa. --


Of Fee fimple.


Seil.s,


the Felonic was done, and thereforethe eſcheate can relate but £o the outlawꝛie pronounced.
Wut the mditement containeth the time when the Eclonie Was committed, and th crefore the
efcheate bpon the outlawꝛie fhail relatcto that time, which Cafes J hance added, to the cndthe
fudent may conccíuc, that the obferuation of torits, Fnbitements, Pꝛoceſſe, Flu dqements,
and other Œntrics, doth conduce much to the buderftanding of the right rcafon of the La,
DEthis $0010 (efchacta) here bfe by our Author, commeth (a) Elchactor, an ancient O&
ficer fo called, becaufe hts office is pꝛoperly to loke to Efcheats, wardſhips, and other Cafu-
altics belonging tothe Crowne. In ancient time there Were but two Eſcheatoꝛs in Eng-
land, the onc on this fide of Trent, andthe other bepond Trent, at Which time thep had Subef-
chactors But in theraigne of Edward the fecond,the Dffices Mere diuided and fener fll Eſcha⸗
etors made in euerie Countie for itfe, «c, and fo continucd bntill the raigne of Edward 3.


3. it is enacted by Authoziticof Parliament, that


there fbouto bec as many Œfchcatozs affigned, as when thing Edward 3, came to the Crowne,
and that Was one tn cucríe Countie,€ that no Efcheatoz fboulb tarrp in bis office abouc a peere,
and bp another Statute to be in office but once in thre pers, the Lord Treaſurer nameth hin,

And hereof alfo commeth efchaetria, Which fignifieth the Elcheaterſhip oz the office of tbe


€ Etficvide, &c. his kind of fpeech is often vſed by our


Duthoz, and doth eucr (mpozt matter of excellent obfcruation, Which pou may find in the Sci


ong noted in the margent *,


And ít is to be Well obferucd, that our Æuthoz fatth, Sil nad afcun heire,&c. la terre e(chae-
tera. Jn Which Words is implicd a diuerſũitie (as tothe Efcheate) betweene fe fimple abfo-
inte, Which a naturall bobíc hath, and fee fimpleabfolute Sith a bodie politique, o2 incozpozate
hath. (b) Foꝛ Eland holden of I. S. be giuen to an Abbot and bis fucceffos : In this cafe


againe this land, ¢ not the 30? by efcheat. Bnd fo if land be qiuen in fe Gmpleto a Deane and
Chapter,oz toa Watoz and Cominaitic, and to their fucceffozg , and after {uch bopte politique
oz incoꝛpoꝛate is diſſolued, the Donoz (ball haue againe the land, and not the Loꝛd bp Œfcheate.
And the reafon,and caufe of this diuerũtie (s fox that inthe cafe of a bodp politique oz incozpo-
tate the feo (imple (g Veſted in their politique oz incozpozate capacitte created bp the polícíc of
mar, and therefore the Law doth annex a condition in La to euctp fucb gift and arant Ghat
i£ fuc) body politique os tncozporate be diffolue®, that the Donop oz qrantoz {ball re-enter, fox
that the caufe ofthe gift op grant fatle, but no fuch condition is annexed tothe effate in fee fine
ple befted tn anp man in big naturall capacitie, but in cafe Where the Donoz 02 Feoffoꝛ referue
to him a tenure, and then the Law doth (mplp a Condition in Las by Wap of cfcheate. fo
( ag hath bene faid ) no matt of efcheate iperh but in the thꝛee cafes afozefaib, and not where a
bodp politique o incozpozate te diſſolued.


€ D commeth our
Authoꝛ to the difcent
. betweane bꝛethꝛen,
&obich hee purgofelp omitted
bcfopjs, € Difcent difcenfus
comtmeth of the Latyn 50020
difcendo, and, tn tbe legall
fence, (t fignifieth ben lands
boc bp right of bind fall vn⸗
to any after the death of bis
Anceſtoꝛs: 07 a difcent is a
meanes hereby one doth de⸗
rine bimtitietocertainelandg,
as beire to fome of big ns
ceſtors. And of thig, and of
that which (hath bene fpoken
Both arife another dintfion of
effateg (n fee Aimple,viz. enerp
man that bath a lawtull eftate
(m fe ümple, bath i either
bp bífcmt, o3 bp vurchaſe.


Section 5.

TE" ff foint

trois freres, &
le mulnes frere puts
chafe terres en fee
(imple a Deuie faung
iffue leigne frere
auca là terre per
bifcenta nemp leput=
fneac, Ct aurt fi
foint trois freres &
le puifne purchafe
terres en fee (imple
& Deuie fans iflue,
leigne frere auera ia
terre per Difcent &


Lfo if there bee
three brethren,
and the middle bro-
ther purchafeth lands
in fee fimple, and die
without iffue, the el-
der brother fhall haue
the land by  difcent,
and not the younger,
&c. Andalfoif there
be three brethren, and
the youngeftpurchafe —
lands in fee fimple, and
die without iffue, the
eldeft brother fhall
mene


Liba.
nemp le mulnes,
pur ceo que leigne
& pluis Digne De
fanke,


Of Fee fimple.


haue the land by dif-
cent & notthe middle,
for that the eldeft is
moft worthyof blood.


oett. 6.


ar Leigne eff pluis
digne de fanke, It is a
tmartme tn das», that the nect
of the woerthieſt blo fhall
eucrinberite, ag the maleand
all difcenvant from him bee


14


e female, and the female of the part of the father before the imate o2 female of the part of
ix. iere die the female of the part of the father (s of the woꝛthieſt blood. (c) And (c) Brirroncap. 115.


therefore among the males the eldelt bzotber and bis pofteritp hall inherite lands ín fee fimple
as heire befoze anp poungcr brother, o» any difcending from him,


‘Bratt. lib. 2. cap. 32. 277.27 9.
3-E.3. 26. 3. € 1g Dser 13% 0.
ufeag Littleton faith he ESRI SERA :


tg pluis digne de fanke, Quod prius cít dignius eft, and qui prior eft tempore potior e(t iute, 3.E. s.s an 7.23 ge
- Si quis plures filios habuerit jus proprietatis primo difcenditad primogenitum, co quód inuen- 32 £.3.difcenr.be,


tuseft primo in rerum natura, In Ming Alfreds time Knights fes defcended to the cloctt
fonne, foi that by diuillon of them betweene males the defence ofthe Realme might be weake⸗
ned, but in thofe Dapes Soccage fee Wag deuided betweene tbe heires males, and therewith


BraG. (1b. 4. 211.
Flera.lib.6.ca.1,

G lanutll, lib.7.c4.10
Mirror eap. 1.5. 3.


agrecth Glanuill * Cum quis haereditatem habens moriatur; & c; {1 plures reliquerit filios, tuac * Glewull.lib.7.ca. 3. & ca. T.
dilinguitur vtrum ille fuerit miles, (ive per feodum militare tenens, aut liber Sockmannus quia Vid.Pleem.229.b.

fi miles tuerit aut per militiani tenens tunc fecundum jus regni Angliz primogenitus-filius patri

fücceditin toto,&c. fi vero fuerit liber Sockmanus, tunc quidem diuidetur hareditas inter om.


nes filigs, &c.2Ibut hereof moze Chall be fato hereafter in big proper place,


Cy temet afcauott,
que nul aucta
terre De fcc. fimple
per Difcent — come
beire a afcun homie,
ſi non que il fort fon
bete dentire fanke,
«ar fi home ad iflue
deux fits per Divers
benters a leigne
putchate terres en
fee (imple & mouft
fang iffue, le puifne
frere nauera la terre,
mes luncie leigne
frere, ou auter fon
procheine cofin ceo
aucta, put ceo que Ic
puifne frere eft De
Demy fanke al eigne
Ce


QU fi home ad
““iffue fits a file


q


Settion 6.


Lfo it is to bee
vnderftood, that


« D mal can bee heire
N toa fe fimple bp
the Common La,


none {hall have land of (4) butbe that hath fangui- (a) Braff. 'b.4.299.6,


fee fimple by difcent
asheire to any man,
vnleffe he be his heire
of the whole blood,
for ifaman hath iffue
two fonnes by diuers
venters, and the elder
purchafe lands in fee
fimple, and die with-
outiflue, the younger
brother fhall not haue
the land butthe Vncle
of the elder brother,
orfome otherhis next
cofin fhall haue the
fame, becaufe the
younger brother is but
ofhalfe blood to the
elder.


Secon 7.
Ad if a man hath


iflue a fonne anda
D 2


nem duplicatum the whole 4 b.2.f.65.

blood; that is both of the faz Press

ther anb of the mother, fo ag , rio om Gifford: oaft,
the halfe blood is no blood tna 31.6.3. Conrerpl. de
heritable bp difcent becaufe "Voucher 88.

that he that is but of the 495454...

Yalfe blmd cannot be a com= tia Rarehfscaje bb 3s
pleat hetre, fox that hee hath fe. 40.41.

not the whole and conpleate
blob, and the Law in dit
cents (m fe imple Doth rez
ſpect that which ts compleat
and perkect. And this maxime
doth not only bolo where
lands ( Whereot Littleton herg
{peaketh ) arectapmed 02 de⸗
manded as beíre (e) but alfo
in cafe of eppeale of death;
for, 1€ one bzother bee flaíne;
the other brother of the halfe
blood (ball neuer haue an apz
peale Calbett bec (ball reconer
nothing therein cither in the
realty oz perfonaltp) becaufe
in the eye of the aw bee (e
not beire to bim, Allſo thts 5,4...
rule extends to a Swarrantie

ag our Puthoz bünfelfe cifes

Sohere holdeth.


(6) 7-E-4.15.


,


« bis is ont fo» an
I crample to illuſtrate
that Swbich hath

bons


Lib.t.


7B otten.ca. 199.


f): 24.E. 1.24.10.
c E.3. Count de Veuch. 38.


5.E.4.fe.
iss i
efe.


fe.7


(b) 10.4f 237.34. 4,10,
31 E. 3. ( ennt de Voussen. 880
33. E. 3. hif. V enc.


nimias b


Capa.


bene € [aid needeth no expla-
nation, Bnd bereSoith agre-
ttl) Britton,


Eifie de terres en
1 S ec fimple. [hele


Swords exclude a feifin in fee
tatle, albeit be hath a fee ſim⸗
ple expectant. (f£ )Andthere=
fore if lands bee giuen to a
man andbis Wife, anb to. the
beireg of tietr two bodies, the
remainder to the beíres of the
husband, and they bauc iſſue
afonne, andthe Wife dieth,
and bec taketh another wife,
anb hath tfueafonne, the fa=
ther dieth, the eldeft fonnc
entreth, and dteth Without
tflue, the fecond brother of the
halfe blod fball tnhertte be-
cauf- the eldeſt fonne bp big
entite ag not aduallp fei-
fed of the fee fimple being cx-
pecant but onip of the eftate
tatle, And the rule is that
potlcffio fra-ris de feodo fim-
plici facit fororem effe hære-
dem, and bere the eideft fonne
is not poſſeſſed of the fee fim-
plebut of the eltatctatle, And
Sphere Littleton speaketh on=
lp of lands, ( 9 ) pet there
all be poff-iio fratris of an
ble, of a Seignioꝛp, a rent,
an aduowſon and’ of other he=
teditaments.

«| Et leigne fits enter.
Ch) Ghefe wordg are mates
ríally added when the father
bít ſetſed of lands in fe fine
ple, For (£ the eldeft fonne doth
mot in that cafc enter, then
without queltion thepounges


Of Fee fimple.


pet bn benter, a fits
p anter bentet, a le
fits Del primer ben-
ter purchafe terres
enfee, & mot fang
iſſue, la foer auera la
terre p Difcent, come
boire a fa frere a nép
le puifne frere, pur
ceo que la foer eft De
leentire fanke a fon
eigne frere,


Sec, 8.


TET auti ou bie

eft fetfie De ters
tes en fee (imple, &
ad iſſue fits a fileper
bn benter, a fits per
autet benter, a mor,
& leigne fits enter,
& mot fang tue, la
file auera les tene-
ments, a nép Ie pui-
fue fits. vntore le
puifne fits eft beire
ale pere, mes nemy a
ſon frere, mes ſi
leigne fits ne entra
en la fre apres la
most fon pere, mes
mot Deuant afcun
entríc fait per lup,
Dongs le puifne fre-
re poit enter, & aucra
leterre come beire a
fon perc. Des lou
leigne fits en le cate
auandit entra apres
là mozt fon pere,# ab
ent poffeffíon, Dongs
là ſoer auera la terre


Seët.8.


daughter by one ven-
ter,& a fon by another
véter,& the fon ofthe
firft venter purchafe
lands in fee and die
without iflue,the fifter
fhal] haue the land by
difcentas heire to her
brother, and not the
younger brother, for
that the fifter is the
whole blood of her
elder brother. -


6

Nd alfo where 2

man is feifed of
lands in fee fimple,and
hath iffueafonne, and
daughter by one ven-
ter, and a fon by ano-
ther venter, and die,
and the eldeft fon en-
ter,and die without if-
fue, the daughter fhall
haue the land, and nor
the younger fonne;yet
the yonger fon is heire
tothe fatherbut notto
his brother, but if the
elder fon doth not en-
terintothe land after
the death of his father
but die before any en-
trie made by him,then
the younger brother
may enter, & fhal haue
the landas heireto his
father but where the
elder fon in the cafe a-
forefaid enters after
the death of his father,
and hath poffeffion,


Quia


Lib.t.

uia poffeffio fratris
defeodo fimplici fa-
cit fororem effe here-


Of Fee fimple.


there the fifter fhall
hauethe land, Becaufe
Poffeffio fratris de feodo


dem. Mes ft font fmplsci facit fororem e[fe


Deut freres pet Di-
mers benters, aleígi
e& feifie De tette. en
fee, a mot fans iffue,
& fon bacle entra
come prochein Dette
alup quel auti moi
faris iſſue, o2e le pui⸗
fne frere puit auer 1a
terre come beire al
pncle, pur ceo que il
ett dclentier (anke a


haredé.But ifthere bee
two brothers by di-
uers venters, & theel-
deris feifed of land in
fee and die without if-
fuc,and his vncle enter
as next heire to him,
whoalfodie without
iffue,now the younger
brother may haue the
land as heire to the
vncle,for thatheis of


Seé.8.


fonne thall be here, becaufe ag
ít hath beene fatd before regu⸗
larip be muft make bimfelfe
beíre to him that Swag laff
acuallp feífeo ( ag to the pur⸗
chafoz) and that was to the
father where the eldeſt fonne
DID not enter. And therefore
Littleton addeth that the forme
is betre to the father. (i) But
Sohen the eldeſt fonne in this
taie Doth enter, then cannot
the poungeft fonne being of
the balfc blood bee befre to the
eldelt, but the land (ball bí-
{cend to tbe fitter of the $0bolc
blond, Pet in manp cafeg al=
beit thefonne doth not enter
into lands difcended in fee
fimple the ffter of the whole
bled fhall inberite, and in
fome cafes where the clocft


15


(i) x1.H.4.1 1.
40.€. 3.39.
45. E, 1.13:


nom p.6.
Ratchffes cafe. lib. 3. fo. Ai.


j : fonne Doth enter, pet the
lup.coment queilfoít the whole blood to pong — of the
1 1 cire,
de Dempfanke à fon him,albeit he be butof a FT de Cather se a (k) £47. be
eique freve, the halfe blood to his  4eafe fozyeares,and the Lef- ::47.5-
elder brother. feentreth € dieth, the eldett 9/7


3. Af p 6.

fonne dieth During the tearme 0073 ^ Rodeo
before entric o2 receipt of rent, the younger fonne of the halfe blood (hall not ínberíte but the
After, becauft tbe poſſeſſion of the leſſee fox peares (s the poſſeſſion of the eldeſt fonnc, fo ag hee is
actually ſeiſed of the fe imple, andconfequently the Gfter of the whole blood ta tobe eite. The
fame Law it ts, (£ the lans be holden by Knights feruice, and the cldelk fonne (2 Within age,
anb the Dardtan entreth into the lands. And ott (s if tye qardian in Socageenter,

Wut inthe cafe afezefato, (tbe father make a Leaſe foz life oz a gtft in taile, and dieth, anb
the eldeſt fonne dieth tn the life of tenant for l(fe o: tenant in taile, the pounger bzcther of
the halfe biod Sali inberitebecaufcthe tenant £o life oz tenant (n tatle is feifed of the freehold,
and the eldeft fonne had nothing but a renerfionerpect int pon that freehold o2 eftatctatle, and
thercfozethe voungeft fonne (bail inberite thelandas boire to bis father, Soho ag lait ſeiſed
of the actuall freehold. And albeit a rent had beene referucd pon the Leaſe for life, and the cl-
bet fonne had reccíueb the rent and died , petit is holden by fome * that the pounger brother « 7.H.$.3 4. per. Halle
hail tnberite becaufe the ſeiſin of therent is no actuall {etfin of thefrechold of the land. Wut & Losdingren.
35-AfT. pl,2.fæmeth tothe contrary, becaufe tbe rent iſſueth out of the land anb ig in lcu thereof, pr
Sobercin the ontp queftion is, whither {uch a ſealin of therent, befuchanacuall feaün. of the 77777
land ín thecldeft fonne as the iffer may in a tto2ít of right make her felfe heire of this land to her
brother, But it (s clerc that (1) (f there bebafkard cigne, and mulier puifnc, and the father
maketh a Leafe Foz life 02 a gift in tayle be referuing arent and Die, and the baftard receiue the
tent and dic, this fbatl barre the multer, fog the reafon of that ſtandeth bpon another marime as
thali manifcftip appeare in bis apt place, Se&t.399.


«| Seifie des terres. (m) But inthis cafe if the eldelt fonne Doth (7252

enter and get an actual! poſſeſſion of the fe fimple,pet (£ the wike of the father be inbosoco of the
third part and the eidett forme dteth the pounger bzother (ball auc the renerfien of this third
part not withſtanding the elder brothers entrie, becaufe that his aduall feifin which bee got
tbercbp was bp tbc enbosoinent defeated. Wut tithe etocft fonne had made a Leaſo fos itfe, and
the Leſſes had endowed the wife of the father, anb tenant in Dower had died, the daughter hould
haue hab therenerGon, becaufe the renerfion was changed and altered by the Leafe foz life, and
the reucrfion ig noto erpectant on a new cftate £02 life.


«p Enter. Dercupon the quettion grotocth whither tf the father
be feifed of diuers fcucrall patcelg of lands in one Countie,and after the death of the father the
forme entreth into one parcell generallp, and before anp actual entry into the other dicth, this


Generali entry into part (ball bet in him an actuall ſetũn in the Swhole, fo ag the iter Mall tnbes
vite the Mhole. Bud this ig a quærc tis 21 Nd a.
D 3


(1) 14.E.2 Baffard,. 26.
Vis.Setf. 359.


ar. H.7.33.4.
Bnd


Libi — (Capa. Of Fee fimple. Sedi. 8.


Bnd fome doc take a diuerſitie when an entrie (ball veft, oz Deuck an efkate,that there mult bg
ſeuerall entricg into the ſeuerall parcelg, but Where the pollellton is in no man,but the free-hola
tn law is tn the beirethat entreth , there the gencrall entrie into onepart reduceth all into big ©
acuall pollelion, And therefozc if the Lord entreth into a parcell gencfallp for a €Boitmatm,
02 the Feoffor £02 a condition broken, op the Diffeifce into parcell generally, the entrie (ball not
eft n0? deueſt in thefe oz like cafes, butfoz that parcel. Wut when a man dics ſeiſed of diuers
parcels in poffefTior, andthe frechoid in Tao is by laxo caft vpon thebeire, and the pollellion in
no man,there the entrictnto parcel generallp feemeth to veſt the actuai poſſeſſion tn him tn tbe
Swhole, Wut tf his entric in chat cafe be {pectall, viz. that he enter only (nto that parceil ana

| into no moze, there tt reduceth that parceil only tnto aduaii poſſeſſion.

€ Home ſeiſie aes terres. Mhat then ts the Law of a Rent,
(£) 19.€.2.quarelmped. 17, ÆouoSwfon, o? fuch things that lie in grant : (2) It a Kent, oan Aduowſon doe difcend ta
3:H.7.5. ^" the eldeft fonne , and hee dieth before hee hath ferfon of the Went, op pzefent to the Church, the
Bent 02 Aduowlon fball ptfceno to tic youngeſt fonne, £02 that he muft make himfelfe here to
iat E366: it herve. 293 hig father, ag hath beene oftentimes fato before, Che like Law is of D fices,Courts, Liber=
Sogo) ttes, Franchifes, Commons of inheritance , anb fuch like. (^) And this cafe differeth from
^ the cafe of the tenant by the courtcfie, £o2 there tf the Swifc dicth be£oge the rent dap, 02 that the
Whurch become void, becaufe there was no laches 02 Default in him, no pollibilitie to act fete
fon, the law in reſpect of the flue begotten bp him will giue him an eftate bp the courtefic of
England, Wut the cafe of the oticent tothe poungeft fonne ſtandeth bpon another rcafon, viz.

to make bímfeltc heite to him that was laſt actuallpfetfed as hath beene fafo,


ras € En fee fimple. à) For balfe blond ts not reſpected in eftates


Rateliffes cafe li. y. fl. 1. in tatie, becaufc that the iſſues boc clatine in bp diſcent, per formam Doni, and the illue iri
tatle ig euer ofthe Whole bloud tothe Done.


(o Braftenstib.2.folies. — QD (k) Poff fio fratris de feodo. fimplici facit fororem effe haredens.
ao» Bercupon foure things arc to be obferucd, eucrp Word almott being operatiue, and matertall,
Posi os cach 4E;.3o, Hirt, That thebzother mull bee tn atuall poſſeſſton. Foꝛ pofleitio eft quafi pedis pofitio,

Secondly, De feodo fimplici, exclude eftates intaile, Chirdlp, Facit fororem effe haredem. &9

(1) Ratchfes ef lis. s fo. A1 ag (1) Sororeft heres fata , and theretoꝛe fome at mult bec Done to make ber be(re , and the

(m) Britten.ea.1 E pounger fonneig heres natus (m ) f£ no at bedonetothecontrarie, And albeit the words be
facit fororem effe haeredem, pet thig Dot? extend to the iiue ofthe ſiſter, ẽc. who thall inherit
befoxethe pounger brother. Fourthly, Ot Dignitic: Whereot no other poffcffion can be had but
fuch as diſcend ag to bce a Duke, Marqueſle, (Earle, Wicont, o2 Baron) toa man and big
heires, there can be no pofleffion of the brother to make the Gfter to inberit,but the pounger bzo=
ther being heire ag Litrleton faith tothe father, fall inherit the Dignitic inberent to the blond,
ag heire to yim that Sas firft created noble,

And pon hall onderftand that concerning Difcents, there is a law, parcell of the lawes of!
England, called luscorone , and differreth, in manp things, from the generall lato concerning

6.H.4.1. thefubtect. As for erample, Che king in any fuite for any thing that pertaine to the Crowne
fball not thew tn certaine bis cofinage ag a fubict [ball oo, o2 as he bimfelfe (bati do, foz things

(e) 34. H.6. fa. 3 4- touching his Duchte. (n) And in thecafe of the King, ik he hath {Tue a forme and a daughter

Pl. (om fo.245. by ene bxnter, anb a fonne bp another benter, and purchafcth lands and Dieth,and the eldeũ fon

233-E.3«6. de natu vltra mare, enter and dieth without ((Tuc, the daughter {ball not inhertt theſe lands, noz anp other fee Ginple
lands of the Crowne, but the ponger brother ſhall hauc then. tobercín note that neither pof-
fctfio fratis Doth hold oflands of the pofleflions of the CroSwne, noz balfe bloud ts no impedi⸗
ment to the difcent of the lands of the Crowne, agit fell out in experience after the deceafe of
Ling Edward the fict tothe Queene Marie, and from Queene Mane, to Queent Elizabeth,
both which Were of the halfe bloud, and pet inherited notonlp the lands hich Bing Edward
02 Queene Maric purchaled, but the ancientiands parcel of the dLrotone alfo,

Pl. Com.vbi fupra. A man that is ting by difcent of the part of bis mother,purchafe Tanng to him and his heires
and die Without ((Tue this land (alt difcend tothe betre of tbe part of the mother;but in the cafe
of a {ubtect, the heire of the part of the father fhall bauc them.

So Bing Henrie the eight purchafed lands to him and his hetres, and dico hauing iſſue tivo
daughters, the Ladie Marie, and the Ladie Elizabeth after the deceafeof iting Edward, tbt els
deft Daughter Queene Marie did inherit only, all his lands ín fee Gmple. Foꝛ che elocft vaugh-
ter, 02 fifter of a king ſhall inherit all his fee umple lands. So ít te it the King purcbaícth
lands of the cuftome of Gaueſkind, and die hautng iſſue diners fonnes , the cloeft fonne fbail
onlp inherit thefc lands. Andthe reafon of atl tbefecafes ts, fo» that the qualttte of the perfon

Pl Cone fi.247. doth in tbcfe and many other like cafes alter the difcent, fo ag all tie lanog , and poffefliong
Sobereof the King (9 fetfed in iure Coronz, fhall fecundum ius Coronz , attend dpon ano fole
10% the Crowne, and thereforeto whomſoeuer the Crowne difcend , thofe lands and voſſeſſi⸗
ong diſcend alfo fo» the Crowne and the lands, whereot the Ting (s felfed in ure Coronz, are


con.


Lib. 10


Of Fee fimple.


Sed.9. 16


concomitantia. 3f tbe right beírc of the Crowue be attainted.of Creafon,pet (ball tbe Crowne 71.0». 228.


diſcend to bím;ar co in(tante( Without


and fuccefozs.
But hereof this littic tatke hall fuffíce,


CET ek afcauoir

“/ que ¢ parol/en=
heritacenett pastät-
folement entendue,
lou home ad treg ou
tenements per Di(-
cent Denheritage ,
mes aurichefcun fee
fimple, ou tatle que
home ad p fon put-
chafe puit eftre Dit
enberitance, put ceo
que tes heyres lup
putront enbheriter,
Cav en baicfe de
Doit que home poz-
tera De terre que fuit
De fon purchale De-
mefne, le bte Divya:
Quam clamat effe ius
& hæreditatem fuam.
Ct iflint ferva dit en
Diuers auters briefs,
quer bócou fée porta
$ Spurchale ómcfi,
coe apiert pr Regift.


- Section 9.


Ai it is to wit, ¶


that this word (in-
heritance) is not only
intended whereaman
hath Lands or Tene-
ments by difcent of in-
heritage, but alfo eue-
ry fee fimple or taile
which aman hath by
his purchafe may bee
faid an inheritance,be-
caufe his heires may
inherit him. For ina
Writ of right whicha
man bringeth of land
that was of his owne
purchafe , the Writ
fhall fay, Quam clamat
effe ius & hereditatem
fuam. And fo fhallitbe
faid in diuers other
Writs which a man or
woman bringeth of
his owne purchafe, as
appeares by the Regi-


fter.


anp etber rencríall the attainder ig btterlp avoided, as 1-77...
it fell ont tn the cafe of Henric thefeuenth. (o) Bud if the King purchafe landsto bim anb bis
belres, he ts ſeiſed thercof in iure Coronz, à fortiori, when he parcbafeglanb to him his hieres


(9) 42.8.3. fol. 20.


T eii Afcauoire. Sel¥.45.46. 57,5 9.80.100.
his Hide of fpa 15,5; 1o: jou se
tg vſed twice in this 419 430 .431.489.633,697.
Chapter , and oftentines bp 749-

our Authour in ail big thre

Bokes, and ener teacheth ba

ſome rule of Hac, 0? gencrail

0? fure leading point, ac pou

Shall percetue by reading, and

obferuing of the fame, Sobich

fo? the cafe of the ſtudious

Keader 3| hane obferued,


€ Quam clamat ef-
fe sus & bereditatem


fum. (ay pete out (2577:

Buthoz declareth tbe right Epniéeni
fignification of this woꝛd (1n-

heritance), Bnd true tt (e that

ín tbc wait of right Patent,

8c, quando dominus remit-

tit Curiam fuam. Che Mods

of the tiozit be, Quam clamat

eff ius & hæreditatem fiam.

And tn the Precipe in capite,

ina cui in vita, (b) ben the (5) Rog, frs.
Demandant clatmeth by pute « ) Fan fina
chafe , the tait ig quam cla-

mat cfle ius & hæreditatem

fuam. Bud With Littleton pie fio. iss
aatet the Kegiller, fol.4. & Frot —
232. and the Woke fn 49.E.3. 39° H.6.38.6.€.3.30,
22. againſt ſodaine opinions Fem. Winbelbes enfe a. c
7 H4.5.10.H.6.0. 39.H.6.38, *8*.*

Pl.com. Wimbifhes cafe 47:

And pet in 7-H.4.5. Which (e


(a) Se.732.


the ake of the greatet weight Sir William Thirning Chiefe Juſtice of the Common
Wench (agit ſeemeth doubting of (t) Went into the Chancerp to enquire of the Chancerie men
the forme of the wozit inthatcafo, and tbep fato that the fosme was both the one Swap and the
other, fo as therebp she opinion of Littleton íg confirmed, and the Woke in 6-E.3.fol,30. (g nas €-£.3-30.
table, fo there ín an action of Wwafte the Plantite fuppofed,that the Defendant did hold de hz-
reditate ſua, and it is ruled,that albett the Piantife purchated the renerfion, pet the wait fbonto
feruc. And there itis fato, Ft hath bene feme, that tn a Cui in vita , the ttít Was, which
the Demandant claymed asherright and inheritance , when (t was her parchafe, Bnd fo thts
point wherein there might ſeame fone contrarictic in Bokes tg mantfellly clered, Wut tn the


Statute of W.2,ca, s, dc hereditate vxorum by conftraction of the Whole Statute te taz
ken oulp fo; the wiues inheritance by Dent and not bp purchafe, ag apppeareth in 1,E.2,


tit. Quare imped, 43,53 $,H,6, 54. F, N.B. 34, b.


3

bere be fome that haue an inheritance (c) and baue tt netther by difcent noz pꝛoperly by F
purchafebut bp Creation, ag when the king doth creatcanp mana Duke, a Marque,
Earle Viſcount, o? Baron to him and his beires, oto the heires males of his bodie, ec. bee
hath an inheritance therein bp Creation. A man may haue an tnherttancetn title of Nobi⸗


W.2.66.5. 2
1-€.2.Fi8,quare amped..
5-H.6.54.

SNL B. 34.5.

(e) Lib.6. fol.52.53. Cmntee
de Rutland: cafe. lib. 8. fol. 1€..
17. the Princes oa,


litte and Dignitte thee manner of Mapes, thatistofay, by Creation, bp Dittent, ped


Lib.t. Copa. Of Fee fimple. Scil.9.


Pꝛeſcription. By Creation twᷣo manner of oxdinarie Mapes (for J Will not ſpeake ot a
Creationby Parliament)by weit anb by Letters Patents. Creation by tait ts the anciens
ter Wap, and here it is to be obferucb.; that a men fhall gaine an inheritance by tait. King
Richard the fecond created Lohn Beauchampe de Holte Baron of Aedermifter bp his Letters
Patents, bearing Date the 10. of October, anno regni fui, 11. before hom there was neuer
any Waroncreated by Letters Patents, burby 102ít. And ít isto be obferuen, that i£ boc
begencralip called by watt to the Parliament, be hatha fe Gmpiein the Waronte wit hout
any Words of inheritance. But tf he be created by Letters Patents, the ltate of inheritance
mut be limited bp apt Words, oz clfc the grant isbotd, Fé a man be called by toztt tothe
Darliament, and the wait ts deliuered vnto him, and he dieth before he commeth and fits in
33aritamcnt, Whether hee Was a Waron o? nov And tris to bee anſwered that hee was no
Baron, for the dirccton and diliuerie of the wzit to bim maketh not him Mobie; for the better
vnderltanding whereol tt is tobe knowne that the words of the wꝛit in that cafe are, Rex,
&c. E.B ce D. Chiualierfalutem, Quia de aduifamente & aſſenſu concilij noftri pro quibuf-
damarduis & vrgentibus negotijs ftatum & defenfionem rcgni noftri Angliæ, &c, concerneñ
quoddam Parliamentum noftrum apud Ciuitatem Weftm. à 21. Octob, proxim. futuro
tencri ordinauimus , & ibid, vobifcum & cum Prælatis, Magnatibus & Proceribus didtireg-
ri noflri colloquium habere & tractatum ; vobisin fide & ligeancia quibus nobis tenemini fir-
Lith. fel. 52.53. Counteffe of. miter iniungendo mandamus, quod confideratis di&orum negotiorum arduitate , & periculis im-
oo HET RM minentibus ceffante excufatione quacunque, dictis die & loco perfonaliter interfitis nobifcum &
cum Prælatis, Magnatibus, & Proceribus fupradi&tis , fuper dictisnegotijs tra@aturis veftrum-
que concilium impenfuris, & c. Bnd this Wait hath no operation oz effect utili he it in Par⸗
liament, and thereby bis bioud is ennobled to him and his Heires ltneall,and thereupon a 15a=
ron is called a Pecreof Paritament, (d) And i£ flue be topned in any action, whether hee bee
Regift.287- a Waron, ac. o2 no, ít fball hot be tried by Furte, but bp the Record of Parliament , Which
vi £3 rene, 47220 £46. contd not appeare dniefle he Mere of the Paritament. Eherefore a Dube, Earle,ec, of ano-
thet Kingdome, are not to befuedby thotenames here,foz that thep are not Peeres ef our 39 at-
liament. And aibeit the Creation bp Wait is the ancienter, pet tbe Creation by Letters Pa⸗
tents is thefurer, for he map be fufficentip created by Letters patents, and made Noble, al⸗

bett be neuer fit in 39 aritament.
(c) Lib.6. fil.52453. Counter (0) Andtt is tobe obferucd that Nobilitie may be granted fo tearme of life,by ac inlaw
= mU AM Svitbout anp acuall Creation; ag i£ a Duke take a wife bp the intermarriage pets a Duc
xS EU bene 254 8. État > ches in La, andfo ofa Marquefle, an Earle, anb te rc(E , and in fome other cafe. And
Y1.H.4. 15. there tg a diuerſitie betweene a Woman tat íg Noble bp Difcent,and a Woman that tg fo-
V. Fleta liÿ.6.ca.10. bie bp marriage, (f) Foꝛ i£ a Momanthatis Noble by Difcent, marric one that ts onder
Drap tie the degree of Mobiittic, pet [De remayneth Hobie till ; but if thee gaine it bp marriage, thee
Brocenofnede dgnitie-éy, lolethit, tf the marrie vnder the degree of Nobilttie, and fo is therute to be bu:derftod, Si mu-
14.H.6.18.2. W611 lier nobi is nupferitignobili definitctle nobilis. (ag )@But t£ a Duchelle bp marriage marrieth
(g) 22 H.6.52. a Baron of the 13 calme fheremapneth a Duchelle and lofeth not her name beeaufe her put

band ts Noble, & ficde ceteris.

And ag anetkate Fos life may be gatnedby marriage, fo may the king create either man oz
th) Lib.o.fol.o7.98. Sir ooman J obie Fos Itfe Ch) but not for peercs, becaule then it might goeto Erecutors o2 Ad⸗
Gerrge Reynelh cafe. míniftratoig. The truc dtuiſion of perfons is, that eucrp man {9 citber o£ Nobliitie that

is , a orb of Paritament of the bpper Houle, o: the Degree of J2obilitic, amongt
the Commons, as iknights, Cf{quires, Citizens and Wurgelles of the lower Houle of D arz
ltament, cominontp caiicd.thye Doufcof Commons, and he that is not of the Mobiiticis bp
tntendement of Lat among the Commons,


@ Come appiert per le Regiſter. Mhich booke in the Statute of
W. .cap.24 is ca led Reoiftrum de Cancellaria, becaufe it contatneth the formes of Watts at
the Cominon Law thar tſſue out of the Whanceric, tanquam exofficina luttitix.  bereíg a
Kegiſter of ortginall wꝛits, and a Regiſter of Judiciall toatts, but when it is ſpoken generate
Vide $e1.89.94.96.101.157 1? Of the Regifter it is meant of the Regiſter original, Foꝛ the antiquiticandercellencicof
234.318.383.412.420. 433. this Boke. Hein my preface tothe eight part of mp Commentaries. Chis crceilent Woke
$14-943-644-657-660.692- gry Author bouchetl divers times inthele Wokes, and fo doth hee diuers other Authoꝛities
* in law of ſeuerall kindg,but with this obferuation, that becitethno Duthozitic, but wher
the Cafe ts rare og may feeme doubtful, Which appearcth inthis, that hee putteth no Cafe in
all his the Wokes but hath Warrant of god Æuthozitie in Law, oz hee knesw Well the
rule that perfpicua vera non funt probanda. And the like obferuation is made of Futtice
Fitzherbert it bíg Wooke of Natura Breuium, thathenener citcth Buthozitic, but ben the
Cafe israrcor Was doubtfuiltohlm, Che Authoʒities which our Author hath cited in his
three Bokes 3l hauccolicced,
Fect. 10.


Lib.i.


€ ET de tielx

chofes De Gur
hoe poit auer bu ma⸗
nuel occupation pof-
ſeſſiõ ou veſceit, ficde
Des terres, tenants,
rents,  huiufinodi,
- Ja Dome dirt en coût
countant, & en pice
plebant, que bn tiel
fuit {cifie en fon Des
melne come ‘De fee,
Mes detiels choles
que ne gifont en tiel
Manuel occupati-
On, &c, ſicome De ad=
uotofon Defglife, a
buiutimobí , La il dir⸗
ta queil fuit ſeiſie co⸗
me De fee, & nemy eu
fon Demefne come de
fee, ten Latin ideft
en luti cag, quod talis


Of Fee fimple.


Seéhon 1e.
AN of fuch things


whereof a man
may haue a Manuell
occupation,poffeffion,
or receipt,as of Lands,
Tenements,Rents and
fuch like , there a man
fhall fay in his Count
Countant and Plea
Pleadant that fuch a
one was feifed in his
demefhe as of fee,but
of fuch things which
doenot lie in fuch Ma-
nuell Occupation, &c.
as of an Aduowfon of
a Church and füch
like,there he fhall fay,
that hee was feized as
of fee, and notin his
Demefne as of fee.
And in Latine it is in
one Cale, Quod talis,


feifitus frit, &c.indo- feifitus fuit in dominico


minico fuovt de feo-
do, & en lauter cate,
quod «alis feifiius fuit,
&c. vt de feodo.


Jaile cfpecialment de mettera tor courage, & cure de ceo apprender.
Placitum {g deriued a placendo;quia bene placitare fu
faid, fo called per Antiphra(in, quia nen placet.


fo vt de feodo , and in


the other Cafe, Quod
talis feifitus fuit, ec. vt
de feodo.


Fect.io.


€ N Count Countant.
]eostszssci cometh
of the- french word
Conte Which in Latine is
Narratio, & is bulgarip called
a Declaration, Che oziginall
Wzitis according tobís namc
Breve, bptefe and ſhoꝛt but the
Count hich the Platntife
9? Demandant make is moze
natratiue and fpacious and
certaine both in matter and in
circumſtance of tine & place,
tothe end the Defendant map
bec compelicd to make a moze
Direct anfSwere ; fo as the watt
may be compared to Logique,
and the Count to Rhetori-
que, and tt {s that, which the
Ciuilians call a Libell, And
ín that ancient 1Bœke of the
Dirroz of Juſtices, lib.z.ca.
des Loiers, Contors are Seri-
ants fhüfull in law fo named
of the Count as of the princi-
pall part, andin W.z,ca.39.
he tg called Seriant counter.
€ £^ plea pleadant.
Placitum. Mere Littleton teas
cheth gad pleading in this
point, of Which in his third
Woke and Chapter of Con⸗
firmatíong, Sect,s34. hethus
fatth, Et faches mon fits que eſt
va des plui bouorables, lauda-
bles, & profitable chofes ex ao-
five ley; de auer le[cience de biez
pleader en aétions veals & per-
fonels, & pur céo, 160 toy coun~


Arid for thie canfe this woꝛd
per omnia placet,and ts not;agfoie aue


ig


Mirror. des lus tices.


W.2.cp.29.


"Brat. lib. 4. fol. 263.
Jdem lib. 5. fol. 372
Britton, fol.205 206,
Fleta lib. 5.ca, 5.
Stanf. prar.8.

"Pl. ( em. fol.191
Wretefieyscafe.


C Scifie ; Seit, commeth of the french too2d (fin .i. poffefiio,
fauina that in the Common La fcifed, oꝛ (ciíin ig properlp appltco to freehold, and pofleffen
02 pofleflton pzoperlp to quads and chattelg; although fometime the one is bfeb in ſtead of the
0


€ E" fon demefne come de fee, in Dominico fuo vt in feodo. Domi-
nicum is not onlp that inheritance, Sbercin a man hath proper dominion oz owner⸗ſhip, as tt
ig diſtinguiſhed from the lands which another doth hold of him inferutce, but that Which is
manually occupied, manured , and poſſeſſed, for the nece(Taríc fultentation ; maintenance and
ſuppoꝛtation of the 1070 and bis houſhold, and fauoureth de domo, of the houſe, etther ad men=
fam , for big o? their bord and ſuſtentation, o? manuallp recetued (ag ents) for bearing and
defraping of neceflarte charges pubitke o2 private. Df thefe(fatth out Authoz) he ſhould plead,
that he (9 fetfed in dominico fuo vt de feodo.i.de feodo domi nicali,feu terra Dominicali, feu red-
ditu Dominicali, Dbich ig as muchtofap as Demepne or Demaine, of the hand, .i« manured
by the hand, oz recciued by the hand, and therefore he caileth tt manuall occupation, poſſeſſion,
07 receipt, And in Domefday temeancland tg called Inland,as foz crample, 4. bouatas terre de
Inland, & 10. bouatas in feruitio.


€ Ex tiel manuel occupation, cc. There i8 nothing it our Author


Darmefde)-


Lib. Capa. Of Fee fimiple. Scél.to.


Britton. 20 5.206.optime.
Fletalib.6 .ca. 5-
Jdem lib. 5 ca.1 5.


(i) 7-E 3.63.24-E.5.74*
34:4.6.34,

19.E. 3.qHar. imp. 154.
«Mirror .cap.2.S 17.


(k) Lib.6.fo. s1.Bofvel:cafe.


29. E. 3.5.

31.E. 3-Eftepel 240. ^
Cm) 7.E.3.63.
BraHon. 363.372.
Fleta lib.5.ca.5.


7.E.3.4.
45-E.3.5.


(n) w.2 ca.5.

(0) Braff. lth. 4. fo. 2 40-
(p) Eleralib. 5 e4.1 4.
(q) Britton.ca. 92. ;
(r) 33-H.6.11.6 per rift
14. H.6.1 5. per Newton,
31. E. 1. droit.68.69.

F.N B. 31.5.

LCS 136.

R. Smythes cafe.

45. E. 3. Fines AT.

4g. E. 3-13. 17. E. 3.78.
17.E.2, Dower 163*


but (s woꝛthy of obfernation, ere is the firft ( &c..) and there is no (&c.) in all bis the
Wakes ( there being ag pou fball percéihe berp tron ) but it is fortwo purpoles -frírft.it dorh
imply fore other neceflarp matter, Specondip, that the ſtudient may together Sith that «€
our Author hath ſaid tngnire what authozities there be tn Lat» that treate ofthat matter, wht
Spill worke three notable effets ; irl, (t will mabe him bnèerftand eur BAuthor better ;
DHecondiy, it willexceedingly adde to the readers inuention. 2inblaftty, ft Sot! fatten the matz
terthomoze furelp in big memory, fox which purpole J Hane for big cale in the bemmnina fet
Downe ín thefe Inſtitutes the choc of fome of. the puncipall Authoꝛities in Law ag J cone
cetuethem concerning thefame. In this place the( &c.) tmplpeth poflellion oz recetpt,andfuch
other matter as appeareth bp my notes in this Section. As for tbe Authoꝛities of Law, pou
all Gndethe effec of them in this Section, anb tbe ike of thereltof tbe ( c.) Wwyhich pou thal
finde in ths Sections hereafter mentioned, omttting thofe ( £oz auoyding of tcotoufnc(le ) that
cither arc apparant, o2 which are erplaned in foe other placeg,viz, Scét.20.4.8, 102,108,120,
135.136.137. 14.6,14951 $4. 164.166,167.168.177,:79.183,184,194, 200.202, 2:0. 214.
217.220,226.233.249,242.2444245.248 262.264,269,770.271,279. 320, 322.313. 32$.
326,5327.329,330,335.336.341.347.348 349 150.352,35 5.356.359. 364. 365. 374. 375-
377.381.384.389.393.39$,397.399.401.472.4.10 417.428.433 447. 449,464 470. 471.
477.483.489.500.$01.5$22.532.552.553.550.558.5$62.578.591.592.$593. $94. 603. 613,
624.625.630.632.634.637.638,648.659.660.661,669.687.693,700.318. 745.748; 749
Bil Which J haue obſerued and quoted here once fo? all fo the cafe of the ftudious reaver. :


«T de feodo. Where (vt) (8 not by way of {imilitude, but to bee
vnderſtod pofittuelp that he ts íctfco in fee, And fo ít is where one pleada dtfcent to one vt fi-
lio & hæredi that ig to 10.5. that is fonneand betre, & (ic de ceteri: Sphere (vt) denotat iptam
veritatem,


qj. Sicome de advow[on. Of an Aduowſon (i) wherein aman hath
ag abfolute ownerſhip and pzopertte as he hath in lands o? rents, pet he Mall not pleade, thar
be (a feifedin Dominio fio vt feodo, becaafe that inheritance, fauouring not de domo, cannot
either ferue for the fultentation of him and his houſhold, noz any thing can bee recetued for the
fame for Defraping of charges. And therefose he cannot fap, that he 19 fcífeb thereof in domin;-
co tuode feodo, Sobereby it appeareth how tbe Commen law dothdeteſt Stmonp anb all coz-
rupt bargaines fo prelentattons to anp benefice, but that (k) idonea perfona £92 the diſcharge
of the cure ſhould be pꝛeſented frælp Without expectation of anp thing; nap fo cautioug ts the
Common law inthis point thatthe pl. ina quare impedir fhould recover no Damages for the
loſſe of bis pzefentation bntill the ſtatute of W.2.cap ¢, Andthatts thereafou that Gordian in
Socage (1) hail notgaeient to an Aduowſon, becaufe he can take nothing for tt, and bp confe=
quent hecannot account foꝛ it. Bnd by the 135 he can meddle With nothing that he cannot acc
count for. (m) Bnd fn a writ of right of Pouowlen, the patron fball not alledge the explees og
taking of the profits in bunfelfe but in bis incumbent. And hereby the old bakes (ball bec the
better tnberftoon,viz. Bracton,lib.4.trad.2.cap-nu.s.Eft autem dominicum quod quis habet ad
menfam, & proprie ſicut ſunt Bordlands Anglice, And Fleta lib.s.ca s. Eft autem domini-
cum proprie rerra ad menfam affignota. Dominicum etísm dicirur ad differentiam eius qnod
teneturin 'ervitio, Wut ofan Aduowſon andfuch like he (ball plead, that he te ſeiſed de aduo-


catione vtde feodo & jure.


«| Aduowfon. Aduocatio, (ígnitpíng an aduowing 02 taking into
protection, ie ag much ag ius patronarus, Sir William Herle {n7.E,3. fo.4, faith, that tt ig
notiong paff, that a man Did know What an Aduowſon was, but Whena man Would grant
an aduo wſon he granted £c Team, the Church, and therebpthe abttosofon palled,  Vid.4 s. E,
3.5. But lurely the 0020 is of greater antiquity, for in the Kegiſter there ig an oꝛiginall tioztt
de re&o Aduocauonisan in the oꝛiginall tort of Alſſiſe de darreine prefentment the patron
is called Aduacatus. (n) Vid, W.2,:a.5. And ſo doth (o) Bra&oncalibím, Aduocatus autem
dici potericillead quem pertinet jus aduocationisalicujus, vt ad. Ecclefiam præfentet nomine
proprio & nonalieno. Bnd (p) Fleralib.s ca. t4. agreeth herewith almoſt totidem verbis: Ad.
uocatus eftad'quem pertinet jus aduocationisalterius Ecclefiz, vt ad Ecclefiam nomine proprio
non aliene poffit præfentare ; Bnd ( q ) Brirton cap,o2, Che Patron (s called Auow, Andthe
patrong are called aduocati foz that they be either Founders or maintepners o? benefactors of
the Church either bp butiding, dotation o? tncreafing of tt, in which refpect thep were alfo calz
leb Potro: i,andthe Adnowſon ius patronatus, .

And itis to be vnderſtod thatthere (ga great (r) diuorſity interaduoeat onem medietatis Ec-
eleſiæ, & c, & medictetem aduocationi- Eccle, and of thetr fenerali remedies foz the fame,
Forthe Aduowſon of the moítp ts When there be ſeuerall Patrons, and two feuerall incum⸗
bent in one Church, the one of the one mottp thereof, and the other of the other moitp, and one

bare


e |
Libi. | |. Of Feefimple. Sela,


gartafsocil o£ tbe Church ag of the towne allotted to the one, andthe other part tbereot to the
Other, andin that cafe cach Patron if bebe diſturbed (bali fauc a quarc impedit, quod permit-
tat iplum praientareidoneam perfonam ad medietatem Ecclefiz, :
+ bnt tftherche two dLopercenerg, and they doe agres to parlent bp turne cach of them (n truth
bath but a ioíty o£ the Church, but fog that there (9 but one incumbent, tf cither of them be bi-
Gurbed fhe (ball aue a Quarei pedit, &c,præfentarc idoncam perfonam ad Ecclefiam ; for that
thereis but one Church and one incumbent, and fo of the like, 25ut (n (C) the fato cafe of two
Coperceners onc of them ſhall bane a 102tt of right of Aduowſon de meditate aduocationis f0?
intrath fbebaty but a right to a moítp, but inthe other cafe where there be two Patrons and
two incumbents in one Church each of them hail bane a Walt of right of Aduowſon dc aduo-
catione mcdietatis. : 4

Bund ag there map ( as hath beene faíb ) be tio fensrall 39arfons in one Charch, fo there
may be t$99 that map make but one 19 arfon (n a Church, (t) Britton fatth,Siafcun Etelife toit

' done adiuers perlons per vn fole avowe nul ne fe pura pleadte per affife de iuris vtrum ne nul

eftreimplede fauns lautre,&c, Bnd therewith agreeth Fleta* (u) Item licet aliqua Ecclefia di-
uifa fueritinter duos, five bona fua habcant comunia fiue feperata, dum tamen vnicum habe-
ant advocatum nullus eorum fine alio agere poterit vel implacitari. Bnd Fitzh.faírb, that two
ps map be one Parlon of a Church, who Mall topne in a Iuris vtrum, fo ag ene

ectory tap be annexed to two feucrall 392ebenbs, and both of them make but ons Warfow,
But where onc is Parſon of the one mottp of a Church and another of the other moitp ag hath
banc fai, there one of them (bell haue a juris virum againt the other, and in the torit (ball
name him p:rfona medictatis Ecclefiz,&¢, But for auopding ef fufpition of curioũtie (£ wee
fbouib proceed anp Further herein, Wwe will attend what Littleton will Further teach og.


Section 11,


ET nota que Nd note that a @ [ Bs doth ete ae
Pl A Well to fe fimpice


ene poit at À man cannot haue conditional ano qua=
plutsampleoupluis amore large or grea- — to fee amples ne
greinder eftate Den= ter eftare of inheri- pipessei poc of the ane
beritance, que fee tance than Fee fim- — and — of the
1 eſtate, and not o£ the gerbu-
fimple, insi ple. tableneffe of the faine, Bnd he
that hatts fee Gmple conditionall oz qualificd hath ag ample and great an cffate ag hee that hath
a feo Gmple abfoiute,fo as the diuerGtie appeareth betweene the quantitie and qualitie o£ the


From this tate in fee Gmble, eſtates (n tatle, and all other particular elkates are derined,and
therefore worthily our Authos beginneth bis rit bake with Cenant in Fee imple for a
principalioribus feu dignioribus cft inchoandum.

€T Ne poct aver pluss ample ou greinder eſtate, Ac. fox this cauſe too
(a) fee Gmpies abfolute cannot be of one, ano tbefeife-famc land, It the King make a gift in
taile end the Done is attatnted of treafon, in thés cafe the king hath not two fimpleg in him,
viz theanctent reuerſion in fes, and a fez Ample determinable bpon the oping without iſſue of
Tenant in taile, but both of them are confolidated andcontopned together ; and foit (g tf fuch
& Genant in tatle doth conücp the land.tothe ing hid hetres and Succeſſoꝛs, the King hath
but one effate in fee linple bnited in him, and the things grant of one eſtate is god, and ſo Wag
ft adiudged tn the Court of Common pleas. And pet in ſeuerall Parfons bp actin Law a
reucron may be in fee fimple in enc, and a Fee fimple determinable in another bp matter Ex poft
: facto ; as t£ a gift ín taile be made to a Villeine, and the Loꝛd enter, the 3070 hath a fe (imple
qualífico, and the Donoza reverfion (n fee, but tf the Loꝛd inteoffe the Donoz, now both Fe
Fmples are buited, and he hath but one fee Ample in him ; but onc fee imple cannot Depend vpon
another by the grant of the partic, ag tf lands be ginento A. folong as B. hath betres of big
baby the remainder eucr its fee, the remainder {g botoc.


Sect, 12. |


€ Cem purchale Lfo purchafe is ej [DY:cha(einatyn (s et
E appel la pof- A called the pof- «Ti aq te toe
feflion Dc terres ou fefion of lands or finvert inthe originall Beats
| : jus 243. Im terris v bene


18


(t) Britien.fo 255.

31-€.1. droit 68.69.

F.N B.31.6.¢,3 3.0.
4.7.8


S^


17.£.3.38.75.76.

7. E.3. 337.

8.€,3.425.

— 33. 14^ H.4 10.
33-6.5. Amp. 1 96.
(9 Brem f i CE

(v) Fleta lib. 5.02.19.


F.N.B.49. o.


F/NC8,45. p.


(à) Pl. Com 349. & 248.
19. H.8. Drer 4.

2g. H.8. Dier 33.
16.Eliq. Deer. 5 30.

2. Marte Diei. 107,
Atiffens cafe.
Da. 38 E lig .rot 108.
Inquar.imp. betweene the
T Pl. andthe Biftop
of Liucolne, Buffey ard
others deff.

15.E,4.6.8.


Liba. |. Capiz


Braffen.lib. 3. fe. 65.
(b) Glamsil. (15.7. ca. Y.


"Eritton ea. 55. fo. 84. Cr 131.


Pl. Com, Wimmbishes cafa, qm.b.


1. H. 5.08. 5.


(C) 9. E.4. 14


Mich.10.I.:.Obiter in Com.
bance.in Tyms cafe.

(d ) B. Caffanans fo. 13.
Conel,29.

30.E.3.2.dr.3.
39.€.3.6.9:10.

1. H. s uit. Exeentors, 108.
wt XDi(cent "Br.45.

p. E.A. 15. Madam

riches cafe.

(e) Vid.28-H1.8.24-


Int.ekliudicata ceram Rege,
Tr.41.E. 3.lio. 3 fo. 104.
$n Thefaur .


$60.341.241. i s


Mirnr.ca. 2.6.1 5.
dr 097.1.§.5.


mentis qua: viri & mulieres
soniunéim acquifierunt, &c.
Bracton calleth (t perquifitum;
and by (b )Glanuil ítíg cals
ied luca 0? perquifitum,
purchafe (s alwayes in⸗
tended bp title, and moft prox
perip bp fome kinde of con-
uepance either for monep 03
fome other confideration, 02
freely of gift: for that is ín
Law alfoa purchaſe. But a


diſcent, becauſe it commeth


Of Fee taile.


tenements que home
ad p fon fait, ou per
agreement, a quel


: poffeffion il ne auient


per title De Dí(cent De
nul bc fes auncefters,
ou Dc fes coufins
mes per fon fait De-
mefne,


Sed.


tenementsthat a man
hath by his deed or a- -
greement, vnto which
poffefion hee com-
meth not by title of
defcent from any of
his anceftors, or of his
Coufins but by his
owne deed.


meerelp bp att of Law, is not ſaid to be apurchale ; anbaccoibínglp the makers of the ad of
Parliament tn 1-H.5,ca. 5. ſpeaketh of them that baue lande 02 tenentents by purchafe o2 Dífcent
of inheritance, And fo (t (g of an efcbeate oz the like becauft the inberitance (9 caft bpon,oz a title
befted in the Lord bp ad ín Law and not bp his owne Deede o2 agreement ag our Authoz bere
faith Like Law of the fate of Œenant by the courteſie tenant in Dower 92 the like. Wut tach
ag attaine to lands bp mere intury and Sozong, ag bp diſſeiſin, intrufon, abatement, vſurpati⸗
on, ac. cannot be faid to come (n bp purchafe go moꝛe then i obberíe, Wurglary, Pyracp o2 the
like can tuftip be tearmed purchafe, '

Fla Mobile man, knight, Efquire,éc. be burted ina Church,and haue his coat armour and
Penniong With big armes,andfuch other enfignes of honour as belong to his Degree oz oader fet
bp inthe Church, o2 if a graueftone o? tombe bee lafo op made, ec. fe? a monument of him, (-) Jin
thts cafe albeit the freehold of the Church be inthe parfon, and that thefe be annexed to the Free=
hold, pet cannot the Parfon oz any take tbeim 02 deface them, but he (e fubéect to an action to the
beire, and bis hetres in the honoz and memozp of $obofe Aunceſtoꝛ thep Were fct bv, Wndfo it
Swag holden, Mich,10.1a. and herewith agreæth the Lawes (d ) inother Countries, Mote this
kinde of tubcrítance : and fome hold that the wife o? € -cutors that firk fet them bp may baue
an action tr that cafe againtt thofe that deface them intheirtime. And note that in fome places
chattels as hetre-loomes, (as the belt heb, table, pot, pan, cart, and other Deadchattcls tnouc-
able) map gocto the hetre, and the heire in that cafe may bane an action for them at the Common
law, and (ball not fue for them inthe Eccleffatticall Court, but tbe hetreloome (g Due by cuftome
and not bp the Common law. And tbe (c) anctent iewels of tbc Crowne are heire loomeg,


and thatl difcend to the next ſucceſſoꝛ, and are not Deutfable bp teſtament.
An heire loome íg called principalium 02 hereditarium.
Confuetudo hundredide Stretford in Com’ Oxoixeft quod hæredes teñtorum infra hundre.
dum przdiétum exifteñ poft mortem antecefforum fuorum habebunt,&c. principalium An:


glice an boire Lombe;viz, De quodam
Optimam carucam, optimum ciphum,&c.


genere catallof, vtenfilium,&c, optimum plauftrum


Dur Ænthoz hath not ſpoken of parceners (m thie Chapter for that he hath particular chaps


ters of the fame,
C) pee qnis ira
«r yEnant en Enant in Fee
Fee Taile. Taileis by
Tallium , 03. force ofthe
VP mein sont T Statute of
French oz tailler fcinderc, tute de Weft.z.ca.r. W.2.cap.r. for before
cee ee b Car duant Edit ſta⸗ the faid Statute, al In- -
€] Le Statute deW. 2. nt Ae Enheri⸗ E: were Fee
Chis Statut wag marein faces fuetfeefimpf; fimple; for al the cifts
— amiga wet cat touts les bones ‘which bee fpecified in
holden at Welkuintter, ann loöt Cpecifies deins y*ftar.werefecfimple


bath


Gradus Parentele & Confanguinitatis, pro
meliori intelligentia Authoris noftri.

The degrees of Parentage and of —— fer the better onderffanding

of our Authour.


Approued by


Adi quiia À Adgnati ex parte Patris. Braéio7, lib.2, cap.s1. fol. 67. Cegaati ex parte Matris Cogmati qua fi
Tae egerit, Coufins on the part of the Father the Britton, cap.89. fol. 220.221. Coufins on the part of the Motherthe neice partei


lee worthy in Difcents, though nec-


Fileta,lib.s. cap.7.
rer of kinne.


Mirror cap.1. 6.3, & que heritages.


more worthy in Difcents, though
farther remote.


| — ; |
PACKS CHE MIS e | Linea. . Linea tranſuerſuli IL 7, ,
The fide Line. PLANTE) Re da L | ca tr ae i — ateralis.


Theright Line.


eAbpatruns magnis. Titauus. YZ Tritania, Ver vH ;
3 à : The great Grand- m tL The great Grand- auaculus magnus,
The xmi ois — AT CE : Ks CDS um À Gnu qu The great Vncles Grandfather
on the Fathers fide. father. mother, on the Mothers fide.


if


Abamita magna.
The great Vneles Grand-mother
on the Fathers fide,


cAbmatertera magna,


The great Vncles Grand-mother i :


Atauia.
The great Grand-fathers
Grand-mother.


Atauus.
The great Grand-fathers
Grand father.


on the Mothers fide. 1


Propatruns magnus.


*Proa


bauus. Abauia. uunculus magnus,

Fathers fide, e Abans. ij

The great Vncles Father on the Fathers fide The great Grand-fathers The great Care The great Vncles Father on the Mothers fide
Father, Mother.


Proamita magna. |
The great Vncles Mother on the Fathers fide,


Promatertera magna.
The great Vncles Mother on the Mothers fide | B


Proauus, Proatia, f
UT : The great Grand- The great Grand- i:
Patruns magne, E lier Hore Anunculns magnus,


The great Vncle onthe Fathers fide, The great Vncle on the Mothers fide.


eum, e uia.
The Grand-father. = The Grand-mother.


Ass ay Be quia ~ Amita magna, Matertera magna.
paire autiqWer,
The great Aunt on the Fathers (ide,


The great Aunt on the Mothers fide,


pa qnefilvee ï Patruus. Dares res Auunculus. Aruorention, qui
À z ; : VARIAR minor,
) 1 The Vncle or Fathers Brother. Father, Mother. The Vncle or Mothers Brother.
| ; j ü
E $3778 Amita, AMatertera. ld Matertera qua
1 4 H : P . Mateo tera)
x The Aunt or Fathers Sifter, Linea B: ela afcendens > The Aunt or Mothers Sifter. H 3
, The right Line afcending. 3
j ia
4 Patrueles 2 Patruo.
Fraterquefi fers B - Auunculini ab oduuncplo.]
— H | Sonaesor Daughters, Cou- Linea tranf- Frater a Brother. Frater,a Brothe : i
{ E finG h h ; 2 r. Lixea tran[- Sonnes or Daughters,Cou- | K
| ? n Germaanson the Fathers #erfalis feu col- | Semi germanus fra- Vterinus frarer à 4 Pac 5 bi
| fide 5 A d : xerfalis, fes col. in Germans on the Mo- | f
À lateralis o grapes Brother of one A sees thers fide |
tere : — Father and ſeuerall Mother & feuerall | Zareraze. Or C HIDE F
See qeffee — E : — ab — ——— —— — AMaterterimià matertera. À Frei quaf na
Semi germani j REP TEC The fide Linc. Sifter. Sifter. The fide Line VERE x Paru re : — feet
- in Germans on thc o-


fin Germans on the Fathers


Fiatres quafi ex libus patribus.


eodera patre ér. ft fide. S : thers fidc.
peralibnsmatrins — B Horum. y ; i
5 H Horum. — — — | °
ES ; Of thefe. Propo- e : fitus. OF thefe. i
Dus ie Filins,
| Giniar £a amare mu LAT Linea recta difcendens. pu Sonne.
| pue, TheDaughte | Theright Line difcending. The Daughter
| right Coufin right Coufin
German. German. ,
Eorum. E
Of thefe. Dau E QUE
Nepos collat. Us Of thefe. li
NEN ; - - Di en i! :
Nephew. 5 act. : €collatera
Repos eh x SERE Nepos linealis, Neptis linealis, Nephew.
Dorm The collateral 3 . : Neptis collat.
C The lineall Nephew. The lineall Niece. The collaterall
" Nicce,
Pronepos linear. Proneptss lisealis.
Evrundem. The lineall Nephewes or Neices Son. The lineal nephewes or neices daughter
l| Of thefe. Eorundem.
l| Proaepos collat. — Of thefe.
The collaterall Abnepos linealis. Abaeptis linealis. Pronepes collat.
Nephewes Son The grand Sonne of thelineall Nephew + The grand Daughter of the lincall Ne- The collaterall
RE RS or Nicce. phew or Niece, Nephewes Son
e collatera Pronepriscollat.
Nephewes : The collatteral
Daughter. Ainepos linealis, Atneptis linealis. Nephewes
Et ficin The great grand Sonne of the lineall Nephew ÿ The great grand Daughterof the lineall Nc» Dauehter.
infinitum. or Niece. 1 phew or Neice. ^ "Et fic ia
T i; T EGEZTNDIS - ; infinitum. ;
Trincpos linealis. Trineptis linealise
The great great grand Sonne of the lineall Nephew E Thy great great grand Daughter of the lineall Nephew


or Niece, Et fic ininfinitum. or Niece. Et fic ia infinitum.


“ra PLE MADER OCR SE CAT TE — — —


Sr REET


Place this next before Folio 19. -


Lib Of Fee taille. Se#.g. 19
m bo ipl ſim⸗ codirionalatthecom- hath the name of the fecond,
pli coDitional al cô mon law,as appeareth ai deci ——
E E appiert vis $e rehearfall of  aweftminter fn the third pere

p/reberlaldititita- the fame Statute. And — 9f the fame ings ratus

e.@t oze pcelftat now by this Statute, Lem Bel im uet
tmátent taile eſten Tenant in Taile is in me Paritaments ‘were after
dur mañs ceuatca⸗ two manners, thatis een dE vue some ep tae
uoite.tenanten taile co fay, — intaile oueiy — ——
genetall,a tenant en gencrall, and Tenant. Prage iy tay
taile ſpecial. in taile ſpeciall. —* bp etn ——
Apon Which Statute, our Authour ( the Inner Temple oid Jearnedip read, whoſe reading
Jhaue. Ot king fds. anb of this Statute, Sir William Herlecbiefe Julticeofthe Conrt
0€ Common Pleas, in 5.E.:.14-faith, Chat Ring E.r. was the wiſelt King that ener Wass 5.F. 3.14.
and the caufc of the making of this Statute, wag to pzeferue the Inheritance tn the bloud -of
them to whom the gift was mabe, Andino.E.3.22.hefaith, Chat thep Were fage men that


mavethie Statute. Sce moze of this tn the Chapter of toarrantícg, Sect. 746.

3Dftbíe eftate Catle (tig fato, (a) Modus legem dat donationi, & tenend eft eriam conuen-
tiojquia Modus & Conuentio vincuntlegem : Vt fialicui cum vxore fiat donatio, habendum &
tenendum (ibi & haeredibus quosinter cos legitime procreabunt, ecce quod donator vult tales
heredesin harcditate pazerna & materna fuccedant,alijs hæredibus eorum remotioribus penitus
exciufis : Et quod voluntas donatoris obferuari debet manifefte apparet per hzc Statuta , quia
autem dudum Regi durum videbatur, &c.


ej Dewant le dit Statute (b) touts Inheritances fueront Fee fimple. ere


Fee imple is taken in his large fence, including as Well conditionall 02 qualtfied, ag abfolute,
£o diftinguit them from ettates in Œaile Gnce the fato Statute. Betoꝛe Which Statute ef
Doniscohditionalibus, Ff Land had beens giuen toa man, and to the beíteg males of his bo-
die, thehauing ofan (Tue female hadbeene no perfezmance of the Condition ; but it he had
iſſue male, and died, andthe (Mus male had inherited, vet hee had not bab a fee Ample ab-
folute, (c) foz1£ he had dicd Without t(tue male, the Donoz ſhould bane entred ag ín his re⸗
verter, By hauing of ue. the Condttion was performed £o? thzee purpoles ; Jrirft;to Alien:
SDecondip, to Forteit : Chirdly, to charge With Rent, Common, ozthe like, Wut the courfe
of difcent was not altredby hauing (fue ; for tf tbe once had (Tue and died, nd the land bab
Defcended to his iſſue, (4) pet tEthat (Tuc had died (without any altenatton made) Without tf-


fue, big colaterall betre Thould not aue inherited, becaufe hee Was not Within the fozmeof the +


gite, viz. beire of he bodie of the Donce. (f ) Lands were giuen before the Statute in frank=
marriage, and the donces had iſſue and died, and after, the {Tue died withont tMue, (t Was ad⸗
iudged that his colaterall iſſue ſhall not inbevite, but the donoz (hould re-enter, So note, that
c bete in Taile had no fee Ginple cbfolute atthe CommonLaw, though there $ocre diucrs
diſcents.

FE Lands had beene giuen to a man andto his hetres males of bis bodio, and hee had iſſue
two’ Sonnes, andthe cloeft had iſſue Daughter, the Daughter Was not inberitable to the
Fe imple, but thepongerfonne per formam Doni. And fo tf Land had bene, given at the
Common Law tu a man and the hetres Females of his bodice, and he had tue a Sonne anda
Daughter, and diedthe Daughter ould haue inherited this Fee (imple at the Common Law,
fo? the Statute of Donis Conditionalibus, ereateth no eftate tatle,but of fuch an effateag was
fe fimple atthe Common Law ¢ is diſcendible in {uch Coume as it was at the Common Law,
* € the Done in taílc had iſſue befoꝛe tbe Statute,¢ the flue had died without (Tue, tbe allena⸗
tion of tbc Done, at the Common Law, having no iſſue atthat timehad not barred the Donoꝛ.

(2) FE Donee in tatle at the Commen Law bab aliened befoze any iſſue had, and after had
f(Tuc, this alienation had barred the Que, becaufehe claimen a Fes imple , pet if that iſſue died
Without Aue, the Dono; might reenter for that he aliened before any f(Tue, at what time he had
no power to alten to barrethe poffíbilitte of the Don. Ch) Wut (£ eme tenant in taile had
taken hufband, and bad í(Tuc, and the hufband anb wife had aliene in Fee by Deed before the
Statute, pet the (Tue might haue had a Formdon in dífcender foy the altenatton Swag not law⸗
full: but otherwile ít ts, if it had bene by ne. And tbefe things though thep ferme ancient are
necetfatíc, not withſtanding to be knowne, afiwell foz the knowledge of the Common Law,

as for Annuttes andfuch ſke Inheritances ag cannot be tntatled y within thefato Statute,
and therefoze remapne at the Common Law, (1) It the king befoge the Statute of Donis
- E 3


com


g.E.3:21-4


(a) Fle'a lib. 3.cap-9
"Brat? lib. 2.64.5 re.
Brit.cap.24. 36.


(b) viq.Sed.18.
Brit.ca. i5.fal.93.

PL («m 235.562, S belleye
(sf. lb. fol. 103.


(c) 44.K.3.3. 30.E.t.
Formedon 66. 7.E.4.6.9
7. H.4.31. 12. H. 4. 1.


(d) 18.E.3. 46.18. 4f. p. 8.
1.£.4.3.


( £)4- H. 3. Formedon 34.
18.4]: 5. 12.£.4.3..
Pl.Com.247.6. 18. E.2. tif.
Formeden 58.59.


(8) 30-E.1.formden 68.
Temps E. 1 sbidem.62.
19.E.2. fermdon 61.

PL. Com. 246.

(h) 4. E.a. formdes sp


6.E.1 56 Ie, of Eltbami cafa,


Lib,


(X) 45.“f/p-6. .


(1) Ph Com.246.5.


Lib. 1o.fal. 38. in'Tort.ezfe.


Dok. Stud. 15.2. cap. 55.


(1) 34. H.8.tír. feoffmentsal
wfes 4. 37. H.B.fo.


f) Pafb.x4 Ta. mabe Kings
pn ST


Yid. Sei.


Cap.


Of Fee taile.. Sedis.


conditionalibus had trade a glkt to a man, and to the betres of his bobít begotten , the Done
Poftprolem ſuſcitatam might bauc al(enco affocil as tn the cafe of acommon perfon, (k) But
i£ the Done had no (Ine, and before the Statute had aliened Sith Swarrantie, and died , and


- the Warrantie had difcended vpon the Hing, rhis Hould not hauebound the thing of hiske⸗


uerfon without alletz: but etheriwife (t Sas in the cafe ofa common perfon. (1) DE the cher
Gide, tf Lands bab benc giuen to the Ring and tothe heires of his bodic, bee could nocbes
fore iffuc aue aitencd in Fer, but onlpto bauc barred his iſſue ag a common perfon mobt
fauc bonc , but not to bauc barred tbe reverfion , for that thouid haue bene a Song
in the cafe of a fabíet , and the Kings Pꝛerogatiue cannot alter his Cafe, noz maki tt
greater, then the Donor gaue dntohim: Bnd itis a maxime in Law, Chat the King can tec
noSojoug tohenall Œftates were Fee imple, then Were Purchalers ture of their 39nrcfa-
fce, farmozs of theit ALeafes, Creditors of their Debts, the King and Lords had their df
cheates, forfeitures, wardſhips, and other profits of their Seigntozics ; and fo» thefe and d=
ther Ike cafes,by the wiſdome of the Common Laÿ all eltates of inheritance were Fee Gimpie,
and bat contentions and mifchiefes baue crept íntotbe quiet of the daSo bp tbefe fetterco in⸗
heritances, datlp experience teacheth bs, Wut fee moze of this matter in the afozefaid Chapter
of Warrantie, $edt.74€. - ; |

€ Common ley. Sec for explication hereof, Sect.170. |

€ Come appeirt per lereherfall de mefme leftatute. Pete, by the au
thozitic ofour Buthoz, Che rchearfalloz preamble ofa Statute is to be taken for truth ; fog tt
cannot be thought that a Statutethat is madeby authozitie of the Whole Reaime, afwell of
the thing ag of the Loꝛds Spiritualland Cempozall, andof allthe Commons will recite a
thing againff the truth, i a

@ Et ore per cel flatute tenant en taile effen 2. Manners, .S. tenant em


tayle generall , & tenant entayle eſpeciall.

Œbis btuifton ofancftatetaile is perfec and found, Foꝛ the membra diuidentia, viz. gene⸗
vall and fpecíall are conuerted pzoperlp with the thing defined, and they are pzouco by manp
Authorities of Law, and appzouep ot all learned men , and foare all tbc dinifiong through ail
bis three Bokes Which the ſtudious and diligent Reader Wilt obferne. And how erceilent
—— a thing it ig to diuide rightip and properly, eſpecially in the Law the learned doe

now,

25» this Statute the land ts ag tt Were appropriated tothe Tenant intatle, and tothe
hetres of bis bodte, and thercfoze (r ) if an eftate be made, either befoze o2 (ince the Statute of
27.H.8.tap.t o. toa man and the heires of his bopte, cither to the bfc of another and bis heireg,
orto the ofc o£ himfcife and bis betreg, this limitation of fe ts btterlp void. Foꝛ before the
faib Statute of 27-H.8. he conid not haue executed the effate to the ble, and fo Swas tt adiudged
(f) in an Eic&ionc firme betweene lohn Cowper 39lantífe, and Thomas Franklin &t, 3Dc-
fenvant,


Section 14. 15.


Erres , Terra,
in bis generall and
legall figntfication
(ag bath bene fatd before)
inciudeth not onlp ail kind of
grounds, ag medow, pafture,
cod, &c, but boufcg and all
edifices Swhatforncr, In a
imoze retrained fence {tig ta-
ken for arrable ground,
¶ Tenements, tene-
menta. bis is tbe onlp Sword
which tbe faid Statute of
W.z. that created €ftates


taile bfeth, and tt incindeth


not only all Cozporate Inhe⸗


titances, which are es may be’


holden, bnt alfo all Anberis
tances iluing ont of anp of


Enãt en taile Enant in taile ge-
€ 3 pir , eft du is where
loutfresoutenetg Lands or Tenements
font bones a bn hoe are giuen to a man,and
&afeg heires de fon to his heires of his bo⸗
cozps engendges : die begotten. In this
Cn cco cafe eft Dit cafeit is faid generell
generall taíle, pur taile,becaufe whatfoc-
ceo à queltunq; feme uer woman that fuch
q̃ tiel tenantefpoufa tenant taketh to wife
(fil auoit plufozs fe= (ifhe hath many wiues
meg, aperchefcun® and by euery of them
eur il ad iſſue)jpncore hath iffue ) yet euerie
chefcun Deleg iſſues one of thefe iffues ap

poi-


Liba.
poſſibilitie poit
—30 les tene⸗
ments per fogce Del
Done, put ceo que
cheſcun tiel iffue eft
— BS corps engendre,


$2.1 le maner
FES lou terres
ou tenements font
Donesa bn feme, ta
Esheires dela corps
ifluants coment que
elauoit Diuers ba-
rons, bneoze liffue
que el poit auer per
chefcun baron, poit
enberiter come iſſue
enletaile per force à


tiel Done, & put ceo.


tielx Dones font ap⸗
pelies general tai-
ies,


Of Fee taile.


poffibilitie may inhe- fefe 3


rit the Tenements by
force of the gift; be-
caufe that euerie fuch
iffue is off his bodie
ingendred.


N the fame manner

itis, where lands and
Tenements are giuen
toawoman,and to the
heires of their bodie,
albeit that fhe hath di-
uers husbands, yetthe
iffue which fhee may
haue by euery Huf-
band may inherit as
iffue in taile by force
of this gift.) ; And
therefore füch gifts
arc called  generall
tailes. !


Setl. 1s.


Cerning, 02 anneredto, oꝛ ex⸗
me le ‘within the fame,
though chep lie not in tenure,
therefoze ail thefe . without
queſtion may be intailed, Ag
(1) Rents, Œftouers, Com⸗
mong, oz other profits what⸗
ſoeuer granted eut of Land ;
Ds Uſes, O ices, Dignities
which concerne Lands 02
certaineplaces map be entai⸗
1e Within the faid Statute,
ecaule all theſe ſauour of the
ealtte, But it the grant be
of an Inheritance mere per⸗
fonall,oz to be exercifed about
Chattels, and fe not iſſuing
out of land, noz concerning
any lano oz fome certaine
place, fuch Inheritances cans
not bc intatied, becaufe thep
fauour nothing of the rcaltie,
Wut eramples Will illuſtrate
and make this learning


Cleere.

Che writ of Aſſtſe (v Swag
De libero tenemento, @ made
bic pletnt o£ the :D fice of the
fourth part of the Scriant
of the Common Wiace, and
the tozit adindged geb, and
feing that a man bath a frees


hold, Liberum tenementum in it, bp confequent tt map bee intafled.
Che Dice of the keeping of the Churchef our Ladte of Lincolne, was intatled, anda


Foꝛmedon there bzouabt bpon that gikt e£ the Office by the tue tn taile, The Cx) 3D ffíce of
the Warfhail of England tntatied. Che ( v ) Office of one of the Chamberiaines of the Ex⸗
chequer intatied. 1.H,7.28, Che Office of a Folſtexſhtp tntatled. 4.4.7.1e o, E.4.56,b. Char-
ters intaflen, 19,H,2,3 Vſe (ntatleo, (7) Nomination to a Wencefice intatied,

Alſo a name of dignitie may be intailed Within tbe Statute, (a) as Dukes, Marqueles,
aries, Uilcounts, and 1Barons, becaufe thep be named of (ome Countie, Wanner, one,
02 Piace, Ff the iſſue in taile (b )in a Formedon (rte difcenderbe barred by a falle croit,
big releafe is no barre to his (fluc, albeit theaction ts at the Common Law, é

Thelike Law ts ofa wꝛit of Errour 3-Eliz, Dicr 188. It᷑ a gift in taile be made ffl)
MWarrantie, the Done releaſes the warrantie, this fhal not bind the (uc in tale, for to ali
thele cafeg ano theiikethefain Statute doth extend 2buti£ 3| grant toa man, and to the
heires of his bodie to be keeper of mp Hounds,o2 Walker of mp Dozfe,oz tobcmp Ffauiconer,
91 ſuch like With a fec therefore, pet tbefc cannot bo intatied within the fat) Statute,fo2 that
thep be not iſſuing out of Tenements noꝛ annered to, or exercifible Within, 02 concerning
Lands o? Tenements of Freehold o2 3inberitance, but concerning Chattels, and favour noz
thing of tbercalitíc, Bnd fo itis tf 3] by mp deed for me and mp beires arant an annuitie to
Aman, andthe heres of his bo die, fos that this onlp chargeth mp perfon and concerncth no
lan tgnoz fauoureth of the realitie, ;
| $nalitbefccafes he hath a fe conditional, ag they were before the Statute,and the gran
te bp bis arant o2 tcleafe may barre his heire, ashee might bauc voneat the Common Law,
fo; that in thefe cafes he ts not reftratned by the fat» Statute,


€ £4 fes beires de fon corps engendres. In gifts in tale thele 100208
Cheires) areag noceflarp, ag in Feoſfments and Giants; for fecing eucry effate tatie, was a
fee impic at the Common Law , and at the Common Law no fe finple could bee in 4reoffe-
ments and Gants Without thefe $5020 8 (heires) and that aneflatetn He tatle is but a cut
02 teftrained Fee, It followeth that ingifts in a mang. life time, no Œftate can bee created


wit hout thele words (hcires) vnleſſe ít becincafeof Frank varrtsge as hereafter (bati bee


HeMed, And Where Littleton fatty Cheires) pet (heire) p tbe Guguiar number (na pin
: cale


20 :


(t)7.E.3.363.18. € .3.27.
7-H.6.8.32.H.28.5.€.4.3.
1.H.7.28,4.H.7.9.1.H 5.1
H.8.fol.3. Nuils cafe. lib.
fil. 33.34

TP l.Cem.in JManxeleafe
fol.2. dr 3.


(8) 7. Af: p.12. 7. E.6 1.


18.€.3.27.

(x) 5.8.4. 3. 10, E. 4.14.
(ym SE p
1.H.7.28,
4.4.7.10.9.E.4.5 26.
19.H.8.5. 1.H.5.1.
(a) Lib.7.fol.33.34
Newils caf.

28. H.6. Lord Vefeyes cafe
(b) 14.472.

3. Elit "Dier. x 89*


"Pl. (eh. tm Manxels cafe


Libs. — (Capa. Of Feetaile. Sedlaó.


cafe map create an C (Fate tatie,as tt appeaxeth bp » o. A (T. p.20-hereafter mentioned. And pet (f |


dns a y Bian. a mangiuclands to A.& hæredibusde corporc fuo,thercmatnder to B.in forma prædicta, this te
— Ls -a ge» Eftate taílc to B. fox that in forma prædiéta do includethe other, It᷑a man letteth lands


to A. for life the remainder to P. in tatic, the rematndet to C. (n formaprædiét. this remainder is
boíb fo; the tncertaintie, Wut if the remainder had beene, the remainterto C. in cadem forma;
this had beene a god Œffate tatic,fog [dem femper proximo antecedehti refertur. Jf a man give
Lanos o? Genements toa man & femini fro, 9g exitibus vel prolibus de corpore fuo, toa man
and to bis Seed, o2 to the Blues o» Childzen of his boote, he hath but aneftatefozlife, foa
albeit, that the Statute proutoeth that Voluntas donatoris fecundum formam in charta doni
fui manifeftè expreffam de cætero obferuetur. Pet that ii and intent mult agre Dith the
rules of Law, And of this opinion was our Authour himfcife, ag it appearcth in His learned
reading aforementioned bpon this Statute: where be holdeth (£a man p land toa man.
Et exitibus de corpore fuo legitime procreatis, 02 fcmini fuo , hee hath but an effate foz life; for
that there wantcth $00208 ef Inheritance.


aq De foncorps. Cheſe woꝛds are not fo firictip required but
that thep map be erprefled bp $0008 that amount toae much ; Sor the eramplethat the ſtatute
of W.2, putteth hath not thefc woꝛds ( de corporc) but theſe woꝛds ( haredibus) viz, Cum
aliquis dat rerram fuam alicui viro & ejus vxori & haeredibus de ipfis viro & muliere procreatis,
Fliands be giuen (c)to D, & heredibus quos idem B. de prima vxore fua legittime procrea-
ret. Chis ig a good eltate in efpecíall tatle ( albeit hehath no Wife at that time Swithout thcfe


Vid. Shelleyes cafe lib.t fel.


(c) 3-2. 3. tit breue 741
3.8. 3.tit. Eflates.


(d) 13.H.4.2. Words ( dc corporc.) Hoitis (4) ff lands be ginen to a man, and tebís heires which he ſhall
(8 Eh * beget of his Wife: (c) o toa man & hæredibus de carne ſuã, o2 toa (f ) man & haredibus dé


fe, In all theſe caſes thefe be god eſtates (n tatle, and pet theſe woꝛds de corpore "ate omitted,

Ft (s holden (2) by fome opinion, that tf there be grandtkather, father and fonne, and landg
arc giuen tothe grandfather, and to bis heires begotten by the father, the father dieth, the
grandfather dieth, thefonne ts tn as cire tothe grandfather begotten bpon the body of bis fa=
ther, and the wife of the qrandfather in that cafe fhalibe indowed. Wut certaine it is, that in
fomecafes one (ball baue the land per formam doni that is not tilue of the boop of the Aone
which fee Section 30.


«| Engendres. This Word map in many cales be omitted 02 ex⸗
pꝛeſſed by thelike, and pet the ftate in tatle is good , ag, Haredibus de carne, haredibus de fe;
hared quos fibi contigerit, &c. ag is afozefatd,and Shere the 30020 ef Littleton fg, ingendzed,
oꝛ begotten, procreatis, vet it the 50020 be procreandis, 01 quos procreauerit;the eftate in taile is
god: and ag procreati: fhallertendto the iſſues begotten afterwards, fo procreandis {hall extend
to the iſſues begotten before,


(g) 12.1.4. 2. per Herten.


18.€.2.tit. Bre,8364
24.€.3-28.


(b ) Lib.1. fel. v20.(Chudleyi
cafe, 40. ^ff. pl.13.34..4ff.
play. Fleta lib.5.0a.3 4.


their two bodtes!foz the dppa-
rant pollibilitic to martp,thep
haue an eftate talc in them
pꝛelentlv. (b) So it te
Sohere lands be gluen to the
hulband of A. and to the Swife
of B.and to the heires of their
bodies , thep haue p2efentip
an eftate ín tatle,in refpect of
the poflibilitie, It a fome foie
boc infeoffe a married man
caufa matrimonij pretocuti,
tt is god for the poſſibilitie.
‘But put the calethat tbe pꝛe⸗
mifles and the habendum bee
{nother manner than Little-
ton hath put, and let bs fce


fafeme. tales bteg
de lour Deux cozps
CE ; en tiel
cafe nul poet inherit
p force De le Dit Done,
korſq; ceux d font in-
gendres perentt eux
deux. Ct eftappel le
fpecíall Œatle, pur
ceo que fila fée deuy,
& il pzent aut fee, a
ad iſſue, liflue Del fe-


Section 16.
sales || Pn home c fa "T Enanten Taile “PF Enantintaile fpe-
e mss " feme. GG ben * fpeciailé lou ffs 1 ciall is where
t at lands bee gt-
nine ou Genements font Lands or Tenement
bnmarricd, and the heresof DONS AYN Home a A are giuento aman and


to his wife, and to the
heires of theirtwo bo-
dies begotten ; Inthis
cafe none fhall inherit
by force of this gift,
but thofe that bee en-
gendred between thé
two. And itis called
efpeciall raile,becaufe
if the wife die,and hee
taketh another wife,


and haue iffue, the if
Sat


Lib.

cond feme ne ferra
jammes inberitable
p force ó tiel Done,ne
aug» liffue Del fecond
baton, file prit Ba⸗
tot Deuie,


Of Fee taile.


fue of the fecond wife
fhall not inherit by
force of this gift, nor
alfo the iffue of the fe-
cond husband, if the
firft husband die.


[ed
óetl17.
Sobat the Rak is in thbefeca-
fes, (c) Bg ifaman tin the
premifes give lands fo anode
ther and the heires of bis bo-
bít; habendum fo bin and big
hetres fo ever ; in this cafe he
hath an eflatetatie, and a fee
fimple expectant: Bnd fo (ít (a


fab) via ver», (f lands be giuen £o a man and to bis heires (n tho pzemifles , habendum to hin
aud to the heires of his bodie, that he hath an eftate tatle, and afe fimpleexpetant, (d) 3E
lands be giuen to B. and bis hetres, to haue anb to bold £o B. anb bis hetres, (£ B. baue hepres
of his bobie, and if he die Without heires of His bodie chat tt ſhall revert to the donoz, this ia
adiudged aneftate tatle, and the reuerfon in the donor, (c) fo, Voluntas donatorisin charta
doni fui manifeftè expreffà obferuetur ; and therefoze inthe cafe next precedent, (Ethefeor the
like Words be added, (and it he die without hetres of his bodie,that the lands ſhall reuert to the
Donor) that thenthe habendum fhalibp authozitie of divers Bokes bec conftrucd bpon the
Swhole Deed, to bea limitation o2 a declaration, What heires are meant inthe premilles,to inherit,
and that tn that cafe the reuerſion is in the Donoz. ;

(f) qifaman make a Charter of feoffement of an acre of land to A. and bis heires,and ano-
ther decd of the fame acre to A. and theheires of bis bodte, and deliver feifin according to the
forme anb cffe of both deeds: An this cafe he cannot take a fee Simple oncip,as fome hold, foz
that ltuerie Mas made according to the deed (n tafle, ag Well as to the Charter in fee, neither can
the linerte cnure oncip tothe decd of effatc tatle With a fee imple expectant, fo? that ituerte was
made ag Well bpon the decd tn fee Ample, as the deed in tatle. Cherefoze others hold, That in
that cafeit (ball enure by moities, that is, to bauean effatetaile in the one moitie, Sith the Fee
fimple expectant, and a £co ſimple tn the other moitie: And fo the linerte (ball woꝛke immediately


bpor both deeds,


"E fi mefine le

maner eft lou
tenements font Do-
nes p bn home a bn
auter oue bn feme,
que eff la file où cou-
fin al Donout en
frankmatiage,t quel
Dott ad bu enbeti-
tance pet ceux pa⸗
tolz (franbmatiage)
& ceo annexe, coment
que ne foit expreſſe⸗
Ment dit, ou reherce
en le Done, ceftatca-
uoir, queles Donees
anerot les tenemẽts
a eux aa Iout Heires
| gentec eux Deut en-
gendres. Ct cco eft
Ditefpecial taile, pur
«co que liffue Del ſe⸗


Setlion 17.


«[^ the fame man- «j


ner it is, where
tenements are giuen
by one man to ano-
ther , with a wife
Cwhich is the daugh-
ter or coufin to the
giuer)in frankmariage,
the which gift hath an
enheritance by thefe
words ¢ frankmariage )
annexed vnto it, al-
though it bee not ex-
prefly faid or rehear-
fed inthegift (that is
to fay) that the donees
fhall haue the tene-
ments to them and to
their heires betweene
them two begotten.
Andthis is called e-
fpeciall taile, becaufe


$


Vn bome onevn


feme. Arbeit the
gikt is made of the land to the
man Sith bis daughter, tc.
petis the gikt qoo to them
both in fpecíall taile, and
therefoze.that of Stephan de la
More fn (2) s.E.3.í8 berp re⸗
markeable, where the cafe
Swag, that Robert gaue the
teuerdon of lands which Ac-
nes his wife did hold fo? her
life to Stephen de la More,
Habendum poft mortem di@z
Agnetis in liberum maritagi-


um cum Johanna filia eiuf-'


dem Roberti, and (t is ad⸗
tudged that it is a god eftate
taíle: wherein thre things
are to be obferucd ; Firſt that
Ivane the daughter take with
bet huſband an eftate in eſpe⸗
call tatle, albeit the ere naa
med but Bader a cum,viz.
cum lohanna,&c,. 2, @hat
thatcum doth come after the
habendum, fos that ít (g but
all onefentence, 3. Gr bat thefe
Swords, in liberum maritagiü,
boctreate aw effate of (nbert-
tance in ſpeciall tails br Lit-

tleton


21.


(6) 21.4.6.7,


(4) 30.A4ffp. 47.
35 ALP 14.37 AG 1$.
5-4. 5.6.


(€) W.2.08.21.


(£) 2-H: 6.25. 45.E.3.22.


Vid.$e8.19.20.


$-E.3.17.

(8) This cafe is vonchedin TI.
Com158. tobee im 4-E.3.
which being not found 1m that
Jeare it ii sh ere fa left without
any further reference, but yon
Seal! finde it as abone faid 17
5:£.3.17:,


Liba.


PW. 3.64.1.
xg. E, 3.159, taie. t.


Ch) 6.£.5. 34
Fit( (72.172.
5. E.4.12.

15-€.2, Cui invita,
Se. aa.

(i) 4.E.3.8.

31 E. 1.taile.30.
Brafon, lib. 2.cap.7.


Ck) 22-R.2.tit. difcem.5o.
Fir(.N.B.212.

9.H. 6.3 5.6.

W. 2.64. Y.«cc


(1) Temp: H.8.Br frankm.1x
Y3.E, 1. formdm 63.
Vid.32.E.1.tail.25.

2. €. 2. Feoffrent dr fait( .9.
17.R.3. $.4.45.£. 3.20.

(m ) 20. E.2.aid 174.
31. E, 3. Gard. 216.


© (n) Bratton. lib. 2.cap.7.
32.6.1. farle. 31.
Y3.H.4.74.4.H. 6.17.
26..4/[.66. 3 1.6.5. garr.29-


26..Af p.66 per Wilbye.


(Co) Braët.lib,2 ea. 34. & 39.


dr lib.2.ca.7.nu.3.dr 4.
Glanuill lib.g.ca.1.& 04.18.


Peta. Is). 3.04.3.


3o. E.1 Ait, Fermien.66,
«ddr. ace. .


31. E.3.t3t.Gard. 1 6.
Mirrer.cap.2.@.15. ace.


9. H.3-Deyer 203,


Capa


Of Fee taile. Sela.


tletonfaith; Le donce ad va. cond feme ne poit in= the iffue of the 2 ife


inberitauce perreafon de ceux : : : :
parolz (frankmariagc) a cco betitetat. may not inherite,


annexe, coment que nc foit expreffement dit, &c. But this bab nebeof fome interpzetation, fos
i€lands be aiuen by tbefe words ( in franbmariage ) according to tberuleg of Law, then Doe
thele woꝛds create an effate of inberitance (n fpectali tatle ; Fo the conffberation of ma
in that cafe moze favoured in La than anp other confderation : Wut though the gift bee in
thefe words, pet ( (t be not confonant to the rules of Law in other things requifitc tbereunto,
there they create but an cftatc fos like. Bnd therefore to fpeake once forall; Foure things be
incident to a frankinartage, Firſt, that (t bee me fox confiberat(on of mariage cither to a
man Witha woman o1,a9 fome hance held, toa Woman With a man : Foz in (b) 6.E.3.33. frt
Peirs de Saltmarth hts cafe, aman gaye land to bis fonne in Frankmariage, and Fitz N-B.172.
taketh the Law foalfo, 20nb 7.E.4.12. per Moyle agatnft a new optnion in temps H.8.Br.tir.
Frankmariage the former bokes being ret temembzed, Secondlp, that the Soman 02 man,
that ts the canfe of the gtft (1) beof the bled of tbe Dono), but it may bee made aſweil after
mariage ag before, and ft map be made With a widow, xx. Thirdly, if thegift be made of fuch
a thing as ipeth in tenure,that the Donees hold of the Donoz at the time of the eftate tm Franks
mariage made, À rent ferutce (k ) may be giuen in Frankmartage btcaufe tt may bee holden.
Bnd fo map a Ment charge o Ment{ecke ag Fitz N.B. holdeth ; ano ít appeareth in ont babes
that a Common Was grantcdin Frankmariage. Fourthly that tbe Doness fall hold treely of
the Donoz till the Fourth degree be paſt. And therefore (Élandbe giuento a woman, With a
fonne of the Donoz tt Frankmariage, there pafleth an inheritance, but ifthe Donc that ts the
canfe of the gift be not the blood of the Donoꝛ, then thercpatfeth but an effate oz itfe if Liuery
bemade, Ailſo it cl) lands be given to a man Swith a woman of the blod of the Dono; in h-
berum maritagium,the remainder in fec cither toa ffranger 02 to the Dones they haue no
eftate tatle, becaufe there is no tenure of the Donoz, but tf (m ) in that cafe, the remainder had
beenc limitted to another in tatle referuing the rewerfion in fec to the Donor there the fato
50020 s (in liberum maritagium ) ercate an inheritance becaufe the Donees hold of the Donos,
And this is the caufe that tt (e holven, Chata man cannot Deuífc land in Frankmariage bes
caufe the Done cannot bold of the Donor, Bnd Cefty que vie before the ftatute of :7.H.8,
could not haue made a gift in Sfrankmartage becaufe the rcrerfion was in the feoffes,
(n) And (f tbe Donoꝛ doth gtuciandg fn liberum maritagium referning arent, thie referuation
{hall take no effect till the fourth degree be paſt, but the frankmariageis god, for (£ the refer=
vation ſhould be god, then could not tbe Doness haue an Cftatctatle fo? want of Swords of
the heires of their bodyes.


G En Frankmariage. Liberum maritagium, Free martage ; Marita-
tagidm (s taken foz rez tatle, and deuideth maritacium {nto liberum & féruitio obligatum :
and herewith agreseth Braëton (o) lib.2.cap.3 4.& 39. Maritagium eft aut liberum aut feraitio
obligatum. & lib.2.ca.7.nu. 3.& 4, liberum maritagium dicitur, vbi donator valt quod terra: fic
data quieta fit & libera ab omni feculari fervitio. And fo, betoꝛe Bra&ton, fafd Glanuill. lib.7.
ca.is. Maritagium autem aliud nominatur liberum aliud feruitio obnoxium ; liberum dicitur
maritagium quando aliquis liber homo aliquam partem terre fux dat cum aliqua muliere in
maritagium,ita quod ab omni fervitio terra illa fit quieta, &c.. Bnd after both of them Fleta that
followed them both, lib.3.cap. 1. faith, Eft autem quoddam maritagium liberum ab omni fervi-
tio folutum donatori vcl ejus Hæredi, &c, Et eft fimiliter maritagium fervitio obligatum & one-
ratum,&c, Bnd thefe woꝛds ( inliberum maritagium ) are fuch words of art, and fo neceflas
tílp required, as thep cannot be expꝛeſſed by Wozds cquípollent, ozamountingto as much. Ag


“£a man giue lands to aman With bis Daughter in connubio foluto ab omni fervitio,&c. Pet


there paffeth in this cafebut an eftate fox life, toꝛ ſeetng that theſe woꝛds (in liberum mariza-
gium ) create an eftate of inheritance againſt the gencrall rule of Law, the aw requireth that
thep ſhould be tegallp purfuen, But then tt map be demanded if a man had given Ianbg at the
Common las» in libero maritagio, Whether tab tbe Donees a fe (ple wichout thefe Words
Cheires ) £oz that ttappeareth bp that which hath benc fatd befoze that all gifts in taile Were fee
Smpleat the Common La, and that the ffatute of W.z. bfo mot create anp eflate in Sree
tatle butout of an eſtate in Fee Gmple, Œo this tt tg anfiwered thattbefe Words (in liberum
maritagium) did create an efkate (n £e imple at the Common law ; and it (a holden in 31-E.3-
gard.116, Per ceux parelxin frankmariage les donees aueront les terres a eux & a lour heires
Parenter cux engendres, & ceo eft dit efpecial taile. Wut pet bet weene ones in Frankmari⸗
age and other Donees tn {pectall tatlethere be many notable diuerfittes, Be the Ising giue land
soa man and a Woman, and the beíreg of their too bodies, and the woman die without iſſue,
pet Hall tbe man be tenant (n taile apres poffibilitic? Wut {€ the Hing gine land to a man Sith
a woman of bis kindzed in a frankimariage and the Woman dicth Withont iſſue tbe mau in the
ings cafe ſhall not hold (t for his life becaufe the Woman Was the caufe of the gift, but -—


Lib


-


Of Fee taile.


Set. 8.


21


Gite it ig in tbe cafe o£ a common parfon, 3£ lands be giuen to aman anb a woman inelpecte 7.416.


ali tatic and thep are diuoꝛced caufa precontractus both {ball hol


lands fo theititues, But


Fee que it thex be fo diuosced; the Soman ball entop the whole land, be-
the was thecaufe of tbcaíft, Fe lands holden in Socage (q) be giuen tn efpectail tatle
andthe Donees diethe (iue being Within the age of 14. peares, (r) the next of Kinncof the


- ofthe father oz of tbe part of the mother Sobich can bap the cuftoby fb


all bauc tt, but in cafe


frankmartage the heire of the part of the mother (ball aue it, becauſe ag (t bath beene ſaid, (ber


Swas the caufe of the gift.


T nota, quod hoc
| q
Abs rato


idem eft quod ad
quanda certit 1
ponere, vel ad quod-
dam certum heredita-
mentum limitare. (f


dinem *


Setlion 18.


AN note that this

word ( Talliare)
isthe fame as, to fet
to fome certaintie, or
tolimit to fome cer-
taine inheritance. And
for that it is limitted


purceo q̃ eft limit a and put in certaine,


mis en certaine, quel
iſſue inbertitera per


what iffue fhall inhe-
rite by force of fuch


fozce De tíelg Dones, gifts, and how long


'& come longement
lenberitance endure-
ra ilett appelt en La⸗
tin, feodütalliatum,.i.
hareditas in quandam
poc Sie ng
Car (i tenant in ge-
neral taile mozuft
fans iffue, E Donoz ou
fes heires potét enter
coe en lout reuerfion,


the enherirance fhall
indure, itis called in
Latine, feodum tallia-
tum, 4. bareditas in
quandam — certitudinem
limitata. Forif tenant
in generall tayle di-
eth without iflue,
the Donor or: his
heires may enter as in
their reuerfion.


«i
our Author thꝛough⸗
out bis tine bakes,

betokeneth fome notable potnt

of inftrucion worthy of moze

fpcctall obferuation Swhich (o

often (1) bled bp him as pou

map percctue by the Sections
noted in the margent,
©] Feodum talliatum

Abereditas in quandam

certitudinem — limitata.

Here our Buthoz doth inter⸗

pret What feodum talliatum

ig. DE all the eſtates tapic
moſt coarced 02 reftraincd
that 3| finde in our bokes, ig

the cftate tatle in 39. Af. PI 20

Sohere lands were giuen to a

man and to his wife anb to

one beíte of thetr bodies law⸗
fullp begotten and to one heire
of the body of that Deíre only.

This cafe being adtudged in

the point ig au exception

(fomefap \ out o£ the generall

tule put before bp Littleton.

Seét 15, that all eftates tailes

were fee fimple at the Com⸗

mon La, fo? (fapthep) bp


this limitation ( heredi ) in the Gnaular number the Denes had nos bad a fee Gmple at the
CommoniawW. Vide regiftrum iudiciale, fo.6. agtft mabeto a man & hæredi maículo de cor-


pore fuo.


SE N meh le ma⸗

nec eft del te-
nant en {pecial taile,
ac, Car en chelcun


Section 19:


]? the fame manner
it is of the tenant
in efpeciall


TER Aem done en


taile fans pluis on-


taile , ffer dire, le renerfion del


&c. For in euery feefimple eff en le donor.


bonc en le taile ſauns gift in taile without
. pluís oufter Dire, le more faying, the re-


reuerſion Del fee ſim⸗


uerfion of the fee fim-


ple ef en le do- pleis in the donor.
no» Ctleg donees & And the donces and


# 2


(bie is wꝛought by the con⸗
ſtrudion of the ſtatute of W.2.
cap.1- which hath tamed the
fea fimple of the 3Dono into
aparticular effate of fnberi-
tance, and the pofltbility of the
Dono? to a reuerſion tn bim
expecant byon the eftate **

a


(p) r3.E. z.zit. Ag,
19. E.3. 4/85.


(q) PL. Cem.Cerrils taf.
(1) 17. B.3.ttf. Gard.146.
27.E.3 79.


T nota. Chis in


(f) Sef. 18.37.42.43. 49.
$2.64,73.89 90 104 108.
114.116. 147.158.161.
168. 70.183.254. 279.
346.3187.452.467.618.
6:9.637.642.670. 982.
634.7 11.717.719-733-


Wefl.2.c2^. 3.
PCom. 251.8.


39. ^ff. pl.2a.


$8. 15.
Vid. pl.eom. fo.29.^.


Regift fudie fo.


Lib.


(t)_12.F.4.23. 5. H.7.14.


Cap. 2.


fo ag there be two inheritau⸗


Wej.1.ca.13. Tl.Cm.247- cog of one land, pet this wag


248.251.562.2. E. 2.fit.re-
feeit. ia


7.
33. H.6.27.39.8 3.18.45.
E.3. 20.


(a) 37.H.8.c4. 10.


(b)38. 2. 3.26.27. E. 3. ag⸗
Y18, 24. E. 3.30. 40. E. 5.


4


€ ) Tr. 31. Elis, inter Fen-
Ge ——
32.H.8. gard. 93.
28. H.8.'Dier.8.9. 10. 7€.
Buskenhamsea/e.
y. Marie. Dier 163.
(d) 1.H.5.8.4.H.6.20.
9. Els. Der. Bromley: cafe.


(e) Dier.5 Marie 156.
Grefivolds cafe adindze-
"Bendlowei Seriant in bis re«
port agreeth.


(£) 20.Eli£.Dier.


Doubted in our Bokes (t) €
there refoiued according to
Littleton, But F (e no cauſe
Swherefore that point hould
be drawne ín queftion, fop at
thefame Seflion of Parlia⸗
ment (in $obícb the Statute
de donisconditionalibus ag
made) viz. ca.3. ít ig expzeſſe⸗


. Ip fai, vel per donum in quo


referuatur reuerfio , fo ag bp
the tudgement of the fame
Parliament a reucrfion wag
fctleb in the Donoz.

€ Le reucrfion del


fee fimple eft en le donor.
A reucrüon (e where the reG-
due of the ettate alwapes Doth
continue it dim that made the
particular eftate,oz where the
particular efkate is Dertued out
of bía eſtate, as bere inthe cafe
of Litt, Œenant in free imple,
maketh agift in tatle,fo ít ts of
a Leaſe fon life, o2 for peares.
GIE a man extend lands bp
force of a ftatute Merchant,
faple, recognizance o2 Œlegit,


Of Fee taile..
Tout iſſues ferront al
Dono? & à fes heires
autielx ferutces , coe
le Donor fait a fon
Seignioz pchein a
lup Paramont, fo?-
fpzife les donees in
frankmarriage, les
queux tiendront qui-
etment de cheſcun
maner De ſeruite, ſi⸗
non que ſoit per feal⸗
tie tanque le quart
Degree foit paffe, ta=
pres ceo d le quart
Degree foit pall liffue
en le cinq; Degree, a
iſſint outtt lautg des
iſſues aptes lup, ti-
endrõt Del doñ ou fes
heires cóc ils teignõt
ouſter cõe il eft auãtð


Setl.1g.


theiriffue (hall doeto
the Donor, and to his
heires the like ferui-
ces, asthe Donor doth
to his Lord next Para-
mont, except the Do-
nexs in Frankmarriage
who fhall hold quiet-
ly from all manner of
{eruice (vnleffe itbee
for fealtie) vntill the
fourth degree is paft,
and after the fourth
degree is paft, the iffue
inthe fifi degree, and
fo forth the other if
{ues after him , fhall
hold of the Donor or
of his heires as they
hold ouer, as before is
faid.


he leaucth a reuerfion (n tbe Conufoz. Wut fince Littleton wꝛete, the defcription mult be moze
large vpon the Statute of (a) :7,H.8. foz at thts dap, tf a man feifeo of lands in fee make a
Feoffment in fee, (and depart With his Whoieeftate) and limit the fe to bis Daughter fo» itfe,
and after her deceafe, to tie ofe of hig foune, in tale, and after tothe ble of the right heires of
the fofo. In this calc, albett he departed With tbe Whoicfe fimple bp the feoffment, and
limitted no bfc to himſelte, pet hath be a renerfion ( b ) foz whenſoeuer the Anceſtor takes an eo
ftate foz life, and after alimitation tg made to his right hetres, theright hetres ball not be puts
chafozs. Bnd here inthis cafe ben the limitation ta to his right heires, and right hetre bee
cannot haue during bis life (foz non eſt heres viventis ) the Law doth createan bfe in Him dud
ring his life, ontill the future dfe commeth in e(Te; and confequently the right heires cannot be
purchafozg, and no diuerfitie $oben the Law creates the eftate for life, and when the partie,
And all this Wag adiudged betweene (c) Fenwickand Mitford in the ings Wench; ano tf
the limitation had beene to tbe bfe of himfelfe foz life, and after to the vſe of another (n tatle, and
after to the ble of bis one right heires, thereverfion of the fee had bene in him, becaufe the ble
of the fee continued enet in bim ; and the Statute doth execute the poftellton to the bie in the
fame plight, qualítp anb Degree as the ble Was limitted.

(d) It a man make a gift in tatle o2 a leafe fox life, theremathder to bis own right hetres,this
remainder (s votd, € be hath the reuerfion tn him, for the Anceltoz during bis life, beareth in his
bodie (in tudgement of law) all bis hetres, and therefore tt is truly {ald that Heres eft pars
antecefforis, And this appeareth in a common cate, that (Flan be giuen toa man and big heires,
all his hetres are fatotalip in bim, ag he map giue the lands te. hom he Will.

(c) Syeit ts (£a man be fetfed of lands in fee and bp indenture make a X, cafe fo life,the re=
mainder to the heires male of his owne bode, this tg a void remainder, foz the Donoz cannot
make his owne right hetrea purcyafer of an Œftatetaile Without departing of the $obole See
Ginpie out of him: as tf a mau make a Feoffment in Fes to the bfc of hinlelfe (02 life and then to
the bfe of the heires males of bis bobíe , this (a a ga Ektatc tatle executed in himfelfe, and the
limitation ts go by Swap of bfc, becaufeit to ratfen ent of the fateofthe Feffees, Witch the
Feo: departed With, and that is apparant ; foralimitatton of fe to bímfcite had Soítbout
queftion beene good.

(Fifa man make a Fooffment in fee to the bfe of himlelke in tafle,and after to the bfe of the
Fokker (n fee,the Feffee hath no vcuerfion, bur in nature of a remaindetabett the Feoffor jane
the &flate taile executed in btm bp the Statute, and tie Feofe is in by the Common Law,
which (g Worth of obfernation, o


Liba. Of Fee taile. Seil.2o.


Go conclave this point (2) wholſoeuer is fetfed of lamb, hath not only the Œftate of the land
— the right to take profits, which te in nature of the bie, and thereloꝛe when he makeg
a ffcoffment in Fee Without baiuableconfideration to diners particular bles , fo much of tbe

ag he difpofeth not, is in him, ag bis ancient bfc in point of reuerter, Bs (E a man be fet=
feb o£ tivo Acres, the one holden bp nights fernice, by prtozitte, andtheother bp Knights
fernice holden bp poſtertoꝛitie, and maketh a feoftment in fee of both Acres to the bie of btmicife
and his heires,the old bfc continued in him, and the priorit ie and poſterisꝛitie remayne. So ít is
9f lands of part of the mother, the vſe ſhall gocto the hetre of the part of the mother, which could
mot be, (Fit Were not the olo fc, butathing nexolp created: the ithe laxo of lands, of thecu=
Some of Wozoughenglilh Gauelkind, tc,


¶ Les dones & lour iffues ferront al donor Gr a fes heires autiels feruices


come le donor fait a fon feignior de rs Ius paramount.Œ be teafon of
this is, that when by conftruction of the fato Statute, there was a reverfion fetico in the Dos
noz foz that the Done: hadan € ftate of inheritance, the Judges refolued that her ſhould hola
of hig Donos, as his Donoꝛ held oucr : ag tf the Cenant had madea Feoffinent (n See at the
Common Law, the Feoſtee fhouto hawe holden of the Feoſtoꝛ ag he held ouer ; and before the
Statute of W.:. the Done had holden of the Donoꝛ ag of hisperfon, and now of hint ag of
big reuerſion: but tf a manmake a Leaſe fog life, o2 peareg, and referne nothing, hee hall have
fealtte only and no rent, though tbe Leſſoꝛ hold over bp rent,ec, And this that Littleton fatth,
is regularly truc, t£ te Donor maketh no fpectall veferuatíon, for then the fgectall reſeruation
excludes the tenurc which the Law would create. As f£ Cenant by Knights fernice maketh a
gift in tatle reforuing Fealtic and Kent, the Done (ball holdin Socage,bp Feaitic,and Rent,
and not bp Knights ferutce. Wut £a man hold land of the thing in grand Seriantie,and mas
keth a guítt in tatic general, in this cafe the Done (ball not hold of the Donor bp graand
Seriantie, becaufe no man can hold bp graund SHertantte, but of tbe King onlp , as hereafter
fa befaid, and thereforefectng graund Sertantte doth include Knights Serutce, he (ball in
that cafe hold of tbc Donozbyp Knights Service. Ita man foiled of land (n the right of his
Swife holden bp Knights Serwice gtucth the fame lands (n tatie generally, the Done {ball not
hold of bim by Knights Seruice, becaule bis wife beld the land, and he had nothing but in
ber right, Bnd tn that cafe the Baron hath gaine a new reucrfion bp Wrong, and therekoze
fucha Done ſhall doc Fealtie only. t

A-fetfed of twoacres of land, holdeth the one o£ B. b» Knights Serutce, anb twelve pence
Kent, and the other o£ C. in Socage and one pennie Rent, and makes a gift mtatie of both
Acres Without any expꝛeſſe reſeruation of any tenure, In thts cafe the Dono; hath but one res
nerfion, And pet he all make feuerall auowꝛies, becaule there befeuerall tenures created bp
Law, in refpect of the feucrati tenures duer: and tbeauotozit is made tn refpect of the tenures.

X015, 9De(ne and Cenant, the Cenant holoeth by foure pence, and the Meſne dp twelue
pence,the Tenant makes a giftin tatle without referuing anp thing, bpreafon whereot he hol⸗
Deth by foure pence, in refpect of the tenure oner, Afterwards the reuerfon efcheate, now (ball
the Done hold by twelue pence, for the Melnaltie Which was foure pence is extinct, andthe
law referned thetenure opon the gift tn tale, tn refpet of tbe Welnaltic, and when tbc Wef-
naltie ts extina, the former 18 cnt betweene the Dono; and Monee is ertine alfo, anb then bp
the famcteafon that the ones (fall take aduantage, if the Donoꝛ by releafe 02 confimation had
tenet — Seruices, bp the farte reaſon he fall be pretadtcen, when be holdeth bp qrea-

er ſeruices.
€ Forſpriſe les donces en Frankmarriage. It is to bee vnderſtood,

that althong) the Land be given in liberum maritagium, in fre marriage generally, pet firft
the Lak doth make a limitation of this $0020 (free ) viz. till the fourth beave bee palt, for the
teafon that our Authoz here peeldeth. And z. albeit (t bee fre marriage, pet the Dons and
their lues vntill tbe fourth degree be paft Mall poc fealtte, foz that to incident to eucrie tenure
(except Frankealmoigne) and cannot be feparated from ít, anb therefore the ones and
their (Ines (ball hota tt ag freely till the fourth degree be paff, as tbe Dono can make tt, Se
moze of this in the Chapter of Frankalmoigne.


Sed. 20.


€ E E Degrees is vals thedegreesin ¶ Wwe Littleton


z ri faith (a t
nkmar- frankmariage fhal £t» —* à hys


tíage ſerrõt accõpts becaccounted in this frantmaytage fait hold by
entielmaner,.4>,0¢ manner, viz. from fesltie onip bntil the fourth
$3 Degree


23
— ———


5-E.4.9.
Lib.1.76.84.85.100:$e.
Chudt.


ey.
Lib.2.56.57.58.77.78.
Lib.4.22. Lib.6.34.43-


43.E.3.10.


Bratton. lib. 2. fal.a1.
Byisten.cap.119
Fletalib.s .eup.1t.dy l5b.d.
cap. 2.

Vide Sett.17.20.


(a) Vide $655. 17.19. 1 38.
268.363.371.7]1:


- LE


Lib.:.


(b) Glenall.lib.7 cap 18.
"Bralf.lib 2 fol.21.
Britton.cap.119.

Fleralib. 3.eap. 1x. & Uib.6.


cap.2,


(c) Vide 15. E. 3 Mit .awopry,


157.

31. E.3. ceffauit. 22.
31 E. 3 ,gard.116,
21.H.7,30.


s. Fulce


Cap.

degree be pak a then tbe iſſue
in the fift deqree (ball bolo of
tbc Donoz ag the Donos
holdeth ouer,(b ) Vide Braéton
vbi fupra, lta quod ille cui ter-
ra fic data fuit, nullum inde
aciat feruitium vfque.ad ter-
tium hæredem & víque quar-
tum gradum, ita quod tertius
heres fit inclufus. And here=
Sith alfo agreeth, Fleta vbi fu -
pra. And tbe (ce) learning of
degrees fct out in the Ciuill
and Canon Law (wherein
J finde fome difference) is
Sworth the knowledge, to the
end that Littleton and


Of Fee taile.


ledonoz ales donees
en frankmarriage,le
primer Degree , put
(que la feme que eft
pubes Donecs couiêt
eftre file, ſoer ou aut
coufin ale Donoz, Ct
Deleg Donees tanque
a lour tffue tl ferra
accompt le fecond
De æ de lour iſſue
tanque à ſon iſſue, le


the Li i,
jaw in thig cafe map thebet-@ tierce Degree, a tint


ter bee Dnderftmd, which J
Will Denideinto certain rules,
Sobereof thefirftig; That a
perfon added to a perfon in
the line of Confanguinitte
maketh a degree. Bnd tt isto
bec bnoerfton that a line is
threefold, viz. the line afcen-
Ding, difcending, andcoilate=
tall, Bnd firft for crampie, o£
the afcending line, take the
Sonne and adde the far
ther, and ít ig onc degreæ af-
tending, adde the Grandka⸗
ther tothe Father, and itis a
fccon degree afcending
Soas how many perfons
there be, take axoay one, and
vou baue the number of de=
gtes. Itthere be foure per=
fong it is the third degree, t£
fiue the fourth , foy onc mutt
exceed, and then pouhaue the
Degree, Likewile by the dif-
cending, takethe Sather, and
addethefonne, and it is onc
degree, then take the Sonne
and adde the Orandchtid, and
tt is the fecond degree, andfo
ikeWifefurther, 10 herein ob-
ferue that the father, Sonne
and Orandchild, albcit there
are thre perfons, ct thep
make hut two degrees , bc-


cauſe (ag tt hath beenefatd )


one mult exteed for making a
degree.

It is to bee noted, tbt tn
euerp line the perfon muft be
teckoncd from whom the com-
putation (e made, And there
tg no difference betweenetye
Ganon and Ciutii Law tn


oufter ac. Ct la caufc
eft, putt que apees
chefctiel Rone les iſ⸗
{ues queux beignont
Deledonor, a les if-
fues queug beignont
De les Donees apres
le quart Degree paſſe
De ambideux parties
entíel korme deſtẽ ac=
compt , popent enter
eur pet la ley defaint
Œfglife entermaric.
Œt que le donee en
frankmarriage ferta
Dit le prime Degree De
les quart Degrees
hoe poit veier en bn
plee fur bn btc De
Droit De Garde P.
21, E.3. Lou le 91,
counta , que for tre=
faicl fuit ſeiſte De cert
terre, aC, a cco tenuſt
Dun autre per fer=
uice De chiualer, ac.
quel Dona la terte a
vn Rafe Holland o⸗
uel fa foer € frank-
mariage, ac. -


Seil.20.


the Donor tothe Do-


nees in frákmariage the
firft degree , becaufe
the wife, that is one
of the donees oughtto
be daughter, fifter, or
other cofento the Do-
nor,& from the donees
vnto their iffue fhall
beaccofited the fecód
degree,and from their
ifiue vnto their iffue
the third degree, and
fo forth. Andthe rea-
fon is, becaufe that af-
ter euery fuch gift, the
iflues of the Donor,
& the iffue of the Do-
nees after the fourth
degree paft of both
parties in fuch forme
to beeaccounted ma
by the Law ofthe ho-
ly Church entermar-
rie, And that the Do-
nec in frankmarriage
fhall be faid to bee the
firft degree of, the
foure degrees, aman
may fee ina plea vpon
a Writ of Right of
Ward , P. 21. £. 3.
where the Pl. plea-
deth that his great
Grandfather was fei-
fed of certaine Lands,
&c, and heldthefame
of another by Knight
Seruice, &c.who gaue
the Landto one Raphe
Holland with his fi-
flet^in  Frankmarri-
age,&c.


the alcenbing and difcending tre, foz ttjofc Whom tbe Ciutliang dee reckon in the fecond be-


grec, the Canonifts nocreckon tn the ſirſt, andthole whom they plact in the fourth , thele place


ín


Liba. Of Fee taile. Sed, 21.


in the fecond. Therefore if we Will know in What degree tiwo of Kindzed doe Hand according
tothe Ciutle Law, Swee malt begin onr reckoning from one, by afcending to the perfon from
whom both are bzanched, and then by difcending to the ether to Sobom Sve Doc count, and it
Sill appeare in What Degree thep are, Foz example; Jn brothers € fiflers fonneg , take one of
them and afcend to bis father, there is one degree from the father to the grandfather, that is the
fecond Degree, then defcend from the grandfather to bis fonne , that ts the third Degres, then
from his fonnc to his fonne, thatis the fourth. Wut by the Canon Law therets another com-
putation , forthe Canonifts boc cucr begin from the focke, namelp from the perfon of home
thep doe difcend, of whole diltancethe quettion is, Foꝛ example, ifthe queftion be, In What
degree thefonnes of twobzothers ftand by the Canon Law 7 See mult begin from the grand=
father, and difcend to onc fonne, that is one degree ; then difcend to big fonne , that is another
Degree ; then defcend agains fromthe grandfather to his other fonne, that {g one Degres ; then
diicend to bis fonne, that ig afccond Degree, fo in What degree cither of them are diftant from
the common ftocke, in the fame degree thep are diftant betwene themfelucs ; And if they bee
not equally diftant, then we mufk obferue another rnie, In $obat degree the moft remote ts Df-
ftant from the common ftock,tn the fame degree they are dilfant betweene themfelucs,and fo the
inoft remote maketh the degree, And albeit the doneebea Cosine in the third oz fourth degree
from the Deno2, pet in this computation it maketh the firft degree: Gradus dicitur a gradiendo,
quia gradiendo afcenditur & difcenditur, Bnd thas much of the Ciuile and Cannon Law is
neceilarie to the knowWiedge of the Common 1a$o in this point : And hereswith agreth our Au⸗
thoz in the words following: ——— ; :

a Les iffues queux veignont de le donor, CF les iffues queux veignont de les
donees apres le 4. degree paffé dambideux parties in tiel forme defle accout poient
enter eux per le Ley de Saint Efglife entermarrier (De Saint Efalife) (d) So
as hereby (t appearcth, Chat the computation of the degrees in this cafe, muft bee according
tothe Cannon Law, Wut itis neccffaríe to bee knowne concerning marriages bet weene
perfons of kindzed onc co another, that (t ts enadeb( e) bp tbe Statute of 32. H. 5. that no
referuation o2 pzobtbítion ( Gods Lak except ) fball trouble oz impeach anp marrtage with⸗
out the Leuit icall degrees.

The caſe vouched bp Littleton £m 2 1. E.3. pou (bail Gnd abgidged by Fitzh tit. gard 116. And
albeit thig peare of 31.E.3-Sas neuer (n paint till Fitzhebert Did abridge ft and publifb ít in
print anno 11 H.8. andgocth onder the name of bzoken peares , pet heere it appearcth bp our
Author, that thefamets of aut hoꝛitie in Law, ag hercatter allo in ocher places (ball bec ob=
fcrucb.


IP S touts cour
tatles auatdits,
font (pecífies en E dit
eftatute De W.2. Au-
x» font Diuers auts
eftates en le taile,co-
ment que font fpeci-
fies per expꝛeſſe paz
tolg tn le Dit eſtatut.
mes ilg font priſes
per le equitie De E Dit
Statute, Sicome
Terres font Dones
à bn homes a (ces
beires males de fon
corꝛps engend2es, en


Sect. 21.


AN all thefe En-
Arailes aforefaid be
fpecified inthe fayde
Statute of W.2. Alfo
there bee diuers other
eftates in taile, though
they bee not by ex-
preffe words fpecified
in the faid Statute, but
they are taken by the
equitie of the fame
ftatute. Asif lands be
giuento a man, and to
his heires males of his
bodie begotten;inthis
cafe his iffue male fhal


“fo, Exe


€ ET touts ceux


Tailes  anannt-
dits fone pecifies en
le dit Statute de


Wefiminfier 2. And
fo it appcareth bp the fapd
Statate, Auxy font diuers
auters cftatesenle taile, &c.
And herewith agræth Car-
bonels Cafe, 33. Ed w.3. titulo
Tailes.

Æbatthecafes of the ſta⸗
tute are fet Boone but fozer=
amples of eftates taile, gene⸗
rail and fpecíall, amo to exc
cinde other effates taie.
3-E.3- 32. 18. Aff. p. 5. 18.E.3.
46. 1.Mar.Dyer 46. PI.Com.
Scienior Barkleys cafe fo.351 .
la illuftrant non
reftringuntlegem.


«| Equitic


24


(d) Brit.ca.11 9..Acsord.
E let. hb. 3.ca. 11. dr (5.6.6. 2.


(e) 23. H.8.61.18.


3.E.3.32. 18.E.3,46.
18.4ff. p. 5 1. Ma Dj. 46.
Pi.Com.251,


Lib.


"Bralf, lb, 4. fal 186.

(b) 18. 4p. 5.18.E.3.46.
33. E. 3t Tiles.
3.E.3.33. Pl.(Com.Seigniowr
Barkleys cafe, a Mar.D3. 46.
V. Sch. a4.


(f)o.H.6.34.11. 8.5.15. 14


37-H.8. Br. ttt. Done 43. Tit.
mefroe 1. Cr 40. Dyer 33. El.
374« Sbelleyi cafe lib, 1. fo.


Cap. ꝛ.


_¥ Equitie is à CON-
ſtrucion made by. the Jud⸗
acg, thatcafes out of tbelct-
ter ofa flat. pct being within
the fame mifchicfe,oz canfe of
the making of the ſame, ſhall
bee Within the fame reme-
Die that the Statute pzo-


Of Fee taile.:


tiel cafe $ iffue male
inberita,æ le (fue fe-
mal ũ vnq; enherita
pas bncoz ints auts
tailes auantdits au⸗


terment eſt.


Sect.22.23-


inherit , and the Iflue
female fhall neuer in-
herit, and yet in the
other entailes : afore-
faid , it is other-
wife.


nideth : And the reafon hereof ig, foi that the Law maker could mot poffibip fer
donc allcaſes (n ecprelletermes , Equitas eft conuenientia rerum que cunéta coiquiparat, &
quz in paribus rationibus paria iura & iudicia defiderar. Bnd agatne, Equitas eft perfecta
quadam ratio qua: ius fcriptum interpretatur & emendar, nulla fciptura comprchenfa, fed fo-
lum in vera rationeconfiftens. Equitas cft quafi equalitas. Bonus judex fecundum equum &
bonum iudicat, & cquitatem ftri&o iuri præfert. Et ius refpicit aequitatem.

Œ Sicome terres font done a vn home Cy a les (b) heires males de [on corps
engendres , en tiel cafe (on iſſue male inberitera , & liffue female ne vnques


inberitera, cc. This thalibe explained aftertoardD,Sect.24.


iocíctxoo Sections,

oꝛ any thing therein,

do neede no erplana=
tion, in reſpect thep thail be al⸗
fo explaned hereafter in the
next Section, fautng oneiy
theſe woꝛds( queux doient in-
heriter) are berie obferuable,
for they imple a diuerũty bc-
tweene a difcent anda pute
chafe, Foꝛ hen a mam gi⸗
ucth lands toa man and the
betres femaies of his body,
and dyeth hauing tue a fon
and a dDauaghter,the daughter
thailinherit ; fos the iii of
the bono: the Statute wore
King With tt) ſhall bee obfer-
ued. Wut in cafe (9) ofa
purchaleit ig otherwife: Foꝛ
f£ A. baue iſſue a fonne anda
Daughter, and a ieafe foz life
be mabde,the remainder to the
heires females of the bodie of
A. A. dieth, tbebeire female
can take nothing, becaufe the
Íg not boire ; for (bec mult be
both hetre and heire female,
which theis not, brcaufe the
brother tg heire, and therefore
the will of the aíucr cannot
beobferucd, becaufe heere ig
Ho gift, ond therefpze the ſta⸗
tute cannot woꝛke thereupon,
Bnd fo itíg if aman bath a
afonne and a daughter, anb
Dieth, and lands bee aíuen to
thedanghter, and the heires
kemales of the bobíe of her faz
ther, thedaughter al take


Setl.22. & 23.


€ 3 mE manner
| eft, tres oute-
nemêts foint Dones
abn hoe z a fes btes
females de fon corps
engenDres ; en tiel
cafe fon illue female
lup ínberíta p force
& fozm De P Dit Done,
& nemp tue male,
purceo que en tiels
cafes De Dones faits
enletaíle,queug doi⸗
ent enheriter , a qux
nemi, là bolunt 1 D0-
102 fert obferue,


€ Fes le cafe q

terts ou tenc-
ments font dones a
bn hoe, ales heires
males 58 corps iſſu⸗
ants, & iad iffue
deur fits, eDeup, a
lcígn fits entra come
bt male, ad (fue file
&Deup, Sfref atiala
ff, a nemi la file, pur


[^ the fame manner
it is, 1f Lands or Te-
nements bee giuento a
man,and to his heires
females of his bodie
begotten ; In thiscafe
his iffue female fhall
inherit by force and
forme of the faid gift,
and not his iffue male.
For in fuch cafes of
gifts in tailc,the wil of
the Denor ought to
bee obferued ,. who
oughtto inherit, and
who por.


A Nd in cafe where
lands or teneméts
be giuen to aman, and
tothe heires ofhis bo-
die,and hee hath iffue
two fonnes, and dieth,
and the eldeft fon en-
ter as hcire male , and
hath iffue a daughter,
and dieth ; his brother
fhall haue the land, &

nothing


Lib.


ceo que le frere eff

male, Des au-
terifit Gra en auters
tailes que font ſpeci⸗
fies en le Dit Sta⸗
tute,


€ AU tts fot-
ent doñs a btt
hoe,ta fs hts males
De fon corps ingen-
028,3 tad iſſue file,
Glad iſſue fits a dup,
æpuis apres E Douce
Deuie, en ceft cafe 1c
fits De la file ne inhe=
betitera pale p force
De letaile, put c que
quecunque que ferra
inherit per force dun
Done en le taile fait
as btes males, coui-
ent conucier fon
Difcent tout per les
Heyzes Males.
Des en tiel cate le
Dono? poct ent pt q
ie Donec € most fans
iſſue male en 1a Yep,
entaunt que P tue
Del file ne poet con-
ueper a lup mefme
le difcent per Hepre
male,


Of Fee taile.


not the daughter, for
that the brother _is
heire male.But other-
wifeit isin the other
entailes, which are
fpecified in the fayd


Statute.


Setl.24.


nothing but an eftate for life,
becaufe there is no fuch perz
fon,the being not betre, Wut
where a gift ig made to a
man, and tothe heires female
of big bobie, there the Donce
being thefirfkraker, ts capa⸗
bie bp purchate, andthe bere
female by difcent, fecundum
formam donis And therefore


Littleton purpofelp added thefe woꝛds, Queux doient inheriter:


Setl.24..
A Lfo if lands be gi-


uento aman and


tothe heires males of force dun done en Taïle,
dc. Vide Tr. (h) 28.


his bodie,and he hath
iffue a daughter, who
hath iffuea fonne, and
dieth,and after the do-
nee die ; In this cafe,
the fon of the daugh-
ter fhall not inherit by
force of the enraile,
becaufe whofoeuer
fhall inherit by force
of agift in taile made
to the heires males,
ought to conuey his
difcent wholly by the
heires males. Alfo in
this cafe the donor
may enter,for that the
donee is dead without
iffue male inthe law,
infomuch as the iffue
of the daughter can-
not conuey to himfelf
the difcentby an heire
male.


«T


Veeungue ferra
enheriter per


H.6. Tit. Deuife 18. ( $pbich
is not in the boke at large,


25


Vide Sef. 919.
(h)r.£.6.24 11.H.6,13.34


25.H,6.nr. Derufe 18. Ota-


than rit Deuiſe. Pl. Cara. im
in Scholaft. caf, i1 a.b.


20.H.6.43. 37. H.B. Britir.


but wꝛitten verbatim out of “Done & Row.6x.sir.nofmne 1.


Statha)Jfa man deuifeiande
toaman, and tothe heires


males of big bodicyand hath:
íffuc a baugbter, wbichbath -
(ue a fonne, this fonne Mali
beinberitable, and not with⸗
ftanding in agift in taile the


Law ts otherwife, and that


by the opinion of all the 3iuv-
ges,in the Exchequer Cham⸗
ber. ut F bolo this cafe to
be (ll reported, vnleſſe pou oti


refer tbe optnion of the Jud⸗


ges tothe gtft in tatle tait
mentioned, Foꝛ fft, albeit


à Deutfe may create an In⸗


heritance bp other words
thana gift can, pet cannot a


Deuife direct an inbcritance
todifcend againſt therule of
Law, Sccondip, there (5 no
intent of the deutfo, appea⸗


ring, that the fonne of the


daughter fhould, againk the


rule of 3a59, inherit, and the


Statute proutdeth, that vo-
juntas Donatoris, &c.ob{erue-
tur. Bnd 31 bauc heard this
cafe often Denied tabec Law,
both inthe kings bench, and
ín tbe Common pleas, Vide


Pl.Coment. 414.b.. And ſo ít {8 (1) mutatis mutandis, Soben a gift in tatle (g made to a man;
and to bis heires females of hts bodie, and he hath (Tuc afonne, Hho hath iſſue a daughter;
this daughter ſhall neuer tnberít, becaufe fhe mult conuep by difcent from females, And foz
the reafon bercof, feca notable Caſe in 15.E.2.tit-Corone 285. Swbereit is adtudged (ag before
tt bab bene) Chat thefonne of a female ſhould haue an appealeof thedeathofacofine ; and
pet the daughter her felfe Mould neuer haue had it. But there tt ts agreed, that the fonne of a


female (k) (ta Libertate probanda, ſhould be no witneſſe op proofeagatntt the ((Tue of the male
Bnd the veafon of this diuerfitte is verte obfcrnable: Foi by the Common ai the


female
might


& 40.


(i)11-H.6,13.


15.E.3.T91.( o7.386-


(k) Bd srrer.¢.3.§.7.Fi.Glarm


wile lib 34.cap. 5.


Liba.


Vijd.Seieneor ds la Wares
cafe lib 1x. fo. x.


17.8. 4.4.
36.H.6.41 4 :


(1) Stanford, 58.6.
45.E.a.tet. Coren. 384,


01.48.13.
9-H.6.35.


Pit. 3. Formen. 29.


Cm) 16 H.7.10.
Lis. A. Dilen from «af.
40. Aff. p.13.

(n) 24.E.3.29.4.


(0) 7. H.4.18. 16.£.5.78.


Littleton fs.66.
vg. Eli "Dier. 326..


€p) 44-E. 5. sit. Paile. 13.


(ap. Y


Of Fee taile. : Setí.24.
mighthane hab an apptale&g beírstoany of her Anceſtors, ag ell ag tbe male, Wut bp
the Statute of magna carta,cap.34, Nulluscapietur aut imprifonetur propter appcllam femi.
nz de morte alterius quam viri fui, reftraineth not tbe fonne of the female, Bnd there
Scrope faith Per tout leSerjant d' Angliterre, that is, bp all the Indges of the doife in Eng⸗
land, tt Mag awarded, that the (Tac of the female fhould have an appeale for the death of hig
contin. But in alibertate probanda, the iſſue of the blod female ſhall net be receiueb to prone
Willenage in the iffuc ofthe bkop male, fos the mother was difabled bp the Common lai, q the
mother might be a ntífe Deen & trene, that is ofthe Water ann whip of thre cozde, ( mening
fuch a bondDweman as ig bfeb toferufle woꝛkes and cozredíon )andenfranchifed bp her buf-
band, Wil which appeareth tn tbe faid boke. Andit is holden in 17.E.4.1. that tf a man be
flaine which hath no heire of the part of bis father, that his oncle of the part of his mother (Dati
hanethe appeale, and pet he mutt of necellity makebis conuepance bp a Soman. Vid.20.H.6.
fo.35. the queftion {uddenip Demanded and debated, awd noconfideration oz mention had of the
fato former iudgements and authopities; there (t is compared to a gift in taile to man and to
bis heires males of bis bobp, that the bcire male of the Daughter Mall not inbe-
rit Which hath no affinitic to it, ano pet the authozitie ofthe bake (a great, Fox tt is by the on
of ali tbe Juſtices of the one bench andthe other in the Exchequer chamber, and therefore
leatie the learned ano iudicious reader to his ofne fubgement. (1) Vid. Stanford, 58.b.15.E.2.
384. if aman giue lands to a man and tothe heires males of hig bodp begotten, rematnder
to him and to bis heires females on bis body begotten, the Done hath illus a fonne Iho hath
{ue a daughter, Who hath iſſue afonne, thisfonne is not inbcritable to either of both thefe.
eftates tatle, becaufe ag Littleron fatth, Che Male muſt make his conuepance onlp bp males
and fo mutt the fremales bp Females, Wut in this cafe the land (ball reuert to the Dons,
And therefore the fafelt Map when a man will entafle his lands to the heires males and fe=
males of bis body, is to limit the fir eftate tu him and the hetres males of bis body,the remain⸗
der to him and to the beíreg of his bobp, and then all bts ilues whatſoeuer are inheritavle, 15:
(EA. hath iſſue a fonne and a daughter and dicth, and the fonne hath (fue a Daughter and bí


: anda Leale fo: life ts made, the temainder to tye heires females of the body of A. An thie cafe


the Daughter of A. thall nottake caufa qua fupra, But albeít the Daughter of thefoune maketh
her conuepance bp a male the (ball take an eſtate tatic bp purchafe, fog the (8 hetre and a female i
but ifiands be deuiſed to one Foz life, the remainder to the next heite male of B. {n tatle, and B.
bath (Tue two daughters and cach of them hath iſſue a fonne and tbe father and Daughters dig,
fome fap this rematnder is voide for the bucertaintie, fome fap that the eldeſt fall take it bez
caufebe is woꝛthieſt, and others fap that both of them fhal take £02 that thep both makebnt onc
etre, It lands be given to a man and to his heires males os females of bis body haa hath an
eftate in general taie in him. :


Section 25.


CE? mefme le JN the fame manner
maner eft, lou "iris, where lands
tenements font Done are giuen to a man
a vn hõe a a ſa feme, and his wife, and to
a a les heires males the heires males of
—— they bes net Delour Deux coꝛps their two bodyes be-


married atthattime, And fo engendres, RC, gotten,&e.
itist€ lands bee ginen to a -
man Sobích hath a Wife, and to a Woman Which hath a bufbanb,anb the beíres of their two bos
dies,thep haue pzefentip an eftate tatle(m \foz the pollibflity that tbep map marry. But (£ lands
be given to two hufbands anb their wiues, and to the hetres of their bodies begotten (n) thep
thail take a font effate forlife and ſeuerall inberitances,viz. the one bufband and big wite the
one moitie, andthe other hufband and Wife the other moitic, and no croffe remainder 02 other
Polltbility (ball be alowed by law, Shere (t is oncefettled and tabe effect, But (f lands be
given to a man and two Women and the betres of their bodies , (o) Bn this cafe they
Hane a fopnteftate for fc and euerp of them fenerall tnheritance, becaufe they cannot bate one
tue of their bodies, neither (hall tberc be bp anp conftrucion a poffibtlitp vpon a poſſtbilieie
viz. that he (ball marrp the one firft anbtben the other. Bnd the fame Law (t (g (p)Xolen lane
te given to tio men and one Soman, and to the heires of their bodies begotten,


«e A F# home, & 4


fa feme. ut
bat tf tenements be given
toa matt, anb to a Soman
being not big Wife, and to
the heires males of their tio
bodies, thep fate alfo an e=


Self ion 16.


Lib. i.


OfFee taile.


Selon 16.27.


- 26.27, Chele siwo Sections nevdeno explanation at all,


€ [gn fitetits foient Doneg

Aabnbome tata feme, & à
ies beires del co2ps Del home
engendres, en c cafele bard ad
ettatcenie tale gencrall, et ta
feme fo2tqs eftate pur terme de
bie,


€] Cem litres foient Dones
+ alc baton a fafeme, & à
les heives te baron, qur d en⸗
gendra De corps (a fem, eu ceo
calelebarot,ad eftate en le tatie
fpecial, a la feme fortqs put


. Lfo if tenements be giuento à
man and to his wife, and to
the, heires of the body of the
man; In this cafe the husband
hath aneftate in generall taile, and


the wife but-an eftate for terme
of life,


adn if lands beegiuen to the
X husband and wife, and to the
heires of the husband which hee
fhall beget on the body of his wife,
Inthiscafethe husband hath an e-
ftate in efpeciall taile and the wife
buran eftate for life.


Sect. 26.27.


terme de bie.


T G E done foit
t: fait al baron «
afa feme, & a ies
beires 1a feme de fa
corps per le baton
engendres, Dong là
femeab cftate en tpc-
cial tatle, & le baron
forfas pur terme de
bic: Mes i terres
font Dones alebaron
a la feme, & a les
beires que le baron
engendsa De corps
la feme, en ceo cafe
ambideux ont c-
ftate en 1a taile, pur
ceo que ceft parol
Cheires) nett limit
à lun pluíg que a
lauter,


Sect. 28.
AN if the gift be


madeto the huf-
band and to his wife,
and to the heires of
the body of the wife
by the husband be-
gotten, there the wife
hath an eftate in fpeci-
all taile,8cthe husband
but for terme of life:
butif lands be giuen
tothe husband & the
wife, and to the heires
which the husband
fhall beget onthe bo-
dy of the wife, inthis
cafe both of them
haue an eftate taile be-
caufe this word(heirs)
isnotlimitted to the
one more thento the
other.


Crrree. This
$9920 ( heires ) tg

: nomen opératiuum;

to which of tbc Dones ít te
limited, tt createth the eftate
tafle, but it it inclins no moze
to the one than to the other,
then both boe take ag here
Littleton putteth the cafe.
And therewith accozdeth the
cafe of (q) 3.E,3. Sobertit ape
peareth; Quod Robertus de
S. dedit Iohanni de Riperijs
& Matilda vxorleius, & hz.
redibus quos idem Iohannes
de corpore ipfius Matildz pro-
crearer, &c. and this adiudged
tobe an eſtate in cfpecíal tatie
ín them both, becaufe the tate
tg equallp tailed to the heires
9f the baron ag to the hetres
of the wife, Ff lands. be gi⸗
ten to the bufband and the
wife, anb to the heites of the
body of thefuruiuout, the gift
tg god, ano the ſuruiusur
fhall auc an eltate fs tatle


general, but the eftate tatle.


beftcth not til there bea ſur⸗
oinour, And here


rebp it ap⸗
peareth Cr) thata atft made


10 a man and to the hetres of big bobp , (s ad god as to big hetres of bis body,


@ 2


Sellos 29.


26


19.H.6.9 5.4, Regift. 239.
317.E.2.86t. Taile1},

3-E. 3.32. 4.E 3.43.
5-F.3.29.6.6 344.

21, E.3.43. 12. H.4. f.


(a) 3-E 3 32: ar. 8.1.45.
39. H.6.9 5 .por Hedy. |


Regift.239.


(x) 20,5 3-2re.377.


*
Lib.i.


210.H6.36. ‘
(f) Lib. fs.vao.b.
Chauleigher cafa adiuzze.


7. E. 2. Teile 33. a.E..3.1.
wt. Taile n4. 6r 5. Ph. &
Mar.Dier 156.

12, H. 4.1. 1 5.H. 7.10,


gH. J


go:


Of Fee taile.


Sel.29:30.


Seëlion 29. | b
Bis is enibent b p fi terre A Lfoif landbeegi-
al that spbich ath ben © Ee ane a bu * uento a man and


fafd and ntc no
‘explanation But —E home d


faid, (€) that if a man gíue
land to another and to bis
hetres of the bobp of fuic a
Soman lawfuiiy begotten,
that thie is no eftate tatle fos
the oncertathtp bp Sohom the


heires (ball bec begotten, for tatle


that the brother of the Done


a feg heires to his heires which he


que à engendga De fhall beget on the bo-
corps fafeme, en ceo. dy of hiswife, Inthis
cafe le baron ad cafe che husband hath
effate en efpecial an eſtate in efpeciall


tiens,


, © la feme nad taile,and the wife hath
nothing. HG


oz other coufin may haue iſſue
by the Woman Sobíc map be betre to the Done, anb cftates ín tatle muftbe certaine, Chere⸗
fozeour Buthozto make ít plaine in all his cafes added to theſe wordo (his beires) which hee
fball ingender. But that opinion (s (ncc our Buthoz Wrote ouer-ruled, andehat eftate adiud⸗


ged to be an eftate taile, and begotten fbalibe neceflarily intended begotten bp the Donc,


(LQu home ad i(fue
eon © deuie,cc.


John de Mandevile bp hig
Swife, Roberge had tue Ro-
bert and Mawde, Michael de
Morevill gaue certaine lands
to Roberge and to tbe beíreg
of Ioha Mandeuile her late
husband on her bodp begot=
ten, and it Was adiudged that
Roberge had ancftatebut foz
life, and thefee tatle veſted in
Robert ( hetres of the bobp
of his father being a gad
name of purcbafc) and that
Sohen he died Without illue,
Mawde the Daughter ag te
nant tn tatle as ett of the bo⸗
bp of her father per formam
doni, and the Formedon
which fhee brought fuppofeb,


Sethon 30.

Clem fi home ad

iffue fits, a De=
ute, & terre eft Done
al fits, Eales heires
De cozps fon pier en=
gendzes, ceo cft bone
tatle, a bncoze le pier
fuit mort al temps
De la Done, Ct mults
auterg effates en
taile p font per le e=
quitie Del Dit eftatute
que icp ne font fpc-
cifies,


AL if a man hath
iffue a fonne and
dieth, and land is gi:
uento the fonne, and
to the heires of the
body ofhis father be-
gotten, this is a good
entaile, and yet the
father was dead at the
time of thegift. And
there bee many other
cftates in the taile by
theequity of the faid
ftatute, which beenot
here fpecified.


Quod peft mortem prefata: Robergiæ & Roberti filij & hzredis ipfius Iohannís Mandauile &
hzred' ipfius Iohannis de prefata Robergia per prefatum Iohannem procreaf, prefat’ Matilda
filix predi&' lohannisde prefata Robergia per prefatum Iohannem procreata forori & hæredi
predict Roberti difcendere debet per formam donationis predi&. Bud yet fn truth the land bib
not bífceu trito her fram Robert but becanfe the could haue noother tozit, tt was adiudged to
he geod. Bu Which cafe it ig to be obferned that albeit Robert being heire toke an citate taile
by purchafe, and the daughter was no heire of his bobf at the time of the gift, pet fhe reconered
tbe land per formam doni, bp the name of betre of the body of her father, Sobich; not withſtan⸗
ding her brother was ahd he was capable at thetime of the gift; and therefoxe when the
ag tabe fbetoke nothing, but (n erpedancie, when fhe became hetre performamdoni. "But
Solere cman bp Dede gave lands to Eriime late wife of Iohn Mafter, habendum & tenendum
prediét’ Emme & haredibus Iohannis Matter de corporeeiufdem Emme procreat'. In tbat cafe
the fonne and heire of Iohn Matter begotten on tbt bodp of Emmctmke na cffate With Emme
in the lands becanfe he was named afterthe Habendum.

* Fifa man bath iſſue two daughters, and diethſeiſed o£ twoacreg of land in free fimple, and
the ont Copercener gineth her part to her After, anb to tbe heires of the body of ber Father, In
this cafe the Done hath an effate tatle tn che moítp of the Donors part, fox the Done is not
entire heite but the Done is hetre with the Done, and (bee canmot atue to the heirss of ber
ofone body, and the Done hath the other moitp of her Afters part fo itfe. XE aman hath tine
a fonne and a Daughter, and dicth, and lano is giuen to the daughter andto the beireg —


Liba. OF Fee taile. Sets.


of the body of the Father, he taketh but an eftate for life becaule fhe (s mot beíre female ¢o tabe
bp purchale ag befoxc hath benefatd. — | :

(ep Etales bcires de corps le pier. Cheſe words (les heires) ate nb-
fernable, £o; tétuep were (fes heires) 16 cleerelp aitereth thecafe. Bnd therefore i£ lande be gtucrs
tothe fonte and to bis heires of the boy of his father, the ſonne cannot take as heire ot the bo3p
pf his Father, becaule the grant is to hin and to bis hetres,ec, and confequentip be hath a Fe


fimple, Wut if therebe Grandfather, Jratber


and Sonne, and the father dieth, and lands bee


given tothe Sonne, and to the beires of the body of the Grandfather, this is a gwd cftate
tafie in the Sonne, fo ag Littleton did put bis cafe of the Sather but for an ccample


«p £r multsanters cRatesenle tayle y fonte. This needeth no ex⸗


planation,


€s ( home
CM terres
ou tenements a bn
auter, à auct a tener
alup « a fes heires
males, ou à ſes bei-
res females, tla que
tiel Done eft fait ad
fee (imple, pur tque
nett mp limit per le
Done De quel corps
liffue male ou female
' íffera. a iflint ne pott
enafcun maner eftre
prife per lequitic Del
Dit eftatute a put cco
il ad kee limple.


Section 31.


B if a man giue ¢


Lands or Tenc-
ments to another, To
haue and to hold to
him and to bis heires
males, orto his heires
females, heto whom
fuch a gift is made,
hath a Fee fimple, be-
caufe it is not limited
by the gift, of what
bodie the. iffue male
or female fhall be, and
fo it cannot in, any
wife bee taken by the
equitie of the. faid
Statute, and therefore
he hatha Fee fimple.


Erres on Tene-


ments. CYS
tule extendetl but to ands
9? Tenements,and not to the
Inherttance that Noble⸗
men and Gentlemen haue in
the Armories oi Armes.
Foꝛ Where the Nobleman oz
Wentieman hath a Fee Ginple
in bis Brinozics 02 Armes,
pet ig the ſame diſcendib le to
the heires males lineall os
collatzrall, Foꝛ aibcit à Fe⸗
male bebcire at the Common
Law, pet the Shield, Armo⸗
vieg and Armes oifcend onto
them that are able to beare
thein (farre exceeding the na=
ture of Gauelkind, but With
ſeuerall differences.) And ail
the females of that Family in
Tefpect that they be ofthe fame
bloud, map in a loſenge o1 vn⸗
der a dLurtaíne mantfcft of
bat Family thep bee by


expelling the Armoztes and Armes beclonging to that framfip , anb the bufbano of
them may impale them 02 quarter them with their owne ag the cafe fhallrequire. And fox
diftincion and better erplanation hereof, Bethe wing bp his Letters Patents gtucty lands
oz Œenements toa man, and to his beireg males; the grant is votd, for that tbe Wing ts decct-
ued in bis grant, (n afmticb as there can be nofuch inheritance of Lands 0; Cenements ag the
Bing intendedto grant. Wut i£ tbe king for reward of fernice granteth Armozics 02 Armes
toa man, anb tobís heires males withsut ſaying (of the bodic) this (e god,and ag hath benc
fato thep (ball diſcend accozbínalp.

FE aman by his Taft will deutſe Lands os Œenements toa man and to bte heres maleg,
this by conttruction of Law is an d£ (fate tatle, the Law fuppiping thefe woꝛds (of his bobte, )
Vide the Pꝛinces (t) Cafe where it appeareth that an Ac o£. Parliament map limit an In⸗
heritance of Lands oz Cenements, otherSife then Common Law would doc, and createa
new Eftateof Finberitance, and many Authorities in Lao there cited Worthy of note and
obferuation, Ror.Parliam.anno r.E-4.nu.26. @be (a) Duchte. of Lancçafter is intatiedte
Bing Edward the fourth anb bis hetres Kings of England, And king Henrie the fict did b
bis Letters 19atente grant Iohanzi filio Iohannis Talbot quod ipfe & hzredes fui Domini
mancrij de Kingfton Lifle ia comitatu Berk. exnunc.Domini & Barones de Lifle Nobiles & Pro-
LI habeantur, teneantur, & repurentur, &c. bp tbíg be had a Fee fimple qualifie in the

tanitic, D

2.H.s.fol.t, A grant was mabeto a man, and to his heres Cenants of the Dannsz of
Dale. A man feiled of Lands in Gauelkind, giuc 02 deutle the fame toa man and to bie
eldelt hetres, he cannot hereby alter the cuflomarte — bnt as tn the cafe of our Au⸗

3 1


c»


18.H.E.tir.Pajsnti, Br.104


27.H.8.37.


(c) Lib. 8.fel. x . The Princes
cafe.
21.Æ,3.4.22.€.3,3.24:
Æ,3.53.9.H,6.25.9.6.415.
1 Marie, Dier.g4,

(ww) Per literas patentes an-
veritate "Parltamonts.


Lib.


Mich.26.& 27.E liz in
(Comm. Bauce.
Leonard Louclacé cafe.


(x) 18. 4p. 5.18.€.3.46.6
9.H.6.33.25.lib.8. fal. 1.
The ‘Princes cafe, Ancient te-
mire:f.l.5.


La) Tempi E.3 waft.135.
39.E.3.16.

33 -E.3 aid 35.43. E. 3.22.
41€. 371. 45. E. 3.22.

28. B.3,96.46.€ 3.13.27.
2.H 4.17.7. H.4.10,

11, H. 4.15.21. H.6.56.
10. H.6. I. 26. H.6.414 77.
3.£.4 11.

13. E.2. Entra (nte. 56.
Fitz. N.B.203.

L:wes Bowles cafe lib. v 1.fo.8.


Cap


OfTenantintaile, &c. Sedaz.


tho, Vt tes magis valeat, the La reteteth (Wales) fo in this cafe the La reiectetl this
Adlectiue (eldeft. ) And fo ít ig if Lande be atucn to a man, anb to the eſdeſt heires females of
bis bodte, pet all his Daughters fball inherttag (t hath becne reſolued. E"
€ Et éfint ne poet efle. prifé per lequitie del dit ftatnte, &c. Foritisa
certaine rule in law that in euery eftate in tatle Within tbefato Matute, it mult be itmited either
by exprefle Words 02by wWords cquípoilent of what bodie the beire inheritabie bail iſſue. And
it was (x) adiudged in arltament,that where lands Were gtuen toa man,and to his heires
males, that this was a fee implican that ag Well the heires femaies as heres males ſhould
inherit, for the grant of a fubted fbati betaken moft ſtrongly againft hunfelfe,
Et pur ceo il ad Fee fimple. Littletons teafon being fboatlp
collected to this. tohofocner hath an Œftate of inheritance , hath either a fo fimple osa Fe
tatle, but where lands be giuen to a man and bis hetres males, he hath no Œftatetaile, and
therefore be hath a dra fimple.
what actions tenant in tatle map tate and cannot baue,vide Sc&. 505.1 hat great alterati<
ons hauebeene made fince Littleton $o20te concerning not only Leaſes to bee made bp tenant


intatle,but barres alfo of the Eſtate tatle tt fife by force of certaine Acs of 99 arliament made
fince Littlerons time, pou fhall read Sc&t,56, and 708, |


—, =


rate, LAUDE 20: bad pls 2d»


Tenant in taile apres po[sibilitie diffue extinét.


[ttleton ha⸗
uingfpoken
Fur] of Eſtates
V/A of Alnbert-

2 tance, viz.
Fe timple and Fee tatle,now
he treaterh of tenants of free=
hold tanruin,that ts, fo2 terme
of life, andtherein rt of Te⸗
Rant in tatle after poſſibilitie
of iſſue extinct, and hee giueth
bnto hin the fir! place be-
taulethis Eenant hath cight
qualíticg and Pꝛiuiledges
hich tenant in tatle htmfel fe
hath, and hich elle foz life
hath not.(a ) As &rft he ts diſ⸗
punifhable for waſte. Se⸗
condip, Hee fhall not be coms
pelled to atturne, Thirdly, be
{ball not haue aide of him in
the rcuerüon. fourthlp, ti pon
big alienation, no 10 zit of en=
trie in confimili cafu , lieth.
dfiftip , After his death no
watt of tntrufion doth lic,
Sirtly, Bee map (opne the
mife tna wꝛit of right, ina
fpecíail manner, S cuenthip,
jin à Pracipe, brought bp
itn hee (batl not name bim=
feife tenant foz life. Œightip,
a Præcipe brought agaínft

hee fhall not bee named
batelp tenant fop life. And pet
hee hathfoure other qualities
Sobich ate not agreeable to an


3 Oz


[f
i
QG 7
Q £N FD '"


€ ; Cnanten
fee tatle
aps poſ⸗
fibilitie
diſſue extinct eft, lou


tenemts font Dones
a bn home ea la fée
enefpecíall tatle, fi
lun de eux Deup fans
iffuc , celup q ſurueſ⸗
quift ef tenant en
taile apzes poſſibili⸗
tie diſſue extinct, Ct
fils auopent iffuc, &
lun Deuie , coment à
Durant la Hie, liflue
cclup q ſurueiſquiſt
ne ferva Dit tenant en
taile aps poffibilitic
Diflue extinct.pnco2ze
filifue deuy fans if-
fuc, iſſint quete foít
afcun iflue en bie que
poit enheriter p force
De ic tatle , Donque
celup que ſurueſquiſt


Evant in Fee
Taile after
poffibilitie,
of iffue ex-

tinct is, where Tene- _

ments are giuen to a

man, and to his wife in

efpeciall taile , ifone
of theni die without
iflue,the furuiuor is te-
nant in taile after pof-
fibilitie of iflue ex-
tinct, and ifthey haue
iffue, and the one die,
albeit that during the
life of the iffue, the
furuiuour fhall not bee
{aid tenant in taile af
ter poffibilitie of iffue
extinct, yet ifthe iffue
die without iffue, fo as
there bce notany iffue
aliue which may inhe-
rit by force of the
taile, then the furui-
uing partie of the Do-
: nees


Liba.

Deles donees cft te-

nant en le taile a-
8 poffibilitie diſ⸗
extinct.


Of Tenant in taile;&c.


nees is tenant intaile,
after poffibilitie of if-
fue extinct.


Secl,33.


Œflateintaile, battoa bare
Leſſee fozlife. (b) Fitſtit be
maketh a feoffinens in fer,this
is a fozfetture of hig Œttate.
Secondly, It an Eſtate in
fee, oz in fee taile in reuerſion,


remainder bífcenb 02 come to this tenant, his Œffate ts dzeiwned, and the fee op fee taile
— oet Sr in the reucrfion o2 remainder (ball be recetued pon his Defanitag wel as
tpon bare tenant £07 life. frourtily,an exchange betweene a bare tenant fo; life and hun is god,
fo; their eftates in refpect oPthetr quantttie are equali, fo as the difference ftanveth in the quac
litie,and not in the quantitie of the Œftate. And ag an (fate taile Was oztatnallp carued oat
of a feo fimple, fo ts the cftate of thts tenant out of an cftate in efpectalltatie, And bc to called
tenant in tatie after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct, becanfeby no poiltbilitte bec cam haue any ifue
inheritable to the fame Eſtate taile. Wut it aman giucth lano toamanand his Wife, andto
the hetres of their two bodies, and they liue till each of them be Œ. peereoid, and bane no tine,
pet poc thep continue tenant (n tatle for thatthe law ſeeth no fmpollibtlitie of hauing chfldgen.
Wut When a man and his Wife bec tenant in efpectall tatle, and the wife dieth without tue,
there the Law fecth an apparant impollibilitie, that any iſſue that the bufband can aue by anp
other Wife ſhould inherit this eltate. And let this tenant beepe bis eftate for he hath tbefe pztutz
ledges in refpect of the priuity of bis eftate,and of the inheritance that Swag once tn bim. (c ) Foꝛ
ín the Cafe of Euens, Mich.28. & 29. Eliz. it Mas adtudged that $oberctenant in tatle after
gottibtlitie of (Inc crtinc granted oucr hig eftate to another,that bis grantee was compelled ta
attozne in a quid [urisclainat, ag a bate tenant £02 life, anb fo benamed in the worit, fos bp the
allignement the priuitie of the Eſtate being altered, the pztutledge as gone, and this iudge⸗
ment Was affirmed in a weit of Erroz,anb herewithagreeth 27. H.e ,tit-aid.Statham 29.E.3.1,bs


€ Cem tenerte

font dones abn
home & a ſes heires
que tl engendea De
cozps fa femoe, en cet
cagla feme nad ryen
enlestenements, &
le baron eft ſeiſie co-
me Donce en fpecial
taile, €t en ceo cas,
fila feme deup (ang
iffue De fon co2ps
engenbees per fot
baron, Donques le
baron eff tenant en
tatle apzes poffibili-
tie diſſue extinct.


taile (c turned to an Œffate oz life, pet thep haue but a bare Eff.
and the bufbanb die hauing no other (ive,
haue the priutledges belonging to a tenan: in taile after
tttb in Lewes Bowles Cafe vbi fupra. Goh
ted by the act of God, and not by limitati
uifione bominls. (d) It land be giucn t.


Seétion 33.


ALS if Tenements

be giuen toa man
and tohis heireswhich
heefhall beget onthe
bodie of his wife. In
this cafe the wife hath
nothing in the Tene-
ments, & the husband
is feifed as Donec in
efpecialltaile. And in
this Cafe if the wife
die without iffue of
her bodie begotten by
her husband, then the
husband is Tenant in
Taile after poffibiltie
of iffue extinct,


CQ! feme deuie
Sars fre. SO


as the eltate of thts tenancie
mutt bee alrered bp the act of
God,and that bp dping with⸗
out (Tue, Co; t£ a feoffiment in
fe be mabe to the vſe of a man
and his $oífe foy tearme o£
thett lites and after to the ble
9f theit nert iſſue male to bog
begotten (n tale, and after
tothe ble of the huſband and
wite, and of the hetres of their
two bodies begotten thep
baging no ifiue male at that
time ; In this Cafe the huſ⸗
band and wife are tenante
ín efpeciali tatle executed, and
after they bane (ue. a fonne
in this cafe, thep ave become
tenants Cog itfe,the remainder
to the fonne tn talc, there
mainder te them in fpectall
tatle, for albett their (fate


ue ate for life, but tf the (lue die,
and then tbe fonne dic Without (Tuc , the Life halt
pollibtittic o£ iſſue extinct, ag (t appea⸗
ere tt (g fatd,that the fate ofthis tenant mutt be creas
on of the partie, ex difpofitione Legis, and not ex pro-
9 à man and to kis Wife,


and to the hetres of tbetr two


bodies, and after thep aredinesced caufa Præcontraétus 82 Confanguinitatis, 92 A finitatis, their
tatc of inheritance is turned to a toint C tate for life, and albeit thep had once an inberttance


fn tym, pet koz that the € (fate (s altered b» chetr oxone ac, and


not bp the ad of Gov, viz. bp
tbe


28


(b) 13.E,Entre Cong.56,.
45.£. 3.22.38. E.3.96.
27../f. p.60.

FN. L.159.32.E.354r.
4£-55-


554 E.3.4.9.E. 4,17,

2. R2 regit 147,
41.€,3.12. ao. E. 3. refcert,
38.6.3 33. Lewes Bowles
cafe vbi fupre:.


LI
(€) Lib.ts. foi. 85.
Lewes Bowles cafe.
17. H.6.tit asd. Stetbam.
29.E.3 1.5.


27. H.6.tit.aid. 39.E.3.1.5.


Lewes Bowles asjslió.v. 6. 9o


(d) y. H.4,16»

8.£.1-A-41§. 4. ,
12.4/f.33. 19.4 f. p.32.
17-3) Af PE infos.


Lib.i. i


C3.


the death of either partie Without (ne,


OF Tenant intaile, &c.


thep arcnot tenants in taile after pofTibiliticef illue ex⸗


Sect. 34.


tint. Lands ate given tothe huſband and Swtfe, and to the heires of the bobícof the hufband,


the remainder tothe hufband and


Soife, and to the heircs of their tino bodies begotten,the huſ⸗


band die without iffue, the wife (ball not be tenant in tatle after poflibtlitie,foz the remainder tri


fpecíall taílc was btterlp bord, for that itconidnener take cffect, for folong ag


the bufband .


foul haue (fluc, it heuld inherit by Force of the gencralitatie, anb if the hufband dic without


im the fpecíall Eftate tatle cannot take effect
— —* muft be begotten bp the hufband, and fo the general which (e larger and grea⸗
ter, hath kruſtrated tbc efpeciall which ts leller.
fo? Swafte,


lands be at=
qs toa mam
Sith a woman
it Frankmarriage,
albeit the Soman
(bich wags the
Canfe of the gift)
dieth Without (flue,
pet the bufband
fball bee tenant ín
tale, apres pofhbi-
litie, &c, for that
hee and his wike
were Dones in
efpectal taile,and fo
within the Words
of Littleton, the rc-
Moue ofthis Hect-
onis cuident.


* This and that.


Swhich follow, is
not tn the firft Œ-
dition ( Which F
baue.) Bnd there
foe ( that 3 may
fpeake it once fo;
ali) it was wꝛong
to the Buthour
to adde anp thing,
—— in one
ontert ) to
Worke, -


3f


Setlion 34.


« T; «nota d nul poit
E tefit cn le taile
aps pottibilitp diſſue ex⸗
tinct, fo?(q; bn Des Do-
tees , ou le Donce en 1e
fpecial tatle«Car E Donee
engenerall tatle ne poit
eftt bnp Dit teñt entatle
aps polfibilitp diſſue ex⸗
tinct,put ceo qj tout tẽps
Durant fa bie, il poit per
poffibilitp auct iſſue que
poit inheriter per force
Demefmele taíle, €t if-
fint en mle mat, liſſue d
eft heireales Donecs eti
Drelpecial taile, ne poit
eftre bit teñt C taile aps
poſſibilitie Di(Tue extinct,


caufa qua fupra.


* Et nota que tenant
en taile apres poflibility
Diffue extinct nc ferca
bogs puny Dc walk, pur
lenberitance que fuit bn
foits eti lup,10,Hen.6,1,
* Des ceftup en le ve-
uerfion poit enter fil a-
lien en kee, 45. E.3. 23.


in as much as the iſſue which ſhould inhe⸗
Aud the wite tn that Cafe hall bee punifhed


* Nd note that none can
be tenant in taile after
poffibility of iffue extinct,
but one of the Donees, or
Donee in efpeciall taile.
For the Donec in generall
taile cannot be faidto bee
tenant in taile after poffibi-
litie of iffue extin&, be-
caufe alwayes during his
life, he may by poffibilitie
haue iffue which may in-
herit by force ofthe fame
entaile. And fo in the fame
manner the iffue which is
heire to the Donees in ef-
pecialltaile, cannot be te-
nant in taile after poffibili-
tie of iffue extin&, for the
reafon abouefaid.


And note that tenant in
taile after poffibilisie ofif-
fue extinct fhall not be pu-
nifhed of wafte, forthe in-
heritance that once was in
him. 0.4.6.1. But hein
the reuerfion may enter if


hee alien in fee, 45.£.5.
22.


Cuar.


Lis Of the Curtefie Dengleterre. Sell.35. 29


vir 60?


Curtefie Dengleterre.


Œnant p
p la Cur:
telie Dẽ⸗
glekre ef,
lou home pret feme
feifie en fee Cimnpt, ou
en kee tait general, ou
feifie come heire dele
taíle fpecial, & ad if-
fue per meſme Ia
feine,male ou famar,
opes oubife, foit lif
fue apres moat ou en
bie, (t la feme Deuie,
le baton tienda la
terre Durant. fa die,
per la lep Dangle⸗
terre, €t eft appel te-
nant pec le Curtefie
Dengleterre pur ceo
que ceo cett bfc en nul
auter realme, foafqs
tantfolement en En⸗
gleterre.

Ct alcuns ont dit,
queil ne ſerra tenant
p le curtefie, finon
q lenfant quil ab p fa
feme foít ove crie.car
ple crie ef pue G le
enfant fuit nee vile:
Ideo quære.


€


SEA Enant by the
| curtefie of Eng-
land is where
aman taketh a wife
feifed in fce fimple,or
in fee taile generall or
feifed asheire in taile
cfpeciall and hath iffue
by the fame wite,male
or female borne aliue,
albeit the iffue after
dieth or liueth, yet i£
the wife dies, the huf-
band fhall hold the
land during his life by
the law of England.
And he is called Te-
nant by the curtefie of
England, becaufe this
is vfed in no other
realme but in England
only. . E
| Aud fome haue (aid,
that he fhall not be te-
nantby the curtefie,
vnleff: the  childe
which he hath: by his
wife be heard crie;
forby the cry it is
proued thatthechilde
was borne aliue, Ther-


fore Quere.


es C uae paper


feafon a mar
Hall be tenant bp the curtes
fie, (c) Cherets in Law a
two foldfetGn,viz, a feta in
Ded, anda fein tn dato;
hereof moze fbalbe fatv,
Sed 467, & 681, Bnd here
Littleton inteadety a feifin in
Ded f it nay be attained bite
to. (£) Bg i£ a man Dict!
feifed of lands in See imple og
fee tatle genetall, and thefe
lands diftend to bis daugh⸗
ter, anb fpe taketh a bufbanb
and bath (fuc; and dyeth bee
fort any entry, the bufbano
Dali not betenant bp the cuta
tele and pet in this cafe thee
had a {cifin in Laww,but if the
9» bee. bufbano bad during
her lifeentred, be fhould haue
beenetenant by the Curtefic,


' (g) Dinan fetfeo of an Ad⸗


uoSofor o) tent in fee hath
(Tue. a. Daughter; who (&
married, and bath élue, ano
bíct!) ſetled, the Swife before
the rent became due, o3 the
Church became wotde, dieth
thee had buta fetfin in Law,
and. pet hee (ball bee tenant
bp the Lurtefie, because hee
coulb bp no tndultrie attaine
toanp other ſeiſin, Er impo-
tentia excufatlegem. Wut &
mam [hall not be tenant bp
the dLurte(ic of a bare right,
title, ble, o2 of a reuerfion oz
remainder expectant bpon anp
eftate vf free hold, vnleſſe the
particular cffate bedetermined
02 ended During the coucrture.


* !
. Bt the Coronation of Ling R. 2. fatth the Recoꝛd, Ch ) lohannes Rex Caftiliz & leg onis
Dux Lancaítriz, coram di&o domino rege & confilio. fuo comparens cidmauit vt comes /Lei-
ceftriæ officium Senefchalciz Anglicz,& vt dux Lancaftria ad gerendum principalemgladium
domini Regis vocat" Curtana die coronationis eiufdem regis, & vtconres Lincolii ad fcinden-
dum & fecandum coram ipfo domino Rege fedente ad menfam di&o die coronationis, & quia
fa& diligenti examinatione coram peritis de confilio regis de premiffis fatis conftabat cidem
confilio, quad ad ipfim ducem tanquam tenentem per legem Anglia poft mortem Blanchiz
uondarn vxoris (ux pertinuitofficia predi&' prout fuperius clamabat exercere , confideratum
itper ipfum regen: & confilium fuum predictum, quod idem Dux officia predi&tá perfe Sc fufz
ficientesdeputatos fuos facerct & exetceret, & feoda debita in hacpärtéobtinerer, Qui —
ax


(a) F.N:Birog


(E) x. Mar Doer.g 5.


(g) 70:366. 3.4.7.5.


(h) Prof fall ad Coren
Vonem R. 2. Arno Regist Jui
Prime tet. clanfi. m 45.


Lib.t.


Ke. Patent. Anne 10. H.


‘Net. Pasend.de
enis 27, N 6 mn.


(VM. s. F.3.6 5. E 3.16.


W.3.04.1.Litt.osp Dewer
fe. 10.688. 52.
T'ainei cafe Lb. 8. fo. 54.


(2) Old tenures 31. H.1.
fit, Dawer 198.


(b) Vid.Paines efe.
wh fut ras


(«) Bratt. I5. $417.43.


Renet.ea.66.dr 62.85.
Fletalib.x.ea.5. & lib 6.
6.54.


(d) -28.8.8.25. Deer.
Paynes cafe vbi fapra,


(€) Mjrrer-enp 1 A3.


Cap. Of Tenantintaile&c.  Seël.3s.


dux officium Senefchalcia predi&' paiesher vou. pid ss te
hold bp graund Seriantie to doe amp ferutce to the Ring a nation t pte
ition ee the EM ag Steward of England, who Lyon hearing the profes either alleined
diſalowed the fare,

jn — ————— ads bp King H.6. to Richard Carle of Saliſbury pow ſhall ſinde this
clanfe, Quodque chari fimus confangwinius nofter Richardus nunc comes Sarum qui Aliciam fi-
liam & haeredem Thome nuper comitis Sarum adhuc fuperftitem duxit in vxorem, & cum ca-
dem Alicia prolem tempore mortis prediétæ Thomz habuit & habet fuperftitem de prefenti, co»
que prtextu idem Richardusnunc comes Sarum nomen ftatum & honoremcomitis Sarum, &c.
habct, & pro tempore, vita fox de d adi premifforum habere dcbet. € be name o£ tl iſſue
&vljich tbt ſaid Richard Earle of Haliibury had by thefatd Alice Gag Richard, Sohe married
With Anne the fifker and heire of Henry Beauchamp Earle of to arwicke, ho Was Carie of
tarWicke to him anb to his heires, and Dube of warkicketo him andto the heires males of
his body. And Richard the fonne hauing then no iflue by his Soifc Ring H. 6. in 27. peare of
His raigne granted to him that he ſhould be Œarle of toariwicke Licet ipfe & predicta Anna exi-
tum inter cosad prafens non habent. — —— more 3 pest uino inca mat⸗
ter, and onip fay to the reader, Vtere tuo judicio, nihil enim impedio.

() Jean e(tateof freehold in Seigniories, Kents, Commons, o2 fuch like be ſuſpended, a
man (fall not be tenant bp the curteüe , but if the fufpention be but fox peares, he ſhall bee te⸗
nantby thecuttefic, As it a tenant make a Leafe fo; life of the tenancie to the Seignozeſſe,
botaketha bufband, and hath (Tue, the Wife dicth, he (hall not be tenant by the curteGe, but
if the Leafe hav bent made but for yeates he Mall be tenant by the Curtefe,


. € En Fee fimple ou en Fee taile generall, ou feifie come heire de la taile


fpectall & ad iffue per la feme male ou female. Secondly of tobat effate,
f lands be giuentoa Woman anb to thebrirs moles of her body the taketh a hufband anb hath
(Ine a daughter and dicth,he (bal not bc tenant by the curtefie,becaufe the daughter bp no poffíz
bilitte couid inberite the mothers citate in the land, and therefoze where Liteon faith,tlue bp
big Swife male 02 female, it (s to be DnDderfteod, Which bp polTibtlitp map as beireto her
mother offucheftate. Littleton himisife explaneth this by erpzefle 00208. Cap. Dower.fo.10,
Se&.sz. Bnd therefozeté a Woman tenant in taile generall makcth a Feoffment in fee, and
taketl) bache an eftatein Fe, anb take a bufband and bath (Tue, and the Suife Dieth, the fue
fap in a Formedon recouer the land agatntt bis father, becanfe be is to recouer bp force of the
eftate tatle ag heire to his mother and is not inberitable to bis father,


« Et adiſſue. 3. Che time of hauing the tue, 4. tabat kinde
of tue. It a man feifed of Lands (n fee hath Que a daughter, Who taketh bufban and hath
iffue, the father dieth, the ufband enter, hee (a) fhalbe tenant by the curtelle, albeit the iſſue
Swag bab before the Wife was ſeiſed. And foit (s albeit the iſſue had died in tbe life time of


' bet father before any diſcent of the land, pet (balle betenant bp the cuttefic. 3€ a Woman


(b) feifed of lande (t fee taketh huſb and and by him is bigac with childe, awd in her trauell
Dieth, and the chile (9 ripped out of her bobp aline pct (bali he not betenant by the curtefie, bc-
cauft the childe was not bogne during the marriage noy in thelife-time of the wife, but (n the
meanetine the land difcended, anb in pieading be mul alledge, Chat be bad ilue during the


marriage.

PE the Wifebe (c) veltuercd of a MPontter Which hath not the thape of mankinde, thieds no
iffne in the Law, but although the (flue hath fome defornuty ín amp part of bis bodp, pet it he
hath bumanc age this fufficeth, Hij qui contra formam humani gencris conuerfo more pro-
creantur (vt fi mulier monftruo(um vel prodigiofum fuerit enixa)inter liberos non computentur,
partustamen cui natura aliquantulurn ampliaverit vel diminucrit non tamen fuperhabundantur,
vt fi fex digitosvel nifi quatuor habuerit ben debet inter liberos commemorari, Siinutilia na-
tura reddidit membra ,vt fi curvus fucrit aut gibbofus vel membra tortuofa habuerit non tamen
eft partus monftruofus.Item puerorum alij funt mafculi alij femina alij hermophraditz, hermo-
phradita tam mafculo quam feminz comparatur fecundum prævalefcentiam fexus incalefcentis:

BE the iſſue be borne deafe oꝛ dumbe 02 both, 02 be boine an 3ibeot, pet ie it a Tasofoll iſſue
to make the huſbaud Tenant by tbe curtefie and to tnhertte the land,


«| Oyes om vine. Itit be bonc aliue (d) itis ſuſtitient though it
be not heard crpe ; £02 peraduenture it map be boꝛne dumbe. And this is refolued clerelp (m
Painescafe Vbi fi pra, Foꝛ thepleading ( ag hath bene fatd ) is, Chat during the marriage be
had iffue by his Wife, and bpen that poire the triall is to be had, and pon the eutdence it mut
be proued, that the (lue was aline, for moruus exitus, non cft exitus, fo ag the crping ts bus a
prefethat the chiite was bone altue, anb fo (a motion Rirring and the like, And it (e fatd
am ancient Authez (c)that it was oxdepned in the raigne of Hing H,1,Quctours que — -
nt


Libu. Of Curtefie Dengleterre. Seil.33.


fent lour femes dount ils vífent conceiue tenuiffent les heritages lour fems pur lour vies.


Wy tbe cuftome of Gauelkinde (f ) a man map be Cenant by the curtefic Without having of


anp fue, . | À

«| Soit leiffue apres mort ou en vie. And therefoze (g) if à woman
K mant ín tatlegeneratl taketh a bufbanb and hath (Tae, Swbich iſſue bíttl) and the Mwife dieth
Sithout anp other iflue, pet the hufband ſhall be tenant bp tbe curtcfie albeit the efate in tails
be determined, becauſe he was tntiticd to be tenant Per legem Anglix befoze the cítate in tatle
Sas fpcnt and £02 that the land remaineth, Wut (fa Woman maketh a gift in tale and veferue
a Rent to her and to herheires, and the Donoz taketh bufbano anb hath lue, anb tbe Done
dieth Without (Tae, the wife dieth, the hulband fall not betenant bp. the curtefe of the Rent
fox that the rent newly referucd is by the act of God determined and no ſtate thercofrematncth-
But Ch) i£a man be fetfeb of a Went and maketh a gift tn tale genevall to à. Swoman, the ta-
keth huſband and hath iffuc, the tilue bieth, the Mite disth Without iſſue, he (ball be Tenant bp
the curtefic of the Went, becaufethe rent remaínetb, Che ofuerütic appeareth,

«| Sila feme deuic le baron tiendra la terre crc. Foure things Doe be=
long to an cftatc of & enancy bp the curtefe,viz. Marriage; Seilin of the Sotfe ; Flue, and
death o£ the Wife. Wut tt ig not requíüte, that thele Houldconcurre all together at onc times
Bnd therefore tf a man taberl) a Woman fctfco of Lands tn fee and is difleifed, and chen haus
(ur, andthe Wife die, he fhallenter and held bp the curtefie, So tf be hath iffue Which dieth
before the difcent as ts afozefatd.

And albeit the tate be not conſummate vntill the death o£ the Wile, petthe fate hath fuch a
beginning after iſſue had in theltic of che wile as (s refpected in lao for diuers purpofeg,
ft, after iſſue had, he fhall Doc homagealone, amb ts becemetcnant tothe Lo2d, andthe as
nowt: [all be made onip vpon the hufband in the life of the wife, as (ball bee ſaid hereafter
oben We come to the apt place, Secondly, tf after ((Tuz( 1) thehudband maketh a Feoffment
ín Fee, and tye Wike dieth, the coffee fhall void (t During the lite of tbe hufband, and the heirs
of the $oífe fall not during bis life recouer it fn Sur cuiin vita ; for ft conto not be a fozfeiture,
fo: that tbe eftate, at the time of the feoffment, ag an eftate of Œenancie bp tbecurtefie inníc
tiatcand not confummate. And it is adtudged in 29.E.s that thetenant by the Œurtcfe cannot
clapmeby a Deuife, and watue the fate of his tcnancie by the Curteve,becaule fatty the bake,
the freehold conumcnceo tn him befoze the Deutle fo? terme of hts life.
« Eteft appel tenant per le curtefie dengliterre pur ceo que neft fe en auter


realme forfque tantfolement en Engliterre.
«| Perle Curtefie. In Latyn Per legem Anglix.


«y Tantfolement en Engleierre. It is alto vied within the realme of
Scotland, andthere (t {g called Curialitas Scotiæ. And ſo it is in the 1B exlme of Ireland.
Et afcuns ount dit qui il ne ferra tenant per le curtefie finon que lenfant


que il d per [a feme foit oye crie, car per le crie eff proue que le enfant fuit. nee


wife, Dur Author hauing delluereD bis ovone opinion befoge,viz.
Oyes ou vife, now he ſheweth the sptnions of others : foꝛ ſo it is ſaid in the (k) Statute De
tenentibus per legem Anglia : an® of that opinion (g Glanuile (1) lib.7.cap.8. Braéton lib. s.
tract 3. cap 30. Britton cap.so.fo.132,Fletalib.6.ca so, &c. Wut the reafon ig againſt thetr opt.
níon ; Foꝛ bp the crpe it to proned,éc, foas itis but an ewtdence to proue thc life of the enfant,

« Afcuns ont dit. But thele and the like fpeecbeg our Author in-
tendeth that the point had beene controucrteb, but thereby except (tbe in this Section where
fonmerlp be deliucred bis optnion ag hath bene fatd, bectacitelp tninuatetlh big owne tudge-
ment which in all therett holdeth £o? god Law and warranted bp gud Authozity throughout
his tire bokes, Which Kinde of fpcach and thelike 3] auc colleted together ag tt appeareth by
the Sections in (l) the margent.


q Ideo quere. THis Quare tg notin the oziginall edition of Lit-
tleton, and theretoꝛe to be retested. :

And fome haue ſaid that in diuers cafes a man Hall by bauing of {lue be tenant by the Cur⸗
tefie Sohere a woman {hall not be endowed, And therefore they fap iflands bee given to two
omen and to the heires of their two bodpes begotten, and one of tem take bafbano and haue
{lue and Die, the inheritances being feverall the hufband (ball be tenant bp the Curteſie ag it is
adiudged 7-E.3. and in other bakes (m ) this iudgementis cited and allowed. Wut certaine tt
is, Ghat tf land be giucn to two men anv to the heires of theit tine bodpes begotten, and the
ono taketh Wife and dieth, the fhall not be endowed fo no eftate in the lano ig altered bp tae
mattiage, Wut 3 leaue the reader to his one — op tather to ſuſpend (ttmttil be come

z tg


30


(f) 9-E.3.38. 16.2.3.

aid. 129. Stat, de Confuction
sil Kancie,

(8) 21-4, 3. #8. Dower 198,
Paynes cafe, Vbi fipra,


h) "Breeze pis. 2
e 86. Won em
1o.E. 3.27.


a) 34-F. 2 Cui fn vita 13.
2.£. 3. (Cui m vita 36,
10.€.3.12.

"Dier. 31. EliQ. 363.


29. E. 3.


(k) "Uet.mag.cat.part 8.
o


.70.
(1) Glamail.hb.7. cap.8.
Paris 5 trad? À icd
Brit.ea.50.fo.132.
Pleta.lib.6.c4p,5 4.

(1) Seéf. 409.319.132.136.
137.1438.141.14 5.148.146.
179.179.192.202.227. 234.
269.336.339.357.400. 41 4.
436.440.443.460.463. 478.
501.503 506.522.513. 524,
534:576.601.633.634. 640.
642.643.644.646.658. 675.
689.721.733.726.730. 731.
733-734


7-E.3.6.
(m) 17. E. 3. ju.


Lib;


Prateg. Regis 64.13.


330.304. Trauer! 36.


(n) Pl. Com. Dawe Hales
Cafe.26 3.


(0) Magna (arta.30.E.1.
81.6


Dower 81.5.
19.H.3.Dewer.


"BraG.lib.2. fal. 46. er 314.


(p) 4 H.3.Dewer 180.
Brat. fel.95.

Fleta lib. 5.02.23.

2. E.2. Dower 121.
3.E.3.Dower. B.103.
9. H.7.1. 30. E. 3.


(ph Lib.rub.ea.70.
Glamil.lib.o.cap.t.
"Erat lib. 2 fel.o2.
Britton.cap. 101.
Pleas lib. 5.cap.22.


Caps. Of Dower. Sedl.36.


to the proper place in the next Chapter, It lands holden of the TR (ng bp Knights ferutce in ca⸗
pite difcend to a Woman, and after office Found (be tntrude anb taketh bufbanb and hath (ue,
In this cafe thehulband thall be tenant by the Curteſie; And pet if the heire Wate after office
inthe like cafe intrudeth andtabeth Mifc, hts wife (ball not be endowed, for fo it is pꝛouided
by the ftatute of Prerogatina ree s,cap,13- that tn that cafetberc accrue to the heire no freehold
noz Dower to the Wife, Which bp interpretation ts as much te fap tbat the hetve [ball auc no
freehold as to this refpect to gíuc anp Dower to his Swife, Ff a man marrric the nicfe of the
Ring bp licence and hath tive bp her, and after lanbg Difcen® to the niefe and the bufbanb en=
ter, the neite dieth, be fall be tenant bp the curtefie of this land, andthe Ling vpon any office
found fhail not evict tt from him, becaufe bp the marriage, the niefe was infranchiled During the
couertuvc, But i£a free Homan matríc the Villaine of the ing by licence,andlands dticend
to tie Willaine, the Willatne dteth, the Wife fall not be endowed, but bpon an office found the
Hing thallhaucthe land, for the Villaine remained ftilla Vitlatneto the King. À Soman
(n) taketh hufband, and hath (fue, lands bifcen: to the wife , the hufband cnters , andafter
the Wife1s founb an Ideot by office, the lands fball befetfed bp the thing, foz the titie of the
tenancie by the curtefic, and ofthe ing begin at one inftant , and the title of the Ling (ball
be preferred. À man (ball betenant by t. € curtefie of a Caftle (0) Which ſerueth fo2 the pub=
like Defence of tjt dB calme, but a Woman (ball not be endowed thereot, ag (ball be fatd moje ab
large hereafter.

@ man (ball be tenant bp the curtefic of à common fauns nomber , but a Woman ſhall not
be endowed tiereof,becanfe tt cannot be deutded. A man fall be tenant by the curtefie (p) ef a
houfe that {3 Caput Barone, 91 € omitatus : Wut ttappeareth bp 4.H.; Dower 180, thata
woman fhali not be endowed of it, froztbe Law refpecteth Honour and Oꝛder. À mantis
entitle to be tenant by the cartefic, and maketh a feoffment in fee bpon condition, andentreth
fo? the condition broken, andthen bie Wife dieth, be fhall not be tenant bp thecurtefic, becaufe
albeit the fate qtuen by the feoffement, be conditional, pet his title to be tenant bp the curtefie
was inclufucip abfolutelp extinct bp the fcofEment, foz che condition was not annexed toit. As
(f tbe Lord difletfe the Œcnant, and maketh a Feoffment in fee of the land bpon condition,
and entreth for the condition bzoken, pet the Seigniorie is extinct for that Mags tnclnGuclp ex⸗
tint bp thefcoffinent, See moze of Cenant bp curtefie. Section $2.


(kA p, are welt aes
Dower.
ST Enant en ¶ € Arena in
€ Rj dower. Te- Dower is
,nens in where a
dote.Dos man is feifed of cer-


Dower ts the Common
Law (4) is taken fo that
Postion of Linde 01 Œene-
ments Which the wife bath
for terme of ber life of the
Lands o? Tenements of ber
huſbands after bis beceafe for
the fuffcnance of ber feife,
and the nurture and educati=
on of ber childꝛen. Propter n-
nus matrimonij & ad fuften-
tationem vxoris & cducatio-
nem liberorum cum fuerint
procreati fi vir præmoriatur :
& hoc proprie dicitur. Dos
mulieris fecundum confueru-
dinem A nelicanam.2yrb Dos
(& btrintbcx donatione; & cít


feifie De certaine ter⸗
tes on Tenements
en fce fimple,taile ge=
necall, ou come bere
De le taile fpccíall, &
pent feme , a Deuie,
la feme apres le De-
ceffe dela baron fer=
ta endow De là tierce
part De tielg terres a
tenements que fue-
ront a fa Beron
en afcun temps Du-


taine Lands or Tene-
ments in fee fimple,
fce taile generall, or as
heire in {peciall taile,
and taketh a wife, and
dieth, the wife after
the deceafe of her |
husband fhall bee en-

dowed of the third
part of fuch Lands and
tenementsas were her
husbands at any time
during the couerture,


tant


Lib.


rant le couerture, a
auer etener a mefine
la feme en ſeueraltie
pet metes bounds
put terme de (3 bie,
Ie quel el auoit iffue
per fa baron ou ne-
mp # De quel age que
la feme foit iffint que
el patte lage De neuf
ans al temps De le
mot fa baron, car il
coutent que el foit
paffe lage De ncuf
ans al temps Del
mozt fa baron,ou au-
terment el ne ferra
qp endow.


Of Dower.


To haue and to hold
to the fame wife in fe-
ueraltie by metes and
bounds for terme of
her life, whether fhee
hath iffue by her huf-
band or no , and of
what age foeuer the
Wife be, fo as fhee bee
paft the age of nine
yeeres at the time of


the death of her huf£ ga


band, for fhe muft bee
aboue nine yeeres old,
at the time of the
deceafe of her huf-
band otherwife fhee
fhall notbe endowed.


Jin Domefday, Dos ig caticb Maritagium. à
To tbeconfumm :tío» of tbíg Dower three things are neceffarte, Viz. marriage, feifen and


the death ofver huſband.


Dos(f the berp name doth ímpost a freedome,
frædomes : Secundum confuetudinem regni mulie


&c. And tenant in Dower (hall not bes diſtreyned fo the debt due to the


Sei.36.


quafi donarium, becanfe either
the Law it felfe doth ( with⸗
out anp gift) 02 the huſband
Diméelf giueth it to her ag hat
be fato hereafter, Bnd at this
Dap Dosoz Dower is not ta-
Ben bp the profeflozs of the
Common Lato, either fos the
land Which the wife bzingeth
With her in marriage to Der
huſband, foz then it is either
called in Frankmarriage 02
ín marriage ag bath bene
faíb , no: for the portion of
monep 0? other gods 02 cate
tels, Sich he brtngeth $oítl)
in marriage , fo? that is
called her marriage Dostion,
Bnd pet of anctent time
(1) Dos mulieris, the Dower
9? Dowrzie of the Woman
Das aifo applpeb to them,
Wut tt is commonip taken for
bertbiro part which the hath
of her bufbands lands oz te=
nements,


foz the Law deth gine ber thereith manp
res viduæ &c. dcbent cffc


quietz de tallegijs


Ring by the buf-


band ín bis life time in the lands which ſhe held tn Dower. And other prutledges the hath; DE


all Which Ockam peeids the reafo


M, Doticius parcatur quis premium pudcris eft.


€ Los Lom. FEthe hulband be an alien (o the wife (hall not be


indowed. Do if thehutband be the Kings Uillatne, t
beenc fatd ) but tf the bufbanb be a Q1illame to a comm
the be intitied to Dower before the entrie of the 1025.

and dieth the ſhall be indowed,
tainted of relonte oꝛ treſpaſſe
Bat tf the hufbandbe attainte
the thail not be indowed ag fbatlbefato hereafter.


Here this word (feífeb)
fetfon in la, 09 a ciuill {etfon, as toa feifon in Ded,
ift be either the one way 0: the other during the co
of a fcífon tn law, As where lands 02 tenements bí
but a feifon (n Law, and pet the Wife fball beend
poileflton, Éoz ít Heth not tn the power of the Sot ,
band map doe of his wiues land, when be ts tobetenant bp curtehie, Sbich ts worthy the ob=
And pet of euery feífon tn Law, o2 actual fei
Foz crample, 3 £tberebe grand
father is feifed of three Beres of land in fee,
the father, who dietb either befozeo2 after


C Setfie.


feruation.
ſhall not be indowed.


be wike fhailnotbee endowed (ag bath
on perfon, the wife hall bee tndowed if
Bnd fo (£a fre man take a ntcfe to wife


Che Wife of an Ideot, non Compos mentis, outlawed 0: ate


attatnted of heretic, præmunire
b o£ ttcafon , albeit ttbee treafo


ozthe like) (ball bee indowed,
n Done after the title of Dower ;


extendeth it felfeattoellto qa ^
Sobích ts anaturall fcífon : but fcifed be 4
uerture. Foꝛ a Woman fhalibcetndowen ,
fcend tothe huſband, befoze entrie, bebath ~
owed, albcitit bee not reduced toan actuall
feto bring ít to bean actual feifon,as the bufz


fon of lanbg oz Œencments, a Woman
father, father, and fonne, andthe grano-
and taketh Wife and dteth , this lano dtfcendeth to
entrie, now is the Sotfe of the father vowable, Che


father dieth anb the Sife of the grandfather ts indowed of ene acre and dieth , the Life of the
father (ball be endowed only of the two Acres refidue , fo: the Dower of the grandmother {a


paramount, the tttle of the Wife of the father,
hina (be tt ín law 02 actuail ) (s defeaten,
On expectant bpon a freehold, anb ín that cafe, Dos de dote
of the grandfather beth living the fathers wife, And here
Foꝛ in the cafeafozefatd, (£ the


Difcent and a Purchale.
02 made à


and the feafon of the father which otfcended to
and no$» tpon tbe matter the father had but a reuerfi-
peti non deber ; although the wife
Hote a Dinerfitte-(w) betweene a
grandfather had infeotfed the father,
gift in tatle nto him, there in the cafeabouefato, the wife of the father, after the de⸗


ceaſe of the grandfathers Swife Should bane bene — of that part alligned to the grands
3


mother


31


(r) ?rizton.ca. 102.
‘tration. lib. 2. fel.9 2.
Glanwil.lib.6.ca. 1.1.7.2. 1,
1. 2. fol.9 3. Bingham: cafe.
4.H. 3. Dos er 179.


(0) Clau & 1. H.3.9. 17.
Reeif 142.143. d
F.N.B.150
Ockbam. fl. 40.


(t) Brat. f1,398.1 o. E.2.
Dower 15 1. Dame Hales oaf2,
13.E.3. Dower. Sterbam,
13.E. 1.157. Dower,


+ / -


Jen wife rf ore Atta

Ting a err
V: eed: 14 —

La c LES TS
bud by HatlulTS CD Z
E LA, eo Ion ZZ
7240 4o
MA © A.


(u) 43:E.3.32. 45. E. 3.13.
9. E. 3-4. F.2N.'8 149.
8.E,3.111..Af.393.
19.E.2.D-wer 170.
23.E. 3. Dewer 36.


(w) 5. F.3.tit.Vomber,
249. T ark ca jv.
9.6 3.4


-


Lib.t.


(x)8.E.3.tit Aff. 305-
13.R. 5. Dower. 55.
32,£.3. 5 8.£.3.3.9. H. 6-4.


(7) 6-£«3.50. F.N.2.145.


(2) 27. H.8.33. F. N. B.
17.H. 3. Dew r 122,


Vid.dell. 242.


(a) Pafe.23.Eh?.in Com.
Banas. Bratt. fol.o6.

Brit cu. 103. Fler.li.5.c.23.
30.E.t.fit. Dower 81.6.
30. E. 1. Vouch. 198.

17. H. 3.192.8. Hen. 3."Dow-
er 196. 8. H. 3.156.194.
(b)Dat. 1. E. 1. part. x.m.17.
£ £^. 4.E. 1 0. 88.


(Orel. 1.1.f. 91. Brit.s.105,
Flesalib, 5.08.22.
Trin. 17. El. im (Com. Banco,


(4) 41.E.3.50. 44. E. 3.26.
3e. H8. Dyer 41.


30./1.3. Dyer AT.


Ce} Res. Parl,26,E,1er0t x.


Caps.


Dower. Se8.36.


mother, and the rcafon of tbig binerfitte ig, fo2 that the &afon that blfrenbebaftcr the beccafg of
the grandfather to che father is avoided by the indowment ofthe granbmother Swhofe titie
Sas confummate bp the death of the grandfather. Wut inthe cafe of the purchafe o; quift shat
to hc ccc in thelife of the meabn fat be (befoze the title of Dower of tbc grandmother Wags
confummate) is not defeated but onip quoad the grandmother, and ín that cafe there Mali be
Dos dedote. And pet there is another vínerfitic (x) ‘where the Soife of the father, ig
fitft indowed, and Shere the wife o£ the grandfather, for inthefame cafe after the deccafe of
the grandfather and father thefonne entreti) ano invowetb big mother of a third part, again
Sohom the grandmother recouereth a thtrd part and dieth , the mother (all enter againeinto
the land recoucred by the grandmother, becaufe fhe had tn tt an eſtate Foz terme of ber life, anv
the eftate foz the life of the grandmother is lefler in the epe of Law, as to ber then ber o wur
life. Alſo the bufbanb (y ) map befeífeo in his XDemefne, ag of thefe abſolutelp, pet the wo⸗
man fbali not be mdewed, ag the thall not be indo wed both of the land given in exchange, anb
of the land taben ín exchange, and pet the bufband was feifeb of both , but thee map haue hen
election to be endowed of Which fhe Swill,

Bifo of a feifon Foz an inftant a Woman (hall net be indowed, As tf Cefty que vie (z) after
the Statute of 1-R.3. and before the Statute of 27. H.s. had made a feoffment tn fecta Wife
fhould not be indowed.

Likewile (f two (opnt tenants be tn fec, andthe one maketh a CeoRement in fee, bis wife
fhali not bee indowed. And fo (£ the Conufe ofa fine doth grantand render the iand to the
Conufloy, the wife ofthe dLonufa fall not be indowed ; for it (s not pollible that the huſband
could hausindowed bis ‘otfe of fuch an eftate ag the vſuall pleading ts, Lib intrat 225. Quia
dicit quod W. quondam vir fuus nunquam fuit fcifitus de tenementis przdi&is de tali ftatu ita
quod candem A. inde dotaffe potuit.


«| Desterres outenements. Df a Caftle that (S maintained fog
the neceflarie defence of the Realme, a Woman Mali not be endowed, becaufe it ought mot to
be bíuibcb, and the publique fall be preferved before the primate. Wut of a Caſtle that is on⸗
1p matntained for the priuate bfc and habitation ofthe owner , a Soman fball bec endowed,
Andfo it Mag adiudged in the Court of (a) Common Picas, Wherein a wꝛit of Dower, the
demand Wag, De tertia parte Caftride Hilierker in C omitatu Northampt : Bnd the Statute
Of Magna Charta cap.7. hereby itis pꝛouided, nifi domus illa fit Ca(trum, is tebe bnderfton,
à Caſtle maintained for the neceſſarie and publique defence of the Realme. Bund this agreth
with antient Records, (b ) (albett in the argument of the fatd cafe they Sere not bonched) the
effect whereot be, Nor debent mulieribus affignariin dotem caftra quz fuerunt virorum, faorum
& que de guerra exiftunt vel etiam homagia & feruicia aliquorum de guerra exiftenc-tobereín ft
is to be obferued, Chat the Law (e not fatif&eb with the names of things, oz nominatiues.
but with things reali and fubftantiall, But of the pzincipail WanGen, o1 capítall Wefluage,
the Svife fhali be endowed, (c) fi non fit caput Comitatus , fiue Baroniz, fox the honour of the
iR calme, 02 (ag hath beenefatd) a Caftiefor the publtque defence of the Bealme. And fo are
the old bakes to be intended, ag it Was refolued 1 r 17.Eliz. ín the Court of Common pleas,
which 3] heard and obferucd, Andof an eftate tate in lands determined, a Woman fhall be
endowed in the like manner and foune ag a man (ball bee &enent bp the &urtefie Mutatis


mutandis.

«T Enfee fimple, feetailegeneral,oc. Bama be Cenant in fee
tafle gencrall, (d) and make a fcoffement in fee, and takcth backs an eftate ta him and to bis
Swife, and tothe hetres of their tio bebies, and thep bae iſſue, and the &offe dieth, the bufband
tabeth another wife, and dieth,the Wife (ball not be endo wed, foz During the coucrture, je Das
fetied " an effate tatle generall, anb pet tbe Que Which thefecond Mite map auc by pollibilitic
map inberit.

he fame Lav tt (e, (fits this cafe he had taken backe an eftate in fee fimple , anb after had
taken Wwifeand had iſſue by her ; pet foe fhail not bee enbowed, fo? that the fee Gupte is bant-
fhed bp the temitter, and her (lus hath the land by force of the entatle, But in that cafe the Te⸗
naut cannot plead, that the bufband was neuer feífeo of fuch an effate $obercof the demandant
tight be endowed, hut be muft plead the {pectall matter.


«| Erprent feme. Ika man fo ſeiſed ag ts afoꝛeſaid, taketh an
Blten to Mife,and dteth,the thail not be endowed: but if the Hing takean alien boane, e dieth,
the ſhall be cndowed by the law of the Crowne. And Edmond the bzother of King Ec ward the
Girt, married the Duenc of Mauarre, and died, and it was refoined (c) bp all tbe Judges that
fhe ſhould be endowed of the ebird part of ail the lands hereof her hufband Was fcifeb in fer.

FE a Few bone in England taketh to Wife a Jew begne alfo in England ; the bufbanb (e
conwerted othe Chriſtian Faith, purchaleth lands, and infroffeth another, and dieth, e e
2 t


Lib.i. Of Dower. Sell.36.


bronght a Swait of 3Do$ner, anb was barred ot her dower, and the reaſan veelded in tbc record
(f ) tstbíg, Quia vero contra jufticiam eff , quod ipía dotem petat vel habeatde Tenemento
quod fuit viri (ui ex quo in connerfione fua noluit cum co adherere & cum co conacst,


Del tierce part de tiels Terres & Tenemenss per feweralsie per metes c


bonds. Albeit of manp Inheritances that bec entire, whereof no
Dinifion can be made bp metes and bonds, a $gman cannot be endowed of the hing tt felfe, pet
a woman (2) (bail be endowed thereof in a ſpeciall anb certaine manner, Bs of a Mill a wo⸗
man Cali rot be etibosoco bp Mets aud Wounds , nos (n common Sith the heire; but ether
the may be endowed ef. the third telle difh , og de integro molendino per quemlibet 2. menferm.
Bud fo of a BWilletne, Ch) either the chird vapes fvorke, oz enertethird weeke oz moneth. M wo⸗
man hall be endowed of the third part of the profit of Stallage, of the third part of the profits
OF a fatre.o€ the third part of the profits of the office of tbe MWarihaific,of the(i third part of the
profits of the kesping of a Parke. Ofthe third part of the profit of a Doue houfe and like⸗
wile ef the third part of a 39tfcaríe, (k ) viz.tertium pifcem,vel iactum retis tertium. DE the third

toan abuosofon, 20 wꝛit of Dower lieth de 3.parte exituum prouenientium de cu-
ftodia gaolz Abathiæ Weftm. Andherewith aqreeth renerond antiquitte, De(1) nullo quod
eft (ua natura indiuifibile, & fecationem, fiuc diuifionem non patitur nullam partem habebit, fed
fatisfaciat eiad valentiam. Ot᷑ the third part of profits of Courts, (m ) fines, heriots,ec. Alſo
a Woman {hall bc endowed of tithes. And thefureft endowment of tithes,is ofthe third thefe,
foz Sobat land (ball befosone is bncertatne.

But in fome cafes of lands and tenements Which are diutfible,and which the heire of the huſ⸗
band thal inherit, pet the wile ſhall notbe indowed, As if the hufeand (n )maketb a leafe fos
life of certaine lands, referuing arent to bim and big heires, and he taketh Wife and dieth, the
Swife fall not be endowed, neither of the reucrGon (albeit ít is Within thefe words Cenements )
becaufe there was no fetfin tn deed 02 tn law, of the freehold, noz of the rent, becaufe the bufbann
had but a particular ftate therein, and no fe fimple, Wut tf the huſband maketh a leafe foa
peares, referuing a rent, and taketh wife, the bufbanb dieth, the wife (hall bee endowed of the
third part of the reuerfion bp metes and bonds, together Sith the third part of therent,and exa
ecution fball not ceafe during the peares. Aud herewith agreeth tbe common expertence at this
pap. Wut ifthe hulband maketh a gift in tatle, referutng a rent to him andto hts belres , and
after the dono; taketh wife anb dteth, the Swife fhall be indowed of thig rent, becaufe it {9 arent
ín fee,and bp pollibilitie map continucfoz ever,

Mfa Common certaine a Soman ſhall beindowed, but of a Lemmon fauns nomber ca
groffe fhe hall not be mbdowed, as hath bene faío befeze. And fo of a rent feruíce, rent charge,
anb rent feck, the hall be endowed: but of ass annuitie that chargeth onelp the perfon, and ti
fuet i) not out of any lands 02 tenements, fhe {ball not be endoiwed, Wut tEthe freahold of the
cents common, dc, were fulpended before the couerture , andfo continue during the coucrturc,
the ſhall not be endowed of then, It after the couerture the bufband doth ettinguthh them bp
ttlcafc oz otheriwife , pet the ſhall be endowed of them ; foras to her Dower thep in theepe of the
Lao haue continuance. *

. FE the wite be entituleb to hauc dower of thꝛee acreg of marſh, euerle one of the balue of
t5ocine pence, the hetre by his induſtrie and charge maketh (t god Meadow, eneric acre of the
value of ten fhillings, the wife fhall haue ber dower accogding to the improncd balue, an’ not
according tothe balue ag (t Was in her hufbanbds time: for ber title is to the quantitie of the
land, viz. one tuft third part.

And the like lato ttis , tthe heiretmpzoue the baluc of the land bp building : And en the
ether Give, tf the balue be impaired in the time of the heire, the {ball be indowed according to the
pour: of thealiquement, and not accojbíng to the balue ag (t Sas in thetime of


«| Afcuns temps durant le couerture. fox the better bnbet(tanbíng
Sobereof (tis to beknosone, that (ag hath bene fatb )to dower three things bec belong, viz.
it ley en anb the death of tbc hufband, Cencerning the foifin, it 18 mot neceflarte thas
Phefame hhould continue uring the couerture, for albeit the hufband alierieth tho lands 07 tene-
ments, o» the rents o2 cermong, &c. pet the woman fhallbe endowed, Wut ít(g
neceſſarie that the matriage Doc continue During the couerture, fos tf that be difolned,the do wet
teafeth, vbi nullum matrimonium, ibi nulla dos. But this ts to bee vnderſtooð when the hat-
banbanb Sife are Digozced à vinculo matrimonij,ag fn cafe of psecontrad confangutnitte,affi-
—5* and not à menfa & thoro onelp, ag fo: adulterte, And pet ít is ſaid, that it the afftgne-

ment of Dower ad hoftium ccc! bee fprcifieb, viz. Chat not withſtanding anp diuorce ail bapz
pon, vtt that ſhe ſhall hold itfozheritfe,thatthisis god. — . E

BE the wife clepe (o ) from herhutband ; thatis , (CtbeSoifeicaue her pufbanb, and goeth
u5pay anb tarríet With her abuiterer,the {hal lofe her dower buttl her porftranb willingly —


32


(£)'D.rfeleuf18. 7.5 0.19


(g)Bradt "ib. 2. fol. 97. b.
23. H. 3.68.4. 4ig EN.
B.149. 45.443. Dower so,


(h) 2.4 6.11. Brad? lib 2,
fel.97. Brit.247. 11. E.3.rif.
Dower 85. 15. Ei. ibid. i.
3.F.3.57 FNZB.8.F.
0)3- E. 2.T 333.3 6.E.3 58
48. E. 3. Dower 50.

(Kk) Bracf.g8.368.Btif 347.
Flet.lib.5.cap.33.. 17. Fa.2.
Dower 194.163, 19.Edw, 3.
Quar. Imp. 154.3 E.3.7

(1) Bradl.97. Brit. 146.147.
(m ) Lib Intr. Indgme. 13.
ft.339..— Lib. xs. fe. 25.26.
Harpers safe,


(n) 38. ^3. 8. R. 3. Daw-
tr 1v E.G Dow. B. 8y.007,


Vid.1.£.6.B.85.


Lib.7. fe 38. Hilline font eafs.
Lib. 6. fe .7 d. Suis A bn ga
niti cafe.


V.3o.€.1.Utct.298.


Braif.93. "Brit.sep. 101.
Bris aep. codem:


0). 2 06.34. Lib. [ntt 38 4.
ets 156.5 €.2 2, Eri e Aog
Menver.cp 5G §-


Lib.


(p) 3-£.3-2.6.€.3.29.
9-E.3.29.19-E.3 .Dewer.
94.41 E. 3. r9.

Vid Fits N.7B.350.h.
8.E.2. Dower 1 55.


(9) Ma. 3. Eli. Die
185.5.


19..A[J- p.a. 47-E.3.4.
Tr 16. H, s. Fat. 447.


36. E. 3.D»wer 11;-
1o. E. 3.31. 4
17. E. 3. Doyer 164.
Y9.F.3 qua.lmp.154.
8 3. E, 4.2.
18.H.6.27. per Pafon.


(0) Magna carta esp.6.
Fletalib « «dp.2 1.
Prallen lil. 3 fel. 96.
Brirtoncsa.103.
19.H.6.14.6.E.6.
"Dyer 76. F.'N.B. 16t.
K egsi.orig. 17 5.

1. Marie Dower 151.


(C) Lamb.fe8.130.71. i7
diuers ancient M anujeripté s
See the 2. portef the
mfitutes esp.7.

(0. Brad. lib. 4.312.

+ & hb.2.96.
Brittcmcap.t 0 4.

Plata lib.s.cop.2 3.


Cu) Regift. indic. 4.
Origsn. 17 3.

Dier 11 El. 284.
Raflplfe.116.#re.
16.E.3. #9. Damages. 83.
$.E.2.ibid.11.


lw) 44E.3 1.491. F.2.
Dower 46.and.mot inthe
beoke at large.

(x) 6£.3.Dorer 5).

23. H.4.7. 9. H.4- 4.151. iſſu-
133.11. H.4. 40.
13-E.4.7. 14. H,8 2506,


Cap.s.


Of Dower. Se.36.


out cocrtion ecclefiafticall be reconciled bnto her, and permit ber to cobabtt Sith bim , all Mich
is comprehended fhoztip tn timo Hexameters,>ponte virum mulier fugiens, & adultera taéta,dore
fua carear, mfi tp: nfi fponte retraéta. Bnd (p ) t£ the gocth Sotilingip Sith o2 to the aucsptrer,
this is a Deparsure andatarrping, albett the rematnetl not continwallp Soith tbeauosotrer, 02
tf the rarrieth Smith him againft her Will, o; i£ he turne her aSway,o; tf (be cobabit with her bufe
band, by the cenfureg of the Church, tn all tbefcc- fes thetofeth ber dote, Wut fee notable
matter hereof, in the erpofition bpon the Statute of W.2-cap.34. wl

& Ex feucraltic per meses bonds. And petinfomecates where
the huſband Sas folc {ciled,the wife hal not be endowed in feucraltio by mcteg anb bonds. As
forerample,(q) 3€ a man feticd of lands (n fec, tobe a Swife and infeokcd eight perfons,a wꝛit
of Dower Was brought agaínft thefecight perfongs, and two confelle the Aion, andthe other
fice plead in barre, awd difcend to (lue, the Demandant {hail haue (ubgement to recouer the third
part of two parts of the land, (n eight parts to be diuided, and after the iſſue being found foz the
demandant agatnt the Gre,the demandant {hal bane tubgeiment to recouer againt them the third
part of fire parts of thefamelands, tn eight parts to be diuided, whichis Swogthie the obferuas
tion, Wut of this moze fhali be afterwards faid m this chapter. '

But regularly Littletons Sods are to be intended, Soberetbe bufbanb was folc feifed, for
Sobere he Swag feífeo in Common, there the cannot be endowed bp mcteg and bonds, ag ít apa
pearcth in this Chapter, Sect.aa. Nota, tbe enbotoment bp metes and bonds, accozeing tothe
common right, {9 moze benefictall to the Wife, than tobe endowed agaínft common right, foa
there the (bali hold the lano charged, in rcfped of a charge made after her title of Dower. ;

«y Le que: el auost iſſue per fa baron ou nemy. IDereiv the tenant in
Dower, as in manp other, to preferred before tbetenant by the Curtefic; Wut pet this great
difaduantage the wife bath, that fhecannotenter into her Dower by the Common Law, but
ig Dituen to her 10 zit of Dower to recomer the fame, Mbhercin fometimes great delapes are feb,
and therefore the Gell aduifed fricnds of the wike Dill pzoutde £02 a topnture to be made to her
ag fbalbcfato hereafter ; Foꝛ bp the ffatutc of (r) Magna carta cap.7. fbi thail tarríc in the
chiefe boufe of her hufband but by the {pace of 40.dayes after the death of her hufband, Within
Sobich time Dower fall be aligned bnto her, bnie(Te tt were fosmerip afligned, tc. but of little
effect Was that ac, for that no penaltig as thereby pꝛouided if it Were not done : which terme
of g.0,dapes is in law called Quarentena. Wut if the marry within thego dapes the lofetl) her
Muarenten, Wut fone haue fato that by the ancient Lave of England the Soman (hould con-
tinuca Whole pearcin her hulbands houte within which time (E Dower Were not afliqned, the
might recouct it: andthis certainip wag the Law of England before tbc Conqueſt (£ ) Mulies |
res vidua bis fenos menfes vidtiasexigunto, atque tum demum cui velint nubant, fin quz ante
annum nupferit ote mulétata fortunis omnibus à priore maritoreliGis priuatur. But for the
teitcfc of the wido w (t was prouided bp the Statute of Merton made in Anno 26.H.3.cap. r.
( &oljícl bp (t) Bra&on {g called Noua conftitutio ) that the wife fball recouer damages in her.
tait of Dower from the timeof the dcath of her bufband, Wut herein Divers things are obfer=
uable. Ftrſt in bat Kinde of Watt of Dower Mhe ſhall recoucr her Damages. In a w2tt (oz
a DoWer ad oftium Ecclefiæ,9 ex affenfu patris fhe {ball recouer ne Damages becaufe fhe map
enter, andthe Words of the Statute be Et dotes fuas habere non poffunt fine placito. fo 4
haue read in an ancient and learncd reading bpon this Statute, that ít extendeth only toa wait
e£ Dower, Vnde nihil habet,and not toa tostt of right of Dower,fog in no tozitof right dama⸗
Ges aretoberecoucred.z. She thal recoucr damages only when her bufbanb die fetfeb, (that ie)
ſeiſed of the freehold & tnherttance,(u )£oz albeit the huſband befoze tbe tític of Dower had made
& ileafe for peares releruing a AR ent the wite ſhall recover the third part o£ the reucrfion Sith a
third part of the rent and Damages, for the woꝛds of the Statute be, De quibus viri fui obierunt
feifiti. 3, Some fap that the Demandant in a toit ef Dower, that delapeth her felfe fall wot
tcconet damages, therefore let tbe Demandant take hed thereof 4. 3t ts neceflarp for the
Soave after the deceafe of her hulband ag fone as thee can to Demand her Dower before gwd tee
ſtimonp, fos otherwiſe fhe may bp her owne default lofe the balue after the beceafe of her hat
band and ber damages foz detepning of her Dower, Foꝛ (f The bring a Watt of Dower again
the hetre, and the beire commeth into the Court bpon the fummeng the rft dap, and pleade that
Be hath bene aliwapes readp and pet is to render Dower, dc. HE the Site bauc not requefted ber
Dowwer, Nhe thail ofc the meane balueg and her damages, butt the hath requetted her Dower
fhe may pleabe it and flue may bc thereupon taken. '

15ut ít is holden in ſome bakes ( w ) that arequet in Pays (g pot faffictent, anb that (t (g the
follp of the wife, that fbcbzouabt not her Soz(t of Dower foner. Wut the Law and manp
(x) bakes be agatnft tt, and the words of the plea (that he hath bene alwapes readp,#c.)proue
eot, anb tbe words of she Statute alfo proue this, Et dotes fuas habere non poffunt fine
placito. |

| er And


Lib.1. Of Dower. Seël.36.


” the reafon why tout temps prift is a god plea (r a wait of Dower bronght againſt the
(— heireto barre ber of the meanc baines anddamages ts , becawfe the beire holbeth bp title, and
Bothno wong tila demand be made, But fn a tto2ít of Biell,Cofnage,ec, Where the land anb
Damages are to be reconcred, there ſuch a plea is not god, foz there the tenant of the land hath
no title, but holdeth the lano by Swzong, And the Feoſtes of the hetre cannot at the ſirſt dap plead
Tout temps prift, becaufe he had not the land all tbe time,fince the death of the Anceſtoꝛ. 5. It
to beobferuco that the meane balucs and Damages are to be reconercd againſt the tenant in a
of Dower, ag (t appeareth in a notable Record (y) betSweene Belfield and Rowle,the Ce⸗
nant as to parccil pleaded J2on-tenure, and foz the refibue,Detepnment of Charters, bpon
Which pleas thep were at (luc, and both (flues found bp the Jurx again the Œenant, anb
found further that the hufband died ſeiſed fuch a dap and peare, and had iſſue fonne ; and that
the Demandant and the fonne by 6,peares after the deceale of the hulband together tobe the
profits of the land, and after the fonne ſuch a dap and pare Dicd without (Tuc, after whoſe bez
ceafe the land difcendedto the Œenaunt ag oncle and beire to him, bp force whereot hee en=
tred and tooke the profite vntill the purchafing of the oꝛiginall to ꝛit, and found the baluc of the
land bp the peare, and aſſeſſed damages £02 the Detepning of the Dower, and coffg, anb bpon
thie berdict.after oftendebating the demandant had tubgement to recoucr her Damages foz all the
time fd the death of her bufband without any defaication. In Which cafe many things apparat
therein are obferuable, Let the Gr enant therefore take heede how he plead falle pleas. 6, Chat
this Statute of Merton Both crtend to Coppthoins (z ) obere the cuftome fs that wonien be
bo$oable, 7. That ifthe wife hath Dower alliqnedte her in Chauncerp the (ball aue no ba-
mages (a) fo2 the woos of the ſtatute be Et vidua per placitum recuperauerint, &c. So it is
t£ tbe heire o2 bis fcoffee alligne Dower, and the Wife accepteth it fhe loſeth her Damages.

À man feifco of lands in fee taketh a wife and granteth a rent charge and after maketh a
Feofkment in fee,and taketh backe an effate tapleand dicth,the wife receucreth Dower againt
the i(Tae in taple bp reddition, the Wife maketh a furmife that her hufband died feifed, and prap=
eth a Writ to enquire of the Damages, and that (e granted to her. Bn this cafe the bold the lano
charged With the rent charge, for bp her ptaper the accepteth her felfc dowable of the z.cftate,
for of the firft eftate Swhercof thee was dowable her huſband died not ſetſed, and fo fhe hath
concinded ber felfe, wherekoꝛe if the rent charge be moje to her detriment then the Damages bes
neficiall to her, itis god £o? her tn that cafe to make no fuch praper,


«| De quel age que laf ee [ost,i[fint que el paſſe lage de neufe ans al teps del mort


Jon baro. Fee twife.bere Lit. fpeaketh of a totfe generally, generally
tt isto bebnberfton aſwel of a Wife defa&o ag de jure. Œherfore tf the Swife bec paft the age of
9. pereg(b)at the time of the Death of her huſbãd the ſhalbe endoswed,of What age ſoeuer her huſ⸗
band be, albeit be Were but 4 peres 010, Quia juñ non poteft dote præmerï neq; vi&ü fuftin ; nec
obftabit mulieri petenti minor ztas;viz. Wherein ít ig to be obſerued, that albeit Confenfus non
concubitus facit matrimonium, and that a woman cannot confent before twelue, noꝛ a man bes
fozefourcteens, vet this inchoate and imperfect. martage ( fromthe Whtch either of the parties
at theage of Confent map oifagre ) after the deathof the bufband fhali gíue Dower to the
Wife, and therefeze tt ts accounted in law after the death of the nfban legittimum matrimo-
nium, a lawfull mariage, quoad dotem. "df a man taketh a Wife of the age of feuen peares,and

“after alien his land,and after thealienation the wife attepnethto the age of 9. peares, and after
the bufband dicth,the Wife (hall be indowed, fozalbeit he Was not abfolutelp dowable at the
time of the marriage pet fhe was conditionally DoWable,viz. if fhe attained to the age of 9.
peares befozcthe death of the huſband, foꝛ ſo Litileron herefaith , fothat the pale the age of
9, poares at the death of her bufbanb, fo? bp hid Death the polltbilitie of Dower ts confummate,

Bndie it is tf the hulband alten his land and then the wife is attainted of felony nowts the
Difabied,but {6 fbc be pardoned before the Death of the huſband the fhal be indowed. It thefonne
indow his Life at her age of feuen pares exaffenfu patris {€ the befoze the death of her hufband
attaine to the age of 9, peares the Dower ts gwd. Wut otherwifeittsofan opiginall abfolute
difabllitic;as tfa man take an Alien to wife, andafter the bufbano alien the land, and after

He is made Dentzen,the ufbanb dicth the fball not be indowed becaufc her capacitie and poſſi⸗
bility to be indowed came by the denizatton, otheriwife (t is t£ thee were naturalized bp ad of
Parliament Sobereof foc moze in the chapter of Villinage. í

And the Withop bpon an (Hue topned in a tip2íCoE Dower, Quod nunquam fuerunt copu-
lati legitimo matrimonio, ought to certifie that thep Swere coupled in TaSofull marttage, albeit
the man were ori» er fourtene, orthe wife aboue nine, and vnder twelve. Hott is tf amar-
tiage de facto, be voidable by Diuoꝛce, in refpect of Confanguinitic, Affinitte, Pꝛecontrac o3
fachitke, whereby the marrrage might haus beene diſſolued/ and the parttes freed à vinculo ma-
trimonij, pet ifthe hufband die before any dinozce, then fox that ft cannot now be auopnco, this
Wife de facto hall bes endowed (c) Foz thíg tg legiti = matrimonium (ag ín the one on

en


3


(y) -Mich.8.ér.9. 8.2
191.904. 5n (Communi bane


(2) Tr.37.ElQ. liba
Jo 30.6. Shawes cafe,
(a) 434fpl,32.


14.H.8.28, |


(b) 3.2.1. Dower.
Tein. North. Y
8.E.2.Dower.122.

7. E-2.Dower. 147.

12. E 2.1b1d. 159,
31.6.3.28.
15.£.3.Dower.67.
13.R 2, Dower. $4.

12. H.4.3. 35.H.6.40,
7. H.6.11 12. 12, H.4.
Doh. & Sind.

Fitz 'N.B.Y 49.6.

22, €liz Dower 369.
Brall.f.(.92. ^

Fleta lib. 5.68.33.
Li^.Intrat. fe. 123.


(c) 10.83.35,
Fleta.l5b. 4.04.22.
Briit.ésp, 107. 007077


Lib..


(d) EraE.lib. 4.fel. 304.
Brirten sbidem.
F lata lib. 6, cap.2 3.

* 32.B.1.Derisé.


(e) Tr-3-Ta. Ret. 1815. in
Cermeai Banco. Inter $yewell
& Wikes in Dower.


(£) 50.€.15 4.


(g) w.2.eap. 3^.


(h) Britren.eap.106.
Brain, lib A. fal. 301.


(i) 31.E.g.tit.collufion 29.


(k) BraBi.lib cap. 59. fel.
92. dre.
Fleta, lib. 4.5.22.
Britirswtap. 101.


(1) Glamuit.lib.6.cap.1.
Bralfen.vbi fupra.
Britren.vbi fupra.
Fletaobi fupra.
Mirrer.oep.1.6.3.

M agua ( aria cap.7.


Fit: N.B.150.0.


(m) £1. F.4. 53.54.

». H.6.26, 23. H.6.14-

$1. H.7.17. 40.7 ff: 37.41.
v6. B. 2. prefeription 53:
43€. 3.32. 45 4f: 3.
Dur. 363. 39.E.3. 2.16.
14. E, 3. Barr: 277.
13.£.3. 0/5, Dower.65.

(A) Vide le ftatute de venue
tnd, Kancia.drc.

Tris. 17. E, 3.tra P Rage
Kan. in Tbe fan, in which ra.
wid Sencutia fiqufstbHWid-
vb res,


Cas.


Of Dower. $568.57.


When the Wife is infra annos nubiles) quoad dote. Bnd fo in a Watt of bosser the Wifhop ongbt
to certifie, that they See legitimo matrimonio copulati , according te the woꝛds of the tor It.
Bnd herewith agreeth 10.E.3.35. Bnd (d) Bracton: quamdiu durauit matrimonium,durauit
dotis exaétio, ca deficiente deficit dous petitio; &c. poterit tamen replicare contra exceptionem
illam, quod fi aliquando fuit matrimonium propter SP HER oh inter cos accufatum
nüquam tamen fuit in vita viri fai folutum nec diuortium ebratum. But (£ they were diuorced
à vinculo matrimoni; (n the lífc of her hufband the tofetl ber Dower: Otherwile it is itthep
Gere diuorced (€) Caufa adulterij, which ts but à menfa & thoro, and nota vinculo matrimo-
nij, ag ít was adindged. Wut fome doe hold that a Swife de facto ſhall not baucan appeale of
the death of her hufband, but onip the that (ga Swife, De iurein fauorem vitas. Vide so, E.5.fol.
1$, 28. E.3.92.37. Aff. Stanford Pl. Cor.59. ano that there vnques accouple in loyall matri-
monie fhalibe taken de iurc ſtrictly. And fo tn fome cafe a wife Dal haue Dower Sobere thea
cannot fauc an appcale, (f) ano in other Cafes fhe ſhall auc an appeale, where the cannot
haue a wzit of Dower, ag i£ the elope ec. ſhe is barred of her Dower, but not of her appcales
and the reafon tg for that the Statute (2) barreth her of her Dower, but not of her appcale.
Sof the bufbandbe attatnted of treafon, tc: bis wife hall not bee cndoiwed, and pet t£ anp
Doe kill him, the Wife (all hane an appeaie, the reafon of the diuerfitte Mall appeare hereafter


tn this Chapter.


€ Apres le mort le Baron. (h) mortuo viro hinc confirmatur Dos,

Q big is mtended of anaturall, not ofactuitideath. Foꝛ it the bufbandentred inreligion,
(1) the Sife hail not be endowed vntill he be naturaiip dead, :
And in this Chapter Littleton bentoctb Mower into fiuc parts, viz. Dower bp the Com=
mon Law. Secondip, Dower bp the Cuſtome. Thtrdip, Dower ad oftium Ecclefiz. fourths
Ip, Dower cx aflenfu patris, And fiftlp, Dower Dc la pluis beale. Bnd all thefe Dovers were
inftituted foꝛ a competent linclthaa forthe wife daring her life. Ck) Propter onus matrimonij
& ad fuftentationem vxoris & cducationem liberorum cum fuerint procreati fi vir præmoriatur.


€ N Ota per le com-

* “mon ley la feme
manera pur [a dower for(-
que (1) la teircepart, eoe.
This third part (s called ra-
tionabilis dos, 92 Dos leziti-
ma, becaufe (t (9 the Dower
that tbe Common Law gí-
ueth rationabilis autem Dos
eft cuiuflibet mulierisde quo-
cunque tenemento tertia pars
omnium terrarum , & teneme-
torum quz vir fuus tenuit in
dominico fuo vt de feodo, &c.

€ Mes per Caflome
dafcun pats el auera le
moitie, & per le cuffome
enaſcun Ville Cr Burgh el
auera lentiertie, Such
a (m) cuffome map extend to
a Countp,Citp,oran ancient


Section 37.


€ EL nota, que per

le common lep
la feme nauera put
fa Dower forque la
tierre part des tene=
ments que fuecont a
fa Baron Durant le
Cfpoulels, mes per
cuftome Dafcun pais
elauera le moitie, &
per le cuftome en af-
cun Wille a Burgh,
el auera lentiertie,
€t en touts tíelg ca-
fes, el ferra Dit tenat
en ower,


A Nd note, that by
the common law,
the wife fhall haue for
her Dower , but the
thitd part ofthe Tene-
ments which were her
husbands during the
Efpoufals , but bythe
cuftome of fomecoun-
tie (ee fhall haue the
halfe, and by thecu-
ftome in fome Towne
or Borough, thee fhall
haue the whole. And
inallthefe Cafes thee
fhall be called Tenant
in Dower.


Burgh without queftion, and fe this cuftome as here tt appcaretbbp Littleton, map extend to
bplanb Œownes, Which areneither, Counties, Curtes, ne: Woroughs. Wut the furer plea-


Ding ín this and tbe ithe Caſes, is tolap thecuftome. within a


annoz 02 &cignio:teif che


truth of the cafe wili (o bears (t. By the cuttome of Oancikind (n) the wife (ball be in dowed
of the mettic, Lo long ag the keepe herfeife (oleam Without child, Which the cannot vaine and
take ber thirds Foz her life. Foꝛ in that cafe, © onfüctudo to lit communem legem.

Bud ag cuftome may enlarge, fo map cuttomeabsidge Xoosper , and reſtraine (t toa fourth


part, qt.


Sede


Lib.


bos


Chis thall be explained bp that Which ball be fafo inthetwo Sections nextenfuing, —


Ale there beetwo other kinds

of Dower, viz. Dower which
iscalled Dowment at the Chutch
doore, and Dower called Dow-
ment by the fathers affent.


€
exaflenfu patris.


Moment ad
CD oftium Eccle-
fie, eft lou home de
pleine age fet(t en fee
fimple que ferra ef=
poutea br feme quat
' fl bient al buis del
monaſtery ou deſgli⸗
fc deſtre c(pouto, tia
apres affiance enter
eur fait, tl endowe
la feme De fa entier
terre,ou dela moitie,
ou Dautre meinD2e
parcel & Ia ouert⸗
ment Declare lc quá-
títíc ala certainty De
laterre que el aucra
pur (a Dower, inceo
cafe la feme, apzesie
mont le baron, poít
enter en le Dit quan⸗
titie De terre Dont le
baron lup endotoa,
fans auter alfígne-
ment Denullup.


À "rp font deur auters

manners De Dower, ce=
 fla(rauoít , Dott que eft aps
pelle dovoment ad oftium Eccle-
fiz, & Dower appelle Dotoment


Of Dower.
Sellien 38.


. Seétion 39.


Owment at the

Church doore, is
where a man of full
age feifed in Fee fim-
ple, who fhall be mar-
riedto a woman , and
when he commeth to
the Church doore to
be married, there, after
affiance & troth plight
betweene them,he en-
doweth the woman of
his whole land or of
the halfe or other lef-
fer part thereof, and
there openly doth de-
clare the quantitie and
the certaintie of the
land which fhee fhall
haue for her Dower.


Inthis cafe thewife af- °


ter the death of the

husband, may enter in-

to the faid quantitie of

land of which her huf-

band endowed her,

without other affigne-
: ment ofany.


SeF.38.39.


€ F thts dower bee made
T: oftium caſtri fiue me-
fuseij ttis not good, but
ought tobe made ; ad oftium
Ecclefiz fius Monafterij-

Et fciendum eft (o) quod
hzc conftitutio fieri debet in
facie Ecclefiz , & ad oftium
Ecclefiz non enim valet facta
in le&o mortali,vel in camera,
velalibi vbi clandeftina fuere
coniugia. Foꝛ the law res
quirethat this and like mat=
ters bee bone publiucip ano
folemnelp,


€ G4 home de pleine
age. That ts of one


and twentie peares. Anno 9.
H.3. Dower 197. 2 man of
the age of eígbtene peres
toke a wife, and by affent of
his garden endoiwed her, ad
oftium Ecclefiz , and tt wag
abínogeb a god enbosomrnt,
aibeít , the bufbanb died be-
fore the age of one anb twen=
ticpercs ; but 3| hold Little-
tons opinion tobe god Law,


¶ La apres affiance
enter eux. Affidare eft
fidem dare. Bfftance o2 ſpon⸗
falitie, and is deriued of this
50028 fpondeo , becanfe thep
contrat themfelues together,
& ideo fponfalia dicuntur
Cp) futurarum | nuptiarum
conuentio, & repromiflio.But
thts Dower te euer after


marriage folemníseb, and therefore this Dower (d god Svithout ded, becanfe he cannot make
a Ded to bis Wwite, Foꝛ no alignement of dower ad oftium Ecclefiz, canbe made before mar⸗
tage, for that before marriage the Woman is net intitled to beue besver,


€ De fa emiier terre on de le moitie. In ancient time (q) as it
3: appeao


34


10.H,3.Daewer.200,


(0) B:atfon.lib. 2.cap. 18.
Mrrror.cap.1.§.3. & eap 5:
104 H.3. Lewer 201,
F.N.'B.150.m.n.

Fleta, lib. c cap. 33. re
Britten.cap.103.128. re.


9-H. 3.Dewer. 197.


(p) Glaill ls £, e«p.1.*
40. E.3.43.
V rde V ermoni cafa D. a fh. 1,2.


lanua. lib. 6. cap. Y.
——— +
lb. 4. irect. 6 eap 1 r6,
"Briten cep. 101. Cre.

F beta lb. § emp. 22. de 6,


Lib. — (ass. TV Of Dowd. Se6h39.


(1) F.X.B.150.
(f) 20.€.3.Barret32. |
45.E,3.6. Fleta. lib. 5.25.


(6 "Eritten.cap. 101.
"Bratfan, sb. 3 cap. 18.


(u) Vide 14.H.;."Dewer 189
9.H.3.Dower 190.
8.H.3.'Dewer 195.

F.N B.i 50.

40.E,3.43.


(w) Magna Carta eap.n.
See the f cundpart "nd Is.
füitutes, cap.7.

Fleta lib. 5.cap.23.
Britton.eap. 103.
Bra. ib, 3 eap.40.
Regif.175.

Vide Dier 6.E.6.76.b cr
161. a. F.N.B.161.
1..Manie, Br. 101.


Kota. flreft way


(x) 45.E.3.26.
48.€.3.36.32. A737.
39.€.3.13. 37.H.6.38.
39.H.6.2 y.

1.8. 5.8.Brewrg99.
30.£. 3.30. 21. E.4. 3.
Vide lb. 1 . Shelley: safe.
45. E. 3-22.


(1)8.£.2.80f.7 5.40, E. 3.23
45.E.3. 5,6.

(b)r. Mar, Dyer 91.

1. E. 2. Dower 146.28. H.6.2.
Drerg.El 263:a6..^ff.a1.

3t. E. 3. Seir. fa.99. 33. H.6.3
Vernons edfe sli. 4-f. 1.
5-£.4.22.


(c)7.H.6.34. ro Ela,
Dower 169. 1o,E.3.38.


appeateth bp Glanuill, lib.6.cap.1. It Wag taken that a man could not hane endowed his wite
ad oftium Ecclcfiz, of a moze then a third part, but of 1effe he might, But at this bap(r) tbe
Law ig taken ag Littleton here hoideth, ag nf of bower ( f ) Swhere the bufband
Sas folc feifed, cannot bee made of the third oz fourth part in Common, but ought tobe tn
fencraitic. «d xis sist dia SU dg f

€ Et la oucrtment (t) declare le quantitie & certeintie del terre. 39ete
be tino things that the Was» doth Delight fn, viz. tlt, to haue this and the like pent andfo- .
lemnely done, Hecondly, te bane certaintie, $0 (us a de of quiet and . Bnd
thts $5070 ( mottic ) aboucfato is te beentended of the haife in certaintic, and not of the moitie
in Common, Sobích cleetelp Cu )appeareth in that bere Lirdeton faith, the quantitioand cer
taintic of the land, : fn 3 4

LE» eco cafe la feme poet enter en le dit quantitie delterre. Bud aftec-
Wards Sc&tione 43. hefaith, Nota, que en touts cafes lou le ceitaintie appeirt queux terres ou
tenements femeauera pur fa dower la fem poet enterapresla mort fon Baron. It was inftt-
tntcd in fauour and veltefe of Mines, that amanafter marriage might alligneto his wifecer=
taintie of Dower, to the end that the Widow houid not beo driven to along and chargeable
fuit wherein delay might be died, and in the meane time her life fpent,together With her monep
allo. froz albeit the ( w ) law hath prouided, Quod vidua poft n. ortem marit fui non detaliquid
pro dote ſua & manfat in capitali mefuagio mariti fui per quadraginta dics poft obitum mariti
fui infra quos dies affignetur ci dos fua , nifi priusei affignata fucrit; &¢ & habcat rationabile
eftouerium faum interim in Communi, pet becaufe there Sas no penaltie o2 putiifbment in=
flicted, the tenant ofthe anb map driue her to fus fox her Dower. And this continuance of the
Sidow in thecapitall Meſſuage is in Law called a Quarentine, Quarentina , foy that itis
‘bp thefpace of fortie apes, ag (g aforclatd, And if the heire oz other tenant of the land put her
out, the map have her twzit, De quarentina habenda. JE the totfe marvie within the foptte
dapes the loſeth ber Quarentine kor her habitatirn tn the houfe te perfonall to her,ant ontp gi⸗
uen to her in (ubgement of Law during her widowhod, albeit the words of the Law bec ge⸗
nerall, And therefore to the end that toidewes might haue certaintie of e(fate ; and that thep
might enter and not be deinen to fuit, the Law hath pꝛouided Dower ad oftiam Ecclefix , and
as it fhallappeare hereafter,Dower cx aflenfu patris, And laſtly, bp making ofatopnture, of
Which (being no Dower but made in fattffacion of Dower either before oꝛ after Marriage)
itis neceflarte that foc thing Mould be fato hereafter in bis apt place, Foz that this now Falieth
out to be thefureft way.


En touts cafes quant le certeintie appeirt rc. la feme poet enter apres


le mort del Baron. Chis isto be intended tobere the certaintie ap-
veareth vpon an affíanement of Dower, ad oftium Ecclefix,og ex affenfu patris Foꝛ (fa Woman
bzing a tozit of Dower of fic pound rent charge, fhe hath indgement to recouer the third part,
albeit it be certain that the fbal bauc foztte thillings,pet the cannot (x )diftreine fo? go. thillings
before the Shortfe doe deliuer the fame onto her: £o? &obercfocucr the woztt Demand land, rent,
02 other things {n certaine, the demandant after fudgement map enter 02 diſtreine before any
feafon deliuered to him by the Sberife vpon tait of habere facias feifinam. Wut (n Dower
where the writ Demandeth nothing in certaine, there the demandant after the indDgement cans
not enter or diſtreine vntill execution fuco, by Which execution the Sberife is by tbe ings
weit to deliver tbe third part in certaintte tothe vemandant. And fo tt ts Shen the wife of one
tenant (it common demand a third part of a inoitie, pet after tudgement fhe cannot enter vntill
the Sherifc deltuer to her the third part; albeit the deltuerte of the Sberife ſhall reouccit tomo
moze certaintte then ít was. , ’


¶ Sans auter afignement de nulluy. For ag concerning Dower at
the Common law, there muft be affignement either by the Sberife (ag hath bene fato) by the
Kings weit, oꝛ clfe by the hetre 02 other tenant of the iand bp confent and agreement betwen
ther Coa perfec aſſignement of Dower cight things are to be obferned: (a) Fir regular⸗
ly the afftqnement mutt be certaine, ag our Aũthoꝛ herefaith.

Hecondlp, Ft (b) muft be either of fome part of theland Sobercof ſhe is vowabie, 02 of a
tent orfome other profit iſſueng out of the fame.cither before tudgement oz after, which Kent
map be aſſigned to her bp pareil, Wut an aflignement of other land $obereof fhe (a not DoWabic,
oꝛ ofarentíTuina outef thefame, (amo barre of her Dower,

(E btrotp, Thealliqnement mul beabfolute, and not conditional, o (ubtet to any limítae


Fourthly, It muſt be made bp him that is Cenant of the and ; but herein certaine diuerũties

are to be obferned, Pes, .
FE two o; moze be Fopntenants of lands, (c) theone of them map affigne Dower 7 =
€;


Lib. Of Dow er.


wile of a tbítb part in Certaintie amp tits thall binds this compantons,becaute thep Mere com

pellableto Doe thefame bp Law, But it one ot them afignearent out of the land to the wite,

this thall not binde big companton, becaule hee was not Compellable by the Law thereunto.
© FE the huſband make ſeuerall Feoſtments of feuckall parcels, and dteth aub the one Feofte
aifigne Dower to the wifcof parcell ofiand infatiffacion of all the Dower which thee ought
to baue in the land of the other feoffees, the other feoffees (ball take no bencfit of thig atigue-
‘ment, becaufc they are ſteangers tberennto, and cannot pleadethefame, Wut tn that cafe {€
the huſband dicth feifeb of other lande in fe finpleand the fame diftend to bts etre, and the
heire indoweth the Wife of cectatne of thoſe lands in fall fatiffacon ofall the Dower that thee
dught to haue alwell in the lands of the feoffes ag in bis owne lands, this afliqnement (o
god, andthe feverall feoffes ſhall take aduantage of it, Awdtherefore tf the wife bang
a ait of Dower againk any of then, thep may vouch tbe heire, and hee may pleade the afliqu=
ment Sobích be btmfelt hath ae in fafette of bimfelfe, teal tbep honid recouer in value againft
bim, (4 fo ag there ts a priuitp inthts vefped betweene the heire ant the feoffes, and bv this


meanes tbe fame may bepleaded by the hetre that made tt, And ſo itis adiudgedinourboks, s


Swhich is a ttetable cafe fo? many purpoles,

Fittly, JE aigneanent be made (e ) bp any difleifor,abatoz, intruder, oꝛ anp Swiong doer, of
lands 03 tencments, ifthepcame to that cfhate bp colinfion and couin betweene the widdow
andthem,albett the widdow hath tuft caufe of action and the affignement bee indifferentlp made
after iudgement bp the Sberife of an equali third part, pet ſhall the Diffetfe, #c.auopn it, foz co-
utn in thts cafe halifuffocate the right that appertatned to her,¢ fo the Sozongfull manner Mal
auoyd the matter that (e lawful. /

»irtly, Gn alliqnement bp (f a difletfoz, abatoz, intrndez, ec. fF there be no couin, is qon,
tnitGe it be pꝛeiudiciall to che diſſetſee, ac. As (£tbe hufban’ Ce intcoffett the pounger fone
Sith Warrantic, the cideft fonne diſſeile the poungeltfonne, and endow the Sotvdom, in this
tafe the pounger forme (ball auoyd this affignement, for otherwiſe he (ball Tofc bis Warrantte :
buta difletfoz,abato?, intrndor, €c. cannot affigne a rent ont of the land to her foy her dower,
to bind the difleifec,ec. ; ;

Seuenthly, Mo allignement can be made, but by ſuch ag hane a freehold, (as hath bin faid)
02 agatuft hom a wꝛit of Dower doth lie ; and therefore ( h) an aflignement bp a gardein tn
focage is botd, but a garocín in Chinatrie may aſſigne dower, as Hall befain hereafter, becaufc a
wꝛit of dower licth again bür arb not againf a gardein in focage.

Cightiy, And before the gardetn in chivalric enter, the heire Within age(i map affigne dow⸗
er, for the gardcin may waiue the wardſhip. And ſo b2iefelp bauc pou heard, of what, by
Sohom,and to Whom the alignement mutt bemade But there needeth neither liuerte of fetGin.nos
Sorting,to anp aTignement of Dower, becauft tt is bue of common right,


Section 40.


Sett. jo.


Moment ex
€ D afflenfu. Pa-
tris eft lou Ic pier eff
leiſie de Tenements
en fee, æfon fits &
beitcappatét, quant
il eft efpoute, endovoe
fa feme al buys Del
Monaſterie ou del
Cigiltic, de parcel De
Terres ou Lenc-
ments fon pier, à at-
tent fon pier taffigtt
la quantitie & les
parcels, En ceo cate
Apres le mort le fits,


D dns by affent
of the father is,
where the father is fei-
fed of Tenements in
fee, and his fonne and
heire apparent when
he is married, endow-
eth his wife at the
Monafterie or Church
doore, of parcel ofhis
fathers lands or Tene-
ments with the affent
of his Father, and af-
fignesthe quantity and
parcels; In this cafeaf-
ter the death of the
I3


q [ses le piere eft ſei-


‘fie de Tenements


en fee. Œenant foz
life of a Carue of Land, the
reuerlion to the father tw fee,
the fonne and Heire apparent
of the father endotecth bis
Swife of tbíg Carue,bp the af:
fent of the father, the Tenant
fozitfe dieth, the bufbanb di⸗
eth, the renerfion ag a Te⸗
nement tt the father , and pet
this tg no ged endo wment ex
affenfà patris,becaufe the Fa⸗
ther at the time of the affent
had but a reuerfon crpedan£
bpon a frehoid, whereot bee
could not baue endowed big
one Wee ; and albeit the te
nant foz life Dico, Using the
hufband, pet, quod initio non


valet traétu temporis non con-


ualefcet,


35


(d) 33-E. 3. Tit. Iutgrm. 54.
-E.3.69. 17.E.3. 58.5.
3E 3 tit. Dower 76.

3. E. 3. Vouch.196. See the
Second part of the Inflit.W. 1.
cap.4o.


(€) 15.4 p. T- 44. 4f 29.
44 E.3.46. 25748724.

Xr H. 4.60.15 E. 4. 4.
19. BH. 8.12.

Lir.83. 151.

(f )12..4ff.p. 20. 21.E, 3.12.
(g) 3-E.3.tir.Dawer 77.

X6, E. 3. fit. Dower Statham,


. ^
+
(h)31.E.r.Dower rst,
29.1] 66.
15.E.3 .Daver 62.
(1) 7- R.2. admefureme;? 4.


FN /B 148. f.


Brst.c.109.Elet Is. 5.0. 22.23
Braë.li.5.305. 6.E,3.34
F.N B.150.


Lib


(k)8.H. 3. Dowir 195.
g.H.3. Dew.191.11.H.3«
Dower.F.W_B.150.!.
29.E.3. Dower134.


(DEN B.sço.eFlet-h.s.
cap.23. Braët.lib.4.305.
timbr Gorges cafa, li. 6 fe.13.


(m3. H. 1 Dover 199.
&,E. 3.34. 8. E. 2. Dew.154.


2.H.3. Dower 159.


(n)o H.3.Dower 190.
F.N.'B.150.m.


1.£.3./Dower 154.


(o)BraB.li.2.fol.33.dre.
er (i.5. fal. 39 6. Brit. fol 34.
65.66. 101. Fles.li.3.ca. 14.
& li 6.0.32. 0011.3 0.354, 5. €


(p)4.E.3.Fines v16.14.€ 2
Ley 79.4. E.2. Ley 98;

25. H.6. 0.25. H.8.23.
F.N.B.132.7.


(q) Bris, fo, rot. BraB.ts,a.
fel. 35. Fletalb 3.08.14.


C#-5-
ualeícet. Bnd i the mott
part, Dower ad oftium Eccle.
fix, and cx af; nfu patris, en=
fuc the nature of a Dower at
the Common Law, Bnd fea
thefe the Swife map baue &
uit of Dower, albeit thep
be certaitic, ag foy thethird
part at the Common Law.
«| Et fon fits & heive


apparent. It mutt
befuch a fonne anb hetre age
parent, ag muff continue am
Hetreapparent, anb therefore
the voungeftfonne and betre


Of Dower.


la feme «entera. en.
meſme le parcell
faung autet alligne-
ment De nullup,
Mes il ad eſte Dit en
ceſt cafe, que tl coui⸗
ent à la feme Dauer
bn fait De le Pier
prouant fon aífent
& confent De cel en-
Dotoment,M.44.E.3.
fol.45.


Set.4.0.


fonne,the wife (hal en-.


ter into the fame par-
cell without the af-
fignement of any.But
it hath beene {aid in
this cafe, Thatit be-
hooueth the wife to
haue a Deed of the fa-
ther, to prooue his af
fent and confent. to
this endowment. c.


apparent cannot endow bis 44.E. 3 f.45 .

Wife cxa(Tentu patris,o£ lands hereof the father is ſetſed in fee of the nature o£ Borough En-
glilh becanfe the father map have another fonne, and then the hulband is not betre apparent:
and ít tg in tefpect 0€ the conftant and pcrpetuall apparance, that the fonne and betre apparant
may endow his Wife of hts fathers land, And fo tt 19 of lands in Gauelkind: (k ) andthis ts
thereafon that Dower ex a(fen(u fratris, 02 confanguinci, (g not good, fox that albeit he tg befre
apparant at that time, pet £62 the common poſſibilitie chat hee map have (Tue, andeuerp {Tue
that tbt brother 02 cofine (bouto haucafterwards, (ball exclude him, beets nofuch beire appa=
rent ag the Law intendeth. (1) But an endowment cx aflenfu marris, tg ag god agex affenfü
patris,becaufe there ig an apparance of aconftant and perpetual heire, Bnd fome haue fato,that
tf the father after hie affent be attainted of treafon oz Celonte , that tbe wite in that cafe lofeth
her dower; becaufe her bufband doth not continue heirt. :


«| Quant il efl efpoufe,endow fafeme. (m) In this cate, albcft the
Frechold and 3 nberitanct io inthe father, pet (n reſpect (as hath bean faid) of the conftant anb
— — of the heire, the heire apparent Both endow, ano the father both but af=
ent. Andtherefore where the father did endow the Wife of hie fonne and heire apparent, that
——— Sas holden tofo, becauſe the huſband in that cafe mu endow, and the kather
alient, ,

And (tte holden in z.H.3.Dower 199. Chat t£ the heire apparent be Within age, pet the en⸗
DoWmient ex affenfu patrisfg god. Mote, Lirrleron frt thecale of Mower ad oftium Ecclefiz,
Doth put the hufband o£ full age, but here of the dower ex affenfu patris, he fpeaketh generally,


€] Et affigne le quantitie & les parcels. So ag both in Dorwer ad
(n) oftium Ecclefiæ, & ex affen'u patris, thecertaintie mult be expꝛeſſed. Bnd therefore Sobers
Booker ſpeake ofa moitie, (t te intended, (as hath bene fatd) of an halfe in certaine,


€] Apres la mort le fitz [a feme entera . In this cafe after the death
of the.hufbandthe Smite ſhall enter,ozhaue a $02tt of Dower albeit the father be altue.


«| Que il consent al feme dauer un fait prouant font affent a cel endow-
ment.


q Vnfait, ADeed faàum, this word (Deed) in the vnderſtan⸗
Ding of the Common Lato is an Inſtrument written tn parchment oz paper, (o) Sobereunto
ten things are neceſſarily incident: Viz. Firſt, Wziting. SHecondip,in Parchment o1 Taper,
Thirdip,aperfon able to contract. Fourthly, by a fufficientname, Æiftly, a perfon abictobe
contracted With. Sirtlp, bp a fufftcient name, Scuenshly, a thing tobe contraeed for, Cight-
lp, apt words required by Law, Minthly, Healing. BAndtenthip, Delincrie, 29 Ded can-
not be wꝛitten vpon Mood, leat Ler, cloath, 07 thel{ke, but onetp bpon parchment ox paper, fos
the waiting bpon them can beleaft bittated,altred,o2 coꝛrupted.

It a deed ( p) bealledged in Count 9? Plea, vegnlarip tt muſt be ſhewed to the Court, tothe
end the Court map tudge whither there be apt Swerbotu make lt a god contrat accozding to
the rule of Law, bercof moze fhall be faid tn the chapter of conditions, But (£ noncít fadum
be pleaded, becaufe thereby the ſealing, deliuerte, 0? other matter of fact (g dented, it Mal be tete
by the Lountrie, Ot Deeds fome be indented, and fome bc Deeds poll, DE indented, forme be
bipartite,fome tripartite, fome quadzipartite, &c. Sohercof moze (fall befatb tn the Chapter of
Conditions, Alſo of Deeds, fomebe tnrolied, and fome (q) be not (mrolieb ; {Ett bee (nrollco
acce» ing to the Statnte of 27. Hen.$.cap.10. ít muſt be inrolled in parchment forthe ftrength
anveontinuance thereof, and not in paper , andfo was tt refolueb (n Parliament bp tbe Fud=


ges


Libs: OfDower. Sef. 41:


ges (anno 23-Eliz. Sok fos the vett ofthe parts of a Dead, hall read thereof plentí-
in our Bokes, aub inmp Reports ; Which bp tbíg fbogt dion you fpall catilp vn⸗


T Wn fait de feoffemene. It is properly called Charta feoffamenti
dier da a deed —— tig pac opi Seas of deeds, forme concerne the
gealtíe, ag here a deed of Écoffement ; fome tbe perfonaltie , ag a Deed of gift of gads , Ob⸗

IS, Wills, d. And fome mirt, whereof moze fall bee {ald in the Chapter of


ele - .

i£ a man deliuer a wetting fealed, to the partie to whom (t is made, aganefcrow to be his
Ded bpen certaine conditions, ec. this is an abfolute deliuerie o£ the Deed, being made to the
partie himfelfe, fog the deliueris (e ſufficient without {peaking of anp Mods, (otheriwife a
man that ig mute could not deliver a Ded) and Cradition is onclp requifite, and then when
the SMogds arc contraricto the act Which (e the deltuerte, tbe woꝛds are ef none effect, non quod
di&um, fed qucd fa&um eft infpicitur. Bnd hereof though there hath beene (1) bartette of opía
níong pet is the Law now fetticd agreeable to iudgements tn former times, and fo $oag it res
folued bp the $obole Court of Commonspleag, But it may be delinercd toa fftanger, ag an
eicrowe,éc, becaufe tie bare act of deliuery to him Without Words Worketh nothing. And this
is the ancient diuerſitie (C) tn our bokes the record whereot 3] hane feme agreeable Sith tbe
reafon of ont oldbokcs. Andag a Ded map be delivered to the partic Without words, fo map

a Derd be deliuered by Words Without any actof delivery, ag tf the weiting lealed lyeth vpon
the table, ano the feoffoꝛ oꝛ obligoꝛ faith to the Feoffer oꝛ obliges, Doe and take bp the fatd wai⸗
ting, tt te fuffictent for pou ; o2 tt Sill ferue the turne,o2 take (tas mp Dede, on the like Words,
tt is a ſuſficient deliuerp.

DEF Deeds anb cheir deſtinctions pou fhallreabe excellent matter in Antiquttie. (t) Carta.
rum, alia regia, alia priuatorum, & regiarum, alia priuata, alia communis,& alia vniuerfitatis.
Priuatarum, alia de puro feoffamento & fimplici, alia de fcoffamento conditionali fiue conaen-
tionali ,alia d e recognitione pure, vcl conditionali,alia de quiete clamantia, alia de confirmati-
onc;&c, Veiba intentioni noné contra debent infervire. ——

Carta non eft (u) nifi veftimentnm donationis. Carta non cft nifi veftimentum orationis,
Nemo tenetur armare aduerfarium faum contra fe. Scripium cft inftrumentum ad inftruendum
quod mens vult, Carta eft legatus mentis. (w) Benigñæ funt faciendæ interpretationes car!a-
rum propter fimplicitatem laicorum vt res magis valeat quem pereat. Nihil tam (x) conueniens
" — equitati quam voluntatem domini volentis rem ſuam in alium transferre tatam

abere.


Verba cartarum fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem. Generaledictum generaliter eft intel-
ligendum, Verba debent intelligi fecundum fubicétam materiam, Carta de non ente non valet,

Note, the father map (a) make a Deede to the Wife of hisfonne, and fo (s the Lao Holden
fo2 that the fathers land by bis affent is charged With a future freehold Wwherennto a Dede te
sequifite,but toa Dower Ad oftium Ecclefiz no Desde fo requifite, And here tt to mot weil
Done ( of him that made the addition to our Buthoz ) to bouche 44-E.3.fo.45-becaule the Au⸗
tho: bindelfe bouched (t not, foꝛ if He (b) meant to haue bouched authorities, bee would have
bouched moze then onc in this cafe, ano tbofe that (c) hee bouched be Wonid hane cíteo truly,
but this cafe ts miſtaken both in the peare and ti the Leafc, for Sphere it ta cited in 44,E-3, tt
is i-40,E.3. and Sobere bc faith it is fo.45. it is fo.a5.

Bu alignment o£ Dower (d) ettherad oftium Ecclefiæ o ex aſſenſu patris map be made of
moe than à third part. But the ancient Law was that nogreaterallignement could bes mabe
ín thote cafes but of a thiro part, but leſſe be might, ag tt appeateth in Glanuill.


Seétion 41.


CET apse mort Andifatterthedeath CE: conclude à

lebaronelenter of her husband claimer afcun an-
€ agree a afcun tiel the entreth, andagree ter dower per la common
dower De les Dits to any fuch dower of ley. Wherein a Diners
dowers ad oftium ec- the faid dowers at the pate — MEM
clefie, &c. Donque Churchdore,&c.them 6 cx adenta patris, and a


335-4. PL ir.

Tr.25. H.8. Der 95,

(t) Tr.s3.Elix inter Han
kefby & Lacher inthe Kings
bench.

Hill,sa[a- Ld fake (ome
poen place.


(f) 13.48. 19 H.8.3.
4-E. 3.18.13, 4.4.8.


(t) Brod 85.3 fo. 3.6.
Pleta lib. 5.64.14, +


(u) Fletali. 6.64.29.
Bralen,


Bratton If. 2. fo 34,


(w ) Braston lib 2.fo.94.9 |
(x) Idem lib. AE i


(y) Pl.Com.in Thrograir-
tous cafe fe.161 b,


(a) 3.£.2. Dover 1363
8.E.3.Dewer 154.
6.6.3.34. 40. E. 3. 43.


(b) 11.4.3. Dower 186,
14. H.3./Dower,

(€) x.E.2.Dewer 125.
V.d.Statwt.Wallie anno.
12.E. t.fo.18. im veteri
ASEH A carta,

47. H 3.Dower 174,

(d) F.N.2.150.p.
Glanuil. lib. 6.02, 1.2. 3-


Lib.


Veracat cafe lib. 4.fo.t.
1. Marie Dier 21.
31-E. 3. Serre fae. 99.
20, E. 4.3.


27. H.8. cap. 16.
(a) 12.£.2."Dower.158.
27. H,8,04.10.ver/us finem.


Leake ty Rar dals cafe
lib.4-fal.4. ^


Vid Vernues cafe vbi fupra,
fea.6.


Dien, 19. Eli .3 58.


‘Britt eay. 162.103.


(4p.5-


topnture ez e(fate mabe to the
Site in fatiséacion of ber
Dower, for one of thofe
Dowers being aflented onto
ígabatreof the Dower at
the Common Law, but a
topnture Was no barre of ber
Dower at the Common 11%.
Fos aright oz titie that one
hath toa freehold cannot bee
barred bp acceptance of cols
laterallfatisfacion, ut a
Woinan cannot have a Double
dower,viz, ad oftium Eccle-
fia, &c. andat the Common
law, forthe wife of one hut
band can haue but one
dower, Wut (nce Littleton


Of Dower.


el eft conclude de
claimer afcun auter
Dower per le com-
mon lep, Dafcuns
terres ou tenements
qux fuerent a fa Dit
baron. Des ft el
boit, el poit refufer
tiel dower ad oftium
ecclefix,&c. & DONG
el poit eſtre endow
folonqg le cours del
common ley,


Sedat.


fhe is concluded to


claime any other do-
wer by the Common
law of any the lands
or tenements which
were her husbands,
but if fhee will, thee
may refufe fuch do-
wer at the Church
dore,&c. and then fhe
may bee endowed af-
ter the Courfe of the
Common law.


iote bp the Statute of
27-H.8. (fa tepnture be madeto (a) the wite accozding tothe parvieu of that ffatutc ít (g a
barre of her Dower fo ag the woman (ball not fauc bothtopnture and dower, and to the ma=
King of a perfect topnture Within that ftatute firethings arc to beobfcrued, Firſt, her topnture
by the firtt limitation is totake effect fox her life in poffeffton, 02 profit prefentip after the deceaſe
of ber hulband, Secondly, that (t be fo? the tearme of her one life, oz greater eftate. Thirdip,
tt mutt be made to her felfe, and to no other for her. Fourthly, tt mult be made in ſatiitacion of
her whole Dower, and not of part of her ower, Fittly, ic mull either be expreffed, 02 anerred to
be ín fatiffaction of her Dower, Andfirtly, tt may be made either befoze 02 after mariage,
Concerning the firft, (f a man make a dreoffment in fee of Lands 02 Cenements either before
oz after mariage te the vſe of the bufbano fo itfe, and after tothe ble of A. for life, and then to
the bfc of the wife Foz life in fattffaction of her DoWer, this is no ioynture Within the ftatute,
becaufe by the firft limitation tt Was not to take effect in pofleflion o» profit pactentip after the
Death of herhufband, Andalbettinthat cafe A. fhouid dpe lining the Dufband, and after the
Death of the bufban® the wife entreth, pet this is no barre of her Dower, but ſhe ſhall haue her
dower alfo becaufe tt ts not Svithin the fato ffatute, and (ag tthath bene fain) by the Com=


mon law ít was no bar of her DeWwer,2, It mutt bc cítber (n fe tatle;oz Cop term. of her on life,
foy an eftate fos life o2 1fues of one o2 many other 02 to her fez
aC, 02 1000, peares, tC. tf the ltue fo long, o» without uch limitation ig no barre of her DoWer,


albeit thep be expzefiely made in fatiffaction of her Dower, cauía qua fupra. 3,9 fan e(fatc bea
made to others tn fee imple, o2 £02 her life bpon tru(t foag the eftatc remaine in them, albeit, it
be fo ber benefit, and bp her affent, and bp expreſſe words to be (n full fatiffatton of bcr Dower,
petis this no barre of her Dower, Che fourth is fo plaine ag it needeth notanp crample, 5. A
Deutfe by will cannot be aucrred to be fn fatiffaction of her dower, vnleſſe it be fo expelled in
she will, 6. Ffthe topnture be made before marriage, the wife cannot waiue ít and clapme
bet dower at the Common law, but if it be madeatter mariage, (ye map Wwatue the fame and
clatme her tower. J haue touched thele points the moze ſummarilp, becaufc thep are refolued at
large with the reafons thereof in Vernons cafe vbi fupra. So ag to compachend all in fe
$0020, a topnture ( hich in common bnderftanding ertendeth as Well to a fole effate as to a
topnt eftate With her hufband ) tg a competent Uucliheod of freehold for the Wife of ands oz
Œenements,#c. to take effect prefentip in poffeffion oz proffit after the deceafe of the huſband foz
theitfe of the wife at tbe leatt (£ the her felfe be not the caufe of determination oz Fozfciture of (t.
Ww hich fec moze at large in Vernons cafe vbi fupra. FF atopnture bee made to a Sotfc of lands
befoze tbe Coucrture, and after the hufband and Sife Alten bp finetbofe lands fo conueyed foz
ber ioynture, the ſhall not be endowed of any of the other lands of her hulband, Wut if thetopn=
ture had bene madeatter martage notwith fanding the alfenation bp the hufband and wife
thereof bp fine, pet fecíng ber eftate Wag origtnallp waiuable, and the time of her election came
not till after the deceafe of ber hufband the may claime her Dower inthe relidue of her lands. 25 ne
fn tbe other cafe,the topnture of the Snife made befeze mariage was not Wwatueable at all, now
ag the dower ad oftium Ecclefix and ex affenfu patris is better For the Wife, becanfe in relpect of
thecertainty, the may enter, then the dower at the Common 128p, Shere (he is bifuen to ber
reall action, and therefoze Britton calleth ower ad oftium Ecclefix and ex aflenfu patris efta-
blifhment of dower bp the bufban® anb affignement of Dower after his deceafe (fo nothing
that is bncertaine ts eftablifhed. ) So a topnturethat hath the force of a barre of Dower by


tbefafo ag of 27.H,8.) tg ag hath beenc fato moze {ure and fafe fo the Soffe then either Done
t a


Lib...


Of Dower:


Seét.4.2.4.,


ad oftium Ecclefix 91 ex affen( patris, foy befibeg itis ag certaine ae thofeethers, and thee map


enter into ft,after the death of her


bufbanb and not be dzinen to her action, She {ball net be bar


red of her iopnture albcit her bufband comit treafon 02 felonte, as fhe fhalbe both of her Dower
ad oftium Ecclefix and ex affenfa patris bp the Common Law, But now at this dap by the ſta⸗
tuteg of 1.E.6.cap.2. and s,E.6.cap, 11. a wife (ball not iofe any title of Dower which to her
Sas accrucd by the attainder of her bufban fox anp manner of murder oz other felony what⸗
foeuer, Wut (a) the hulband be attainted o£ high treafon 0? petíetrcafon the fhalbe (b) barz
ged of her Dower at this dap, fo long ag that attatndze ſtandeth tn force. à ;

«| Couclade, commeth of the cc) verbe concludo vohich is Deriued
Qf con and claudo to determine, to Gnith, to (but bp, to eftoppe, o barre a man to pleade 02
clapme anp other thing, Vid-Eftoppell,


eC nota que
E nul fete ferra
endotp ex aífenfu pa-
tris eu le fozme a=
uantdit, mes lou [a
baron e(t fits a heire
apparant a [on pier,
Quere De ceup Deux
cafes de Dotoment
ad oftium Ecclefiz,
&c. fi la feme al
temps Del most fa
baron, ne balle lage


Seton. 42.


Nd note that no

wife fhall bee en-
dowed ex affenfu patris
in forme aforefaid,but
where her husband is
fonne and heire appa-
rant to his father. Qwe-
re of thefetwo cafes of
dowment ad offzum ec-
cleſiæ &c. if the wife
at the time of the
death of her husband
bee not paft the age of


De (p. ang, (rel aucta, .9.ycares, whither fhee

Dower offon, <r rttramefower or no.
Section 43.

CE Thotaque en Ndnote that ig all

LL er PM where the


le certainty appicrt
queug tres ou tenc-
ments feme auct pur
fà Dotwer, là le feme
poit entrer aps la
mozt fa baron, fans
aflignement De nui-
lup, Wes loulecet-
taintic ne appiert, (i
come deftre endow
Dela tierce part Da-
uer en feueraltie, ou
Del moítíe folonque
le cuftome De tener


certaine appeareth
what lands or tene-
ments the wife fnall
haue for her dower,
there the wife may
enter after the death
of her husband with-
out aflignement of a-
ny. But where the cer-
taintie appeares not,as
to be endowed of the
3. partto hauein feue-
ralty, or themoity ac-


cording to the cuftom
5


Vi feme ferra en-
€N eae, of


this fufficient bath beene fato
befoze,


Œ Quare de ceux deux
cafes de dowment ad ofti-
um Ecclfie ce. And


ít femeth that thefe Dowere
being made bp aſſent, 2c, that
the fame atc go albeit the
wife be Within the age of
Nine peares, for Conſcoſus
tolliterrorem. But Without
queftion, a fopnture mane to
her vnder oz aboue the age of
Mine peares,ts god,


€ fz moa que en
touts cafes, ec.

Gn all cafes ‘where the
demaund of the Dower ts
certatme ag in cafe of Dower
ad oftium Ecclefix 0$ ex af
fenfü patris, therethe Swifeafs
ter the Death of the bufband
map enter, Wut where the
Demaund ts vncertaine ag in
tio2íts of Dower at the Lom=
mon La, there albeit the
thing tt felfe be certaine, pet
fbail the not tabe tt without
aMignement, As (£a Woman
bang a tait of dower of
thre fbtllings rent; albeit fhee
onght to bee endowed of onc
thilling, pet cannot thee after
tudgement diftreine £02 twelve
pence before alliqnement, be=
cauſe the demaund Was vn⸗
certame


37


Brad. 3 11.ftb. 4
Brsrton.ca. 1 5.


1-E.6.en 6. S. E.6.c4. 11.


(a) Sranford 195.h ;
(b) Vid.in the chapter of
Carranty. $e.

(c) ‘P..Com. 1376.5.

pr Wali).

Vid. Sef.69 3-695.
667.675,


40.E.3.22.43. 45. E. 3. 4.
20.E.3.barre.132.
8.E.2.Enrry 75.


Lib.t.


Caps.


taine, Andfo ít is tf twotes
nants ín common bec, and the
$otfe of one of thent being a
TO2it of dower to be endowed
ofa third part of a moitic,and


fignement, albcit the afltgne-
ment cannot gine her anp cer=
tatutic becaufe her bufbandg
ftate Sas incertaine, Se
moze of this before Section
39.


Of Dower.

eti feueraltie, en tiels
cafes il coutent que
fa dower foit a lup
afligne aps le mort
bel baron , put ẽ que
non conftat Deuant
affignemét quel part
Des terres ou tenc-
ments el aueca pur
fa doter.


Sect. 44.


Se0.4.4.45.
to hold in feueraltie.
In fuch cafes it behoo-
ueth that her Dower
bee affigned vnto her
afterthe death of her
husband , becaufe it
doth not appeare be-
fore affignement what
part of the lands or te-
nements fhe fhall haue
for her dower.


DE thts fufficient bath bene fatd before , and that (n this cafe, the wile cannot


enter without allignement,


€ M£: fi fotent deux ioin-

tenants De certaineterre
en fee, a lun alien ceo que alup
affiert a bn auter en fee, que
prent feme a puts Deuie ; eh ceo
cas la feme put fa Dower auera
le tierce part De la moitie que fa
baron ad putcbafe, a tener en
common (come fa part amoun-
tera) ouefque lbeire fa baron, &
suefque lauter tointenant que ne
aliena pag, put ceo que en tiel
cag fa Dotoer ne poít eftre aſſigne
per metes a bounds, .


B Vtifthere be two ioyntenants
of certaine land in fee, and the
one alieneth that which belong-
eth to him , to another in fec,
who taketh a wife, and after dieth.
Inthis cafe the wife for her dower
fhal haue the third part ofthe moi-
tie which her husband purchafed,
to hold in common (as her part a-
mounteth) with the heire of her
husband, and with the other ioin-
tenant , which did not alien. For
that in this cafe, her dower cannot
beaffigned by metes and bounds.


: Sell. 45.
pike cbr of this ¶ T^ | eft a(cauoit Nditis tobe vn-
T iecit n Es la feme ne fe- 3 derftood that the
futuíuct, clapméthtbelano tmp endow De ter= wife fhall not bee en-


bp the &colfment , and bp fore
utuorlhip, which is aboue the
Title of Dower, and may
picab the feoffment , made to
bhwfelfe Without naming of
his compagnion that died, ag
fbai! bec fato bereafor in bis
Proper place, but Tenants in
common dave feuerail Free⸗
Holds and Juheritances,and
thett moities fball offcenb to
tbeft femoral heires, a therefore
tbeis Wines (ball be indo wed.


tes ou tenements à
fa baton tient ioint-
ment oucfque bn aus
ter al temps De fon
mozant:smeg lou él
tient en common au⸗
terment eft, come en
le cafe prochein à-
uantdit,


dowed of lands or te-
nemétswhich her huf-
band holdeth iointly
with another at the
time of his death : but
where hee holdeth in
common, otherwife it
isasinthe cafe next a-


bouefaid.
| Seff.


Liba. |


€ ESS afcauoft que

- Aufitenant en le taíle
endotoa fa feme ad oftium
Ecclefix , come ett auant=
Dit,ceo feruera pur petit ou
rien al fame, pur ceo que
apres la mot fa baron,
liffue ett letatle puit entrer
fur le poſſeſſion la feme:
€t int puit celup en le
reuerf. fine fort tflue en le
taile en bie ac,


OfDower. ‘=< $68.46.47.48. 38


Sed. 46:


Ndit is to bee vnder-
£ Aftood, that if tenant in
taileendoweth his Wife at
the Church doore, as is a-
forefaid , this fhall little or
nothing at all auaile the
wife, for that, that after the
deceafe of her husband, the
iffue in taile may enter vpon
her poffeffion,and fo mayhe
inthe rcuerfion, ifthere bee
no iffue in taile thenaliue.


CT:
Reas
fon cf
this i¢,f02 that
tenant in tafle
ig reftrained
bp the fato ſta⸗
tute of 15.E 1.
De donis con-
ditionalibus.
Bnd fo did our
Authour take
the law (n his
Learned reas
ding. Bere our
Buthors rea⸗
fon is à fine,


anv therefore fuch an Cndowment ts mot to bee made becaufe it is to ends,


‘CE A ry G home leili
ra tes fee fimpie efte-
ant Deins age endows
fa feme al huis Del mo-
nafterie ou Deglife, a de⸗
uie, afa feme enter, en
ceo cas Ibeire la baton
lup puit outer. Des au-
terment eft (come il ſem⸗
ble) {ou le pier eft feifie en
fee, & le fits Deins age
endow fa feme ex affenfu
patris, le pier Donque e=
ftcant dz pleinage,


Sect. 47.


Lfo ifa man feifed in

Fee Simple beeing
within age endoweth his
wife at the Monafterie or
Church doore, and dieth,
and his wife enter , inthis
cafe the heire of the huf-
band may out her. Buto-
therwife it is, (as it fec-
meth) where the father is
feifed in fee,and the fonne
within age endoweth his
wife ex aſſenſu patris , the
Father being then of full
age.


€ He reaſõ

of this

diuerfitie
is fo? that in the
firt cafe the huſbãd
Within age is fei=
fed and therefore
hee becing Within
age cannot bp a
boluntatíe act bind
himſelle: ot herivile
tt is where he doth
an at wherevnto
bec is coinpellable
bp law, but ín the
latter cafe the Fa⸗
ther which giucth
the affent, is feifed
of the frebold and
In heritance, and
the Sonne there⸗
in hath nothing,


and therefore bis Heire (hall mor anofe (t (m refpet of hie Fnfancie,


€ A Urrilpadbn
AD endow⸗


Feclion 48.


Lſo there is ano-


CE


T le Seignior de


ment, que eff appel
Dotoment dela pluís
beal, Ct ceo eft come
en tiel cate,que home
feifie De zl, acres de
terre, a él tient bint


ther dowerwhich
is called dowment de
la pluis beale. And this
is in cafe whereaman
is feifed of fortie acres
of land, and hee hol-


 deth twentie acres of


3


que le terre eff te-
mu en Chiualrie enter en
les vint acres tenus de


luy. For hee is not


Vide Self. 194.


Vid.g.H. tif. dower i7.


polſſeſſed aga Darden again ,


Whom a Watt of Dower Heth;
bntill hee doth enter : of the
ttoatbfbíp of the bopíc be te
boſſeſſed befoze felfure,becanfe

it


Vid. le Jatut.de bigamis eap.3.


(a) 44 E. 3.13. 4.4.6 11.


3. H.7.17, 4 H.7.1. 4. H.7.


Cas.


it tg tranfitozte, but hee is not
vpoſſeſſed of the land bntili hee
enter becaufeit is permanent.
And therefore ££ hee Doth net
enter, the hetre within age
may afligne Dower ag hath
benc faid,and as it appeareth
afterwards,
€ Si en tiel cafe el
port breue de dower en-
ners le Garden en Chi-


ualrie. Albeit (a) the
Garden in Chiualric 02 the
(rante of the dking of a
wardlſhip hath but achattie
During the minogitie of the
heire, and the Woman ſhall re=
couer a freehold tn ber t0pit of
Dower,pet afterthe Garden
ag is afozefatd, hath entred inc
to the land, that weit lteth ac
gatntt him,and not agatnft the
heire bo ts tenant of the
freehold, becaufe thelaw hath
trufted the Garden to plead
for the beire Within age, and
that is in bts cuftedte,and als
fo for his owne particular in⸗
tereſt, and by this diuerftie
all the ookes beereconctied,
So likewile tf the Garden
dieth, the wife (ball hauea
ait of Dower againk hig
Érccutezs , and if there be
two Exccutozs, and one of
them alone take the profits;
the to2tt of Dower hall be
matntained againt him onlp,
FE a man bee poñeftedof the
1oarvfbíp of certaineland,ct=
ther topntip With his wife oz
ín the right of big wite, vet
the to2tt of Dower lieth a-
geinftthe huſband only. Gar⸗
den tn Hocage fball not en
0930 berfelfe de la pluis beale
without indgement, ag ſhall
befatd hereafter.

( Le Garden en Chi.


ualrie poit pleader. e
authonitie of Littleton ig dtc
tct that the arden map
plead this plea. But hereof
atifeth two queftions. Firſt
Sobither tf the hetre bec bou-
cheo by the tenant in the toit
of Dower ín the gard of the
Garden, Whither becomming
tn ag Touche map plead that
plea, Thelecond ts, Whither
tf the Garden in focage bane


Of Dos


acees De leg Dits tl.
acres De terre Dun p
feruice De chiualrie,
eles autres bint. a-
eres De terre Dun au⸗
ter enfocage, apaét
feme, a oit iffue fits,
a moautt , fon fits c-
fteant deins lage De
riii, angle Seig⸗
niourde que laterre
eft tenug en cbíual-
rie, entre en les tt.
acres tenus De luy,
& eux ad come gar⸗
Dein en Chiualrie
Durat le nonage len=
fant, la mere De len=
fant enter en le rem-
nant, & ceo occupie
come gardein en fo-
cagesfi en tici cafe le
feme poat. baíefe De
Dower enũs le gat-
Deinen chiualrie, De-
five endow De les te⸗
nements tenus per
ſeruice De chiualer en
le Court le Woy, ou
en auter Court, le
gardeinen chiualrie
puit plede en tiel cate
tout cet matter &
monfire coment ta
feme eff gardein en
focage , coment De-
uant eft Dit, a pete F
fetta adiudge per la
Court que le feme
lup mefine enpotocra
De ie pluis beale de
les tenements que el
aD come gardein en
focage folonque le
balue dele tierce part


Se#.48.
the faid fortie acres of
one by Knights Ser-
uice, and the other
twentie acres of ano-
ther in Socage, and ta-
keth wife, and hath if-
fue a fonne, and dieth,
his fonne being with-
inthe age of fourteene
yeeres, and the Lord
of whomthe Land is
holden by Knights
Seruice entreth into
the twentie acres hol-
denof him, and hol-
deth them as Garden
in Chiualrie , during
the nonage of the in- .
fant, and the mother
ofthe infant, entreth
into the refidue , and
occupieth it as Gar-
den in Socage. If in
this cafe the Wife
bringeth a Writ of
dower againft the gar-
den in Chiualrie to be
endowed of the tene-
ments holden by
Knights Seruice,inthe
Kings Court or other
Court, the Garden in
Chiualrie may pleade
in fuch cafe all this
matter, and fhew how
the wife is Garden in
Socage, as aforefaid,
and pray that it may
bee adiudged by the
Court , that the wife
may endow her felfe
de le pluis beale .i. of
the moft faire, of the
tenements which fhee
hathas Garden in So-

que


Lib.

que el claime Dauer
Deles tenements te-
nus eu chiualrie per
fabriefe De Dower.
Et fila feme ceo ne
puit Dedire , Dong
le iubgement ferra
fait, quele gardeine
en cbíualvie tienD2a
les terres tenus De
lup Durant le nonage
lenfant, quit De la fe=
mec,


Of Dower.


cage,after the value of
the third part which
fhee claimes by her
writ of dower, to haue
the tenements holden
by Knights Seruice.
Andifthe wife cannot
gainfay this, thenthe
iudgement fhall be gi-
uen, that the Garden
in Chiualry fhall hold
the Lands holden of
him during the nonage
of the infant, quite
from the woman, &c.


Sed.48.


notinfictent, as tfthe Land
holden bp feruice of Chiuai⸗
rie be tbirtíe Acres, and the
lands holden in Socage but
fine Acres, wherher (be ſhall
be endowed by parcelg,yiz.to
recouer fine Acres agatutt the
Garden in Chinairic, and to
retainefiue Acres. And as
to the firft the Garden fhall
alWell plead it, Soben be come
in ag Wouche, as when be ts
tenant. And as to the fecond
fome fap that the demandant
ín tbe tait o£ Dower muft
haue Aſſets in ber hands to
the baluc of ber Dower, ſo as
the ſhal not be partly endowed
againt the Garden, and partz
lp rctaínc tn ber one hands.
And they fap, that the tudge=


tuent ſhould be in part,that ts,
ag tothe land in Socage tn ſeueraltie, and as to theland in Chiuairte to recoucr the third part,
and compare it to tbc Caſe in s.£.4.3. that damages fhalinot be recovered, partip agatnſt the
befendant in an appcalc, and partip agaínft the Abettozs;but enttrelp etther againſt the one 02
theother. Bud Littleton here putteth his Cale that the Garden in Socage hath Dilcts in va⸗
lutjanb feng (t is a Dower againk common right,thep bol» that the muſt be intirelp endowed
either bp her felfe agaínft common right, o2 againſt the Garden according te common right.
Wut (a) petby the Wooke in 25.£.3.52-b and others tt appeareth that ſhe map in this very
cafe retaine for part, anbrtconcr againit the Garden fos part,

( Gardein in Chiualrie (b) fball piead in barre ef her Dower , detainment ,. o2 eloigning of
the bopíc of the taro, becaufe big marriage noth appertatne onto him: Bnd (E the heive come
ín (c) ag touche, hee ſhall plead the fame plea, Wut he (all trot picad detainment of the Char⸗
ters, (d )becaufe the Charters concerning the inheritance of the beive,belong not to the gardein.
Abe gardein inChinalrie(e map alligne dower of the lands andtenements be hath in ward,
oꝛ if be aſſigne a rent out of tbofe lands in allotwannce of her dower, it is god. Fe tie Dar
dein in C biualrie aſſigne too much £o? her dower,the heire hal haue a Writ of Admefuremr bp
the Common Law. Andfo(f) tthe hetre Within age afliqne befoze the gardeineenter, to the
wife too much inthe Dower, the G ardein hall haue a Wait o£ A d mefurement, by the ffatute of
Weft.2.cap.7. Und (f the heire Withinage, before the gardein enter into the land , aſſigne too
much in dower, he himfelfe (al haue a wꝛit of Admefurement at full age: and fome baue ſaid,
that inthat cafe be map hae (t Mithin age (2) Wut tithe betre (before the gardcin enter )en-
Dow the Wife of more than the ought, and the garbcíne alligne oucr bis efkate, big alligne fbail
haue no it of Admefurement, becaufe tt Maga thing tn ation. Allo the betre ſhaũ haue an
Ch) Admefurement foz the aſſignement in thelife of his anceftoz,bp the Common La, (i) and
a &vsít of Admefurement lieth pon an aflignement in Chancerte,


«| Donques lejudgement ferra fait que le gardein en Chinalrie tiendra les
Terres tenus de luy durant le nonage lenfant, quite de la feme,crc.


@ Zudgement. ludicium quafi iuris ditum, the berie bopce of Lato
and right, and therefoze, iudicium femper pro veritate accipitur. The anttent Words of Judg⸗
ment arc verte fignificant, Confideratum eft, & c. becaufe that Judgement is euer ginen bp the
Court bpon bnc confideration had of the Recoꝛd before them: and in eueríe Judgement there
ought to be thꝛee perfons, A or, Reus,and Iudex. DE Judgements, forme be final , anb fore
het finail, hereof pou (ball read more hereafter. And now to rctume toour Author, (t (8 ma
teríall that theſe woꝛds ( & cetera) be explanedat large, viz. Et quod prædiéta A. ( the Dee
mandant) capiat de terris hæred prædiéti in cuftodia fua exifteñ ad valentiam pd. 3 ‘partis cum
pertineñ tenend nomine dotis fuz pro præd z.parte fuperius per cam petit. 120% fome are of
Opinion, that bpon this indgement the demandant map not in any fozt endow her fclfe of the
land, becaufe the cannot doc an att to her feife, but he {hall recoupe the third part of the profits
bpen ber account, and be endowed again the heire at bis futt age. Wut obferne What Lirtle-
tonfaith in the next Section : but before poucome to that, obfcrue What pꝛiuiledge the common
Law gineth to tbc land holden by Knights ſeruice, = that ít (all not be difinembzed, Ds Lad

. 3


39


$.€.3.60. 3. 5.3.33.
Lib.istrat. Dogrs foli225. 4.
18. E.5.4.6.


14,H 7.26. Keble,


(a) 25.E.3.52.b, 4.E.2.
tit. diff [in 10, Regi? fudie. 26.
Lib. [ntrat.22. 16. E. 3. breue
657. 20. . 3. iuge ent 175.
(bj7.E.3.57 8. E.3.71.
(317.E.3.58.

(d; 10. E.3.50.6.El. Dy,230


(e) 3-£.3.Dow.75. 8. £4.a.
Dower 155.
W2:64p.7.


(€) BiatF l5. 4. 3 14. Reg. tji.
gin.17 3. E let. lj. 5.04.22.
g.E.a.tit. AAmifAi5.

F.'N. 2.149.


(g)7-R. 3. dmef. 4
F AL B.1a484.


(h)7.R.2 vb.fa.F.N B.149.4
(i) 7-R- 2. vbifup 12. H.G.
Adnif.9.F.N.'B.:49.

25. E.3. 51.


22.E,4.Dow.16.16.€.3-
Waj.120.45.E. 3.6.


Lida.


15.E.3.Dow.6).
16.E.3.tit.Waj!. 100.


"Bradl.li. 5.339. F .N.B.758.


Cap.s-


Of Dower.


Seël.49,50,51.


So Ethelands holden in Socage, and the rcafen te, for that Knights ſeruice
— — Ge Real, Shi 48 pro bono publico, and thercfoxe t9 be fauoured,


. Setlion 49.


E T nota,que apres tiel judge⸗
ment Done,la femme pull pꝛen⸗
Det eg Wicines, € en lour pae»
fenéendower luy melme p metes
a Bonds, delapluts beale part
Deles tenants que el ad coe gat-
Dein en Socage, Dai et tener a
lup pur terme De fa bie, a tiel
Dower eft appel Dower de la
pluis beale.


Nd note, That after füch a

Iudgement giuen, the wife
may take her Neighbours, and in
their prefence endow her felte by
Metes and Bonds, of the faireft
part ofthe Tenements which fhee
hath as Gardein in Socage,to haue
and to hold to her for terme of her
life: &this Dower is called Dower
de la plus beale.


And the indgement,viz. Tenen noie dotis, pꝛoueth, that fhe map have tt fog terme of her fe,


foz cucríe dower is fog termeof life,


‘Section 50.


«T pon le iudgement

eff fait, &c. FOr
Without fuch a tudgement,ag
appeareth before, Oardeme tn
Socage cannot endow her
felfe,ag like wiſe hath bin fato
befoze.

Ou en auter court.
That is bp wꝛit of Right of
Dower inthe Court of the
bette, tf he have anp, o ef the
3Lo?n of howe the Land is
holden,


a Et ceo eft pur fal-


€ ET nota, à tiel

32o0tonment, ne
puit efte, mes lou 1e
tudgement eft fait en
le court le 2op.ou en
auter couzt,ac, et ceo
eft pur faluation Del
effate Del Gardeine
in Chiualtie Durant
le nonage le En—
fant. |


A nd note, that fuch
dowment cannot
be, but where aiudge-
ment is giuen in the
Kings Court, or in
fome other Court,&c.
And this is forthe pre-
feruation of the eftate
of the gardeinin Chi-
ualrie, during the no-
nage of the Infant.


uation delestate del gardein en Chiualrie , durant le nonage de lenfaut. fox
the hetre (befoze tbe entre of the Gardein) cannot plead the fato plea, that the demandant oul
endow ber felfe de la pluis beale. Bnd theteafon of this dower de la pluis beale tobe all of tte
Socage land, Was fo? aduancement of Chiualrie fox the defence of the Realme,


Sect, 51. .


Œbig (s manífett of ttfelfe,and tberefoze needeth no explauation.


€ ET (fint popes beier
cinque manners De Doto-


A fo you may fec fiue kinds
of Dower,viz.Dower by the


«t, $8, Dower per le common
Ac», Dower per le cuftome,
Dower + vet Ecclefiz, 2205
Mer ex aflenfu patris Dower
de la pluis beale. €


Common Law, Dower by the cu-
ftome, Dower ad offium Ecclefia,
Dower ex aſſenſu Patris, and Dow-
er de la plus beale,


Self,sa.


L


Lib. |


LT memorandü
er en chefcun
cafe lou home paent
feme feifte De tiel e-
ftate De teneriits, ac,

illint que liffue que il


ad per fon feme pott


p poffiblitie enheri⸗
termefines les tenc-
ments De tiel eftate

— quela feme ad come
heire al feme, en tiel
cale apꝛes le mot la
feme id aucca mefiits
les Tenements pec
lecurtefie De Angle=
terre, & auterment
nemy.


Of Dower.


Sect, 52.
AM memoran that


in euerie cafe
where a mantaketh a
wife feifed of fuch an
eftate of Tenements,
&c.as the iffue which
he hath by his wife
may by poffibilitie in-
herit the fame Tene-
ments of fuchan eftate
as the wife hath , as
heire to the wife ; In
this cafe after the de-
ceafe of the wife, he
fhall haue the fame te-
nements by the curte-
fie of England, but
otherwife not.


Setl.52,53.


Mrs Chis

woꝛd doth cuer bcto-

hen Come excellẽt point

of learning, Which our authos

hath vſed in other places, ag
appeareth in the margent.

Œ be matter bcreot hath bin


partly explaned inthe Chap⸗


ter of Genant by the curtefie,
£a mai. (a) taketh a Sotfe
feifed ofdands 02 tenements
in fee,and hath iſſue, and after
the wife is attatnted of felos
nie, fo as the iſſue cannot in⸗
herit to her, pet be fall be tes
hantbp tbc Curtefie, in rec
{pec of the iſſue Which be had
befoze the felonie, and Which
by polfibílític might then haue
inberiten, Wut tf tbe wife
bab bene attainted of felonte
before tbe iſſue, albeit ha hat
{lue afterward, be (pal not boo
tenant bp the Curtevie,

«| Come beire al fee.


This doth implie (b )a fecret of Law, for except the Swife be actually fetfed , the betre (ball not
Cas hath beer faid) make bimfelfe betre tothe wite: and this is the reafon that a man (ball net
be Tenant bp the Curtcfc,of a feign in Law,


Cee aurp en
| dicti cafe
loule feme pent ba-
ton ſeiſie dtiel eftate
Des tenements, ac,
Iſiint q(i p pottibí-
litie il puiffort bap-
per à file feme auoit
afcun (fue p fa bató,
& quem liffue puiffo-
it per poflibilitie en-
heriter mefines ies
Œencements de tíel
eftate quel baron ab,
Come boire aL bacon,
detiels Tenem̃ts ei
aut fa Dotocr, & aus
teument nemy, Car


Seétion 53.


AS alfo in euerie
cafe where a wo-


Sfint que fi per pof-
T I  dbilite 1 je


mantaketh a husband per que le feme auoit af-


feifed of fuch an eftate
intenements, &c. fo as
by poffibilitie it may
happen that the wife
may haue iffue by her
husband , and that the
fame iffue may by pof-
fibilitie inherite the
fame Tenements of
fuch an eftate as the
husband hath, as heire
to the husband. Of
fuch tenements fhee
fhal haue her dower,


&otherwife not. For eg


cun iſſue per fon baron.
Dibett the wile bee a hundzed
peares olo; o? that the huſ⸗
band at big death ag but
foure oꝛ ſeuen pcares olo , fo
as ſhee hab no poflibilitte to
bane iſſue bp him, pet ſeeing
the La faith, Ghat (£ the
Site be abone the age of nine
peares atthe death of ber huſ⸗
band, the thall beendowed,
and that Women in antient
times baue bao -childzen at
that age, whereunto no wo⸗
man eth now attaine,
the Law cantict tudge that
impollible, which bp nature
ag pollibie, Bnd tn mp
time, a Soman about thꝛee⸗
ſcore veares elo bath basa
and idco non definitur

1n


40


Self. 214.391.3 -


(a)21.E.3.9. 11. H.7.
3-H.7.17.Stamf-19 5.
27:E.3.77.46.€.3. Pet. 30
26. 4 ff-p. 2.1 3. H. 4.8.


(b) Li, 8.fo. 34. in P aine: cafs.


12,H.4.2.7. H.6.t 332


Lib.t.


3. Voucher 249.


s.£.
8.E.3.AfT. 193.
48


1.6.24. FN, /D.1 49.


m


i."


Caps.


|. iniure, And koꝛ the huſbands


being of ſuch tender peres, he
hath habitum, though bee hath
not potentiam at that time,
and therefore his wife fal be
endowed.
«| Et que meſme liſ-
fue puiffoit per pofsibslitie
inberüterme[mes les tene-
ments &c. 28 man ſei⸗
fed of land in generall tatle,
taketh wife, e after ts attam=
ted ot telonie, before the fato
Statute o£ 1. F.5 Phe Iſſue
fhonid haue tnherited,and pet
the wife (bouto not haue ben
endowed: Aro, the Statuteof
W.2.ca.1-relieucth the tue tn
tatle, but not the wile in that
cafe, Wut at thie day, tEthe
bufband be attatnted of felo-
nie, the wike hall be endow⸗
ed , anb pet the iſſue ſhall not
tnherit the lands which the
father had infec Ample, FE
the Sotfe clope from her bufz
band, ac. thee fall bee barred
of her dower , as bath bene
faid, and pet the Iſſue hall
inherit,


Of Dower.


li tenem̃ts font doũs
abnbócaa les Dies
que il engenDza De
corps fa feme,en tiel
cafe la feme vad rigs
enles tenements, &
le baron ad eftate
fozfque come Donee


en eſpeciall taile; bti-


core ſi le baron Deuy
fans iflue, meſme ta
feme ferra enDoto De
metis les tenants,
pur ceo que liffue que
el p poſſibilitie puiſ⸗
foit auer per mette E
baron, puiffoit enhe⸗
riter mefines les te=
nements, Apes fila
feme Deutat, biuant
fa baron, puis E ba-
ron priſt auter feme,
& moꝛuſt, ſa ſecond
keme neferra mp en⸗
Dow en ceſt cate, cau-
fa qua fupra.


Setlion 54.


Sed.54.


if tenements be giuen
toamdn, and to the
heires which hee fhall
beget of the bodie of
his wife, in this cafe
the wife hath nothing,
inthe tenements , and
the husband. hath an
cftate butas donee in
fpeciall taile ;yet if
the husband die with-
out iffue,the fame wife
fhall bee endowed of
the fame tenements,
becaufe the  iffue
which fhee by poffibi-
litie might haue had
by the fame husband,
might haue inherited
the fame tenements.
Butif the wife dieth,
liuing her husband, &
after the husbad takes
another wife & dieth,
his 2.wife fhall notbe
indowed in this cafe
for the reafó aforefaid


« You may eafilp percetue by the context that this thaft came never ent of Littletons quiner
of choice arrowes, And therefore 71 Will leaue it. Only for Students fake F Will veferre
thensto s-E,3. Voucher 249. 8.E.3.A(1.393. 4.H.6.24. F.N.B:149.


woe fi bn home foit ſeiſie
Decertaine terres & pꝛiſt
vn keme, et puis aliena mefine la
terre oue garrantie, a puíg le fe-
offor, ele fcoffecocuiont, ale feme
De le feoffor post bn action Dc Do-
ter enuers le iſſue le feoffee, « il
bouch Ibeire le feoffoz, a pendant
leboucher & nient termine, la
feme le feoffce port fon action De
Dower enuers le heive le feoffee,
feDemaunda la tierce part De ceo


Ore ifa man be feifed of cer-

taine lands, and taketh wife,
and after alieneth the fame land
with warrantie,and after the feof-
forand feoffee dye, and the wife
ofthe feoffor bring an action of
dower againft the iffue of the fe-
offee,and he vouch the heire of
the feoffor, and hanging the vou-
cherand vndetermined, the wife
of the feoffee brings her actionof
dower againft the heire of the


feoffee,


Lib.


De quefabaron fuit feille, & ne
poiledemaunDer le tierce part
del eux deux parts De que fà
baton fuit feifie, fuit adiudge,
queel nauera tudgement tan-
ple. fuit Detet-


que lauter
mine,


SQL nota que
CE Vauifour Dit,
Que fi bn bome foit
{eifieDeterve et fait
felonie, & puís alien,
g puts eff attaint, la
feme aucta bone
action de Dower en⸗
uers le feoffee: Ses
(i foít efchete al Roy,
ou al ſeignior, el na-
vera bte DeDowwer, Ec
ficvide diuerfitatem,
& quere inde legem.


Of Dower. :


feoffee, & demand thethird part of
that wherof her husband was feifed,
and will not demand the third part
of thefe two parts of which her huf-
band was feifed, It was adiudged,
that fhe fhould haue no iudgement
vntill füch time as the other plea


Setl.55.


were determined.


Setlyn 55.


A Nd note Vauifor
À faith that ifa man
befeifedof land and
cómitteth felony, and
after alieneth, and af-
ter is attaint the wife
fhall hauea good acti-
on of dower againft
the feoffee: but ifitbe
efcheatedtothe King,
or to the Lord, fhe fhal
not haue a writ of do-
wer. And fo fee the
difference, andinquire
what the law isherein.


q Die (g alfo of the
| new addition, & ex^
plofa eft hac opinio;

fo? itis clerein Law thatthe
Sife at the Common laxo
ſhould not haue bene endow⸗
ed againſt the feoffe. 4ros te
deterre and retaine men (ror
committing of treafon o» fe=
lonp, the Law hath infliten
fiuc puntfhments pon him
that is attainted of trcafon og
felony, 1. ee (ball loſe bis
life and thatbp an (nfamoug
death of hanging betiwene
beauen andthe earth ag %n-
worthy in refpect of bis of-
fence of etther.2. bis wife that
ts apart of bim£clfe (Ec erunt
anime dug in carne vna) {hall
lofe her Dower, 3, bis bleod
is coꝛrupted, and big cbilozen


cannot be betres to him, and (f he be noble o1 gentle before, he and all hig pofferítie are bp this
attainder made ignoble. 4.13¢ fall fopfeit all bis lands and tenements; Bud fiftlp all bis gods
and chattels, and all this ts included by the La in the iudgement Quod fufpendatur per col-
lum, But this ts not intended of ail felonies but of felony bp ftealing of gods aboue the baz
lue of rit.pence,and not of petit larceny bnderthe balue, So as tbe woman hall lofe her bo-
Socr af well againſt the fcoffæ ag againſt the Loꝛð bp eſcheate. And fo tt was refolued tna Sozit
of Dower brought bp Mary Gateslate Wife a£ Iohn Gates, Who after the couerture had tnfeotted
Wifman in fee,and after committed high treafon,and was thereofattainted, that the Wife hould
not be endowed agaínft the fcoffe, anb (n that cafe it vas refoined, that fo it Was at the Come
mon Law in cafe of felony. And it is to be vnderſtood, that the wife fhall not ontpTofe her vea-
fanable Dower at the Common Law fo, the felony of her bufbanb;but alfo her Bower ad oftis
um Ecclefia: and exaffenfu patris foz felonp done after the Dower afltgned, anddower by cus
Home aifo. Bnd the reafon of all this ts peribeb bp Littleton himfcife in tbe chapter of mar⸗
tanties,ScCtiqn 746.to the end that men Should be affraid to commit felony, Wut at this Dap the


Soife of a man attlinted of felony ( ag often hath bamefato ) halbe endowed by force
Statutes (n that cafe pꝛouided )% n y force ot the


Bud it appeareth bp Britton Que fem de homicide ne teigne nul dower de tenants que lour


fuitaffigne per lour barons, fo ag the Wife of a felon attainted by the Common Law was pífa-
bied to recouer dower ad oftium Ecclefiz and ex affentu patris, ag Swell ag her reafonabic


bosoer Which the Common Law gaus her. See in Bracton many barres of dower
— then be, 2 p barres as the


Cua».


41


Vid.Sdf.746.

"Vid. Briitonycap.109. lib. 1 .
Brallon title ewscens lib. A.
Sal 327. 39:311.

Stanf.pl. cor. X9 4.195.


Britton fel. Ys enp.s.


V id.Sed.746.


243.64. Ph.tr Mar,
Ro0.760.in cem. banco,
8.F. 5.20. 12.H.4.30-


"Bralfenlib. 4 fo. 111.


Vid. $e8.746.

Britten cap.de homicide,
fol.15.

Braéton, lib. 4 fol.308.

dr Fletavb: fupra

dr Britten vbifnpra.


Lib.1.


BraG lib. 2.ca q. cr a4p.9.
fol.26.Flera lib, 3.04.1.
"Brittén fol.83. :
Bratton 4. fel. 100.

Vid Self. 381.


(a) Vid. le Deane de Worceft.
cafe, lil. 6.fo. 57-

27 AÎ 31. 39.8.3. T.

27. H*6. Recocnitance
S'arbimpl.vltime.
38.H.6.17.

Bra@ton lib.2.fol.9.
Brittonfol.84.8 5.


(b) 27.Afp 3*-
dr Pl.com. fol. 28.5.
in Colsherft cafe tir. Barre 305^


(c) Littleton 167.

11. H.4.43. 17. E.3.48.
39.E.3. 25. 7. H5. 46.
$.H.4.15.Dicr. £. Eli ( 253.


(d) BraH.lib.a.fo. 222.23.


232. & vid ſo. 136. 137.
Fleta lab.4.ca. 19.25. 416. 27
8.E.3.54.55. 21. E. 3.41.
48.8.3. 31, 7. E.4.18.

21. H.6.46. 10. E.4. 3.
F.X, B. 180. lil. 4-§6.87-
m Luttrels cafe.


Vid. $28,381.


Rafeseafe lsb. 5 foci 3e


(4.6.


€ V pur terme
de vie dun
auter home.


Now it (s to be bnocrflæn
that if the ieflee in that cafe
Dicthituing eſty que vie, (that
ig be for Mole itfe the Leaſe
ag made ) hee that firft en=
treth (all hold the land During
that other mang life, and he
that fo entreth ts within Lic-
tletons $0010g,v1z. tenant pur
auter vie, and fbaibe (a) pu-
nifhed fo; Malte ag tenant
pur auter vic, and fublect to
the payment of the rent refer=
ued, andis in la called an
occupant ( occupans) becaufe
bis title is bp bis firft occus
pation. And ſo if tenant for
bis owne like grant ouer his
eftate to another, tf the gran⸗
tee Dieth there {hall bee an oc-
cupant, Jin like manner itis
of an eftate created by Law,
fo? i£ tenantby the curtefie ez
tenant in Dower grant over
bis oz her eftate,and the gran-


Of Tenant for life.
Cuar. 6. Sel.56.


Tenant a Terme de Vie,


Tou home
leffaterres ou tene-
ments à bn aute
purterme "Dc vie le
leffce, ou pur. terme
De vie Dun autc
home, entielcafe le
leffee eft tenant à
terme De bie. Des
per cOmon parlance
celup que tient pur
terme De fa bie De-
melne eſt appel te-
nant put terme De fa
bie,æ ceftup que tient
pur terme Dauter
bie.eft appel tenant
purterin Dauter bic,


Setl.s6.


& Enant for term
pF... lite. . 154
where a man


letteth Lands or tene-
ments to another for
terme of the life ofthe
Leffee,or for terme of
the life of another
man. Inthis cafe the
Leffee is tenant for
terme of life. But by
common fpeech hee
which holdeth for
terme of his owne
life, is called tenant
for terme of hislife,
and he which holdeth
forterme of anothers
life, is called tenant for
terme of another
mans life.


tee Dieth there fbalbe an occu -
pans. 25utagaínft the King there halbe no occupant, becauſe nullum. tempus occurrit regi.
And therefoze no man (fail gaine the things land by pꝛioꝛitie of extríe, Œbcrecan be no occu-
pant of anp thing thatipeth in grant, and that cannot palle without Dede, becaufe euerp occu.
pant muſt clatme bp a queeftate and auerve the life of Ce’ quevie. It ere (c) god to paenent
the incertatntte of the eltate of the occupant to adde theſe woꝛds, (to haueand to bolo to him
and bis heires During tbelifeo£ Ce’ quevie) and this (hall pzcuent the occupant, and pet the
Aeflee map affine it to whom he tll, ot tf he bath already an effate foz another mans life Soith=
out thele words, then tt Mere geod fos him toaltanc his eftate to Divers men and theit heires
During tbcliteof Ce’ que vic.

Note that (d) to enerp tenant for life, the Law ag incident to his eftate Without pꝛouiſion
of the partie giveth bím three kinde of cftouers, ( that ig )housbote Which ts tvofol,viz. efto-
uerium edificandi & ardendi, Ploughbote, that is eftoucrium arandi, Bnd laftip Hayebote,
and that ts cflouerium claudendi and thefe eſtouers muff bee reafonoble cítoveria rationabilia..
And tbefe the 3L c(Tee may take bpon theland demiſed without anpafliqnement, oniefle he bee
refrained by fpecíallcouenant fos modus et conuentio vinaint legem. Bote fn the Saxon
tongue and citouers in the French in this cafcate of ati one Ganification, tiat (s to baue com=
penfation op fatif£action £oztbefe pnrpofes. Eftoucrs commeth of the french Sword cftoucr.
Bnd the fame eltouers that tenant fo life map haue,tenant £02 peares fhallhane, … -.

You haue perceiued, Chat our Purhe: drutdes kis 24 lifeinto to bzancbeg, viz. into
Œenant fo: terme of his owne life, and into Tenant for terme of another mang lífez to thts
map be added a third, viz. into an eftate both fo tirme of his owne litfe, and Cos terme of ana
ther mans lite, rit

Ag if a Lealebe made to A. tohaueto him forterme of bis one life, and the lines of B.and
C.fo; the LLefles in thts cafe hath but one Freehold, Which haththislimttation, During hia
owne life, and during the liues of two others, And herein is a diuerfitie to bee obferued bes
tweene ſeuerall cftates tn feuerall degrees, and oneeftate Sith fenerall limitations, Foꝛ in the
firft, an eftate £01 a mang owne life is higher than fez another mans life, but in the fecond it (a
not, As it A. be tenant foz life, the vermafnoer 02 reuerſion to B. for life, A.may furrenber to B.


foi


Lib. Of Tenant for life. $etl.56.


' fo? the eftate of B. fe) terme of bis one fife is higher than an eftate Co? another mang life :
And therefore


t€ & enant Fog life inkeoſte htm in the remainder foz life, this tsafurrender,andno !


fozfeiture, And albcit an eſtate £o; terme ofa mang own life be but onefrechold, pet may feueral
freeholos in certaine cafes be veriucd out of the fame, whereof onr books are beríe plentifall,and
SobhereWith you may difpert pour {clues fora time, As (£ tenant foz life maketh a Leaſe by
Dad, 02 Without Derd, to him tn che remainder ofreuerfion,tn taíle o2 in fee,fo2 the term of the
fife of him in the rem. oꝛ reverfon,and after be in the remainder taketh Wife and dieth, bis wife
Shall not be endowed, fo tenant £o» life (bal entoy the land agatn,for fozetture it cannot be, fox
hein the rem was partie, and furrender ít cannot bee, fosthat his whole effate Was not giuen.

The heire maketh a Teafe for life, reſeruing a rent, agaiuſt whom the Wite recouereth her Doz
Sver,and dicth, the Leſſee ball banc the land agatne foz his life, and the rent is reuiued.

So itis, (£ Œenant foz life take buiband, and bp Deed indented chop make a Leaſe to him


in the renerfion £0? the life of the hufband,referning arent,this is neither forfeiture, noz abſo⸗


lute furrender, fos the canfe afozefatd, and the refernation is god,

B. feifed ot iands in fer, taketh to wite LC amb (nfeoffe C:in fee, Soho take Alice to Wife: C.
bieth, Alice is endowed ; B dicth, If reconcreth Dower agaín& Alice,and dieth, Alice ſhall en⸗
top the Land againe during berlife,

A.and(a)8. &opntenants, A. fo? like, and B. in feo, topne in a leafe Co? life, A. hath a reuerſi⸗
on, and fail topne in an Bion of waſt.

Tenant for (b) itfe, and bein the reuerſion ioyne in a leafe fo; life, itis fai, that thep Mall
fopne in an Action of watt, and that the Leſſee £o? life Mhail recover the place Walked, and he in
teverfion,dammages.

£a man grant (c) an eftate to a Woman dum fola fuir, oz durante viduitate , o? quam diu
€ bene geflerit, og to a matt and a Woman During the couerture,o2 as Tong as the grantee dwell
(n fuch a toute, o2 foiong as he papx-. ec. ox ont(ll the grantee bee promoted to a Wenefice, op
fos any like incertaine time, which time, ag Bracton faith, (6 tempus indeterminatnm: In all
thefecafes, i£ ttbe oflands oz tenenents , the leſſee hath in tudgement of law an effate £o? life
Determinable, t£ liuerie be made ; and tf tt be of rents aduowfons, e? any other thing that lie tit
grant, he hath a like eftate fo? life bp the deituerte of the Deed, and in count oz pleading be hall
alledge the ieafe,and conclude,that bp fogce tbercot hee was fetfeo generally for terme ofhis life,

Alfa man make aleafe of a Mannoꝛ, that at the tine of the leafe made (g woꝛth xx.f. per an-
num, toansther vntil C.ł be paid, in this cafe becaufc the annual profits of the manoz are incer⸗
tain, be hath an eftate for life, (€ liuerp be made determinable bpon the leuping of the C.|. Wut tf
& man grant a rent of x.!. p an ont(ll C.l.bc papd, there he hath an eftatcfor ſiue peares , for
there ít ts certaine , and depend bpon no (ncertaíntíc, And pet in fome cafes a man thal baue
an incertaine intercit in {ands 0? tencments,and pet neither an eſtate foz life, for peares, o at
Will, As (£a man bp his will ín Writing, deutle big lands to bis Erecutoꝛs foy payment of
debts, and bntill his debts be pato ; inthis cafe the Œxccutozs baue but a Cattell, and an
incertaine intereſt tn the land vntill bis Debts be pato ; foz tEthep ſhould bauc it £02 their Itunes,
then by their death thetr eftare Mould ccafe, and the debts vnpaid: but being a Chattell, (t Hall
gocto the Executoꝛs of Erecutozs forthe payment of his debts ; and fo note a diuerũtie bee
tweene a deuife and a conucpance at the Common La, in big lifettme. And tenant bp
Statute merchaut, bp Htatute ſtapie, and by Elegit, hauc incertaine intereſts in lands o2 te⸗
nements,and pet thep have but Chattels, and nofreeholo , whofe eſtates ave created bp diners
Ads of Parliament, $»bereof moze Hall befatd hereafter. And ſo haue Gardeins in Chiuairp
&vhích hold over for finale 0; Double baluc incertaine intereſts, and pet but Chattels.

FE one grant lands oztencinents,reuerfong, remainder, rents, aduowſons, commons, 02
the like, and exprefie oz limit no eſtate, the leſſee 0? grantes( due ceremonies requifite bp daw bez
ing performed ) hath an eſtate for life. Che famela ts of a declaration of a ofc, A man map
bauc ati eftate fo? terme of iife determinable at Will ; Ag tf the ising doth arant an officete one
at Will, and arant a rent to him £02 the erercife of his office for terme of his rife, this is determi⸗
fiable bpon the determination of the office.

A. tenant in fee (imple make a leaſe of landg to P. tohane and to hold to P. fo? terme o£ life,
Without mentioning fez whole life (t ſhall be, it ſhall be Deemed £o terme of the life o£ the leflee ,
£02 it (ball be taken moft ffronal» agaiuſt the leſſoꝛ, and as hath bene fato, an eftate for a mans
owne like is higher then fo: the itfe of another. ut tf tenant in tatle make fuc) a 1cafe Without
exprelling for Sobofe life, this Mall be taken but Co? the like of the 1e(To7, fos two 1Reafons.

Firtk, when the conſtruction of anp act ts left to the Law, the aw Which abbozreth iniu⸗
tíeanb wꝛong Will neucr fo conftruc tt, ag (t {hall Swozke a wꝛong: and in this Cafe; bp cona
ſtructien it (bouio be for the life of the leſſes, then (boulo the efkate tatle be difcontinned, anb a
net reuerſion gained by Wong : but {€ (t beconttrueo fox the life of the tenant in tatle, thes
no $020ng (c $02eugbt. And tt is a general rule, that Sobenfoeuer the words of a Weed,0z of
the parties without Dead map have a double ME cus and the one ſtandeth With - i

» ?


42


34-E. 3.33. dr 68.30.6/-7,4
y.£.5.Swr. B. 3147


13.8.1. Dow 95.7.M.6,3.
per Cur18.E.3.48,


y. H. 6.4.


29.4 f.p. 64.
8. E.2.2[f.393.45. E. 3. 13.


(2)2.H. 5.7.13. H.7. 15.
18. E. a. Br. 835. F.M. B.59. f


(b) 35, H.8.13.13. B.7.15.
22.H.6.24.17.E. 3.9.6.


(c)37-H 6.27.36.£.3.69.
14,8 3 Grajf 92. 3.E.3.1 f.
14. H.8.13.


Bralt.li.4.fi2e7 FLl3.e.12


LA
334 p-2-
Li3.fo.9..Manningseafà.


3: H.7.13.37. H.B8. 5.
14.H.8.13.31. 4 fF. p.8.


V.$e8. 38 1.9. Mff. pl.1,
13. El. Dyer 302.


7 E435


V Se. 381,


Lib.


4E, a Wafl 11, 17.2.3.


‘
19.N.6.7.H.4.32.
6.E.3 1g. 7.€.3.66.
18.E.3.60.23. E. 5 ea. 1. 7t.
11 H4 44.58. E, 3,23 .24¢


"Bralfon.lib.5. fol. 15.
Britton, fol.88. Fle:a lib. 3.
eap. 3. & lib. 6.cap. 39.40.


2, H.5.eap.7. which is repealed
Dect. dr Stud.lib,2.cap.29-


Cap. 6.


Of Tenant for life. Sell. 57.


right, andthe other is Wonglull anb againtt Law, the intendement that Manbeth with Law, -
thalibetaben. i à
ccondip, G be Law moze refpecteth a le(Ter eftate by right , tben a larger eftate by Wrong,

Pam itfe in remainder dilſſeiſe tenant foz lite,now be hatha fe fimple, but if Cenant
for life die now (s bis Swrongfull eftate in fe bp (ubgement in law changed toa rightfull effate
fortife. '

En a manretaine a feruant generally without expꝛeſſing any time, the Lai fbati conſtrue
it tobe for one peare, fox that retatner ts according to La, Vide 23.E.3.cap.1.&c. Co fbut tp
this point it hath bene adiudged, that Shere Cenant in taile made a leafe to another foz terme
of life generally, and after releafed to the leſſee and bis heires, albeit bet weene the Œenant in
taile, and him a fee imple palled,pet after the death of the ieflee,the entrie of the iſſue in talle was


lawfuil ; which could not bee, tEithad been a leaſe for the lite of the leſſee, fos then by the releafe
it had bene a difcontinuance executed. Wut let bg now retarne to Littleton. x


€ LESS and tbereft that
tollow in this chap
ter concerning the
defcription of Feoffoꝛ and
fcoffeo, Donot and Donee,
and iclozand Leſſee are eui-
dent. i
€ Ft eft afcanoir
quel yad le Feoffor, e


le Feoffee ci e.V ide Sect.
2, Where a light touch íe gi-
uen bo may purchafe, now
ſomewhat is to be fato, ho
fauc abilitie to enfcoffe, ac,
anb ina be a Feoſtoꝛ Donoꝛ,
Lefloz, &c. tobofocuer is diſ⸗
abled bp the Common Law
to take, ts diſabled to (nfcoffe,
&c. But manp that baucca-
pacitie to take, haue no abili⸗
tícto in€coffe,tc. As men at-
tainted of Creafon, Feionie,
or of a Premunire, Ælieng
bozne, the Kings Q1íllatneg,
ÆŒraitors, felons, tc. be that
hath offended againl the
Statutes of Premunire, after
the offences committed 1€ At⸗
tainders cníue, J deots, Mad⸗
men, à man Ddeafe,Dumbe,and
blind from bis Natiuitie, a
Fem, Couert, an Infant, a
man by bures: forthe feoffe-
ments, ec. of thefe may beea=
uoided. Wut an Pereticke,
though he be conuicted of he⸗
refe, a Leper remote» by the
Rings wrt from thefocietie
of men, Baſtards, a mart
Deate, Dumbe, o? blínbe, fo
that hee hath onderftanding
and found memozie, albeit he
expreſſe bis intention bp
lignes, Vilaine of a common


Seétion 57.


CET € afcauoite
que il p ad le
4rcoffo2 ale feoffce,
320100? & le Bonee, E
Aeflor a E Leflee,Le
feoffoz eft pꝛoperm̃t
lou home enfeoffa bn
auter en afcuag tet-
res ou tenements en
fee imple, celuy que
fift le feoffement eft
appel feoffour, a ce⸗
lupaque le feoffinét
ett fait.eft appel feof-
fee, Ctle donour eft
properment lou bn
home Done certaine
terres ou tenements
abnauter enie taile,
cclup que fift le Done
ef appelledonoz, &
celuy a quele Done eft
fait,eft appel le 220:
nee, Et le Leflor eft
properment lou bti
home leffaa bn aute
certaine terres on te=
nements pur terme
Debie, oupurterme
Des ans, ou à tener a
bolunt celuy que fift
le leas eft appell leſ⸗


AN itis to bevn-

derftood , that
there is Feffor and
Feffee, Donor and Do-
nee,Leffor and Leffee,
Feoffor is properly
where aman enfeoffes
another, in any Lands
or Tenements in Fee
fimple,hee which ma-
keth the feoffment is
called the Feoffor,and
he to whom the feoff-
ment is made, iscalled
the Fcoffee. And the
Donor is properly
Where a man giueth
certaine lands ortene-
ments to another in
taile,he which maketh
the gift, is called the
Donor,& heto whom
the gift is made, is cal-
led the Donee. And
the Lefforis properly -
where aman letteth to
another lands or tene-
ments for terme of life
orfor terme of yeares,
or to hold at will: Hee
which maketh Jen
Leaíe is called Leffor,


fo?


fo» æ celup à que ic
1 Lefiee, €t chef=
ti que ad eftate en
un terres ou tene=
ments pur terme De
fa die ou put terme
Dauter bie , eff ap-
pell tenant Defrank-
tenement, & nulau=
ter De meindre eftat
poit auct franbtenc-
ment, mes ceup De
gteinder eftate ont
franktenement car
ceftuy en fee imple


Of Eénastfar lie:


and hec to whom the
Leafe ismade,is called
Leffee. And euey one
which hath an eftate
in any Land or Tene-
ments for terme of his
owne Or another mans
life; is called tenant of
freehold, and none o-
ther of a-Lefler eftate
cán haue a Freehold,
but.they of a greater
Eftate haue a Free-
hold ; For hee in Fee
fimple hath a Free-
hold, and Tenant in


may infeoffe, ac,

(a) Bil feofiments, gifts,
grants, anb Heafes bp Bi⸗
Dogs, albeit they bec confire
med by tbe Deancand Chap⸗
ter, bp anp of the Colledges
9; Walls in either ofthe inte
uerlities,o2 elſe where, Deans
and Chapters, Walker 9)
Gardein of any Wolpitai,par=
fon, Wicar, oz any other ha⸗


Setl.57.


» perfon before entríc, os the like


45


(3)3 2. H.8.cap, 28.1. El. neo
printed. v3. El ea. 10.1 46El.
«4.11. 10. El.ca 20, 14,64,


uing Spirituall oz Ecclea⸗


fticall living, ate alfo to bee
auopded, (b) and all tbe ſayd
bodies politique 02 cozpozate;
are bp the Statutes.of the
1B calme difabledto makeanp
conuepances tothe king , oz
to any otber;ag tt hath bin ad⸗
tudged: Which ftatutes bane
been made fice Littlet.wꝛote.


Alt is proutded (c) bp the.


ad franktenement, a taile, hatha Freehold, Statute of Magna Chart
celup en le tatle ad &c. a quus AS "e de
franktencment, ac, — i A red


terre fuz poffer {ufficient fie-
ri domino fcodi ſeraitium ei debitum quod pertinetad feodum illud. . Upon Which ac 31 haue
Heard great queftion Cd) made, whether the feoffment made againſt that Statute Socrc bofo-
able 02 n0, and fome haue ſatd, that the Statute intended not to auoto the feoffment , but im⸗
plicite to direct the tenure, viz that the tenant ſhould not infeoffe another of parcet to Dolo of the
chiefe 1029 (that ig of the nect 1.020 ) but to hold of himſelfe, andthenthe Loꝛd map diftraine
inenerp part £oz bis Dole feruice Without any pretudice bnto him. Wut thigopinion (e agatnft
Ce) the authozitie of our Boxkes, and aga inſt the ſaid Statute of Magna Charta: Foꝛ firtt it (&
agreed ih 1 0.H 7.that afiwel before the Statute as after a tenant Which held two Acres mighe
Hatie aliened onc of the Acres to hold of him, and not withſtandingthe Lozd might have dtltrat=
ned ih Which ofthe Acres he Would fox His whole ſetuices: and reafon te cheth that before that
SHtatute a tenant Cond nor have altened parceil to hold af che chiefe Lord; Foꝛ the Setgnio⸗
ty of the 11020 Was intire, fos the Which tbe 3070 might difttatne in the Whole oz in anp part,
and Which the Tenant bp bis owne At cannot diuide to the preiudtce of the 102b to
barte him to diftraine in anp part for bis Serutees , as bee fhould doc, if he fboulo
enfeoffe another of parcel to hold of the chicfe Hom, Wut tbe Œenant might haue
mabe a Feoſtment of the Whole-to bolo of the chicfe 3,020 , fo» tere no paciubice infucd
tothe loss. Others haue ſatd, and they ſaid truly, that the intention of the Statute Wag
that the Cenant couid not. alien parcell ( which might turneto the preiudice of the 1,070 )with=-
out his allent, and this appearcth clerelp by tbe SBitroz, And by this Statute the Ring
take benefit to aue a fine £o? his licence, before Which Statute no fine for altenation Was due
tothe Ging, Foꝛ it is ( £) adiudged that for ar altenation in time of Henry thefecond, no fine
Sas due, and (t appeareth in our Wookes, that if am altenation hadbeene made before 3o. H.s.
4:0 fine Was duc tothe King for alienation: flow it ig to be obſerued; that oftcntinics fo2 the
better vn derſtanding of our Bokes, the adutied iReader mull take itght from Wiltozte and
“Chronicles cipectatip foz diſtindion of times. And therefore Matthew Paris (Shain big Chꝛo⸗
nicle reciteth Magna Charta) teftifieth that Ring Henry the third bp eutll counfelt-Canvd cfpc-
cially ag the truth was of Hubert de Burgo then chiefe Juſtice) fought to aucite the great
te firlt granted bp his Father king lohn, and afterward aranteo and confivme bp him⸗
in the ninth o£ Henry she third, for that ag he ſaid King Lohn pfo grant it by Dares, and
that he himſelle Wag Within age when be granted and confirmed tt. Wut koraſmuch as after-
Wards the fato thing Henry the thftn, in the twentieth peare of bis Ratane, at What time hes
was nine and twentie peare old, did grant and confirme the faid great Charter , for that caule
to putout alifcrupleg (e the twentieth peare of Henry the third named, albert tn law the ings
Charter granted in the ninth peere of Henry the third, was of forceand validitie notwithitan=
ditg his nonage, £07 that, in iudgement of Law the me ed Hing,cannot be fate tobe a Mi-
3


ner


(b.) Lib.4.fo.7 6.120.libr.5.
fo. Ging. Li. 5. fo, 37. dr. 11.
fo 67: Magdalen Colledge cafes
Vide Left de W.2.ea.41«


(c) Magna Chartacap.32.
Mirror.cap.5.§.2.
Gla-ut'. lib. .cap.x.

"Evalf. lib. y. Britten.88 ge.
Fletalib.3 cap.3,


(d) Videan excellent detlara-
tion hereof tnter adiudicye co= ©
ram eges J
Trin E. 1 fol: 2. in Thef.
Nort.cr Derb.


(e) Braë lib.1.

10« H.7. fel. 10.5,

33. E: 3 ausw⸗ 2$ 54

Stanf. prer. fol. 29. 8:E:4 12.


Mirrr.cap. 5. S. 2.
Fleta.lib.3.cap.35.

«£) 26. ^[. p.37. 20. ALP 17
25.E. 3. auos ri« 126.

34. E.3.cap. 15. Vade Stanf.
29.30. Matt. Pars.
Walfingham 37-39-


Vide 5.H.3,.Mordanc. 53.
Magra Chartathere v wched,
which was the Charter of King
Ton, for tt was esttd fore.
9.4.3.


Lib


20.4 ff. pl 17.03 Skipwith.


Britten.fel.28.88.186.187.
245.247. "Prer.R egucap.7.
Fletalib.6.cap. oo

20.2,3..4f6122.39.Af-pl.


19. 14°€.3. quare smped.45.


I3. H. 41313. 9.8.3. fal.26.


1 £.3.cap. 12.34/E. 3.62.1 f.


lib.2. fol.81.82. in Seigntor
Cromwels cafe. i


Regilt.int les brenes deenerand


pro rata portione.


Bralfon.lib. 4. fs1.324.
Britton.eap.32.dr 47.
"Brabton.lib. 4. fol. 33.
Kegifh radic.68.73.


38. 4f. p 7. W.. 2s cap. 18.
Status.demercateribus anne


(a) Mirror. sap. 2. S. 177.
Spiller a A
Fel. 320. Fleta.lib. 3 cap. 12.
dr lib, 5.cap.34.

(b) Fer the word ( dimitto )
Bee Set.5 31.


Cep.7


Of Tenant for yeares.  Seël.58,


nor, fo oben the Kopall Bodie yoittiqne of the King Both mete with the wall
capacitie in ont perfon , the whole Wodie Mali baue the qnalitie of the Mopall Boll
tique, ‘Which is the greater and moze $eoitby , and Wherein is do Mindꝛitie. oz
Omne maius trahit ad fe quod cft minus. Bnd tt íg to bee obferued, that noKe

can bee found, that either a licence of alienation Sas {aed 02 pardon fos alímatíon Sa
obtained fo? an alionation withont licence at anp time befoze the twentieth peare of Henne
the third, andit is holden tn the twentteth of Edward the third , that a licence fo alienation


grew by this Statute,


- 0% in the cafe of a common perfon ít Has thecommon opinton,that tf the tenant bab alie=
ned any parcell contrary to tbe fato ac, that he bimfelfe Sas beunbbp bis owne act, but that
bis bere might haue auopded (t and intheIings Cafe many held the fame opinten; oz
Britton faith, Ne Countes,ne Barons, ne Chiualer, nc Seriants, queteignont en chiefe de nous:
ne purr my difmerrbec nous fees fanus licence : que nous nepuiffent per droit engettre les pure
chafors, &c. And herewith agreeth Flers, anb oti Bokes. Wut now bp the Statute 1,E:3;
cap.13. & 34-E,3,capet se although the Rings tenant in chiefe, o2 bp grand feriantte oe alien
all o? any part Svithoutitcence, pet is chere not any fozfetture of the fame, but a reafonablc fine
therefore to be paid, And note, it appeareth bp the preambiein 1-E.s. thatcomplatnt Mag made
that land holden of the Ling in Capite , being aliened Without licence Was ſeiſed as forfeited,
Ændin thecafe of a common perfon, to Statute of 18.F.1- De quia emptoies terrarum Hath
made tt cleere, koz this hath in effec as tothe common perfons taken away the ſaid Statute of
Magna Charta cap.32: for thereby it is pꝛouided, Quod liceat vnicuique libero hominiterras
fuas feu terementa (ua, feu partem inde ad voluntatem fuam vendere, ita quod feoffatus teneat,
&c. de Capirali Domino. Bnd herein atc divers notable points tober obferned, Fixſt, that
this $0025 liccat proueth that the tenant could not, oz at leaſt wayes was in danger to alien
parcell of hig tenancie, &c. bpon the fato Act of Magna Charta. Secondly, that bpon the feoffz
ment of the whole, the tenant ſhall hold of the chicfe Lod, Thirdip, that the tenant might in⸗
feoffe one of part to hold pro perticula of the chiefe 3026. Wut this Act (the Ring being not nas
med) Doth not take away the Kings fine buc to him by the Statate of Magna Charta.


€ Frankrenemit. Here it appearcth that tenant ín fee, tenant in
tafle, and tenant fo? life are faid to haue a franktenement, a freehold, fo called becaufe tt botl) bí-
ſtinguilſh it from tearmes of yeares, Chatteis vpon incertaine interefts, lands in Villenage op
Cuftomary, oz Coppihold lanbg. Liberum autem tenementum dicitur ad differentiam Ville-
nagij, & villanorum qui tenent Villeuaginm quia non habent actionem nec affifam, &c. item
quod fit fuum & non alienum, hoc eft fi teneat. nomine alieno vt firmarius & ad terminum vel
ficut creditor ad vadium. Bnd note that tenant bp ſtatute Merchant, ſtatute ſtaple oz elegit are
fato to hold land Vt liberum tenementum $ntíll their debt be patd,and pet ín troth thep(as hath
benc faid) bane no freehold, but a Chattie, which (ball qoc to the Crecutors,and tbe Crecutoze
alfo if tbep be ouſted ſhall baucan Alife. But (vc) is imtlitudinarie,becaule they (ball by the
ftatuteg baue an Bille ag tenant of the Freehold (ball haue, and to that reſpect hath a fiintlítuor
of a freehold, but Nullum fimileeft idem, 1 ! ;


— M


Cuar. 7. Seét. 58.
Tenant for tearme of yeares.
Enant for


Ou home 4j Cnat pur «

leffa terres : tearme of

xc. leffa yeares is,
és : and Leale is where a
Word pen or non tee res OU tenements a manletteth Lands or
that the lice commetbin be vn auter pur terme Tenements toanother


lawtull meanes (b) am di-
mittere is in french lay (fer
fo depart Sith o2 Forgoe,
when Littleton wꝛote mas
np perfong might make Lea⸗
(ge for veares, 02 for life oz


De certaine ang fo-
lonque le number
des ang que eft ac-
cord perenter 1e lef-


for tearme of certaine
yeares after the num-
ber of yeares that is
accorded between the


fot


Lib.t.
for æ le leſſee. Ct
quant le leffee enter
per force Del eas,
Donque tl eft tenant
terme Des ans,
ct fi le lefloz en tiel
cafe referuc alup bn
annuall rent fuc tiel
leas tl poit eflier à
Diftrainer pur le rent
en les tenements Icf-
fcg,ou tl poit aucr bn
action Dc Debt pur
les arrerages enuers
leleſſee. Mes en tiel
caſe il content quele
leſſour ſoit ſeiſie de
mefines Ieteneméts
al temps Del leas car
il eſt bone plee purle
leſſee adire, que le leſ⸗
for nauoit viens en
les tenemẽts altẽps
de le leas ſinon que
le leas ſoit fait per
faitendent, en quel
caſe tiel plee donque
ne gift enle bouch te
leffce apleader,


Of Tenant for yeares.


Leffor andthe Leffee,
and when the Leffee
entreth by force of
the Leafe, thenis hee
tenant for tearme of
yeares, and if the Lef-
{or in fuchcafe referue
to hima yearely Rent
vponfuch Leafe, hee
may chufe for to di-
ftraine for the Rent in
the Tenements letten,
orclfe he may haue an
A&ion of debt for the
Arrerages againít the
Leffee. But in fuch
cafe it behooueth that
the Leffor be feifed in
the fame Tenements
atthe time ofhisleafe,
for it is a good plee
for the Leffee to fay,
that the Leffor had no-
thing in the tenements
at the time of the
leafe, except the leafe
bee made by deed, in-
dented, in which cafe
fuch plee lieth not for
the Leffee to plead.


Set.58.


lines at their Swill and plea⸗
fare, Which now cannot make
them firme tn Law. And fone
perfons map now make leafes
fo? peares , oꝛ Foz life op lives
(obferuing due incidents)
firme and god its la&o $oljo of
themfelues could not fo doe
Soher Littleton wrote, and
this bp force of diners Acts
of Parliament (c) ag name=
ip 32.H 8. 1-Eliz.13. Eliz.18,
Eliz.and 5. Lac. Regis of which
ſtatutes onets inabling, and
the ref are difabling, wher
Littleton $020te , Biſhoppes
Sith the confirmation of the
Deane and Chapter, 9Daftct
€ Fellowes of anp Colledge,
Deanes and Chapters, Ma⸗
ſter oꝛ Dardian of anp 12of-
pitall, and big Wiethzen,
Parſon o» UWicar, With the
confent of the 39atrone and
Droinarp, Archdeacon, Pꝛe⸗
bend, oz any other bodie Po⸗
litique Spirituall and Ec⸗
Clefiaf¥icall ( Concurrentibus
hijs que in iure requiruntur)
might haue made Leafes foy
lines 02 peates Swithout limi⸗
tation oz ftínt, Andfo might
tbey haue made gifts in taticg
02 ftates im feeat their ill
and pleafure, $oljercupon not
onlp great Decap of Diuins
Seruice, but Dilapidations
and other inconueniences en⸗
ſued, and therefore they were
Difabled and reftrained bp the
fato Acs of xz.Eliz; c2. Eliz.


44


(c)3::H.8.ca.28. 1. EQ. nor
prinzed but in the a ridyement .
13. Ex cap. 10. 18. Eliz.
cap.6. 3ac.cap. 3.


Lib.§5 fol. 4.c«fe de £eclefía-
fricall per fans.

Ltb. v1. fol.66. Afagdalen
Colledge cafe.

Leucfque de Serum; eafe lb.
10. fol. 62.61.


and3.lac, Regis to make anp —


efkate o? Conveyance to the


Hing at all ez to thefubicc, but there is excepted out of rhe reſtraint oz diſabilitie, eaſes fox
thre liues, 92 one and twentic peareg ; Sith {uch referuation of Rent, and with fuch other
pzeuítiens and limitations as hereafter (hall appeare, Aifothey map make grants of ancient
D ffíces of necellitie with ancient fees Concurrentibus hijs que in iure requiruntur, foy thofe
grants arc not Within the fratuteof s 2.H.8. but bp conftruction, thep are not reftrained by the
flatutes of 1-Eliz.oz 13, Eliz, becaufethefe anctent D ffices be of neceflitie,and With theancient
fes,and fo no diminution of reuenue.

There be three kinds of perſons, that at this bap map make leafes for three liues, ac. tn Tach
fozt as hereafter ig exprefled hich could not fodoe When Littleton Swaote. Viz. Fir, Anp
perfon feifed of an eftatetatic in his owne right. Secondip, Any perfon ſeiſed of an effate tn
fe imple in the rtabt ofbis Church. Chirdip, Buy hulband and Wile feífco of any eftate of
tuberitance in fee ũmple, o2 fee tatle fn theright of bis Spite, o2 tepntip With bis wife befoze the
couerture 02 after, viz. the tenant in tatle, by dedto bind bis {lues intatic, but not the reuer⸗
fion o? remainder, the Biſhop, ec. by deed Without the Deaneand Lhapter to bind hts ſucceſ⸗
fons, the bufband and Sife bp deed to bind the Wifeand her and thetr heires,and thefe are made
ged bp the ffatute of 32-H.8, Which trableth them thereunto. Wut tothe making qo» of fuch
leafes by the fato ffatute there are nine things neceflartlp to ber obferued belonging to them ail,
and fore other to forme of them tn particular,

Fick, Che leaſe mult be made bp Deed indented, and net by Ded, Poll, o? bp Paroll.

Decondiy, Jt mutt be made to begit from the vag of the mabing 6,02 From she making
thereof, Ahivoly,


Lib. c. fol.6, Seig Mounticyes
exfe.


»


Lib.t.


Lib. s. fol.2,Elasers cafe,


(4) Lib.s fol.2, Tewels cafe.
17.E.3.75.9- Af 24. V4. E. 3.
Scire facias 22. 10.H,6.2.

3. H.6. 21.


(e) Lib.6. fol. 37e Deaneand
© Chapter of Worcefler cafe.


Lib.s.fel.6. Seignior Mount-
foyes Cafe.


Lib.6. fol. 37.38. Deane and
Chapt. of Wore: ster Cafe.


Lib. 5. fol.5.Seignior Mount
sayes Cafes Lb. 6. fol.37-


Lerd Mountioyes ('afe vbi
Supra.


Deane and ( bapter of Wore.
Cafe. Ubi fupra.


Deane and Chapter of Ware.
Cafe. Vbi fupra.


3-E. 6. 1. Mar. tit. leaſes
Bre.61,


Cap.7.


Of Tenant for yeares. Setl.58.


Thirdly, PE there be an old Teafe in being, ít muſt befarrendzed o? expired, 02 ended withing
veare of the making of theleafe, andthe furrender muft be abfolute and not conditional, -

Fourthly , Chere mult not bee a double Leaſe in beeing at one time, as 1€ a XLeafe
fu; peares bee made according to the ftatute, hee in the renerfion cannot erpuife the Lef⸗
fe , ant make a ALcafe for life o2 lines according tothe flatute, poze conuerfo , forthe words
Of the ftatute be to make a leafe Fox thaee lines, o2 onc and twentie peares,fo ag one og the other
inap be made, and not both. ic? "Mi

dfriftlp, It mul not exceed three lines, 02 one and tiventie peareg, from the making of it, but
ít map be foz a leſſer terme oz fewer lines.

Dirtip, Jt mut beof Lands, Œenements, o hereditaments, Wanurable or Corporec
ail Which areneceflarp to be letten, and whereout arent by jaw may be referued, and not
Cd) of things that tie in grant, as Aduowſons, Satres, Markets, Franchifes, andthe itke
Whereout a rent cannot be referued.

Seucnthip, It muft be of Lands 02 tenements Which haue molt commontyp beencletten ta
farme, 97 occupted by the Farmers thereofby thefpace of 20 peates nert befozetheleafe made,
foag if it be lettestfoz x 1.peareg at onc ot fcucratl times within thele 20.peares it is fufficient.
2 grant(c )by copie of Lourt roll in fee foz life o2 peares (a a fufficient letting to farme Within
this Tatute,foz he te but tenant at will according to the cuftome, tfo ít is of a 1eafc at Swill bp
the Cominon Law, but thofe lettings to farme muſt be made bp fome fetfed of an cflate of In⸗
heritance, € not bp a Gardein in Chiuairie,tenant by the curtefio tenant in dower oz the like,

Eightly, Chat bpon euerp fuct) teale there be referued pearelp during the ſame leaſe Duc and
payable tothe Leflore their beíreg and Succeflozs,tc, fo much pearelp farme oz rent, 02 moze,
ag hath bone moft accuftomablp petlded 02 paid foꝛ the lands, ac. Mithin t&oentie peares next
before fuchleafe made, Hereby firft (t appeareth (ag bath benc fato ) that nothing can be de⸗
mifed bp Authortrte of this ac, but that whereout a rent map be lawfully referned. Second=
lp, Chat Where not only a pearelp rent Was fozmerip refered, but things not annuall,ag hes
riots ; oz amp fineoz other profit at oj bpon the death of the Éarmez , pct (£ the pearelp rent be
referued bpon a leale made by fozceof this ſtatute, it fufficerh bp the expaetTe Words of tbc Ac,
Chirdip, 3€ he referuc moze then the accuſtomable rent tt ts god alfo bp the expzeſſe letter of
the Alt; but i£ twentie Acres of land haue beene accuftomablp letter , and alcafe ig madeof
thofe twentic,and of one Acre Which Was noz accu(tomablp letter, referuing the accuſtom⸗
able pearelp 18 ent,andfo much moze as exceed the value of the other Acre,this leaflets not Svar-
ranted bp the Ac, for that tbeaccuffomabie ik ent is not referued, fœing part was not accu⸗
ftomeably letten,and the Rent ilucth out of the whole, Fourthly, 3€ tenant in taile let part o£
tbc land accuftomablp ietten , andreferne a Rent prorata, oꝛ moꝛe, this (g good fo? that isin
fubttance the accuftomable Rent. Fittly, It two Coperceners be tenant in taile of twentte
Acres enerp one of couall value, and accuttomably letten, and thep make partition, foas each
haue ten Acres, thep map make leafes of thew ſeuerall parte cach of them, referuina the haife
of the accuftomeabierent, Sirtip, JE theaccuftomeable kent had bene papableat foure
bapes 0? Feaſts of the Peare, pet tf it bereferuied pearcip payable at one Seat, tr (a fufficient,
foz the words of the fkatutebc,referucd pearelp,  ! j

" sNinthip, $2 o2 to anp icafe to be made Without tmpeachment of wafte,therefoze (£a Leaſe be
made foz life, the remainder foo life, ac, this is not Warranted bp the ſtatute, becauſe itis diſpu⸗
nífbablc of wate, Wut i£aleafe be made to onc During thze lines this ts qwd,fo2 the occupant
if any happen; ſhall be punithed for Soafte, Cie Swords vf theffatute be (‘cifed inthe right
of bis Church) pet a Biſhop that is fetfed iure. Epifcopatus, a Deane of his fole polleflions (tt
iure Decanatus, an Archdeacon iniure Archidiaconatus,a Pꝛebendarie and the like are with⸗
in the ftatute, for cuerp of. them generally ts feifed in iure Ecclefiæ

Buta Parſon and Wicar are excepted out of the ſtatute of 32.H.8. and therefogze t€ either of
thein make a Icafefoz three liues, €c. of lands accuftomeably letter, referuing the accuftomeo
Rent, it mut be aifo confirmed by the 39atrone and D 20inarie, becaufe it ts excepted out of
324,8; and not reſtratned by the fatutes of primo o213-Eliz. Bud what hath benefatd con=
corning a leaſe £02 three lines, doth hold for a leaſe For one and twentie pares,

Œ bus much hhaitfuffice to haue ſpoken of the inabling ffatute of 32-H.s. the better toinable the
Beader to vnderſtand both this and that which folios. Now to ſpeake ſomewhat of the diſ⸗
abling Statutes of x. Eliz. and 13. Eliz. the words of the exception ont of the reftraint and
diſabilitie o£ 1 Eliz. ave, Other than for the terme of twentie one yeares, or three liues, from fuch
timeasany fuch grant ora ſſurance Mall bee ginen,/ whereupon the old and accuftomed yearely
rent, or more, fhall be referned : Bnd to that effet ie the exception tn the Statute of 13-Eliz.
Fick, It is tobe onderftod; that neither of theſe diſabling Acs, nozany other, doc in arp fore
alter o? change the tnabling Statute of :2.H.8. bytieaneth (t foo a patterne in many things for
leafeg tobe made by others, -Seconvip, It is to be knowne, that no Leafe made according to
the exception of 1-Eliz.-9213.Eliz. and not Warranted bp the Statute of 32.H.3. it it bee m
of ?


Libs. | Of Tenant for yeares. Seéd.58..


by a Bichop, ot any fole Corporation, bat tt matt be coufrmed by the Deanes and Chapters.
on others that bauc intercit, as hath beme ſaid in the cafe of the 39arfon and Cicar, but exam⸗
ples doe illuſtrate. It a Biſhop mabe a leaſe foa 2 1. peares, amo all tbofo peares being fpent
fauing three où moze ; pct map the Biſhop make anew leafeto another fez t&oentie one pearcs,
to begin from the making, according tothe exception of the Statute, but not a Leafe fog life
opines, as hath bene fato, and this concurrent Leale hath bornerefoined to be gad, as Well
pon the ccceptíon of 1.Eliz. inthe cafe of Withops, ag bpon : 3.El:z. which extend tofptr(tuail
and ecclefiafticall Coꝛpoꝛations, aggregate of manp, ag Xoeaneg and Chapters, ec. which
32.H.8. did not : but in the cafe of the concurrent leafe, inthe. cafe of the Withop (t mutt be con=
firmed. Bilo the exception of 1.Eliz. and 13-Eliz. doth differ from the ftatute of 32-H. 8, foz the
leafes fox peares to bee made according to the exceptions of the ſtatutes of 1, anb i3. Eliz.
mutt begtnne from the making, anb not from the dap of the making, bus bp fozce
of 32.H.8. from the day of the making, Bnd although the ftatutes of the rft oz thirteenth
of Eliz. doe not appoint the leafeto be mabe bp weiting, pet mull it therein and in the other ciat
properties os qualitics before mentioned and required by 32-H,8. follow the paterne thercot
(the concurrent leafe only excepte). Bithough the exception in 1-and 13,Ehz. concerning the

accuftomed rent (g moze generall then that o€ 32.H.8. and there ts not anp prouifion fox leaſes

made difpuntthable of Waſte, ec. pet mutt the paterne of 32-H.8. befolloXoco: fo: leaſes with⸗

ont impeachment of waſte made bp fuch Spiritualland Œcclefatticall perfong are vnreaſona⸗

ble and caufce of dtiapidations, Œ bus much haue 3] thought godto lead the ftudious Reaver

bp the hand, and to conduc him tn theright wap. And to put ail tbefe things together vpon

confidcration bap of all tbe ftatutes, hich otheriwife might haue prima facie femed tobim a

diffufeand Darke laborinth, And albeit it be pzouided by the fato Acts of 1. and 13-Eliz. that

ali grants, ac. leafes, tc. made, &C- (other then leaſes fer thzeeliues, oz onc and twentie peared

acco ding to thofe Acs) ſhouid be btterlp boo and of none effect , to all intents conſtructi⸗

ons and purpofes, pet grants; o? leafes, &c. not Warranted bp thofe acte are not boid, but gov

agaínft the Leſſoz, if it be a fole Lozpozation, o2 fo long as the Deane oz other head of the Coz-

poration temaine. (fit be a Corporation agaregate of many, (o2 tbc ſtatute was made in bencfit

of thefucceffoz. Wut ict vs now rcturmcto our Authoꝛ.


«| Home leſſa. Were Littleton putteth this cafe tohere one let⸗
teth, xc. It is therefore neceſſary tobefeene what the Law is where diuers iopne fn a Leaſe
Ik che tenant of the Land, and a flranger which hath nothing in the Land fopne (n a leafe fo
gearce bp Deed indented of one ant the felfe-fame land, this is the Leafe of the tenant only,
a the confirmation of the franger and pet the Leaſe ag to the Granger workes bp con-
ciution.

Ff two fencrall tenants of ſeuerall lands, fopne in a leaſe for peares by Dede indented,
thefc befcuerail Leaſes and fcucratl Confirmations of each of them, from Seboim no interett
paſſeth, and Warke not bp wap of conclufien in anp fort ; becaufe ſeuetall intereſts palle from
them, B, tenant £o? lifcof C, and be tithe reminder o2 reuerſion in £c, hauing ſeuerall eftateg
in the one and the fame Land (one tn aicafe £02 peareg by Toce indented, this demile fall
5701kc in this fort, during the life of C. tt ig the Leaſe of B. and Confirmation of htm (s the
tcuerfion 02 remainder, and after the beceafe of C. itis the Leaſe of him in the reucrfion oz re
matnder, and the Confirmation o£ B. forfesing the Leafoze baue feuerall eftates, the Law ſhali
conftruc the Leaſe to mouc ont of both their eftates reſpeciuely, anb euerp one toilet that Swbich
he lawtully may let, and notto be the Icafc ontp of tenant fog life, and the Confirmation of him
in the rcmatnuer o2 reuerſion, netther is there anpconcingon in this cafe, ag fall be fato here=
after, Cenant fo? life and he in the remainder (n fe, made a leaſe for pearcs by Deed indented,
the Leſſee was etected,and brought an Eie&ione firme;anb declared bpon a Demífomabe bp te=
nant £o? life and him intematnder, and bpon not guilty pleaded this {peciall matter was found
and that tenant fo? life was living and it Wag adiudged (a) againſt the pl, for during the
iife of the tenant ( as hath bene fatb ) ít ig the Leoſe of the tenant for life, and thercfors daring
bis itfe be ought to haue declared of a Leafe made bp him, anb after hts deccafe he ought to de⸗
clare of a Leafe made by him tn remainder. (b) Bndthe Deed indented conto be no Eſtoppeli
in this cafe, becauſe there paficd an intereft from them both, Bnd Whenſoeuer anp interelt
vaſſeth From the partic tere can be no Eſtoppell againft bim, and (c) fo it Was adiudged Here⸗
bp pou ſhall vnderſtand pour bakes the better which treate of theſe matters ; and accordingly (t
Swag adiudged that where tenant in tatie and he in the remainder (n Fee (opneo in a grant of a
rent charge bp Wed in fec, and after tenant in tafle died Swithout ((Ine, the grantee diftrepned
and auowed bp force of a graunt from him tn the remainder and vpon non conceffit, the Jury
found the {pectall matter, and ít Has adiudged for the auowant ; fo enerp onc granted accos=
ding to bis eſtate and intereft,

Leafles for l{ues 02 peares are of three naturce, is geod ín Law; fomes be boppablebp

entris,


—— RA d


45


Lit.3. fo. $9.60. Lincolne Col-
ledge café. P. 39. € liz, Inter
Haat. & Singleton. ibidem.


Vide Se. 346.11.H. 4.1«
5-£. 4.4.4. 27. H. 8.16.


(a) 27. H.8./9: 13.4.13. H.7
3 4. 2. À. 5.7. Lib.t. fol. 76
Bredons ( afe.


(5) Mich. 36. & 37- Enc.
in the Kings ‘Bench.

Vide Mich.6.dr 7, Eliz,
‘Dier 334. 235:

(c) Hill. 44. Eliz Rot. 145 Go
15 Communi Banco inter Else


dr (mne.


Liba.


(d) 32.H.8.cap.28.


(e) 33. H.8. Dier.
Ifi. 5. fa. 5 o. 60. in
Lincolne (C olledgeeafc.
Hunts cafe voncbed.


Plcom.Wietef.198.

35. H.B. tit expofitien

det parols 4%

lib. t. fa. X4$.5n Danenperts


caf.


(E) Lis.r.fo.rg4inthe
Reëtor of (hedingtons cafe.


(g) Vid.Seët.s 31.
(A) Regifler.F.N.B.270.6.


(i) 8.H.6.34


( K)14.H. 8.14. 3. Mar.feafes
Br.67, 3..Mar. ibid. 67.

Say & Pullers cafe, P|.com,
3731. & Weldens cafe ibid.
4. H.6.13. 31. H.7.58.
Vid.le cafe del eue/que de
Bathe, !1b.6.f0.34- 35.
Bra. li. 2.ca.9.
Vid.lib.x.fo.x$ 5.156. Relfor
de ( hedingten: cafe,


Brallon lib. 3.04, 9.
Sorefelued Hill: 26.
Els’. ret.9 5. incern,
banco.


"Tl.eem,Say dr Fullers cafe.


Cop.J. Of Tenant for yeares. Seël.58.


entrte, anb fome voide without entrie, Df ſuch ag be god in Law, fome begad at the Con
mon ia ag made by tenant in fee whereot Littleton here putteb his cafe, fome bp Bc of Pare
ltament, as tenant in taile, a Biſhop feífeo in fee in the right of bis Church alone without bis
chapter, Aman feifco in fee Gmpis op fec tatlein theright of his wike together Sith bis Wife
Cas hathbencfaid ) may by deeds moenten make Lealeg Foz 2 1. peares 02 three lines in ſuch
manner and forme ag hath beene faid and bp the Statute (d) (g limttted ; all Which Were boy-
Dable bp the Common Haw When Littleton wzote, and now are made gad bp j9ar-
itament.

Bn infant ſeiſed of Land bolden tn Socage, map bp cultome make a leaſe at his age of 16,
peates, and (bail binde him, which Leaſe Wags vopdable bp the Common Law ; Qiopbable,
Tome bpthe Common Law, atter the death of the leafoz ag of tenantin tatica Withop,ec, Dz
after the Death of tbe bufband (intended of Leafeg not warranted by tbc fato ftatute of
32.H,8.) Some boyvable by Be of Darltament, as bp a Withop though it be confirmed bp
Deane and Chapter, tf it be not Warranted bp the Statute of 32,H.8, and fo ofa Deane and
Chapter after the Death of the Deane; Some dopdable at times by the leſſoꝛ himfelfe o2 hig
beires, ag by an infant and the like, ome bopde in futuro, andfome botde in prefenti. In fu-
turo ag it a tenant in taile make a Leaf £o? peares and die without (Tue, (t is bofbe, as to them
in renerfion ozremainder, though itbemade (e) according to tbefatb Statute. FE a Pꝛe⸗
bend, Parfon o2 Nicar make a Lenfe fo; peares, tt is voyde by death, {Fit be mot accosding ta
the Statutes, Dtherwifeit a of a Leaſe for itfe £2 that (9 bepdabie, & fic de fimilibus,

Some voide in prefenti ag tf onemake a Leaſe Fos fo many peareg ag he (hall line, thie is
botde in prefenti £02 theincertaintie, Et {icin fimilibus Swhereof Littleton buufclfe ii teach
pou nectandimmed{atelp and 3 know pou Would now glaolp heare him.


«| Pur terme. Pro termino, Terminus in the vnderſtanding of the
Law doth not only fignifie the limits and limitation of time, but alfo the c(fate anb intereſt
that pafleth fox that time, Bs (£a man make a Leafe for 2 1, pearcs, and after make a leaſe to
begin A fine & cxpitatione predicti termini 21, annorum dimiff. and after the firfk Leaſe i¢
furvendzed, the fecond Leale (hail begin prefentip, but (£ it had beene ta begin Poftfinem & ex-
pirationem predi&" 2 r.annorum, ftt that cafe although the firft tearme had beencfurrendzed, pet
thefecond leaſe (boulb not begin, til after the 2 1. peares be endedby effluxion of time, awd fo
note the diuerfitic bet weene the terme for z 1. peares, and 2 1.peareg ; and (F ) herewith agreeth
the Loꝛd Pagets Cafe,

(2) woꝛds to makca leafebe, demtfe, grant, tofearmelet, betake, and Swbatfosucr word
amounteth toa arant map ferue to make a leafe, In tbe Kings cafe (h) this 020 Committo
doth amount fometímc toa grant, ag when he faith Commiflimus W.de B officium fenefchal-
ci, &c, quamdiu nobis placuerit, and by that $9070 alfohe map make a leafe : and (1) therefore
a fortiori a common perfon by that $0010 map doe the fame,


e| Decertaine ans. Foꝛ regularly in euerp Leale fo» peareg the
terme muft haue a certatne beginning, and a certaine end, and herewith (k )agreti) Bracton,ter-
minus annorum certus debeteffe & determinatus. Bnd Littleton is here to be tnderfton,
firſt, that the peares muſt be certaine Shen the Leaſe ig totakeeffect in intereſt 03 porreflion.
For before tt takes effect in poſſeſſion o2 interefl, it map depend bpon an {ncertatntie,viz. vpon
a poffible contingent befoze it begin (rt pofleffion, oz interet, op bpon a itmitation oz condition
fubfequent. Secondlp albett there appeare no certainty of peares (n the ieale, pet (£ by refe⸗
rencetoacertaintie it may be madecertaine it fuficeth, Quia id certum eft quod certum reddi
potett. Foꝛ example of the ſirſt. It A. fetfeb of lands in fee grant to b. that When B. papes ta
A. xx. thillings, that from thenes forth he (ball baue and eccupietbe land Foz 21 .peares, and af-
ter B. papes there. thillings, this (c a geod leaſe foz 2 : ,peares from thenceforth. Foꝛ the fecond
{€ A. leaſeth bis land to B.foz fo manp peares ag B hath in the Mannoa of Dale,and B.hath chew
a terme (n the mannoz of Dale fo? : o,pcares, this (& a good leale bp A.to B. ofthe land of A. fog
1o.peates, BF theparfon of D. makea leafe of hig gleabe koꝛ fo manp peares as hee (ball be
parfon there, this cannot be made certaine by anp meanes, oz nothing te moze bucertatne thers
the time of death, Terminus vitz eft incertus, & licet nihil certius fit morte, nihil tamen incer-
tiuseft hora montis, Wut (£ he make a leaſe for three yeates, and fo from thꝛee peares to three
peares, fo long ag he (atl be parfon, this (s a god lcafe for 6. peares, if he continue parfon fa
long, fir fo three peares, and after that for tires peares ; and foz the refidue vncertaine.
It a man maketh a leafeto 1,5. fo» fo many peares as LN. fall name, this at the beginning
ig tneertaine, but When I.N, hath named the peares, then (t is a good leafe £o fo many peares,
A man maketh a leaſe Foz 2 r.peares {€ L.S, ifne fo tong, this {9 a god leaſe for peares and pet
{g-certaine tn incertaintte,fos the life of l 8. is incertaine. Spee manp excellent cafes concerning
this matter put (n the fatocafe of the Biſhop of Watheand wells, Wy the anctent Law of
England fo; many refpetg a man could not have made a leafe abous 4o. prarcg at the moft, AA
t


*


Lib.t. Of Tenant for yeares. — $66.58.


ther Sag (tfafo that by long leaſes many tere pzetudiced, and mang tines men ditherited,but
that ancient Lao (c antiquated, i
Fn the eve of the Latw any eftate fog life being ag Littleton hath fatban eftate foz Sreelold,
hor à precipe quod reddat Both Ipo tg an higher and greater eltate then a leafc for
peares though it be fora Thouſand 02 moze which neuer are Without fulpiiion of frauds, ahd
they vcre the lefle valuable, fox that at the (Commen Law they were fubiect bnto,and vnder the
power of the tenant of the freehold, the learning whereof ſtandeth thus and ts wozthy to be
lnexone. tober Littleton Wrote (£a man had made a leafe for peares by Sziting, and he that
bab the Freehold had fufferco himlelfe to be impleaded in a reall action bp collufion to barre the
Lette of his terme, and made Dcfauit,dc, Che Statute of Glouc’ gave the Leſſee fos peares
fome remedp by Swap of receipt, anda tríall Sohether tbe Demandant did mouc the plea bp god
right o: collufion, and fit were found bp collufon then the termoz ſhould inioy bis tearme,
and the execution of the tudgement (ould fay ontíll after the tearme ended. Wut this Sta⸗
tute ertended not to5-Cafes. 1. i£ tbc leale were Without waiting for the Words of thts ad
are, ( fo that the termor may hauerecoucrp bp watt of Coucnant, ) z Ft extended not but toa
recouerp bp Default, 3. The termoz conto not be relienedby this ftatute, vnleſſe he knew of the
téconerp and Were receiued, tc. 4. By the better opinion of bokes, it extended not to tenants
bp Statute merchant, tatute ffaple ozclegit. 5. Jot to garden, (1) Wut now the ftatute of
31 H.8. doth giucremedp (n all the fatd cafes ſauing the cafe of the gatoian, anb giveth them
power to falfific all manner of recoucties bab again&thetenants of the freehold bpon tained
and bntructitles,¢c. Now the (m ) ſtatute faith that tt was a doubt. betoze that ftatutc Wht-
ther a Tormoz for pcares might falüific oz no, but pet (t ſeemeth bp the better opinion of bokes
tn fo great varíctte, that he hauing but achattel, Was not able bp the Common Law to falfi-
fic a couenong recouery of the freehold, becaufe he could not hane the thing that was recouered.
(a) Bnd Thrning and Hankford boc hold that agardian ts hot within the ftatutc of Glouc.

Fl two Coperceners be, and one of thei let her part to another fo? peares and after vpon
a tÜait of partition brought againſt the Leſſoꝛ too little ts alotted tothe Leſſoꝛ, ttis Holden bp
Come that the Leſſee cannot anotve tt for that it ts made bp the oath of men, and indgement (s
thereupon giuen that the partition Mall rematne firme and fable. Wut tf there be two Coper⸗
ceners of thze acres af land cuerp onc of equali value, and the one Copercener letteth her part,
and after make partition, and oneatre (g alotted only to the Leffoz, the ilefle is not bound
hereby, but he may enter andtake the proffite of another halfe acre, for that of right belong vn⸗
to him. Thus much jauc 3| thought good to fct downe for (t {ufliceth net to know Sat the
La ts in thefecafes, vnleſſe he onderftand the reafor and caufe tbeteof,

And albeit ( as hath beene ſaid) a leafe Foz peares muft haue a certaine beginning, anda cere
taine end, pet the continuance thereof may be (ncertatue, £o the fame may ceafe and reuíue as
gatne in diuers cafes, Ag if tenant intatle make a leaſe Cop yeateg reſeruing re. thillings, and
after taltea Soife and die Without iſſue, now as to himin the reuerſion the leafe (e meerelp boide,
but if hee indow the Wife of tenant in taile of the land, (ag the map be though the efkate taile be
determined ) now (s the leafe ag to the tenant in dower ( Who is in ot the fate of her huſband)
(a)tcuíticb agatne ag againſt her,foz as to her the eftate tatle continneth, £o: the fbal be attenBant
fo: the third part of the rent feruices, and pet thep wereertint bpatinlaS. Hott te (f tc-
nant in tatle makea leafe £02 peareg vt fupra, and dieth without ifluc, bts Wife enfeint With a
fonne, he in the reuerfion enter, againt him the cafe ts voide, but afterthe fonne be borne the
leafe ig good, if it be madeaccozding to the (b ) ftatute, and otherwife is voydable.

The ing made a gift in tatic of the Wannoz of Caltfarietgh, in Kent to W- to hold by
nights feruice ; W. made a leafcto A. fox thittte Gre peares, veleruing thirteene pound rent ,
W. dyed, hisſonne and heire of full age, all this wag found bp office: ag to the Ling thie leaſs
is not of fozce, for he (ball hauc his primer feifin ag of lands in pofleffion, but afterlinerie, the
leſſee may enter ; and il the ((Tuc in tatle accept the ront, the leafe (hail bind htm, £02 the Kings
primer feifin ſhall not take away the cicction of the iſſue in tatle, for tt map bethat the rent was
better thanthe land: (c)and foít as adiudgedin Aw ftens cafe, ag 4| had ttof the report of
Pafter Edmond Plowden, a graue andlearned Appzentice of Law,

PE tenant in £& take Wife, and make a ieafe fox peared 1), the wike is endowed, Hes
hall auopd the Icafe, but after her deceale the leaſe (lati bec in folie agatne, Wut tithe Patron
grant the nertauopoance, and after Parlon, 39atron, and Dzdtnarie, before the Statute;
Cd) had made a cafe of the glebe fo» peares, and after the Parſon dieth, and the grantee of the
next auopdance had prefented a Wierke to the Church, Who (e admitted, inſtituted, and tnducted,

and bícth Within tbe terme ; the Patron prefents a new Clerke,and he (g admitted, inflituted,
anb inducted, albeit he commeth in vnder the Patrron that was partie to theleafe, pet becanfe
Thelat incumbent, who had the Whole ſtate in him,auopded the Icafe, (t Hall not reuiue agate,
no more than (£a feme couert leuie a fine alone, ifthe hulband enter and auoyd the fine, and
die the whole eftate is fo auopded ag (t ſhall not 9— the wife after bis death.
z


3t


46


Lib. 11.fo.33-


(1) 21.4.8.ca.15.


(mJ That atermer might
falf fie at the Common Law.
Vid.19.E.3. .Aff.82.
31.£.3.1.7.H 7.15.6.
1.4.7. .6. Pl.com.83.
10.E.3.46. 19. E.3.refedt?


112.

That be could not. 30. H.6.
Fanxerrecouery 9.
43.4941. 36. B.8.2.
9.€ 4. 38. F. N.D.198.£.
14. H.8.4. lib. 9. fo. 13$.
Aſcongbos cafe.

(a) 7.H.4.12.

33. H.8. Dier 52.


»


(a) 19. E.3.26. 4. 4f: 8.
23.£.3. Dower 150.


(b) 32.41.8262, 28.


vo


(c) Pafeh. s.d 3. ph. dr Mar.
inansnformatron of Intrufion
$n the Exehrquer againft
Auſten.

Vid. Dier Pafèh.2.dr 3°

Ph, Mar.115-

13. EliQ . c4.10.

(d) 6.F.6 Dier.72.

ty. E, 3.52. 17. Aff. p.12.
2.R (3.20. 9 H4. 33


Libr (Caps. Of Tenantforyeares.  Se&s8.


3.E 3.8. per Seroope.


Pl. Com. 437.4.


V.$48. 454.455


V. fell. 665. more fully of thts
matter. :


Mil.17,€l.in the kings Bench.


37-AG.p.11.P Com. 418.6


J
Li 5, fo. x (C laytontcafz 12,
Elhz Dyer 286.


14, El. Dy.307. 5.El. Dy. 218


Li. fe.s.Goddardi cafe.


(a) PL. Com.1 48. 3.£.6. tit.
Leafes Br.62,3.El.Dy,195.
1.Mar. Dyer 116.


f a woman be endowed of aw aduo wſon Which ($ appaoppiated, and ſhe pzcfent , and her
incumbent tg admitted, inftituted, and induced, albeit the incumbent bie, pet (s the appꝛopꝛia⸗
tion Wholly diſlolued, becauft the incumbent Sobich came in by prefentation , had the Whole
ſtate in bim, aud fo Swag tt adiudged,as thecafe is to be intended.

@enant in tatlemake a leafe for Fortis peares,referuing a rent, to commence ten peares af»
ter ; tenant in taile dic, the ide enter and inkeolke A. ten peares expire, the leflee enter , {€ A.
accept the rent, the leafe ts good, £02 he fall bane tht fame election that the iſſue intatlehad, ei⸗
ther to make ít gad, 92 to auoyd ít, fo ag tt could not be precifelp affirmed, whither by the enteric
9f the iſſue this crecutozte leafe Was auoybeb, but (t dependeth incertainip bpon the Will of the
feoffe:, Wut now 3] know pou are defirong to heare Littleton, who ts {peaking to pou,

Et quant le loſſee enter per force del leafe, domques il ef} tenant pur terme


des ans. And true itis, that to many purpoles he ts not Cenaunt
fe? peares butt he enter: ag a relealemade to him ts not gab to him to (ncreafe hts eftate,befoze
entric : but he may releafe the vent referucd before entrie in refpect of the pꝛiuitie. Neither can
the Leſſor grant away the renerfion bp the name of the renerfion, befoze entrie, vide Sc&. 567.
Wut the leſſee befozc entrie hath an intereſt, interefle rermini grantable te another,vide Sc&t.3 19.
And albett the leflog die before the le(Tee enters , vct the leflee map enter into tbelanbg , ag our
Author bimfclfe hoideth in this chapter, And fo (£tbelef(Tos dpeth before he entred, pet his exe⸗
cutoꝛs c adminiftrators map enter, becaufc hee prefentip by the leaſe hath an intereſt in him :
And i€ tt be made to two, and one die bcfoze entrte, his intereſt ſhall ſuruiue. Vid Sea.281.

He that hath a lcafe £o» peares, hath tt cither in his oxone right, wbercof Littleton hath heere
fpoken, o? in anothers right, and that in Diners manners, aga man map bâge a ferme for
peares in theright of bis wife, whereof the hufband hath power to difpofe at anp time during
bis life,and if be furuincth his wtte,the law doth gine the ieafeto him, Wut if he make no di
pofition thereof, and his wike furniue him, it rematneth with the Wife: but of this in another
place moze fully.

31£ a man be pollefled ofa terme of foztte peares tn the right of his Wwife, and maketh a Leafe
fox twentic peares, referuing arent, awd bít, the wife Thali baue the reGdue of theterme, but the
executors of the huſband thal bauc the rent,foz tt Sas not incident to the reucrfon;foz that the
wife Was not partie to the leaſe. So note,a diſpoũtion of part of the termets no pífpofition
of the whole. Wut ifthe bufbano grant the Whole terme, bpon condition that the grantee fall
pay a fumme of money to his erecutozs,¢c, the huſband die, the condition is broken, the Execu⸗
tozs enter, this is a difpofition ef the terme, and the wike is barred tbercof, for the Whole inter⸗
eft Das palled away. 5

It a leaſe be made to a baron and feme fo; terme of their lines, the remainder tothe Execu⸗
tors of the furutuoz of them, the bufband grant awap thes terme and dieth, this {ball not barre
the wife, fo? that the Wife had but a poflibilitic,and no intereſt.

FE thehulband and Wife be elected of a terme tn the right of bis wile, and the hufband bring
an cicétionc firme {n big owne name,anb haue iudgement to recouer, this íg an alteration of
the terine,and veſteth it in the bufband,

Fifa leafe for peares be made to a Biſhop and his ſucceſſoꝛs, pet his executoꝛs 01 adminiftra=
tois fhali baucitin'auter droit, fog regularly no Chattell can qoe tn fuccedlion tna cafe of a fole
Coꝛpoꝛation no moze than tf a leafe be madetoa man and his heires, ítcan goeto his heyꝛes.
Wut let be returne to Littleton, PS

Touching the timeof the beginning of a leafe for peares, ibis to beoblerued, thatif a leafe
be madebp Indenture, bearing bate 26.Maij,éc tohancand to hold foz twentie one peares,
frou: the bate, 02 from the bap of the date, it {hall begin on the twentie feuentb dap of Wap, FE
the lcafebeare date the twentie Grt ba» of Way, ec. to haue and to hold frons the making here⸗
of, 02 from henceforth, tt ball begin on the dap tn Which tt is delivered, forthe Words o£ the In⸗
Denture arenot ofanp effect tilithe Deltuerie, and thereby fromthe making,os from henceforth
take their fir effect, But (£ tt be a die confectionis,then tt ſhall begin on. the next Dap after the
deltuerte, FE the habendum be fozthe terme of t wentie one peares, Without mentioning When
tt hall begin, tt fall begin from t {ueric, fos there the words take eſfect as (e aforciatd. It
an Indenture of leaſe beat Dali is voyd o» impollible, as the thirtieth day of frebzua-
rfe, 02 the fortieth of March, ik in this cafe theterme belimttted to beaín fromthe date, ít fhail
begin from the deliuerte, ag ik there had beene no batcatall. (a) And ſo it is, 1€ a man bp dis
Indenture of leafe, either recite a cafe which is not,oais bopb, ox mifrecite a leafe (n point ma⸗
teríall which is in e(Te, Qro haue and to hold from the ending of the former leale , this leafe hail
begin in courfe of time from the deliuerie thereof. i :

«p Et file leffor en tiel cafe referne a luy vn annual rent fur tiel cafe, il poet


efler a diflreyner pur le rent, on il poet aner Action de debt pur les arcrages.


¶ Aire


Een OfTenantforyeares,  Seël.s8.


¶ Referne a duy vn annual rent cre. Firſt it appeareth (b) here bp
Littleton that a tent mult be reſerued out of Lands 02 Cenemonts, whereunto the Leſſor map
haue reſort 0? recourfe to diftreine, ag Littleton here alfo faith, anb therefore a rent cannot be
reſerued by à common perfon out of anpincoporeallinberitance, as Bouowfons, Commons,
Offices, Cozodte, maicurcofa Mili, Cpthes, Fares, Markets, Liberties, Pꝛiuiledges,

fes andthe like. (c) Wut if the teafe be made of them by Dede fox peares, it map be
ged by Swap of Contract to have an action ef debt, but diftreine the Lefloz cannot. Meither
Gall ít patte With the graunt of the teuerion fos that {tie no vent incident to the rewerfon,
But it any rent berelerued in fuch cafe bpon a leafe fos life, tt is vtterlp voive, for that (n that


cafe neadíon of Debt doc lye. Wut (£a man demiſeth the veiture os herbage of bis land he may.


teferne a rent, foz that the thing (s mapnosable, and the Leftoz map Diftreine the chattel vpon
the Land: And ſo a reuerſion, 02 a remainder of lands oꝛ tenements may be granted referving
a rent, £o? the apparant poffibilitp that (t map come ín poſſeſſion, and thep are tenements within
the words of Littlcton.

(a) Ft appeareth bp Littleton thatrefervando ig an apt Word of referuing arent, and fois
reddendo, folvendo, faciendo, inveniendo, dummodo, and the like,

(b) And note a diuerfitie betweene an exception( Which ts ener of part of the thing granted
and of a thing in cfle) £o? which exceptis, faluo, preter, and thelitebe apt $0009 ; ‘and a refer=
sation Which is alwapes of athing not in effe, but neSolp created oz rcferued out of theland
0? tenement demifeo, (c) Poteritenim quis rem dare & yartem rei retinere , vel partem de per-
tinentijs, & illa pars quam retinet (emper cum co eft & femper fuit. (d) But out of a general
a part may be excepted, ag out of a Dannoz; an Acre, Ex verbo generali aliquid excipitur,and
' mota part of a certaintie, ag out of twentie Acres, one.

3it (a further to bee obſerued that the Lelloz cannot referue to any other but to bimfelfe,
fo? Litt.fapth referue a luy,tefertse to himfelfe. (e) FE two topntenantg be, ethep make a leafe
fo) yeares by paroll, 02 den poll reſeruing arent tooneofthem, this hailenureto them both,
but (£ ít bec fo reſerued by Deed indented, tt fall enure to him alone by Wap of concluſion.

CF) Littleton here ts putting ofa cafe, and not making aleafe, fo then he Would not referue
the rent to him, but to him, and his heires, fox otherwile the rent (ball determine bp bis death
££ be die within theterme. (2) Wut Fhe referue a rent qeneralipswithout hewing to whom it
ſhall gor, tt thail goe to his heires. FE he reſerue a rent tohimanyY bis Aflignes, pet the vent
thall Determine by bis death, becaufe the reſeruation (s god but during bis life. So itis tf bc
teferuc atent to him anb bis €recutozs tt (ball end by bis death, becaufe the heire hath the re=
uet(ion, and the rent was incident to tbe renerfion. So if a man warrant landto B. and bis
afignes, the aſſignee mutt bouche during the life of B. £o; the iarrantie continue but only du⸗
ting the life of B. for the Warrantiots but fog Itfe, £o» Sant of Wozds of inheritance. Woe tf the
Swarrantie be to P. his heires anb affíanes;foas he hath an inheritance therein,thon bis afliqnee
fbail bouche after his deceafe. So (f the rent be refcrucb to the Leſſoꝛ his heires and afliqnes,
ſo as it be incident tothe inheritance, then (ball all the aflignecs of the reuerſion cniop


the fame, 24 à
Œ 4Avnual rent. &yo it ig if tbe rent be referued eucry thoo 02 thee


oz mozepeares. Ot Rents Littleton voth crcellentlp treate hercafter in bis Chapter of rents,
and therefore in this place thus much (ball fuffíce.


€ 4 aiftreiner pur le rent. Pere it is neceflarie to be (eene of tobat
things a diſtreſſe may be taken foz a rent, and how the diftrefle ought to be demeaned, (h ) Sirk
ít muf be of a thing, wbercof a valuable propertic is infome bodp, and therfore Dogs, Bucks,
Dong, Contes and theltke thatare fere nature cannot be diſtreyned. Hecondip, although it
be of baluable pzopettíc as a hozfe,¢c. pet oben a man 02 Woman ig riding on him, 07 an arc
in a mang bano cutting of wod and the Itke, they are £o? that time priufledged and cannot be
Diftrepned. (i) 2, Q3aluable things Chall not be diftretned foz rent fez benefit and maintenance
of trades, Which by confequent arcfor the Common-wealth, and are there bp Ænthozitp of
Law, as abozfe in a Sinithes Hop ſhall not be diſtreyned fog the rent iſſuing out of the hop,
102 the horſe, tc. fu the Hoſtry; noz the materials tn the tocaucrs hop for making of cloth, noz
cloth o; garments ina Gapiozs flop, nos facks of coꝛne o? meale, in à Mill noz in a Market;
noz any thing diftrapned for damage fefaunt,fozít (a in cuftodp of Law, and the like,
(k) 4. Mothing thal be diftrepned fo; rent, that caunot be rendered againe in ag god
plight as it was at the timeof the diftrefietaken, ag ſheaues o3 {hocks of come o2 the like cans
hot be diſtreyned foz rent, but fos Damage Écfant thep may be diftrepned, Wut charrets 02 carts

With come may be diftrepned for rent foz thep map befafelpreftezed. ©
(D. Bealts belonging to the pies, aucria caruce fhallnot bediftreined (whichis the ans
cent Common Law of England fo no man hati be diſtreyned by the btenfillg o» inſtruments
of big trade o? pzofeffion,ag the are of the T on the bakes of afcboller) while gods
3 oF


(b) Li.7. fo.35.Butteafz, Li.
10.f2. $9.60.

(€) jo. 4f. p. 5. 12.7 ff.20.
20.E, 4.10,

1-H. 4.152,31 3 H. 4. 82.
19.€.2.Fmes 126.44.E.3.45
9. A]. 34. 36.a/[.60.14.E.3.
Se r fac. 22, s. E. 3.68.
17.E.3.7 5.11. H. 240.
3:H.6.21.45.12. H.6.12 —
21H. 6.11.5. H.7.39.

21. H.7.19.17.E. 1, £x. 11 2.
23. El. Dyer 377.


(4) 40.E. 3.47.8.£ 3.67.
CMT EEG i
31.a[[. p. 30.3.a[.2.26 a[f.66.
32. E. 3. Br.29 1.8. E. 4.8.
10. El. Dy.276.F 1. Coven
Browning & Beefions cafe


f9.131.132.dre:


(b) so. E. 3.13.13..4ff-$.
38.E, 3.10. 21.£.3.4.34.a/-
Sf-11.29 E.3.14. 3-H.6.45.
10.H.6.8.41.33.H.6.1.
35.H.6.34.17.aff. 14.H.8.1,
44-E.3. 43. P / Cori. 361.

(©) Brad ii. 1. f. 32.9. dr f.249
(d)9.61.Dy.364.38 H.6 38
14.H.8.1.23,€.5.8.
2-E.3.56. 5.£.3 66.
34. ff 11.

(6) 5.E.4.4. 14: E.5.

bro. 282 lib.8. fo. 70.771.

(D) Vi. Self. 51 4.215.216»
Ge. 10.8, 4.18. 11.E. 3.
"Af 86. 17.H.8.19.

21. H.7.25.30. H.8.Dy.45.
(BE) Mifeh. s Ta in repl inter
Wootton & Edwin bank leroy.
Hil.33.El.Rot.1431.inba ke
le roy enter Richmond & But-
eber.


Vi.for this werd Diftreine,
Seit.136.
(h)r4.H.8.25.2.E.2.rir. Di-
ffrefe 6. R.a. Refeows 11.
7-E. 3. Movr. 199.15. E.2.
Auewry 2.

(1) 23. E. 4.49.5. 7. Hy. 1.9.
22.E.4.36 4 E 6.tit. Dif.
Br.74.


(K)18.E.3.4.a.11.H.7.
14.8.21. H. 7. 39.0. 22.€.4.
$6.62: H. 4.1 5.

(DOkebam 38.39.

Bra. li. 4. f-217.F.N.B. 99.4
Re1.97. Elet.li, 2.8.41,
Mirr.cap.2.§.1 5-16.
4.E.3.1.39.6. 3.17.


Lib.t.


(m) 11.H.7.16.

3.F, 3. Aff. 46.9.

(u) 5.H.5. 1.5.10. H 7.21.
Y1,H.7. 4.4, 15. H.7 17.
38. E.2.«wnwrie 219. 6.E.4.
ai.E.4.49* .

4-£.3. diftres,18.27-F.3.80,
2.H.4.16.

(0) Ma. lebr cap. 4.

WL ap. 16.

adr 3.Ph.& mar.csp 13.
Fleta lib.a.e4p.20.

6. H. 3 anewrie 241,

3e. “ff. 38. 1.H.6.9.
22,E, 4. 11. F./N. B. $9.
Door & Student. lib.2,cap.
27. $.H.7. fel.o.

(p) 33 H-8. ri. diffrer, Br, 65


(q) 4.£.6.0se.diftres.7 4.
E,W.B.100.E,
(1) 5- E. 5 tie ranf-11.


(0) 34. M. 6.18.


(0 Regif. F.N.'B.1c0. 101.


(n) y. M 6.13.lib. a. f 1.49.
Lib.3.fol. X6. 34. B.r.tir.
eunyrie 233. 33,H. Zr.
velsefe 11.F.N.B.82.83.

G lemal. lib, 9.ap. 35.

Fleta lib. 2.eap. 40. 7 hib. 3e


eap. 4.

"BraBon.lib. 2. fol. 36,
W.1.c4p.35. 35. E. 3 capit,
Brison. fol. 57. c7 7.


(x) 45. F.3.9 20. £.4.10.
34. H 6.48. 35. H.6.34.
9g.H.6.15.1.H.4.22.
(y) 2.€.2.Ejop.25 3°
39.€.3.13.
Pl.(ons.434:18.E. 3.16.
15.E.3.Efep.236.
14.H.4.32.

(a) 14-H.6.23. 8. H.4.7.


(3) Xefilue. Tapeh. 2.Eliz,
50 Communs Banco,

(b) Mich. 31.7 3 2 Elix, in
Communi Banoe adiudze in
Londens cafe.

(€) 58,H.6.24. 3o. E, 3.21.


(C7. OfTenantforyeares.  — 568558.


02 other bealts which Bra&toncalg animalia (oz catalla) otiofa map be diftratned (m ). 6, Fur⸗
nefles, Candrons o; the like fired te the freehold, 02 tbe deoꝛes 0; Xo(nboSore of a boufe , o2 the
like cannot be biltratned, (n) LaGip,beatts that efcaps map be diftrained fo? rent,though thep
bane not bene ienant anb couchant, (o) Note that he that diftraines any thing that hath lite
mu impound them, in a lasofull pound within three miles in the fame Countic, and thatis
etther Ouert 92 Open, ina Pinfold made fo? fach purpoſes, oꝛ (n bis oone Ciofe,oz in the Ciofe
ofanother by bis confent. And tt te therefoze called Open, becaufe the Dsoner map giue his
Wattle meate and drinke wit hout trefpaffe to amy other, andthenthe Cattie mutt be fuftained
at the perill of the Dioner. (p)D2 itis a Pound Conert o2 Clofeag to impoundthe Cattic in
fonc part of bis boufe, and then the Cattie are to bee (nftained Sith meate and brine at the
perillof him that diftratneth, and be ſhall not bane anp fatiffaction therefore. Wut tf the ota
ftre(Te be of Utenfilg of houſhold o2 {uch like Dead gode Which map take harme by Wet 02 Wea=
ther, 02 be ftolnc a$pay, there he muft imponnd them (n.a boufe os other Pokwnd coucrt Within
m míleg Within tbe fame Countte, foz (€ he impound them in a Pownd oucrt hee muft au⸗
wer koz them.

(9) FE tbe diſtreſſe be taken of gods Without cauſe tbe Owner may make Reſcous, but
t£ tbcp diftrained Without caufe, and impounded, the DSoner cannot bzeakethe Pownd and
takethemont, becaufethep arethen in the cu@odic.ofthe Law.

Cr) But it a manoiftraine Cattie for damage fcafant, anb put them in the pond, anb the
D Soner that had common there make frefh fuite; and find the deze bnlockeb, he map tait tbe
taking swap of the Wattle (ti a parco fracto. (€ ) FE the DSwner bzeake the Pokwnd, and take
away bis gods, the partie diftraintng map haue big Acton de parco fracto , andhee may alfo
take bis gods that were diftratned $obereforucr he find them, and (mposonb them agatne.

Ft te called a t2it de parco fra&o of thele Words (n the Mꝛit (t) Parcum illum vi & armis
fregit. And the forme thereofappeare in the Regifter and F.N.B. Z

Wut tés to be obferued that for the rent bue the laſt bap of the Œcarme, the Leflorcannot
diſtraine becauſe the Œerme ts ended, and therefore fome tfe to referne the laft haifo peares
rent, at the Feaſt of the Patiutiteof Saint lohn Baptifl befoze the end of the Qr erme, foag {€
the rent be net then paid, he map diſtraine betweene that and Michaelmafle following.


€ Altion de debge Note à Diuetfitie bethocene à rent reſexued
pon a leafe £02 peares, refer ning a pearelp rent; the Lefloz may baue feuerall Actions of debt
fo? cucrp peares rent. But bpon a bend o? contract fo? payment of feucrall fummes.no Action
of debe lieth till theiaft pap be paff. But otheriwile it is of a Recoguisance, which feat large
and the reafon tbercof cap. Releafes Se& 512.513. (u) Note that the 307b thali not bane ar
acion of Debt fo? releite 02 forefcuage due onto him , becaule hee hath other remedie, but hie
Grecutozs 92 Adminiſtratoꝛs fall hanean Aion therefore, becaufcit is now becomeag a
flower falre from the (loce, and thep haue no other remediec, Neither Chall the 3020 haue an
Action of debt for aide, pur file marier 62 faire fitz Chiualer foz the caufe afozefain.


€ «Mes en tiel cafe sl couient que le leffor foit feifie de me[mes les tene-
ments altemps del leac, car eft bone plea pur le leffee a dire que le leffor nauoit
riens en les tenements al temps del leafe. And the teafon of this is, fos


that ín cuery contract there muſt be quid proquo , foy contra@us eft quafi a&us contraadum,
and therefore if the Leſſor hath nothing in the land, the Leflæ hath not quid pro quonosanp


thing for which he fboulo pap any rent. Bnd tn that cafe be map allo picad, thatthe Xi cíTos non


dimifit , anb gine in emtdence the other matter, ;


€ 55 (x) nonquele leaſe foit per fait indent dre. PE the leaſe be made

by deed indented then are both parties concluded; Cy ) but (f (t bebp ded poll the Leſſee is not e=
ſtopped to ſay that the leffoz,had nothing at the time of the XLeafe made. A leſſee Foz the life of B.
makes aleafe for peares bp decd indented, and after purchafe the renerfion (n £e, B dieth, A. ſhall
avoid his owne dLeafe,foz be map confelle ¢ anotd the leaſe which tok effec in point of intereff,
and determined bp the death of B. But if A. hadnothing tthe land, anv made a Leafe foz
xeares bp deed indented, and after purchafe theland, the Leſſoz (s afweliconciuded, ag the
Leſſee tofay that the Leſſor bad nothing in theland, and here (t worketh only bpon thecon-
clullon, and the Lefloz cannot confefleand avoid ag hes might (the other cafe. (z) Fifa man
talit a Leafc of his ofwne Land bp deed indented referning a Rent the Lee (g conclave.
(a) Wut (£a man take a Leaſe of the herbage of his osome Land by Deed indented, this is no
conclafion, to fap thatthe Leſſoꝛ Had nothing in the Land, becaufe tt Wag mot made of the land
it ſelle: (b) but {fa man take a Leafe for peares of bis otonc Land bp dedindented, the ex
ftopeli Doth not continue after the terme ended. Foꝛ bp the making of the leafe the cltoppell
doth gro and confequentip bp cheend of the icafe , tbe eftopell Determines (c) and that
part


mc


Lib.


& eff afca-
BP oxi Queen
leafe pur terme Dc
ans per faitou fang
| fait, il ne befoigne
aſcun liuerie de Sei⸗
fin deſte fait al Leſ⸗
ſee, mes il poet enter
quant tl boet p force
De meſme De Leale,
Des des Feokints
faits cn pats, ou
Dones cn E Cale, ou
leafe pur term De bie,
en ttels cafes ou
Franktenement pat-
fera,ficeo foit per fa-
it ou fauns fait, il
couiẽt auct bu liuery
De ſeiſin.


Of Tenant for yeares.


part of thefadentare Sobich belonged to the le(Teo, Dott
Sohich (ponto not be i£ the eftoppell continned.


Section 59. |


Nditisto bevn-
derftood , That
ina leafefor yeares by
deed or without deed,
there needs no Liuery
of feifin tobe madeto
the Leffee, but he may
‘enter when he will by
force of the fame
leafe. But of Feoffe-
ments made in the
Countrie, or gifts in
Taile, or Leafe for
terme of life, in {uch
cafes where a Free-
hold fhall paffe,ifit be
by Deed, or without
Deed, it behooueth
to haue Liuerie of
Seifin.


Sect.59.


after the terme ended, belong to the leſſoz,


€ Rue de feifin.

Traditio, 02 delibera-

tio feifina tg a folem
nitie that the La requiret,
for the pafling of a Freeholde
of Lands oj Œenements bp
Deliuerte of Seilin thereof.
(b)Interuenire debet folenni-
tasin mutatione liberi. tene-
menti ne contingat donatio-
nem deficere pro defectu pro-
bationis.

And there be two kinds of
Itnerte of feifin, viz. a liuerie
in (c) Ded, anda liucricin
Law, A liuericin Ded, is
Xoben the Sfeotto, taketh the
ting of the deze, og turfe oz
twiggeoftheland, and deli
uereth the fame bpon the land
tothe feoffæ in name of ſei⸗
fin of theiand, &c, perhofti.
uin & perhafpam & anulum
vel per fuflem vel baculum,
&c.

A fetfed of an boufe in fee,
and being inthe houfe, (d)
faith to B. “3 ocuífe to pou


this bonfe for terme of mp itfe ; this ig a god beginning to limit the ftate, but here Manteth li⸗
ueric, À itnerie in Ded map be done tio manner of Wapes by a folemne act and words, as by
Delinerte of the ring oz hafpe of the poze, or by abganch o2 twig of a tre, 02 by a turfe of the
land,and With (c) thefcoz the like words, the feoffo? and fcoffe both holding tbc Deede of


feoffement, and the ring of the Deoze,halpe,bzanch,twigge,oz turfe: and the feoftoz faping, Were
3| deltuer pou fetfin e bileRion of this boufe, tn the natreofalithe Lands ano Tenements
contaínco in this Tmipomenccomine to the forme and effect of this Deed. D2 bp Words without
any Cereinon beingat the houſe daze, 02 Within the boufe; bere J de=
liner poufeifin [c onfe, in the name of feifin and poilellion of ail tbe iands
andtenements contathedsn this D: Et fic defimilibus, oz enter pou into thts houſe o;
land, and fauc and en(oy fi


Teecording to the Deed ; 02, Enter into thehoule oz land, and Gov
gine pou foy, 02 Jam AS iba (bail entop this land according to the Ded, 02 the ithe. Foꝛ
ſt words map amount to alinetie Within the view, much moze (t hhall vpon theland, Wut tfa
man deliuer the Deed of fcoffement opon the land, this amounts to no liuerie of the land, fog tt
hath another operation to takc effect ag a Deed: but ik he deltuer the Ded bpon the land in
name of feifim of all the lands contained in tbe Ded, this is a god ltuerie:and ſo are other books
entended that treat heraof, that the Deed was dDeliuered tn name offeifin of that land. Perebp
itappraretb, Ghat the deliuerie ofanp thing bpon the land tn name of feifin of that land,though
{tbe nothing concerning theland,ag a ring of golo,(e god,and fo ath tt benc reſolued bp ail
the Judges and fo of the like,

FE diners parcelis of land be contepned fn a Ded, and the Feoffoꝛ deliuers ſeiſin of one pat-
cellaccozding to the Deed, all the parcels doc paſſe abbeit be fatth mot ( fn namo of all,ec. )be-
canfe the ad contevneth all. Andfot€ there be diners Feoffees, and hee make liuery to one
according to the Deed, the land paffetb to all the Feoſffees, and pet the plapner Wap ts tofap(in
thename of the whole, oꝛ of all the Feoſtees.)

Alfa man make a Charter infer, and deltucr fetfin Fo2 life fecundum formam carta, the whole
fe umple (bati paſſe, for (t ſhall be taken moſt ſtrongly agaínft the Feoſfoꝛ. Note that tbefe
Sods ( Secundum formam cart ) are vnderſtod accomding to the quantitie and qualítíe of
the effectual eftate conteynedin the Dav, Jia man mabe a leafe foz peares bp Ded, —


18,£.3. fe 16.41 E. 3.19,
40. M. 10.2.7. 1.3 E.3.4
43-E. 3.Feoff- 1. Pl. ( om.
25.0. & 303.5. V.S H.66.


(b)£raëf. li. 2.04.15.


(c)Bradt.li-2.04.15.6° 1 8.
Brit .ca.33.1n fiae ſo 87.
Flet.li.3.0015..— -


(4) Li,6.fo.16.Sharps cafe,
bu, Xo me.


(e) See of this more S eT. 6o.


41.£.3. 17 5. AT. ALP 10.
38. ff. p.2.38.E. 3. Vr.
39. Mp. 12.26. f: 39.
27 Ajfp.61:18.E.3.16.
11.6 fo.26. Sharps cafe.


43. E.3.tit.Feoffm. 51.
35.H.8. Feeffm.Br.


$0.E.3. Rot. 'arl.hu. 30.


13.8. 3,8]fop.177.


Ibisero.


7.8. 4.25.39.)4[[:40.
x0. .A[f.13.43. 4.29.


Lib ^ (ap.


Micb.3 3. dy 34.El (. inthe
Kings bench Inter Hezge &
Croff for lands in Louden.
Vid. T sors. 395.


V See morc of this SeB.66.
11.4.4.91. 19040). *
1y.H,8. 9.6.


Bridgewaters Cafe.


Vi. $48. v.


38.8.3. 01. 38.4 p.3.

4 3 4f: p.20.Temp: H.8.
Tit. Feeffments Br. 7.
18.6.3.16 b.
23.H.8.F.18. 9. E. 4.39.
po Moyle,
Braét. lib. 2 .eap.18. &

lib, a. fo.22 5.2.

(a) 9. E.4.39. 38. E. 3. 11.
(b) 9. E.4.28.40.5. H.7..
3. H.6. tis. Plein. s.


11.421.432. 1t. E.5..4/f: 86.


(€) 3t p.23.


(d). Hill: 5. Elic.ret.630.
in com.bancoyinter Browne d
Tirreyadiudged.

"Dier 16.Eliz.234.
3-Eli.Dier 1 31.


Lib. 3.fol.3§.intar
Iemnwgs dr Bragge.


Leb. z.fo. 31.32.
Bertyfsyertbs eafb.


- tn the whole, from being ou(Eco oz diſpoſſeſſed.


Of Tenantforyeares;  Seël.s8.


liner ſeilin according tottje fozwtc anb effect of the Dede, pet he hath bnt an eſtate foy peares,
and the liuery is boive as Littleton faith, So tf A. by Ded giuelandto B. to haue and to
holp after the death of A.to B. and bis betreg, this to a boite Ded, becauſe be cannot referue to
bünfclfe a particular effate, and contruction mult be made bpon the Swhole Ded, and if liuery
be made accozding tothe forme and effec of the Ded, the liuery alſo is bode becaufe the linerp
teferretl to a Ded that bath no effect in Law, and therefore tt cannot woꝛke fecundum for.
mam & effectum carte. And fo it Wag adiudged, & fic de fimilibus, * Bnd it ig to be obfers
ued that neither the 4reoffoz being abſent, can make liucrp, noz the Sfeoffe being abfent can
take linerp ; but bp warrant of Pttoznep,bp Deed and not bp parol,becaufe it conceructh mats
tct of Ereehoid. :

Vide Sect.x. in Bridgewaters Cafe, Where a man hath a moneable eftate of (nberítance, for
trample there put,in 13.acres : the queſtion ts Sobere liuery fballbe made, Firſt, iFtbepbepar-
cell of a Dannoz, thep map pafle bp the name of the Wannoz, but tEthep bein grofle then tbe
Charter of Feoſtment mutt be of 13, acres, lping and being in the mcadoS of 80.acreg, gene=
rally without bounding oz diſcribing of the fame in certaintic, and liuerp of the ſeiſm of anp
13, acres allotted to the fcoffæ fox a peare fecundum formam cartz is a god liuery to pafle the
Content of 13. acres Swherefoeucr the fame. lic in that meadow, In tbe fecondcale where one
entire Maunoꝛ tg feperate and deutded, as (s afozefatd, there is no queftion but the liuery mutt
be made of that Mannoꝛ, but in the other cafe Where twwo Mannoꝛs are feparate, and deuided
alternis vicibus, there the Wharter of fcoffinent mult be made of both, and ituerp inthat Man⸗
102 Which be is fcífop of in amp one peare fecundum formam carte, andthe next peare in the
other fecundum formam carte : fo there are two diftint SPannos, and feucrall eſtates
tn them,

A linery in Law is &oben the Feolfos faith tothe frcoffe being inthe vie of the houfe os
land, ( 31 gíuc pou ponder land to pou and pour beíreg anb goe enter into the fame, and take
pofleflion thereofaccordingly,) and the Jreoffc doth accezdinglp in the life of the -frcoffoz enter
this ts à god fcoffment fox fignatio pro traditione habetur. Bnd herewith agreveth Braéton,
Item dici poterit, & affignari quando res vendita vel donata fit in confpe&u quam venditor &
donator dicit fe tradere : And in another placehe faith, in (cifina per affectum & per afpectum.
Wut tf cither Jrcoffoz 02 the Feolkee Dic before entry the itucrp is voyde. And i(nerp Within
the bic ig god Where there is no Deed of feoffiment, (a) And ſuch a liuerp (9 ged albeit the
land lie in another country. (b) 4 man map banc an inheritance in an vpper chamber, though
the lower butidings and fopis be in another, and fecíng itis an inheritance cozpezeall it fall
pale bp liuery. (c) A man maketh a Charter of fcoffment and deltucrs feifin Within the biew,
the feoffee dares not enter for feare of death, but claimes the fame, this ſhall belt the freehoia
and firjeritance in himsalbett bp the liverp no eftate paſſed to him, neither in Ded,noz in Law,
fo as fuch a clatme Chall feruc, afSwell to deft a new eſtate and right in the eoffæ, as in the
cOmon cafcto reuck at ancient cftate and right in the diffctfe,ec. ag Mhalbe fato hereafter moze
at large in the chapter of centinuallclatme. And fo note a liuery tn Law thalbe perfected and
executed bp an entrp (1 Law. (à) Ff aman be diffeifed, anb make a Ded of feoffment, and
aletter of Attoꝛney to enter and takepofleftion, and after to make liuerp fecundum formam
cane, this is a god Ecoffment albeit be Was out of poſſeſſion at the time of the Charter made
foz the Duthoztty gtuen by the letter of Attozneyp is executozic, and nothing palled bp the delt⸗
uery of the Deed tillitucrp of feifin Masmade. And in anctent letters of Attorney power is
given to others to take poſſeſſton forthe Feoffor. But (£ aman be diffetled, and make wꝛiting
of Leaſe for peares and deltucr the Ded, and after deliver tt vpon the ground, thefecond deli⸗
herp (g botde, for the fir veliuery made it a Deed, and Fos that the leale for peares muff take
effect bp the deliucrp of the Deed therefore the Deed deliucred When he Was out of potiellion
Was botde, Wut fo it is not of a Charter of fcoffment, for that takes effect bp the liuery and
feifin. Wut tf the Leſſor had delinered it ag an efcrowe, tobe delinered ag bis Wed bpon the
ground, this bad bœnc co.

A man makes a leafe £02 peares and after makes a Ded of fcoffinent and deltyers fetfin, the.
Lefle being fn pofellion and noi aflenting to the fcoffment, this liuerp is bepde, £02 albeit the
Heokkor hath the freohoid and inheritance in bim, pet that is not fuficient, £o a ligerp muſt be
ginen of the poffe(Tion alfo: but (£ the leflee be abfent,and hath neither wife nozfernants (though
bc hath cattcll) bpon the ground the liuerp of feifin hall be geod, |

3E à mam be feifeo of an houle, € of diuers ſeuerali clofes in one Countie in fe, anb makes a
ltafe thereof fox veares, andafterMard maketh a feoffement in fee of the fac, and makes tues
rie of {eifin (n the Cioles, (the Leſſee oꝛ hts Wife 02 feruants then being in che bonfe) the lfuerp
(8 bopd fo? the Whole : £02 the leſſee cannot be bpon cuety parcell of the land to him Demifed, foz
the preferuation and continuance of his poſſeſſion therein. And therefore his betng in the boufe,
62 bpon any part of the land tohim demiled, (e fyffictent to paclerue andcontinne his poſſeſſton


fox


Lib. Of Tenant for yeares. Sel. 60. 49


Motea great Diver Stic, when a man hath two ayes to pale landg,and both of the Wapes 7-£.4.20.6. per rontsles uf.
bc bp tbe Common Law,and he entendeth to paffe them by oncof the Swayeg, pet vt res magis 114-471. Pl.Comt 52.
valeat ít hall patie bp the other, Wut Sobere a man map palle Lands either bp the Common PET
La%,07 bp ratfing of an fe, and fetling it bp tbeffatutc , there in many cafes it (g otbersoi(c,
For example, FE à man be ſeiſed of txos acreg in fer, and Ictteth one of them £02 peares, and tne
tending to palTe them both by feoffement, maketh a Charter of fcoffement , and maketh liucríc
trt tbe acré in polſeſſion, in name of beth, onelp the acre in poſſeſſion paſſeth bp tbelíucric, Pet
££ the lefTeo attoꝛne, the reuerfion of that acre fall paſſe by the decd and attomnement, for be tg
£n by the Common Law, and tn the per in both, anbfo tn tbe like, ButotherSifeit ts, it tbe
father make a Charter of fcoffement to bis fonne, and a letter of Attorney to make itueric, and
mo inerte is made, pet no tfe hall rife to tbe fon, becaufe be (boulb be in by the (latutc in anoz
ther degree, viz in the poft, and the intention of the pattics wozke much both inthe taífing
and Direction of bles. So i£ Ceity que vie and his fcoffecs had topned in afcoement after
the ſtatute of 1.R.3.€c, tt had beene the fcoffeinent of tbe feoffecs and the confirmation of Cefty
quc vie, £o? the fate at the Common daw hail bepicferreo, Sotoconciude in this point, Ot
Arechold and Fnheritances, fome be coꝛpoꝛcall, ag houles,rc.ianog,¢.thele are to pale by 1i-
uerie of fcím,b» Deed oz Without Ded ; fome be incozpozcail, as Pouowfong, Kents, Come
mons, Eſtouers, xc. thefe cannot pafle without Ded, but without any liucrie, Bnd the law
hath proutded the Deed in place oz ſtead of a liuerte, Bnd fo (t is (£ aman mabea leafe, atio bp
Dad grant the reuerfion in fee , here the freehold With attoynement of theicheeby the Dede
doth pale, which ts in lieu ofthelineric, See Braët-hib.2.cap.18. Brett traditio de re corpora-
lide perfona in perfonam de manu, &c. gratuita tranflatio,& nihilaliud eft traditio in vno. {en-
fu, nifi in poffeffionem inductio,de re corporali ; & ideo dicitur,Quod res incorporales non pa-
tiuntur traditionem ficut ipfum ius quod rei fiue corpori inhærer, & quia non poffunt; res incor-
porales poffideri (ed quafi,ideo traditionem non patiuntur, & c.

This antient manner of conucpanceby £coffement and iiuery of ſeiſin, doth for many relpects
exceed all other conuepances, Foꝛ (as hath beene ſaid) it the teoſtoꝛ be out of poſſeſſion netther
Ene,recoucric, Indenture of bargaine and fale inrolleb,noz other conueyance , doth anopd an
eftate by wzong, andreduceclesrelp the eftate of tbe feoffez, andmakea perfet Tenant of the
Frehold,but onelp liuerie of feifin bpon the land: the other conuepances being made off from
the ground, doe fometimes moze hurt than god, hen the feoffo? is out of poileflton, An» pet
in feme cafes à freehold hall pale bp the Common Law without liverte of (cifin: As if a
boufe oz land belong to an office, bp the grant of the office by Deed, the houle o2 land pafteth ag
belonging thereunto, Soil a boufe or chamber belong to a Lozodie,byp the grant of a Cozo-
die, the houleoz chamber pa(fetb. 29. Freehold map bp cuftome be furrendzed Without liuerie,ag
hereafter (ball be fai: and fo of aſſignement of Dower ad oftium Ecclelix, 0; otherwife, and oe Honntfelrcare,
by exchange a Freehold may gaffe Soithour ituerte,as hereafter Mall be fato in this Chapter. ser tee


Seciion 60.


Vtifaman letteth
lands ortenements


Li.z. fe.3 5.36.Sir R.Hey-
wards cfe.


VR 3-c8.1, a1. H.7,


Lib. a. fo. 5 5. Bucklers cafe.


1.H.7.38. 8.H.7.4.


31.H.6.16.8.H.7.4.
M. 31.E.1eoram Rege. Ra


«I [Dr fait, on fauns
fait. For teeing that
the remainders take effec


€ Es ft bom
Mitts terres


22. H. 6.1.19,£.4. 1.


ou Cenements per
fait, ou fans fait, a
terme des ans,
le remainder oufter
abn auter put terme
De bie, ou en taile, ou
en fee Donque en tícl
cafe tl coutent que le
leſſor fait vn liuerie
De ſeiſin a Le leſſee per
terme deans, ou au⸗
terment riens paſſa
8 cur enle remainð
comt d le leſſee ent en


by Deed or without
Deed for terme of
ycares, the  remain-
der ouer to another
for life , orintaile, or
in fee; in this cafe it
behooueth, that the
leffor maketh liuery of
feifintothe leffee for
yeres, otherwife no-
thing paffeth to them
in the remainder, al-
though that the lef-
fec enter into the


#


bp linette,there needs no deed,
€] Le remainder (g
a refidue ofan effate in land
Depending bpon a particular
eftate, and created together
With the fame, and tn awe
Rattin tt {g calicd Remanere,
« Fait vn linery de
(eifin al Leſſee. This Line
tp ig not neccilarie in this
cafe fo; the icilee htmfeife,bes
caufe be hath but a Œerme
£o? peares, but tt is forthe bee
nefit of them in the rem’, fo
as the linery tbe leſſes thal en=
ure forthe benefit of them in
therem’ : £02 the ituerte of the
poftcitíoncoulo not be made te
the next in —


18.E. 4.13.


Lib.


10.E.4.1.13.£.4.15.
y5.£.4,18.22.£.4.55.
40. EF, 3.10.41.


Temps H.8. Feffments73.


6.H.4.2.b. Litt. 155.
3-H.7.13.


Ruth.eap.4. verfe 7.8.
"Deut.2 5.9.10.


Ganefis 23. verfe 11.


(a) Bracton,lib. 1,


(b) (P.19.El(. i» Com-


muni Bance.

Pl. Comin Aff de freth-
foree. 91. 29..4ff:26.
43. ANp. 3. 3. H. 6.19.
in formées.


Cap. 7.


the voſſeſſion belonged tothe
le lee fox peares , and fo; that
the particular terme , amb all
thetemainder make fn Las
but onc cftate, and take effect
at onetime therefore the liue⸗
rie is to bec made to the leſſe.
Bat tf a leafe foy peares
Githout Deed bee inade £0 A.
and B. the rematnder to C. (n
fee, and liuericig madeto A. tn
theabfence of b, inthe name
of both; ít feemeth the liuerie
íg god to beft the remainder ,
and there tg a Dinerfitte , be-
tweene two topnt Attornies
to receiue liuerie for another,
anbliuerp and ſeilin is made
to one of them, tn the name of
both, this ts cleerelp void be⸗
caufe they had but a mere and


Of Tenant for yeares.


lestenements, Ct (t
le termoz en tíelcas
entra Deuant aſcun
liuerie De feifin fait
alup , Donque eft le
franktenemt a auxy
lereuerfion en le lef=
fo? : Mes ft il fait
liuerie De feifin a le
leffee , Donque eft 1e
franktenement oue
le fee a eur en le re=
mainder, folonque le
forme Del grant a ie


. bolunt del leffoz,


 Setl.6o.


tenements. And ifthe
Termour in this cafe
eritreth before any li-
uery of feifin made to
him, then is the Free-
hold and alfo the re-
uerfion in the Leffor.
But if he maketh liue-
rie of feifinto the Lef-
fee , then isthe Free-
hold together with
the feeto them in the
remainder acording to
the forme ofthe grant,
& the wil ofthe leffor.


bare authezttie, and they beth doc,in Lao make but onc Ættonep , vnleſſe the toarrant bee
fopntip and fenerallp, but the leflee fo? peares hath an tntereft in the land, Againe, it A. (a ta
make a feofinent to B. and C. and their heres Without ded, and A. makes ituerteto B. inthe
abfence of C. in the name of both, and to thetr hetres; this Ituerte {8 bold to C. becauſe a man
being abfent cannot take a Freehold by a ltuery, but bp big Attorney being lawfuilp authoriſed
to recetuc liuerie bp Ded, vnleſſe the feoffment be made bp deed, andthen the liucrieto onc tn the
nate of both ig god.

Note there ig a diuerfitie bet weene liuerie of fetfin of land, and the deliuerte of a Deed; fo2 tf
a man deliucr a Deed without faping of anp thing, ít (s a good velíueríc; but to a liuery of ſei⸗
Gn of land, words arenecellarte; as taking in his hand the Ded, and the King of the dore
CIE it be ofan beufe) op aturffe 02 twigge (tf tbe of land) and the feofte laptng his hand on
tt, the feoffog fap to the (coffee, ere 3| deliuer to pou feifin of this houle, oz of thig land, inthe
maine of all the land, contained in this Deed, accoading to the forme and effect of the Ded, (ag
hath beenefsto ) and tf it be without Ded, then the Words map be, Were F deliuer pou ſeiſm
of thts boufe oz land, €c. tobaue anb te hold to pou fo? life, o2 to pou andthe hetres of pour bo-
Die, 02 to pou and pour heires foz ener ag the cafe thal! reqiure.

10 hen the 15 infman of Elimelech gaue bnto Boas the parcell of land that Swag Elimelechs, he
toke off his ſhooe, anb gaue it onto Boas in the name of {eifin of the land (after the manner in
1frael){n the prefence, and With the teftimonte of many Sitnelles. And when Ephron infeoffer
Abraham of the field of Machepela, heefatd to bit, Agrum trado tibi, &c. 3| deliuer this
field to thee.

A man makes aleafefor peares to A. theremainder to B. ín fee and makes liuery to A. with⸗
ín tbc vie ; this liuerie is bod, Foz noman can take bp force of a lfuerte Within the bic, but
be — freehold himſelke.

([ Er ff Le termor en tiel cafe enter deuant aſcun linery fait, cic. Wy the
entrie of the leſſee be ts tn actuallpoffeflion,and then the liuery cannot bemade to him that ts in
pofleffion, fo? Quod femel meum eft, amplius meum effe non poteft. But tf the lellog and iefles
come bpon the ground, of purpofe fo? the leloz to make, and fo? the leſſee to take linery, there his
entrie veſt no acuall poffellion in htm bnttilitucrie be made; for ag (a) A ffc&tio tua nomen im-
ponitoperi tuo, And therefore (£ it be agreed betweene the diffcifoz and difleifee, that the diſſei⸗
fee fball relcafe ali bis right tothe diſſeiſoz spon the land, and accordingly the diſſetſee entreth
into the land, and deltuereth the relcafe to the diffeifoz bpon the land, this (s a geod relcafe, and
the entrte of the dtietfee, being for this purpofe dtd not auotd the diffetfin, fos his intent in this
cafe did guide hig entrie to afpectall purpofe. And fo was tt refolued (b ) bp Sir lames Dicr,
and the Whole Court of Common Pieag,Pafch.18.Eliz. vpon eutdence Which 3] my felfe heard
ano obferued. Wut il the dillctfor infeoffc the diffetfæ and others, there albert the diſſeiſee came
to take liuerte, pet when ituerte ts made,the diffeife is remitted , to the bole in iudgement of
law, ag (hall be fai moze at large in the Chapter of Remitter in bis proper place,

Sel.


Liba. ©. Of Tenant for yeares. — $ed.61.62.
i Sellion


€ ES ft Home voile
— A faítefeoft, per fait
oufans fait, De tres ou
tenements que tl ad en
plufozs Willes en bn
— Gountie, le liuerte De ſei⸗
fin fait en bn parcel de
leg tenements en bn bil-
le en le nofine De touts
fuffift pur touts les aus
tres terres & tenements
compzrebendes deins m̃
T £eoffement,en touts les
autres billes Deins m
lecoutitic, Mes {i home
fait on faít De fcoffc-


ment Des terres ou.


tenements en diuers


Counties , La il content,


enchefcun Countie auct
bn liuerie De Cei (in,


Ndifaman wilmake

a feoffement by deed
or without deed, of lands
or Tenements, which hee
hath in diuers Townes in
one Countie,the liuerie of
fcifin madein one parcell
of the Tenements in onc
Towne inthe name ofall
the reft is fufficient for all
other the Lands and Tene-
ments cóprehended with-
inthe fame feoffment in all
other the Townes in the
fame Countie,but ifa man
maketh a Deed of Feofte-
ment of Lands or Tene-
ments in diuers Counties,
there itbehoueth in euery


-Countie to hauea liuerie


of feifin. .


NR, un

Countie.
A Countie (a fet
ched trõ the French,
and Shire from the
Saxon. jfo?Styran
th the Saxon tongue
fignífictl) partiri,bes
caufe eucrie Coun=
tie 0? Shire (g bes
utded anb partco bp
certaine metes and
bounds from anos
ther, and fn Latine
ts called Gomiratus
a comitando, foi
accompanping to-
gether, And fo» ag


inuch as the inert.


of one Countie doc
not accoimpaníe to⸗
gether With men of
another Œounticat
Countie Courts ;
Turnes Al ets and
other Courts, ther⸗
fore in tudgeiment,
of La tbcp fball
take no notice of a
liucríe dn another


Countie to palle any lands in their o wne Countic, Wut of this moze (ali be faio hereafter,


Setlion 62:


CET en atcun
cas home auc-


tà per le grant dun
auter fee (imple , fee
- faile, ou frankten.
fans liuerie de ſeiſin.·
Sicome deur homes
font, a cbefcun deur
e(t feifie Dun quantí-
tie De terre Deins bu
countie,æ lun granta
fa terre à lauter en
elchange purla terre
quelauter aD, % en

etme le Wanner
lauter avanta fa ter=


Nd in fome cafe

a man fball haue
by the grant of ano-
ther a fee fimple, fee
tailejorfreehold with-
out liuery of feifin. As
if there bee two men
and each of them is
feifed ofone quantitie
of Land in one Coun-
tié, and the one gran-
tetn his Land.to the
otherin exchange for
the Land which the o-
ther hath , and inlike
maner the other gran-

$c


€ H Ere Littleton put-


tet a cale Shere
Freehold ; sc. ſhall

patle Without linerte of
and thereupon p


of anexchange of iat one
Countie that (d god by ded
ox Without decd, Without an


pP
léuerie, but tf it bee tivfeuerati
Counties there muſt bee a
Deed, Alſo of things that ite
tn grant ag Aduowſons,
Rents, Commons, Ec.an ex⸗
change of them albeit thep bec
ín one Countic , { not god;
bniefle it be bp deed, and there=
foze Littleton putteth his cafe
Swartly of lano, And in cafe
ofa fme; Which te a (eoffment
of Reco, of a dentle bya
laff will, of aſurrender, of a
telexfe oꝛ confirmation to a
le(fee fog —⸗

8


50


45.€* 3.21.


4$.€.3.31. 3.E.4.10.
9.E. 4.21.7 H.4 1,8. H.7.4.


28.H.6.2.


Libs.


Vide SeB.1.


9.E.4.38.39. 45-F.3.20,21-
45-E,3, exchange Yo.


(a) 30.£ 3. Efeh.1 5.
3-E.4.10. 9.€. 4.31.
14.H.3.30.


Lj
(b) 6.£.56. 36. E. 1. £ fh. 16
x6. E. 5. Efch. a.
y. H. 4.34. 3-E.4.11.


(c) ».£.4.21. 9. E.3.56.
31. E. 3.6.


Fftates.
Vide Set, 652.


Cap.7.
all theſe and ſome other caſes
a freehold, «c. (as bath beene
fato) map pale without line-
tie, Wut this Sword ( «f-
change) Swhich eur Authour
bete bieth, tg fo appropztated
bp Law, to this cafe ag ít
cannet bee expzefled bp anp
Pariplpais o2 ctrcumlecutic


on.
€ En ceo cafe chef


cun poet enter, orc. Foꝛ
by the exchange the parties,
albett thelands becallín one
Countic, bauc no frechold ín
Deed oz Law in them before
thep execute the fame by en-
trie; and therefoze tf one of
them dieth, before the ere
changebe crccuted bp entrie,
the exchange is boit; for the


bctre cannot enter and takeitas a


tea le primer gran⸗
to? en efchange put
la terre que le pꝛimer
grantoz aD,en ceo cas
cheſcun poit enter en
lautet terre iſſint mi-
fe en efehange fang
afcun liuerie De fet=
fin, & tiel efchange
fait per parolt De te=
nemts Deins mefme
le Countie fans ef-
cript , ef Aſſets bo⸗
ne.


of Limitation of cftate in courfe of difcent.


4


€ Big is entdent c-
| nough. ut of
bat things an ex⸗
change map be made (Swbich
ag a connctance frequent in
former times) is to be feene,
and herein man? things ave to
bee obfcrucb.

Firth, Chat the things ex⸗
changed (a) need not to bc in
ficat the time of the exchange
made, (Ag tl 3 grant arent
newly created eut of mp lands
th exchange, £0? the mannoz of
bale, this is a god exchange,

(b) Secendip, There ncc-
beth no tranfinutation of pof-


feflton , and therefore arcleafe of a Rent, 02 €ftoucrs,


is good.


Sechon 63.


€ ET files terres

ou tenements,
foient en diuers coft=
ties ,. ceftafcauoire
ceo que lun ab eft bn
Countie & ceo que
lauter ad eft en auter
Countie là (1 couient
De aver onfaít indent
Deftre fait enter eur
De tiel efchange,


Of Tenant for yeares, Seël.63.64.65.


teth his Land to the
firft Grantor in ex-
change for the Land
which the firft Gran-
torhath. In this Cafe
each may enter into
the others land, fo put
in exchange without
any liuerie of feifin.
And. fuch exchange
made by paroll of te-
nements within the
fame Countie without
writing , is good e-
nough.


urcbafo;, becaufe be Was named onlp totakcbp wap


AN if the lands er

tenements bee, in
diuers counties , viz.
that which the onc
hath in one countie,
and that which the o-
ther hath in another
countie, there it be-
houeth to haue a deed
indented , made be-
tweene them of this
exchange.


92. right to land in efchange £o2 land


Qr be things (c) exchanged need not be of one nature, fo tcp concerne lands 03 Tenements
Sohereof Littleton herefpeaketh. 20g land foa rent 02 common, 0» any other


concerne lands oz tenements, 02 fpirituall things, as € pthes, ec. fos tempozail, anb tenutebp
a diuine Seruice fos atempozall & cigntozic, ec. Wut Annuities ozfucb ithe tohich charge the
perfon only, and Dec not concerne lands 0 tenements , cannot be exchanged foziands 02 tener
ments,


Section 04. 65.


CET nota que Nd note that in
en erchange il exchanges it be-
content Gieseftates hooueth that the e-
foient egales, que {tates which both par-


am⸗


CE» efchange, il co-

vient que les e-
flates foient ega les, orc.
€ qualítip in lads is tbtefol»,
viz. jfitft equatitie in value ;


Lib.
ambideur tielt pat-
tícgaucront en les
tres (int elchan-
ges, cat fi lun boit a
gtant que lautet a-
uecoit laterre en fee
taile, pur le terre que
il aucroit Del grant
Dele auter en fee ſim⸗
ple, coment que laut
foit agree à cel, cett
efchange eft boide,
purcco d les eftates
ne font mp eqales.


2 M le man-
of ner cft. lou il eft
grant a agree enter
eur que lus aucra en
lunterre fee tale, à
lautet en lauter terre
fort a terme de bie,
ou ff ius auera en
luo terre fee taile ge⸗
nerall.æ laut en laut
terre fee tatle efpecí-
alac, iint touts
foits il couient que
en efchange les e⸗
ftates dambideux
parties ſoiẽt egales
teſtaſcauoire, fi lun
adfee Gimple en lun
terre,que lauter aue-
ratiel eftate en lau⸗
terterte, æ ſi lun ad
fectaile en lun terre
ilcouient que lautet:
ata femblable eftate
en lauter terre ac. &
fic de alijs ftatibus,
mes nek my riens a
charger del egal va⸗
lue beg tertes, car


Of Tenant for yeares.


ties haue in the lands
fo exchanged, be e-
quall, for if the one
willeth and grant; that
the other fhall haue his
land in fee taile forthe
land which he hath of
thegrant of the other
in fee fimple, although
that the other agree
this, yet this ex-
change is voide, be-
caufe the eftates be not
equall.


N the fame manner

ir is, where it is
granted and agreed be-
twcene them, that the
one fhall haue in the
one land fee taile, and
the other in the other
land but for terme of
life, orif the one fhall
haue in the one land
fee taile generall, and
the other in the other
land fee taile efpecjall,
&c. So alwayesitbe-
houeth that inexcháge
the eftates ofboth par-
ties bee equall;viz. if
the one hath a fee fim-
pleinthe one land that
the other fhall haue
like eftate inthe other
land, and if the one
hath Feetaile in the
one land the other
ought to haue the like
eftate inthe other land


.&c.and fo of other e-


ftates, but itis —
to charge ofthe equa


N3


Set. 65.


Second ly, equalitte (n quantis
tie of eſtat e gluen and taken.
Thirdly, cquality in qualitíe oz
manner of the eftate gtuest
and taken, Wut as Littleton
after faith, Œqualitiein balue
of lands in an exchange (s not
requiſite; either equalitie in
the qualitie e2 manner of the
ciate, Bnd therefore tf two
topntenants giue lands ioynte
lp to tio men, and their
beires, and the orber (n ex⸗
change of other lands te then
and their betreg in common,
this is a god exchange, and
pet the manner of their effateg
ig notequall, fo? che eftate of
one partic is topnt, and the o⸗


51


therincommon, And fo itis .


i£ te men give lands (n ex⸗
change to A. and bis beireg
fez lands from A.tothem two
and their heires, though the
one pirtie bauea iopnt eftate,
andthe other a ſole eſtate, pet


theexchangets god, The tke”


ts it the one land be of a defca=
Goletitic, and the other of an
bnbefeafible title, pet the ex⸗
change is gobtillít be auop⸗
bed,

(a) Bn exchange Sith tbe
hing ig god and pet the
King is ſeiled in his politique
capacitie, andthe ſubiect in big
naturallcagacitie But equa⸗
litíe of the quantitie of the e⸗
flate ts requifit:,ag tt appeaz
reth cleerelp tn che cafes put bp
Littleton. (b) But therein tt
tg to be cbferuco that (t (s not
neceflarie that the parties to
the exchange be feifed of an
equall eftate at thetime of the
exchange made : for (£ Tenant
tn tatle, opahulband, ſeiſed in
the right of his wife, erchange
lands, and both by the ers
change, giue a fee fimple, thie
tg goo bntillit be auoyded bp
the iſſuo tn tatie,oz by the wife
after the death of the huſband,
(4) fo ag Littleton fatth that
tn exchanges it behoueth that
the eftateg Which both parties
baut in tbelant fo erchanged
be equall (s ag much to fap ag
that the tate recipzocallp gi⸗
nen fn exchange ought to be
equal. (e) But tira partic
tion theeftates allotted to efc
ther partie need not to be e=

quati


v


(a) Brafes lil. f.. 385.
17. E. 3.13.6.


4. H.4. 2.


(b) 14.H.6.

6.E.3. £xch. 12.
8.6.2. (ui invita 28.
19. E. 3. Exch. 13.

16. E. 3. Exo. 2.

3 E. 3.19. 1 3. H. 4.13.
21.H.6,15. 13. E. 4. 3.


(d) 44.E.3.29.38.€.3.15.
39.E.3.1. 9, E. 4 21.
g.H.4.17. 30. E.1.Uf,
bre.884. 3a. E. x. tir,
exchange, 15.


(e) F.NH:62.m.


Lib.i.


(E) 9.E. 4.21. 2§.4.6.56.


19.H.6.27. 44. E, 5.34.


(b) 9.E.4.39.15.E. 4.3.
45.£.3.30.


AS-E- 3- efehange x.
(g) 28.M.6.3.

(h) 45 €. 3-20.
g.H.&1r.—

(i) 4.E. 2. tit.exch. 10.
X2, H. 4.12.


C * 7 è
quail, ag (ball be obferned in
big proper place,

Æo thut bp this point,
There be fine things neceflac
ty to the perfection of an cs
change. 1, Chat the eftates
given beequall, 2. That this
ed ( excambium exchange )
be vſed (f ) which ts fo indi⸗
uiduallp rcquíGte, ag tt cannot
befupplicd by any other $0020
oꝛ defcribed bp any circumlo⸗
cution ; and herewith agreeth
Littleton afterwards tn this
chaptet Se&. In the boe of
Domefday J finde hanc terram
cambiauit Hago Briccuino
quod modo tenet comes Mc-
riton, & iptum fcambium va-


. letduplum.


Hugo de Belcamp pro efcam.
bio de warres,


3. That there be an execu⸗


Of Tenant for yeares:


coment que la terre
lun bault mult plus
que la terre De lautec
ceo neſt riens a pur=
pote : iffint que les
eftates perlefchange
fait, foient egales.
Ct iffint € lefchange
font Deux grants
cat chefcun partie
grant fon fre à lau-
tet en c(cbange,ac. &
en chefcun De lour
grants mention fer-
ta fait Dc lef:
change,


Sedt.66.


value of the lands, for
albeitthatthe land of
theonebe of a farre
greater value than the
land ofthe other, this
is nothing to the pur-
pofe, foas the eftates
made by the efchange
be equall. And fo inan
efchange there betwo
grants, for each partie
granteth his land to
the other in efchange,
&c.and incach oftheir
grants mention fhalbe
made of the efchange.


tion by entrie oz clatme in the life of the parties, as hath bin fab, (e) 4. & atit tthe of things
that ipe tn grant, tt muft be by Devde, Ch) 5. Ikthe lands be in fenerall Counties there oughe
to be a Desde indented, oz if thething 1e in grant albeit thep be tn one Countic,

(i) Jean tnfant ecchangelands and after bts full age occupte thelands taken in exchange,
the exchange ts become perfect, fo» tbe exchange at the frit was not vopde ( becanfo it amounted
toa ituerp, and alfo in refpect of the recompence ) but bofoable,


«| Coment que lauter agree ace


Lceft efchance ef voide. Che agreement


of the pattícg cannot make that god Sohich the Law maketh boíbe.


cs! home leffa terre


4 Un auster. pur
terme dans, Coment que
le leffor moruft deuant,


dc. Che reafon is
becaufe the intercl of the
tearme (ag bath bene fato )
Doth pafle and veſt in tbc
Leſſee before entric,and there=
fore the Death of the ileflog
cannot deueſt that which
ag veſted before


¶ Acttorney. Is an
ancient Œnglifh word and
fignificth one that is fet in the
turne, ead 02 place of ano=
ther, and of thefe fome be
p2tuate (whereof our Duthoz
herclpcaketh )efome bee pub⸗
like, ag Bttorneps at Law;
Sohofe warrant from bis ma⸗
fer ig ponit loco fuo talem At-
tornatum fuum. #obfchfetteth
in big turne o2 place ſuch a
mantobe bis Bttoznep,


Settion 66.


cyem fi. bone
leffa terre à bn
auter pur term Dang,
coment que le leffor
morutt beuant que le
leffecenteren les te-
nements, vncore il
poit enter en memes
les tenements apres
le moꝛt le ieffour, put
ceo que le leſſee pet
fozce Dc le leafe ad
Droit maintenat Da-
uet les tenements
ſolonq; le foꝛme De le
lcatc, Mes fi home


fait pn fait De feoffe=,


ment à bn auter, abn
letter dattorney à bu


Ale if a man let-
teth land to.ano-
ther for terme of
yeares, albeit the lef-
for dieth. before the
leffee entreth into the
tenements, yet he may
enter into the "fame
tenements after the
death oftheleffor, be-
caufe the leffee by
force ofthe leafe,hath
right prefently to haue
the tenements accor-
ding to the forme of
the leafe, but if a man
maketha deed of Fe-
offment to another, &
aletter of Attorney to”


¶ zt


Lib.


Home a Deliucrer a
lup feifis per force De


metme le fait, vncore


filiuerie De ſeilin ne
foit fait en la bie ce-
luy que fefoit le fait,
ceo ne bault tiens,
pur ceo que lautet
nad pas afcun Doit
Dauer les teñts fo:
long? lepurpozt De le
Dit fait, Deuant le li⸗
uerie De feifin, €t fi
nulliuevie De ſeiſin
{oit fait, Dong apres
le mozt celup que fitt
lefait.le Droit Deticis
tenements eff maín-
tenant en fou Dette,
ou en afcun au-


Of Tenant for yeares.


oneto deliuer to him
feifin by force of the
fame deed, yet if liue-
ry offeifin be not exe-
cuted in the life of
him which made the
deed, this auaileth no-
thing, for that the o-
ther had nought to
haue the tenements
according to the pur-
port ofthe faid Deede
before liuery of feifin
made,& if there be no
liuery of feifin, then
after the deceafe of
of him who made the
Deed, the right of
thefeteneméts is forth-
with in his heire,orin
fome other.


Sed.66.


€ Etvoleter dut-


torneya vn home a de-


liuer 4 luy feifin per
force de mefme le fait.
Bere firlk ít appeareth that
the Authority to deliver feifin
(as bath beste fatd ) mutt be
bp Deede; Soe Letter dat-
torncy íg ag much aga Wars
rantof Bttoznep bp Merde
foz Littere dos ſtgniſie fome=
timea Wed ag litere ac-
quietanciæ doe fignifie a
Dede of Acqutttance, and
herewith(a) agræth Britton.

2. Littleton bere ſpeakes
generally a vn home, and
few perfons are (b) difabied
to be pztuate Attozneps to
deliuer fcifin ; £o» Mounks,
infanta, fem couerts,perfons
attainted, outlawed, excom⸗
munícateo, btlleíng, alíeng,
€c, may bee Attorneys. 39
fem may be an Attoznep to
deliuer ſeilnn to her hufband,
and the huſband to the Sife,
and bc in the remainder to


tet, the lellee Foz like.

3. Git appearetb here that the Attorney mu (c) purſue his warrant, other wiſe he doth not
Deliucr feifin bp force of the Deed, ag Littleton fpeaketh. $2099 his Authozitic ts twofold,
expꝛeſſed in bis Warrant, and implied in La, both Which be mul purfuc and firff of his ex⸗
prefle authoꝛity. A man feifcd of blacke acre anb White acre makes a Derde of fcoffinent of
both, and a letter of Attornep toenter into both acres, and to deliver fetGnof both of them acs
cording to the forme and cffed of the Deede, and heentreth into blacke acre and delivers ſeiſin
fecundum formam carte, thig ltuerp and feífin is good, albett he did not enter into both, no? inte
one in tbe name ofboth ; £0? when he delivereth feifin of one fecundum formam carte, this ia
tantamount and tmplieth a liucrp ofboth, Se Wien the keoffment ts made to t$00 02 moze,
and the Attorney ts to make ltuerp of feifin to both, and the Attoꝛney make líuerp of feifin to
one of the Feoffees fecundum formam & effe&um carte, this (s good to both, and pet in that
cafe bc that ig abfent map waiue the linerp. 31€ Leſſee Co? life make a Deede of Feoſffment and
a letter of Attoꝛney to the Leſſoꝛ to make l(uerp anb the Leſſoꝛ maketh liuery accozdinglp, nots
withſtanding he Mall enter for the fosfettare,but tf Leſſee for peares make a feoffment tn fe and
a letter of Attorney tothe d.ciT02 to makelinerp anbBhe make liuerp accozdinglp, this l(uerp
ſhall binde the Lefloz, and {hall not be auoided by him; fo? the Leflos cannot make liuerp ag At⸗
tomep tothe Leſſee, becauſe be had no Freehold, Mhereof to makeltuery;but the freehold was tn
the Leſſor· It the Lefloz make a deed of Feoffment, anda letter of Attorney to the Leſſee for
peares to make liuery, and he doth tt accordinglp; this thali not done e» extinguith bis
tearme, becaufe he did tt as a miniſter to another and in another right, and is accounted (n
tndgement of Law the act of the other and the Feoffee clatmeth nothing by him.

Ff onc ag Dzocuratoz oz Attoznep to another prefent to his owne benefice, be putteth him⸗
feife out of pofledion, becaufe he comineth tn bp the induction and inſtitution of the Oꝛdinary.
FE the tenant deuifethat the Lozd ſhall fell the land, and dicth, and the Loꝛd felicth ít, the
Heignioay rematne. Wut (£ the Loꝛd 02a grantee of a Rent charge hadbeeue alfo Ce’ que vie
of tbe land anbafter the ftatute of R.3. anb before the ftatute of 27-H.8, Ce’ que vfe had mada
afcoffinent in fee of the land, albett the land palleth from the Feoſfees and bis feoffment te war⸗
ranted by the power a(ucn to him by the fatute, pet the Secignozp of rent charge is extinct bp
his Écoffiment, for that he hath nota bare Authority as the Attoꝛney hath,

FE a man be diſſeiſed of blacke acre and White acre, and a Warrant of Attorney tg made to
enter into both and to make livery, there (f tbc Attorney enter intoblackeacre onlp and makes
liuerp ‘ecundum formam carte there the livery of feifin ts botde ; becaufe he Doth iefle then bis

Warrant forthe eſtate of the viffeifez in White acre cannot bee Beuefted Without an E
nt


52


Vid.Sef-196,


(a)24.€.3.27.11.H.97.13.
Brnits 101.6.


21.€.4.18. Br.feoffment:.59


21.H.6. 39.
13.€.3..Atterney 73.


(c)12: Afpl.24.26.Af.39,
11.H.4.3.10. H.7.
11.H.7.135- 40.438.


27. Aff.61. 41.4 f. 10.
41. 8.3.17.


Tr.7. Elix.imcom bance.


17. E.3.61.


Lib.


(k) Hil.36.€1.Rot.493. In-
ter Stanton (y Barnes, in £te-
Girone firma jin the Kings benob


2. 3. Ph. &æ M. "Dyer 151.
17.E1. Dyer 40.


(1) Pafe. 31.E1. Rot. 514. in

oro. Bane.inter Carter pl. &
Claypole & ah def. In Eseiliene
firma, & in Briefe de Error.
Mil 32. El. Ror.72 1.


"Paf. 5. £l.in Com. Bane, in
Tarbam: café,


23. H.6.6.


BraB. li. 3. fa. V6. 40.a[f. pl. 38
29. H.6.7.4.14.6.4.3.
18. E. 3.16.5.


11.H.57.1 3. &c.


18. H.8. 5.11. H.7.19.


Mich. 3. Ia.in Com. Banco.
FN B.213.2.E. 3.Offic.de
Cours.29.Stamf. Prar. 30.


Cap-7-


Of Tenantfor yeares. Sei.67.


But there (d adiuerfitie bet weene an anthozitie coupled With an tntereff, anb a bare authozitie,
Foꝛ example, A cuftome Within a mannoz time out of mind of man bled, Wag to grant certain
lands parcell of the fato mannog ín £e imple, and neuer any grant Sas made to any , and the
hetres of bis bodte, for life 02 Éoz peares ; andthe Loꝛd of thefaid mannoz bíbarant to one by
Copie foz life, tbe remaínber enct to another, and the heires of his bobíc: Bud it Wag (k) ad⸗
indged, that the grant and rematnder ouer was god for the Lord hauing authositie by cuftome,
and an intereft wWithall, might grant any leſſer efkate : £02 in this cafe, the cultome that enabieth
bin to the greater, enableth him to the leſſer, Omne maiusin fe, continet minus. Wut fec that
hath but a bare authottte, as he thathath a Warrant of Atturnep, mnft purfue his authority, .
(ag bath ben fato ) and tf be doe lefle, it (g voyd.

A man make aleafe foziife, and after make a Charter of feoffement, with a Letter of Attoꝛ⸗
nep to deliver fet(in, the Ætturney enters bpon tbe Lele,this tsfufficient to conuep away the
reuerfion ; for (that ttmap befatd once foz all ) liuerie ef feifins being to perfect the common afs
farance of (anos, is alwayes erpounded fauourablp, vt res magis valeat quam pereat. Bnd ail
this was adiudged anb (1) rcfoluco by the Court of Common Pleas, and after affirmed bp
all the Judges of the Rings Wench, in a wꝛit of Erroz.

Bund itis to be knowne, that a beso of Fcoffement beginning Omnibus Chrifti fidelibus, &c.
0? Sciant præfentes & fururi,&c. 02 the like, a Letter of Attarnep map bee contained in fuch a
Ded ; forone continent map contatne diners Weeds to feuerall perfong, but if it be bp Inden⸗
ture betweene the Seoffor on the one part, and the Seolfe on the other part, there a Letter of
Btturnep infuch a Dedis not god, vnicile the Atturnep bec made a partiein the Ded in-
dented,

$205» the authorttte of an Atturnep implped tn the Law, ts, though the toarrant bee gene
rail, to deliuer {cifin : pet the Atturney cannot deliner feifin Within the biew, for bis Warrant
ig intendable in Law of an actuall and expꝛeſſe liuerie, and not of a liuerte inlaw, and fo hath
ttbenerefolucd, Se moze hereof here nert following,


«| Vacore fi liuerie & feifin ne foit fait en la vie celuy que fefort le fait Here
albeit the toarrant of Atturnic be tndefintte, Without limitation of anp time, pet the Law pres
ſcribeth atime, ag Littleton here faith, in the itfe of htm that made the Deed: but the death not
onelp of tbc Seoffo2, of solom Littleton fpeaketh, but ofthe feofke alfo, ig a countermand in
La, ofthe Letter of Att irney, anb the Ded it felfe 1s become of none effect, becaufe tn thie
cafe nothing doth pafle before Liuerteof Seifin, Foꝛ tf the Feoffoꝛ dieth, the Land defcende
tobis heirc, anb (E the Softee dyeth, liuerte cannot be made to big heire, becanfe thers hee ſhould
take by purchafe, where hetres Sere named bp Wap of limitation, And herewith agreeth Bra-
&on, Item oportet, quod donationem fequatur rei traditio, etiamin vita donatoris & donatorij.
Therekoꝛe a Letter o£ Attognep to deltuer Liuerte of Hetfin after the deceale of the FeofFoz, (s
bopb.

Fourthip, In ali cafeg the Atturney mut purfue the toarrant {n fubftance and effect,that he
hath to deliner Seifin,

Fiftlp, Wil this tg to be vnderſtood of fole perfons, o? of a Corporation oz bobíc confitting of
onefole perfon, oz a a Biſhop perfon, ac. Wut tt holdeth not in a Corporation aggregate of maa
nie perfons capable, And therefore tf a Matozand Commonaitic make a Charter of feoffe=
ment,and a Letter of Attoznep to deliver Seifin, the ALiuerie of Hetfin ig gad after the de⸗
€cafc of the Watoz, becaufe the Cozpozation newer dieth, Che like of a Deane and Chapter,
Et fic de fimilibus.

Laſtly, Ff the Leſſoz bp his Weed itcence the Leſſee foritfeos peares, ( Which ig reffrainen
by condition not to alten without Licence) toalien, and the Leïoz dieth before the Leſſee dot
alten, pet ts bis Death nocountermand of the licence, but that he map alien, koꝛ the licence eremp=
teth the Leſſee out of the penaltte of the Conditton ; and tt was executed on the part of the Leſ⸗
fozas much as might be, Andſo Was tt refoined, Michael 3. Ia:ob. in Communi Banco. Bg
s the King Doth Licence toalien in Moztmaine, and dieth, the Licence map bee executed
after,


Seil. 67.


€ Tem fi Tene⸗

ments foiêt leſ⸗
fes abn home p term
De Demy ar, ou pur le


Lfo if tenements

be letto aman for

terme of halfe a yeare,

or for a quarter of a
ge» .


q S! le Leffee fait

waft. Waff, Va-
ftumdicitur à vaftädo, of wa⸗
fing and Depopulating : and
fo? that waſt (8 often alled⸗


Lib x.


quacter De vn an, ac,
Cn tiel cate, (t E leſſee
fait watt ł leſſoꝛ aues
ta enuers lu» betefe
pc noatt, a le Brieke
Ditva , Quod tenet ad
terminum annorum :
Mes il auera bn fpc-
ciall Declaration fur
lc veritie De fon mat=
ter, tle Count naba-
tera le Brieke, put
ceo que tl putt auer
nul auter brieke fur le


Of Tenant for yeares:


yeare,&c. Inthiscafe
if the Leffee commit
watt , the Leffor fhall
haue a Writ of Wafte
again(t him ; and the
Writ fhall fay, Quod
tenet ad terminum anno-
ram : buthe fhall haue
an efpeciall declarati-
on vpon the truth-of
his matter, and the
Count fhall not abate
the Writ, becaufe he
cannot haue any other
writ vponthe matter.


ged to be (i timber, which we
calin Jatin Maremium, 0
mareínium , oꝛ marefmium,
it is geod to fetch both of them
from the oziginall, Firſt, Tim-
ber tg a Haron $5020. Se⸗
conolp, Mareminm tg Derived
of the french $0020. Marreim,
où Marrein, Swhich properly
fignifieth timber,

An Action ef waſt doth lie
again tenant by the Curte⸗
Ge,tenantin Dower, tenant
foz life, fox peares, o1 balfe a
Peate,oz gardein in Chivalry,
bp bím that hath the immedi⸗
ate eſtate of inbcritance, (oz
Swatt 02 deftruction in houfes,
Gardens, wods, trees, o2 tn
lands, meadows, éc,o2 tn exile
of men to.the dithertion of him


. Setl.67.


matter, inthe reuerfion oz. remainder,

Œberc be two kinds of Waſts, viz. Woluntarte o2 aduall, and permiſſiue. (a) watt map be
bonc in houfes, by pulling o2 pzoftrating them downe, oꝛ bp fuffering the fame to be bncoucred,
Sobereby the fparres oz rafters, plaunchers, o2 other timber of the houfe arc rotten. (b) Bue
i€ the boufc be bncoucred When tie Cenant commeth in, tt (9 no watt tn the (€ enant, tofaffer
thefame to fall done. Wut though the boufe be ruinous at the tenants comming in, pct tf hee
pull ít done, it is Walk vnlee he tc ediſie it againe. (c) 2MfotE glale wWindowes (though
glafed bp the tenant himſelte) be broken downe, oꝛ carried away, ttis Walk, for the glaſſe ig
part of bis houſe. And fo itis of watnfcote,benches, dooꝛes, windowes, furnaces ; andthe
like, annexed 02 ficco to the houfe,cither bp hint in the rcuerfiow,o2 the tenant.

(d) Ghough there bee no timber growing bpon the qround,pet the Œenantat his pertll muſt
keepe the boufes from wafting. It the G enant voc oz fuller waft to be done in houſes, pet tf
he repaire them before anp Action brought, there licth no action of waſt againk hin, but he can
not plead, Quod non fecit vaftum, but thefpectall matter.

A Wall bucoucred when the tenant commeth in, ig no walt (f it be fulfred to decay (c) FE the
tenant cut downe 0? deſtroy anp fruit tres growing in the garden 02 orchard, it is Swaft,but (£
ſuch trees grow bpon any of the ground Which the Cenant boldeth out of the garden oz sDa-
chard, it {9 no waſt.

CF) Flthe Conant build anew boufe, (t is watt, and tf he fuffer ít to be Swatked, itis a new
alt, (2) Itthe houle fall Downe bp tempeſt, oꝛ bc burnt bp lightning , o2 proftrated by ene=
mies, 02 the like, Without a Default e£ the Cenant, où Was ruinous at his comming in, and fall
done, the Cenant map build the fame againe with ſuch matertalls ag remaines, and Sith
other timber which he may rake growing sn the qvouno fo2 his habitation, but yee muft not
make the koufe larger than ít was, It᷑ the bonfe be diſcouered by tempeft, the tenant mult in
conuenient time repaire it.

Ch) FEthe Cenant of a Doue houle, Warren, Parke, Wiuarie, Eltangues, o? the itke, doe
take fo manp, as ſuch fuffictent (tore be not left as hefound when be came inthis te waft,and
tofuffer the pale to decap, whereby the Dere atc difperfed,ts waft,

And it is to be obferucd, Chat thereis watt, deftrucion,and exile. talk properly is in hou⸗
les, gardens, (as (e afozcfaid) in timber trees, (viz. Dke,Athe, and Eime, and thefe be Cim=
ber tres (n all places ) either by cutting of them done, o» topping of them, oz doing anp Ac
Sobereby the timber may decay, Alſo in Countries where timber ig fcant, and Weeches oz the
like ate conuerted to building fo2 the habitation of man, o2 the itke, they are alfo accounten tim⸗
bor. (1) Ff the Œenant cut down timber tres, oꝛ ſuch as are accounted timber , ag (s afoze=
{aid, this ts waſt, anb (6 he (uffer the poung germpns to be deftroped,this is deftrucion,(k) So
tt is, tf the & crant cut downe vnderwod, (as he may bp law) pet tf be fuffer the poung ger=
ming to bedeftroped, 02 tf he ſtubbe bp the fame, this ts deſtruction.

(1) Cutting bosonc of Willoughes, bech,birch,alpe,maple,oz the like, ftanding tn the defence
and fafeguard of the houfe, is deſtructton. (m) It there be a quickelet Fence of bitethoine,
It tbetenant flubbe it bp,oz (utfce tt to be deſtroyed, thts (a deſtruction, and for all thofe and the
ithe deſtructions, an action of Malkiteth, (n) Che cutting of dead wod, thot is, vbi arborcs
fant atidæ, mortuæ, caux, nonexiftent macremium, nec portantes fruétus, nec folia in æftate,fg

. ne


53


V. Merib ca, 22.
a.part of the Infiis.


(a) j4 8.3. af. 145.


(b) 40.aff 22.3. Mar. Dy-
€r117.23.H.6.24.10.H.9 2
44. Est 39.E. 3. 33.8.48
fe.63 Mor lakendensca‘e,
(€)22.H.6.N8.12. H.8.1.
— 27.E) 4.18.
21.£.4-39.10.H.7.2, Reg,
Tienes iN a !


(d)41.E.3. 21.38. 0ff 1.

4. E. 33¥aft. 22.1 0 El Dy-
#7 276.15. 5. fa. 11 9. 10 Whelps
dalcs cafe. À
19-E. 3. Vaſt. 30. 44. E. 44
(6)7-H.6.38 a4 E adi.


(f)42. E.3. 21. 49. E. 3.3.

9 H.6.514 y.E z. Wafti9.
(B)Li 4.52.65. Merickendens
cafe, 43. £.3.6; 26. E.3.7 6.
BUH. 4.32.12. H 4.5.

22. H. 6.18.19. €. 3 wafl.30.


(b ) Temps Er Wal, 128.
Brit. fo.34 8. R. 2/5. 97.
12. H.8.1.PL.: c9. 322.

7. H.3.Wafl. 141.


(i) 22.11.6.14.4.9.H,6.1 66
3t H.6,1.F. NB. 5 9.m.
(k) 20. E.3.2/2fl.32,10.H.7
2. 42. E. 3. 6.6. 5. E. 4.100.
41. E.3.PVa[1. 82. 10. Edw.3.
Waft.3 $.12.E.4.1.

(1) 40.£.3.15-6. 35.

12. E. 4.1.12. H.8. 1.5.
16.H.7.2.8.E.2.Wast, Lit.
4.E.6.Waft.Br.136.

(m )46.E.5.17.9. H.6.10.
12. H.8.1.

(7 )16.61.Dy.3 33.20. E.1,
Waji 32. F N.8.59.m.


Lib. (ap.7. Of Tenantforyeares. Sed. 67;


Co) 44-E. 3. 44. 20. E. 3.
Waft.32.F.2].B.59.6,
19.£.3.Waft. 30.
(P)22.H.6.18.b.9.€.4.35.
41 E.3.Waft.82.17.E.3.7.
9-H 6.66. 2-4.7.24- FN.
"B. 59.2 à 149.c.20.Ed. 5.
Waft.32.

(a) Anne 6. El. Ofthe Re-
port of Iu[ ice Dalifen in Grif-
finscafe.17.E. 3.65. B st.
f0.1 68.6.

(1) 20. H.6.1.F /N. P. 59.0.
6. l.vbi fupra.


(() 28. H.8. Dyar 37.

23. H. 6.34.10. H 7.5.4.
44E.3.44,

(t)16.El, Dy.332. 21.H.6.


Tee jc. 12.£.3.
Wajl.38.48. E. 3.35. Tem:
E.1.123.20.8.3 Wafl. i2.
19 VE. 3. afl. 50.


(u) 3.$.5.v3ft. 5.
Braëon lib. fe. 315.


(w) Braffon fo.1 68.
Fleta.lib.t.cap.11.


11.€.2.Wuff.153.
F.N.B. 50. H. & 55.6
Retit.iudic. 25.

(a) Glouc.cap. 5.
W.1.6a.21.

«Magna Carta.tp. 4.
Merleb.ca.23.

(b) &raH.lio. 4. fo. 316.


& 317-
(c) Fletalib. 1.04.11,


(d) 7.€.3.54 5.2. H.$.7.
23. M.6.24. 13.H.7.

25. H.8.13.F."N. b. 5».f.
8. R. 2 Wa ft 145.


() 3. H.4.22.
(E) a-H.4.2-


(g) xo-F.4. t. 49.23 25.
3 :. 4.8.1. Wall; Br.
38.E. 1.17. 44.£.5.8.
45-E-3-3- 46.E. 3. 31.

1i E. 3 Waft. 115.

3.Mar alf. 117.

8. E. 1 woft. 110.

(B) 24. E.3. 27. go. E. 3. 3.
$.H.6.15.

(i) Brat lib. 4 f. 315.316.317
F leta lib. 1.ca. Vx "Brit.


fo-168.

Delt. & Stud. lib.2.cap.1.
12.H.4.3. 10. H.3.
Wa[l.x 43. 20.H.6.1.

4 H. 3.Waft.140.

9. H.3. ibid. 326,


no aft ; bnt cea trees tocoles fos fewel, when there is fufficient dead md, (8 waſl
(o) Ff the Tenant fuffer the honles to be Walked. and then fell boson timber to repaire the fame,
this (s a double aff. ( p) Digging for graucti, lime, clap, bzicke, earth, ftene,oz the like, oꝛ foz
mines of mcttall, cole, 02 the like, hidden in the earth,and Were not open Shen the tenant came
ti, tg Matt ; but the Cenant may dig for grauell o2 clap fo? the reparation of the houfe,afwelas
be map take conuentent timber tres.

(q) Ht is waft to fuffer a wall of the fea to be in Decay, fo ag bp the flowing € reflo wiug of the
fea, the meadow 02 marſh (s furrounbded, hereby the fame becomes bnpzofitable: but tf ít bee
furroundedfuddenip bp therage and vlolence of the fea , occafioned bp wind, tempelt, 07 the
like, without any defauit inthe tenant, (1) this ts no walt puniſhable. Soit ts, ifthe Te⸗
nant repaire not thebankes 02 Walls againtt riuers, oz other Waters whereby the mea dowes
o2 marfhes be furrounded,and become rufbie and bnpzofitable,

(£) Siftbe Cenant conuert erableland into wad, 02 à conuerfo , of meadow into eradic,
it is waſte; Foz it changcth not onip the courfe of his hufbandzp but the profeof bis euidence.

(t) The tenant map take fuffictent $ocob to repaire the Walls, pales, fences, hedges and
ditches, as hefound them, but be can make no newe: and be map take alfo fufficient plow-
bote, firebote, and other houſbote.

The tenant cutteth done trees fos reparations andfciicth them, and after buycth them a=
gaine, andimploy them about neceflarp reparations, pet tt is waſte by the bendition: bee can=
not fell trece and With the money couct the houfe ; burning of the boufe bp negligence 92 mtf=
chance (e waſte

(u) 3ifa manmake a Leafe foz life ano bp Deed grant that (£ anp waſte oz deſtruction be
Done, that tt (hallberedzefled by neighbours, and not by fute 92 plea, notwithftanding an acts
ott of waſte (ball 1pe, for the place Halted cannot be rcconered Without a plea.

(w) Bra&on, Fleta and Britton, doe ble the fame diuiſion ag te afozefatd,viz. Vaftum,deftru
Gio, & ex lium, fn their proper fignification.

JN 0% fomewhat is to be fpokcn of Exile o1 deftruction of men ; Exile oz deltruction of Ul⸗
letnes, o? Tenants at Will, o2 making them poe where tbep Were rich ben the Tenant
came in, wherby thep depart from their tenures, is alle. (a) And pct the ſtatute ot Glouc”
ſpeaketh not of ertic, but it is comprehended vnder the gencrall $0070 of waſte. The Matute of
W.x. hath deftructionem, the ftatute of Magna Carta bath Vattum & deftruétionem, the ffa-
tutcof Merlebridge hath vaftum, venditionem & exilium in domibus,bofcis,vel hominibus, & c.

Wut Wale and deftructton in thetr larger fence arc Words conuertible. (b) Item de hoc
quod dicit va&um & exilium, fciendumeft quod non funt referenda ad eundem intelleQum,
fcd vatum & deftru&tio fereidem (unt, vaftum idem eft quod deftrudtio,& é conuerfo, & fe hae
bent ad omnem deftructionem generaliter.

(c) Vaftumautem & deftruétio ferecquipollent & conuertibiliter fe habent in domibus, bo-
fcis, & gardinis, fed exilium dici poterit,cum ferui manumitrantur & à tenementis fuis iniurio-
fccijciantur, fortuna autem & ignis vel huiu(modi ccentus inopinati omnes tenentes excufant.

(d) fo perfon fhall hane an action of waſte, bniefebe hath the tmmedtate Mate of inheri⸗
tance, but fometitmo another (ball topne Sith him Éoz conformity. 209 (£a reuer&omn be granted
to two and to the heires of onc ; thep tio ſhall ioyne in an action sé waſte: and in like fort the
furutuing Lopercencr, and thetenant bp the Curtefie (ball iopne in an action of waſte: and if
two topntenants be, and tothe heires of one of chem, and thep make a Leaſe fox life, thep fball
ioyne in an action of $oafte, (c) FE the eftate tatle determine, hanging theacion sf waſte, and
the pit, become tenant in tafle after polltbilitic, the action ot waſte ts gone, (F) FE the Cea
nant doth Hate, and he inthe renerfion dieth, the heire (ball not haue an action of waſte fo» the
Soa fte bonc in the life of the Anceftoz ; noz a Wihop, mater ofan Dofpítall, Warfon, o2 the lite
in the time of the Wzedeceflor, Ce) Andfo (£ Leſſee for peares doth waſte, and Dicti ; an action
of Wafte Ipeth not againt the Œrecutor 02 Arminiftratoz, Fo waſte bone before their time.
Wut (£ two Coperceners be of areuerfion, and waſte ig committed, andthe one of them dic,the
Bunt anb the £j &ce (ball topne in an action of wafte,

(b) It lands be giuen to two and the betres of one of them, he that hath the Fee (ball not
haue an actton of waſte por the ftatute of Glouc: foa that theparetopntenants, but his heive
ſhall haue an actton of waſte againſt tenant Fog life.

7- Mote after Wafte done there is a ſpeciall regard te be had to the continuance of the reuerſion
in the fame {tate that tt was at thotime of the waſte done, for (£ after the waſte he gran=
teth it ouer though be taketh backe the whole eftate agatne,pet 1s the waſte diſpuniſhable. Sa
{€ he grante the veuerfion to the bfe of himfelfe and bis Wife, and o£ his heires, petthe waſte (a
Difpuntfhable, and fo of the like, becauſe the eftate of the reuerſion continueth sot, but is altered,
and confequentip the ection of waſte foz waſte done before ( Which conGH in priuitp ) is gone.

(i) B Pzohtbition of waſte bib lye againft Cenant bp the curtefie, Cenant in dower, and
a gardian in Chiualry bp the Common Law, but not agaínft tenant £05 itfe,02 peares, Nj

. ep


Lib Of Tenant for yeares.' Seil.67.


thep came in bp their owne act,and he might bane proutded that no Walle ſhould be done, (1) A
tenant bp the curtefic o2 in Dower can bol of none but of the heire, and his heires by vifcent,
and therefore (£ tcp grant oucr their whole eſtate, and the grantee Doth walle, vet the heire Mall
faucan Action of waltc again them, anb recoucr tbe land agaínft the aſſignee: but tf che boire
either before the aflignement had granted, op after the allignement doth grant shercucrfion oucr,
the ftranger fhali hauc an Action of Wate againt the aſſignee, becaufe in both Cafes the pitui-
tie is deftroped: in all other Cafes the Action of Salt fall bebzougbt againk htm that Did the
waſte (£o? tt isin nature ot a trefpa(te )bnlefle tt be in the caſe of a ard (k) for there (£ the
®ardian doth Wak andafligne oucr, the action lieth againſt the afligne (1). A Gardtan halt
not be puniſhed foi waſte done bp a ftranger, it is fo penall onto him, foz he (ball lofe the toard=
Hip both of the boníc and of the land, though the waſte be but to the valuc oftwentte Hillings,
and if that {ufficerh not tofatt(&c fos the Watt, then he (ball recouer Damages of the Wake, ouer
anb abouc tbeloffeof the ward. Wut tenant bp thecurtefte , tenant tn dower, tenant fozlife,
peares, ec. hall anſwere for the waſte donc bp affranger, and (ball take their remedte over,
Cm) But (£ there be two topntenants of a Ward, and one of them Doe waſte Both hall anfwer
fo? it.

(n) FE the Gardian doth waſte and the hetre within age bring an action of waſte, the Gar-
dian thalliofe the wardſhip as (e afozeſaid, but tl the heirebzing an action of waſte at his full
age, then he ſhall recouer trebic damages, for then be cannot Tofe the wardſhip.

(o) Bn infant and Baron and Fem hail be punifhed foz waſte done by a ſtranger, and fa
fhalthe &cífo that hath the ſtate by furuiueur,foz walk done bp the hufband (n hig lite time,tE the
agre to tbc Eftate, though there hath beene bariette of opinions in our Wakes.

Cp) Wut (£ Fem tenant foz life take huſband, and the bufbanb doth waſte, and the Wife oí ctb,
no Action of Wakelicth againk the bufband in the tenuit , for he Was feifed but in 1ure vxoris
and his Wife Was tenant of the freehold, but tf a Feme bee poſſeſſed of aterme for peares, and
take huſband, and the huſband doth waſte, andthe wife dieth, the bufband fall be charged in
an Acionof Salte, forthe Law aíuetl) tbe termeto him.

(q) It tenant for life grant over his Eftate bpon conditton,and the granite doth watke,and
the Grantozre=entreth £02 the con dition bzoken, tho Action of Soaffc hall bee brought agnintt
the grantee, and the place waſted recouered.

(r) Fé a ieale fos life be made to a Villaine, and waſte is done, the 3.025 entreth, he fball not
be puniſhed Fog the waſte done before, but for Malte done after he fhail.

CL) Bn occupant (ball be puniſhed foz waſte, andfo if an Eſtate bee made te A. and bis
beires during the lifeofB. A. dieth, the heire of A-fhall be puniſhed tn an Actton of Spalte,

(t) £a tcafebc made to A. foriife, thoveinainder to P. fozlife, the remainder te C. in fee in
this cafe where it ig fat in the Kegiſter, and in F- N.B. that an Adcion of Waſte doth lie, itis
to be vnderſteod after the Death o2 furrender of B. inthe meane remainder Coz during histife, no
Action of Watke doth ite.

Wut if a 1ea fc foziifc be made, the remainder for peares, theremainder in fee, an Action voth
lie prefentip during the terme in rematnder £o? the mcane terme £o? peares ts noimpediment,

But it a man make a leaſe fo? life 02 peares, and after granteth the reuerfion foz peares.the
Aeflor (ball haueno Action of waſte during the peares, fos be himfelfc hath granted away the
reucrfion, in refpect hereof bc isto maintaine hie Action. (*) Dtbersotfe it tg, {€ hee had
made aleale in reuerfion Which had bene but a future intereft,foz there an action of waſte lieth
during the terme, and fo is the Woke to be vnderſtod, and terme hall be faucd in that cafe.

(u) Moaction of Walks licth againſt a garden in focage, but an account o? trefpafle , noz a⸗
gaint tenant by ffatute, ſtaple, ac. o2 elegit.

Cw) Ff tenant for lite o2 peares o? their afligne makeagrant oner, and not withſtanding
— the profits, an action of waſte lieth againſt him, bp him inthe reuerſion ozremainder bp

atute, Nota.

(x) FE Wake be done ſparſim Hereand therein wods, the Whole Wads fhalibe recousred,oz
fo much Wherein the Matte (parfim ig done. And fo in boules fo many roomeths Mall be recoue⸗
ted Wherein there is waſte done, but if waſt be Bone fparfim throughout, all ſhall bee recouereD.
Ft hath bin faíb that tf the hall be Walked, the Mole houfe (Dati be vecouered, becaufc the Whole
douſe is denominated of the ball: but later Authoꝛitie is to the contraric.

(y) Chere ts affe of a finall value, as Braon fateh, Nifi vaftum ita modicum fit propter
quod non fitinquifitio facienda. Pet tres to the baluc of thꝛee ſhillings and foure pence,hath bin
adiudgen Wate, and many things together map make Wwafke toa baluc. Wut ict bs now re-
turne to our Authour.


© Brief de waſte. See in the Regitter fiue ſeuerall Wꝛits of
Swafte ; Two At the Common Law for waſte done bp Tenant in Dower, 02 the Garden,
anb Eine by fpecíall oz ſtatute law , for waſte donc bp tenant Foz life, foꝛ peares and tenant


by the curtefic. i
Ó 2 € Brief


54.


(i) F.'N.B. 5 6.0.e8 f.

Temps E.1.waft.122.18.E 3.
:36.€.3.16.38.£.3.23.11.
H. 4. 18.4. E. 3.25. Regii. 2.
lib. 3. fol. 33.Waleers caf. ib,
9. fel, 142. Beaurzont : cafe.


w


(k) 27-€.3.81,36-€ 3.
Wafie.to.

(1) 12.4.4.3. Brat. lib,
315.317. Fleta. lib. v.cap YT.
Brirt.168.34.E.3.Waj! 146,
44. E. 3.27.

EN. B. 59.4.67 60.6.6 T.


(m) 33.£.3. Waft.6.

(n) 44.€. 3.27.48. E. 3.10.
F.N.'B.60.t.Y3.H.4.3.
19.E.a.Waff.117. 4V.E.3.
Waft. 81. 3.E.2,Waf.. 3.
7.€. 3.12.

(0) 15.H.3.Wafl.16. Temps
€.1.Wajl. 128.2. H.4. 3 a.
3.€.3.13.76. (1. 7f. i1.
24.H.65.24.5.33. B.6.3 1.8.
42 €.3.22.19.E. 3. breue 246
46.E.3.25.7 H. 6.2.4.3. €. 3.
46.10.E.3.14.18.9.E.3,
42. 9. E. 3.briue 246.17. E. 4.
7- 9. H.6. sa. FN. B. 36.L.
*"Dedl. c Stud. lib. 2 .cap.1.
23. H. 8.Waft.1 38.1. 8. fel.
44. Willingbams cafe.

(p) Eib.s.fol.76 . (1 ftens
cafe 46. .3.25.46.E.3.Waft.
Statham.12,H.6.11.12.
(q) 30. €.3-16,

(r) 48.E 3.19.

(D) eb. 6. fol. 37. le Deane
and Chapter of W ercel.cafe. .
lib, yo. f6l.9 4.

(D 4.£.3.18.Cotes cafe. 3. E.
3.18 F.N.B.58.c. dr 59 h.
50. F. 3. 3. 33. E. 3.V4/(. 14 4.
11. E. 3.ref eit. 118.10.E.4.9
Regi(t.7 4. lib. 2.fol.92. inrer
Paget & ('arie in Binghams
cafe. lib. s fol.76. Pagers cafe.
16.10, fol. 44. lenns es cafe.
F.X.B.59.4.4-E,3.18.
(*) 4. E. 3. 18. F. tit.
Wast.18.

(0) Merlbridgecap.17.21.E.
3-30-16.E. 3.tit.waff.100.
14.€.3.waft.107.2.€.2,
Waft.1.28.H.6.walt.9.32.
H.6.7. F.N.B.59.EF,

(wr) x1.H.6.eap.5.

Lib. 5. fol.77.Boathes cafe.
(x) 8.E. 2. waft. 112.4. E. 6:
waft. 136.405.3.32.15.H.7.
11.15 .£,3-Waft.134. Temps
€£.xovaftl.134.18.H 8 1.
(y) Braff. lib. 4, fol. 3 16.
38.E.3.9 6. 34. E. 3. waſt. 46
14. H. 4, 11.6, F. N. B.Go c.
Temps E. x. waſt. 124
19,H.6.8,


Lib .1.


(x) We. Bra lib. q.fo. 4t 3.5.
Fiera lih. 3. cap. i3

Seeshe eond part of the In-
Fitutes, W. z.cap. 34.


De vafe.

Braët.lib.4. fol.318.316.317
F leta.lib. x .eap. Vy. Gb. s.
cap.33. Brstt.fel 162.6 168
AGE. 3. j1.F.N. B.6o.e.
4E.4.13. 37.H.6.26.b.
7-H 7.3.14. H.9.12.
18. E. 3.27.


Vide Marlebridge cap. 13.
2. part of tbe inifitutes.


(a) 12. H.8. 1.


F.N.'B. fol.127


(b) 15. F.5.9. 9. H.6. 6.
42.H.6.18. 9.F.4.35.

12. E. 4.8. FN. B. 149.6.

& $9.7.

(€) Lib. 5.fol.12.Sanders cafe.


(3) 15. E.2. eomenan!,25.
19. E. 3.ceuenant. 2.4.

32-€ 3. Quid iuri cl, 5.
7E. 3.29.46.F. 3.31.
40. E, 3.5. 11. H. 4.34.

Y 4-Eliz. Dier. 309. M.40.
dr 41 Eliz.in Communi Banco.
Rot.211 5. intrefp, inter
Sparke ér Sparke..
Hi. 42. Eliz, Sir Tohn Sana~
gei cafe in Curia Wardorum.


(ap.7. OfTenantforyeares. — $68.67.
¶ Brief dirra. The Waits oziginall of the Regiſter (25 (ag


Braëton faith ) fozmed, anb of courfe had heir ſirſt authozitie bp De of Parliament, a nd there⸗
fore Without an A of Parliament thep cannot be altered, oz changed, Which ts proncd by the
flatute of W 2. cap.24. Sobereby remedie (g proutded in many cales. Wut heare What Bra&on
faith. Sunt quxdam brcuia formata in fuis cafibus, & quadam decurfu , quz concilio totius
regni funtapprobata, quz quidem mutari non poffunt, abfque eorundem contraria voluntate.
Magiftralia autem fæpe variantur fezundum varictatem cafuum,&c. And this is the reafon that
inthis cafe of Halle a pearethe woꝛds of the tait ſhall be without change, Quod tenetad ter-
minumannorum, and tbe pl mutt make a fpectall Declaration accozting to bis cafe, foz other:
wile hee houle bee Without remedie, In this particular cafe the ftatute of Glouc. cap.s.
Which giueth the Acton of wate againft the decile toz life 02 peares ( Which lay
not agatnft then at the Common Law) fpcaketh of one that holdcth fos tearme of peares
in the plurali number,and pet here it appeareth by the authoztticof Litticion.@ hat although (t
bea penal Law, whereby treble Damages and the place waſted [fall be recoucreb;pet a tenant
fo halfe a peare being Within thefame mifchiefe,thail be Within the fame remedie, though ít be
out of the letter of the Laſw, fo? Quihæretin littera, haret in cortice, which ig an excellent ex⸗
ample, whereupon in many like cafes a man may fettlea certaine tudgement. ‘You map sb=
ferue inthe fato anctent Authors , What remedte was gtuen fo? waſte at the Common Law,
and agatnft whom, and What was adindged wafte, deftracion, and exile.

Ju many cafes a tenant £02 1e 02 peares map fell downe timber tomake reparationg, als
beit hee be not compellabletbercunto, and [ball not bee puntthed fo? the fame tn anp action of
waſte. As (a) ifa boufeberuinous at the time of the leate made, if the leſſee {uffer the houfe to
fall done be is not puntfhabie,foz be ig not bound by law to repaire the houfe in that cafe And
pet t£becut done timber bpon the ground foletten,and repaire it, he map well tuftifie tt, and
the reafon (s, fo2 that the la doth fauour thefupportation and mafntenance of houfes of has
bitation £oz mankind. And therefore tf tivo oz moze iopntcnants o2 tenants (n common be of
a boufe of habitation, andthe one Will not repatre the boufe, the other hall haue bp the law a
Wꝛit De ype facienda, and the tait faith, Ad fuftentationem eiufdem domus teneantur,
Doit (a it che Lefloz bp his Couenant vndertaketh to repatre the boufes, vet the leſſee (iC tbe
3. c(Toz doth te not) map With thetimber growing bpon the ground repaire tt though hee be net
compellabie hereunto. Fn thefame manner, ifa man make a leaſe of a houſe and land Without
finpeachment\pf Wwatte foz the houſe, pet map the elec With tho timber Upon the ground 1e=
patrc the houſe, thongh be map vtterly waſte it if he Will , andfoin many other cafes. Aman
hath land in which there (e a Mine of Coales,oz of the itke,and makéth(b )a leaſe of the land
(Without mentioning any Mines) foz life oz £02 peares, the leſſes Éoz fuch Mines ag Were ox
pen at the time of theleafe made,map bigge and take the profit thercof.(c But he cannot diggs
foz any new Mine, that wag not open at tie time uf the leaſe made, fo? that foni» beadindged
Swafte, And ifthere be open Mines , and the sDSoner make aleale of the land, With tbe
Mines thercin this ſhall extend to theopcn Mines onlp, anb not to anp hidden Mine, but tf
there be noopen Wine, andthe leaſe is made of tieland together With ail Mines thercin,chere
tbeicffee map digge for Mines, and entop the benefit thereof , otherivife rhofe words fenis
beboid. 4| haue beene the moze fpactous,concerning this learning of Swatte,forthat (t ts mot
necefarie to be knowne of all men. J

42050 hath Littleton fpoken of an effate oz life, and an eftate fo peares tn feucrall per=
fons. Now ict bo fee ho they ftand fimul and femel tn one perfon.

It a man ietteth lands to another fozitfes the rematnder to him for 21. peares, hechath
both eftates in him fo diſtinctly, ag he map Grant aap either of them; for a greater effate map
vphold a leffer, but not à conuerfo, and therefozetf a man make a leafeto one for 2 1, peares,
the remainder to him foz terme of hig itfe, the leafe foꝛ peares (8 dꝛowned.

(d) Fifa man make a leafe fop life to one, the rematnder to bis Executoꝛs for 21, peares,the
terme For pearcs hall teft in him, foreuen as Anceftoz and Heire are corclatiua, ag to Inheri⸗
tance (as (fan eſtate for life bec made to ^. therematnder to B. tntatle, therematnder to the
tight hetres of A, the fee veſteth in A, ag ft had beenclimitted to him and bis beires ) euen fo are
tbe Œeftators and the Executoꝛs corclariva ag to any Chattell, Bnd therefore {fa leafe foz 1ífe
be made to the teftatoz, the remainder to his Grecutozs for peares , the Chattie (all belt in the
leflee himfelfe, ag well ag ff te bad beene limited to him and his Crecutogs,


Cua».


—


Lib.t.


C BANI. d.


“ou tene=
ments font leſſes per
bi home a vn auter,
a auer a tenecalup a
la bolunt le ieffo2,
pforce De quel leafe
le leffee eff en pot-
- fcífíon, entiel cag le
leffee eft appel tenant
abolunt, pur cco que
il nad afcun certaine
ne fure eftate, carle
leffo? lup poit outtet
à quel temps que tl
luy plerroit:bncoze (
E lefiee emblea E terre
éle leffoz apres lem-
bleer, & Deuant d les
bleed font matures
lup outta, brcoze 1c
Effee auera fsbiees,%
aũra frãk entẽ egres
& regres a ſcier a De
carier les blees,pur c
q̃̃ tine ſcauoit a quel
temps le leſſoꝛ baloit
ẽtre ſur luy. Auterm̃t
eſt ſi tenãt pur terme
DANS J conuſt le fine
De fon terme emblea
fa terre, le terme eft
finy Deuant que Ics
bles font matures
en ceo cas Ie leſſor, ou
celuy en la reuerſion


Of Tenant at will,


Of Tenant at will.


Enant at will
is, where
lands orte-


ments are
let by one man to ano-
ther, to haue and to
hold to him at the wil
of the leffor, by force
of which leafe,the lef-
fee isin poffeffion, In
this cafe the leffee is
called tenant at will,
becaufe hee hath no
certain nor fure eftate,
for the leffor may put
him out at what time
it pleafeth him. Yet if
the leffee foweth the
land, and the leffor af-
ter itis fowne, and be-
fore the corne isripe
put him out, yet the
leffee fhall haue the
corne , and fhall haue
free entrie, egreffe and
regrefle to cut and car-
rie away the Corne,
becaufe hee knew not
at what time the leffor
would enter vpon
him. Otherwife it is
if Tenant for yeares,
which knoweth the
end of his terme, doth
fow the land , and his
terme endeth before
the corn is ripe;Inthis
cafethe leffor,or he in

D 3


—
SOY A


&. 68.


Sedt.68.


Enant Av0-
lunt eff, ow
terres o8


tenements,


ſont leffes per vn home a
Un anter, a Ayer & tener
4luy ala volunt le leffor,
de. Ft is regularly


true that cuerp leafe at ill
mutt in law bee at the will of
both partied , and therefore
When the leafe is made, To
haue and to hold at the will of
the Leſſoz, the lao tmplpeth
tt tobe at the will of che telle
alfo ; fos tt cannot bee only at
the Will ef the Leſſor, but it
mutt beat the will of the leſſee
alfo. Bnd fo tt is when tie
leafcíg made To haue and to
hola at the will of the Leſſee,
this imuft be alfo at the il of
the Leſſor; and fo are all the
Dokes, that feeme prima fa-
ae to Difécr, cleerelp recon=
ctled.


€


55


Fleta lib. 3.cap.15


18. H. 6.1. 38. H.6. 1.
9.€. 4.1.5. (0.£. 4.18.5.
21.H.7.38. 13, H.8.16. .
14H. 8.11.14.


¶ Par ceo que il nad Fsiicms.


afcun certaine ou fure


effate, &c. Alia poffef-


10 eft præcaria & alia pro pre-
ce conceffa vt fi quis fine fcrip-
to concefferit alicui babitatio-
nem, vel vfumfrudum in re
fua tenenda ad voluntatem
fuam hzc quidem poffeffio
precaria eft & nuda eo quod
tempeftiue & intempcítiue
pro voluntate Domini poterit
reuocari.


Œ Yacore fi le leffee
emblea la terre, & le lef-
for apres le embleer, cc.
Che reafon of this (e, for that
the Eſtate of the Lee ts vn⸗
certaine , and therefore leaſt
the ground ſhould be vnmanu⸗
red, Which ſhould bee hurtfall
tothe Commonswealth ws

a


Lib.


18.E. 4.18. -


Tempi €.1.br.25.
10.47 pl.6.
10.E. 3.29.
46. E. 3. 1.

7. H.4.17.


7.Aff.19.
Lib. 5.126, Olands cafe.
(a) 8.40.11.


(b) 14.H.6.6.

$c) Lib.5-fo.106.
Olanas cafe.

(d) Olands caf: vhi füpra.


(e) 33- E. 3 trefp.F 254.
42.€.3.25-

Olands cafe.

Vhifupra.

(60 IHE. 37. H.6.6.
Y2.E.4.45« 14. £.4.6.
15. E. 4.31: 2. H. 7. 1.

$ H.7.17. Ya. H.7.2 5.
10. H.4.1. 28. H.8.52.
*Dier.

(g) 44-E-3-15-

Fleta lib.3. cap.15.


(B) 35-H.6.24. 21.1.6.9.


1. E. 4. 3: 21. £.4.5.
*Pl.com. perfan de
Henyland: cafe.


14.E 4.6.
8.E 4. u.c.


(a) Lih.5 fal. 10.
Henfleads cafe.
10.Eliz. Dier.269.b.


(ap.8.


3


Of Tenant at Will. Seit.68,


Gl Lec the Crop Sabi auerales bleeg, pur the rcuerfion fhal haue
Men EUM. peo que le teriMDg PEU PAR cute
be be rine, ud otis nuft lecertaintie we Leffce oe the cer-

efet rots , orfow Dempt terme quant 9 tme taintic of his tearme
où Flax, tt i ; - k
— Ee iine DA ferroit inp. & when itfhould end.


planted, the dLcfTo? ouft the Acilee, 02 (€ the Lellee dieth pet he 02 his Executoꝛs fbail bate that
peares crop. But it bc plant poung fruit tres, 02 poung Dhes, Afbcs, Elmes,ec, 02 fowe
the ground With Acornes, ec, there the Lefoz may put him out notwithitanding, becaufe thep
Svill peald no prefent annuall profit, Bnd this (s not only proper to a Leſſee at Mill, that when
the Leftez determine bis will that the A cflee hail fauc the Lorne ſowne, ẽc. but to euery parti
cular Cenant that hath an cftate incertaine, foz that ts the reafon which Littleton erpreleth in
thefe 300209 ( Pur ceo queil nad afcun certeine ou füre eftate.) And therefore tf Cenant foz itfe
foweth the ground, and dicth his Executozs fball bate the Come, forthat his eftate Sas vncer⸗
tainc,and determined bp the act of Gov, Bnd the fame law 18 of the Leſſes foz pearcs of Gee
nant forlife, So it a man bcfcífco of land in the right of bis wife, and foiweth the ground,and
he dicth, his Erecutozs Mall haue the corne, and if his wite die before him be fball baue the
Come, Wut it hulband and wife be topntenants of the land, and the bufband foweth the
ground and the and furutucth tothe Wife, (tts fatd (a) that the hati haue the Cone, FE cc
nant pur terme dauter vie ſoweth the ground, and Celty que vie dieth, the Lellee hail haue the
Cone, Bf aman feifed of ands tn fee and hath iuc a daughter and dieth hts wife being
enfeint Sith afonne, the daughter foweth the ground the founc is bone, pet the daughter Mali
Cb) hance the Come becaufeber cftate was lawful, and defcatcd by the ad of (bod, and tt ts
god forthe Common Wealth that the ground be fowen, (c) Wut t£ the Lellee at will ſowe the
ground With Coznc, ac. andatter he htunfelfe Determine his Will and refafcth to occupie the
ground, in that cafe the ALcfloz (bati hauc the Corne becaufe he lofeth bis Went, Andifa wo⸗
man that holveth land Durante viduitate fua fotweth the ground and taketh hufband, (d) the
LefToz (bati baue the embleaments becaufe that the Determination of her one effate grew bp
ber owneat, But Where theeftate of the Lellee being incertaínctg defeafible bp a right
paramount, o2 (£ the Leaſe determine by the ad of the Leſſee as bp forfetture, condition, te.
Y €) x here he that hath the right paramount, oz that entreth fos any fozfeiture,ec- Mall bauc
the Cozne.

Alfa Ditletfor owe the ground and feuer the contes and the Diſſeilee re-enter Cf) hee ſhall
fauc thecozne becaufe he entreth bp a Former title, and feucrance oz remouíng of the cogne alte-
reth not the cafe, for the regres is a recontinuation of the freehold in bin in tudgement of Law
from thc beginning.

(2) It tenant by ſtatute Merchant foweth the ground, and then afodaine and cafuall pzofz
fit falleth by which he (a fatithend, he fall have the emblements.

€ Leleffor loy puit oufler. Thereis an expꝛeſſe oufter, and im⸗
plicd oufter, anerpzefle,as when the Leftoz commieth bpor the land, and expꝛelly forewarneth
tho Leſſee to occupicthe around no longer ; an implied, ac (£ the Leflor without the confent of
the Leſſee enter into the land anb cut powne atre, this is a determination of the Swill, foz that
ít Chould otherwile be a wꝛong in him, vnlelle thetrees Were excepted, anb then it ts no deter=
mination of the tto ili, forthen the ad is lawtull albett tbe Will Doth continuc. Fé a man Icafcth a
Mannoꝛ at voill whereunto a Common ts appendant, {€ the 3Leflo put in bis beatts to bfethe
Common this tsa determination of the will. The XLeiTo2 map by actuall entrie into the ground
determine big torllin the abfence of the Lefler, but by Words fpoken from the ground the will
ig not Determined vntin the Leſſee hath notice. $30 more then the diſcharge of a Facoꝛ, Attoz=
nep, o2 fucb like in their abfence ts fufficicnt in Law vntill thep haue notice thereof,

(a) It a woman masc a Leaſe at Will referuing a Rent and fhe taketh hufband, this te
no countermand of the Leafe at ill, but the hufband and Sotfe hati hauc an action of debt foz
the Rent, andfo it is (£a Leaſe be made to a Woman at will referuinga Kent and the Lelle
taketh hufband this is no countermand of the cafe but the Leſſor map haue an action of Debt
92 diftretne them for the Went : ſo it the buíbanb and Wife makea Leaſe at Will of the wifes
lano reſeruing a Rent and the hufband die, pet the Leale conttnueth: In like manner {£a Leaſe
be made by two to two others at Mill and the one of the Lellors ozof the Leſſees die the Leafe
at Swill ig not determined in neither of thofe cafes ; which are neceflarie points tobe knowno.


Apres lembleer, & denant que les blees font matures. hen out the
cafethat the corne (9 ripe and ready cut Downe, and the ALefToz befozethe Leſſee reapeth it, enter,


and pnt out tbc Meller, S» bíther (ball the Letter haue the come ? and ít ig without ali quefttorn
that the Leſſee ſhall haue ít, fox by the fame reafon that bc fhall baue tt Sohen he ts put out —


Liba. Of Tenantat Will.  Seë.69.


it be ripe, be fall baucít when he is put out when ít is ripe, Et vbi cadem eft ratio, ibi


idem jus.


¶ Et anxi franke entrie, egres & regres. (b) #02 Whenthe Lato doth

anp thing to one, tt giucth impliedip whatſoeuer (e necellarp, forthe taking and entoying
of the fame Quando lex aliquid alicui conceditsconcedere videtur,& id fine quo res ipfa eff? non
porett, and the Law inthis cafe daineth bim not toan. action for the come, but gineth bin a
ipeedy remedy to enter tuto the land, and to take anb carvp it away, and comyclleth not him to
takett at onetime, 02 to carrp it befozeit be readp to be carrted ; and therefore the law giueth
all that $obícb ts conucntent,viz. free entrie eqrefle and regreſſe ag much as is neceflarp.

It the Lefte be difturbed of thts Swap Mbhich tbe law voth gine onto htm, be thall haue his
action bpon his cafe, and recoucr bis Damages, andthis action the law doth gine bntobim ; for
Sohenfoeucr the lat giucti any thing, it giueth alfo a remedy Foz thefame, Wut here ts to be
obferucd a diuerlity, betweene a Pziuate Wap, &obercof Littleton here fpeaketh, anb a common
Gap, Sop tf the Map bea common Wap, tf any man bo difturbed to qoc that way, o» tf a ditch
be made ouerthSvart the Wap fo ag he cannot goe, pet Chall be not haue an action bpen bis cafe,
and this the law pzontoeb fo? atsopbíng of multiplicity of fuites, for if anp onc man might have
an action, all mer might baut theltke. Wut the lat fo? thts common nufance hath proutded an
apt remedy, and that is by pacfentment in the Lestees inthe ome, bnicile anp man Yath a
particular Damage ag if cano his hozfe fall into the ditch whereby herecetucd hurt and lofle,
there for this fpccíall damage which ts not common to others, be Mall haue on ation bpon bis
cafe, and all this (c) Was refolucd bp the Court tn the Kings bench: Bnd ín that cafe it Was
aid that (t had beene adiudged in that Court betweene Weftbury and Powell that Where the
Anbabitants of Southwarke had bp cuftomea watering place Éoz theit cattell which Sas
ftopped bp bp Powell that in that cafeanp Inhabttant of Southwarke might aue an action,
fox otherwile thep (boulo be without remedp becanfe fuc) a nufance ig not prelentable in the
Leete os Tozne : Note the diuerltie.

bere be thacekinde of wayes, Whereof pou fhall (d) reade nour anctent bookes. Firſt a
fete way, Which is called Iter, quod eft jus eundi velambulandi hominis, and this Sas the
fir w


a *

The — is a foote Wap and hoꝛſe way, which ts called actus ab agendo ; and this bulgars
ip is called packeand prime way, becaufe it (g both a fot Swap, Which was the firft o2 prime
way, anda packe ogdrift way alfo,

Abe third tg via o2 aditus Which contepne the other two, and alfa a cart Way,ec, For this ts
jus eundi, v chendi, & vehiculum & iumentum ducendi ; and this ts twofold,viz, Regia via
the kings high Way For all men, & comunis (trata belonging to a Gitte oz Cowne, o between
neighbours and neighbours. Œbis is called in our bokes chimin being a french 30029 £05 a
Swap, Whereof commeth chiminage chiminagium, ozchimmagium, Which Fgnifietha Coll duc
bp — for hauing a Wap througha Forꝛeſt; and tn ancient Wecords tt is fometime alfo
called Pedagium, 1

Fé the Leſſee at will by god huſbandzte and induſtry, either bp ouerflowing o2 trenching, oz
compafling of the meadowes, oꝛ digging bp of bulbes ozfuch like make the grafle to growe tr
moze abundance, pet (£ the Lefloz put him out, the LelTeæ ſhall not hauc the graſſe, becaufe that
the grate is the natural proffit ofthe cart, And the fame law (s 1€ he doth fowe hap fed, and

thereby encreafeth tbe graffe.

€ Auterment eft de tener a terme dans que conuſt le fine de [on terme, Grec.
teil faid Littleton (Which knoweth the end of his terme ) that (e, Where thecnd of the terme
ig certaine, but Sobere the Leaſe for peares Depends pon an incertainty, ag bpon the Death of
tenant fox life being made bp him, oz of a huſband ſeiſed (s the right of bie wike o3 thelike, there
it is otherwile.


Section 69:
€ [ua {ton mete ATP if ahoufebee aS! va mefe [oit leſſe


foit leſſee a on letten to one to a vn home a tener
home a tener a bo- holdatwill, by force « volunt, &c. Che
lunt, p force De quel whereoftheleffee en- reafon of this te ealpent bv»
leleüo enter en le trethintothe houfe,Sc oath Sobicbbary beme far


mele deins quelmeſe brings his houfhold- @ cee, op —


X Mas


56


(b) Temp: £.x.tit grant 4. Holt LA.
9.E.4.35. $.£.3.frefp.13- | Jabber J
21 H.7-14 b. 8.H.6.18.5. 4 73e»
2.R a barre.137.
14. H. 8.2. 27. . 8. 18.6


|


(€) 27.H.8. 27.
2.€£.4.9. $.E.4.2.
Tr: 41. Elia. berweene
Finsenx and Homenden,
Vid.lib.5.fo.7 2.
Williams cafe.


(d) Fleralib.4. ca.27.
"Bratton.lib.a fa. à 324


32.€.3.barre26r.
27.E.3.78.


6.8.3.21.


Carta deforea cap.x4.


Lib.:.


(2) 5 1. El.ca.1.
im Dom feda).


(b) Reg. y 3. F. N.2.127.
AE. 2. Vouch. 244. Six acres
of land may bs parcel of a


(€)12.E.4.37. 34. H.6. 40.


(d)Brad.li.a.ca.52.b.


(¢)2-H.6.15. 21.H.6.30.


(£ )Flet.i.3 ea.3. dr 08.05.


41 E. i. Tit Feof.& faits 51.
35.H E. Fe.f. Br. 37-7 f. 61.


38.4 f. 2 39.4.12
41. E. 3. 17. li. 6. fo. 26
Sharp: cafe.


Ca-9.


fon, calicd (m legall Ratine
Mefluagium, containeth ( ag
bath bene faid) the WBuii-
vings, Curtelage, =D achard,
and Garden,

Cottage, Cotagium is a
littie boufc without land to ít.
(a) Se@31-Eliz.cap.1- and
Cottages in Domefday
boke are called Cotterelli :
And in antient Becozd8 haga
fignifict a houſe. Fifa man
hatha boufc nare to my houfe,
and be fuffereth bis boufe te
beforuinoug, as itíg like to
fall spon mp boufc, (b) 3
map bauca wꝛit de domo rc-
parando , and compell him to
repaire bis boufe, Wut a Præ-
cipe lieth not de domo, but de


meflua go.
«| Per  reafonable
temps. ( c) {Hts vea=


fonable time (ball bc adindged
by the difcretion of the Juſti⸗
ces, before home the caufe
Dependeth ; andfo ít is of rea⸗
fonabie fines, cuftomes, and
ſeruices, vpon the truc fate of
the cafe depending before
them: fo? reafonablenefle in
thefe cafes belongeth to the
knowledge of the Law, and


Of Tenant at will.


il posta ſes vtenſils
de meafon, & puis le
Leffo2 lup outta, vn⸗
core il aucta franke
entre egreſſe a te-
greffe en mefme ie
mefe per reafonable
temps, De carrier
fes biens & btenfils.
Sicome home feilie
bun mefe en fee ſim⸗
ple, fee taile, ou put
terme De bie, le quel
ad certaine biens
deins m̃ le mefe,e fa=
it fes executs, a DEp,
quecunque ap2es fa
mot ad E mefe;bncot
les executorꝛs anont
frank entry egreſſe a
regres ð carier hors
de mefme le mele les
bg lour teftatoz per
reafonable temps,


S870.


ftuffe into the fame,
and after the Leflour
puts him out, yct he
fhall haue frec entrie,
egrcfle and regrefle
into the {aid houfe,by
reafonable time to
take away his goods
and vtinfels. As if a
manfeifed ofa mefe in
fec fimple, fee taile, or
for life, hath certaine
goods within the fayd
houfe , and makes his
Executors , and dieth,
whofoeuer after his
deceafe hath the
houfe, his Executours
fhall haue free entrie
cgrefle and regreffe
to carrie out of the
fame houfe the goods
of their teftarour by
reafonable time.


therefozeto he dectded bp the Juſtices. (d) Quam longum effe debet non definitur in iure, fed
pendetex difaetione lufticiarior: Bnd this being fato of time, the like map befatd of things tn=
certaine, Which ought to bercafonabie ; fox nothing thatigcontraric to reafon, ie confonant


to Law,


| (c) Sicome home fcifi dun mefé en fee fimple,ou fee taile, ec» Œbisis


fo euident, as (t needeth no explanation.


qr € tre it appeareth,

Ghat t£ the Feot⸗

fee doth enter, be is

tenant at 1 fl, becaufe hee en=

tret) bp che confent of the
jreotfo:,

«| Et deliver a luy Le


fait. Albeit the deed
be delivered bppon the
Ground, yet doth ít not
amount to a ituerte of fet=
Gn of the Land ; jroj ít
hath big naturall effect to
make ft a Ded. (f) Do.
nationum alia perfe&a , alia
incepta & non perfeda : Vt


Seclion 70.


€ Te fibn hoe

fait bn fait De
Feoffement à bn au-
ter De certaine terre,
& Deliuet à lup le
fait, mes nemp liuc-
tie be Seifin , en ceo
cate, celup à que 1e
fait eft fait, pott en⸗
ter en le QC ette, ate-
nec # occupier à là
boluntcelup que fift


Lfo ifa man make

a Deed of Feoffe-
ment to another, of
certaine lands,and de-
liuereth to him the
Deed , but not liuerie
of feifin ; in this cafe
heto whom the Deed
is made, may enter in-
to the Land, and hold
and occupie it at the
will of him which
le


Libre
Te fait, put ceo que fl
eſt pꝛoue per les pa⸗
rols del fait, que il
eſt la volunt que le
auter auera la ter⸗
ge, mes celup que
fif le Fapt lup po-
et oufte quaunt lup
pleift,


€ [gem ft bn mele

foit leffe a tenet
aboiunt, Le leſſee nett
pas tenus a fufteiner
ou repairer le Mea⸗
fon, (ícome Œenant
à terme Dans eft te-
nus, Des file Leſ⸗
feca bolunt fait vo⸗
luntarie watt, ficome
en abatement des
meaſons, ou cn cou-
perdes arb2es, il eft
Dit que le Leſſor auc-
rade ceo enits lup a-
ction De Crefpaffe,
Sicome ico bayle a
bn hoe mes barbitsa
copefters £C, ou mes
boefes a aret la tert,
& il occiſt mes auers,
íco puiffoy bt ati bu
actd tris enüs lup
nient obfant Ebaile-
ment,


action of Crefpaffe (ur le cafe, fos this conuerfion,at his election.


Of Tenant at Will.


made the Deed, be-
caufe itis prooued by
the words of the
Deed, that it is his will
that the other fhould
haue the land; but hee
which made the Deed
may put him out when
it pleafeth him. —


Seélion 71.


Lío if a houfe be

leafed to hold. at
will, the Leffee is not
bound to fuftain or re-
pairethe houfe, as Te-
nant for terme of yeres
istied. But if Tenant
at will commit volun-
tarie waft, as in pulling
downe of houfes,or in
felling of trees, it is
faid that. the. Leflor
fhall haue an a&ion of
Trefpaffe for this, a-
gainft the Leffee. Ás
if I lend to one my
Sheepe, to tathe his
land, or my Oxen to
plowthe land, and he
killeth my Cattle, I
may well hauean a&i-
on of Trefpas againft
him , notwithftanding
the lending.


Set. 71.
fi donatio le&à fuerit &
conceffa ac traditio non-
dum fueric fübfecuta. But
it the Deede be belínerep in
name of fetün o£ tbe Zand,
oa tt the Sfeoffoz faith to the
Feottee, Cake and entoy this
Hand according to the Ded,
9? enter into this Land, and
God gíue pon top, thefe
Words doe amount to a liner p
of fein,


TS! vns mec foit


leffc a teuer a vo-


lunt le leffee nef? paſſe te-
nus &c. Foꝛ the ſta⸗
tute of Gloucefter aboue mens
ttonco extends notte a Te⸗
nant at Will, and therefore
for permiffiue Walt, the ieiioz
hath no remedieat all,

«| Mes fi Lefee 4 vo-
lunt fait voluntary waft,


oe. (g) And true it
ts, Chat t£ Cenant at Wtil
cutteth bovone timber Crees,
62 boluntartlp pul downe and
proftrate houfes, the Leffour
fhallhiue an action of Œref-
vaſſe aga inſt him, quare vi &
armis, fo? the taking opor him
power to cuttimber, oꝛ pꝛo⸗
ſtrate houſes, concerneth fo
much the kreehold anb inberi-
tance ag tt Doth amount in
La to a Determination of
big Will, Ch) andfo hath (t
beene abiudged.

Ci) FE Ceuant at toiil
granteth ouer bis eftateto an
other , and the Grantee ens
treth, he is a Difetfoz,and the
ieffoz map baucan Aion of
&E refpatte agatnf the grantee,
fo? albett the grant was void,


: ; j i ft antountetl) to a Determination of his ill.
«| Sicome ito baile aun home mes barbits acompefler fon terre, crc. Bud
thereafon is,(k )that when the Bailite hauing but a bate dle ofthem , taketh bpon him as an
owner, to kill them, he loſeth the benefit of the ble of them. Dz inthele cafes bee may haue an


. © Trefpafe. Tranſgreſſio deriuatura tranfgrediendo, becaufe it pats
feth that which is right: Tran(greffio autem eft cum modus non feruatur , nec menfura: debet
enim quilbetin fuo facto modum habere,& menfuram : Nota, 31 the loweſt amb the higheſt


offences there ave no accellaries, but all are principals, ag 5 Spots touts, forcible —


r


37


(g)21.H.6.58. 38. E.3.25.
12.4, 4.322. E.4. 50,


(h) Michs28.& ag. E i278
Ror.318.in Com, Bane. enter
Walgraue & Somerfer, V. le
Cents de Sbrewiburies cafe,
Hi. 5. fo.13.

(i) 17. H. 6.3.22, £.4.5.


(k)V.1i.H.4.34.1.E.4.g.b
12.E. 4.8. 31.E. 4.19.67 75,
22,E.4.5. 3. H.7.4. a1 H7.


14.
Flers. li. 3.64.1.


Lib.i.


21. H.7. 39.6. 2. E. 4. 6.b.
7-E.4.27.4.
6.R.23..Ausnrie 86,


(1) Bratton lib. 4. fol.318.
4.E.3.39. 7. £.3.13.
24.E.3.24. 38.£.3.28.
7. R.z- fawour deff. 30.
8.E.3.35. 4.H.6.30.

22 €.4.38. 18. E. 4.2 5.
F.'N.B.201, D.253.
pe 87.

Temp: H.8.b.15.
fit.tenant a volunt.
Tl.com.138.

4.H.7. 3.

(m) 13.H.7.16 4.

21. H.6. 54. 5. E. 4. 3.
22.R.2. tit. Diſcont.
48.E. 3.23. pl.com.43 5.
19.E.3.bre. 468.
15:E.4. Difcont. 30.
6.E,3.56.87- 11. £.4.5.
21. H.7.38. 10.€.4.18.
Der (hohe, d Litt.

(n) Statw'ede Merlbridge
sap. 26.

Abb. Aff. 120.5.
F.N.B.196.
11.£.4.10. & 11.
Brait.lib. 4 fe. 252.253.


Cap-9.


other tranfgre


Swhich (e crimen leſæ majeftatis,there be no acceflarics : but


befoze anb after,


cy: poet diffreyner
pur le rent arere
ou auer de ceo Un action


de debt cic. But if be
impound the diſtreſſe vpon
the ground ietten at will, the
Willig determined. Note be
may dilſtreine for the Kent,
and pet (t is no Rent feruice,
foy no fcaltp belongeth there=
unto, but a Rene diſtreinable
of common right.


Of Tenant by Copie.


fliong vi & armis, which are the lowe offences , and fo in, the highett offence
cranii io. de fn felontcg there be acceffáricg both


Seil. 72.


& NI Ota fi le leſ⸗
N foy fur tiel
leafe a holunt te-
ferue alup bn annu-
al rent, il poit Di-
firainer pur le rent
arere, ot aucc De ceo
bn action De Debt a
fon election,


7


561. 72.73.


N TOte if the leffor

vpon a leaſe at
will, referue to hima
yearely rent, he may
diftreine for the rent
behinde, or haue for
this an action of
debt at his owne ele-
&ion.


Chere tg agreat diuerſity between a tenant at will, anda Cenant at fnfferance;fo? Œcnant at


will is alwapes bp right, and Genant at fuffcrance entreth bp a lavofull Leaſe, and holdeth euer
bp wong. A Cenant at fuffcrance {8 he that at the firfE came tn bp laSwfull demife, and after
bis eſtate ended continucth the poffc(Tíon and Swzongéullp bolocth oncr, (1) As Cenant pur
terme dauter vic, continueth in poſſeſſion after the deceaſe of Ce’ que vic, o2 tenant for peares
holdeth ouct bis tearme; the Leſſoꝛ cannot auc an action of treſpaſſe before entric, 4205» that


*


a wꝛit of entrie ad terminum qui preterijt lpeth againſt ſuch a Tenant as holdeth ouer, is rather


by admilſton of the demandant, then £o? anp eſtate of Frechold that (e in him, Éoz in iudgement
of Law he hath but a bare poſſeſſion,but againt the ting there is no tenantatf{uflerance,but be
that holdeth eucr tn the cafcg aboucfatd ts an intruder bpon the King, becaufe there ts no laches
tmputed to the king for not entring (m) FE Cenant tn tatle of a Rent orant the fame in fee and
bíctb, pet the iſſue in taile may bring a Formedon and admit bimfelfc out of pofic(Tion. Cheilike
La (a ít if a man maketh a 1Lcafeat Dill and bicth,no tg the will determined, and it the
Lefeccontinueth in poſſeſſton he is Œenant at fuffcrance , and pet the here bp admiflion
imap haue an aſſtze of Mordanc again bim. (n) 2but there is a dinerfitp betweene particular
eftates made bp theterretenaunt, ag abouc (e {aid, and particular eſtates created by ad in Law:
ag if a garbíam after the full age ef the cire, continucth inpollefiion,beis no Œenant at fuffe-
tance, but an Pbatoz, againt Shon an A lize of Mordancefter doth ipe, Et fic de (imilibus, :


ee


Cua r..9.
Tenant by Coppie.
aa) Cnant p co-


Setlion 73.


Eur’, Copie wecallin Latpn
copiam, though copia fs big
proper figuification Gontficth
plenty, but Swe haue made a
Latyn 50070 of the French
50010 copie and tbíg ig ancia
ent for (t the Recifter fo.sr.
there {g a wꝛit de copia libel-
li deliberanda, Sbich (g
grounded bpon tbe ffatute of
2. HA.ca. @herets mo te-
nant ín tbc Law, that holdeth


Ipie de court
—rorett deins
quel manoꝛ il p ad
bn cuftome que ad
efte ble De temps
Dont memozie ne
court, que cettaine
tenants Deins metri
lemanoz, ont bfe da⸗
uet terres & tene⸗
ments, a tener à


28 Enant by copy
Tom Court Roll
is, asif aman


be feifed ofa mannor,
within which manor
there is a cuftome,
which hane beene v-
fed time out of minde
of man, that certaine
tenants within the
fame manor haue vied
to haue lands and te-


eut


Lib.t.


eux a la lour beires
en fee fimtple, ou
en fec taile, ou à
terme De bic, tc. a
polunt le Seigni⸗
p» folonque le cu-


nements to hold to
them and their heires
in fee fimple, ou fee
taile or for terme of
life,&c.at the will of
the Lord according to


Of Tenant by Copie.  Seë.73.


bp copie but only this kinde
of cuftomarp tenant, for no
man bolbeth by copie of à
Charter, 02 bp copie of a fine,
oz fncb like, but this tenant
holdeth bp copie of Court roli,

(a)Bracton catleth Copthol=
ders Villanos Sockmànos, not


becanfe thep Swerebond, bur
flome De melme le the cuftome of the beaute they pro by bale te
nure bp doing of UWillein


. fame manor.
máno? E fcraíceg,


And Britton faith that fore that be free of blood doe hold land in Willenage, and Littleton
himfelfe in the next chapter calleth them tenants bp bafe tenurc : and in F.N.B, fo,12.C. Et ceft
terme que eft orea ceft jour appel copitenaunts ou copiholders, ou tenaunts per copie, eft forfque
vn novel nofme trove, car dancient temps ils fuer" appelles tenants in Villenage, ou de bafe te-
nure,&c. (b) Bnd pet (n 1.H, s. 11. thep be called Copptholders tit 14.H.4.34. tenant per le
verge. (n 42.E 3 25. Tenant per Roll folonquele volunt le fcignior ; amo ín the ſtatute of 4.E.1.
called extenta manerij thep are called Cuftumarij tenentes, anb fo Doth Flera calithem ; And bc-
Éoge him Ockam (bo W2ote in the raigne of H.2.) {peake of then and how and tpon bat
occafion thcy had thetr beginning,

(c) Terra ex fcripto Saxonice Bockland, fundii veteres aut ex fcripto qui Bockland.i.bookläd,aut
fine fcripto qui Folklind dicebatur;poffidebant,que fuit exfcripto poffe(fio commodiore erat pof.
feflione libera, atque immunis, fundus fine fcripto cenfum penfitabantannuü, atque officiorum
feruitute quadam eft obligatus, priorem viri plerunque nobiles, atque ingenui, poíteriorem ru-
.. flici fere & pagani poffidebant.


@ Court. Curia, Court (8 a place tohere Juſtice ts iubícíallp mi-
niftred and (s deriued a cura quia in curijs publicis curas gerebant, (d) Che Court baron muſt
be holven on fome part of that which ts Mithin the Wannoz, for if it be holden out of the
Mannoꝛ ít ts voide, vnleſſe a 1029 being fcifed of two oꝛthꝛee Mannoꝛs hath vſually time out
. efiminds kept at onc of his Mannoꝛs Courts £o; all the fato Mannoꝛs, then b» cuftomc fuch

Courts arc fufficient in Law, albeit thep be not holden Withinthe feucrall Mannozs, And
it is to be bnverttwd that this Court is of two natures, the irk {9 bp the Common Law,
and ig callco a Court baron, ag fone hane faid fo? that tt is the freeholders o2 freemans Court,
( fox barons in one fence fignific freemen ) and of that Court the freeholders being fuitoas be
indgegs, and this may be kept from three Weekes to thre Weekes; The fecond is a cuftomarp
Court, and that doth concerne Coppiholdergs, and therein the 3.020. or hia Steward is the
indge. Now ag there can be no Court baron Without freeholders,fo there cannot bethis kinde
9f cuſtomary Court Without Coppibolders oz Cuſtomary holders. And as there map bea
Court baron of Freeholders only Without Copptholders, and then is the fkeward the Regi⸗
Ker, fothore may be a cuſtomary Court of Coppihoiders onlp Without Frebolders,an® then
ig the Lozd oz bis ſteward the tudge. And Whenthe Court baron ts of this double nature,
the Court Roll contetncth aſwell matters appertatning to the cultomarp Court ag to the
Court baron, i

And forafinuch ag the titis, oz effate of the Coptholder (s entre (nto the Roll Swbereof the
ſteward deliucreth him a copie, thereof he ig called dLoptboloer, (c) Ft tecalleda Court baz
ron becaufe among the lawes of king Edw: the Conteſſoꝛ (t {s fa(o ; Barones vero qui fuam
habent curiam de fuis hominibus, &c. taking hig naine of the Baron Soho was Lozd of the
Mannoz, opfoz that properip in the epe of Law it hath relation to the Freeholders, (f) ho
are Judges of the Court. Andis Ductent Charters and Kecords tbe Barong of London,
and Barons ofthe Cinque posts doe Agnifie the free men of London and of the Cinque ports.


© Seifie dun mannor. Manerium dicitur a manendo fecundum excel-
lentia fedes magna fixa & ftabilis. Lageman .i. habens focam & facam fuper homines fuos,
&c. (2) Et fciendum e& quod manerium poterit effe per fe ex pluribus edificijs coadiuuatum
fiue villis & hamletis adjacentibus. Poteritetiam effe manerium & per fe & cum pluribus villis
& cum pluribus, Hamletris adjacentibus, quorum nullum dici poterit manerium perfe fed villa:
fuze hamlettæ,poterit etiam effe per fe manerium capitale , & plura continere fub fe maneria non
eapitalia, & pluresvillas & plures Hamlettas quafi fub vno capite aut dominio vno. Bnd af:
teripards, Mancrium autem fieri potericex pluribus villis vel vna, plures enim villz poterunt
effein corpore manerij (icut & vna, Bnd in thefe (b) ancient Authors vou fball fe the diffe-
rence, inter manfionem, villam, & manerium, Concerning the inftitation of thts Court b
the Lawes and D2dinances of ancient things "4 efpectalig of ting Alfred, tt app ,
2 a


58


(a) "BraBon lis. 2. 0.8,
fr. 26. & lib.4 fo. 30g.
Britton. i6 5-
Flctalib.x .cap,8.dr lib, à.
Cap.6. Itemmdecujluma iis.
e am ("ap.qwid mardrurm,
F.N,B. fo.12.2.


(b) 1H. 5.31.34, H.4. 34.
42.E.3.15.
Vid.lib. 4. fo, 3, Brownes cafe.


(c) Lam). verb,
Terra ex. fertpto,


(d) Vid. 4 fo. 4. inre»


Murrell So. stb eodem
Lib. fo. 277 Ante liftos dr
M elinenx.


Lih.4.fo.26..Malwstches
cafe, Brittonfal 274.


(e) Lamb fo.128 & 116.
Cambéen Brit.fs.121.8.
Britton fa.274.


(£) -Mirrer cap.1.8.3.


Demeftay.
(g) Bratton sb.4.fol.213.
Fleta lib, 4.cap.1 5.o 166.6.
tap. 49. Britton fel. 124.


(R) raH.b.5 fe. 434:
leta vbi fupra.


Mirror. eap. 1. 5. 3.


Libr (ap.9. Of Tenantby Copie. — Sed. 74.


(i) Lib. 4. fal. 24.p. 39. Eliz.
Suter Rous & Arteis.


(k) Dior. Miche, dr 8.
Msz. Monfript.


9
CI) Vide lib. 4. fel.24. inter
Marvel dr Smith,


Eib. v1.17. Sir H."Neuils cafe.
Lib.4. fol.30. gr» inter Hoe
dr Tayler.


‘Rerif. F.N.B. 270.4.
Wet, mag, Cartaineap Itin,
fel.1 5 1. Bra. lib. 3.117,
Fleta.lib, y eap. 20.


that tbe firff things of this Realme bab ailthe Lands of England in Demeane, and les grand
Manors & Royaluesthep referue to themfelues and of the remnant thep, C02 the defence of the
Realme,enfeoffed the Warons of the Realme With fucb turifotaton ag the Court Baron new
hath, anb inftituted the fræbolbers to be Judges of the Court Waron, And herewith agreed
theafozefaid Law of Saint Edward. Anditisto be obferucb , that in thofe ancient Lawes.
vnder the name of 2Barong Were compꝛiſed all the Nobilitie.

There map be a cuftomarie Manoz granted by Copic of Court Koll, fo although the word
be ( cific ) which psoperlp betokeneth a Freehold, pet Cenant fot peares , Œenant by ffature,
Merchant, Htapie, Elegit, and Cenant at will, Garden in Chiualrie, ac, $010 are not pꝛo⸗
perip feifeb but poſſeſſed are Domini protempore , not onip to make admittance, but to grant
boluntarie Copies of anctent Copthold lands which come into ther hands. And therefore there
ig a ptuerfitic betweene Dillcifozs, Abarozs, Jntrudozs, and others that Daucbefeafiblo Ti⸗
ties, £o? their boluntatp grantg of ancient Copihoidiands , thall not binde the Diiicifozg oz
others thatright have, And boluntatíegrants bp Copie, mate by fuch particular Tenants
as (e afozelaid, hall bind him that hath the Fræbold and Jubheritance,becaufeall thele belaw=
full 1,0208 foz the time being, but fois not a Œenant at fnffcrance , becaufehets in bp Wrong
ag hath bene fato, and fo (1) Was it adindged P.2o. Eliz. inter Rowfe & Arteis lib. 4.fol.24.
But admittances made by Diſſeiſoꝛs, Pbatozs, Jntruders, Tenant at fufferance oz others
that haue defeafible Titles, and geod againt them that right haue becaufe tt was a lawtull
at, anb tbep were compellable to doe them.

Ck) And pet in fome fpecíall cafe an (E (Fate map be granted by Copte,byp one that (2 not Do-
minus pro tempore, noz that hath any thing tn the manoz, As it the 1 020 of a manoz by his Will
ín writing, deuiſeth thar his Executoz fball grant tbe cuftomarp Cenements of the Manoz
according tothe cuftome of tbe Manoꝛ for thepayment of big debts , and dieth, the Erecutoz
bauing nothing in the Wanoz map make grants according to the cuftome of the Manoꝛ.


€ Deins quel mannor il y ad vn Cuftome que ad effe vfe de temps


dont memory ne court, cc. €Df this cuftome here fpoken of there bee
three fupporters. Che firft is time, and that muft be out of memozp of man, Which ts included
Within this word (cuftome) foas Copihold cannot begin at this dap. (1) Chefecond fuppoz-
ter is that the Cenements be parcell of the Wannoz oꝛ within the Wannoz, Which appeare by
thefe woꝛds of Littleton, que certeine tenants deins mefinclemannor, &c. Œbe tbíro fuppoz=
tct is that it hath bene dimiſed and dimifibleby copie of Court 1B oll, fez tt neede not to be di⸗
tmifed time out of mind by copíc of Court ; butifit be vimifible (tía fufficient, Foz erample: FE
a Copihold tenement efcheat to the Loꝛd, and the 3070 keepeth it in bis hands bp manp peareg,
during this time tt (e not demiſed but demiſible, £02 the Lozd hath power to bimtfe {tagaine,

€ 4 volunt Le féigniour folonque le cuflome. So as he is not a bare
tenant at Will, bata tenant at Sill accoidinig tothe cuftome of the mannoz, ag fbaibe fpoken
moze hereafter in this chapter. m.

€ Certaime tenements. notat things maybe granted bp copie, is
neceflarte to be knowne: Firlt, a Danoz may be granted by copie, Hecondip, vnderwods
Without the fotle map be granted by copícto one andtobis hetres, and fo map the berbege og
veſture of iand Chirdip, generally all lands andtenements Within the Manoz and Sobatfo-
euer concerneth lands o2 tenements map be granted by copie: ag a fatreappenbanttoa a Man⸗
ter map be granted bp copy, &c. ]

€ Confuctudines. This word Confuctudo beingderfueda Con-
fucto, properly fianifieth a Cuftome, as here Littleton taketh it: Wut (n legall vnderſtanding
it fiqntfieth atfo Colles, Murage, Pontage, Wantage, and fucb itke newly granted by the
Hing ; and therefoze When the King grantes fuc) things, the Sods be Conceffimus &c. in


auxillium ville przdi& pauiand' &c. confuctudines fubicriptas, viz. de quolibet funnagio, & c.


And tt Hag an Article of tbe Juttices in Eire totnquite, De nouis confüetudinibus leuatis
in regno fiue in terra, fiuc in aqua, & quis easleuauit & vbi. tobere confuctudo fg taken fo:


Tolles, an fuc like Cares oz Charges spon the ſubiec.
Section 74.


CET tiel tenant se. ¶ TT tiel tenant Nd fuch atenant
E puit aliener fa ter- TE puit alien fa may not alien his


re, de. And this ig terre per fait, car landby deed, MS


Lib.


Donques le Seig-
nior poit entre come
enchote forfeit a lup,
mes (il boit alien fa
terre a bn auter, tl
coutent folonque af-
cuts cuftome De fur-
render ics tenemets
en afcun Court ac.
en le maine le Seig⸗
nioz, al bfc cclup que
auerale (fate, entiel


fozitt,ou a tiel effect,

Ad hanc Curiam
venit 4. de B. & fur-
fum reddidit in eadem
Curia, vnum mefua-
gium, &c. in manus
Domini,ad vfum C.de
D. & hæredum fuo-
rum, vel heredum de
corpore fuo exeuntiü,
vel pro termino vitz
fuz, &c. Et fuper hoc
venit przdi&us C. de
D. & coepit de Domi-
no in eadem Curia,
mefuagium prædictü,
&c. Habendum & te-
nendum fibi & hære-
dibus fuis , vel fibi &
hæredibus de corpore
fuo exeuntibus, vel fi-
bi ad terminum vitz,
&c.ad voluntatem do-
mini , fecundum con-
fuetudinem manerij,
faciendo & reddendo
inde redditus, feruitia,
& confuetudines inde,
prius debita & con-
fueta, &c. Et dat Do-
mino pro fine, &c. Et
fecit Domino fidelita-
tem, &c.


Of Tenant by Copie.


the Lord may enter as
into a thing forfeited
vnto him. But if hee
will alien his land to
another , it behoueth
him after the cuftome
to furrender the tene-
ments in Court , &c.
into the hands of the
Lordtothevfe ofhim
that fhall haue the E-
ftate in this forme or
to this effea.

A. of B. commeth
vnto this Court , and
furrédreth in the fame
Court a Meafe,&c .in-
to the hands of the
Lord, tothe vfe of c.
of D.and his heires,or
the heires iffuing of
his bodie,or for terme
of life, &c. And vpon
that , commeth the a-
forefaid C. of D. and
takcth of the Lord in
the fame Court, the
forefaid Meafe &c. To
haue and to hold to
him andto his heires,
or to him and to his
heires iffuing of his
bodie, or to him for
terme of life, at the
Lords will, after tne
cuftome of the Manor
to do and yecld there-
fore the Rents, Ser-
uices, and Cuftomes
thereof before due &
accuftomed, &c. and
giueth the Lord fora
fine, &c. and maketh
vntothe Lord his fe-
altie, &c.

D 3


Sett.74..


tine in Wale ef, alienation,
but ben a man hath but a
right to a€opthold,be map ree
leafe (t bp bet 02 by Copie,
toone that tg adinitted Te⸗
nant de facto.

Alien per faite
Pere tt appeareth bp Littleton
that there muft be an aliena⸗
tion: for the making of rhe
Deed alone vnleſſe ſome what
paſſe thereby (e no fezfetture =
ag it he makea Charter of fe=
offement, oz a Deed of demtfe
foi life, and make no liuery,
this ts no forfeiture, becaufe
hothing paleth, and therefore
no altenation, but otherwife
tt tg of a leafe fo? peares,

Forfeit a luy.
Chis Adiectlue in Latine is
forisfactus, the Werbe tg fo-
risfacere, andthe NMowne fo-
risfaQura, thep are all deriued
of foris, (that (8) extra and
facere , quafi dicerct extra le-
gem feu confuctudinem facere
to bea thing againt oz with⸗
out Law 02 Cuftome , and
that iegallp (s called a foz-
fetture. Littleton vſeth this
woꝛd but once inal his bok,
What (ball befatd Ck) fosfetz
tures of Copiholds pou mav
read at largein mp Keports.


€ E» afcun Court.
(D Chts ts the gencrall cuz
fto:ne of the Kealme that eue⸗
vie Coptholder map {urrender
ín Court and need not to al⸗
leadge anp cuftome therefore,
Soi out of Court hee fur-
vender to the 3,020 himfeife,he
Heed not alleadge in pleading
anp cuffomc, but tf he furren=
Der out of Court tnto the
bande of the Lord by the
hands of two oz thzee,ec,€0-
piholders, o2 bp the hands of
the bapitfte o; Reeuc,¢c-02 out
of Court bp the hand of anp
Other, thefe cuftomes are par=
ticular, and therefore he muſt

plead them,
(m) Bra&on lib.4. fol.209.
detur of thefe Kind of cu-
onary Cenants, faith, Da-
re autem non poffunt teneme-
ta fua , nec ex caufa donatio-
nis ad alios transferre non ma-
gis quam villani puri, & vnde
fi transferre debeant reftituunt
ça


59


Lib.intrat. t 31.
Lib.4. fol.2 5.b. füter Kite dr
Qusinton, ;


(k) Lib. 4.inter les Copthold
cafes 21.23.25.27.28, Lih.
8.92.99.100, Lib.9.7 5.1075
Lib 10.1 31.


(1) Zra&llib. a. cap.8. & lib.g
49. 15. H. 4.34.1. H.5. 1I.


(m) Brat. Ib. 4. fol. 209.
lib. 2..cap, 8 ec. X4. A.4. 34-


Libt. (apo. Of Tenant by Copie. Sedl.76;


(b )Ceram rege Mich.31.2.3
‘Ranulph Hunting falds cafe.
3-E.3.(orena 310.
11.H,4.8 3. per Therning.


(c) Vide lib. 4 inter les cafes
de Cop.bolds.


(3) Mish.s.& 3.76. M.
in Com. Baneo, by the whole
Court in Conftables cafe of
Prckenbamin Norfolk.


Le) Flea liba e 6 5.67 7x


(€) See mere of this lib. 4. the
eafas of Copiholds.
Trin.1.Ta,Rot.85 4. inter
Shapland & Ridler m repl. in
(Cem. Banco, the cafe of the
Gardin Sorage adiudzed,


(RIT. 39.Elix. betweene the
Coppibolders of the Mane of
Gniltivns 5 inthe Countie of
*Nertbumberlandand Arme-
rong , Lord of the Maner

yw ( banserie.


ca Domino vel Baliuo & ipfi ea tradantalijs in villenagium tenenda; but although ít be in⸗
cident to the eftate of a &opibolo, to pale ag our Auth oꝛ faith bp furrenders, (b) y ct fe ferct=
ble is cuftomethat by ita Freehold anb 3 nberitance, map alfo paflebpfurrender ( without the
Jeaue of the Lozd)in his Court and delinered over by the Watlp tothe fee according tothe
koꝛme ot the Ded, tobe inrolien in the Court og the like, 1

€, 44 banc Curiam venit A. de D. & furfum reddidit, cc. Pere
Littleton putteth an crampic of a ſurrender ín Court, and in thig example three ( c) things are
tobe obſerued.

Firtt, Chat thefurrender to tbe Lord be general wit hout exprelling of amp Eftate,for that
be is butaninftrument to admit Celty a que vie, foz no moze pallet to the Loꝛd, but to feruc
the limitation of the ble, and Ce’ que vfe , Xoben bec is admitted, Mail bec in bp him that made
the furrender, and not bp the 1020,

SHecondip, it she limitation of the tft be genierall,then Ce” que vfe taketh but an eftate fos life,
And therefore here Littleton expꝛeſſeth bpon the declaration of the vſe the limitation of the E⸗
ftate, viz. in fe imple, fee tatle, tc.

Chirdip, Che Lod cannot grant a larger Œftate then ts exprelled in the limitation of the tfe,
Littleton here putteth bis cafe of onc, It two topntenants be of Copthoid lands in fe , andthe
onc out of Court according to the cuftome furrender bis part to the Lords hands, te the bfe of
bis laft wlll, and by his will deutfeth bis part toa ftranger in fe, and dieth, anb at the next
Conrt thefurrender ts prefented ; by thefurrender and prcfentment the topnture Mas feucred,
and the benífee ought tobeadmitted to the moitie of the lang, fog now by relation, the ſtate of
the land was bound by the furrender. i

[In manus Domiui. Dominus manerij The Lod of a Manoz is de⸗

{cribed(e) bp Fleta ag he onght to bein thefe Words, In omnibus aute & fupra omnia de:et que-
libet Domini verbis effe veracem, & in operibus fidelem,Dcü & Iuftitiam amantem,fraudem &
peccatum odientem, voluntariofque, maleuolos, & iniuriofos contemnentem , & apud proxi-
mos pietatem vultumque motibilem & plenum , ipfius enim intereft potius confilio quam ri.
ribus vti ; proprioue arbitrio: non cuiuflibet voluntarij iuuenis meneftralli , vel adulatoris
fed iurifperitorum virorum fidelium & honeftorum, & in pluribus expertorum confilio debet fa-
uere. Qui bene fibi vult difponere & familiz fuc, fcire veram executionem terrarum fuarum ne-
ceffarium erit, vt perinde fciat quantitatem fuarum facultatum & finem annuarum expenfarum,
And the vcüibuc is fit For cucrp Loꝛd of a Manos to know and follow which Were too long
here to be recited, onip his concuinfion hauing fpoken of the 20108 reuenue anb cepenfeg 31
Spill adde, Qua omnia diftinéte fcribantur in membranis, vt perinde fagacius vitam fuam difpe-
nat & facilius conuincat mendacia compoftariorum,

CF) Be the Lord of the Manoꝛ fos the time being be Leſſee for life o2 for peares, garden, oz
any that hath any particular intereſt, oz tenant at Swill of a Manoꝛ (all Mbich are accounted
inla@ Domini protempore) doc take a furrender into bis hands , and before admittance the
Leſtee for life dicth, o2 the peares intereft 02 cuftobíc Doc end 02 Determisc,o2 the Will is deter⸗
mined, though the 1020 commeth in abone the Leafe £o? life oꝛ fox peares,the cuftonte o2 other
particular intereſt o? tenancte at ill, pet Mail he be compelled to make admittance accozbíng
5 ne furrender, anb fo wag (t holden tn 17-Eliz. tn the Caric of Arundels Cafe, which 31 mp

€ heard,
€ Et dat Domino de fine. For the fignification of this woꝛd
(finis) vide Sc&, 17 4-183.194.441-

Of fines buc tothe Lozd by the Copiholder, fore be bp the change o2 alteration of the 3015,
anb fomc by the change 03 alteration of the tenant, the change of the Lord ought tobe bp 20d
of God, other wile no fine can be due,but by the change of tbe tenant either bp the Ac of Gon,
02 by the act ofthe partíca fine map be Duc; foz tf the Loꝛd Doc alledge a cuftome Within bie
Manoz to haue a fine of cuerp of his Copthoiders of the fato Mano: at the alteration og
change of the 1070 of the Manez, be ít by alicnatton, demile, Death, oꝛ otherwiſe; Chis tsa
cuftome egaint the Law, as to the alteration oz cbange of the Loꝛd bp the actof the partic,
for bp that meanes the Copiholders may be opprefled bp multitude of fines, by the act of the
1.020. Wat When the change groweth bp the ac of God, there the cuffome (g go ag by the
Death ofthe Lord, Bnd this, bpona Cafe in the Chancerte (g) referred to Sir Iohn Pop-
ham Chtefe Juſtice, and bpon conference with Anderfon, Periam, Walmefiey, and all the
FJuvacs of SHertants Inne in Flecftreer, wag reſolued, and fo certified into the Chancerte,
But bpon the change 07 alteration of the Tenant, a fincis due onto the 1020.

Dffines taken of Copiholders fome be certaine by cnftome, and fome bee incertaine but
that fine though tt be incertus, pet moth tt bee rationabilis. And that vcafonablenefro fail bee dif
cuffed bp the Juſtices bpon the true circumftances of the Cafe appearing onto them , and (f
the Court where the caute dependeth , adiudgeth the fine exaged bnrcafonable , then —


Lib.t. -


€
in Law.


Of Tenant by Copie.


compellable to pay tt, Bnd ſo was tt adiudged Ch ) fosali xcelliueneſſe is abhozred
He more concerning Gunes of Goptholoers tw mp Reports ( i)which are fo plainip


there fet dowue, as they need not be reberfeo here,


CET tiels te:
F — case fontap-
pelles Cenants per
copie De court tolle,
put ceo que ils nont
auter euidence con⸗
cernãt lout tenerñts,
forfque les Copies
Des Bolles d Court,


Œtiels tenats
Sp, nc emplebcrót,
ne ſerront empledes
Delour tenements p
biiefele Roy, Aes
fils toilent empleder
auters pur lour tene=
ments, tls aucront
bn plaint fait en te
Court le Seignior
en tiel forme, ou a
tiel effect : A.de B.
queritur verfus C.de
D. de placito terra,
videlicet, de vno me-
fuagio, quadraginta a-
cris terr',quatuor acris
prati, &c. cum pertin.
& facit proteftationem
fequi querelam. iftam
in natura breuis domi-
ni Regis affife mortis
antecefloris ad com-
muné legé, vel breuis
domini regis afifæ
Nouæ diffeifine ad
cómunem legem, aut
innatura breuis de for-


Setl. 75.


Nd thefe tenants

are called tenants
by copie of court
Rolle, becaufe they
haue no other e-
uidence concerning
their tencments but
only the Copies of
Court Rolles.


Setlion 7 6.
AM fuch tenants


(hall neither im-
pleade nor be implea-
ded for their tene-
ments by the Kings
writ, butif they will
implead others for
theirtenements, they
fhall haue a plaint en-
tred in the Lords
Court in this forme,
ortothis-effect. A.of
B. complaines againft
C.of D. of a plea of
land,viz.of one mefu-
age, forty acres of
land, foure acres of
meadow,&c.with the
appurtenances , and
makes proteftation to
follow this complaint
in the nature. of the
Kings writ of afffe of
Mordancefter at the
Common Law, or of
anaflife of nouel dif-
feifin, or formedon
inthe difcender at the


Ls nont anter ent-


q

dence. Chis is to
be bnberíto of eutdences of
alfenation, for a releafe of a
rightbp Ded a Coptholder
(that commethin bp ‘Swap of
admittance) map have, and
that io {nffictent to ertín-
guith the right of the Copi⸗
bolo which be that maketh
thereleafe had,


Grpiilels tenants ne
2 esas , nt
ferront empledes , ec.
This is euident and needes
no explanation.
«| Mes fils violent
empleder auters, ils ane-


ront. dre. put the cafe
that the Demandant tn à pies
tnt in nature of a reall ation
teconereth the land erroni⸗
oufip, bat remedp for tie
partie gvicucd = Foꝛ be can-
not haue the Kings Swzit of
falfe (uegement in refpct of
the bafeneffe o£ the eftatcand
tenure, being in the cpe of the
law but a Cenant at Swill
anb the freehold being in anor
ther, be (ball baue a petition
to the 105 in the nature of a
tosit of falle tudgement, and
therein afligne errors and
baue remedte according to
Law.
@ De forma donatio-
nisin difcender ad com-


munem legem. Dy the
opinton of Littleton ag there
may be an effatetatle bp cua
ftome Sith the co-operation
of the Statute of W.2.cap.1.
fo map be haue a Formedon in
difcender, butas the Statute
Sithont a cuftome ertendeth
not ta Copiholds, fo a cu


Setl. 75.7 6.


60°


(Ch) Pafeh. x. Hac.in com.


bance rot A84 5 inter Sral'on
dr Brady.


(i) Lib. a tbecafes of
Copiheldi.


4.H.4 34.adindge ia
Parltament.


14.H,4:34. 1. B. 5. 1%.
Ver. ANUE.18.

1 3. R. a. rif. Faux iud; erre if,
7-E.4.19 21.€.4.89.


Lb.3 fo.8.9.5m Haydons «fe,
Lib.4.fo.22.23.
15. H,8. Brit. raile,


Lib.t.


(y) 7.29. Eliz. inter Kill d-
Vpcheic. (nfleme deins le rma-
mer de Onerbak in Effex.
31.€liz. "Die; 356.

33 Eliz, Dier 373.

(2) 10.£.2. fermden. 5.
21. E, 3.47. l. (Com. 240.

4. E.2, fermdm so.


13.€.3 tit. praféript.20.
1 3. R. 2. feiux indgement 7,
32. H. 6.261 Subpena 2.
7.£.4.19.


Vide $48.81.82.84.15 2,


(b) Vid.43.E. pais
Eres, fol. 2650


Cap-9.


Of Tenant by Copie.


Sel. 75.


ſtome without the ftatutecans ma donationis in di- Common Lawe, or


not create an Œftate taile,
Now (t is not a fufficient
profe that lands haue bene
gtanted (m taíle , for albeit
lands have anctentip and bz
fuallp bene granted by Cos
píeto manp men and to the
beires of their bodies, that
map bea See imple conditionall ag (t


fcendere ad commu- in the nature of any
nem legem, ou en na⸗
ture Dafcun auter
beiefe,ac. Plegij de
profequendo, F.G.&c |
was atthe Common Law. Wut tf a remainder have


other Writte, &c.
Pledges to profecute
F.G.&c.


been limited oucr fuch Œftates and entoped, o t£ the ((Tuce fn tatle base auopbeb the alienation
of the anceftoz, ez if they bauc recouereb tbe fame fn tio2ít8 of Formedon in the difcender, thefe
and fuch like be profes of an Eftate tatle. (y) Wut (£ bp cuftome, Copthelp may be intaried,
the fame by itke cuftome, bp furtender map be cut off, and fo hath it bene adiudged, (z)fome
baue holden that there Wags a Formedon, inthe difcender at tbe Common daw,


CC 4 (lef
Cz ) que
fi le Seignior ,
dre. And here


Littleton faith trus
lp that tt (s fato fo,
fox fo it te fatdin
13-E.3.13.R.2. 32.
H.6,& 7.E.4.19-

Wut hee fetteth
not boton bis own
opinion, but rather
tothe contrarie,ag
bersafter in this
chapter appeareth,
Wut now magiftra
rerum Experientia ,
hath maps this
terc and Without
queftton, that the
Lord cannot at big
Pleafure put out
the lawtull Cop⸗
piholder without
ſome cauſe of toꝛ⸗
keiture, and ik he do
the Coppihoider,
map haue an actton
of treſpaſſe againft
him, fo? albett hee
is tenensad volun-
tatem Domini, pet
it is fecundum con-
fuetudinem Mane-
rij.

(b) Bnd Britton
fpcaking of thefe
Kindeof Œcnants
faith thus, & ceux
font priuiledoes en
tiel maner que nul
de les doit oufter de


Sed. 77.


€r coment que at-
cun tíclg tenants


ont inheritace folonque
le cuftome del 9pano?,
bncílg nont cftate forſ⸗
que a bolunt le Seig-
nioz folonque le courte
Delcommon ley. Car il
e(t dit, Seignioz eur
outta, fils nont auter re=
medy korſque De fuer a
lour Seignio2rs per pes
tition, car fils aueront
auter comente, ils ne ſer⸗
tont Dits tenants à bo-
lunt le feigntoz ſolonq;
le cuftome Del Manoz,
ms le Seignioꝛ ne boile
enfreinder le cuftom d eft
reafonable € tiels cafes,

@ Wes Brian Chicfe
Juſfice dit , que fon opi-
nion ad touts foits efte,
a buques Cect, ff tiel teñt
per le cuftome payant
fesferuices foit etect per
le Seignioz que tlauera
action Detris bers lup,
H.2 1, Ed.4, €t (fint fuit
lopinion De Danby chiefe
uftice , AD, 7.Ed. 4.


Nd although that
fome fuch Tenants
haue an Inheritance accor-
ding to the cuftome of the
Manor, yet they haue but
anEftate but at the will of
the Lord according tothe
courfe of the cómonlaw.
For itis faid , that if the
Lord doe ouft them, they
haue no other remedy,but
to fueto their lords by pe-
tid, for if they fhold haue
any other remedy , they
fhouldnot be faid to be te-
nats atwil of the lord accor
ding to the cuftome of the
Manor. But the Lord cánot
breake the cuftome which
is reafonable inthefe cafes.
«| But Brian Chiefe Iu-
ftice faid , that hisopini-
on hath alwayes beenand
euer fhall be, that if fuch
tenant by cuftome paying
his feruices be eicéted by
the Lord, hee fhall haue an
Aion of trefpaffe againft
him. H.21.Ed.4. And fo
was the opinion of Danby,
Chiefe Iufticein 7.Ed.4.
Car


ie eee eee! AE


, Lib. Tenant per le Verge.


Car il Dit que le teit
per le cuſtome eft ci-
bien enheriter De a=
ue fon terre folongs
lecuftome, come ce-
ſtuy que ad frau&te-
: al common
e».


bím,


For hee faith that te-
nant by the cuftome is
as well inheritour to
haue his land accor-
ding to the cnftome as
he which hath a free-
hold atthe Common
Law.


Sedl.78.


tiels tenements, tantcome ilz
font les feruices quea lour te-
nements appendent, nenul ne
poet lour feruices acreftre ne
changea faire autres feruices
ou pluis. Bnd here with agrees
eth Sir Robert Danby chiefe
Jultice of the Court of Come
mon pleas M. 7.E.4. 19. and
Stt Thomas Brian big ſuc⸗
celloz M.21.E,4.80. viz, that
the Copibolber doing bis cu=


Homes and fornices, tf bes be put out by his Loyd, hee hall haue an action of trefpatic againtt


Cua p. Io. Sef, 78.
Tenant ber le Verge.


tici na⸗
ture come @enants
periecopy de Court
Roll, Mes la cauſe
pur que tis font ap-
pelles tenats per la
Werge, ef p ceo que
quant ils boilét ſur⸗
render lour tenets
en le maine lout ſeig⸗
tio? al bfc Dun au-
fct, tls aueront bn
petite berge ( pet
le cuftome ) en lour
maine,le quel ds bai-
lea al Senefchali,
ou al baiiife folon-
que Ic cuſtome x bie
Del manor, a ce-
luy G auera la terre,
prendra mlatrre es
lecourt, a fon paitel
fetta enter en 1e roll,
tle Senefchal, ou le
batlife, lolonq; le cu-
frome Deliuera a ce-


Enants by

the Verge

are in the

fame nature
as tenants by Copy of
Court roll. But the
reafon why they bee
called tenants by the
Verge is, for that
when they will fur-
render their  tene-
ments into the hands
of their Lord to the
vfe of another, they
fhall haue a little rod
(by the cuftome) in
their hand, the which
they fhall deliuer to
thefteward, or tothe
bailife according to
the cuftome of the
manor and hee which
fhall haue the land thal
take vpthe fame land
in Court, and his ta-
king fhalbe entred vp-
on the roll, and the
fteward or bailiffe, ac-
cording tothe cuftom


a


€


Enants per


24 le Verge.
«Gy Chis Cez
^ mant per le
Vergc íg a mere dLepiljolber,
and taketh bis name of the
Ceremony of the Merge.
Tenure in Utllenage o» bp
bafe tenure ts thus befcribed
bp Britton, (a) Villenage
eſt, teñ de demeynes de chef
cun Seignior baille a tener a
fon volunt p Villeines ferui-
ces de enprover al opesle Seig-
nior, & liuere per verge &
nient per title de eftrit, ne per
fucceflion de heritage dont
gards de mariages ne auters
feruices reals come homage &
rcliefesne ponent des amnones
de demeynes ne de villenage
efts demand.


€ 4 Le fencfchall.
C tobich ee call a fleward )
Senefchallus íg dertued of
fein a bonfe o» place, anb
Schalc an officer 02 goncrnour,
fome fap that {en is an anctz
ent ob for Juſtice, fo ag
Senefchail fhoutd ſigniſie off-
ciarius Iuftitiz, and fome fap
that feward te deriued of
Stewe ( tbatíg )aplace, and
Ward, that figutficth a Kee⸗
per, Warden 02 Gouernour;
And others that tis dertued
of Stede, that fignifieth a
place alfo and Ward ag ft
Swercthe Keeper 0$ gouernour
of that place ; bnt (t is a —


61


14H. 4.3]


(a) Brittenfol.165.4.
E.N.B. fol. 12.
Libo, atso por "Virgam.


Lib. i.


Vid.Sef.9 3.67 379.
Fleta lib. 2 cap.6€.
Vid. Starut.de extent.
maner.14,£.1,


Ved. lib. 4. Cafes de (opi


helds, fo. 26.27.30.


Vid. Lamb.expo[i. sonof
Saxon words.


Fleta lib.2.04,67,


Cap.1o.


of manp Ggnifications, Jin
this place it Ggnifieth an otfí-
cer of Juſtice viz.a keeper of
Courts,¢c, Fleta defcribeth
the office and Duty of thi
officer at large moft excellent
Ip ; Prouideat fibi dominus de
fenefchallo circumfpeéto & fi-
dcli, viro prouido & difcreto
& gratiofo, humili, pudico,
pacifico & modeſto, qui in le-
gibus confeetudinibufque pro-
vinciæ & officio fenefchalcia fe
cognofcat & jura domini fui
in omnibus teneri affcétet,


Tenant per le Verge.
lup que p2ift la terre,


mete? berge, ou bn
auter berge en nofme
Delfeifin, æ pur cel
caute (ls font appel-
leg tenants per ie
berge, mes ils nont
auter enidence, finon
a copy De Court
roll,


Sel.79.


fhall deliuer to him
that taketh the land
thefamerod, orano-
therrod in the name
of feifin, and for this
caufethey are called
tenants by the verge
butthey haue no. o-
ther euidence but by
copy of Court roll.


quique fubballivos domini in fuiserroribus & ambiguis fciat inftruere & docere, quique
egenis parcere, & qui nec prece vel pretio velit à tramite jufticie deviare, & perucrfe judicare,
cuius officium cft curias tenere maneriorum & de fübtractionibus confuerudinum , feruicio-
rum; reddituum, ſectarum ad cur", mercata , molendina domini & ad vifus francpledg: alia-
rumque libertatum domino pertinentium inquirat, &c.
Office ig Worth pourrcading atlarge, Euery fteward of Courts ts either by Ded 02 without
Ded, fo; a man map beretapned a ſteward to kepe bis rt baron and Leete alfo belong=
ing to the Wannoz Without Ded, andthat retepner tha
The 3.020 of a Mannoz map makeadmittances out o£. Court and ont of the Mannoꝛ aifo,
ag atlargeappeareth tn my reports,


€ A Le bailie.Qp big
$0020 bailie ag fome
fap commeth of tbe


French Sword Baylife, in La=


tprbalivus but tn truth Wats
licig an old Saron $0020 and
fignitficth a fafe keeper oz pꝛo⸗
tectoz, and baile og ballium (g
fafe keeping 02 protection,
Bnd thereupon we ſay When
aman bpon furctíc ts deliue⸗
red out of prffon craditur in
ballium he is delivered tnto
baat is, into their fafe
Keeptitg 02 protection from pꝛi⸗
fon ; and the therifethat hath
Cuftodiam comitatus,tg called
balivusand the Countie ba-
liva fua.


€ Reis Deriued
of the Saxon woꝛd gerefa oz
gereve, anb bp contraction o2
rather coꝛruption Gereue 02
Reue and íg in Latyn præ-
fectus 62 pra pofitus. 3t Ggz
nifies ag much ag appruator a
Difpofor o? director, ag wod⸗
resue, hheepe rue, (bite rene,
qc. hereof moze (albe fato
hereafter, Vide Fleta lib.z.
cap.67. bete hee treateth of
the office of the Bailike, and
cap.69. de officio prepoliti of


Section 79.


CET auxy en Di-
uers feignio-
ties & mano028, il p
ad tiel cuftome, ſi tiel
tenant que tient per
cuftome boloit alte-
net les terres ou te-
nements, tl poit ſur⸗
renderfes tenemétg
a le Batly, ou a le
Beene, ou à Deur
probes homes Del
feigniory , al bfe ce-
ftup que auera le tet-
re, Daueren fee ſim⸗
ple, fectaile, ou pur
terme De bic.æc, Ct
tout ceo ils prefente-
tont al procheine
Court, dong celup
qauccalatre p Copy
de Court 130l, auera
meſme la tre folongs
lentét del furrender,


Che refidve pertaining to big


ntinue bnt{il bec be difehargeo,


Ndalfo in diuers
Lordfhips | and
mannorsthere is this
cuftome,viz. if fuch a
tenant which holdeth
by cuftome will alien
his lands or tenements
hee may furrender his |
tenemétsto the Bailife
ortothe Reeue or to
two honeft men of the
fame Lordfhip to the
vfe of him which fhall
haue the land to haue. -
infee fimple, feetaile, M
orfor terme Of life,
&c.and they fhall pre-
fent allthis atthe next
court,& thé he which
fhall haue the land by
copy of Court Roll,
fhall haue the fame ac-
cording to the intent

ofthe furrender.
the


Lib.t. Tenant per le Verge. Se#.80.81,


the office of tbe resus, and What belongeth of Butte andright to either of them, which Mosds are
toolong hereto be inferted, only this 3| li take eut of bím, balivus autem cuiufcunque mane-
rij effe debet in verbo verax, & in operediligens & fidelisac pro diftrero appruatore plegiatu-
& electus qui de moribus & legibus pro tanto officio fufficient’ fe cognfcat, & quod fit ita jus
ftusquod obvindi&am feu cupiditatem non quærat verfus tenentes domini ncc alios, &c, Przpo-
fitus autem tanquam appruator & culter optimus, Scc. domino vel eius fenefchallo palam de.
bet prefentari cui injungatur officium illud indilate, non ergo fit puer aut (omnolentus fed eff
caciter & continue comodum domini adipifci nitatur & exarare, &c.& be residue concerning both
the D Fices being worth pour reading. — à j 1

q A lebailie oua le Reeve. Littleton intendetb into the hands of
the Lozd by the hands of the Wailtffeor the Reeve.

«| Ou al deux probes bomes del feigniorie. he cuttome doth guide
thefefarrenders out of Court, and the cnftome mutt be purſued.

Et tout ceo ils prefenteront al procheine court crc. Wy the futven-
bet out of Court the Copihold eftate pafleth tothe AL oz onder a fccrct condition that tt be pze⸗
fented at the next Court according t9 thecuftome of the mannoz, Andthereforeif after fuch a
farrender,and before the next Court he that made thefurrender diech,pet the furrender ſt andeth
god,and ff it be pꝛeſented at the next Court Ce’ a que vie fhalbe admitted therunto ; but (fit be
not pzefenteb at thenert Court accozding to the caftome, then the furrender becommeth toíoe,
and fo was ít clerely holden Pafch.14 Eliz. fn the court of Common pleas Which 3 mp fete


heard,


€ E thine eft af-

cauoite, que ert
Divers feigniories, &
Diuers mano2s, font
plufozs a Diners cu-
flomes en tielx ca-
fes, quant à prender
tenements, a quant
apleder, & quant ag
auters choles a cu-
ftomes a faire, tout
ceo que neft pas en-
counter reaſon, poít
bien eftre adinitte &
allow.


@ 1s font appelles tenants per baſe tenure. DE


€ ET tiels tenants Gteignont

.' tolongsle cuftome dun ſeig⸗
niozie, ou Dun manoz,coment que
ilg ont eftate Denberítance fo=
longsle cuftome dei Seigniory
ou mai, bnc pur ceo Gilg not atc


Sed. 80.
AN fo itis to bee


vnderftood, that
in diuers Lordfhips,
and in diuers manners,
therebe many and di-
uers cuftomes, in fuch
cafes as to take tene-
ments,and as to plead,
and as to other things
and cuftomes to bee
done, and whatfoeuer
is not againft reafon,
may well bee ad-
mitted and allow-
ed.


Section 91;


beenefpoken before,


QD 2


€ So pluſor c

diners customes.
@his as cautíonüp fee
Downe, for (n refpect of the
baríctie of the cultomes tn
mot Mannoꝛs, ít i¢ not pof=
fbicto fct Downe anp certatne
tte, onlp this incident infepac
tabie euerp cuftome mutt
haue,viz.that tt be confonant
to reafon, fo; how long foener
tt hath continued, t£ tt be a=
gaintt reafon, tt is of no force
in La,

Enconter reafon.
his ig not to be vnderſtod
of euerp vnlearned mang teas
fon, but of arttfictall and legal
reafon Warranted bp autho⸗
ritp of Law: Lex eft (amma
Tatio.


this fufficient bath


Nd thefe tenantswhich hold
according to the cuftome of
a Lordfhip or Mannor, albeit they
haue an eftate of inheritance ac-
cording to the cuftome of the
Lordfhip or Mannor, yet becaufe


frank=


62


Vid. lib-4.fol.2¢,
Kee dr Quaintin: cafo.


Libs.


1e. E.4.18. 33. E.4.15.
3. R. a barre 337.11. H. 7.32.
Pi Ma 4 :


(4p.10.


Tenant per le Verge.


6ecl.82:


fran&tenementper le coutg Del they haue no freehold by the
common lep, ilg font appelles courfe of the common law, they


QLenantg p bale tenure,


Enant a
€ T volunt
folonque le cu-
Jlome puit auer
estate d enberi-


tance,cxc Here
note that Littleton
alloweth that by
the cuftome of the
fano, the Copi-
holder hath an In⸗
beritance, and con-
fequentlp the Lod
cannot put him out
Without caufe.

(C Mes fi
home, &c. voile
Leſſer Terres
ou tenements 4
Un auter aauer
C tener a lu)
© fes beires a
volunt le leffor,
ceux parols ( a


Les heives de le
leffee) font voi-


des , car en ceft


cafe fi le leffee
deuie | & fon
beire enter le lef-
for auera action
de trefpaffe en-
sers luy | Oe.
Wp Which it is
P20ued that bythe
death of the teller,
the Leaſe ts abfo=
lutelp determined ,
Which is pzoued by
this that if the
etre enter the ilef=
foz (ball bauc an
action of trefpaffe,
quare vi & armis,


Sed. 82.


€ ET Divers Diuer{i-

ties p font peren-
tectenanta bolunt , que
eft eins perleafe fon leſ⸗
fo? per le courte Del come
mon lep,a tenant folongs
lecuftome Del mano? en
le forme auantbít, Car £
à volũt ſolonq; le cuftom
puit auet eftate Denberi=
tance (cde eft auantDit.)
al bolüt le feignioz folóq
le cuffome & bfage Del
mano, Mes fi home ad
terres ou Cenements ,
queur ne font deins tiel
manor ou Seigniozic,
ou tiel cuftome ad efte
bfe en le forme auantDit,
æ voile leffer tiels terres
ou tenemntg à br auter,
a auer a tener à lup ta
fes heires a le bolunt le
leffor, ceug parole (ales
heires De le leffec) font
voids, Caren ceft cate ſi
le leffee Dente a fon beire
enter icieffor aucta bon
action Detrefpas enuers
lup, mes nemyp ilfint en=
uers lheire le terre perle
cuftomeen afcuncas,tc,
put ceo que lecuftome de
le manoz en afcun cas
lup puit aide De barrer
fon fefgnioz en action De
trefpafle, ac,


befoze amp entrie made bp the Leflo;,


are called tenants by bafe tenure,


*


Nd there are diuers

diuerfities betweene
tenant at wil which is inby
leafe of his leffor by the
courfe of the Common
Law,and tenant according
to the cuftome of the Ma-
nor in forme aforefaid. For
tenant at will according to
the cuftome may hauc an
eftate of inheritance (asis
aforefaid)at the will ofthe
Lord,according to the cu-
ftome and víage of the
Manor. But if a manhath
lands or tenements which
bee not within fucha Ma-
nor or Lordfhip, where
fucha cuftome hath beene
vfed in forme aforefaid,
and will let fuch lands or
tenements to another, to
haue and to hold to him
and to his heiresat the wil
ofthe leffor, thefe words
(to the heires of the Lef-
fee) are void. Forinthis
cafe ifthe leffee dieth, and
his heire enter, the Leffor
fhal haue agood Action of
trefpaffe againft him , but
not foagainft the heire of
tenant by the cuftome ina-
ny cafe , &c. for thatthe
cuftome of the Manor in
fome cafe may aide him to
barre his Lord inanaction
of Trefpafle, &c.


€ Pur


Lib.t.


Tenant per le Verge.


Pur ceo que lecuſtome dele Manor en aſcun café luy puit aider de barrer
on nier en action de trefpaffe, cc. Perevp it appeareth that by the


opinion of Littleton, the Loꝛd again the cuftome of the


€ I Tem lun tenát

pet lecuftome €
afcuns lieux Doit re-
paíreca fufteiner fes
meafons, tlauter te-
sant a bolunt ne-
mp.


€ ITem lun tenant
per le cuſtome
ferra kealtie, a lautet
hemp. Ct plufors
auters diuerſities p
font perenter eux,


Setlton 83.


Lfothe one tenant

by the cuftome in
fome places ought to
repaire and vphold his
houfes , and the other
Tenant at will ought
not.


Seil, 84.


AL the one tenat
by the cuftome
fhall do fealtie and the
other not, and many
other diuerfities there
be betweenethem.


Manos cannot ult the Copiholder.


€pz le Cuffome.
Foꝛ bat a Copihol⸗

ber map 02 ought to
Doe, 02 not Doe, the cuftome of
the Wanoz (a) malt direc it,
fo; Confuetudo Manerij eft
obferuanda. (b) But if thetr
beno cuftomete the contrarp,
walt either permiliue 02 boc
luntarie of a Copihelder, is
a forfeiture of big Copthold.


¢ L/ tenant per le

cuflome ferra fe-
altie , & lauter nemy.
Bnd the doing of feaitic bp a
Œopibolder, pzoueth that a
Woptholder foiong ag be ob⸗
ferueg the cnftome of the
Manoꝛ & papeth hts feruíceg


bath a fired Œftate. Foꝛ Cenant at will that map bee put out at picafure thall not voe fealtic,
For to What env (houle a man fxocare to be Faithfull andtrue to bis 10:5, and thouid beare
faith to him Which he clapmeth to bold of him, anb thatiawfullp hee fball doe bis cuftomes and
feruices , «c. when bee hath no certaine eftate , but map bee put eut at the pleas
fure of tbe Leiloz , oꝛ hee bünfelfe map determine it at bis pleafure, of thefe
bind of cufomarie Cenants, anb of many things concerning them, pou
map read moze tu the fourth Woke of mp Repoꝛts, fol.2 1.22.23. &c.
hus much as J have here fct downe, map fuffíce fo; the


vnderſtanding of fuc) Cafes and Dpinions


ag Littleton hath expꝛeſſed.


Fini: Librig privi.


Secl.83.84.


(a) Braon.lib. 2. fol.76.


(b) Vide lsb.4.fol.21.22, |


érc. to cafes de Coptholds.


Vide Se8.132.


L164, fil.21.22.15. ere»


pi —
bi NE au^ +43
A UR * VAS vii
b duos di Mines *


Pan P. ‘a - T à
D'ART dC. ri n wn T 14 UR
* — E o E DE! E EE A


2d quo | tm


-


ATE No *
T. 4 Re "1 mie ALS. 141 8 cade sii oy ftue mm Mss
vao SPARE Pe dU a "t hora iu J qud do Cho odia ocu Ej

vows deo à E oc ia WO. 00 0:0 e. CM
Ce MN s UT RE d à Sh; vhs xor D AMA $ed 117 (OLE
— a RERO. AL iere fp nro © Aono AN
1 : — X nh ine tp nal o6 Se eam ——
So wd Gre c vill gah Tv 3i itd E weiter;
; x TP Punti diris : Hd da pelas saa,
n 4 y dad froth WA, à


X wis X TET *


THE


SEC OND'BOOKE


of the firít part of theln-


ftitutes of the Lawes of


Greenery d


(3 a omagectt E


ble feruice De reue=
tence, Gfranktenant
puit faire a fon
&»eígníoz, Cat quát
le tenant fetta ho⸗
mage a fon Seignt-
02, il ſerra Difcinct a
fon teft Difcouct, &
fon Seignioz feera,
ele tenant genulera
Deuant fup fur am⸗
bíbeur genues, &
tiendra (cg .maines
extendes, & lopntes
enfemble enter les
maines E Sreignioz,
& iſſint Ditta: Jeo


Mar pluígtono- À Sd
vice, & pluíg bum-


ENGLAND.


Sect. 85. |


Homage.


uicé &moft
humble feruice of re-
uerence that a Frank-
tenant may doe to his


Lord : For whenthe


Tenant fhall make Ho-
mage to his Lord, hee
fhall be vngirt, and his
head vncouered, and
his Lord fhall fit, and
the Tenant fnal kneele
before him on both
hisknees, and hold
his hands ioyntly to-
gether betweene the
hands of his Lord,
and fhall fay thus : I
become your man


€ Ur Authoz bas
ning taught bs
(i) ín bis former


bake the ſeue⸗
tall diſtinct eftateg of lands
and tenements ag moff ne-
ceflarp tobe knowne, fo the
bnderftanding of thefe two
other bokes doth tn this fee
cond bake treat of the tee
nures anb feruices, whereby
the fato lanbg and tenements
bene holden, bich he deui⸗
bct into twelue parts,viz.
Homage, Fealt:e, Efcuage,
Knight feruice,Socage, Fran-
kalmoigne, homage aunce-
ftrel, grand Sericantie, petit
Seriantic, tenure in Burgage,
in Villenage, and fnto Rents,
Wbercin big method (s moft
excellent , fo? hee beginneth
Sith homage , becaufe it (&
the mott humble fernice of re⸗
uerence erprelling the dutte
of the tenant to his 3,020, and
the affecttonate loue and pꝛo⸗
tection of the Loꝛd towards
his tenant jd — —
care, Hecondlp, Fcalty &
app £


ib. ꝛ.


(a)Glanu, li.9.0a.1. Bract.
fe.78. 8o. Brit. fo. 170 172,

¥973-Flet.li.3.0.16..Mir.c. 3.
da Horsaze,é5 li.5.§.1. ——


(5) Lib. Rnb.ea. 5 5.


Capt.


facred feruice, exprefling bp
oath bis fivelitis to bis 3Lozb,

Thirdly, bſcua ge, Which ts
Seruitium {cuti , theferuice of

Shield.

Fourthly, Knights Ser⸗
nice, foz the Defence of the
Beaime againt outward ho⸗
Cilitie and inuafions , hich
the better might be effected, if
fuch dutie,fidelttte, t louc were
betweene Lords and tenants,
ag oughi to be,and ag the law
expecteth.

Fiftip, Socage, the ſeruice
of the Plough, aptly placed
next Knights feruice,fos that


Of Homage.


deueigne voſtre hoe
De ceftiour en a=


uant, De bie, a De.
member, a De terreff
5ono2,a à uous ſerra
fotall a loíall, efop a


vous porta ðs tefits
G ico clatme De teñ De
vous falue là fop que
ico Dop a nte Sit te
Bop, a Dons le für
iffint (cpant , Iup ba-


Sed. 85.


from this day forward
oflifeand limme, and
ofcarthly worfhip, &


'vnto you fhallbe true


and faithful,and beare
you faith for the Te-
nements that I claime
to hold of you, ( fa-
uing the Faith that I
owc vnto our Soue-
raigne Lord the King.)
Andthen the Lord fo


the Ploughman maketh the
belt fouldier, ag fhall appcare
in his proper place,


fera. .. «fitting fhall kiffe him,


Hirtip, Frankalmoigne, Seruice duc to Aimightte God, placed towards the midocft for


two caufes ; Firſt, for that the middeſt is the mol Smopzthte and moft honourable place ; And ſe⸗
condlp, becaufe the firft fiuc preceding Cenyres and Heruices, andthe other fire fubfequent,
mutt ail become profperous and dfefull,by reafon of ods truc Religion andferuice,foz Nun=
quam profpere fuccedunt rcs humanæ,vbi negliguotur diuinæ : fobercin 3] Would have our ſtu⸗
dent Follow the aduice giuen in thefeantient Uerſes, fo the good {pending of the dap,


Sex horas fomno, totidem des Leeibus equis.
Quatuor erabis des Epulifque duas.
Ouod [upereft vitro [acris largire camems.


Seuenthip, Homage aunceftrel Antient Fomlies cntopina With thetr bloubtbe antíent in-
beritance of their fozefathers, ag a great bielling of the Almightie.

8, & 9. Serjeantie grand & petit, Due to the King onelp, te $0bom the higheſt and moſt emi-
nent honour, ligeance, and reverence of all kind ts onc ; Which hath two notable effects : irk,
Imperij Maiettas eft tutela falus , accozdingto the old rule, And fecondip, it is an aflured
meanes of long continuance of houles and families in pzofpcroug eftate, whereof onr Authour
ſpeaketh in tbe Chapter befoze, :

10 Œbenfolioweth the Cenure of Burgage, of antient Burghes and Cities, dc. Which are
to befupposted fo? the bonour of the king, and fo? the maintenance of trade andtraffique, the
life of all Common Wweailths,efpectallp of Iſlands.

11 Villenage, foz the performance of feruice, pet neceſſarie fernice for the clenfing of Cities,
Scents, et €c,and fo? the better manuring of arrable qrounds,and increafe of i»uf-

andate.

12 And lafflp, Cenure bp Rents, which are called Viui redditus, becauſe the 3,0708 and ow⸗
ners thereof doe ituc bp them, Which they ſhall entop the better, trade and traffíque be mains
tained, and our natiue commodities, Which are rich and necefarte, goiben op andfaleable at a
reafonable baiue. And now bnderftanding his method, let be perufe our Authors Mowe,

And ag our Buthoz began his firlt Woke With Fee imple, Which is the «oft pꝛincipall and


* Sooitbícft eftate , fo he begtnneth hts fecond Wookc Sith Womage,whtch (a the moft honourable


and humble feruíce,


Home ts deriued of (a) Homo, and ft (8 called Homage, becaufe
S»ben be doch this feruice, be faith, Ico deucigne voftre home : Bud (n Enalih Pomage
is caileb Wanhood,fo ag the manhwd of his Cenant, andthe homage of his Cenant (9 al ene,
Mutua quidem debet effe Dominij & Homagij fidelitatis connexio ita quod quantum homo de
bet domino ex homagio, tantum illi debet Dominusex Dominio preter folam reuerentiam.


« Foial c» Loyal. Cheſe words are of great extent. foa they ex⸗
tend tothe obſeruation of the Loꝛðs dLouncell in $obatfocuer (e honeſt and profitable, (b) Om-
nis homo dcbet fidem Domino fuo de vita & membris fuis, & terreno honore , & obfcruatione
concilij fui per honeftum & vtile (compzetenoeo (n tbefe 5002708 Foyall & Loyall) Glua Fide
Deo & terrx Principi.

Serniets


1
J
3
*
«
3


4


Lipi : Of Homage. Setl.85.


q Serwice. (c) Seruitium in Lege Angliæ regulariter accipitur pro
feruitio quod pertenentes Dominis fuis debetur ratione feodi fui : Wut feruitium eft duplex;Spi-
zituale whereof moze (hall be fatb tn tbe Chapter of Franbalmotgne ; & Temporale , Whereot
our Futhor bere treateth : Bnd be beginneth with Pomage,firl, becaufe (t ta moft hononrable,

Honor plus e(t in honorante, quam in honorato. 2 It is Pluis humbledereucrence , and
pothof thele £o) fine caufes on the part of the Cenant, Fick, The Tenant $vben he Doth bis
homage (g di(cindtus, Difarmed ox Ougarded. Secondip , Nudo capite, bate headed, Chirdiy,
- Ad pedes Domini fuper genua proic&us, rourtblp, Ambas manus iun&as inter manus Domi-
niporrigit. Fittly, Per verba omni fupplici veneratione lena be faith, Ico deueigne voftre hoe,
&c. Bnd for three caufeg onthe part of tbe Loo : Firit, Che Lord doth üt. Secondly, De
dnclofeth bis Tenants bands betweenchis one. Thirdip, Che Lozd fitting kilſeth the Œe-
pant. Pzudent antiquitie Did Éoz the moze folemnitie and better memozie ano obferuation of
that Sobich is to be done, expaeílefab(tances vnder ceremonies,


Nil fine prudenti fecit ratione vetuflas.


q 10 dencigne voftre home de vie & de member. And therefore he ts


difcin&us; for that be muſt newer be armed againſt, og oppofite to bis 3070 , but bott life and
member mult be readic foi the latofull defence of his Loꝛd.


« 2 DeTerrenchonor, Expꝛeſſed bp bueeling at the feet of his
Ao.

E Debet quidem tenens manus fuas vtrafque ponere inter manus vtrafque domini fui per
quod fignificatur ex parte Domini proteétio, defenfio, & warrantia, & ex parte tencntisreueren-
tia & fubicdio. Soastheholding bp of the Cenants hands betokenctl) reucrence and ſubie⸗
tion, andthe Lords incloſing ofhis Œenants hands bet weene his owne, betokeneth protection
and Defence,


4 Etavousferra foyal & loyal, & foy a vous portera, cc. This
faith, Fides, 02 Foedus perpetuum this perpetual league bet weene the 3020 and the Tenant, is
expꝛe ded by the Lords Kiiling of the Cenant : And fome fay, Chat Fœdus dicitur à fide,quia ſi-
des interponitur : Bad fo firme and rong was this league betiw eme them, that by the antient
Haw of England, Nihil facere poteft tenens propter obligationem homagij, quod vertacur Do:
mino ad exhæredationem, vel aliam atrocem iniuriani. Nec Dominus tenenti ¢ conuerfo,quod fi
fecerint diffolnitur & extinguitur homagium omnino & homagij connexio & obligatio & eiit
inde iuftum iudicium cum venerit contra homagium & fidclitatis Sacramentum quod in eo in
quo delinquunt puniantur, s. in perfona Domini, quod amittat dominium, & in perfona te-
nentis, quod amittat tenementum.


«| Des tenements quenx coclaime a tener de vous. Britton faith, Chat

(a) in doing of homage he mutt name the Lands o? Cenements for Which he both homage in

certaintie and the rcafon ts, Nc in captione homagij contingat Dominum per negligentiam de-
cipi vel per errorem.

Fo; the better vnderſtanding o£ that Which hall be ſaid hereafter, itis to be known, Chat
Girt, thereis no land in England fn tbcbanog ofanp Subiet, (ag tt hath benc fatd) but ít
ig holden of fome Loꝛd by fome kind of ferutce, as partly hath beene touched before.

SHecondip, Bil the Lands (b) within tbíg realme Were oꝛiginally derived from the Crown,
and therefore the Hing is foueraigne 1020, o2 Lez patamont, either mediate 02 immediate of
all and euerp parcell of land within tbe 1B ealme,

Thirdly, That in antient time Lords open tbe creation of their Cenures did net enelp res
feruc rents, feruices anb profit, ec. for which thep might deſtreyne and aue other remebte, but
alfo toe an humble fubmiffton of his Tenant bp promife and oath, (for to homage feaitie is
fncident ) to betrue and faithful to him foꝛ the Cenements holden of him, Which fabmilTion te
Called homage and fealtic,accozdiing to the tenure referued,


«| Salue le foy que ico doy a noftre Seignior le Roy. Both becaufe there


tg E gium ligeum $obícl) ts Bue tothe King onelp, anb allo becaufe jets fogeráigne Loꝛd
gutta


3j baue ferie an antíent 18 ecojo in Anno 6. Edw.1. in theſe words, Michael de North qui
fequitur pro Rege queritur quod cam Dominus Rexrationeregiæ dignitatis & Coronz fuz ta-
le habeat pridilegium quod nullusinregno fuo de aliquo qui fit in regno Angliz alicui homagi-
um facere debeat, vel aliquis huiufmodi homagium ab aliquo recipere debeat nifi fata mentione
dc homagio Domino Regi debit cidem Domino Regi fideliter obferwand Walterus Exoii Epus,
R in


65


(c)2.B. 4.6.


Glanmil & Mir. vbi fupra.


Pratt. fo. 8o. Brit. f.173.5.4c.
Flet.li.3 64.16.


"ra vb. fup. Brit. fe. 17 4.


(Aa) Brit vbifap.BraB.vb fug.
G anuil. hs 9.ca.1.
Mar. Ca, 3.46 Homage.


(b)18.£.3.3 $.44.£.5.5.
48.E.1.9.8. H.7.13.


lanuil li.9 c4. 1. by op.
de Feaitie. Bra. "Ubi fup,
Brie vbrfp.


Inter Inquif.ayud Lamceften,
anno 6. E. 1, Cornnnh. in Taf,


Lib * 2


(d) Mirrerea 1. 6.2.
ca.2.6.1. dr a.
Bratfonfo.5.107.368.369.
340.Fleta, lib. 1.cap. s.
Forte[cu: eap.8. dr 37.
Sranf.pl.cer. 68.99.27
"Prer. 65.

(e) Glamall lib. 2.e«. 1.
Brallon fo. 8.9.
Brérton,ca.68. 2.170.171.
Fleralib.3, ca.16.

(g) Glan |, lib. 9*cap. t.
"Bratten.li».3.78.

Fleta lib. 5 . cap. 16.acc.


21. €. 3.40. 26.E. 5.63. 64.


32.E. 3. age.80. tir.
per que feruitia.y.
13.4.4.5. 33.H.6.16.
20.€. 3. per que feruic.24.
(h) Britton.fe.171.


Ci) Glinml. bb. 9.c4.1.
F.N.B.157. Regifi. 296.
Britton ibi fupra

sMirrer ea.1.6. 3.


€k) Glaswi!llib. v.eap.o. '
em fine.
Britton lib. 3.78.


Bratton sap.68.
Fietalib.s.eap.16.


(1) Vid.Selt.96.0 133.


Cap. Of Homage. Se. 86:


in contemptu domini regis & ad manifeftam quoad priuilegium predi&um ipfius domini regis
exharedationem, & ad damnum & dedecus ipfius domini regis ad Valenciam decem Mill’ li.
-brarum de Henrico de Pomeray Thoma de Kane Iohanne de bello prato Laurencio filio Ric,
Iohanne le Socr, Willielmo de Alex’ ,Eudone de Tranacl Rogero le gros;Iohanne le Lunge;Rado
de Beuill,Guidone Nouant, Willielmo de Rouskerrek,& Hen:Cannel accepit feruitia contra pris
vilegium predi@”, nulla faéta mentione de homagio & fidelitate domino regi debitis. And iudge⸗
ment inthe end Sas given again tbefato Biſhop : N |
¶ Roy. Dur Anceftozs the Saxons termed im Coning or Cy-
fing a name fignifping power and ſkill, which bp Way of contracion Wwe now call King. Chis |
name the Saxons With a {mall alteration hab from the Brittaines Sho called him Koningh og
Konincke; in french be {9 called Roy, in Italian Re,in Spanth Rey all deriued from the La⸗
tpu Rex)ef the truc figntficatton Sohercof pou [ball rcade(d )plentífull matter in our oid boks.
So as homagets deuided firft In homagium ligeum, & non ligeum. dt
2, Inhomagium antecefloriü, & nonantecefforiu. It {g here necefTarp to be Bnowne, What
tenant,that bolocth bp homage ſhall do homage,(¢ Item videndü quis poteft homagium facere,
Sciendu eft quod quilibet liber homo tam mafculus quam femina,clericus & laicus,maior & mi-
nor, dum tamen ele@i inepifcopos, poft confecrationem homagium non faciant, quicquid fece-
rint ante, fed tantum fidelitatem, Conuentus autem Homagium non faciet de jure ficut nec
Abbas, nec Prior co quod tenent nominc alieno fcilicet nomine Ecclefiarum. |
(g) DnewWithin theage of 21.peares map boc homage, but Bracton fatth hee cannot doe
fealty, becaufe in doing of fealty he ought tove ſwoꝛne wbichan infantcannot be. Wut ſome
opinions be tn our bakes tothe contrarp,viz. that an infant (ball doc fcaltie, but 3| take tt to
be meant of homage ; and here with (h) agræth Britton bo faith), Et toutfoit queenfant deins
age fait homage, pur ceone volons nous my que il face ferement de fealtie, jefque a taunt que il


foit de pleine age ; & tout foit ceo comon dit del people que fait deenfant fait deins age ne foit
fait my a tener cítable : volons nequedent que chefcun home & chefcun feme de quel age que ils
foient, facent homagea lour feigniour folonque leftatut dela grand charter. )

Glanvill faith, (i) women hall not Doe homage but Littleton fatty that à Swoman hall doe
homage, but the (ball not fay, Leo deveigne voitre feme, but leo face a vous homage, and fo ig
Glanuill to be vnderſtod, that the hall not doe compleate homage,


€ D man of Reltgton

ben (k) hee doth

homage (ball fay,
Ico deueigne voftre home,bez
caufe hee hath pzofefled him⸗
felfe the man of God, pet fall
be doc homage, and ſhall fap,
(1) Ieo face a vous homage,
& avous ferra foyall & loy-
all,&c. and note that bere
religion ig taken largelp, fo?
tt extends not onlp to regular
perfons ag Abbots and the
like, but aïfo to all Ecciefias
fticall perfons, ag Biſhops,
Deanes 02 amp ether fole
EccleGalticall bovy politique,
and fo (t is in bfc at this dap
bichalfo appeareth in our
ol? bakes,

And it is te bec obferacd
that inold bokcg and rec
cords, the homage Which a
Biſhop, Whbot 02 other man
eftcligion doth is called Fe⸗
altio, fos that tt wanteth thefe
Words (1co devcigne voftre
home.) Wut pet in tudges


Set. 86.


€ M£S { on Ab⸗

be, ou bu
4D2p02, ou autet hoe
De religion ferta ho-
mage à fon eignioz,
ine Ditra: Peo Dc-
ueigne bofire home,
ac, put € d tl ad luy
pꝛokeſſe pur eft tant
folement lehome de
Dieu: meg tl Dirra
(fint, Jeo bous face
homage 4 a fous
ferra foíal & loial, &
foy a Vous portera
Des tenements que
íco teigne De bous,
faiue la fop que co
Dop a noſtre Speig-
nioz le 130p,


Vt if an Abbot or

a Pryor or other
man of religion fhall
doe homage to his
Lord, he fhall not fay,
Ibecome your man,
&c. for that hee hath
profeffed himfelfe to
be only the man of
God. But hee fhall fay
thus. I doe homage
vnto you, and to you
I fhall bee true and
faithfull, and faith to
you beare for the te-
nements which I hold
of you ( fauing the
faith which Idoe owe
vnto our Lord the
King.


g
ment o£ Tao it is homage, becaufe he faith ( 341 boe te pou homage,¢c, amb fo of à Socmam.


Sect. 87s


Lib.2.


€ Pur ceoqueneftconnenient dre. IBY this it appeareth (m) that
argumentum ab inconuenienti plurimum valet in lege, ag often fpati bee obferued hereatter.
Non folum quod licct; fed quid eft conueniens eft confideranduma, nihil quod eft inconueniens


eft licitum.


Cj can fi feme folc ferva
. *bomage afon feignioz ,
el ne derra: Jeo Deucigne bo-
‘fire ferme, pur ceo que nett con-
venient que ferie Divra ql el De-
uiendra feme a afcun ome
foziquea (a baron quant el eft
efpoufe, mes cl dirra: Jeo face
a vous homage, a à vous ferra
foíal a lotal,2 top a bous pogte-
ta Des tenements que teo
teique De hous, falue la top que
ico doy à noſtre (cígnío? Le 330p,


cyan home puit
ber en bn bone
note 9P,:5. C, 5. Lou
bn home a fa feme fier
homage a fealty en le
common banke, qi eft
efcrie en tielfozin, Mo⸗
ta que J, Leukner &
Élisabeth (a feme, fict
homage à W. Chorpe
en ceft maner, lun &
laut tienDaont iointm̃t
lout mains enter les
mains "o, qr. # le ba-
ton Dit en cet forme:
Nous hous ferromus
homage, + fopa tous
pozterons, puries te-
nements à nous teig-
nomus De À, bte conu-
for, § à vous ad graunt
nofire feruices en 25, 3
Cet auters villes,ec,


Of Homage:


Se. 87.


King.


Sec. 88.


Líoaman may fee

a good note in M,
15.E.3. where a man and
his wife did homage and
fealtie in the Common
place which is written in
this forme. Note that /.
Lewknor & Eliz. his wife
did homage to W.Thorpe
inthis manner. The one
and the other held their
hands ioyntly betweene
the handsofW.T.andthe
husband faith in this
forme. Wee doe to you
homage, and faith to
you fhall beare for the
tenements which wee
hold of 4.yourConufor,
who hath granted to
you our feruices in.
and C. and other townes,
&c. againft all nations,


BR z


Se#.87.88.


MN this (n) rez
cord thee things
are to bee obfer


€


ped,
1. Bow neceflarp,
and profitable coꝛds
and obferuations are ;
albett thep were not
publí(beo in print, foz
atthe time when Lit.
tleron Sete, this rec
Cond was ot prttiter,

z, Ghat the buf:
band and Wife Doíng
homage, tbe bufbanb
fball ſpeake the Wore
fo» them both, viz.
(‘Swe boe pou fo:
mage, ge,

3. Ghat the fos
image which the buf-
band and ‘wife doe ,
is the verp homage
which the wife ould
Doe alone but thie
topnt homage tone by
the hufband and wife
ts intended to bee bec
fore (fue had bet weene
them Sbercof smoze
fball bee fa(b heres
after, (0) Bud it is
to be obferucd that

brrp


66


(m) Fer B'ereafeni ab inn
cormenients. Vid. Sect. 139.
I 39-231.269-440.478,
665.722.730.
21.H.7.15, F.'N.8.330.4.


Lfo if awoman fole fhall dee,'^^7*

doe homage, fhee fhall not fay
I become your woman, for it is not
fitting that a woman fhould fay that
fhe will become a woman to any
man butto her husband when fhee
is married, but fhe fhall fay, I doeto
you homage, and to you fhall bee
faithfull and true and faith to
you fhall beare forthe tenements
[hold of you. Sauing the faith 1
owe to our Soueraigne Lord the


*


(n) Mich, sel. y. tie


Auowy ie Log.


o) Wid. Hill: 1s. E.2.
ba ov. x


Lib.2.


(p) 33. H-9- rit. fealtie Br.
us. Lib.4. fol.Y1. Lib.7.
Jil.to. Eib.10. fel; 1


Cap.


berp feo. cafes ru⸗
led 02 refolucd in
the raigne of Ed-
ward the Chird,
but the fame op the
like had been ruled
01 refolued in the
Batgnes of Ed-


.ward the Second,


Edward the Firſt,
oz before, as foz ex⸗
ample foz warrant
hereof,


Of Homage.


encounter touts gents:
faluc la fop que nous Dc-
uong a noftre Speignior
le 1305,3 à fes heires, a à
noftre auters ſeigniors:
ælun & lauter luy bafe-
rõt. En puis tls fict feal-
tie. et lun et laut tpen-
D20t lourmainsfur n li⸗
cut tle bard Dit leg polr,
et ambi baferont le liũ.


Setl. 89.


Se#.89.90.


fauing the faith which we

owe to our Lordthe King
andto his heires , andto
our other Lords,and both
the one and the otherkif-
fed him. And after they
did fealtie , and both of
them hold their hands
vponthe Booke, and the
husband faid the words,
and both kiffed the Book.


€ £ , a mes auters Sejgniours. Chis fauing for other Lords is


good to? erplanattor, albeit the homage is referred onlp t9 tbc Cenements which beboloetl) of


htm to Whom he doth tbe homage-


€ NOM ion home ad feucral
tenancies queug il tient


be feuerals Scigniors, 3. chef-
cun tenancy per homage, Donque
quant il fait homage a ba Des
Seigniors, tl Divra en le fine De
fonbomage fait , faiuela fop que
ico Doy a noftre Seignioꝛ le 130p,
Fames auters Seignioꝛs.


€ EX<" dun au-

ter. As the
Dufbanb and totfe in tbc
tíabt of his wife ; tbe Biſhop
tri right of bis Withopztke, ec.
tbe Mbbot 02 Pꝛioꝛ in right
of his Monafterie, «c, But
no Œorporatton aggregate of
manp perfoug capable, bee the
fame Œcclefiafticall o» Cem⸗
pojall can doe homage, aga
Deane and Chapter, Maioz,
and Comminaltie ; and fuch
like, albett thep bee feífeo tn
fe ef lands holden bv homage
pet [hall not they doe homage.
And the reafon ts becaufe that
homage muff be bone in per=
fon , and a Corporation ag-
gregate of manp cannot aps


> Setl. 90.
CN? que nul


ferta homage,
mes tiel que ad e-
ftate en fce Cimple, ou
en fee taile , en fon
droit Demefne, ouen
droit Dun auter. Cat
il eff bn Maxime en
lep que (1d ad eftate
korſq; pur terme Dc
bie,ne ferra homage,
ne prendra homage,
Cat fi feme ad terres
ou tenements en fee
imple, ou € fee taile,


N Ote if a man hath feuerall
Tenancies which he holdeth
of feuerall Lords, that is to fay,
euery tenancie by homage, then
when hee doth homageto one of
his Lords, hee fhall fay inthe end
of his homage done , fauing the
faith which I oweto our Lordthe
King, and to my other Lords.


N Ote,none fhalldo

homage but fuch,
as haue an eftate in fee
fimple , or fee taile in
his owne right, or in
the right of another.
For it is a maxime in
law, that hee which
hathan eftate but for
terme of life, fhall nei-
ther doe homage or
take homage. For ifa
woman hath lands or
tenements in fce fim-
ple or in fce taile


quete


Lib.2.


queur el tient De for
Seignior per bo-
mage, prent baton,
æ ont iffue , Donque
ie baron en la vie la
feme fera homage,
pur € que tl ad title
dauer les tenements
per le curteſie Den⸗
gleterre Gl furuel-
quiftiafeme, a auxy
il tient en Droit De (à
femte, Des {ila feme
Deup Deuant homage
fait pet 1c baron en
la bie fa feme;a le ba-
ron {op tient eins co-
me tenant perle cut-
te(íe, Donques tine
ferta homage a fon
feignioz, pur ceo que
(labonque nad eftate
forſque pur terme de
bie.
¶ Plus ferra dit
ð homage € le tenure
per homage aunce-


+


Of Homage.


which fhee holdeth of
her Lord by homage
and taketh husband, &
haue iffue , then the
husband in the life of
the wife fhall doe ho-
mage, becaufe he hath
title to haue thc tene-
méts by thecurtefie of
Eng if he furuiueth his
wife, and alfo hee hol-
deth in right of his
wife, but if the wife
dies before homage
done by the husband
in the life of his wife,
and the husband hol-
deth himfelfe in as te-

nant by the curtefie,


Sect.go.


peare in perfor, foz albeit the
bodies naturall whereupon
the bodice Politique confilts
map bee feme, pet the bodie
elítique oz Coꝛpoꝛate it
t cannot bee feme, noz Doe
any ad but bp Atturnep, and
homage, mutt euer be dene in
perfon, dc. And albeit an
Abbot and Cousnt is a
Corporation aggregate of ma⸗
np, pet becaufe tbe Couent are
all bead perfons in laxo, the
Bbbot alone im nature ef a
folc Copzporatton {ball Doc
homage, )
Vn maxime en-


Ley. B marie 18 a
gropofitíon, tobec of all men
confc((eo € grantes Without
profe, argument, oz diftourte
Contra negantem principia
non eft difputandum. ut
of this ſomewhat bath bænc
fato befoze,


€ 2! que ad estate


then hec fhall not doe forfque pur terme de vie.


homage to his Lord,
becaufe hee then hath
an eftate but for terme
of life,

€ More fhall bee
{aid of homage inthe
tenure of homage an-
ceftrell,


(q) # Parfon oz Qi (cat of a
Church that hath a qualtfed
fe, (r) and pet to manptn=
tents vpon the matter but an
eftate for life can netther re-
cetue homage nos Boc homage
ag a 2Btfhop an Abbot, 02 a=
np fuch like that hatha tee
abfolute map, ({) Sotfa
man and bis wife be feiled in
fee of a Speiqntozie in the
right of his Sotfe,the bufband


fhall notreccine homage alone but be and his wife together, (t) But it the bufband tn that cafe
hath iſſue by his Wife, then he (ball receiuehomage alone during the itfe of hts Wife, andthe
reafon is becaufe be bp hauing of iſſue (e intitled to an effatefoz terme of big osoneltte , in his
one right, and pet ts fetfed (n fe inthe right of bis wife, fo ag he is nota bare tenant fos life.
Wut if bis Wife die, then he hath only but an eftate fo? like, and then he cannot recetue homage,
Pet tenant for itfe op peares of a Seigniozie, (u) fhallhaue tard, Marriage and iBelícte,
and fhall fuppofe that the € enant died in tbe feaitie of the 191, (w_) Fieri poffunt homagia li-


bero homini tam mafeulo quàm femiaztam Maiori quam minori tamclerico quam laico.


C Et ount iſſue, donque le baronen [a vie la feme ferra homage. Che
reaſon hereof ts rendied before, e alfo that after the dcath of bis Swtfe he being buta bare tenant
fo; life hail doe no homage; for regularly it is true that hee that cannot receiue homage in rez
{pect of the —— of hig eſtate tn the Seignioꝛie, hail not do homage tf be hath a like eſtate


in the tenancte.
FE a man hold of the King and hath iſſue diuers daughters and dieth, the ting ſhall haue
homage of every one of theſe Daughters Andthts (a) appearcth bp the Statute de Hibernia
anno 14.H.3. to be the Common Law, for that Ac fatth, In regno noftro Anglia ralis eft lex
& confuctudo quod fi quis tenuerit de nobis in capite, & habuerit filias herzdes ipfo patrc
defunéto anteceffores noftri habuerunt & femper nos habuimus & cepimus homagium de om-
nibus huiufmodi filiabus, & fingulaearumtenerent de nobis in capite inhoccafu. Bnd there=
foze hereby the (b ) Statute Deprærogatiua Regis, ft is proutded,Sivna hereditas, &c. that
ig but an affirmance of the Common dao, (c) Wut this ig to bec bnderfion where the co-
beíreg be of full age, for it they Within age and (n ward to the #ing,Primogenita qaum faciet
R 3 oma-


67


(9) G ami! lib.o.cap. 2.
"Bri £n. fol.170.


Temps E. 1.11. Inrisvtium 13,


(r) 8 £.4.28. 39. E. 3.15.
3E. 3. amowrse 175.


(€) 2.E.2. anowrie 183,
F. N R. 257. 13,23.
gard. 39.


(0 27.4 p.51.
F.2N.3.257.

1 3.H. 6. auowrie 11.
43-E. 3.13.44. € 3,41.
3. E.3. anowrse 175,
13-€.3-3.gard.3 9.
23. E. 3. fal. 19. gard. 44.
(4) 6.€. 2.gard. 133.
13.£.3. gard 39,
22.E.3. gard. 44.

(Ww) Glam! lib.9 .e4p.3.
18.6.3.7. 43. E. 3. 13.
44.E.3.41.

13. H. 6.aurwrie. 31.7
8.H.6.13. 7, E,4.37.
F.N.2.357.


(a) 14. H. 3. tit, proreg. 5.


(b) Prarag. Regis cap. s.
(©) Srasur. de homage ca.
piende Torzpi €.x.


Lib.2.


(d ) Glanusll. lib.7.c4p.3. d
ib. 9.cap.2. Bradt. lib.x. de
breraag eap end. cy lib. 2. fel.

, 78.82, "Britton. fol.168.5.
171.172. Flta lib. 3. cap. 16.
dr lib.2.cap.60.& lib. q.ca.ↄ.
F.N.B.161.159.259.
Stauf. prer.23. 24.

(0) F.N.8.16z.

Vide Y1.E.5.auowrie.10 1.
(D) 45-E.3.23.24-E-3 73.
Marlbrid,e iab. 9.
F.N.B.162.

(g) 2.€.3. auowric. 179.


(h) 7.2. 4.27.28.

Y 44H.4.58. 1. H. grant. 43+
31,E. 3. f41d. 116.

(D 48.E. 3.8. 15.0.4.15-
5,€-4-3-


(k) 22.2.4.23.


(1) 3. £.2. anewrie 187.
13. H.45.

13.2. 2.fit. answrie $9.
8. H. 3.tit. prescription 38,
Ell. 23.E,1. coram R ego
‘Rot, 45.


(a) Bref.lib.2.fol.80.
Bratton. Regifk.ovigen. 302.
Mirror cap. 3. de ferement,
& de fealt.

Statut. de 17, E, s Bt homage.


(b) Braffon.lib. 2. f21.80. a,
Britton. fol. 173.

Fleta lib.5.cap.16.
Littleton. fol. 29. mi 132.
40.€. 3,34. 9.H.6.43.
15.H.5.13. 5-H.5.12.
9. E. 4.1. 21. E.4. 29.
$.H.7.11*


((4p.2. Of Fealtie: Set. 91.


homagium pro fe & fororibus fais, & alia forores cum ad etatem peruenerint faciet (eruitia Do-
minis fordorum per manum primogenita. (d) Bnd therefoze (£ a man Holds of a tommo
perfon by the lerutce of homage, and hath (uc diners daughters and dieth, the eldelt Daughter
onip ſhall boc homage foz her and all her fitters. Bnd this appeareth alfo bp the Statute of Hi-
bernia. Primogenita tantum faciet homagium Domiro pro fe & omnibus fororibus fuis. Bnd
the rcafon ts thercrendzed afterward, Quia omnes forores funt quafi vnus heres de vna heredi-
tate. ( €) But it tbe Copercencrs íntbat cafe make partition, then cuerp onc [ball boc homage,
becanfe now it ignot Vna (ed diuerfa hareditas. (f) Budtott is it onemakea fcoffment in
fee (hich ig a partition tn law foz that part ) that fcoffæ fball doe homage, fo enerp Tenant
in common fball doe ſeuerall fcraíces. And tt hath bene aotuegeb ( g ) tour Bokes that it
the cloeft Copercener doe homage tothe Lord, and afteriwards tbe younger Gfter maketh a
fcoffinent in fee of ber part, the 1,029 fhall auc homage £oz the part of the pounger filter > for
that Which Was vna hereditas, one Juheritance by law , bp the altenatton Which is her arte
(ag hath benc ſaid) diuided and become in groſſe and the Coperccnarte defeated, 1219 h :

Wut if Cenant cufeoffc diners men in fee totntlp, Ch) all tbefe totstenants (bail tointlp dog
their homage, andtheir fealticalfo, (i) FE homage be vacoy the Cenant, and hee maketh s
fcoffinent in fee, the Jrcoffoz fhallnot doe homage , becaufe albett bets ſuppoſed to be Œenant
in fome Cafes quant al auowsic, pet the Jreoffe ig very Cenant, and homage ali ener b
done by the berfe Tenant, but that very Cenant needeth not to be very Tenant of the Land,
and therefore the Meſne becaufc he is berp Cenant to the Lod Paramont (though bebenot
Tenant of the land) fball doehomage. And fo tt is of the 3DilTcife anb of Tenant in tatie,afe
ter a keoffment in fer, kor in that cafe the Done (s berp Cenant to the Doroz. É

Alfa Tenant that holdeth bp homage maketh a fcoffment in fe of part (k) that Feoſtee
fbail voc homage, and fo fballeuerp Fcoffee of bat part foeucr. ,


Fe there be two Coperceners 02 Jointenants ofa Scetgntorte, if the Tenant doth homage
and feaiticto onc of them (1) be fball be excuſed againſt the other.
FE homage be parcell of atenure, tt is a prefumption thatthe tenurets bp knights foruice,


bnieg the contrarte be pꝛoued, but of it fcife it maketh not Knights feruice, And pet bpcu-
ftome the heire of him that holds bp homage only map be tn tard, 6
More hall be fato of homage in the titie of homage anceftrell.


^^)


French is
A! feaulty,and
j| ig (a) dert⸗
TE =" ued of the
Latine 50029 fides, oz fideli-


tas.


€ Et quant frank-


tenant. Euery Free⸗
holder except Tenant in
Frankalmotene fhall doc Fe⸗
altie, (b) Bnd pet fome that
ave not tenants of anp Frees
hold [bail doe fealtic, as a te⸗
nant for peares fhall Doe feal⸗
tie, Bracton fatth , De nullo
tenemento quod tenetur ad
terminum, fit homagij fitta-
men inde fidelitatis Sacramen-
tum.


€ Que avous fer-
ra foial cy loial, cc.
Cr foy a Vous portera des
tenements que ico claime
atentr de vous, & que
loialment a vous ferra
les cuflomes & ferwices,


Ce


1


if


y.
Qnuar.2. dediongi.


Fealtie.


quod fi-
" delitas €
Latin Et quát frãk⸗
tenant ferta fealtie a
$ Seignior, il tien-
ina fa maine Derter
fut bn Lieur et Ditra
iſſint;, Ceo opes vous
mon Scignio?, que
ico a bous ferra fotal
et loial, ct fop a bous
portera Des tenemts
queíeo claim̃ a tener
De vous, et que loial-
ment a hous ferta
les cuftomes a ſerui⸗
ces qur faire a bous
Doy às termes af-
fignes, ficome mop
aide Dieu € teg
S»aíntg,ac,


L
m


pxesmEalue is. the
UE fame that fide-
oe" litas is in La-
tine. And whena free-
holder doth fealtieto
his Lord,he fhall hold
his right hand vpon a
Booke, and fhall fay
thus.Know yethism
Lord, that I fhall bee
faithfull and true vnto
you, and faithto you
fhall beare for the
Lands which I claime
to hold of you, and
that I fhall lawfully-do
to you the cuftomes
and feruices whicHeg
Iought todoeat the
termes affigned, fo
helpe me God andhis
Saints, &c.

CO Fealtie


Lib.2.


-


Of Fealtie. Sei.92.93.94.


68


£c) Fealtie is a part of homage, foʒ ati the wogds of Fealtie are comprehended Within homage, Sh Mirror cap. 3.


audtherefore fealtic is tncident to Hoisage,


OE Sicome moy aide Dieu. Ag homage ts the moze honourable fer=
nice, fo Fealtic ts a ferutce moze facred becaufe he is ſwoꝛne thereunto. Bnd the rcafon where⸗
foze the Œenant is notfworne in doing his homage to his 3070 (c fo? that no {ubtec is ſwoꝛne
to fubiect to become bis man of life and member but to tbe Ring only, and that is called

of Allegiance 02 homagium ligeum. Bnd thofe Words fo? that purpofe are omitted out

pf Feaitie, Which is tobe bonc bpon oath, Bnd Littleton fatd Well ( Mhen a Freeholder doth
SFealtic) (d) for the Feaitte of bin that holdeth in Uillenage Difforcth from the fealtie of
Freeholder. Foꝛ the Villeine holoing his right hand bpon tbe boe (ball fap thus to
Bi Peare pou mp 1025 A.tbat 3| A.B. from this dap forward fDall be to pou true and
fatthfull, and fall oc pou Fealtie for the landthat J Hold of pou in Uillenage and {haibe


fakificd dp pou (n body and gods fo helpe inc od, ec, ag bp the at appearcth,


QL graund Di-
eh uerfitie p adp
enter keaſans à feal-
tie et De homage, cat
homage nepoit eftre
fait korſq; al fic 1n :
Mesie Senelchal
Decourtie Sfr, ou
Bailife, puit pren-
Der fealtie pur lc
Seigniorz.


c [&a tenant à
: terinede bie ferra
fealtie , et vncore il ne
ferta homage, Ct di-
uers auters diuerſities
p font perenter bamage


et fealtic,


€ | Cembome poit
beier 15. C. 3.

coment home et fa
feme feront homage
et fealtic en common
banke,quelett efcript
Deuant en Tenure
De homage,


Sechion 92:


A Ndthere is great


diuerfitie bee-
tweene the doing of
fealty,and of homage;
for homage cannot be
done to any but to. the
Lord himfelfe,but the
fteward of the Lords
Court, or Bailife may
take fealtie for the
Lord. é,


Sed. 93.


fealtie.


Seton 94.


v WI man may
ice "in 192 ELT.


how aman and his
wife fhall doe homage
and fealty intheCom-
mon place, which is
written before in the
tenure of Homage.


ALS tenant for terme
oflife fhall doe feal- :
tie, and yet hee fhall not
doe Homage. And diuers
other diuerfities there bp the Common Law
be between Homage and Pau e. gue


€ [ii lib. 2. fo.8o.


fatth thug; Sciendum

eft quod non per pro-
curatores nec per htreras fieri
poterit homagium fed in pro-
pria perfona ‘tam — domini
quam tenentis, capi debet. Sc
fieri,


€ Mes le fenefchal
Cre. ou Bailife poet pren-
der fealtie. (His ts fo


enident ag tt needeth no ex⸗
planation,


€ Be Tenant
mutt Do feals
ticin perfor

becaufe hee muſt bee
ſworne bnto it, and
no man can {weare


Cp {g euident and


appeareth before,

and tf Lords knew
What benefit thep map reape
by receiving of Bomage and
Feaitic they Mould not neg=
lect them, (e) for bp the recets
ting of cither of them, tt ts a
fufictent fetfin of atl manner
offeruices ag bp the words
(f ) o£ either of them appea-
teth, Pow tf — —


‘rend. & de Foaltie,


(d) Stat.det7.&.2.1i2,
Hemagt in le abridgerment.


Eracton.· lib, 2. fo. 9.
21. £, 4. 17. acc. 2. E. 3.10.
33. H.6:23. 05.9. (3.76.


Ce) Vid. For the fienification
of Senefcha! and Baslife
Sell 78.739.248. & 379:


Lib.2-f$.75.


(e) Lib.A.fv.8.2 9.
Bewlli cafe. 13. E. 4. f»


(CF) Vid Se 18.139;
1310138


Lib.2.


(g) Brt.ca.sy. (alnin: cafe.
4,9. fe 6 b x 3 HT. i8.


Lambert 138.


(a) Miír.ea.1.G.5.
"rit. fo. Y63. crc. Ockamcay.
Quid fit (cut agnam,


(b) Bra® .li.2.f0.15.2.
Flet.li, 3.4.1 4.Ockans wbi
fear. 27 [f.5 2. 31 45:38.


C3


Whar difference to bet weene
the oath of feaitie, when itis
Bong to the ting in refpect of
a Genure,and the oath Which
euctie Subiect ought to take
in refpect of bis allegeance,
Littleton here fetteth done
the oath of Fealtte. Now the
(g) Dath of Bilegeance is


Of Efcuage.


Plus ferra dit de
Fealtie en le tenure
en Socage.s en E te-
nure en Frankeal-
moigne, a en le tenut
per homage Aunce=


Seél.94.05.
More fhall bee fayd


of Fealtie in the Te- -
nure in Socage, and |


in Frankealmoigne ,
and inthe Tenure by


homage Aunceftrell.


thug, Pou fball ſweare, Ec. >


ben it map be demanded, to bereano when te this oath to betaken, anditisanfwered, Bhar |
Swbofoeuer ts aboue the age of twelue peares, ig to be ſwoꝛne in the Œoutne, onielle hee bea —


Within fome Lect, and then in the Leet: And 3| read among(t the la&oeg o£. Saint Edward, -


Quod hanc Legem inuenit Arthurus, qui quondam fuit inclitiffimus Rex Britanorum , & ita


confolidauit & confederauit Regnum Britanniz vniuerſum femper in vnum. Huius legis avtho-


ritate cxpulit Arthurus praedictus Saracenos & inimicosa regno. Lex enim ifta diu fopita fuit &
fepulta donec Eadgarus Rex Anglorum excitarit,& erexitin lucem, & illam per totum Regnum


obferuari precepit. which lao tn fome maner (g obferaco at this day, Wut to returne to Lite


tleton.


Chap 4.
7 Ee (a) 3n


Latine  Scutagium,
Cid eft) Seruitium feuti, Sere
nice e£ the Shield, berebp
tt appeareth, that right tnter=
Pretations and etymologies
are nece(Tatíe : for, ad recte
docendum oportet primum in-
quirere nomina , quiarerum
cognitio a nominibus rerum


dependet.


Nomiaa fi nefeis, perit. cog-
nitiorerum.


And herewith agreth that
Sich is fatd , Primo excuti-
enda eft verbi vis ne fermonis
vitio obftructur oratio, fiue lex
fiue argumentis.

Scutum tn French (e Efcue,
and thereof commeth the Ef-
cuer, (i. ) Scutifer, Mhich Wee
vſually call Armiger, (b) DE
this Bracton faith, Item fu-
tagium dicitur quod talis præ-
ftatio ptinet ad fcutum quod
affumitur & feruitium mili-
tare. And Fleta faith, Sunt
quzdam feruitia forinfeca, &
dici poffünt regalia qux ad
fcutum præftantur,& inde ha-
bemus fcutagium , & ratione
fcuti pro feodo militari repu-
tatur. And Ockam ſaith, Hzc
itaq; fumma quia nominc fcu.
tomm  foluitur, fcutagium
nuncupatur,


Efcuage.


CE Scuage eft
ES en Xa-
tine Scutagium,ceftas
fcauoire, Seruitium
Scuti. Et tiel tenant
que tient fa terre per
€fcuage, tient p tet-
uice De Chiualer, €t
aury tet communc-
ment Dit, queafcun
tient per bn feed fer=


uicede Chiualer, Ct


afcun per le moity
butt feed Seruiced
chiualer,ac, Ct ileff
Dit,que quaut le Kop
face bopage royall en
Œfcoce pur fubduer
leg cotes , dongs
il que tient per bn
fee De Seruice de
chiualer, couient eftt
pue le Koy per 4c,
fours, bien et cóuena-
blement array purle
Guerre, Ct celup que
tient fa Terre per le


Sed 95,"


Ee iscalled in


Latine, Scutaginm,


thatis, Seruice of the


Shield ; and that Te-
nant which holdeth
his Landby Eftua

holdeth by Knights
feruice. Andalfo itis
commonly faid, That
fome hold by thefer-
uice of one Knights
fec, and fome by the
halfe of a Knights
Fee. And it is faid,
That when the King
makes a voyage royall
into Scotland to fub-


due the Scots, thenhe «


which holdeth by the
feruice ofone Knights
Fee, ought to be with
the King fortie dayes,
well and conueuiently
arrayed forthe War:
and hee which hol.
deth his land by
the moity ofa Knights


moítp


Lib...


moitie dun Fee De
chiualet coutent efte
oue le Bop pet 20,
tours, €t tl que ti-
ent fon Terre per le
quart part Dun fee
De chiualer coutent
efte oue le 330p per
ro, tours, ct. iffint
que pluis, pluis, ct
que meins, metm sg,


Of Efcuage.
fee, ought to bee with
the King twentie
dayes: and hee which
holdeth his land by
the fourth part of a
Knights fee, oughtto
be with the King ten
dayes, andfo he that
hath more , more,
and he that hathleffe,
leffe.


Ny € &, 9 5 o

«[ (C)Ettiel tenaunt -
que tient fon terre per Ef-
cuage tient per féruice de


Chisaler. (d) for ag
Fealty (s incident to homage,
fobomage and night Ser=
nice be incident to Œfcuage,
anb bp the grant of Seruts
ces, Eſcuage paſſeth with the
teft, Œuerie Cenure bp EE
cuage tg atenureby Knights
Seruice: but enerfe Cenant
that holdeth by knights fer=
uice, holdeth not bp Œfcaage,


as (ball be faid hereafter. Wut note here the Wifedome of Antiquitie, (c) mavult enim Prin-
ceps domeíticos quam ftipendiarios bellicis apponere cafibus,that tg, to bs fered (n his warres
by his owne fubtects, rather than bp ſtipendarie Foꝛeners.


«p Vn fee de feruice de Chiualer. (£) Q[ bete 18 great diuerlitie of
opinions concerning the Contents of a knights fe, that is, how much land goethto the
linelphod of a Knight; fo» fome fap that a Knights fee confifteth of eight hides, and everp hide
contcpneth an hundzed acres, and ſo a Knights feo ſhould containe 800.acres; others fap that
a Knights fe containeth 680.acreg ; others fap that an organgeof lands containeth 1 ç.actes,
andeight organgs make a plowland ; bp Shichaccount a plowland containes 120: acres,and
that virgata terre, 02 a pardlandcontatneth 20, acres. Wut 3| hold that a Knigbts fee, an hide
62 ploselanb a pardiand 0? Drgange ofland doe not containe anp certaine number of acres,
But a knights fe ts properly to be eſteemed according to the qualitte and not according to the
quantitie of theland, that is te fap, bp the balucand not bp thecontent. Bnd therefore tt ts bes
tp truc Swbich Maſter Camden in hig Britannia pa.136.fatth,viz. Subféquenri ætate ex cenfu
vtcolligitur fa&i fuerunt equites, xc Bnd Bntiquitiethought that twentp poundland was ſut⸗
fictent to maintaine the degree of a knight, ag appéatetl) in the ancíent treatife de modo tenendi
Parliamentum tempore regis Edw: filij regis Etheldredi. where tt appeareth that comitatus (t6
Swit ) an Earledome con farex viginti feodis vnius militis, quolibet feodo computato ad viginti
lbratas : Baronia conftat ex 13. feodis, & 3.partevnius feodi militis fecundum computationem
predictam ; Vnum feodum militis conflat cx terrís ad valentiam 20.1. which Antiquitie J) cite
fo; that it concurreth With the ad of atliament.anno1-E 2. de militibus, bp Which at Cenfus
militaris the ftate of a Knight (e meafured by the value of xx. pound per annum, and not by ang
certaine content of acres ; and With this agreeth the ftatute of W.1.cap.35. and F.N.B.fol.82.
Soherc twenty pound of land in Socageis put in Equipage of a nights fe, and this te the
moſt rcafonabic efttinate,for oncacre may bc better then many otberg;foas bo Which hath 680,
192 800, acres o£ fore barren land had not according to the ancient account a fuffícient reuenue
to maintaine the degree of a Knight, and he which hada lee number of acres of fome land of
the balue of xx.pound per annum hada fufficient linelphood tn tbofe vapes fo? the maintatnance
of aknight. So Antiquity thought that 400,markes of land per Annum ‘Wags a competent
ituelieod fo? a Baron and 400. pound per annum, Ad fuftinendum nomen & onus of an
Œarie, and of late time 800,markes per Annum of a Marquetle, and 800, pound per Annum
of a Duke, fo that their pearelp reuenne Wag eſtimated by the baluc and not bp the content.
Bnd one plowiand, carucata terræ, 07 a bite of land, hidaterræ ( which (g allone ) is not of
anp certaine content, but ag much ag aploto canby courfe of bufbandzp plow in a peate, Bad
therewith agreeth Lambard verbo Hide. Anda plow land may containe a mefluage Sood mede
Dow and palture, becaufe that by them the plowomen and thecattell belonging to the plow ate
maintained. Vide Temps £,1-tit.Briefe 860. 4.E.3,47, PlL.com.(r Hill and Granges cafe, fo,168.
Vid,6.E.5. fo.42. and 39.H,6 8.2. And venerable Beda calleth a lowland familiam a famílp,
becaufc (t containeth neceflarp things for the maintenance ofa family, And Prifor Sell faith
tn 35.H.6, fo.29. thataplow map till moze land tn a pearein one Country chen {n another,and
therefoze (t ſtands With rcafon, that a plowiand Mheuld be leſſe in one place than fn another,
41.E.3, tit.fine 40. and 13. E.3. fines7, Afine (ball not berccetucd De vna virgata terræ fez
the oncertatntíe vid.39.H 6,8, Wut ag acre a is certaineby the Gatute Deterris menſu-
randis. fotcalfo (Reader ) that cuerp plowland of ancient time was o£ tbe pearelp Value of
fe nobies per Annum, and thefe wag the liuing of a plooman o2 y eomas, and Ex duodecim
carucatis conftabat vnum feodum militis which arsounttezo.pound per Annum, Bnd thie
pos map fi Termino pafch.anno 3.E,1.Coram Rogero de Seyton & focijs fuis Lufticiarijs apud,

S Welt


69


(e) Mir.c4.1-§.3.


(4) a.E. 3.8.6. 19. E. 304.
Morrie 394.26. H. 5.1.4.

22 E. 3. Per qua Serpic. 1i.
43-£,3:22. 8. N. B. 83.84.


(e) Lib. vad,


(£) L9.g.fa.133. i5
Lowes cafe,


Vid. leb.7. fol. 33. 94%
Neil cafe.


Lib


9 H.4.9.3114f:3e.
26. Aff. 66. 27.40: 53.
8.E.3. 154.


5. E.3.39. 11. H. 4.5.

F.N.B.38.6. dr 83.4.

3.M.4.16. 38.81.6000.

39. H.6.38. 6.R.2.protelzio.

46. 19 .R. a. gard.16 5.

27.H.6, Pretettion 56.
.£.4.37. Y1.H.4.7.
A416.


Lib. Rab in Seace.47.48.
yo. R.2.gard.95.

6.R a /TrotelTion 46.

6. H3. Auouric 342«

Vid. Rot,Cleuff. 8. H. 3. &
Finius 8.4. 3. ér patens.

g. H. 3.multi folnerunt
feutaqimm pro cxereit in
Walliam. memb.10.dr «nte.
Clauff.6. H. 3.32ewmb, 3,


Magna Cartavap. V7.
Fleta li$.cap. 60.


C»


Of Efcuage. $e8.95.


Weftm. Ebor.Ro.1o Radulphus de Normanville petens in brevi de medio queritur contra Luci-
am de Kyme quod cum ipfa teneat de ipfo duas carcétatasterræ in Coningfton per homagium
& fervitium militare, vnde duodecim carucatæ terrz faciunt vnum feodum militis pro omni {ere
vitio, ipfa diftrinxit ipfum ad faciendü ſectam ad curiam fuam de Thorneton in Craven, &c,

And itigto be obferned that tbe reltefe of a night and all abeue him Sobích be nobie, is tbe
fourth part of their pearely Meucnuc, ag of a Knight fine pound which ig the fourth part of
20.pound, £50 Vnabzroniaconftatex 13 fcodis militum & de 3. parte vnius feodi militis;
Which amount to 400. Markes, anb therefozehts reliefeis tbe fourth part of tbig,viz. 100,
markeg ; anb an Carledomeconfifts of twenty Knights fees Which amount to 40o.ponmb (ag
befoze it appeareth by the fa(o ancient iR ecozd De modo tenendi Parliamentum,&c.) and thete=
fore his relicfcis 100.pound, Andthis alfo appeareth bp the ſtatute of Magna Carta,cap.2. and
by the equitie of this ftatute, infownch ag a a Matquiſdome which confifts of the reuenue of
two IBaronics hich amount to 8e0,markes, ſhall pap according to that tuft paopostíen fog
big relie 200, markeg, and becaufea a Dukedome confitt of the revenues of tivo Carlebemeg,
viz. 800.potimb per Annum, a Duke fball pap 200. fo arelife, Whichis alfo thefourth part of
bis reuenue, and With this agree the Records of che Exchequer.

dote ( Reader) At the time of the making of the ffatute of Magna Carta, $.9.H.3. there
ag not anp Duke, Marquette 02 Wicount in England ( and therefore the ſtatute could not
makementton of them ) and Edward the efocft fonne of king E.2.cailed the blacke Pince Wags
the ſirſt Dake in England after the Conqueft, and Robert Earle of Oxford in the raigne of
R.2. Was thefirft Marqueile. Sicenim inter ordines Anglia in fua Brittanniateftatur Camden
vbi fupra. E: titulus Marchionis ferius ad nos devenit, ncc ante R.a. tempore cuiquam delatus
illeenim Robertum Vere Oxoniz comitem delicias fuas primum marchionem Dubliniæ defig-
navir, merumquc erat honoris nomen, Hac, lle. Bnd befoze the raíane of H.6. there was mot ax
np Viſcount. Sic enimidem Author vbi fupra afferit, Poft comites vicecomites ordine fequun-
tur Vicounts nos vocamus ; hzc vetus officij fed nova dignitatis appellatio, & H.6. temporc ad
nos primumaudita, Hæc ille, Et dominus de Bello monte was the fir Qiifcount Created bp
Bing H.6. Vide Caffianeum in gloria mundi parte 4. confidct 5 §. that this Dignity ofa Mis
count tg of great antiquitte ttt other Realmes.

Bra&on lib,2. 36, Item funt quadam fervitia que dicuntur forinfeca, quamvis funt in carta
de feoffamentisexprefla & nominata, & qua idco dici poffunt ferinfeca, quia pertinent ad do-
minum regem, & non ad dominum capitalem,nifi cum in propria perfona profc&us fucrit in fer»
vitio, vel nifi cum pro fervitio fito ſatiſfecerit domino regi, &c.


Voyage royall. A dopage vopall (8 not only when the king
himalelfe goeth to warre, ag Littleton bere faith, but alfo when bis Licttenant o3 Deputy of hig
Lieftenant goeth, And What hail be fato a Wopage ropall all be adiudged ín this cafe by the
Judges of the Common Law ag an incident to E(cuage and not by the Confbabie and jars
fati oz any other, & ficde fimilibus,

Qr bere ig alfo another kinde of QXopage i opall,viz, when one goeth With tbe kings dangh=
ter bepondfea tobe marrico, tc. foa ſuch a vopage is for the gad of tbe $obole Mealme, ( fog
moze pzoffít fox the 18 calme cannot be then to make alliance With another ation, but of this
Wopage 18 opall Littleton fpeaketh not here, but only of the Mopage 1Ropall to Warre; fo ag
tbereíg a Uoyage WR opall of Warre,and a Tiopage 18 opall of peace andamitic, Bud it is to be
obfcrueb that he that holoeth bp Cattle gard oz comage holdeth bp Knights feruíce, and pet bee
Hail pay no Eſcuage becaufe he holdeth not to gos With the Ring to Warre. ;

« Ex Efcoce.In Scotiam, this (8 put but for an example for ifthe
tenure be toga in Walliam Hibernia Vafconia,Pidavia,&c, it igall one, De an ancient reco20
Rott. De finibus Termino3Mich.1 1,E.2. Sir Rich:Rockefley Runighe did hol’ lanbg at Seaton
bp Serfanty to be Vantrarius Regis, that ig to be the ings foze-fotman Shen the Bing went
into Ga(coigne,donec per víus fuit pari folutarum precij 4.d.thatis vntill be had Soome out a
patre of ſhoes of the price of foure pence. And this feruice being admitted to be perfozmed
when the Ring went to Gafcoignetoe make warre, ts Knight ſeruice. |


€ !/ que tient per un fte de feruice de chivalier covient effe ove le Roy per
40.teurs But this ts to be bnderftood of a Œenant that boldeth of


tbe tking immediately, fos cuerp man is bound bp his tenure to defend bis 3020, and both beg
and bis 1.02 tbe king and bts Wountrie, and therefore ik the 3.020 goeth nor his tenant íg exe
cuſed. But vet t€ the tenant perauatle goeth with the King, (t excaifetb ali the meanes
And it (s to be obferned that fos cuerp pound ncíent balue of a Knights fee accounts
ting twenty poundiand, the Tenant mult goe With the King two dayes, Which commeth tuk
f0 40, dapes for a whole Knights feebp the Statute of Magna Carta ft (s proudded that (cu.
tagiumdeceter’ capiatur ficut capi confüeuit tempore Hen:regis aui noftri. a
Sethe


Lib.2.


Es il appiert
Ms plees &

nts faits en
vn von plee fur beiefe
de Detinue De bn e⸗
ſcript obligatoꝛie
post per br H: Gray
T.7.E.3. que nt be-
foigne a celup q tient
per Eſcuage De aler
pue le op luy mefit,
fil voile trouer vn aus
ter perfon able pur
]up conuenablement
array pur le quette,
De aler oue le 130p,
Ct ceo femble eftre
bonteafon, car poít
eftre q̃ celuy que tient
pet tíclg feruices eft
languifbant, iſſint à
tine poit alet ne chi-
uaucher, Ct aurp bt
Abbe, ou auter home
de Keligion, ou fente
fole q tient per tíclg
feruices, ne Doit en
tielcas aler en p20-
per perfon, Ct Sic
W. Herle adonque
chiefe Futtice 8 com:
mon bank, Difoit eu
tícl plee, que efcuage
tic (ceca graunt, mes
lou le 130» alaft lup
mefmeen fon proper
perfon, Ct fuilt De-
Murre en tudgement
en mefme le plee, le
quelles xl.iours ſer⸗
ront accompts de le


pꝛimer iour del mu⸗


Of Efcuage.
Sedion 96.


Vut it appeareth

by the pleas and
arguments made ina
plea vpona Writte of
detinue of a writing
obligatorie brought
by one H.Gray 7. E.3.
that it is not. needfull
for him which hol.
deth by Efcuage to
goe himfelfe with the


Kingif hee willfinde ge


another able perfon
for him conueniently
arrayed for the warre
to goe with the King.
And this feemeth to
be good reafon. Forit


may bethat he which 5


holdeth by fuch ferui-
ces is languifhing, fo as
he canneither goe nor
ride. And alfo an
Abbot or other man
of Religion, ora feme
fole, which hold by
fuch feruices ought
notin fuch cafeto goe
in proper perfon. And
Sir William Herle then
chiefe Iuftice of the
Common place faid in
this plea, that efcuage
fhall not bee granted
but where the King
goes himfelfe in his
proper perfon. Andit
was demured in iudge-
ment inthe fame plea,
whither the 40. dayes
fhould bee accounted
from the firft day of


9:1


Setl.96.


79


Cc R;7.E,3.&c.Œhigig 7-7-F.3.fel.ag.
| the firft bok at large


that our Duthoz bath
cited & (t is to bc obferucd that
this point (g not debated in the
fato bike, but onip itig there
admitted, € pet is god authoꝛi⸗
ty in la, for our Authoꝛ faith
that it appeareth bp this bak,
ROW both bp Littleton hime
ſelfe, and by the boe of 7.E 3.
ít (s apparant that albcít the
tenure ig that be which hole
deth bp a Whole Knights feo
ought to be With the King, gc.
to boc à coꝛpoꝛall feruice, pet
map finde another able
manto dee (t for him.

Wp tbe (fatute of Magna
Carta,cap.20. ft is pzoutded,
that no Knight that holdeth
bp Callleegard (ball bee dts
frepnedto giue money fo? the
Beeping of the Œaftle, Si ipfe
cam facere volucrit in propria
perfona fua vel per alium pro.
um hominem faciet fi ipfe
cam facere non poffit propter
rationabilem cau(am.

Some fauc thought that
he that holds bp efcuagets tas
ken bp the equítie of this fac
tute that fpeaketh onip of Laz
fe gard, but ít is holden
that this fatute (2 but an af⸗

ce of the Common law.
jfo; Sbere that Ac fatth,
(propter rationabilem cau-
fam ) that reafonable caufe is
referred to the Œenants owne
diſcretion anb chopce, andthe
caufe (e not materíall 02 iſſua⸗
bie no moze then in the cafe
that Littleton here putteth ad
hereafter appeareth, And F
would avutfe our Mudent,
that Soben bee (ball be enabico


“and armed to fet bpon the


peare bakes, 0) reposts of
La, that hee bee furnifhen
with all the Swbole courfe of
the Lawe that when hee hea⸗
reth acafe bouched and applis
sdetther in wellminſter Bail,
( Where tt ig necellarp for
him to bee a diligent bearer,
and obferuer of cafes of 1.35» )
92 at readings 02 other exerci⸗
fee of learning, bee map finde
ont andreade thecafe fo bons
chen, fo; that will both —


| Lib,


€.H.3.Auowry 241.
F.N.B.83.84.


(C9


. ítín big memozp, ano bee to


bim ag god ag an expofitíon


. eftlatcafc, but tbatmuft not


Hinder big tímelp anb ozderip
reading Wh ch( all excules fet
apart) he muft bínbbimfelfe
bnto, for rhere be two things
to be auoyded bp him, ag ene=
mies to icarning , præpoftera
lectio, anb præpropera praxis.
But let bs now heare what
ont Authoꝛ will fap,


Of Efcuage.


fter de hott le Bop ,
fait per les Com⸗
mons, & per commã⸗
Dement le 130p, ou De
la tour que 1e 130p
primes entra en Cf-
nd * Ideo Quære de
oc.


$ etl.96.
the mufterofthe kings |
hoft made bythe com.
mons, & by the come
mandement of the
King or from the day;
that the King firften-
tred | into  Scorland
Therefore inquire of
this.


€ Et ceo femble bone reafon, érc. Here Littleton ſheweth thzee rea⸗
fons wherefore the & enant ſhould not be conftraincd to doe his ferutce in perfon.

Fick, Jt map be the Cenantis che, foas he (e neither able to gocnoz rule. And euer fuch
conftructon muft be made in matters concerning the defence of the Realme 02 common god, ag
thefame may be effectedand performed. Co the former difabtlitte map be added Wherea Eoꝛ⸗
poration aggregate of many, ag Deane and Chapter, Watoz and Comminaitie, €c, o2 an In⸗
fant becing a 39urcljafer , fox tbefe alfo muft finde an able man. Wut (t map bee obieccd that
in thefe particular Cafes tbc Cenant might finda man,but not When be himfelfe ig able Swith=
out allcrcufc oz impediment, Cothts it te anfiwered, that Sapiens incipt à fine. Andtheend
of this ſeruice is foz defence of the Realme, andfo ít be bonc by an able andfuffictent man, the
end ig effected,

Secondip, Seeing there are fo many tuft excuſes of the Cenant (t Were Dangerous , and
tending to the hindzance of the ferutce, t€thcfle excufes ſhould bee iſſuable, Multa in iure come
municontra rationem difputandi pro communi vtilitate introducta funt. :

Lai, both Littleton anb the Boke (n the ſeuenth of Edward the Chird, giucth the cs
nant power, without any caufe tobe ſhewed to find an able and fuffícient man, and oftentimes
Iura publica ex priuato promifcue decidi ron debent.


€ 77 Abbe ou auter homede religion. Note that tf the Ling had


giuen Lands to an Abbot andhis Succeflozs to hold by Knigyts ſeruice,this jad been gad,
and the Abbot ſhould doc homage €finda man, ec. o? pap Cicuage, but there Was no toordthig
oprelicfe oz otherincident belonging thereun:o And though tbe Loin Cath that this wag a
PMooztmapne, thatts, thatthep held kaſt their Jnheritances , pet if the Abbot Sith the affent o£
his Couent, fao conucpco the land to a naturall man andhis heires , now Wardſhip and Ke⸗
Itefeand other incidents belornige» of commonright tothe tenure. Bnd fo (t is, tf the ikina giue
Lands toa Matozand Comminaltte, and their Succeſſoꝛs to be holtcn bp Rnights S»erutce,
In this caſe the Patentees (as hath beene fatd )fhail doe no homage, neither fball there be any
toardthtp o3 Weltcfe : only they alfo fball find a man, €c. 0 pag Efcuage. Wut tf they conuep
ouer the landg to any naturall man and bis bcíreg, now Domage, ward, Warlage, and Ke⸗
liefe, and other incidents belong hereunto. Bnd pet this pollibuiitie ag remota potentia, but
the reafon hereof ts, Ceflanterationelegis ce flat ipfa lex , the reafon of the immunitie wes in
— of the Bodie Politique, which bp the conuexance ouer cealeth, which is Worthy of
obſeruation.

And it (ato bee obſerued, that euery Biſhop in England hath a Baronte, amd that
an ig holden of the Wing in Capite, and pet the ing can neither hane wardſhip og

eltefe,

4€ twotopntenants bee of Land holden by Knights Serntce, tone gocth with the Hing, te
fufficeth for both, and both of them cannot becompelied to goe, fo» bp their tenure oneman te
only te goe.

FE the Tenant perauaite goeth, (t difchargeth the Mefne,fozone Cenancte (ball pap but one
Eſcuage. E ini IR —
€. Ow auter home de Religion. Here this Word (Keligion) ts ta⸗
ken Negelp, viz.not only fozrequiar, 03 dead perfong, ag Dbbots, Monkes, ogthelike. Wut
for Syccular perfons alfo, as Withops, Parfons, U (care; and theitke, fog neither of them are
bound to coe in proper perfon. Foꝛ ncmo militans Deo in plicet fecularibus negotiis.

€ Languifhant. Soit maybe fai of an Jdeot, amad Dan, à
Leaper, à man mapmed, Wiind, Deafe. of decrepit age, orthelike, : t

€ 0: fem fole. Seeing that a femfole, that cannot perfogme


Lanighte Dernicemay ferucbp deputie, ttmap bee demande Swberefoze an heire ni ken


Lib.2. Of Efcuage. -  éetl.96.


Gwithinageof21, peares may not feruealfo bp Deputic, beeing not abloto ferge bimfeite,
«. Gorhistt is aniswcred, that in cafcg of Minopitie, all ig onctobotb {eres , viz. tf tbebctra
maie be at the death of the Anceftoz vnder the age of onc andtwentie, o2 the heire female onder
tyeage of fourtene, thep can make no Deputie but the Lord fall baue wardſhip ag an inct=
pent io the tenure : therefore Littleton ig heretobe onberítooo of a femfote of full age, and feífeo
afkand holvenby nights Seruice cither bp purcpafe og difcent, ^


(OL Corcrablement arraie pur le guerre. So as here ace foure things
fo bc opícruco. 3
uit (as hath bene fato) that he may find another.

Secondly, That he that ts found mult be an able perfor,

Thirdly, be mult be armed at the cots andcharge of the Œenant ; and herein ig to be noted,

Quod non definitur in iure, with bat manner o£ Armoꝛ the Souldier (hail be arraped with
fox time, place,and occaffon dec alter the manner and Kind of the Armour.

Fourthly, 12e mult have fuc Drmour,as (ball be necellarie, and fo appointed in rcabfnetfe,

FerdwittgaSaxon $0910 & fignificat quietanciam murdri im exercitu. Worfcott ig an old
Englith $901 anb Gguificth, Liberum effe de oneribus armorum.

Ft is truly fato, Quod miles hac tria curare deber, corpus vt validiffimum & perniciffimum;
habeat arma apta ad fubita imperia cactera Deo, & Imperatori Cure effe,

Sapiens non femper it vno gradu, fed vna via, nonfe mutat fed aptat. Qui fecundos optat
euentus; diuinetarte, non cafu. In omniconflictu non tam prodeft multitudo quam virtus. — —

Eftoprimi ducis fcire & vincere, & cedere prudenter tempori. Multum poteft in rebus hu-
manis occafio, plurimum in bellicis.

Quid tam neceffarium eft quam tenere femper arma quibus tectus effe poffis. Wut Jwill
take mp leaue o£ thefe excellent Authors of Art Militarie and referre them to tbofe that pꝛoteſſe
the fame, and will retuencto | ittleton. ;

€ Uafer. 4 find this word in the Statute of r 8,H.6.cap. 19.
and the ancient Militarie Order is Worthy of obferuation , for befozeand Tong after that ſta⸗
tute, ben the Ling was tobe ſerued With Houldiers for his Warre. A Knight oz Eſquire of
the Countrie, that had 12 euenuce, Farmozs and Cenants Wouldconenant with the King by
Indenture inrolleo inthe Exchequer to feruc the king for fuch aterme Sith fo manp men
Cfpectallp named (t a Lift) in bis Marre, ac, anexcelient inſtitution that they fhould ferue vn⸗
Der him, Whom they knew and honozed, and With whom thep mult liue at thetrreturne , thefe
ten being muſtered befoze the Rings Commifltoners, and teceiuing any part of their Wages,
And thet names forecozded, ik they after Departed from their Captaine within the Cerine,con=
travieto the forme of that Statute tt was felonie. Wut now that Statute ts ofneforce, bc-
canfe that ancientand excellent forme of militarte courte 18 altogether antiquated : but later
Statutes haue proutded for that intfchiefe.

' Tomulter is to make a thew of Souldiers Well armed and trained before the da (no Com⸗
miflioners in forme oper ficld, Vbi (e oftendentes preludunt przlio. In Laune tt (g Cenfere,feu
luftrareexercituin.

Wy the Law before the conque(t that muſters and ſhewing of Armour Houldbe V no eodem
die per vniuerfum regnum ne aliqui poffint arma fimiliaribus & notis accommodare , necipfi
ila — accipere, ac iuſtuiam Domini Regis defraudare, & Dominum Regem & Regnum
offendere.

Concerning tbe point in Law, bemurreo (n tudgement , in thefeucnth of Edward thethird,
here mentioned bp our Duthoz, The Law accounteth tbe beginning of the fortle dayes after
the Hing entreth into the korreine ation, for then the warre beginneth, and till he comethere,
bc and bis hofte are fato to aoc towards the warre, and no Militarie feruice is to be done, till
the Ringand bis hoſte come thither.


€ 57 William Herle.A famous Latoper conttituted chiefe Juſtice
ofthe Common Pleas by Letters 3Satentg dated, 2.die Martij anno s.E.3. It appeareth bp
Littleton , and bythe Kecord that he wag a Knight again the conceit of thofe, that thinke,
that the Chicfe Juſtices of the Court of Common Pleas Were not Knighted till long after.
Dur Student (ball obferuc that the knowledge o£ the LaWigitkeadeepe well, ouf of
Which each man dꝛaweth according to the frength of bis vnderftanding. be that reache


the Mater, ( £02 Nullum elementum in fuo proprio loco eft eraue) but take (t from the water, (t
Cannot bee dꝛ⸗wne op but With great difficultie. So albeit beginnings of this ſtudie leenie
Difficult, per when the 1920feffoz o£ tbe Lak can diue ints the depth tt is Delightful, eafie, arte
Without amp yeaute burthen, fo long ag he keepe — in bis owne proper element.


3 € uie.


Fleta.lib. 1. (ap.43.


Liuius,
Vegerisss,
Polilsus,


V gerims.


Lib .6. fel.29. the Sexldiers
Cafe.


Lamb, fol.x x 5.6.


“<<a” Le


Lib.


Glamile lob. 3 eap. 6. dre.


£6, Af p. 34. 4. F. 5. fal. 19.
Brain li 3. fol.105.b.
Britt fel. 2.
Fletalib.2.0ap.2.
Mirrer.cap.5.§.1-
Fortefenecap.g1.

See inthe Prafasete the third
part efmy Reports.


Mirrer.cap.5.§.2-
Fleta.lib,2.eap. 5 4.


Vid. BraB. ib. c. fol. 353.4.


4. €, 3.25, S. Sratwe.d.


Cap Of Efcuage. Sed.96.


C ice. Jn Glanuill he is called Iuftitia in ipfo abftracto, ag ít
&ptrt Juthice it (eife; Which appellation rematnes fill in Englilh and French, to put them in


mind of their Duties and fanctons, Wut nos» tn legali Latine thep arc called Iuſticiarij tanquam
iuftiin Concreto : andthep are called lufticiari) de Banco, &c. and ncuer Iudices de Ban-


co, &c. ; :
De Comen Banke. Banke tg & Saxon 10020, and fignifieth a

Bench o2 high feate, o2 atribunall, anbís pzoperlp applped to the Juftices of the Court of
Common Pieas, becaufetbe Juſtices of that Court {et there ag in a certaine place: fo ail
wꝛits returnable into that Court are Coram Iufticiarijs noftris apud Weftmon. 92 anp ether
certaine place obere the Court fct, and 3Legall Records tearme them lufliciarij de Banco.
But wꝛits returnable into the Court called the Kings Wench, are Coram nobis (.i. Rege) v-
bicunque fucrimusin Anglia. @ndallindictall Recoꝛds there are Filed coram Rege. Wut fog
Diftinction fake tt (s called the Rings Wench, both becaufe the Records of that Court are ſtiled
(ag hath beenefatd) Coram Rege, and becanfe Kings in former thnes baue often perfonailp
fet there, Foꝛ theantiquitte of the Court of Common Pleas they erre , that hold that befoze
the Statute of Magna Charta there Swag no Court of Common Pieas, but had his Creatt=
on bp, oz after that Charter : fo? the learned know , that in the fixe and tiventicth peare of
Edward the Œbiro. Che Abbot of B. ina tozit of Aflize brought before the Inſtices in Eire
clapmed Conuſance and to auc to2ítg of Alſize, and other outginall wꝛits out of the Rings
Court bp prefcription, time out of mind of man, inthe ratgnes of Saint Edmond,and Same
Edward the Œonfefloz before the Conquelt, And onthe behaife of the Abbot were ſhewed
Diners allomances thereof in fozmer times inthe kings Courts , and that King Henric the
firft confirmed thetr bfages, and that thep ſhould haue Conufance of Pleas, fo that the luftices
of the one Bench, or the other fhould not intermeddle. Bnd the Statute of Magna Charta,
erecteth no Court, but giueth direction for the proper turifdicion thereof tn thefe $0010g, Com-
munia Placita non fequantur Curiam noftram, fed teneantur in aliquo certo loco. Bnd proper=
lp tbc Statute fatth, non fequantur , fo? thatthe Kings Wench did intholedapes follow tbe
ing vbicunque fueritin Anglia, and therefore enacteth that Common Pleas ſhould be holden
tna Court refident in acertaine place. In the next Chapter of Magna Charta (made atone
and the fame time) {tis proutded. Et ea que per cofdem (s. Iufticiarios itinerantes) propter dif-
ficultatem aliquorum articulorum terminari non poffunt , referantur ad Tufticiarios noftros de
Banco, & ibi terminentur. Bnd ín the nextto that (Affifze devltima præfentatione femper ca-
piantur coram Jufticiarijs de Banco, & ibiterminentur. Œbercfoze it maniteſtly appeareth that
at the making of the Statuteof Magna Charta,there Swere lulticiarij de Banco, Which all men
confefic to be the Court of Common Picas. And tbercfozc that Court was not erected bp oz
after that Statute, Foꝛ the Authoꝛitie of thie Court, (t s euident by that Which bath bene
fat, that ft hath turifoicion of all Common 39icas, Wut let vs returneto Littleton.

€ Demurre en indgement. A Demurrer commeth of the Latine
57010 demorari to abtde, anttberefoze he which Demurreth in Law, to fato, be that abtoeth in
La, Moratur, 0? demoraturinlege. Whenſoeuer the Councell learned of the partic tg of a=
pinton, that the Count oz Plea, of the aduerſe partic ts infufficient in Law,then be demurreth
orabtdeth in La, and referret!) thefame to the tubgement of the Œonrt, and therefore weli
faith Littleton, ere demurre en iudgement, the woꝛds of a Demurrer being Quia narratio, &c.
materiaque in cadem contenta minus fufficiens inlegeexiftir, &c. And foot a lea, Quia Pla-
citum, &c- materiaque in codem content minus fufficiens in lege exiftit, &ce vnde pro defe&u,
fufficientis narrationis fiue placiti &c. petit iudicium, &¢. But if the Plea befufficientin Law,
but the matter of fact is faife, then the aducrfe partic taketh iſſue thereupon, anb thatig trted
bp a Jury, for matters in Law are decided bp the Judges , and matters in fat bp Juries,
ag ellewhere ts fato mete at large.

4201» as there to no tffuc bpon the fact, but when it is topned betweene the patties, fo there
íg o Demurrer in Law, but ben ít tg tovned, and therfore Mhen a Demurrer is offcrcb bp
the one partic ag te afozefaid, the aduerſe partic topneth with him, (fozerampic) fatth, Quod
Placitum przdi&um &c.materiaque in eodem contenta bonum & fufficiens in lege exiftunt,
&c. & petit iudicium, andtherenpon tbe Demurrer is faid to be fopned, anb then the Cafcis
argued bp Councelllearned of both fives, and if thepoints bee difficult, then tt igargued o⸗
venly by tbe Judges of that Court, and (£ thep oz the greater partconcurre tn opinion, ac-
cojbínglp indgement is giuen, and tf tbe dLonrt bee equallp denided, 02 conceiue great
Doubt of the cafe , then map thep adtozne ít into the Œrchequer Chamber , Sobere the
cafe fbali bc argued by all the Judges of England, Sbere if the Judges Wail bre cquailp
diuided, then (1f none of them change their opinion) ít ſhall bee decided at the next Parliament
bp a 391elate, to Earics, and tio Barong Which fball haue power and Commiflion of the
Hing te that bebalfc, and bp abuíce of themſelues, the Lhancciioz, G reafurer, tbc ii =

t


‘Libs Of Efcuage. Setl.97.


theone Bench and the other, and other o£ tbedsíngs Conncell, as many and fuch ag fall
feme conuenient, fhail make a god iubgement, ec. And if the difficuitte be fe great ag thep
cannot determine tt,chen tt Mall be determined by the X 0158 in the opper Houle of Parliament,
Hecthe tatute, for it extends not only to the cafe abouefafo, but alfo where iudgements are
Delaped in the Chancery, kings bench, Common bench, andthe Exchequoz, the Juſtices al=
Ggned, and other Juſtices of Oyerand Terminer, fometime bp difficuitie, fometime dp diuers
opinions of Juſtices, and fometime fos other cauſes. (a) Wefore Which Hatute, i£ iudge⸗
mients ere not giuen bp reafon of difficultte, the Doubt was Decided at the next Parliament

( Dbich then was to be holden once euerp peare atthe leaſt) (b) Siautem talia nunquam pri-
ais euencrint, & obfcurum & difficile fiteorum judicium, tunc ponatur judicium in refpectum
vfque ad magnam curiam vt ibi per concilium curiæ terminentur, But hereof thus much (ball
faftice. (r) Be that demurreth in Law confelleth all ſuch matters of fad ag are Well and ſuf⸗
ficientip pleaded, FE there be a demurrer for part and an (Que £o? part, the moze oꝛderly courfe
is to giue iudgement bpon the demurrer fir, but pet (€ (9 inthe difcretion of the Court to trie
the (flue firtt if they will. After demurrer ioyned in anp Court of record, the iudges fball giue
fudgement according ag the berp right of the canfe and matter in Law Mall appeare, Without
regarding anp want of Forme in amp tozit, Keturne, Pleint, Declaration, og other pleading,
3920c¢s, oz Courfe of proceeding, except thole onlp which the partie Demurring {ball {pectallp
and particularly fct downe an expꝛeſſe in his demurrer, (a) Now What te fubftance ato
Swhat is forme pou fhalireade in mp Reports,

And tn fome cafes a man (ball alledge fpectall matter, andeonclude Sith a Demurrer, (bas
ín an ation of trefpalle brought bp 1,5. £o? the taking of bis bozfe, the ocfendant pleades that
he bimfelfe was polletied of the hoꝛſe ontíll be Was bp onc 1.5, difpofeed, who qaue him to
the plaintife,æc, the platntifefatth that I.S. named in tbe barre, and 1.5. theplaintife Sere all
oneperfon a not diners; anb to the plea pleaded by the defendant in the manner,he demurred in
Law, and the Court did hold the plea anb demurrer god, fox Without the matter alicdged hee
could not demurre. Now asthere map be a demurrer bpon counts and pleas, fo there map be
of Bide prior, Woucher, Receite, Waging of Law, and the like. (c) Bp that Which bath bene
faío it appeareth, that there is a gencrall Demurrer that (s ſhewing no caufe, and a fpeciall de=
marrer Which cheweth tbe caufe of hts demurrer. Alſo bp that Which hath bene ſatd, thero is a
Demurter bpon picadina, ec. and there tg alfo a Demurrer bpon cutbence, (d) Ag {€ the platn=
tife in euidence ſhew anp matter o£ Recoꝛd, où Deeds 02 weitings, oz any fentence in the Ec⸗
clefiafkicall Court, o2 other matter of euidence by teſtimony of witneſſes, o otherSwife wheres
vpon Doubt in Law arífctb, andthe defendant offer to demntre in aw thereupon, the plaina
tife cannot refule toiopne in demurrer,no mozetben in a demurrer bpon a Count, repiication,Æc
and fo E converfo may the platntífc demurre in Lai bpon the eufdence of the defendant,

Wut (feutdence for the Ring in an information 02 anp other fuite beqiuen, and the Defen=
bant offer todemurre in Law bpon the Œuidence, the tings counfell (ball not be enforced to
topne tn Demurrer: but in that cafe, the Court may direc the Jury to finde tbe fpectail


"€ Enindzement. forthe fignification of thig vooꝛd, VidSect.;66
$ed. 97.


i CET apres tiel

bopage royal
en Cfcoce, il e(t com-
munement Dit, que p
authoritie De Par⸗
liament lefcuage fer=
ta affefle = mis en
certaine, s.certeine
futhe Dargent, quant
chelcun que tient per
entier fee De feruice
Dechinaler, qt ne fuit


Nd after fuch a

voyage royall in-
to Scotland, it is com-
monly faid, that by
authority of Parlia-
mient,the efcuage fhall
be affeffed and put in
certeine , S. a cer-
taine fumme of mo-
ney ; how much euery
one which holdeth by
a whole Knights fee,


€ es voiage ró3-
al, de ileff com-
munement dit que per
Authority de Parlia-
ment efcuage ferra af-
Jefe. Nota here is à
fecret of Law tueinded, thag
albeit efcuage incertaine be
Bue bp tenure, pet becaufe
the affeffiment thereof con-
cerncb fo many arid fo great
anumber of the fubtecs of
tbe realme, (t could not be
affefled bp the King oy anp
other but bp Pariiament?
(a) am


72


Ret Parliam. 14. E. 3. mi. 31,
a preceeding in Sir Iobn Stan-
tons Cafevpondiffieulsse in the
Court of Common Pleat.
Vid'Britten, fo. 41.
31.E.5.37.38.
39-E. 3. fo.1.21.35.

429. E.3. 34. 13.H. 4.3.4.
(a) 4.8.3. ca.14.

(b) Braten lib. 1. cap.2.
ru.7. Britr.fo.4r.
1.£.3,7.8. 2. E. 5.6.7.


(r) 1g. E. 3.50.6.

45.€. 3.13.14. 5H 7.4.
13.£.4. 7.5. Pl. Com. 85.
411.172.

48. £.3.18. 2. R 2. inqu:f.z.
38. E.3.25. 11.H.4 5.7 5-
3.€.4.2. -


(2) Lib. 3.fe- 57. Line. (ch.
cafe.

Lib. 5.fo.74. Wymeks cafe,
Lib.1 o. fo.88.vfque 98.
Dolor Leyfields safe.

(b) 13-2.4.7-

31.€ 3. efleppel. 244.
33.H.6.9.10, 22. E.4. 5c.
1. H. 3.217


(c) 14 H 4.31.37. H.6. d.


(d) Lib.5. fe. 104.4.
Bakers cafe.


(e) 38.4.8. Dyer 53.


Lib.z.


(a)13.B.4. €.
(b)3. B. s Roe. ( lauf dr Ret.
fium 30.67 ente.


Bteff.p. v4, E.x.de Benes.


EN.B.84.


Brad. lib. 2.36.4.


F.X.3.34-


‘Ret, Parl.g 7,3, eat.


Vide Fx 38,


19.2.2. 7H9.Auew. 14.
36. ff. 65. 30.E. 3.35.5,
L 95.4. fo.889n Lwirrels caf


Cap
(a) and this was by the com-
on La


tu: N

(b) No Elcuage was affef-
fed bp Parliament fince the
raigne sf Edward tbe feconb,
and in the eighth veare of big
taigne Œfcuage was alſeſſed.

EL the Œenant goeth with
the ing ano pieth in exerci-
tu,in the bof ozarmie, hee is
excufed by dlaw,and no Œfcu=
age fhall be Demanded.

Bnd ít is to obferned, that
ik he that hold of the King bp
Eſcuage, goeth, oꝛ indeth ano=
ther to gde for him Sith the
King, &c. then bec (ball bane
efcuage of bis Genants that
hold of him bp fucb feruice.
which muft be alleiledbp par=
liament,

But i£ the Kings Tenant

oeth not With the dking, thers

e hal pap fo2 bis defarit Eſ⸗
cuage, and fball haue no eſcu⸗
age of his Œenants. Richard
the ſecond making a bopage
Bopail (nto Scotland, at the
petition of bis Commons
pardoned the payment of Cf»
cuage.


eT Scuws
teig-


UB


Of Efcuage:


per lup metme,ne per
bn auter purluy, oue
le Koy patera a fon
Heignioz Dc que il
tient la Cert per ef=
cuage, Sicome mit-
tomus,que tl fuit oꝛ⸗
Daine per authozitie
be là parliament,
que chefcun que tiét
per entítefecó Ser-
uice De chiualer , que
ne fuit oue le 130p,
papera a fon Seig-
nioz 4°.6, Donque
celup que tient pet
moitie Dun fee De chi-
ualer ne payeta a fon
feignioz fo2fqs rr. 8.
& celup quetient p la
quart part de fee De
chiualer ne papera
fozfque x.s. a fic que
pluis, pluis, & que


Meins meins,


Sed. 98.


T afcung teíg-
nont per là cu-


$£8.97.98.


who was neither by.
himfelfe nor by any
other, with the King,
fhall pay to his Lord
of whom he holds his
land by Efcuage. As
put the cafe that it was
ordained by the au-
thoritie of the Parlia-
ment, That euery one
which holdeth by a
whole Knights fee,
who was not with the
King, fhallpay to his
Lord fortie fhillings ;
then he which holdeth
by the moitie of a
Knights fee, fhall pay
tohis Lord but twen-
tie fhillings , and hee
which holdeth by the
fourth partofaknights
Fee,fhallpay but x. s.
& he which hath more
more,and which leffe,
leffe.


A Nd fome hold by the


cuftome, That if Ef


nont per cuffome,
ec. Nota,that
Eſcuage ie directed
by coftome,

«| mes au-
terment eff de
Efcuage certain.

Here it appearetb,
that Efcnage ts too
fold, viz. Œfcuage tn
certaine, wherok Lit-
tleton here fpeaketh ;
anbefcuagecertaine,
Quemadmodum in-
certitudo fcutagij fa-
cit feruitium milita-
ré5 ita certitudo fcu-


ftome que fi lefcuage
courge pet authozitie De
Parſiament, a afcun
fummeDe monep,quetls
ne pateront fozfque la
moitie De ceo, & afcung
teignont que tls ne pay⸗
eront fozfque le quart
part De ceo, Mes put
ceo quelefcuage que 118
patetont eftnon certain
pur ceo que nett certaine
coment le qarliament


cuage bee affeffed by au-
thoritie of Parliament, at
any fumme of mony, that
they thal pay but the moi-
tie of that fumme, and
fome but the fourth part
of that fumme. But be-
caufe the Efcuage that
they fhould pay. is vncer-
taine, for thatitisnot cer-
taine how the Parliament
will affeffe the efcuage
they hold by Knights fer


aſſeſſerq


Lib.


aſſeſſera leſcuage eux
teignont per Seruite de
Chiualer. Mes auter⸗
ment et De leſcuage cer⸗
taine, be que ſerra parle


Of Efcuage.


cage.


en le tenure De Socage,


€ ET ft bóc parle

genecalment
Defcuage, il ferra en⸗
tendue per E common
parlance deſcuage
noncertaine, que eft
Seruice de chiualer,
a tiel efcuage trait a
lup homage, & bo-
magetraita Iup Fe⸗
altic, cav fealtie eft
incident à chefcun
manner De feruice
korſque ale Tenure
en Frankalmoigne,
come ferra Dit apres
en le Qenure De
Frankalmoigne, Et
iſſint tl que tient per
Cicuage, tient p bo-
mage fealtie & Cf
cuage,


Sei. 99.


Ndif onefpeake

generally of Ef-
cuage, it fhall be inten-
ded by the common
{peech of Efcuage in-
certaine , which is
Knights feruice : And
fuch Efcuage draweth
to it Homage,and Ho:
mage draweth to it fe-
altie ; for Fealtie is in-
cident to euerie man.
ner of feruice , vnleffe
itbetothe Tenure in
Frankalmoigne,as fhall
bee faid afterward. in
the Tenure of Franke-
almoigne. And fo he
which holdeth by Ef-
cuage, holds by Ho-
mage, Fealtie and Ef-
cuage.


Sed. oo.


uice, But otherwife
is of Efcuage certaine,
of which fhall be fpo-
ken in the tenure of So-


Sei.98,99,100.


tagij rfacit Socagi-
um. But moze of
this tn the Chapter
of Socage Sect.120.
«| Per Parli-
Ament.
DE the Butiquitie
anb Ænthogitie of
this Court fee Sect. 164.


it


GT fi home parle
generalment def-
cuage fl ferra intend
per le common parlance
de[cuage non certain.
Verba æquiuoca & in du-
bio pofita intelliguntur in dig-
niori & potentiori fenfu. Te⸗
nure in Capite ex vi termini
tga Genure in Grofle, anb it
map be holden of a Subic,
but being fpoken qencrally,
tt ig fecundum excellentiam,


intended of the sing, for he is
Caput Reipublice.


a Et ticl efcuace
trait 4 — duy homage,
Q* homage trait a luy
Fealtie, car Fealtie eft
incident a chefcun man.
ner de feruice forfque 4
tenure en Frankeal-
moigne.


Chis is gathered by the eſtecs of their Tenure, Foy eſſences are found ont bp properties;
tountaing by Riners, and caufes by effets: £02 amongt others, the 30209 thal haue Eſcuage
Df their Cenants,¢c.as tt follosoctl),


CET eft. afcauoire, Que
quant efcuage ef tielment
affeffe per authozity De Parlia⸗
ment chefcun Seignioz de que
laterre eft tenus per Cfcuage,
auera lefcuage iſſint aſſeſſe per
Parliament pur ceo que il eſt in⸗


Ndi itis to be vnderftood,that

when Efcuage is fo affeffed by
authoritie of Parliament, euerie
Lord of whom the land is holden
by Efcuage, fhall haue the Efcuage
fo affeffed by Parliament, becaufe
it is intended by the Law, That at


tendus


73


Entendments ex Ley SeB,100.
110.3 67.377,393.406.462.
463.

s. E. 2. Ref. 165.20. H.6.33.
21.H.6.$8.37.H. 39.

13. H.4, 4.6. El. Dyer 2 36.
10. E.4. 11. 32. E. 3. Garg, 31


Brit.fo.162.


40 E. 3.220 8. H.5.4.—


Lib.2.


F.N.B.8 4.
Regiffer.88. de
Scusagio habendo.


(a) Bratton lib, 5.fol.513.


Fletalib.2.eap.13.
Britten, fel.133,227.


Brallin vbi (upra
"Britton vbi fupra.
Regif..88. F.'N.B.84.


F.N.B, 84.


Cap. 3.


tendus plalep, Gal comencemt
tiels tenemts fuct Dones ples
Siirs ales tenátg De tener per
tiely feruices a Defender lour
Siirs,aury bien come le 1309.8
mitter en quiet lour Sñrs & le
130p,0cleg Seotes auandits,


Cj ; s feigniours aue-
ront lefcuage Cc.
This is euident.


¶ Breife le roy. Chis
commeth of the ALatpne $0010
Breue.

Fitz. (t big 192cface to bis
N.B. faith of them, that tbep
be thofe foundations where⸗
upon tbe $obolc aw doth
Depend.

(a) Bra&on defertbeth a
tait thas, Breve quidem
cum fit formatum ad fimili-
tudinem regulx juris quia
breuiter & paucis verbis inten-
tionem proferentis exponit &
explanat ficut regula iuris rem
quc eft breviter enarrat, non
tamen ita breve effe debeat
quin rationem & vim inten-
tionis contineat.

DE tozite fome bcoaígíttali,
brevia originalia, and fome be
fubícíall, brevia judicialia.

Mifo of Driginals,quedam
funt formata fub fuis cafibus
& de curfu , & de communi
confilio totius regni conceffa
& approbata, que quidem
nullatenus mutari poterint
abfque concenfu & voluntate
corum ; & quadam funt Ma-


Of Efcuage.


the beginning fuch tenements
were by the Lords to the tenants
to hold by fuch feruices to de-
fend their Lords afwell as the
King, andto put in quiet their
Lords and the King from the
Scots aforefaid.


Sect. 101.


CET pur ceo que

tiels tenemts
Deulendzont primes
Des ſeigniors, il eft
reafon q̃ ils aueront
lefcuage De lour te=
nants.€tles Seig⸗
niors € tiel cafe pur-
tont Diftreitt pur lef-
cuage iffint affeffe,
ou tis en afcung ca-
fes purront aũ bte le
roy, Direct ag Uicdts
be mies Counties,
fc,de leuter tiel efcu-
age pur eux, ficome
apptert p le Regifter.
Mes dtiels tenants
queur teignont per
efcuage de Roy, qut
ne fucront ouc le cop
en Œfcoce, le Bop
mefme aucra lefcu-
age.


Setl.100.101.


Ndbecaufe fuch
tenements came
firft from the Lords,
itis reafon that they
fhould haue the Efcu-
age of their tenants.
And the Lords in
fuch cafe may di-
ftreine for the efcuage
foaffefled, or they in
fome cafes may haue
the kings Writts di-
rectedto the Sheriffs
ofthe fame Counties,
&c.to leuie fuch ef-
cuage forthem, as it
appeareth by the Re-
gifter.But of fuch te-
nants as hold of the
King by  efcuage
which were not with
the King in Scotland,
the King himfelfe fhall
haue the efcuage..


giftralia, & fzepe variantur fecundum varietatem cafüum fa&orum & querelarum, ag £03 ers
ample actions bponthe cafe which varie accozding tothe bartetic of euery mang cafe and
thelike, and thefe being not of courfe , the mafters being lcarneD men did make : Item bre-
uium originalium alia funtrealia, alia perfonalia, alia mixta. Item breuium originalium, alia
funt patentia fiue aperta, & aliaclaufa. Œertatne it is that tbe oꝛiginall wzite arc fo arttfictz
allp and brícfelp comptied, astherc ig nothing redundant o2 Wanting fn them, of which an ho⸗
nourable Secretary of fate once fato, that (t wag not poſſible to comprehend fo much matter,
fo perfpicuoufly in fewer words : of all thefe Kinde of Wꝛits pon ſhall reade plentifullp tn the
Kegiſter whereof Littleton maketh mention in this place, and alſo (tt Fitz N,B.
© Sicome appiert per le Register. Regifter,tg the name of a moſt an⸗
cient boke and of great authority in Law, containing all the oꝛiginall to2zttts of the Common
3L a9 ,of Which bok fee moze tn the 39rcface to the ninth part of my Reports,¢€ contatneth alfo
Breuia iudicialia qua fepius variantur fecundü varietaté placirorü proponentis & refpondentis.
Ailo (tappearetl) by the Regifter that the 3s (nq fall bane efcnage of his tenants Which hold
of himag of a 99 anno? Which ke hath in ward, o2 bp reafonof a vacation of a Biſhopꝛicke.
Bnd fo (bali a common perfon,tf be hath an eftate for life o2 £02 peares of a © eigntony. E


ection


Lib.2.


CT en tiel
. Scale auandit,lou
le Koy face bn voy⸗
age ropall en Eſcote.
& tefcuage eft affeffe
per arliament, file
für Diftreine fon te-
nant que tient de luy
per feruice  Denttet
fee De chinaler put
letcuage iſſint atfeffe,
ac, a lctenat plede,t
boít auerrer que il
fuit ouc Ic Bop en E⸗
fcoce ac. per rl.iours,
le Seignior voit
auerrer le contratie,
fleft Dit, que tl ſerra
trie per le certificat
Del Marſhal del hott
le Bop en efcript
fouth 5 feale q fet-
ra mis ales Juſti⸗
ces, —


Of Efcuage.


Setion 102.


Tem, in fuch cafe

aforefaid,where the
King maketh a voyage
royall into Scotland,
and the Efcuage is af-
feffed by Parliament, if
the Lord diftraine his
tenant that holdeth of
him by feruice of a
whole Knights fee,
for the Efcuage fo af-
feffed,&c. and the te-
nant pleadeth and will
auer that he was with
the King in Scotland,
&c.by 40. daies, and
the Lord will auerre
the contrary, it is faid
that it fhall bee tried
by the certificat of
the Marfhall of the
kings hoft in writing
vnder his feale, which
fhall be fent tothe Iu-
ftices.


Sedt.102;


€ ET veet averre que
il fuit ove le voy


en Efcoce per 4.0. tours,
orc. (a)ileft dit que il
férra trie per le certificat


del Mar(hall. Chis is
a trill appointed by the
La, Ne curia regis defi-
ceret in Iufticia exhibenda,
(b) herewith agræth the Re-
gifter, Where the Marlhall (s
ig called Conftabularius ex-
ercitus noftri.


©, Marfhall de hofte
le roy. Marefchallus


exercitus,in Saxon Mari'chalk.
..equitum magifter. This
(ord Marfhall ts efther Dez
tined of Mars 02 of Marc an
horfe and fchalc which fignis
ficti) in the Sarou tongue,
a after oz Gouernour.
(€ In tbe Lawes before the
Œonqueft ít ig faib, Marcf-
challi exercitus, feu duétores
exercitus Heretoches per An-
glos vocabantur, illi ordina-
bant acies denfiflimas in præ-
lijs & alasconftituebant prout
decuit, & prout ei melius vie
fum fuerit ad honorem coro-
nz & ad vtilitatem. regni.


(d) Bud here tt (e to be obfer=


uen, that bie Certificate tn this cafetg atriallin Law, JF read ot fige kindes of Certificates
allowed fo? trialis bp the Common Law; the Firſt Mbhercof Litrleton here ſpeaketh of,in time
of Sarre out of the Reale, 2, In time of peace out of the Reale: (c) As if it be alledged
ín auoydance of an Outlawrie, that the defendant Was in prifon at Burdeaux tn the ſeruice of
the Maior of Burdeaux, ít (ball bez tried bp the Certificate of tbe Major of Burdcaux, 3,4192
matters Within the Kealme, (f ) the Cultome of London ſhall be certified by the Watoz € Ale
dermen by the mouth ef the 18 ccozbtr. 4.05 y certificate of the Hherife bpon a to2ít to him direced
(g Jin cafe of pꝛiuiledge if one be a Citisen osa Foꝛreiner 5. Criall of Records by certificate of
the Judacs in whoſe cuſtody thep are bp Law. Dil thele be tn.tempozall caufes. 6. 31m cauſes
Ecciefiatticall, ag lopaitic of marriage, generall baftardie, excommengement, profellion, Œ hele

and the like are reguiarlp tobetricd bp the Certificate of the ozdinarte, 3
And there be diuers other trialis allowed bp tbe Common Law, ten by a Jury of 12, mci
Sobich pou map reade at larac ín the ninthbok eof my Reports, fo.30.31.&c. in the cafe of the
Abbot of Strata Marcella, Whichare as platnelp fet downe there, ag they canbe bere : and in
this cafe, (£ thetriali (boulo not be bp Certificate, (t hould want triall Which ſhould be incon=
uenient ; Dnilp inthis place J will adde fomething of a Fozretnc tríall which 31 Ande not tn anp
ofthe Treatifestatelp publifhed agatnft finale combats, becaufc tt map deterre men from that
bngodlp and vnlawtull kinde of reuenge, Wkereapon many murders haus enſued, and pzeucnt

ali hope of impunitie foꝛ Default of triall in that cafe

FE a fubíct of the King be killed by another of bis ſubiects eut of England in any fozreine
Countrey, the Wife oz he that ts Deíreot the dead may haue an appeale foꝛ this murder o? homi⸗
eide bekore the Conftabie and the Marth all, Sbofefentence is bponteftimony of witneſſes oz
combate, Bud accopdingly Where a fubiect of the Ling T Aaine in Scotland bp —
2 [2


74


(a) 2.€.4.11. 4.F.4,10,
21.£.4. 10. F.'N.2.8;

11. H.7.5. L b.9.fo.;a
Cafe de Strat. Mare:


(b) 7eerf.88. F.N.B.S4.
2.E. 4.1.4. E. 4.10.
9. H.4.5. 11.H.7. s.
21,H.6.50. 33.H; 6, 1,45.


(€) Lamb.fo.136;


(d) 2.E.4. 1.5.4 F. 4. 10.
23.£.4.47. FAN. 0:85.


(e) 4-£.4.10.


(E) 5:£.4.30. a1; E.4.i6.
(g) 19. H:6.10.


Stat.de 1. H4 cap.14.

13. H.4.fe. 5.

Vid. Rer. arliam, 8. H. 6.
mi. 38.Stanf. pl. Cor.fo.6 5


Lib.2.


(*) Anne s3.€liz.


(a) Glowil.lib.7.cap. Ya.
(b) Regift.2. 30. E. 7:34.


(c) OG lanuil.l5b,7 cap. 14.


(d) Glewil,lib.7 cap.9. bre.
Fleta.üb. y.cap. 8.

"BraBl. lb. a. fol. 8 5.
iritton.fol.162, & fel.28.a
$5. Ockans indiuer (it lect.
aire eap. x. S. 5.

Sudey Dien.


(6) TiraBben. lib. 2. fel. 56,37.
Britton. fol. 364,165.

F teta lib.3.eap.1 4.

15.E 2.amowrte 224.
26.4/f.6 5. 31.^ff 30.
3o. €. 4.23. y. E. 3.67.

7 H.4.19.


Cap4-


x
*


Of Knights Seruice.


Sed.103:


Sfc of the Dead had her appeale tberefoe befoge the Confable and the
— (* ) d; amer iBatgne of Queene Elizabeth fn the cafe of Spir


Francis Drake Soho ftroke off theh
and beire might baue an Appeale, ðc


ideo dormiuit appellum.


f ab tally Sounded in France,
er pe gs Ratate , £02 tt is not


Appeale doth ite vpon thefatd


proceeding there (as hath been


moztall Sound ag ginen out of the Beaime,


cadof Dowtie,in partibus tranfmarinis, that hig bzother
d Regina noluit conftituere Conftabularium Angliæ,&c.8c


anb dieth thereof in England, ít (g fato thatan
punifhable bp the Common Law , andthe
c fat) is bpon witneiles op combate, and not by Jurie, andthe


Cuar. 4. Seé. 103.


Ny Eruice de
SA : x4 Chiualer.
Des» AI Nota.ftap-
CSSS pearcth bp
(a) the Regifter, that ít is
(b)fafe vnum fœdum mili-
tis and not foedum vnius mili-
tis, ag ít was fato (c) bp
foine of old, and fo duo foeda
militis, &c. and fometime
thefe fess are called foeda mi-
litaria. Dur Authour bautng
befoze treated of ibomage,
Fealtie and Eſcuage, now
commeth, to right Seruice
tt felfe, Jin Domefday , it is
thugs recozdeB Epifcopus Ba-
jecenfisille quitenet de Mo-
dardoreddit ci 50.s, & ferniti-
um vnius militis.

€ Chinaler .i.eques,
Knight ts a Saxon $0020, and
by them Swattter, Cnite, Chi-
valer taketh big name from
the horꝛſe, becanfe thep al⸗
Swapes ferned in Swarres on
boifcbacke, Che Latines cal-
led them Equites, the Spani-
ards,Caualleroes, the French-
men,Chiualiers, the Italians
Cauallieri, and the Germanes
Reiters, all from the bozfe, Ft
tgs neceflarp to bee feone bp
What names this ferutce of a
knight ts called, Je is cal-
ied (c) Seruitium fornifecum
quia pertinet ad Dominum
Regem & non ad capitalem
Dominum nifi cum in propria
perfona profectus fuerit in fer-
uitio, & nifi cum pro feruitio
fuo, fatisfecerit Domino Re-
gi, &c. ideo fornifecum dici
poteft, quia fit & capitur foris
fiue extra feruitium quod fit


Knights Seruice,


efcuage ,
eft à tener per fecuice
de chiualer, a trait a
luy garde, matiage,#
veliefe, Cav quant tí-
eltenant moruſt, à
fon beire male eft
Deins lage De 21,
ang , le feignioz ata
la terve tenus de luy
tanque al age Del
beíte De 2 1, ang, le
quel ctt appell pleine
age, put ceo que tíel
home per entende-
ment Dellep neft pas
able De faire tiel fer=
uice De chittaler, De=
uant lage de 2 :.ang:
Ct auxy ſi tiel hetre
ne ſoit marie al téps
De most De tiel aun⸗
cefter,Donque le ſeig⸗
nioz auera le garde
& le mariage De lup,
Mes t tiel tenant
deufe, fon heive fc-
malc efteant Dage De
14,888, ou De plug,
Donque le Seignioz


Enure byho-
mage, feal-
tie and ef-

^ Cuage isto
hold by Knights Ser-
uice, and it draweth to
ic Ward, Mariage, and
reliefe. For whenfuch
tenant dieth , and his
heire male bee within
the age of 21. yeares,
the Lord fhall hauethe
land holden of him
vntill the age of the
heire of 21. yeares,
the which is called full
age, becaufe fuch heire
by intendement of the
Law is notable to doe
fuch Knights Seruice
beforc his age of a1.
yeares. And alfo if
fuch heire be not mar-
riedatthetime of the
death of his Anceftor,
then the Lord fhall
haue the Wardfhip &
mariage of him, but i£
fuch Tenant dieth, his
heire female being of
the age of 14. yeares,
or more,thentheLord
fhall not haue the

nas


M


\


Lib 424
nauera nip le garde
Del terve ne De corps
put ceo que feme de
tiel age poit auct ba-
ron able De faire ſer⸗
uice De cbíüler, Wes
fi tiel boire female
foit Deins lageDe 14,
ang, ænient marie al
temps Ddelamogzt fon
auncefter, Donque le
Seiqnioz auera le
garde De la terre te=
nus de lup, tanque
al age De tiel beíre
femaie De 16. ang,
pur ceo que il eft Done
per le Sptatute de
eff, 1. cap. 22.
Que per >. ans pz0-
cheine enfuant leg
Dits 14, ans, le frig-
nioz poit tender con-
uenable mariage (43
Difparagement a tiel
heire female, Ct (iic
Seignioꝛ deins lcg
bits 2. ans ne lup
tend ticl mariage, fc,
Donque el al fine Des
Dits 2. ang, poit en-
ter toutte fon Seig-
nio?, Wes Ktiel bte
female fop marie
Deins lageDer4.ang
en la bie fó ancefter,
& fon auncefter Deup
el eſte ant deins lage
de 14, ans, le Seig⸗
nioznaucra forſq; là
garde De là terre, jeſ⸗
ques à fine De 14,
ans, dage Dc tiel
bette female, & Dongs


Of Knights Seruice.


Wardfhip of the land,
nor of thebodie , be-
caufe that a woman of
fuch age may haue à
husband able to doe
Knights Seruice , but
if fuch heire female
bee within the age of
14. yeares, and vnma-
ried at the time of the
death of her anceftors,
the Lord fhal hauethe
Wardfhip of the Land
holden of him vntill
the age of fuch heire
female of 16. yeares.
For it is giuen by the
Statute of W. 1. cap.

22.that by the {pace
of two yeares next en-
fuing the faid 14.
yeares, the Lord may
téder conuenable ma-
riage without difpa-
ragement to fuch heire
female. And if the
Lord within the faid
two yeares do not ten-
der fuch mariage, &c.
then fheeat the end of
the faid two yeresmay
enter, and put out her
Lord;but iffüch heire
female bee maried
within the age of 14.
yeres inthe life of her
Ancefter,& her Ance-
fter dieth, fhee beeing
withintheage of 14.
yeares , the Lord fhall
haue only the Ward-
fhip of the Land vntill
the end of the 14.
yeares of age of fuch


€ 3


Domino capitali. Bnd (t ig
called Scutagium;ag (t appeas
reth (£) bp Littleronand mas
np authozities before recited,
Hometime droit deefpee. 217
fo it is called (2) Regale fer-
uitium, quia fpecialiter perti-
net ad Dominum Regem. Vt
fi dicatur in Carta , faciendo
inde fornifecum feruitium, vel
Regale feruitium,vel feruitium
Domini Regis quod idem cft,
&c. Bnd another fatth. Er
funt quzdam feruitia fornife-
ca quz dici poterunt Regalia
quz ad fcutum præftantur, &
inde habemus Scutagium , &
ratione fcuti pro foedo milita-
rireputatur, &c. 0 as tn
tefped of htm that doth ft, tt i
called feruitium militis, bat fti
refpect of bim £02 € to whom
ttig bone, viz. tothe ing, €
foz the iReaime tt te calisd
feruitium Regale,92 feruitium
Domini Regis, &c. Ch) Jn
ancient time tbep which held
bp Zntghts Seruice were
Called Milites, qui per loricas,
&c. defendunt & deferuiunt,
&c. and fometime this feruíce
ts called feruitium hauberzi-


Sec.ioʒ.


75


(9 Bra&. vbi fupra.
leta lib. 3 .cap.14.
g) Britton. fal. 187i
atin. vbi fupra.


(h) Carta Hen. prims.
Afar. Paris.
AM irrer.cap.2-§.17>


cum. And in anctent time -


fuchas held by Knights ferz
Bice fog the defence of the
Beaime had many Peiuiled⸗
ges granteoto them bp aw :
ag foz example thep might
bane a Wꝛit Deeflend’ quiet
de tallagio, the effet Solyercof
5vag(i)Si Th.filius Ranulphi
terram fuam teneat per ferui-
tium militare, ficut Domino
Regi monftrauit, tunc nullum
abeodem Thoma capiant tal^
lagium rec pro eo dando ip-
fum diftringant , vel homines
fuos qui per confimile ferui-
tium teneant. Bnd this a
greth with the anctent Char⸗
ter of King Henric the Sri,
befoze mentioned, Which he
made on the dap of bis Caz
tenation fog the reſtitution of
the Ancient Lawes, (k) Mi-
litibus qui p loricasterras fuas
defendunt & deferuiunt terras
Dominicarum carucar fua-
rum quietas ab omnibus gil-
dis, & omni opere &c. con-
cedo.) and the teafon thereof
ig there pælDeb, Sicut tam
magno grayamine alleuati

fins


(i) Rer.shuf 19. 1.3. 8.22^


(k) Corta Fi.2.én ldra rm.
Lol, 45, im bm )mnis.


TU Sa ERREUR


Tib.z


(1) Ghamuil.lib.7.cap.9.10.
Fleta lis. i· cap. & 9. & lib.
3.cap. 16.17. de.
Bralton.lir.2 cap.16.
«Mirror eap. 5. 8. 2.

Britton. 162-


(m) Fertejetie cap.44-


Qu) Exam’, fol. 135,4.


Cop-4-


fint, ita equis & armisfe bene
inftruant vt apti & parati fint
ad feruitium ricum, & defen-
fionem Rcgni mei. But thefe
Pꝛiuiledges anb Quitt an⸗
ces aredifcontinwed, and the
charge remapnctb.

jt is called commonip in
(1) ont Bobkes feruitium mi-
litare, &c. 02 (eruitiam militis.
Andthis fcruíce Was created
and proutded foi the defence
of thedBeaime, to performe
Sobícb ferutce the hetres are
notaccounted in Law abletfil
the age of one and twentie
peatcg, Therefoꝛe During
their minozitie, the Loꝛd fball
haue the cuftodic of them, not
£o; benefit onlp , but that the
Lord míabt fe, that they bx
inthetr poung peates taught
the deeds of Chinalric, and o⸗
ther bertuoug and Sooitbp
Sciences.

(m_)Si hareditasteneatur per
feruitium militare, tunc per le-
ges infans ipfe, & hærcditas
cius, &c. per Dominum foedi
illius cuftodientur, &c. quis,
putassinfantem talem inarti-
bus bellicis quos facere, ratio-
ne tenure fue, ipfe aftringitur
Domino fœdi fui, melius in-
{truere poterit, aut velit, quam
Dominusille , cuiab co ferui-
tium tale debetur, & qui ma-
ioris potenti: & honoris æ-
ftimatur, quam funtalij amici
propinqui tenentis fui ? Ipfe
namque vt fibi ab eodem te-
nente melius feruiatur dili-
gentem Curam adhibebit , &
melius in hijs cum erudire ex-
aus effe cenfetur quam reli-
quiamici iuuenis, &c. & res
utra non minimum erit Reg-
noaccommodum, vt incola e-
jus in armis fint experti , nam
audacter quilibet facit , quod
fe fcire ipfe nondiffidit.

(n) Amonglſt tbc Lawes
of Saint Edward tbe Con⸗
feffoi, tt ig thug pzouided.
Debent enim vniuerfi liberi
homines, &c. fecandum fœ-
dum fuum , & fecundum te-
nementa fua arma habere, &
illa femper prompta conferua-


Of Knights Seruice.


fon baron & lup po-
ient enter ẽ laterre a
oufte le feignioz, cat
ceo eft hors Dc cas De
le Dit eftatute entant
que le Seignioz ne
poit tender mariage
à lup que eft marie,
ac, Cat Deuant Ie Dit
eftatute m2eftm. 1,
tiel (fuc female que

fuit Deins age De 14.

ang, al tẽps De mozt
fon auncefter, a puis
que el audit accom-
plifb lage De 14 ans,
fans afcun tender
De mariage per ie
SHeignioz a lup, tiel
heire female Donque
puiffoit enter en 1e
terre, a oufte le ſeig⸗
nioz ficome appiert
per te reherſall a pa-
rolg dele Dit (tatute,
iffint que le Dit Sta-
tute fuit fait en tiel
cas,tout pur laduan-
tage De Seigniors
come il femble, Wes
vncore € touts foits
eft entendue per ies
parole De im le Sta-
tute quele Seignioꝛ
nauera les Deux ans
apes les, 14. ang,
come eft auantbít,
mes lou ticl eite fe-
male foit Deins lage
De 14. ans, nient ma-

rie al temps De mort

Sauncefter,


read tuitionem Regni, & fer-


Sedl.163.-


heirefemale,andthen -
her husband and fhee
may enter: into the
Land,& ouftthe Lord,
For this is out of the
cafe of the faid ftatute
infomuch as the Lord
cannottender mariage
to her which is maried
&c. For before the
faid ftatute of W. 1.
fuchiffuefemalewhich
was within the age of
I4. yeares at the time
ofthe death of heran-
ceftor, & after fhe had
accomplifhed the age
of 14. yeares, without
any tender of mariage
by the Lord vnto her,
fuch heire Female
might haue entred in-
to the land,and oufted
the Lord as appeareth
by the rehearfall and
words of the faid fta-
tute, fo as the faid fta-
tute was made (as it
feemeth) in fuch cafe
altogether forthead-
uantage of Lords. But
yet this is alwayes in-
tended by the words
of the fame Statute,
that the Lord fhall not
haue thefe two yeares
after the 14. yeares as
is aforefaid,but where
fuch heire female is
withinthe age of 14.
yeares, and vnmarried
at the time of the
death of heranceftor.


uitium Dominorum fuorum iuxta preceptum Domini Regis explendum & peragendum, And
William the Conquerour confirmed that Law (n theſe words. Statuimus & firmiter præcipi-


mus;vtomncs Comites, & Barones, & Milites,& feruientes, & vniuer(i liberi homines


totius
Regni


Lib.2. Of Efcuage. Seé.103.


regni noftri predi&ti habeant & teneant fe femper in armis & inequis vt decet, & oportet, &
quod fint femper prompti & parati ad fervitium fuum integrum nobis explendum & peragen-
dum cum femper opus adfucrit fecundum quod nobis debent de feodis & tenementis fais de jure
facer &c, Ont of tbefettvo Lawes the Hudions and learned reader Sotil gather Divers nota⸗
bisthings. And therefore ifafterthe 3,070 hath the wardſhip of the bobp and tbe land, the
Aozd doth rcleafe to the infant bis right in the Steaniorie, opthe Seignioꝛie diſcendeth to the
énfant, be (bai be ont of ward both forthe bobp and the land, fo? be Swag in Hardin refped he
Swag not able to boc thofe fcruices Which be onght to Doe to big Lord, Which now are extinct,
and Ceffante caufa, ceffat caufatum ? Bnd our Authos fatth, that the tenure bp Knights fers
nice dꝛaweth onto (t tard; Warriage,ec. foag there muſt be a tenure continuing. Bs (€ the
Œonufozin a ftatute Merchant bein execution, and bis land alfo,andthe Conuſee releafe to
bím all debts, this fhall diſcharge the erecutton, foz the debt was the canfe of the Œrecution,
andof the continuance of tt tll tbc debt befatiffeb, therefore che difcharge of the Debt Which ts
the canfe,difchargeth the execution which ts the effec, à


@, Ertrait luy gard, marriage, & relife. So as regularly there
be Sire incidents to Rnights feruice, (viz, ) two of honourandf{ubmillion, ag Honiage and
Fealtie. And foure of proffit,viz. Efcuage, Swbereof he hath treated befoge, Ward ( · i. Wardſhip
of the land ) Marriage, and Rclicfe ; ofall Which eur Authoz hath ſpoken. Wut chere be other
incidents to Knights feruíce befides thefe, (a) ag Aide pur faire fits chivalier, & aide pur file
marier,&c. tobich at the Common Law were bricertaíne, and Were called rationabilia auxi-
Jia, becaufe tf thep Were excefltue and bnreafonable {n the tudgement of the Sourt Shere thep
Sere quettioncd, thep ought not tobe patde: Wut now afwell in the Kings cafe, ag tn tbe
cafe of he fubicc, thep arebp Acts of Parliament reduced to certaintie Swhich are woꝛthy
pour reading,


€ Gard, 02 Ward, in Latyne Cuftodia, and hereof the Loꝛd is
called Gardian, Cuſto⸗, and the miner fg called a toardoz one in tard. (b) And albeit(as out
Buthor faith ) Knight fernicedzaweth With tt ward, ec, pet bp cuftome the hetre of him that
holdeth in Socage map bein ward,


@ Marriage. Maritagium, betokeneth not onlpthe copulation of
manand wife in marriage, butalfo ( ag in thts place bete ) the intereft of the dbarotan tn bes
ftoWing ofa Ward in marriage, which the Law gauc to the 307b not for bis bencfitonip, but
that he hhould match him vertuoullp, and ina god famtlp Without difparagement ag (ball be
fato hereafter, Which is the pzincipall foundation of big cftate,


¶ (c) Reliefe. Relevium,tg Derived from the XLatpne woꝛd Rele-
vare ; foz fo (d ) ancient Authoꝛs fap and gine this reafon, Quia hæreditas que jacens fuit per
antecefloris deceffum ,relevaturin manushæredum, & propter faétam relevationem facienda
erit ab herede quzdam preftatio que dicitur relevium. And in Domefday it te called releva-
mentum and relevatio.

he reliefe of a Whole knights fee to fiuc pound, amb fo according to that rate, And this
reliefe was ag foine hold certaine by the Common La,” but the reltcfe of Earles and Ibarong
were incertaine, and therefore Were called relevia rationabilia but the ffatntc ef Magna carta,
cap.2. limits them it certaine; and mentioneth alfo a dantgbte fe, Wut | reave in the boke
of Domefday, Quod Tainus vcl miles regis dominicus moriens pro relevamento dimittebat regi
omniaarma fua & equum vnum cumfella & alium fine cella, quod fi effent ei canes vel accip:-
tres praftabantur regi, vt fi vellet, acciperet.

S ince Littleton wꝛote (c )thereis a geod Law made againk fgaubulent Feoffinents, ditta,
Grants, ec. contrived of fraude to hinder os Defraube Lords, ac. of their Weliefes and Derrt-
ots amongft other things foꝛ the expoſition of Which (Eatute reade the Authorities quoted in
the margent, Bndit ts to be obferued that the words of the ſatd Act of 15.Eliz. ave, (bec it
therefore declared, ordeyned, and ena&ed ) and therefore lite cafes and in femblable mifchiefe
hall bee taken within the remedp of thie Aa by reafon of thts $0020 (declared) hereby it ap=
peareth bat the Law was befoze the making of this ftatutc,


€ Sonhetremale. (£) Forreguiarly bp tbe Common Lato the
beire fall not be in ward vnleſſe he clapme ag betre by difcent. The ftatuteof Merton, Dc hijs
qui primogenitos feoffare folent; (s) Dd helpe frcoffmente by collufion in certaine cafes,
Bnd Britton fatth that Robert de Walrand a fage of the Law did adutfe the great Lords of the
AR calme to make the fato Latute, Which When tt Was paft the famo Bea coke his firft effec in
the heire of Walrands owne hetre, Lobereof Britton maketh a fpecíall remembrance, Wut now
Ch) by the ftatutes of 32.and 34.H.8. of wills, be which holdeth lands by knights fernice
map bp Ae executed in his lifetime, o2 bp hig Taft will in Writing diſpoſe two parts ag by tye
(atd Fas appeareth, Behe diſpoſe ally ad executed, then tt (gall Band gad agaínft the m
9


76


See W.1, 62.48, the f. cond
Part o; the Infistutes.


20.4ff v.7.


(a) Grand Cuft.de Nerm,
c4.3§5.Regift.orty.fe.87,
Glarutl ltb.9. c4.8.35.
Fleta lib.a.cap. 40. ¢r tib.3,
£4. V4. Mirror ca,1.§.3.
Brstton fo.55.¢7 90. F.N.B,
82.6.V.1.ca. 35.3 5,E, 3.
€4.11.11,H.4.34. 5E. 5.11,
Vid. — e


(b) 8.H.3. Prefcript. 38.
P féh. 23. E. 1. Cotamrege
Rer. 43. Nota pro Hsbernia
Prior del St. Trinity de
"Dublin: cafe,


(e) Vid. Sect. 112.

(d) Brafor lib. 2.ca. 30.
fo.84.Fleta lib.x. ca. 10.
& bb.3.c4.16.17.
Britt.ca. 69.70.

Glanu l.15.9.ca. 4.

& lib.7.ca.9.

Ockam dedifferentsis

rel vieum.

(*) Ockam. vb: fupra.
Ballon lib. 2. fo.8 5.


(e) 13.Elís.ca. s.

17.E.3. Relief: 3 *

5. €.3 ib. Yi lib. 3 fo. 80. &c.
Twyne: cafe.
Lib.5.fo.60.Gooches cafe.
Lib. 6. fo. 18. Pakemans cafe.
lib.to.fo.56 b.

See alfo the flatutes of 3. Hl. 7.
64.4. 50. E. 3.04.6.

Vid. Mich. 12. dr 1 3.Elit.
Dier 295.

(f) Brseton.168.
Fleta.lib.x .ea.9.

(g) Merton ca.6.
Brat. fa. 85. Britt.fo 66.
9. H.4.6. 4. H.7. £4.17.
27.H.8.7.89.
Partridges cafe pl.etrn.8 3.
(ho 32. H.8. va. 1,

34. H.8.ea. $.


Lib.


Gi) Li.s. fo.a5.26.in Butlers
cafe. Li.6.fo.75.in Sir George
Curfons cafe. L1.8 .fo.163-
Mizhts cafe. Eod.lib.fe 171.
im Vigil Parkers cafe.

(k) Mir.ca.1.§. 5-


(k) 39. E.5.36.tit.Gard 92.
33-E. 3.gard 162.11.H.7.11
19. E. 3.Gard 114. 18.aff.18.
40. [f. 36.20.El. 362.
4.H:6.16.4.F.N.B.143.

6. H.4,4.a.

(127. H. 4.12.11. H.7.12.
22.€,4.7.6.40.€.3.43.
4:44.136.15.E. 410,11.


33-E.3.Gard 162.


Et Hey 12


13.1. Dyer 298.


(l)12, H.4.16. per Thiruing.


(m)4r.E.3.225,
(n)15.E.411.


(0)14.H.8.5. 4.H.7.cap.
(p) 41- £.3. a6. rit. Anow-
1/8264. 20. H.6.9 48.€.3.8.b
10, E,3 26. 31. E. 3. tit. Gard.
Y16. 18 E.5.7.14.H. 4.38.
1-H. 5. Grant 43.5. E. 4.3.
7-E.4,27-1 5€ 41312 €:2
Anew. 181.


Cap. 4. Of Knights Seruice. Sed. 103:


fo ag nothing fhail diſcend tnto the beire, But in cafe of a Denife by bis laft Wii, a third part
thall difcend to the betre, though ati be deutſed aSoap : &if tbc Œenantieaue a third part to difs
cenb, then the deuile (g good forthe refidue, (1) But thelethings require fo many Diuerütieg
grounded bpon evident reafons, and arefo plaincip crpze(feo tn my Commentarics , as thep
(being bxric long ) Dali not need tobe repeated here. (k) Andthat the tenurcby Knights fere
- pts toit ward, Marriage, anb AA clícte, tg of great antiquitic,foz fo it was in thetime
of King Alfred.


- «T Quant tieltenant mort. ere Littleton fpcaketh not of a dying
fcifco by the Tenant, for in many cafcg tbe hetre fhalibein ward, albeit the Genant died not
fetfed, ec, noz inthe homage of the Lord, Bs ifthe Cenant maketh a fcoffement in fe vpon
condition, and the fcoffoz dieth,atter bis death the condition (s broken, the hetre within age en-
treth fo? the condition bzoken, be ſhall be in ward, and pet the feoffoz bab no cftate o2 right in
theland at tbe time of hig death, but onclp a condition, and Which Was broken after his dex
ceafe.(k) Wut becanfe the condition reftozeth the tenant to theland in nature of a Difcent, (fox be
[bail be in bp difcent ) bp the famercafon fljall ít reſtore the Lozdto the wardſhip feeing now
(ag Littleton fatth ) the hetre of his G enant ts Within age, and not able to Doc htm ſeruice and
tio Default in the 3070 to barre him of his Wardihip.

(1) Bnd fo 3| voc take tt, that ifthe heire within age recouer fn a Dum non fuit compos
mentis, 92 Formedon en difcender, oꝛ tcinatuber ag beire, 92 ſuch like,the bere (ball be in tard,
fo? thefe be ftronger cafes than the former, Éozbere avight doth difcend to tbe Demaundant,
Which right being bycourfe of Law reftored to the polfefffon of the betre Within age, by cons
fequence the Lozd is to haue the wardthip of him, but inthe cafe of thecondition, no right at
all difcended to the heire, as hath beene ſaid.

Bud fo if tenant in taple, the remainder in fee, maketh a feoffement in fee, and dieth leaving
the iſſue in taile within age, tf the fcoffec infcoffethe {lue in tatle,wherebyp hee tg remitted, hee
fhail be in Swardto the 3.020 : For as he (6 reſtoꝛed to tbe title of the land as beire.fo is the Row
reftozed to his title of upardthip ag Lomofthe fre. And as tothis purpole berein 3 take no
difference bet weene a right of action anda right of entrte Difcending, when by action the right
of theland ts lawlullyx recoucred by the heire Within age, to his Tenant , and albeit hee ayer
not in bis homage, pet there ag a right of homage. and no default 02 laches Sag inthe 30:0,
0? act done by bim to pretudice himfeife thereof,

Wut tf one leutea fine erecutoste (as fur grant & render) toa man anb bis heires, and be to
Sohom the land te granted ano rendred befoze ecccution dieth, his heire being Within age en-
treth, he ſhall not be in Sard, for bis Anceltoz Was neuer tenant to the Loꝛd: andfo there is a
manifelt dincrfitic betweene this and the other cafes. Et fic de ceteris.

But (£tbe Cenant maketh a fcoffement in fe of lands holden bp Knights feruice, tothe vſs
ofthe feoffe: and bis hetres, bntill the time that the fcoffoz pay to the (coffee 02 hig beires a hun⸗
Daed pounds, fo» the which a time and place tg ltmitted ; the feofkee victh, his bete within age,
the 1020 thal bauc the wardſhip of the bobte of the heire, and of the lands ef the fcoffæ,conditio-
nally, foz becannot hane a moze abfolute intereft in the wardſhip, than the heire hath in the tex
hancte: and therefoze if the feoffor pay the mony at the day and place,and entreth into theiand,
ín this cafe both the wardfhip of the bodte and lands is deueſted, becaufe the 3030 har no abſo⸗
lute ínterc(E in netther of them, but doth depend opon the performance o2 not performance of th
condition. x

(3) So tf the Conuſoꝛ of a fine executozie of iands holden bp Knights lerutce, diech his
betre Mithin age,the 3.020 thal haue the Wardfhip of the bodte and land : but {the Conule ene
treth, the hetre is diſherited, and the Lozd hath loft the whole benefit of bis wardſhip

Fe the Difleife dieth, his heire being Within age, ( m) tbe 307b Mall hanethe wardſhip of
the betre of the bodie of tbe Diſſeiſee. (n) Wut put the cafe that in that cafe the Dificifoz dieth
ſeiſed, and bis hetre Within age, the 3,020 may fcífc the wardſhip of his heirealfo, and of the
land alfo: butthe doubt is, Whither the heire of the Dtiletfee Hall after the difcent to che heire
of the Diffetfoz, continue in Ward, Foz that after the difcent the etre of the Difcifoz (& become
vd lawful tenant, eno the heire of the Diffetfæ is not tenant onto him bntél he hath recouered

eland,

It Cefty que vſe befoꝛe the Statute of 27.H.8. had died, his beíre Within age , the Lorn
Co) thonid hane the wardſhip of bis beire : and {£ the feoffee had dted, his heire Within age, the
Lod (bouto hauehadthe wardlhip of bis betre alfo, and fo a double wardſhip for one anb the
fame land, the one bp the Statute of 4.H.7. the ether bp the Connon law,

Cp) Genant by Knights ſeruice maketh a gift in taile, tbe remainver in fee, Tenant in tade
mabeth a £coffement in kee, and dieth, big hetre within age, the 3029 ſhall bane tbe wardſhip of
bím: and (£ the Scoffee dicth, big heire Within age, the Lozo (bal bausthe Wardhhip aifo of his
betre, and of the land, 3t


Lib.2. Of Knights Seruice. Seét.103.


cnant bp Knights feruice maketha gift (n tatle, anb tbe Donc maketh a fcoffement tr
"Od bonc dieth his heire Within age, tbc Donoz fball haue the wardſhip of bim.becaufe
bete yia tenant in right. (a) «but iftbe Foote dieth, his hive Within age, the Donoz (hall
hot aue the Wardlhip of his heire, butthe Lord paramount; becaufe be ig tenaunt in fait to
Him, neither (ball the donoz atioto dpon tbe Feoffee oz his hevze, forthe leruttes due onto him,
Decaufcbe mull in his auowzte be the reversion in fee to beout of bi by the fcoffement , anu
confequentiy the feruices incident to the reuerſion are alfo out of bim, but be fhall ausw vpon
the Done anb bis iſſues: and thus are all the bokes that ſeenieto beat varfanco either anfwe=
red 02 reconciled.


(a) La terre tenus delay, rc. Littleton bete ſpeaketh of Lands hol⸗
Denof a Subic : for (fa man bold land of the king bp Knights feruice in Capite, and other
Jands of other 10208, and dicth bis heire within age, the Ring (ball haus the wardlhip of ail

the iands by big Prerogatiue: and this Swag duc to the king by the Common La, the fees of
Certaine excepted, ad in the Statute of Prærogatiua Regis cap.i. appeareth. |

Aut i£ a man boldeth lands ofthe Ling bp Knights feruice, ag of an Wonsur o? Mannoz,
€c, (b) in tbat cafe the ing ſhall onclp haue the lands Holden of him, and not of anp cther.
Pet bp reafon of tenures of the King by Knights feruice, of certaine honours, (Sobile thep
Sere in the Rings hands) the King (ag fome baucfato) had (ag it Were by prefcription) his
Pꝛerogatiue, viz. Raleigh hage net bonony and beverel, and fo of lands holden by Knights ſer⸗
ice of the Duchie of Lancaſter in thecountie Palatine. — — ‘ :

(c)toben an beire hath bin in ward to the Ling by realon of a tenure in Capite,after his full
agebe mutt fuc lingerie, which ts halfe a peares profit of bis lands holven, Wut tf be bee of
fuil agt at the time of ths Beath of bis Anceftoz, then befball pap forlands in poſſeſſton a whole
peares profit £o? Primer fejfin: but it it be of a reuerfion expectant vpon an eſtate Co? life, as tex
nant in Dower, Cenant by, the Curteſie, op Cenant for life, then he (ball pap but the motty
of one pearcs profit. “id 1 as ! à

(d) It᷑ the heire be in Ward bp reaſon of atenure of an Honour os Mannoꝛ (except as bez
foze) he (bat! not fus tiueríc, but an Oufter le maine cum exitibus, albeit he neucr mabe tender.
(c) mp (E he be of full age, the Ring fhall haue no Primer feifin,but Reltefe, Wut where the te=
nureis in Capite, there tbe. King ſhall haue the meane profits ntill tye tender be made, and if
the tender be made, and not duly purfucb, the Bing fball alfo haue ail the meane profits.

(£) Bethat boloeth of the 3Xaing bp Socage tn chicfe,and dieth, his hetre of full age, the Ling
fball haue ituerteand Primer(cifin onelp of the lands fo holden, and not of the lands holden of
others. (2) Wut tf the hetre of fucb a Tenant in S ocage in chtefe, be within the age of fourz
tanc at the death of his Buceltos; he ſhall netther fuc liuerie, 02 pap Primer feifin, either then
02 any time after : and thereafon thereof is, for that the cuftodie of his bodicand lands in that
cafe, belong tothe Procheinamy,ag Gardein in Socage. (h) either (bati the King bane Pri-
mer feifin of Lands holden in Burgage, (ag fomehauefayd ) foy that te t& no Cenure in
Capite. |

Hote, there is a gencrail liuerie, anda fpeciall liuerie: D gencrall liuerfe hath two prac
perties : :

Fick, it is Eull of charge tothe beíre, for be muft find an office in encrie Countte Where he harh
— oz clfc hecannot fuea gencrail liusrfe, and bee mult fuc ont his wꝛit of Atate proban-

a, &c. ; DS

Ci) The feconb pzopertíc (a, that (t (a (ull o£ Danger: Firſt, It concludeth the heire for cuer
after to dente anp Œennre found tn tbe Office. Secondiy, It Liuerie be not {ued of all and of
euerie parcell Which the Ring ought to baue, whither it be found in the effíce, oz not found ( for
a generall liuerte could not be fuco by parcelg ) the ltuerie ts void, and the King map refetfe the
lands, and be anſwered of the meane profits. So tt ts tEthe xD ffíce beinfuffictent,on the 4920-
tele whereot the Liuerie Was made be infuffictent,oz tbe itke,the ing fball reſeiſe, ag (& atoꝛe⸗
faid. (a) Therefore for the cafe of tbe hetre, and fo? auopding of fuch Banger , tbe beíre £o» the
taoft part fucth out a fpeciall liuerte, which contatneth a beneficiall pardon, andfaneth the fapd
charges, anb preuenteth the fato concinfion, andthe other dangers, which being of grace, and
not of right, ag the gencrall liuerte ts, the King may Sell and tulklp take moze fop a fpecial liue⸗
tic, than koꝛ a qenerall,fo2 the caufes afozefatd;, but euer Sith fuch moderation as the hepze
may chearefullp go thzough therewith, j f

Note that a liuerie is tnnaturcof a'reftitution, Which (a to bee takers fauourablp: £o2 if li⸗
uerie be made of a mannoz cum pertinentijs; the hetre (ball thereby baue the aduo wion appen-

dant, otherwife itis in Grants bp Letters Patents. :

Since the time that Littleton $910t€( c) there is a Court of Wards and Ltueries evetco bp
Authoꝛity of Parliament concerning the ozber of the ings mards, ec. to be holden before the

Matter et the wards,and the Council of that bi bp thele Ags, Œbis **
mis


77


(q) So mas it holden Tr. 8. El.
$n (Com. Banc per Cur. Mich
my felfz beard and oted in Six
J ho. VV yats cafe.

(r) 9o wae it refolued in Sir
The.FV yas cafe.v.». fur,


(a )Glanuil.li.7.c ro,
Brak [i.2 fo. $ 586,87.
Brit.li. 3.ca. 3. F lct. 1.1.6 10.
9. H. 3. Prereg. 25.21. H. 3.
16.26. Ret Fshitimn.6.1ohan.
Stat. Prercg. Reg.cap.1.


(b )'Bratt.vh. füpr «Mag.ca--
Ea cá. 31. 34 E. 6.0. 4. 5 E. 3.5.
47-E.3.21.29 H 8. br.rit,
Linery 58.28. H,8.10.55.


(c) Lib. 8.fo. 172. Haleseafe.
38. H.R. Br. rir. Liucrio 60.
"Vi. Sell. 154.


(4) 1. ELy.168;


(€) 32. H.8.13. Liu, Br.62,


(£238. H.8. Liver. Br 60,
45-E. 3.11.35. H.6. $2
Stanf.1 3.5.
(g)20.El.Dy 352.
F.N.B.1$9.b.


( h) F.N.B.263.7.E.4. 17^
Sranf.Prer.13. Br.it. Liu 64.


(i) 46. E. 3.33.47. E. 3.21.
21. H.6.28.5. 33. H. 6.50.
29.Af-8-Pl. (om. Countee of
Leic.cafe, 44.E. 3.13. & 25.
13 R. a. Lin 28.3. H.7.fo.12.


(a) 1-H.4. 6.5.35. H.8. E-
ffop. 8r. 318.7. £,6 8b. 222,
Scurfields cafe Tr. .Ia.sn cur⸗
Ward.23.El.Dy.:77.

28. H.8. Br. Vit. Lowery 555


41.E. 3.5.5. 8.667 27.4.48.
Pl. em. 252.20. El. "Dj 360.


(c) 13. H. 0.46.51. H. 8,21.


Lib.2.


(d) 2.€.6.04.8.


(e) 4.E.4.33.33. H.B.tit.
antea conteab, "ly. 135.


(E) 14.287. Dierfo.319.


(g) §.Mar. Dier.1 55.


(a) 24.E.3,31.38-

9. H.6.18. 12. E. 4-16.

30. 4/f.18. lib. 4. fo. 56. dr
60. Sadler cafe .Stanf.yrerog.


58.5. 52. $.€.4.4.16-E. 4.4.


1,H.7.14.2. H.7.13.
4.H.7 15. 8.H.7.11.
FN. B.263.1 2. R.3.
ÆZsuery 28. F. N. B. 233.
Lib.7. fa. 44.45. Kens cafe.
!O (b) 4. E.2.23. 19. H. 6-19.


Lib.4.fo. 5 6.é7e.Sadlers cafe.
32. H.8.entre (Conge.Dr.125.


14.E. 3.2.14.


4
Ce) Vid.hb.6.fe.6.
Wheelers cafe.


(4) 12.€ liz Dier fe. 292.4,
Lib.8.fo.168. Pars Stengh-
Bers cafe.


13. € it. Dier. 306.
4.H.6.13.10.H,4.2.b,


1 £, E. 4.12. 40.2.3.12,
31, M. 5. 11. 3. M. 7. 5.-


Cap. 4. Of Knights Seruice. Seél.103.


made fuch a manifold alteration, ag were too long here to beinferted,¢ betb belong to another
Œreatife mentioned in the Epiſtle of the iurifbition of Courts, there (t Sere neceflary, that
the true iuriſdiction of that Court (boulb be fet none, a matter of no great vifficuitie, feíng it
began fo late bp Duthority of 39arlfament. And fince Lirtlctons time, (d ) there is a right prox
fitable Statute made concerning the finding of O ffices and other things, not oni concerning
the Kings wards, oz thetr rights and poſſeũtons, but fome other prouifions berp benefictall fog
the fubiect, in alito the number of 12, (c) Sirk that {uch perfons ag holo foztearme of peares,
or bp copp of Court Kolle, o» haue anp Rent, common o2 profit appacnder out of anp lands
found tr anp office, wherby the King is intituled to the toardihip ofthe Lands 0? Eencments,
01t0 the forfciture of the Lands oꝛtenements bpon attainder of treafon, felony, præmunire, og
anp other offence, pet may thep hauc,hold,entoy,and perceine their feucrall eftates,interefts and
proffits,aitbough thep be not found in the office, And this being a benefictall La the eftates of
Tenant by ftatute ffaple, Merchant, and elecit, & Executors that hold lands fo papment o£
debts aretaken to be Within the benefit of the clanfe: (f )and fo (g a Doubt in 14. Eli. Dier clered,

2. Where it ts found, that the heire ig of Fewer peares than in truth hee ts, hee Mall not bee
conciuded hereby, (2) but eucrp fuch betre at his berp full age map prefecute a Wꝛit ef atate
probanda, am fue big Liuery oz oufter le maine : in which cafe hs had no remedp bp the Com⸗
mon Law, but the ing may trauerfe fuch an  flice found.

(a) 3. Where one perfon oz moze be found heire, Where another perfon ig heirc, the partie
grieued had noremedp.

4. D2 Where one perfon 02 moze be found heire in one County, and another perfon o2 pere
fong found bcire in another County, there could haue benc no interpleading.

5. D2t€ any perfon be ontrulp found by office Lunaticke, 02 tdcot, 07 Dead, the party aríes
ued map traucrfe the fato office ; and pou may rcabe in Kens cafe boS the office thall be tranerz
fed vpon this Ac.

(b) 6. where ft is vntruly found bp office that any perfon attatnteo of Ereafon, Jrelonp,
02 Premunire ig ſetſed of. anplands,tc. the party gricucd hauing tuft title of frebolo, (ball
bauc hts trauerg 02 Mransde droit ( Sithout being bzíucn by this double matter of Becoꝛd
to bis petition of right as he was before thts Statute, Which is much moze fpedpthen the
petition; for bpon the petition there be foure &o2íts of (earch, and eucry one mutt bauego.dapes
bekore tie ferning, and now but two wꝛits of fearch,

7. Where an office is found by thefc xo020g 02 the Ifke quod de quo vel de quibus tenementa
predi&a tenentur, juratores pred’ ignorant,oz holven of the King per qua fervitia juratores ig-
norant, ít (ball not be taken fez amy immediate tenure of the King tn chicfe, but in fuch cas
fcg à melius inquirendum to be awarded ag hath bene accuftomed of oldtime. Chis branch
hath bœne cll ( d) expounded, fog if the fir(E <D fice finde a tenure of the King per que fervitia,
&c. petifbpon the Meliusinquirendum the tenurebefound of a fubiet, the fir office bath
loft big fozce per fenfum huius ftatuti, and need not be trauerfed, andthe Melius,&c. ig in na⸗
ture of the Diem claufit extremum 0? mandamus, &c. and this was but a declatation of the
aunctent Common Law, ag bp the Words of the Statute (as hath beencaccuftomed of old)
ttappeareth ; but tf bpon the melius ít be foundagaine as bncertainelp ag befoze (s fato, then
it is in iubgement of Law a tenure in Capite, and ſo (t was before the making of thie Dc, and
fo are the boohcs that fpeake hereofto be intended ; but {€ bpon tbe melius atenure be found of
the Hing Vt de mancrio per que fervitia, Xc. ít fall betaken for Knights feruice.

8. where tt tg found that Landg,¢c. arc holden of the ing immediately where in truth
thep are holden ofa common perfon and not of the Ring immediatly, and that the heire ts with⸗
tn age, fuch betre Within age fall banc bis trancrie,ec. Swhtch be coule not haue bab bp the
Common Lak,

9- The meane Lozds of Mhom thelands arc holden Which the King hath bp bist pꝛeroga⸗
tine During the mínozttp of the befre ſhall recetucand take {uch 138 ents as ace enetntotbem bp
thehands of fuch of tho Kings officers ae recetue the proffite of the fame lands, bere before
that Ad, the Lords vſed to {pare the Rents duc, €c. during the Rings pofle(Tíon, and after Lis
uerp fue, charged the heire With all tbe arrerages.

10, here is a prouifion Fes offices found before the Hatute o2 before the 2o. bap of March
Hert after the Act.

11, Aſpeciall claufe is that a Scire fac fhall be awarded bpon enerp travers by force of thie
Ba, and Where the partic was pnt to hts petition, there bpon the tranerg there fpall bes tie
To:2ít9 of fearch granted.

12. And la(Hy, Eindgement hall be giuen againt the King bpon a trauerfe bp bertne of
thie Bet, all former rights appearing of 18 eco2d are faueb to the Ring. But albeit thefe points
ate moft neceflarp to be kmoSone, pet let bs now returne to Littleton.

Littleton &patílp and materiallp ( treating of a common perfon) faith tenus de luy holden e£
htm, for be Shall jane nothing tn gard but that which is holven of him, But the Ring by his

pꝛexogatius


Of Kightsfernice:  Sefioz,


Lib.2.

fhall not only bane fuch lands and tenements Which ( ag hath besne fato ) the etre
of big Cenant bp Knights feruice in capite holdeth of others, but fuch inberitances alfo ag
arenot holden at all of any, as Rene charges , Rent fecke, ffaires, Markets, toarreng,
Annuities, and the like; andfots the Law clerelp holden at this dap, ag it hath benc refol-
ged; and ſo experience teachorh, thatthe ing by his pzcrogatíue giuento him by tbe anctent
Connon Law fall have tbofe inberttances not holden, and fo the Quare made bp (0) Stan-
fard ig cleercd and inade Without queftion.
- Abe Law is changed ince Littleton Wzote in many cafes both foz the marriage of the body,
and fo? the wardſhip of the lands, anda farre greater benefit ginen tothe Lozds then the Com=
ton Law gaue them, andfomeaduantage giuen to thebeites, which before tbep had not,
Swhich fhail bc tonched brteflp,

FE the Father had made an eftate for life 02 a gtftintaple of lands holden bp Knights fer-
. nice to bis eldeft fonne, 02 other heire apparant Swithin age, the remainder in fee to anp other,
And Died, the heire hould not baue bene in toard, fo? this Sas ont of the ffatute of Merle-
bridge: But at this dap the heiro {ball bein that cafe in ward fos bis body, and a third
partof big land.

(a) Spotl the father had infeoften bis eldeſt fonne Within age and a ffranger and the beíreg
of thefonne, and diced, thcfonne ould hane beeneout of toard, but atthis Dap he thall be tn
Ward for bis bodp, and fo; a tbíro part of His moitie. (b) Sot the father had (nfeoffeb anp
of bis poungerfonnes 02 others fo» the making of bis Wife atopnture, oꝛ for the aduancement
9f his daughters, 02 forthe payment of hig Debts, and after tnfeoffe oz conucp the the land to
bis boire and died, his beire Within age, bis heire ſhould not haue bene in ward, becaufe hee
Was bound bp the la of natureand nations to pꝛouide £oz them, but now in all thefe cafes
the heire Hail be in toard for his bodp, and a third part of the land, and all this groweth bp
tonftrudion bpon the Sptatutes of 32.and34-H.8 (c) Wut it either the eldeſt fonne, op anp of
the pounger fonnes purchafelands of bis father which archolvenbp Knights feruice, bona
fide fo? the reafonabie valuc, this is out of thefe Batutes, and the beire (ball netther bee in
Ward noz pap Prime: feifon. |

Bund in alithe cafes abouefato ( Foz erample) {€ a 4rcoffment be made to the ble of his Swife
fo life, 02 to the bfc of any of his pounger fonnes Foz life, orto the ble of fome perfons fo2 itfe
foz papment of debts, and opon all thefe cftateg a remainder is limitted ouer, ifthe wife 92 Te⸗
nant fozitfe dic in the lic of the father, (d ) oz (£ít be conueyed to the bfe of the wife o» pounger
childzen tn fee, o? fee taile, 01 tn fee fos payment of debts, andthele lands are conueped away in
thelifetime of the father, after the beceafe of the father no 1W9arD{bip,ec. accracth bp foxcc of
any of thefats Statutes, for {uch eftates muſt continuctill the title of wardſhip Doc growe.

(c) 3E the father conucp bis lands boïden bp Knights [cruíce either of the king oz ofanp
meane 3.020 to his middle forme in tatle, tbe remainder tothe poungelt fonne in Fe and dieth the
etocft being Within age, andthe ting 02 Loadfetze thebodp and two parts of the land, tf the
middie brother die without (Tue, the ing o2 the Lozd fbati not haue anp benefit of the ftatute
—— Dim in remainder, fo; the ſtatute xoag once ſatiſſied and the ſtatute extendeth net te bins

tematnder.

(£) FE there be a grandfather, father, and diuers fonnes, and the grandfather {n the life of
the father conuey bts lands holden bp Knights {erutce to anp of thefonnes, this is out of the
fatute of 32.H., and tithe grandfather die, therets neither wardthip noy 192tmer feifon Due,
Foꝛ the father hath tbe immediate care of big fonnes, but (£ the father be dead, then the care of
them belong to the grandfather, andthen ik thegranfatherconuep any of the lands to anp of
thefonnes, itis Sithin thefato ſtatute: ( g ) anda conucpance te thebfeof anp of bis collatc-
tall bleob, which ig not his heire apparant (g out of the fato ſtatute. And fo are connepances
epther bp father, either bp father ez mother too? te the ble of baftard chtlozen out of the ffatute,
fo quiex damnato coitu nafcuntur, inter liberos non computentur. And tbe Preamble {peas
Beth of lawfnll gencrations. It a man fetfed of lands holven tu Socageconuep them to the
bie of bis wife, oz of bis childꝛen, o» payment of bis debts and after purchafe lands holden bp
Znights lernice in Capite, and dieth his heire within age, the King fall have no part of the
Hocageland. (h) Wut (f in chat cafe he had bp his Sot tn Sogiting deuife hie Socagelandg
in fee, and after purchafed lands holden in capite, and dieth, the Bing (ball haue fo much of the
Socage lands as Will make a full third part of all. The bencfit that grew to the fubiet bp
thofe Acs of parliament, were that tenants (n Fe (iple might deuife their lands by their
Lak wills in wꝛiting infuch manner and forme, ag bp thefato Aas appeareth, ifo that the
father might infeoffe his cideft fonne 02 other hetreltneall oz cotlaterall of his lands holden bp
nights feruíce, and two parts of the lands fhalbeoutoftogro, Bndtn * Mightescafe por
frati reae excellent matter of eltates made bpon collufion,

And both the Statutes of 32. and s4.H.8. concerning tills and wardſhips are many
Mapes pretudtciall to the heires, ag tabing one erample foy manp, Jf enant bp aM s

2 crate


78


(0) Stanf-prar.fe.2.


Mar lébridge ce. 1.
Pl.cwn.82.
27-H.(.10. 33,H.6.14.


(a) 31.2.3. Cellufíen 29.
33. H.6.14.


(b)33.H.6.14 27.H.5.7.
Lib.6.fo.76.77. Str George

Cor fons c fe.

10.£ lie. 269.3. Eli .193.

20.€ 57.361. 19 Ett 276,
5..Marie,158,


(c) Lib.8.fo.83. Leonard
Koucys cafe.


(d) Lil.155.9v. Binghams
cafe. lib G-vbi fupra 84.
Lib. s fo. 16 5. Digiyes cafe,


(e) 14.Eliq."Dier 308,
ze Marie Dier.130.
Lib.2.f0.03.94. Biagkars
eafe, & Northcors cafe.
Lib. 1 0.f0. 80.6. Leonard
Lemeys cafe,


(£) 2b 6.fo. m7. S;
Gurfons n diy Sent
2.Eliz Dier. 1r,

8. Eli. Dier 252.


(B) Lib.1o.fz. 33. Lesnard


Loweys cafe.


18, Eh Dy p.385.


(R) Leen, Leweyscafe
ube fupra. Butler & Bakers
€afe. lib. 3. ſo. 2.5. dre.


* Lij.8.fe.163.Mighny


vafe.


Lib.2.


Leon. Loueys cafe, vbi fupra,
21.£ Ii. Ditr. 367.


32.E,3.gard.61,
2.H.5.4.


10. H.6.8. 21, E, 3.33.4.
37. H,8.


Vide Britton. fol. 169.


Glanuill. lb.7.cap.1.
Airror.cap. s.S.2.
Britron.fol.168.b.
39.H.6.cap.2.


35.P1.6.40.
Bralten.lib.2.0ap.37.


34-E.1Stat. 3.
Glanus!.lib.y .cap.9 .
Dior 9. Marie 162.
Brafton.lib.2.cap.37-
F,.N.B.203.


35.H.6. ga. fit. gard.71.


Seanford.3.6. F.N.B 256.


259. 3 5. H.6.49.


‘Britton.fol. 169.3 $.H, 6,52,


Co-4- Of Knights Seruice. Sect. 103.


ſeruice make a feoffittent in fee to the ble of his Swifeanb berbetres , 02 to the ofc of a pounger
fonne and his heires, 02 wholy for thepapment of bis Debts. Fn thele cafes although nothing
at all ofthe lands fo holden difcend tothe heire , but hee is ditheritedofthefame , pet his bodte
fball be tn tard : but this foz alíttle talte map fuffíce, moze hereof pou map reade (n mp 1Rec
ports ín tbe fenerall Cafes nored inthemargent. — ]
€ Pleine age. Full age regularly is one and thoentie yeares.
Entendement del ley. Entendement .i. intehectus the buderftanding,
9; intelligence of the Law, Regularly Judges ought to adtudge according to the common (nz
tendement of Law.

Wy intendement of Law enerp Parſon o? Kectoꝛ of a Church is fuppoled to berchdent on
bis Wenefice, onie(Te the contrarte be pꝛoued.

$D f common intendement one part of a Manoꝛ fall not be of another nature then the reſt.

D Ecominon intend ement a ill hall not be fuppofco to be made bp colluion, In facto quod
fe habet ad bonum & malum magis de bono , quam de malo lexintendit. Lex intendit vicinum
vicini fa&a fcire. Nulla impoffibilia aut inhonefla funt præfamenda,vera autem & honefta , &
poffibilia. Lex femper intendit quod conuenit rationi- As (n thts cafe the Gardeine hall auc
the cuftodte of tbe land tnt(ll the heire come to big full age of one and twentte peares , becaufe
by intendement of 1a the betre ts not able to doe Knights Seruice beforethat age, Which is
grounded bpon apparantreafon, Chere note that the full age of aman oz a woman toalten,
Demife, Ict, contract, ec. te one and twentte peareg, the ciuill Law fiue anb twentte peares, for
then tbc Romans accounted men to haue plenam maturitatem , and the Lombardg at eighteene
peares, ;

€ Sileheire ne foit marie al temps del mort de tiel Auncefler, cic. Aun-


cefter ig deriued of the Latine woꝛd anceceflor, and in Lato there
{9 a difference betweene anteceffor and pradeceflor. Foz anteceffor ig applyed toa naturall
perfon, ag 1.5. & antecefforcs fui, but Predeccflor íg applped toa bodte Politique o; Coꝛpo⸗
rate, ag Epifcopus London & pradeceflores fuf. Rector de D. & prædeceflores fui, & ce


Mes fi tiel tenant deuie fon heire female cfleant del age de 14.
ans , cc. And the reafon as 4 find in Antiquitie , wherefore


the Law gauc the marrtage of the heire female tf fhe were Within the age of fourtene , and
that the ſhould not marrie bcr felfe, ag pur ceo que les heires females de noftre terre ne fe ma-
rieront a nous enemies, & dountil nous couiendroit lour homage prendre, (i eux fe puiflent ma-
riera Jour volunt. Chis (e a fpecíall age foz an befre female to bee out of ar, if fhe attaine
nto ít in the life time of her ancefter, foz at that age the may bauc a bufband able to do Knights
Soeruícc. À Woman hath feuen ages foz feuerall purpofes appointed to herby Law: ag feuer
veares foz the 3,070 to haue atde purfile marier : nine peareg to deſerue Dower, Twelue
peares to confent to martage, vntill fourteene peares tobe tn ward, fourteenc peares to bee ont
of Warr, tf (be attained thereunto in the ite of her Anceſter; Sixtenc peercg for to tender her
mariage ifthe Were bnder the age of fourtæne at the Death of herancefter, and one and twen=
tie pearestoalicnate her Lands, Gods anb Chattels,

A man alfo by the La fo; feuerall purpofes hath diuers ages alligned onto him,viz.tweine
pearesto take the oath of Pileageance inthe Œozne oz Let. Fourteene peares to confent ta
mariage, fourteenc peeres fo the hetre in focage to chofe his Gardein, and fourtænc peares te
alfo accounted his age of diſcretion. Fifteene peares foꝛ the Logo to baue atde par faire fitz
Chiualer. Under one and twentteto bein ward tothe Lord bp Knights Seruice. Under fours
teeneto be in ward to Gardeinin Socage. Fourteene to be out of Ward sf Gardein in So=
cage, and one and twentieto be out of tard of Gardein in Chiualrie, and to alien bis Lands
Gorgs and Chattels,


€ Mes fi tiel beire female (oit deins lage de 14. ans & nient marie, &c-


Le Seignior auera la gard del terre. ut put cafe that the Loꝛd cannot
haue the wardſhip of the Land, ag tf the Loꝛd before the age of fourteene granteth oner the
wardlhip of the bodie, in this cafe the grante of the bodie cannot entop the benefit of the tio
peates, becaufe hecannot hold ouer the land, and the Lozo, Mich bath the wardſhip of the
Zand onip thonid loſe the benefit of thetwo peares, becaufe he hath the lands only and cannot
tender anp mariage,.therfore tn thts cafe the heire female thai enter into her land at her age of 14.
peates. So (£a tenant holteth of one Lozd bp p2tozitte, € of anotber by pofteríositp €dicrh, bis
hetrefernaie Within the age of 14. peares,the Lord by poſterioꝛitie hall haus the lands,but vn⸗
till ber age of 14. peareg, becanfe the martage belongeth not to him. Pifo ifthe Loꝛd marieth the
betre female within the two peares, ber huſband and fhe {hail prefentip enter into the lands.
for Ceffante caufa, ceffat effectus: & ceffante ratione legis, ceffat beneficium legis. at


Lib.2. Of Knights Seruice. Setl.104.


FBFEthe Lord tendor a connenable mav(age to the heire within the 00 veares, and fec marte
elle where Within thofe two peares, the 3:020 [ball not have the forfeiture of the mariage, foz
the Statute atuctb the tivo peareg onip to mabe a tender. ] 1

© Et file ſugnior deins les dits 2. ans ne lay tender tiel mariage, dre.


donque el al fine del dits 2. ans poet enter, & ou[le le feignior. Chis is ſo

euident, ag it needeth no explication, 5
Mes fi tiel beire female [oit marie deins lage de va. ans en la vie fon

Ancefler, c fon ancefter denieil efteant deins age de 14. ams le feignior naucra


la gard for(que de la terre ieſque al ace de 14. ans crc. Note, albeit the
heire fomale be maried at the age of twelue peares in the life of her anceftoz, (at which age fhe
. map confent to Matrimony) to a man of fuil age, that ts able to doe Rnights Serutce, pet tf
the Anccftos die before her ageof fourteenc, the Gardein fball bauc the Rand bntill her age of
fourteene,becanfe (as bath beene ſaid) that is the time appointed by the Common Law, And
fo t€ rhe heire male be married inthe itfe of the Anceſtoz at his age of fourteene peares , and the
Dncelko: dieth, the Lod (ball hanethe Land vntill the iar’ commeth to theage of one and
twentie.

© Car ceo eff hors del cafe del dit ftatute, intant que le ſeignior ne poet ten-
der mariage a luy que eff marie.

Natura non facit vacuum, neclexfupervacuum. The Laꝰ doth neuer enforce a manto doe
a baine thing.

And where the faid Statute of W.1. gineth onto the Lord the fatd two peares , therebp (g
implyed, chat if he dieth within the two peares his Erecntozs o? Adminiſtratoꝛs (ball haue the
fame, oz hen the Dtatute velteth an intereſt in the ord, the Law giueth the fameto hig
Crecutors où Doininiltratozs. Cen put cafe, (GL batadior hath the wardſhip of the bodie
end land of an heire female, and maketh his Œrecutoz and dieth befoze ber age of fourtesne
Peares, Whether the C recuto? (Ball haue the two peares, becaufe the Execute, is not 3,020.
Wut 3| take tt, che Executoꝛ hauing the toardihip of thebedie and land, fball in that cafe hauc
thet%wo peares, forthat thep were beled in the Lord. -

Ft is further pꝛouided by the fato Statute, that tf the 3,025 tender à Conuenable marriage
to the hetre female, within the ſaid too peares, andthe bcire female refuleth, then the Loꝛd fhall
hold the land vntill ber age of one and twentie peares, ano further ontili be hath leuted the balue
ofber mariage. Wut if the Loꝛd doth not tender a martage Within the two peares, he Mal lofe the
balue of the mariage, and content bimfelfe With thetwo pearcs balue,


€ Car devant le dit flatut crc. ficome appiert per lereherfall G parols de
le dit ftatute. Nota, the rehearſall o? preamble of the Statutets a


god mean to find out the meaning of the ftatute,and as (t were a Key to open tbe vnderſtanding
thereof. he tender of a mariage to an beíre femalebefore the age of fourteenc ts botd, Which
mutt be vnderſtod Where the 3010 map hold the land foz the fato two peares, for then the {tas
tute appointeth the time of the tender, but Swbere the Lod cannot haue the two pearcs, he may
tender a mariage tothe hetre female at any time after the age of twelue and befoge fourteen, for
fo he might bauc pone at the Common Law.


Sel. 104.


ene que 1c N°: that the full COs sia.


plein age de + ‘age of male and RS Le


male æ female folon= female according to age of otferetion , which is


que le common pat: common fpeech is pags of Fouttoene fomsphat
lance, per he {aid — of 21. Bu nose fo t mint af a
21,üng, Ct lageDe yeares. Andtheage of Srement o ditagrement in
Difcretion eft Dit lage, dicretioniscalledthe Wait. eve timeot age


de 14. a tiel age of 14.yeares, For, they marrie infra annos nubi-
ageleenf, Titi acthisage, the Infante peii
tie Deis tiel age a whichis maried with- foutteme, o after, and there


1 it nierd no new mariage , (£tbep
bn feme, puitagreer in {uch pa d doi MSN MEME —*


=
/9
35. H.6.52.35. H.6.tit garde


71. Lib.6. fol.7 1. the Lord
"Darcies ( afe.


E.N.B.143,


27. H.8.3. 11. E. 3. Excen-
ters 77. 4.£.3.55.
28.4: p.7.


31.4 ff p. 26.


Lib. 6 fal.71. L.Darcies cæſe.


35H: 6.52. gard.71.


35. H.6.52. gard.7i.
Lib.6.fo.7 1; Lord Darcietcafe
"Britton. 169.


5. Mar. gard. Br. pl.vltinss.
39.E.3.32.33-prer.reg cap. Oo
Tr.24.Eli€. Rot.84a. in
bank lerey Banifters cafe.


Lib.2.


13. P, 1. 924.137.
Britton, fal 169. ace.


Glanoil.lib. 7. cap. 12.
27. M.6. tard. 118.


27. H.6. gard. x18,


237. H.6, gd. 118.


FN B.14:.


7. H.6.11.


(a) 30.8.1. 214.156.
X2. E. 1. gard.138.


21. E.3.19. 20.€.3.gard. 41.


Temps E, y ibidera. 123.
35.H.6.45. 7. H.6. 11.
Vide prerogat.Regu cap.6.
13. H. 3. gard.147.
Stanf.prar.26.27-

(b) 27.H.6. gard. 118.
F.N.B.143.m.

19,E.3 fudgement 123.
A5. E.3.16.

(€) 47. E. 3. riz ation für le
ffatut. 38, andthe "Bosker
⸗boue /aid.


Of KnightsSeruice. — Sef.105.


a tiel mariage > oH man, may agree or dif-

ap Dífagre anb : :

— d Ne oth nefits Difagreer, agree to fuch mariage.
out anp Divorce : and tf thep once after giueconfent, thep cannener bifagre after, It aman
of the age of fourteene marie a Soman of the age of ten, at her age of twelve he map alwell dif
agre, ag the may, though be were of the age of confent, becaufe tn contradg of Matrimonie


Cap. 4.


not befoze the ſaid ages, and


eicher both mutt be bound, oz equall election of diſagreement given to both, anb fo à conucrío, (t
the woman be of. thc age efconfent, andthe man vnder. |


€ Ft (a a maximc inlaw,
[as Dominus non
maritabit minorem in
cuftodia fua nifi femel, And
another fait), Si femel legiti-
mé nupt fuer’, &c. poftmo-
dum non tenebuntur fub cu-
ftodia dominorum efle.Blbeit
this mariage ig de fa&o, and
not deiure, and though the
Dilagreement diſſolueth (t ab
initio, pet the 1.029 ſhall ne⸗
ser bant the mariage of him.

And fo tf the Gardein maz
rieth hig tard toa woman,
anb after the maríage tg dif-
folued bp rcafon ofa precon-
trat, pet the Gardein ſhall
neuer fauc the mariage of the
tard agaíne.

Wut i£ one rauiſheth a
Ward from the 1020, and maz
vieth him Soithin the agc of
confent, in that cafe tf the
3010 taketh again his tard,
anb becat the age of confent
diſagreeth tothe mariage, the
Xoꝛd fball auc the matfage
of bím, for he neuer bao tt
before.

So ithewife, tf the Ance—⸗
(oz marteth his hetre appa-
tart infra annos nubiles, ana
dieth his etre Within age, the
Ward difagreth, the Gar—
Dein fhall auc the wardſhip


Sect. 105.
€ fi 1a gat-


Deine € cbiual-
tíe marie bn foits le
garde Deins lage De
14. ans, à bn keme, a
puis fil al age De 14,
ang Difagree a le
mariage, tl e(t Dit per
afcuns , quelenfant
ne pag tenus per le
lep deftre auterfotts
marie per fon gat-
Deine pur ceo que le
gardeine auoit bn
foits le mariage De
lup , & pur ceo il fuit
hors De fon garde,
quant al garde à fon
corps, Ct quant tl a-
uoit bu foits le ma-
tiage d lup a bn foits
fuit bos De fon gat-
de, il naucta plus a-
uant le mariage Dc
lup,


Ndifthe gardeine

in Chiualrie doth
once marie the Ward
within his age of 14.
yearesto a woman, &
ifafterward at hisage
of 14. yeares he dif-
agree to the mariage,
itis faid by fome, that
the Infant is not tied
by the Law, tobeea-
gaine maried by his
Gardein, forthat the
Gardein had once the
mariageof him , and
becaufe hee was once
out of his ward, asto
the ward ofhis bodie.
And when hee had
once the mariage of
him, and hee wasonce
out of his wardfhip,
he fhall no more haue
the mariage of him.


of him, The ſame Law (t (s in thefame cafe, if the wife dteth belere tbe age of confent ; the
1.020 hail haue tbe martage of the heire,
And fo note a dinerfitte When the ward ts maried bp the Anceftoz o bp a Rauiſher, and


When by the Gardein bímfelfe.(a ) Foꝛ t£ tbe Bnceftoz marie his hetre apparant infra annos nu-
bilesanddteth: In this cafett the maríage be diffolned bp difagræment, either of the ward 0l .
of hig fe, the Gardein fball hane the martage of him (b) Bnd fo it is it a Rauiſhoꝛ marie a
Ward infra annos nubiles, and the mariage ts diſſolued ve fupra, the Gardein thalihauc the taz
tíage. 3f the here male tn toard of the age of ten peareg be maried without the confent of the
10:0, he map tender ontotbe heiretnfra annos nubiles a martage, albett bebe fo marícb. and (f
he refute and agree to the foꝛmer martage, the Lord (ball bauc tbe forfeitureof his mariage, ag
tthath beene holden, Wat o-
therwife (t (a (c) (faith Lirtleron ) Sberethe Gardein himfeife marteth the tard, ve fupra,
Bnd the reafon of the dinerfitie is becauſe inthis cale the ardetn had once the martage of bít,


but fo hadnot he in ctther of the other cafes, and tt (98 marime {n Lato Quod Dominus non .
maritabit pupillum nifi femel. 3t


Libi. OfKnightsSeruice.  Sef.106,107.


It appearcth bpon confideration of all tbe bokes afozefato that Where the Anceſtoꝛ matris
eth hig heire apparant Soítbín the age ofconfent, and dicth, the enfant Mill being Within the
age of Content, the Lozd map take theinfant ( fhe will) into bte poMellion, in refpec the in
fant map difagre to tbe marriage, and £f the infant be detepnedfrom him, be fball recoucr him
tna wait of Rauiſhment of toard, and thereupon haus the infant deliuered to him, (d) But tf
the Anceſtoa marrieth bis beire apparant infra annos nubiles, and dieth his betre betud Mira
annos nubiles, anb after age of Confent the hetreagresth to the marriage, netther the Ring no;


she 10:0 fall have ths marriage, fo? no itig a marriage ab initio, and there n&bc no other


marriage.


Section 106:


CER meme le N the fame manner Qprbis Linleron ad⸗
maner ett, ſi le p is if the gardian ete Fon *


gardein luy marie, x
la feme deuie eſteant
lenfant deins lage
De xiiii. ans, ou xxi.


que tiel en⸗
me fant poít Difa-
greet a cícl mariage,
quant ti bient al age
De xiiii.ans, il eft
proue perics parolt
Del ffatute De Mer⸗
ton Cap,6, que iſſint


tt,


marry him & the wife
diethe infant being
withintheage of 14.
yeatesor 2 1.


Sed. 107.


Nd that füch in-

fant may difa-
gree to {uch marriage,
whenhe comes to the
age of 14.yeares, itis
proued by the words
ofthe ftatute of Mer-
ton Cap.6. which faith
thus :


De dominis qui maritauerint illos quos babent in
en[fodia ſua, villanis, vel alijs, ficut burgenfibus vbi
difparagentur , (i talis bares fuerit infra 14. annos,
ce talis etatis quod matrimenium confentire non
pofit, tunc fi parentes. illi conquerantur, dominus
amittat cuftediam illam vſque ad etatem beredis,
e omne commodum. quod inde receptum fuerit
conuertatur ad commodum beredis infra etatem
exiftent fecundum difpofitionem parentum propter
dedecns ex impofitum. Si autem fuerit I4. ans
& vltra, quod confentire po[sit, & tali matrimo-
vio conſenſerit, mulla [equatur pena.


€t illint ef proue
p meme ie eftatute,


que nul Difparage-


And fo it is proued by
the fame ftatute, that
there is no difparage-


next before of a diſagreement
bp thetufant, here hee fait,
that if the wife Die, the in=
fant being within the age of
confent,


qj z iftatut de Mer-


ton. So called
becaufe the Parltament Sag
holden at Merton,


€ Et que tiel en-
fani poit difagreer, crc.
west proue dre. Hote
the time of diſagreement (a fet
boxone bp act of Parliament,
and fo obferued bp Littleton,
who fakes no other proofe
therein then bp the Law of
England,

€ v5 difparagen-


tur. BDilparagement,
difparagatio commeth of tbc
berbe difparage, and that of
difpar, and ago.

$3030 it ts necellarp to bec
vnderſtood what diſparage⸗
ments there be kor the which
the hetre map refute,

Ans of fuch difparages
ments there be koure kindes.
(E be firft propter vitium ani-
mi, ag att Best, non compos
mentis, & Lunatique, ac.
(be fecond propter vitium
fanguinis, ag firft a Wilicine,
z,lbuvaenüs, 3. Che fonne
‘or Maaghter of a perfon at-


ment eſtu : en tainted of treafon oz felony,

E su MURIS TRS, > rooned, fo; the bind
lu» qui L di iG Whlc is in War is co»tupteb, 4. À 1Bafrarb.
eft marie Deing lage maried withinthe age —— =
Dt xiiii.ans. of 14.ycares, jeg


trade, ag an Haberdaſher, a
Drage


So


(d) 7.H.6.11. adiud;e is
she beoke at "ange.


"Merton, 63.6,


Era&fon lb. 3 fol.91.
Brirtonfel.V6o. Fleta bb.1,
tap. 12. Mirror e4.3:S. 17.
Ret. Parl.18.E.1.f0.9.

The daughter of New maried
tothe foune of Tho:of Weylemd,
after his attainder.


| Lib.2. (cp. Of Knights Seruice.  Scël.108,


Dꝛaper opthelike, (an? this aaretb with tbc Ciuill Raw, Patricij cum plebis matrimonia ne
contrahant.) Sohereof Glanuill fpeaketh thug, Si vero fuerit filiusburgenfis ætatem habere tunc
intelligitur, quando difcrete fcinerit denarios numerare, & pannos vinare & alia paterna ncgotia


— 7


fimiliter exercere. j
/ Á A. ' @be third propter vitium corporis, ag firft de men.bris, hauing but one hand, cnefeot, one
4/7020 2, eye, Qc. Secondly, deformitic, ag tolokea fquint, a cripte, bait , lame, decrepit, creokcd, ac.
A Pr Œbiroiy, Prluation, ag blind, dcafe,oumbe,#c. Fourthly, Difcafe horrible ag Leprofic, Dally,


s. Waopiey, o2 fuch itke difcafes, Ftftip, great and continuall infirmitte, ag a Confumption and
y^ coy M^ ta 4 ich Tn pes Impotencie to aue childzen in refpec eítber of age paft chtidzen, 02 fo ten-
a / e M wi peares ag there tg to great bífparitéc, o2 £o? naturall difabilitic o2 impediment o? fucb ithe,
i, £6 (4. Adpagycucnthly, Defloured of ber Uirainitic,

tA rre,


'


, She fourth kind ef difparagement Swag propter ia&uram priuilegij, & c. ag to marie thchcire


j fi t to a Widow, whereby he fbonib by rcafen of the Bigamic haue loft the benefit of bis Cicargte,
An) : Soberchp be might faue his life, but now the exception of Bigamie in that cafe is oufted bp the
(a) Vide Seft.109. (d) Statute. And Littleton faith that there be many other difparagements which are not
EN: 149. fpecificd in the fato Statute, foztbofetxoo mentioned are put but £o? examples, In a word ít


malt be competens maritagium abfque difparagatione. :
| Ql, Si talis heres fuerit infra x 4.annos, & tals etatis quod matrimonio


confentire non pofsit, oc. Srote albeit the Nard vobere hee is diſpa⸗
raged map dDifagres at bis age of fourteene peares, pet the Law doth fo abhoꝛre the odious deac
ling of the Bardetn, to Whom the cuftodie of the heire ta committed, and his hogrible profana=
tion of honozable mariage, the onlp ligament of meng Inheritances ag tt inflicteth a great pu=
nifhment bpon the 3020 (n this cafe, albeit the mariage beenot perfec, but auotdabie bp diſa⸗
qreement, : i; j
€ Terc fi parentes illi conquerantur. Littletoninthenett Section
expounocththefe Woꝛds (n thts manner, viz. Si parentes conquerantur, .i. Si parentes inter cos
| Jamententur, qua eft tanta dire, que fi les Cofens detiel infant ont caufe de faire Jamentation ou
E. complaint pur le hont fait lcur Cofen iffint difparage,quel eft in manner vn hont a eux. Parenseft
| nomen generale ad omne genus cognationis. See moze of this in the nert Section.
© Dominus amittat cuftodiam illam vfque ad etatem heredis & omue


commodum quod inde receptum faerit conuertatur ad commedum haredis dre.
Here followeth the penaitie,

Fir, amittat cuftodiam, that ts, the Whole bencft ofthe toardihip. Wut in this cafe tf the
Gardetn hath granted tbe wardſhip of the Land toanother bona fide, andafter, the heire is
—— Grantee ſhall not forfeit big intereſt, fozthe Statute ts (Dominus amittat
«uitodiam.

Secondip, Etomne commodum quod indereceptum fuerit conuertatur ad commodum bæ-
redis fecundum difpofitionem parentum, Theſe words are expounded bp Littleron Which nee⸗
beth no further explanation: Jn ow Where readers bpon this Statute,haue put a cafe,that (Ftbc
Tenant hath {lue a daughter.his wife en(eint With afonne and dieth,the Loꝛd doth vifparage
the Daughter before the age of twelue peares, the fonne (a bone, the daughter difagres, the

Vide she ficond par? of theIn- ſonne dieth, the Daughter within the age of fourteene, fhe thallbe in Sard againe, Chis cafe

fitntes. Merteneap.5.6. tg not Warranted by this S»tatute, forthis Statute ertends not to theheires female,

354. 6. 53. Fe tbe Tenant make a Leafc to A. fos life, the rematuder to B.in feo, the Œenant for life
furrenders bpon condition, B. dicth big hetre within age, the Lord difparages the beire, @e=
nant Fo life cntreth Foz the condition broken ant dieth, the hetre (ball be out of tard, foz that he
Clapmeth ag betre to one man. But tf after the difparagement, lands difcend from another an=
ceftoz to the ward fo difparaged, be ſhall be in Wardforthofe Lands.

FE two Flopntenants be of a Ward, and the one difparageth the heire, both thail iofethe
toardlhip, Foz the werog be & omne commodum, &c.


(L Si autem fuerit 14. annorum & "vitra, erc. nulla fequater pena.


Brion. fel. 69.27. By Sobích tt appeareth (ag Littleton obferueth) that there is no difparagement but Svbere the
Ward (g maried Mithin the age of fourteenc,
" — Seétion 108.
€] fouet ma € If c ithathb
Effatute de mag- Mta que il fo- Ore, it hath beene
Ai , :
— L na Charta. N loit eftre que- a queftion how


Though tthe infomeota ſtion, coment ceux thefe words fhall bee
pas


parol. fectont en-
tendes, Si parentes
conquerantur,&c.*€¢
il ſemble a afcuns q
contideront leftatute
De Magna Charta
que boit, Quod hæ-
red’ maritenturab{que
difparagatione , &c.
ur quel cel Sta-
tutede Merton fur
tiel point eft foun-
due, Que nul action
poit eftre país fur cel
Statute, entant que
il ne fuit buques
bíctone oye, qatcun
action fuit poat fut
cel Statute deMer=
ton p cel Difparage-
ment enuers le gar⸗
Deine pur ceft matter
auandit,zc, Ct ſi aſ⸗
cun action puiffoit
eftre prife fur tiel
matter, tl ſerra en-
tendue aſcun foits
eftre mife en 20,
*Er nota qute Ceux pa=
toit, ferront enten⸗
Beg, Si parentes con-
querantur, id eft fi pa-
rentes inter eos lamen-
tentur, que eft taunt
abite, que files cou-
fins De tiel enfant
ont caufe De faire la⸗
Mentation ou com⸗
plaint enter eur pur
le hont fait a lour
Coulin ifint diſpa⸗
tage, quel e(t en mas
net bn bont à eux,
donques puit le p20-


Of Knights Seruice.


vaderftood, (Si parer.
tes conquerátur.) " And
it feemeth to fome
who confidering the
ftatute of Magna carta,
which willeth, Quod
beredes maritentur abf-
que difparagatione,@c.
Vpon which, this fta-
tute of Merton vpon
this point is founded,
That no ation can be
brought vpon this fta-
tute, infomuch as it
was neucr feene or
heard that any action
was brought vpon the
ftatute of Aerton for
this difparagement a-
gainft the gardian for
the matter aforefaid,
&c. And if any acti-
on might haue beene
brought forthis mat-
ter, it fhall bee inten-
ded that at fome time
it would haue beene
put in vre. * And note
that thefe words fhall
bee vnderftood thus,
Sí parentes conqueran-
tur, id eft fi parentes in-
ter eos famententur ,
which is as much to
fay , as if the coufins
of fuch infant haue
caufe to make lamen-
tation or complaint
amongft themfelues
forthe fhame done to
their coufin fo difpa-
raged, which in man-
ner is a fhame to them,
then may the next


X


Charter, petbeing granten
by affent and autbosítíe of
Parilament Littleton here
faith ttiga ſtatute.

Ghis Parliamentary
Charter hath diners appella⸗
tions in Law, ere it is cal»
led Magna Carta, not foz the
length or largeneſſe of tt (fox
it is but fbozt in refpect of the
Charters granted of private
things to priuate perfong
now abapeg being ( Elephan-
tinz carta) but tt is called the
great Charter in vefped of the
great Weightinefle € Weighty
greatne(fc of the matter cone
tained init in fem words,
being the fountaine of all the
fundamentall Lawes of the
Realme, andtbetefoze tt may
truelp befatd of tt; that (t ig
magnuminparvo. Ft ts tr
our bakes called Carta liber-
tatum ct comunis libertas
Angliæ 62 libertates Angliæ.
Carta de libertatibus, magna
carta,&c. Bnd Swell map the
Lawes of Englandbe cailed
libertates, quia liberos faciunt.
Magna fuit quondam magne
reverentia Cartæ.

Œbis ftatutc of Magna
Carta, ig but a Confirmation
oz téftitutton of the Common
La, as in the ftatute called
Confirmatio cartarum, Anno
25.E.1. (f appeareth bp the
opinion of all tbe Juſtices
and (n 5.H.3.tit. Mord.s3.
Magna Carta is there vou⸗
Ched, fo: there tt appearcth
that King lohn had granted
thelike Charter of renduation
of the anctent Lawes.

This fatute of Magna care
ta bath bene confirmed aboue
30.times, and Commanded to
be put in execution. 15y the
flatute of 2 5E, t.ca.z. iudge⸗
ments given agaínft any
points of the Œharterg of
Magna Cartaoz Carta de fo-
refta are adiudged boide, And
by the Matute of 42-E.3,ca.2.
i£ any ftatute be made agaínft
either of thefe Charters (f
fbail be voide.


¶ Sur leſtatute de
magna carta leflatute de
Merton eft foundue [ur
tieh


Setl.108.


81


Via. hb. 8. ghe Princes eafs.


"Breilon 414.7 291.
Flera sb. 2.cap. 48.
& (65.3. p. 3.
Mirror eap.2. 6.1 8,
Britton fel. 125.5.


25.8.1.


5-H.3-Mord: 53.
Math, Paris, 346.276.241.


2 g-E.t.cá. 3.


AXE. 3.62.3.


Lib.2.


Wid. Petite: coram
demine vega in Tarliaminto,
f0.3.38.E.1.


39.H.6.39.per Afton.
6.€ liz. Diers339.
23.Eh(. Dier.

Nullam brows derrero de
imdicio in 5.pert.quia nullura
breue reperitur.


3-5. 3.50.11. H. 4.7. 5 38.


"Vid. Leflatute de Merle-
bridge ea. 17.
Incuffodia pareuiw.


Cap-4-
tiel point, viz. Quod
haredes maritentur ab.


fque | difparagatione.
€ Foundue, So a8
Magna Carta fg the foundati⸗
on of other Ads of Parlia-
ment, Chis Ac extendeth as
well to kemales ag to males,
© Nw action poet
effe prife fur cel flatute,
sntant que il me vrques
fuit view on oye, &c. Et
fi afcun action puiffoit
efle prife fur ceft matter
il ferra intend a afcun

foits eftre mifé in vre.
Hereby it appearcth how
fafe itis tobe guided by tudt=
call pzefidents the rule being
god, Periculofum exiftimo
quod bonorum virorum non


Of Knights Seruice.


chein coufine à que


lenberítage ne puit
DifcenDer,enter a ou⸗


flet le gardein en
chivalry, €t fil ne
voile, bn auter coufín
Del enfant poit ceo
faire, & les iflues &
ptits prender al bte
Delenfant, & De ceo
render accopt al en-
fant, quanttl bient à
fon plein age : ou au-
terit lenfant deins
age poít enter lup
mefme, & oufter Ie
garbeíti ac, Sed quæ⸗
re de hoc.


Setl. 108.


Coufin to whom the
inheritance cannot di-
fcend, enter and oufte
the gardein in Chi-
ualrie. And if he will
not, another coufin of
the infant may doe
this, and take the if-
fues & proffits to the
vfe of the infant and of
this to render an ac:
coütto the infant whé
hee comes to his full
age : or otherwife the
infant within age may
enter himfelfe and
oufte the gardein,&c.
Sed quere de hoc.


comprobaturexemplo. And as tfage is a good interpzeter of TLaspeg, fo non vſage Where there
ig no example (ga great intendment, that the La will mot beare it , foz fatth Littleton, It
any action might haue beene grounded ppon {uch matter, tt hall be intended that ſometime te
ſhould hanebeene put in vꝛe. Not that an Ad e£ Darltament bp non Aſer can be antiquated
oꝛ loſe his force, but that it may be expounded o? Declared how the Act (s tobe tnderftod, —

¶ Si parentes conquerantur. DE this fufficient hath beene fatd
befoze.


¶ 5; les Confins. Here Littleton erpoundeth parents to be his cou-
fins, bnder Which name of coufins Littleton includeth oncles and other confins, Sohe oben
the father (8 Dead are in loco parentum. ;

€ Ont caufe a. faire lamentation,crc. Note if they haue caufcto
make lamentation, ít {nficeth though thep nener complaine. ; ; :

Œ Pur le hont fait a lour coufin. Fox toben their coulin is Difpara-
ged — ias marriage, tt (g not onlp a (fjame and tnfamp to the heire, but tm him to all bis bleu
and kindzed,

€ Dozques poet le procheine cosfin a que le enheritance ne poet difcender
enter c — le gardein in chiualrie.

This is worthy the obferuation foz the Swez0g of the ftatutc are generall Secundum difpofi-
tionem parentum, andthe conftrudionthercof (ba be accoꝛding tothereafon of the Common
Law, fo: the nert coufin to whom the inberitance cannot difcend {hail enter anb onft the gars
dian, and (ball be tn place of a gardtan, as tt fe in cafe of a gardtan in focage. .

Et filnevoille, un anter coufindel enfant poet ceo faire. &ptill puta
fuing thereafon of the Common Lake in cafe of garbían in Socage.

€ Et Les iffices & proffits prender al vfé delenfant, dc. This is ſo eui⸗
dent ag (t needeth no crplication, - ) , :

€ On anterment lenfant deins age poet enter lny mefine & oufte le gardein.
FE none of tbe coufing afoꝛelaid will enter, then the beire himfcife map enter, In all Which tbe
geafon of the Common Lawig purſued. Wut what it the beire be Difparaged and the next of
Kin both enter, and when the heire commethto 14 he agreeth to the marriagc>pet (ball not thie
giue anp aduantage tothe Loꝛd, forthat be had loſt the wardhhip befoge,


! Sedlion


Liba.


Of Knights Seruice,


Sed. 109.
€ Oftbis tufficient hath beenc faíb before.


cyan mults auters Divers
Difparagemts p font, que ne
font (pecifies enmelmeleftatute,
Come fi Ibeire que eft en gard eft
mary a bn que nad fozfqs bu pee,
ou fortgs bu maine ou que c(t De-
fozme,Decrepite, ou apant hoꝛri⸗
bie Difeafe, ou graunDa con-
tinual infirmity: Ct (( foit
beire male) (i foit marry a feme
que eft paffe lage Denfanter,
Ci muits auters caufes De Di-
{paragements font Sed de illis


TA there be many and diuers
other difparagements, which
are not fpecified in the fame fta-
tute. Asif the heire which is in
Wardbe married to one which
hath but one foot,or but one hand,
or which is deformed, decrepit,or
hauing fome horrible difeafe or
great and continuall infirmity. And
(f hebeanheire male) if hee be
married toa woman paft the age


Seti 109,110.


82


ofchildebearing. Andtherebeo- '


ther caufes of difparagement, but


uære cartl ef bon matter dap⸗


prender,


CET des heires

males que font
Deins lage De 21.an8
apres le mort lour an-
cefter nient marries.en
tiel cas le ſũr aucca le
mariage De ticlheire, &
auera temps a fpace De
tender a lup conuena-
blemaríage fang Di-
, fparagement Deins m
le temps De 2 1,ang, Ct
eft afcauoir, que Ibeire
entiel cafe poit eflier fil
boit c£ marry ou nor,
‘mes ft le Sũr que ett
appel gardetn en chi-
ualry a ciel heire tender
couẽabł mariage deins
lage De21. ang fang
Dilparagement, lheire
Ceo refute, a ne fop ma-
. Ve deyns le Dit age,


inquire of them, forit is a good


matter to vnderftand.


Set, 10.


Nd of heires males
which bee within

the age of 2 1.yeares af-
terthe deceafe of their
Anceftorand not marri-
ed, Inthis cafe the Lord
fhall haue the mariage of
fuch heire, and hee fhal]
haue time and {pace to
tender to him couenable
mariage without difpa-
ragement within the faid
time of 21.yeares. And
itis to bee vnderftood,
that the heire inthis cafe
may chufe whither hee
@ willbe married or no,
but ifthe Lord which is
called gardian in chi-
ualry tenders to fuch
heire couenable mariage
within the age of 2r.
yeares without difpa-

Eai


€[) tender 4


luy conuena-
ble mariage, Gc.
Wut itis inthe election
of the Lord Whether £02
the finale value the 3,020
Will tender a mariage 03
no, fozbe (bail baue the
finale balue Without a=
ny tender,

And of this there nee⸗
Detl no other erplicatt=
on; @he faluc sf the
mariage of fuch an heire
{8 accozding to the bas
luatíon bp laSvfull triall
ozas much as another
had before offered to
gine foz the fame with⸗
out fraude asd coupit,

Le heire en
tiel café poet eflier
fil voet efle marie,


en non, Ac. And (o
on the other fine though
there bea tender made of
a couenable martage
Without diſparagement.
pet the beire map refafe,
fep in eucrp mariage

there


Lib.6.fo.7o.Lo. Darcses
€


t1je.
V id. Britton, fel. 169:


Merton cap. 6.
AB. E. 3. 18.


Lib,


Stat.de Merton.cap.6.
a.E.3.acc. fur leflat.45-
3.E. 2.1bid.27.


26.£.3.tbid. 14.18 F.3. 18.


Temps & x. acc. fur lcftat.
43. E. 3. 11. 27. H.8.4.
datus. de Merton eap.7.


35. H.6.tit.gard.o1. Lib. 6.


Fel. px. Lord Darcies caf.


Lib.4. fol.88. im Luprerels
vafé. Lib.G. fol. 20.2.
Gregorses cafe.
I19./R- a. gard.15 5.


Cap.4.
there mull bee a free confent,

a Sitiel heire. That
ig. it ſuch an heire to Soom a
tender hath ben made by the
Loꝛd and bp whom a refufail
haue bene made, 1f fuch an
beire afterwards marieth auz
other within age, be ball for=
felt double the value, but tf
bcc befoze anp tender marteth
himfeiie Within age, hee ſhall
pap but tye finale value of rhe
inartage-

{either the Gingle balue
oz the double balue ſhall bee
recoucred again the beire,
but after bis full age, butfoz
both tbefc the 3020 bath a
Bouble remedic: viz. an Adte
on ag igafozrefitd, oz the Loꝛd
map retaine the land after Full
age fox bis fatiffaction of both,
with this difference. that tn
the cafe of the ingle baluc the
taking of the profits fballnot


Of Knights Seruice.


Donques le gardeine
aüta f balue Del ma⸗
tíage bel tiel Heire
male,mes fi tiel beire
lup mt matie deins
lage De 21. ang en⸗
counter là bolunt le
gardein en chiualtie
Dongle Garden ata
le Double balue Del
mat per force De le-
ſtat ð Merton auant-
Dit come en m̃ leſtat
eft compaife pluis à
pleine,


Sect. tt,


ragement, & the heire
refufeththis,and doth
not marrie himfelfe
within the faid age,
thenthe Gardein fhall
haue the value of the
mariage of fuch heire
male, but if fuch heire
marieth himfelf with-
in theage of 2 1.yeares
againft the will of the
Gardein in Chiualrie,
thenthe Gardein thall
haue the double value
of the Marriage by


force of the Statute of Merton aforefaid, as in
the fame Statute is more fully at large compri-


fed.


beaccounted parceli of the balue but ag a gage o2 pledge tili tbe beíre docfatifie himof the ſin⸗
ale balue, but tn cafe of tie double balue, the perception of the profits [bail be taken in fatifface
tion of the Double balne,foz the Statute of Merton Which giucth the forfeiture faith, Dominus
teneat terram, &c. per tantum tempus quod inde percipere poffit duplicem valorem ma ritagij,
Swhich Words (quod inde, &c.) pꝛoueth that the taking of the profits hall goc tnfatilfacion :
but in cafe of the ſingle baiue, vntill the heire doth fatiffic the 3,020 of the fame.

jo forfeiture of mariage ig giuen bp the fato Statute of Merton, of an heire female, ag ap=
peareth by thefatd Act, neither at the Common Law could the 3.070 haue holden the land of
she hetre female after fourteene pearcg fon the value,


€ PE Caffle gard.
Wardum  cafiri,

feu caftle gardum , (tn
caffri-gardum 13e that
boldeth bv Œaftie-gard, hol⸗
deth bp knights Herutce,
butnot bp Cicuage, for Efe
cuage ts Due Swben the king
maketh a Uopage Boyail out
ofthis Kealme (ag hath ben
fatd) andthe Cenant maketh
default, but Calle qardis te
bedone Within the Kealme, €
without anp Q1oyagc ropall.
Alife a certaine tearme is
appointen for tbe Serutce of
the Tenant that holdeth bp
Œfcuage, but no certaine
terme by Law for him that
holoethby Caſtle gard, Vide
inthe Œitie of Grand Se-
rtantle Sc&. Hereot come


Section 111.


€ [ Cemdiuerste-
nants teígnont
de lour Seigniorz p
ſeruice De cbíualer, &
bncore ts ne teíg-
nont per Cfcnage, ne
pateront efcuage.co-=
me ceux queteígnont
De lour Seigniors
pet caftle garde, ce-
ftafcauoire, a garer
bn tower Del cattle
lour Deigniog,ou bn
buis ou bn auter lieu
Del cattle per reaſo⸗
nable garnifbment,
quant lour Seigni⸗


Lío diuers Te-

nats hold of their
Lords by Knights fer-
uice,and yet theyhold
not by Efcuage, nei- .
ther fhall they pay Ef-
cuage, As they which
hold oftheir Lords by
Caftleward, that is to
fay, to warda tower
of the Caftle of their
Lord, or a doore or
fome other place of
the Caftle vpon rea-
fonable warning,when
their Lords heare that
the enemies wil come,


018


Lib.2.


028 oyont que ene-
mies boplent Dener
ou font benus en
Engieterve, Ce en
pluſoꝛs auters cafes
Home poit tener pet
feruice De chiualer, a
vncore il ne tient per
e(cuage, ne paycta
efcuage, ficome ferra
Dit en le tenure per
Graund Serieanty.
Des en touts cafes
ou home tient p ſer⸗
uice De chiualer, tiel
feruice trait al ſeig⸗
nioz Gard a mariage.


Of Knights Seruice.


or are come in Eng-
land. And in many o-


ther Cafes aman may |


hold by Knights Ser-
uice, and yet hee hol-
deth not by Efcuage
nor fhall pay Efcuage,
as fhall bee faid inthe
tenure by Grand Seri-
antie. But in all Ca-
fes where a man holds
by Knights Seruice,
this Seruice draweth
tothe Lord ward and
mariage.


Seca,


Caftellani ; 03 Conftabularij
caftri, fo? Keeners op Con⸗
fables of a atte,

CA garder vn
tower del Castle , dre.
À Comer, 02 a Mare, 0? à
Bridge, 02 a Sconce, oꝛ ſome
other certaine part of the (Las
ſtle, for the tenure mult be cer⸗
taine, And this may be Done
by the Cenant himſelte op bis
Deputie. ;

€ Del Seignior. fo
ít cannot bee of a Œaftle of
another ,

Lord and Tenant bp Cas
fie gard, the Loꝛd granteth oz
uct his feigniozp to ancther,
(a) the dLaffle gardis gone
becauft the Grantee hath not
the Cattle, (b) Fos the fame
reafon itis, that if one hel=
deth of mecas of mp DMDanoz
of D. by fcaltíc and futte of


Court, tf J avaut ouer the feruices of this Tenant, thefuite is gone becaulethe Grantee bath


not tbc M


anoz. (c) Wut if the Laftle be wholy rutnated, Si Caftrum fit penitus dirutum, pet


thetenure remayneth bp Knights Serutce, and tt gocth in benc&t of the Cenant , ag to the
Garding of the Caftic ontill ít be reediſied. But Ward and Wartage belongeth tothe Lozd
in the meane time, Foꝛ Littleton inthe end of this Section putteth it fora generall rule in ail


cafes Where aman holacth bp Knights SHeruice, tt drawety Hard and M


ariage.


PFE the Cenant make defaut in garding of the Caſtle, the 3.020 map diſtraine £o tt, and re⸗


couer fatiffacion in damages.


€ Per reafonable carnifhment. Chis Warning mutt bee atuen bp
the 1010 02 forc other For him, and the Tenant ned not to ftirre dntttl he haue fuch Warning.

€ Enemies. Mhich ts tobe vnderſtood of anp manner of enc-
mies Whatfocuer, And tyough Littleton fpeakes of enemies, pet it ſeemeth that to kepe a Cae
fic in time of Inſurrection and Webellion (albeit in propzictis of ſpeech Rebels are no ence
mics) is a tenute bp Knights Seruice, Vide Hill.8.E.1. Midd. Rott.86.


Œ Voilent vener. For preparation ts to be made bpon warning
before the cnemiebe come indeed into England. Chis appearcth to bein time of boftiitie and
Swarre,oz £02 preparation therefore. Wut a tenure to keepe a Callie in time of peaceonty te no


Knights Seruice.


BE the Cenant bp Caſtle gard dec feruethe King in bis warre, hee fball bee diſcharged as
gaint tbc 3,020 according to the quantitie of the time that he was in the Kings hot.

Fleta fpcaketh of an old woꝛd called Wardwite and (fatth he) fignificat quictanciam mife-
ficordix in cafu quo noniauencrit quis hominem ad Wardam faciendam in Caftre.


€ ET fi bu tenant

_ que tient De for
feignioz per feruice
Deenticr fee De chiua-
lermozutt , fon heire
Dongs efkeat De plein
age ,9, De 21, ang,


Sed. 112.
ie if a Tenant


which holdeth of


hisLord by theferuice
of a whole Knights
fee dieth, his heire
thenbeing of full age
S. Of 2 1. yeares , then


$3


€. R Eleife,releusuns,
Œbis $0020 ts dert=
ued from the oztemí-
nail befoze.

Nota, iBelícfe (a) is mo
ferntce bat an tmpzoucment of
tbefcru(ce , 02 an ínctoent to
tbe ferutce , for the which the
3020 map diſtreine but canc
not haue an ion of Po


83


Vide Mag. (afr .cap.1 9. 20.
#.1 .eap.7. Brac. /sb, s, fel,
363. Fleralib, 2.07 p. 43.


Magna Cara. cap· 2o.


(1) Temps E. 2.36. Af 3 99,
31.E 1.48. Af 4 41.


(b) 17-£.3.65.72.
46,342.


(c) Lib. a. fe'.88.

Luthrel, eafe.

3. H.8. Bendlees, Capels cafe,
4E. 3.557


Ffate. lib 1.eap, 4s,


Vids $e8. 10 3.


(a) Temps En nliefe,
13.41.6.3.22-

4B. 2 aurw rie 319.7, H. 6.13
22. H. 8,/R 065528.
34.8. X. uri MD


puru


Lib.2.


(5 Stat. de x. E,2.de milits-


Vide lib.g. fol. 124.
Anh, Lewes café,


G lanuil.lib.9.eap 4.6.
"Eralon.lib. 2. fol.8 3.
"Britton, fol. 178.
Ockam.42.F.N.B.83.25 6.
Fleta lib. 5.eap.17.
Magna (C barta cap.2.


Vide Bratton fol.24. y 4. H.4«


énrecerdo longo. 10.H.7.19.
20.8.3. Mi 32. tit. aue wrie
126. 18. Aff pl. vltimo.
33.£.3.8,


16.E. 3. Efchange 3.
46.E.3. forfeiture 18.


24. E. 3.24. 26.H.8.
32.H.8.cap. 2. in fine.


1.€.3.6. Pl. (om 2139.
33-E. ʒ. tit. gard. Stathom.


Cap-4-
but bis Executozs 02 Admi⸗
niftratozs map haue an Actt⸗
on of Debt, and cannot dt
ffraine,

Andit (b) ig to be vnder⸗
fiob that foedum militis, à
Knights Fee, confifteth of
twentte pound land, and be
papeth for his relicfe for a
hole Knights fee, the fourth
part of his fee viz. fiue pound,
ano fo accozding to the
rate.

Baronia , a Waronie, 02 à
Warons Fe confifteth of


Of Knights Seruice.


Donque le Seignior
auera ©, 5, put re⸗
liefe, a Del heire celup
que tient per le moí-
tie Dun fee De chiua⸗
let XL, $, & De celup
que tient per E quart
part à fee Dun chiua-
lev 25, 5, & fic que
pluíg., piuíg, aque
meíng, meins,


Sed. m:
the Lord fhallhaue C.


s.forareliefe , and of
theheireof himwhich

holds by the moitie of

a Knights fee 50. s.

and of him which

holds by the fourth

part ofa Knights fee

25.5. and fo he which

holds more, more,and

which leffe, leffe.


thirteene Knights fes, and |
the third partof a Knights foc which amounteth to foure hundred Markes per annum, and
the Baron fo» an entire Baronie papeth foz his veliefe an hund®zed Markes, Which fs the
fourth part of the value of bis Baronie.

' Comitatus, an Œarledoine, of an Œarles fee confiftcth of a Waronte, andthe third part ofa
Waronte, which includeth t&ventíe Knights fees amounting to foure hundzed poundiand per
annum, anû be papeth for his reltefe fox an entire Carideme the fourth part of his reuenue,
and that is ahundzedpound, Bil Which appearcth bp the Statute of Magna Charta, cap.2-
made in the ninth peare of Henrie the third, at which time there Was neither Duke, Mar⸗
queſſe noz Viſcount in Fngland ag before isfaid. Wut there be P2ehdents in the Exchequer
that a Dukcoomeconfifting of two Earicdomes , viz- eight hundzed pound land bp the peare
papeth two hundzed pound, anda Warquelleconufting of two Warcntes , viz. eight hundzed
Markes land per annum, and of an Earldome and a haife papeth two hundzed Markes for
hig relícfe, What the Uiſcount fhouid pay in certaine 3] hauenot heard. Wefoze the making
of the Statute of Magna Charta the ing had rationabile releuium of Noblemen, andit was
not reduced to any certaintie, pet ought itto haue beene reafonabic and not excelſiue.

J haue ſeene the Wecord of a Charter made in 2c.H.6. to Henry Beauchampe , Earle of
Warwicke, whereby be Was created Bing of the Ie of Wight, to him and the hetres males of
bis booíe, bis relicfe Wags incertaine, and not limíteo bp the Statute of Magna Charta,

Ft (s tobe obferucd that the Words of the Statute of Magna Charta , be Hæres Comitis de
Comitatu inteero & heres Baronisde Baronia integra, & c. Now $obatan entire Œarledome,
anb an entire Baronie is hath bene declared before,

Ftis alfo tobe obferucd that at and before the Statute of Magna Charta, all Earledomes
ano Baronies Were deriued fromthe Crowne, and Were holden bp the Hing in Capite, and.
and the Laing Wwonld not fuffer them to bedeutded, o? ferucred, And fucb entire Œarledomes,
and entire Baronies are Within the Statute, but at this day Carles and Warons are with⸗
eut fuc Earledomes and Waronies of the Kings gift inchiefe, Jroz at the Creation of an
Earle he hath ſometimes an Annuitte granted onto him, efowctime nothing, fo ag fuch Caries
anb Barons fo created are clerelp out of the Statute of Magna Charta, and are to pay fuc
relicfes ag other men that hold ofthe King in Capite. Foꝛ as tbebeireof a Knight hall not
pay reliefe vnleſſe he hath a Knights fee, ec. fo netther the Carle no? Baron ball pap anpres
liefe by this Statute, bnicte he hath an Earledome, tc, 02 Waronp, ec. ;

€ Son heire de pleine age .s. de 21. ans. And pet infomecafetbe-
heire fhal pay reliefe Shen he Was within age at the time of the death of his Anceftoz. As (£
aman holdeth lands of the thing bp Knights £»erníce in Capice, and of a common perfon other
lands by Knights Seruice, and dieth bis betre being within age, the ing hath all in toOard
by bis 32crogatíuc butill the fullage of the hetre. Fin thts cafe the heire fati pay reliefe tothe
other Lord, for that the king bab the wardſhip of bodicandiands, And the 1020 spon cute
rp Difcent ought to bauc cither wardſhip 02 clicfe.

But it there be 3020 and Cenant bp Knights Seruice, and tbe Cenantdieth , His heire
being Within age.the Lord wayueth bis to ardthip ag he map, and taketh bánfelfeto his Seig⸗
niozic, in thts cafe the Loꝛd fhail not hauc reltefe at his fuil age becaufe bo might haue hadthe
Wardfhip of tbe bodte and land. Loꝛd and Cenant of two Wanors bp dtuers tenures by
Knights Serutce, tbe Cenant ts difleifed of the onc, andthe Willetio: diethſeiſed, and the Cex
nant dieth fcífeo of the other hie heire Mithin age, the Lozd fetfen the bodfe and lands of that
Manoz and after thehetreat big fullage reconercth the other Mano again the boire of the
Dillctfor, he (ball pap reliefe Foz that Manoꝛ, and fo onc Loꝛd of the boire ef one Cenant bail
bauc both wardſhip during bts miinoritie and reliefe at his fullage,

Son


Lib.


Of Knights Seruice.


¶ Sonbeire. (k) And pet the ſucceſſoꝛ of a Biſhopoꝛ Abbot map


pap reitefe bp ppefcription oz arant,
PE the tenant (nteoffcth bis heire apparant by colluGon, and bictb, (1) his bcíre of fullage it


tg a quetti


on in our bakes, whether be fall haue relíefe cither by the Common Law, o2 by the


flatate of Marlebridge.ca.6. Wut now the ftatute ( m ) of 13-Eliz,ca.5. hath clereb that quefti-
on, and that the 1,020 fall haue reiicfe Where the conwepance ig made to amp perfon bp collu-
Gon, ec.


Section 113:


This fg euident, and needeth no erplanation,


€ I Tem home poit tet fon tre
. £ de fon Sfir per ie feruice de
beug fees de chiualer, & Donque
lheire efteant de pleine age al
temps De mot fon aunceſtre pai-
eraa fon Sir p. T, pur teliefe,


€ NOta fí foit
aiel, pitt, d
fits,æ fa mere mozuft
biuant le pier Dc le
fits € puis laiel que
tient fa terre p fer-
uice De chiualer mo-
tutt fetfic, a fa terre
Difcendift al fits la
mere, come heire al
aiel d eff Deins age:
en ceft cas la Sfr
fuera le garde de la
terre, mes nemp le
arde Del cozps Del
eire pur ceo que nul
ferra en gard de fon
€02p8 à afcun Sfr
biuant fon pier pur
ceo que le pier durãt
fon bic aucta le ma-
tiage De fon boire
apparant, # nemp le
Sir. Auterment eft
pule pier e(t mot bi-
uant là mere, Tou ie
tette tenus en chi-


Sed. 114.


Ote , if Grand-

father, father and
fonne, and the mother
dieth liuing the father
of the fonne, and after
the grandfather which
holds his land by
Knights feruice dicth
feifed, and his land di-
fcendto the fonne of
the mother as heirc to
the grandfather who is
withinage : In this
cafe, the Lord fhall
haue the Wardfhip of
the land,but not ofthe
body of the heire, be-
caufe none (hall be in
ward of his body to
any Lord,liuing his fa-
ther,for the father du-
ring his life fhall haue
the mariage of his
heire apparant, & not
the Lord.Otherwife it
is wherethe father di-
eth liuing the mother,


ARR aman may hold his land
of his Lord by the feruice of
two Knights fees, & then the heire
being of fullage at the time of the
death of his Ancefter fhall pay to
his Lord x.pound for reliefe.


CE. Bet the fa-
ther fball baue the ma⸗
tíage of big Daugh⸗

tet f£ the bee bis boire appas

tant , anb Littletons gcafon
ertendeth tothe Daughter,foz
that ( fatth be) the father fbati
bauetbe wardſhip of his bare
apparant , within bitch

Words the Daughter ts incite

deb, fo long ag the continuety

beire apparant,

€ Le fesanior auers
le garddel terre. {rote
that albeít (n this cafe the

La doth giue the cuftody of

the body of the father, and

barreth the 1.010 thereof, pet
the 1,070 (ball haue the wards
fbípot the Land by force of
the tenure at the ir(E creation
thereof, And fe ít (s it the
father marieth his heire with⸗
in age and dteth, pet the Lord
i bane the wardſhip of the


€ sans fon pier.
(E big doth not extend to anp
collaterall bcíre, but ontp to
the fonne o? Daughter being
beíce apparant, £o; albett a
man fball baue an action of
trefpaffe, Quare confanguine-
um & hzredem cæpit,an® al-
bett the words be Cujus ma-
ritagium ad ipfum pertinet,


becanfe the well bciboxoíng e


Se#.113.114.


84


(k) 3.£.3.13.76.
8. Ra. reliefe, 14.
H.4.2.


3.

a €.3. Ausrie, 124.
(1) 39.€.3.18. Rehele
324.E.3.24.€.3.Reiefe11.
rales 9 2-3. €

(m) 13. Elit .ca $.


Fl ta lsb.i. cars.

Y 6. E. 3.diffcifin 6.

1, E. 1. gard 154.
8. E.2. rrefp. 335.

. N. B. 243.
Anmbrofia Gorges cafe,
lb, 6.fo aa⸗


"m ew


9 E.3.18.E.3.34.39.4ff.15.
29.E. 3. 37. 3 6E.3.barr. 217


Tib. ꝛ.


$2.E.3.Gard33.39.2.3.176
31. H.6. 5 5.13. H. 4. 16.
F.N.B.143.31.6.3.Br.357
$.E.4.93. ^


VE let.1.1.9.6,S0aW.2.0.35


33 H.6.55. Li. 7. fe.13.
f Caluins cafe.
V.Flot.li.y.ca. 13. S.eumn
"Patr de fecdo, re.


OfKnightsSeruice.  Seélins.


ualry diſcendiſt al wherethe land holden
fits De part fon pitt, inchiualry difcendsto

RC thefonon the part of
Dorr but not againſt a garbían


in Chivairie , andthemother the father &c.

fhail haue the like &o2(t fo? taking away of her ſonne and heire apparent : and pet the mother
thall not barre tbe Lozd bp knights feruice, of big wardlhip of the bodie, ag Littleton here
fatth, Qui tamen ex filia tua nalcitur in poteftate tua non eft, fed patris cius.


«| Aafcunfeignior. Put the calethereigs X,020,& Feme Tenant
by nights feruice of a Carue of iand,the Feme maketh a feoffement in fee bpon condition, and
taketh the 1.020 to huſband, andhaue tive a fonne, the wife dieth, the fue entreth fox thecon=
Bitton broken, the Lozd entreth into the land ag Gardeine bp knights ſeruite, and maketh hig
Œtecutozs, and dieth: tn this cafe the Executoꝛs ball auc tbe wardſhip of the land during
the minozétte of tbe bete, but not the wardſhip of the bodte,for albeit the 1020 feemet h tobaue
a double intereft in the wardſhip of the bodie, oneas Lozd, and another as father, pet ag Fa⸗
ther, and not ag 3020 in tubgementof Law, he ſhall bauc the wardſhip of the bodie of his fors
anb heire apparent, tn refped of nature, which Was before anp wardſhip in refpet of Seig⸗
níozteg by Knights ferutce began, and that wardſhip by reafon of nature cannot be vaine,
anb claime made in refpect of the Seignioyie. And the Executozs of the Father fball not jane
fuch a wardſhip which tbe Ceftatoz ab ag father, neither can fucb a wardſhip be fozfctted by
outlawꝛie becaufe tt ts Due to the father in refpect of patuitie of nature,

«| Defonheire apparent. Andthereforetfthe father be attainted
of felonte, qc. then cannot the fonne o2 Daughter be an heircapparent, becanfe the bloudis coz=
rupted bet weene them, and confequentlp in the life of the father, his fonne tn that cafe (yall bg
in Ward, *

A Woman leiled of lands in fee holden bp Knights ſeruice, taketh bufbanb an Alien, anb
bath iſſue, and the ife dieth, the iſſue (all be tn ward, and the father ſhall not banc the cufte=
die of him, £o; that in the epe of the Law he te not bis cire apparent, ag Littleton bere


fpeaketh.
Setl. 115.


Ghis Section (e an addition to Littleton, and thercfore Jpaſſe it oner, andthe rather, foz
that the faf» Statute of 4. H.7. {8 become of no force, fox that bp the Statute of 27.H.s.
cap.1 0. all vſes arc tranfferrco (mto poſſeſſton.


€ "N Ora, fi home foit feifie De As ifaman be feifed of land
Cerre que eft tenus pet which is holden by Knights
feruicede Chiualer , æfait feoff= feruice,and maketh a feoffement if


(Cap. 4.
bía beiteapparant in mariage
fg a great cffablifment of his
bonfe, pet that iste be vnder⸗
fon ag again a wong


ment enfecafon bfe, et moꝛuſt
feifie del bfc, fon heir Deing age,
et nul bolunt per lup Declare, le
Seignioꝛ auera Betefe De Droit
De gard Dc co2pg.ct Del Terre ſi⸗
come Cenant bft Deute feifie Del
Demefne, Ct fi le heire fopt de
pleine age al temps Del morant
fon anceftoz, bn ttel cate il paye⸗
ta reltefe (come il fuiffoit feifie
del demeſne. Ct ceft per leſtatut
De anno 4.H.7.cap.17. !


fee to his own vfe,and dieth feifed
of the vfe,his heire within age,and
no will declared by him, the Lord
fhall haue a Writ of Right of the
wardfhip of the bodie and land, as
if the tenant had died feifed ofthe
demefne. And if the heire bee of
full age at the time of the deceafe
of his Anceftor, in this cafe he fhal
pay reliefe,as ifhe hadbin feifed of
the demefne.And this is by the fta-
tute of 4.H.7.c2p.17.


Sed.


Lib.


Ora, il y ad
Pc i
it en Chiualrie,
e Bardein en fapt en
Chiualrie. Gardein
en droit en Chiualrie
eft, lou le Seigniour
per caule De fon
Seignioꝛie, ett ſeiſie
De gard de Terres &
Del heyre, ve fupra.
Gardein en fapt ert
Chiualrie eſt, lou eri
tiel cafe le Seigni⸗
out apres fon ſeilin
aunt per fait ou
uns fapt le Gard
des Terres, ou Del
beíte ou Dambideur
& bn aute, er
fozce De quel grant
le Grauntee ei en
pofteffion , donque
eft le Grauntee ap-
pel Gardeine en
fait,


Of Knights feruice.


Sed. 116.


N°: there is
Gardeine in right
in Chiualrfe, and
Gardeine ia Deede
in Chiualrie. Gar-
deine in Right .in
Chiualrie is, where


4| roy Liuletori
He Gars


Seét.116.


* * A


85


bene in hi: .


ualríe , into Garden {ré
Bight, anb Garveine tn
Fatt. Bnd this ts enibent,
and næbeth me explana
tion,


«| Per fait ow fanns


the Lord by reafon of fait. Heree Littleton


his Seigniorie is fei-
fed of the Ward.
fhip of the Lands,
and of the heire, vt
ſupra. Gardeine in
Decde in Chiualrie
is, where in fuch cafe
the Lord after his
Seifin grants by Deed,
or without Deede,
the Wardfhip of the
Lands , or of the
Heire, or of both,
to another , by
foree of which grant
the Grauntee is in
poffeffion , then is
the Grauritee called
Gardeine in Fait, or
Gardeine in Deede.


affitmeth, Chat tbe wardſhip
eere bobíe map bee graunten

er without Deed, and heres
in notea diuerũtie betwen an
oziginall Chattell of a thing
shat properlp licth (n grant,
anda Œbattell deriued out of
a Frechoidof anp thing that
Beth th grant. Bs fog eram=
ple, (fa man maketh a Leafe
for pearec of a Q3tileine , this
Cannot be done Without ded,
neither can the Lefle aligne
it over without Derd, becauls
itis Derlued ont ofa Free⸗
hold that lieth in gtarit : but
the wardſhip of the bodie is
an opiginall Chattell, during
tbe minogitié, deriued out of
no Freehold, and therefoze as
the Law createth tt without
Deed, fo ít map be aligned over
Without Ded,

B Corporation aggregate
of manp cannot make a
Xeafe for peares without
Deed, (Wrefped of (be qualitp
ef tbe Incoꝛpoꝛation, hut that
Zee map affígne tt ouer
without Deed,


FE an Aduowiſon be bolben vy Knights fermíce,anb the Cenant dieth, bic boire being with⸗
int age, the Lozd cannot grant the Wardihtp of the 28bnoSofon Without Med, becanfe ít to des
singed out of at 3i nbrrítance that lieth in grant, anb paſſeth not bp Liuerie: fez,lus przfentan-
di eft incorporale, and fo ( albeít thers be Dinerfitis of opinion (n our bokg )(g the Lak taken at


tbíg day.


Car.


12.Ë,3.r68. Grant 59.7.2.3.
63. 1€. E. 3.65.28. £.3.96
14.2.3. fie Lef.17.
25-€.3.40. 31: E. 3. oncb, 5
46.€. 3.25.30. E.4.16.

13. H.4.19. 54H 7517.36.
33.E!.Dyer 371.35. H.84
Br.s18.Grans 85.


36. H.8. sit, Grax 0.115,
23.H.6.34. 19, 8.6.3 3.


24.E.3.69.70. 5. E.3. «8.
43-E. 3.15. 3. 7.36.

14. H. 7. 16.15. H. 8. 8.
Brak. 366.168.146.43 E. 3.
2.6. 5. H.7. 37. 11. A. 6.4.
6.H.7. 3. 10. M. 8.

16. EB( Dyer 433


Libize


Mirror ea. 1.G. 3.


4. Nerea. 19+
Lib. 4. Terr inghams cafe
50.39.07 4 Hi.7.64.13.


(8 )as. E. s. A doc furemevt.
14. 4/21, 24.£.3. 35.
5 Mere.


Bratton fe. 2v. F lata. lib. 3.
———
Ockam. 38.39. 4. E. 3.1.0.
19. E. 2.9. alien für
leflas.4 c. Temp: E.1.


AUS} 430.
29. E. 1.16.17.


Cie lib. offic.


Virgil 1.6.1. Georg.


Geneea im Eps.


Cep.s. |


Of Socage.


Sed...


C nua r. 5. Sef. 17.


Enure in
ZA Socaze. A⸗
, 61 qriculture 02
^ Giilage is
of great account, in Law,as
berp profitable for the Come
tion 10caltb, wherein the
geodneſſe of the habit to belt
none bp the pzination,
Foꝛ by laping ef Hands, b=
fed in tütb, to pafture;
maine inconuentences Soe
batlp encreafe, Firſt, Idle⸗
nefle, Mhich ts the ground
and beginning of all mif-
chtefes. 2. 3D cpopulation,;ano
Decay of townes , for Where
in feme totones 200.perfong
Soereorcupied, and lined bp
their lawtull labours, bp
connerting of tillage into
pafture, there banc bene
maintained but two 02 three
bearomen : Bnd where men
banc bene accounted thepe
of eds palture, now be-
come fheepcmen of thefe pa-
flurcg. 3. Hulban drey, which
íg one of the greateſt com⸗
mobditics of tbe calme, ig
Detaped. 4. Churches are
deſtroyed, and the feruice of
God neglected by diminution
of Church linings, (ag bp
becap of tpthes,€c.) And 5.


Socage,


7 tant tient
de fon feignioz fon
tenement p. certeine
feruice p touts ma⸗
ners De feruices, if-
fint que les feruices
ne font pag fernices
De chpualer : Sicde
lou home tient fon
fre De fon ſeignior p
feaitie à p certeine
rent p touts maners
De fernices, ou lou
home tient p homage
a fealtie & cerf rent
pur touts mancrs Dc
feruices.ou lou il tiẽt
phomage a fealty p
touts maners de fer=
uices, cat homage


-
 Enure in So-
cage , is
where the
Tenant hol-
deth of his Lord the
tenancie by certaine
feruice for all manner
of feruices, fo that the
feruice be not Knights
feruice : As where a
man holdeth his land
of his Lord by Fealty
and certaine rent for
all manner offeruices:
or elfe where a man
holdeth his land by
homage, fealty, and
certaine rent, for all
manner of feruices,
for Homage by it felfe
maketh not Knights
feruice.


p fop ne fait pas feruicede che,


Iniury and zong doncto Patrons and Gods miniflers. 6. Che defence of the Mand a-
gatnt foraine enemies enfeebled and impapzcd, the bodyes of bulbandmen being moze ffrong
and able, and patient of cold, beate, and hunger, then of any other.

The two confequents that follow of thee inconuentences, ave firft the bifpleafure of Al⸗
mighty Bod, and fecondip thefubuerfion of the Pollicie and gad Douernment of the Reale,
and all this appeareth in ourbokes, 20nb the Common Ha (a) giveth errable lan b( which
anciently tg called Hyde & gaine) the pꝛehemtnencie and pꝛecedencie before meadowes, pas
ſtures, ons, mines, and all other grounds Sobatfocuer : and * aucria caruce the beaſts of the
plow bauc in fome cafes moze pzíuttebac than other cattle haue.And among(i the Romans B=
arículturc o: tillage Was of high eftimation.infomuch asthe Senatozs tbemfelueg Would put
their handtothe plow,and it is faid, Œ bat neuer profpered tillage better,then $oben the Henas
tors themfelues plowed ( fuch force hath tbe example of fapertore ) &obercof three Famous ih ox
manes (n thetr fencrall kindes fpake,

Omnium rerum ex quibus aliquid exquiritur nihil agricultura melius, Nihil vberius, nihil dul-
cius,nihil libero hominc dignius,

O fortunatos nimium, fua fi bona norunt
Agricolas, quibus ipfa procul difcordibus armis
Fundit humo facilem victum juftiffima tellus.

Nullum laborem recufant manus quz ab aratro ad arma transferuntur, &c. fortiorautem mi

les ex confragofo venir, fed ille vn&us, & nitidusin primo puluere deficit. Wat no%o let oe


perufc our Anthors Words, t
Socagiwpm


Liba. Of Socage. Se 8. n9;
¶ Scagium. Littleton in this chapter Se&ion r19.fetcheth this


woꝛd the exiginall. Socagium idem eft quod ſetuitium ſocæ, & foca idem eft quod ca-
tua. s. vn foke ou vn caruc. iB
Bnd Bra&on agretb herewith, Dicitur focagium (fait! he )à focco & inde tenentes dicun-
turSocmanni (b)co quod deputati funt tantummodo ad culturam. And Benerth fignificth thefer=
miceof plongh and cart. It is to be obſerued thatin the nnm o£ (c) Damefday, Hand holden
Knights feruice Was called Tainland, and {and Holder bp Socage Sas called Reueland,
ich appeareth in that there it (a fait, Hæc terra fuit terra regis Edwardi Taineland fed poftea
€onuerfa c& in Reucland, And in thatboke thepthat held in Socage were called bp feucrall
naines, ag Sochemanni 67 Sokemanni, Which fill continueth, fomet tie * Coleberti.i. qui te
nent in liberum focagium per redditum, and fometfinethcp are called Radcheneftres.i, liberi ho-
mines, quitamenar thant, herciabant, falcabant, & metebant, &c.? Bnd bere it appeareth how
neceſſary itis, that words be fetched from thetr oꝛiginalls, and our Puthog Eft verus Etimolo-
gus both in this ano (n many other places in his (d) thee bokes. Bnd it (s to be obf{crucd once
£o: all, that the legal! terinination of ( agium ) in compofition &gnificth feruice oꝛ dutte ; as ho-
magium theferuice of the man, E(cuagiumferuitiam fcuti,(e)Socagium feruitium foce,hidagi-
um the dutie to be patd fo? a hide op plough-land, andfo of cornagium, coragium, carnagium,
cariagium, burgagium, villenagium, guidagium, (which one b(feribetb thug ) quod datur ali-
cui vt tuto conducatur per loca alterius; andthe like,

Ifsint que les feruices( £ ) me ſont pas feruices de Chivaler. Bnd (tt
the next Section belaítb, andcuerp tenure, that (c nota Cenure tn Chiualry is a tenure tn
Socage, Ex donationibus autem feoda militariay vel magnam Seriantiam non continenubus
eritur nobis quoddam nomen gencrale quod eft fokagiam. dere Littleton fpeaketh of G cnnreg
ofcemmon perfens, £02 grand p ertantíc (g not Knights feruíce, ano pet itis not a tenure tit
Hocage, as ſhall be fai hereafter. Aifohere he meaneth tempozall féruices, and not Frank⸗
almoigne ag by. the examples be putts manifeft, and agin bis proper place fhall appeare moze
Atlarge. Bile here Littleton fpeaketh of Socage largely taken, and fo called ab effectu, that
íg, alſtenures that haue thelike effects. and incidents belonging to then, ag SHocage hath, are
Éctmen tenures in Hocage, albeit orꝛiginally feruíceof the plo was notreferued : ag it o2t-
ginallp a Koſe, a paire of guilt Spurres, a Went, andfuch ithe were referued, o2 that the Te⸗
nants tn Condemnaros vItrices manus mittant vt alios fufpendio, alios membrorum detrunca-
tione, &c, puniant, thefe are fafd tobe tenures in Socage rb effectu, fozthat there ſhall be like

Gardein in Hecage, like Reliefe, and fuc) other effects and incidents asa tenure in Socage
bath, and are fe tearmed to diſtinguiſh the fame from Knights ſeruice Map,the Wor Tenure
that 3l bauc read of,ts of this kinde,as to hold lang to be Vitor fceleratorü conde,nnatorum,
vt alios fufpendio, alios membrorum detruncatione vel alijs modis juxta quantitatem perpetrati
fceleris puniat, (that is) tobca Hangman oz Œrecationer. It Ceemeth in ancient times fuch
officers Were not Uoluntaries, noz for lucre to be hired, onle(ctbep Mere bound thereunte bp
Cenure-And fo note that fone Cenures in Socaye are named à caufa and ſome and the grea⸗
tet part ab effectu. *


€ Car homage de ſoy ne fait fervice de chivaler. But it 8 à pꝛeſump⸗
tion that where homage fe duc, that thelandis helven by Knights leruice, as hath benc fato,


Sed. n8.


€ «n hoe poít teñ de fon fñr Ai^ 3 man may hold of his

pur fealty met tiel tenure e(t Lord by fealty only,and fuch
tenureen focage, Car chefcun tes tenure is tenure in focage: for eue-
nure queneft pas tenure in chi= ry tenure which is not tenure in


ualry, et tenure en focage. chiualrie isa tenure in Socage.
DE thts fnficientip hath bene ſaid before.


Sei]. 119.


€ ET il et Dit, que la Nditis faid that the ¶ T Empsde


caute pur que tiel reafon why fuch te- memor)
tenure eft Dit & ad le noſ⸗ nureiscalled,and hathtfie — tme of memorie
íg Sohen no man


me De tenure en (ocage, name of tenure in Socage, sigs path bab any
vz proote


raton. foo.
(b) Glanwil,lib ae
& 11. bib.g.ca.4.
Fleta lib. 1 04.8, & lib. 5.
ca 14. 16.

Britton fe.154.

(c) "Demejdas;
Hereferdfc,

"Uid. disant, Sell. t.
Sadr.

Wendeford.

Wefcelterfe. á $
* Mich.10.E.3.( ram -
rege Wiles tn Thejaur.


(4) For etimnolegies vid. *


SeG.95.154.164.204-
234.267.268. crc.

(ce) Flera lib. 5.ca. 15,
Braëton. lib 2.04.16.
Britronfo.1 64.

(E) AMirreryoa.2.§. 18.


Fleta,v5i füpra.


Ockam,cap.284 per folam
conſuitudinem, &c.


Ockam fo.31.4, & bs


Lib.2.


Cap. burgage. Se®, 170.


sMirror.eep. 3 6.18.
Vidi 1 9.€ .2.auswrie.32 4.
3-E.2.accon, fur leff.24.
yo €. 3.34.

20.8 3.anowrts 134.
33.0.3.17. 39.4 f.p. 5.
30.4.1.


(ap.ernfrmation, Eclt.5 39.


4.E.3. 101. 6. X. 3. 283.


Caps.
profs to the cons
trarie, nos bane a=
np Conufance to
the contrarie, ag
Hall bee hereafter
{aid in big proper
place. And of ncs
ceflitte this change
hereafter fpoken of
imuft bebefozc time
of memogie , foz
within time of me-
mogíc, the feruices
of the Plough cane
hot be changed tnto
monep bp confent
9f tbe Qr cnant, and
the defire of the
log... into an
annuall Rent, neis
ther by reteafe o?
confirmation o2 o=
ther conuepance ag
longas tbe Setg=
níor(c remaine ag
bail beefaid tn his
bue place.

¶ Denoient


vener oue lour


Sokes. The
Plough is named
propter excellentia,
but the Sicle and
the Sythe for the
reaping in Darueft
anb fuch like are
alfo included, Foꝛ
89 Carucata terre,
a plough land, map
containe loufes,
Milles , Paſture,
Medow, and Won
ec.as perteining to
tbe Plough, fo bn=
bet theferuice of the
Plough alifernices
of @illage o? huſ⸗
bandip are ínclu-


ded,

€ Vncore le
nofme de Socage
demurt. Alls
though the caufc
SHherups the mame
of Socage firft
grew bee taken a-
Soap, pet the name
temaine(ag tt hath
bene) and is bfcb


Of Socages: >


eft ceo; Quiarfocagium
idem eft quod: feruitium
foce , & foca idem eft
quod caruca, .s. bn foke
ou bn carne. Ct en anci⸗
ent temps Deuant le l=
mitation De temps De
memozie grand part De
les tenants que tpen-
Dont à lout Heigntors
pet focage , Deuoient bc-
niet ouc lour fobeg, cbef-
cun De les Dits tenants
put certein tours per an
put arer a femer les De-
mefnes le Seignioz, &
pur ceo que tiel£ ouera-
ges fueront fait pur ie
diner & fuftenance De
lour Seigniozs, tis fue-
tont quits enuers Tout
SHeigniozs 0 touts maz
ners De feruices, ac, Ct
pur ceo que tielx ſeruices
fucront faits oue lout
fokes tiel tenure fuit ap-
pel tenure en focage, Ct
puis apzes tielsferuices
fucront changes en Des
pers, pec confent Des
Cenants & per Delire
Des Heigniors, s.en bn
annual tent, ac, Mes
bucosele nofine De So⸗
cage Demurt, a en Diuers
Ipeur leg tenants n-
core font tiels fernices


puc lout fokes a lout


Seigniors, iffint que
touts maners ð tenures
que font pas tenures p
feruice De chiualer, font
appels tenuts € focage.


isthis, becaufe Secagisms,
idem efl, quod ſeruitium San
cæ, and Soca, 1dem eff qnod
caruca, oc. A Soke ora
Plough. In ancient time
before the limitation of
time of memorie , à great
part of the tenants which
held of their Lords by
Socage, ought to come
with their Plougkes, eue-
ry of thefaid Tenants for
certaine dayes inthe yeare
to plow and fow the De-
mefne of the Lord. And
for that fuch Workes
were done for the liueli-
hood and fuftenance of
their Lord,they were quit
againft their Lord of all
manner of feruices, &c.
And becaufe that fuch fer-
uices were done with their
Ploughes, this tenure was
called Tenure in Socage.
And afterward thefe fer-
uices were changed into
money by the confent of
the Tenants , and by the .
defire of the Lord, viz.
into an annuall rent, &c.
But yet the name of So-
cage remayneth, and in
diuers places the Tenants
yet doe fuch feruices with
their Ploughes to their
Lords, fo thatall manner
of Tenures which are
not Tenures by Knights
Seruice, are called tenures
in Socage.


$0 biftingui this tenure from a tennrebp Xsníghtg Sesuice. Nomina fi se(cis perit cognitia


rerum


Lib.


Of Socage.


Sect 120,121.


reramiEt nomina fi perdas cert? diftinétio rerum perditur.. Æberefosethe names of things (ag


ale


Tem ( home tient
$ I fon Seigntoz per
efcuage certaines, € tiel
forme quant lefcuage
curge & eft affefle per
Parliament a griender
fumme ou meinder ſum⸗
me, que le tenant paiera
a fon Seignioz forſque
Deny, marke pur efcu=
age, € tient pluíg ne
meins, a quel graund
fumme, ou a quel petite
fumme q lefcuage courge
gc, tiel tenure e(t tenure
en Socage, « nemp ſer⸗
uice De chinalrie, Des
loule fumme que le tenát
paiera pur lefcuage eft
non certains, lou il poit
eftre QE foie d le tenant
patera pur lefcuage à
fon Seignioꝛ poit eftre
abn foits le greinder a a
auter foits le meinder,
folonque ceo que c(t aſſeſ⸗
fc ac.Donques tiel tenure
eft tenute pet feruice de
chiualer.


as the huſbandman map the rather lue m quiet
Hecondly, Eſcuage is to bee paid at euery time When
pato but when ét amounteth to foztte ſhillings.


Sed. 121.


€ | gem ft home tient

fatef pur paiet cer=
taine vent a fon Ceigntoz
pur Caftle-garde,tiel te-
nure ef tenure € ſocage:


Sehion 120. .


Ati a man holdeth

of his Lord by efcu-
age certaine .s. in this
manner, when the efcuage
runneth, and is affeffed by
Parliament to a greater or
leffer fumme, thatthe Te-
nant fhall pay to his Lord
but halfe a Marke for Ef-
cuage , and no more nor
leffe , to how great a fum,
or to how little the efcu-
age runneth, &c. Such te-
nure 1s tenure in Socage,
and not Knights Seruice,
but where the fumme
which the tenant fhall pay
for Efcuage is vncer-
taine ; .s. where it may
bee that the fumme that
the tenant fhall pay for ef-
cuage to his Lord may be


at one timé more , and.


at another time leffe ac-
cording as it is affef-
fed, &c. fuch tenure is
tenure by Knights Ser-
uice.


Lfoif aman holdeth
his Land to pay a cer-
taine rent to his Lord for
Caftle-gard,this tenure is
tenure infocage,burwhere


Littleton here teacheth) are fog anopding of confufon Diligentip to be oblerued.
—


€ Es ize
certeine,
Is not in rei veri-
tate feruitium Scu.
ti, Which is to bo
bone bp the bobp of
man, but ít ig fer-
uitiumCrumenæ,0f
monep which ts td
be drawne out of
the Purſe, and that
ts in effet a Cee
nure in Socage,
Soherein tt ts to be
obferucd that the
feruice of payment
of monep ts the
moze bafe and leſſe
profitable , £o? the
Commonwealth (ty
this cafe,and heres
of fometobat hath
bent fatd before in
the Chapter of Eſ⸗
cuage, Sect.98.99.
jf aman hold
by Bomage, Feal⸗
tie,and Efcuage,s,
by an balfe pennp
wyhen elcuage rung
at kortle (billings,
this te a tenure tn
Socage and no
Knights Seruice
fo: to caufeg,
SFirft, 3t is So
cage tenure becaufe
of the certaintie foz
to the tenure tn fos
Cage, certa feruitia


Doceuer belong, fo


ft ie alleled, unb bereit is not to bee


Grein the
CH

ſtandeth
thus, It a rent be
pao fo? dafllez
gard (t is cleere a
fecage tense, -


87


1 5. E, 3, tif aiewrie 31 5.
zB, Ilf 44.
16.-Aff.66. 53. 6


$. E. 4.138. V thre Roc." Puri.
4-E.3.28. 19. Clanersngs cafe
exvellent ly refeiued in T ar lhe-


tent. 2 a
Hill. 3 E. 3 coram 'R ege.
Rer, 34.Agnes. Browsis eafh.


Vide $v8-88-85.


Lib.2.


Vile lib. a fol. 88.in Lut-


terels cafe.


39.R.2. gard. 19 6.16. A [f.66


FN 8.853.156. Lib.6, fel.
20. Gregories cafe,


Vide le flatute de 4.07 5.
Th.& Marie cap. 8.


(aps.

igagred (n Lutte-
rels Cafe according
to Littletons opínís
on, buti€ a fumme
in grofle 02 other
thing be boluntart=
ip pato o: giuen bp


Of Socage.


Des louk tenant doit p
lup mou p bn auter faire
Caftle garde, tiel tenure
eft tenure per feruice De
chiualer,


$e61.122.123.


the tenant ought by him-
felfe or by anotherto doe
Caftle-gard , fuch tenure
eft tenure by Knights Ser-
uice,


the Tenant, an bolantartip recetned bp the 3.020 fn feu of Calle-gard, pet the teuure bp
Knights Herutce remapneth. Vide Seét.88.89.


€ qt ig called
[ent Sets

nice, becaufe
ít is atcompanted
Sith fome cozpozal
fernice, as Fealtie
at the leaſt, in re=
fpet Sohercof the
Lord may diftraine


Sechion 122.


Can entoutg cates
lout tenant tient Del
Seignioz a pater alup
alcun certeine rent, cel
rent eft appelle vent fer-
uice,


tft
a


Lfo in all cafes wheté

the tenant holdeth of
his Lord to pay vnto him
any certaine rent, this rent
is called Rent Seruice.


fox ít of common right, Spee moze of this matter inthe Chapter of Rents,


€ EX tiels

tenures ẽ
Socage. "df a
man bec ſetied of a
Bent charge, Rent
ſecke, common of
paffurc, and fuch
like Jubheritances,
Which doc net ite in
tenure, snd dieth
bis bcire within
age of 14. pratcg.
In this cafe the
Deire may chofe his
ardeiu, but if he
bee of fuch tender
peares ag hee can
make no chotcethen
(t£ the father b. th
made no difpoGtion
of the cuftodic of the
childe) it were moſt
fit that the next of
kinne to whom the
Land cannot dif=
tend fhould baue
the cuftodie of him.
Andwholoeuer tac
keththe vent, the
heite fball charge
him in am account,
But if he hold any
dana in Socage,
3n that Cafe the


Sect, 123.


qr [gm en tielx tes

nures en focage fit
fad iflue a deuie foniffue
cftcát Deins lage 014,88,
Donques E prochine amp
Del heiva q iheritage ne
poít diſcẽdr auct la gati
bla tert a Del heir íefq al
age Del beir à 14, ans, 8
tiel Gardein eft appeile
gardein en focage, Car ff
la terre deſcẽdiſt al eite
Deptie pier Donques la
mere,ou auter procheine
cofen De pt le mere auera
la garde, Ct fiterre Dif-
cenDift al beire De partla
mere, Donques le pier ou
le prochein amp De part
De pier aucta Ie garde DC
tielx tette ou tenemétg,
«t quant lheire Vient al
age De : 4,áng compleat,
il poít enter & ouftre le
Gardein en Socage, &


Lfo in fuch tenures in

Socage if the Tenant
haue iffue and die, his iffue
being within the age of
14.yeares, then the next
friend of that heire to
whom theinheritance can-
not difcend fhall haue the
Wardfhip of the Land and
of the Heire vntill the
age of 14. yeares , and
fuch Gardeine is called
Gardeinein Socage. For
if the land difcend tothe
heire of the part of the fa-
ther, then the mother, or
othernext Coufin of the
part of the mother fhall
haue the Wardfhip. And if
land difcend to the heireof
partof the mother, then
the father or next friend
of the part of the father
fhall haue the Wardfhip of
fuch Lands orTenements.


oc⸗


Lib.2.
ottupier la terre tup
metit Gi voit. Cttiel
Gardeine en focage
ne prendra afcuns
iflues ou profits De
tielx terres ou tene=
ments a fon ble Dc-
mefne , mes tant-
folement al ble &
- profit Del heive,et Del
ceo tl rendea ac-
compt al heire quant
pleattal heire apres
ceo que lbeire accom-
pliſh lage De rit,
ans, Wes tícl Gar⸗
Dein fur fon accempt


aucta allotoance De-


touts fes reafonable
colts et expences en
touts chofes ac, Ct
(i tiel gardein maria
ibetre Deins rii,
ang, tl accompteta
al heire, ou a fes exe⸗
cutoꝛs De balue Del
mattage,coment que
il ne pꝛiſt viens pur
lebalue Del mariage,
pur ceo que il ferra
tette fa follp Dc-
mefne, que él lup voi⸗
loit marier fans
pꝛender la balue del
mariage, ſinon que il
lup marta a tiel ma-
riage que eff tant en
balue come le matí-
age Del heire, ac.


Of Socage.


And when the heire
cometh tothe age of
14.years complete he
may enterand ouftthe
Gardian in focage, and
occupie the land him-
felfeif hee will. And
fuch gardianin focage
fhal not take any iffues
or profits of fuch lands
ortenemétsto his own
vfe,but only to the vfe
& proffit of the heire,
and of this he fhal ren-
deran accountto the
heire when it pleafeth
the heire after hee ac-
complifheth the age
of 14.yeares. But fuch
gardeia vpon his ac-
count fhal haue allow-
ance of all his reafo-
nable cofts and expen-
ces in all things,&c.
And if fuch gardcin
marry the heire within
age of 14.yeares hee
fhall account to the
heire orhis Executors
of thevalue ofthe ma-
riage, although that
hee tooke nothing for
the value of the mari-
age,for it fhall bee ac-
counted his owne fol-
ly, that he pete mar-
him without taki
iie value ofthe pa
age,vnles that he mar-


rieth him to fuch amariage that is as much
worth in value as the mariage of the heire.


3Doneg haue fue and die their (Tne Within age of r4. pearcg, the ert cf kinns of the part of
the mother (ati bauc the cuſtody of the boop, anb not the next of Binne of part of the father
albett hefirft feafen him, becaufe the mother wag thecaufeof thegtlt, Fl aman bee felled of
lands holden in & ocage of the part of bis father, anb of other lands holden in Socage of the
part of bis mother, and dicth his ine being within the age of 14. Peareg, Juthis cale —


Seët.123.


Gardlan (n focage fbali take
into bis cuffobp as Socii
Rent charges, $c. as the land
Holden in Socage becaufe b
hath the cnftodp of the fcire,


€ Sé letenant ad if.


fae & deuie. Lhe fame
Law it (d (€ the Cenant hath
no (fuc ; but a bother 02 cos’
fin within age of 14. peareg

at tbt time of ifs death,

(a) Allo this Doth extendaf=

— iſſue female ag to iſſue

male,


€ Dems lage de


14. 4n:. OE this fuf-
fictent hath bene fpoken tn
the nert preceding chapter,
€ Dongues le pro-
cheine Amy del heire a


que le enberitance ne poet


difcender. The nett
friend of the hetre, ec, Tere
Amy 03 friend ig taben foz
the next of blob, fo as the
effet of (t (9, that the next of
bind to whom the tnheritance
cannot dilcend, whereby affic
nitie without biwd is ere
cluded,


€ Le prochein. Che


wert,

(b) FE there be two 02 thae
bietbien, anb the poungelt
hoideth iandin Socage and
hath (fue and dieth bis (lue
Within age of 14.pcares both
the Uncles are in equall des
gte, and pet the eldeſt (ball be
Gardein, becaufe in cual
degree the daw pzeferreth
him. (c) And pet (£ lands
holden in £y ocage be gluente
aman and the hetres of big
body, and be dieth, bis heire
within age, the next cofi of
the part of the father albett he
be woꝛthier (hall not bee pres
ferred befoze the next confin
of the part of the mother, but
fach of them as fir fcafi
the beire fail haue bis cuſto⸗
bp: But it lande bee giuen
in Sfrankmartage, and the


88


(a) 12.5.3 Ascount,i 33:


Glamvil lib. 9. cep.i, |
Britton 163.

Fheta I5. 1-6ap.9.
Stat. de Hsbernta,

su, Partitson.


(b) Vid. 30. 47.


Ce) Plow. Carrels efe.


47. H.3.Gand 146.


“He À


(d )F.2N.8,139.5.. Regier.
(e)7.€.3. 46.16. E.5..«. 5a
21.E. 3.8. 3 1. E. 5, Enfant 9.
17. E. 3. Accennt 131.
26,8.3.63.10.H, 6.14,
F.N.'B.118.

f)'Bradl li.2. fo.88.

b) Fler.li. 1.64.10.


1) Lib. Rab.cap.ne.
H —* — I.


(LI. Com Carrcliesfz.


(m)Li.di.x.fe. 2,3.


(n) Braff. li. 5. fol. 87.
"Bris. (0.1 6 3.0. Fle. li. 1.0. 10.
38. E. 1. $11. 0. Forteſe. c. 40.


(0) Fortefe.vb fupr.Statnt. da
Hemagio eapicude, temps E. 1.


(a) 12.3.43. P. 4.5.


(b) L.3 fol. 57.
4


€) 33. EF. 3. gerd. 5t.
— relin.


Caps. Of Socage. Sed.13.


the nert of Kin of either fide as Girt happeth the bodte hal bane bim,but the next of blond of the
part of the father (ball enter (nto the lands of the part of the mother, andthe next of Kiune of
the part of the mother, fpall enter inte the lands of the part of the father,

(d) FE A.be Gardein in Socage ef che bodte anb lanbs of b. Mithintke age of fourcteens
peares, A. thall be Gardein in Socage per caufe de Gard. Wut an infant Within age, that
(c) isnot ín tbe cuftodie of another, cannot be Gardein in Socage, becaufe no Szit of aca
cennt liethagaint an 3infant. Bnd herewith agreeth Bract.(f) and peeideth this reafon, A lium
regere non potett,qui feipfum regere non nouit. Bnd Fleta faith, (b) Œbat minor minorcm
cuftodire non debet, alios enim prafumitur male regere qui feipfum regere ncfcit : And bp like
reafon an Ideot, a mat non compos mentis, a Lunaticke, a man fecus & mutus, ezfurdus &
mutus, 02 à Leaper vemooued bp a Sgit de Leprofo amouendo cannot bea Garbein in SHocage,
but (na cafe of Gard percaufe de Gard, there lieth an Action of Account againſt a. fn the
cafe abouefaíb, ] : "

a A que leheritagene poet defcender. (i) Nullus hæredipetæ fuo pro-
pinquo vel extraneo periculofa fane cuftodia commitiarur. Note (k) this $0070 ( Poct) mapoz
can. (1) Andtherefoze this doth not onelp erclubo an immediate difcenf, but all poſſibilit ie of
difcent, As ifa man hath tffue two fons bp feueral Venters, & bauing lands holden in Socage
of the nature of Burgh Englifh,dicth, the ponger bzotber Wet in age of 14.pereg,(m the elven
brother ef the halfe bloud ali not haue the cuftodie of the land, becaufe by poitbtlitte the elder
map inherit theland,foz t£ the yonaeft nie without tue, ¢ tbelanb diſcend to an Uncle, the elder
brother of the halfe bloub map be bctre bnto him:¢ herewith de agree our antíent Authozs:(n)
Heres fokmanni {ub cuftodia capitalium Darum non crit,fed fab cuftodia confanguincorum fu-
orü propinquiorü, hoc eft, eorü qui coniunéti funt iure fanguinis, & non iure fucceffionis,ex pare
tc quorum non difcendit hereditas, & regulariter verum eft, quod nunquam temancbit aliquis
in cuftodia alicuius,de quo haberi poffit fufpitio, quod velit ius clamare in ipfa hereditatc,& vns
de fi plures fint filiæ & hæredes & tenere debeant in focagio,nulla debet effe in cuftodia alterius,

(o) Bnd this is contrarte to tbe Ctntle La ; foz, Leges Ciuiles impubcrum tutclas proxi-
mis de corum fanguine committunt,agnati fuerint,fiue cognati, vnicuiquesvidelicet, fecundum
gradum & ordinem qui in hereditate pupilli fucceffurus eit.2But this the Law of Englandfatth,
Eft qua(i agnum lupo committere ad deuorandum.


«T Douqueslamere. — f20te, albeit Land cannot diſcend to the
mother from ber fonne, (as bath beene {ald )becaufe Inheritance cannot afcen®, pet here tt apa
pearcth bp Littleton, Chat [be ts next of bloub ; for none (ag hath bene fato ) can be Gardeine
tw Socage, but the next of bioud, andthe like ig to befato of the Father, as hereafter next aps
peareth, ; à Lie
a Donques le Pier. Bpthis it appeareth, Chat the Father in
cafe of a tenure in Socage (ball be gardein in Syocage,¢ thal not haue the cuftodic of hig eldeſt
fonne, in reſpect of bis paternall naturali cuſtodie, (as be ball hate tn cafe of a Cenure bp
nights feruíce, as before itappeareth ) but ag Gardcine in Socage : andthe reafon of
the dinerfitteis, for that in the cafe of atenurcin Socage, the father mult bp Law be accouns
table tothe Sonne both fo? bis mariage, ag alfofez the profits of bis Lands, Which be (boulu
not bc if be bab tbecuftobte of his eidett fonne in this cafe ag big father, in refpectof nature,
and the ac a Law neuer doth anp man Song,

Wut no 3,020 02 other perfon in refpect of anp tenure by nights Scrutce oz ot herwiſe hal
baut the cuftodte of any chile that is heire apparant to bis father, but the father onip Daring
hisitfe, ag hath bene ſaid befoze,

It ts tobe obferucd, thatin the Lawes of England, there are thꝛee manner of Gardein{bips,
viz-bpthe Common Law, by the Statute Law, and Cuftome, Wy the Common Law
there are foutre manner of Gardians, viz. Gardein in Chiuairie, whom Littleton hath de⸗
{cribed befoze SeCion 103. Ec. Gardein by nature, asthe Sather of tbe eldeſt fonne of Som
Littleton hathfpoken Section 114. Gardein in Socage treated of bp Littleton in this Seaton,
and Gardein per caufe de nurture, all frequeng in (a) eur Bokes. Wy the Statute, that íg,
ín 4. & 5.Phil. & Maria, of women childzen,and that ts in two manners, cítber of the father
02 mother without affígnatíon, o2 of anp other to whom the father fballappoint the cuftobie, ei⸗
ther by bis laft will, e2 bp anp Actin bis itfe time, Whereof you hall reabe at large (b) tn
Rarcliffes Cafe (n mp Reports. S

(c)ilattip,bp druftome, as of Daphang bp the cuftome of tbe Citic of London, and of other
Cities and Boroughes. 4 >

€ Tansfolement al vſe & profit detheire. Andtherefore Gardein in

Hocage (ball not forfeit bis (ntereft bp outiawate oz attaindez of felonie o2 Treaſon becaufe
be hath nothing to bis one ble, bnt to the ble of the betre, J


Lib.1. Of Socage. Seët.123.


Alſoit the mother be Gardianin Socage, and taketh huſband, and dieth, the bufbanb hall
not haue this cuſtody bp Suruiuour, becaufe the Sife bad it en auterdroit tn the right of the


A Gardian in Socage fbatl not (d) pzefent to a benefice inthe right of the hetre becaufc hee
cannot be accomptable therefore, £02 that hecan make no benefit thercof, foz the Law doth abe
hore fimony oz any coꝛrupt Contract foz benefices, anb tbercfoze tn that cafe the heire (ball
—— and Britton fpeabing of thefe Gardians ſaid well, Les queux gardeins tont
plus ferjants que gardeins, (that te ) which garbíang arerather feruants then Gardians.

€ Urendra account erc. apres que lheire ad accomplifhe lage de 14 .ans.
@bis point hath beone much contronerted in our bokes, and the caufes of the doubts haue
benc, &r(t bpon the Words of the ffatuteof (e) Merlebridge,ca,17. 2. Vpon the oꝛiginall writ
of Account againf the Gardein in Socage, The Words of the Hatutebe Cum ad legitimam
ætatem peruencrit fibi refpondear, & c. anb legitima atas, (f ) laxofull age.tg xxi.peares. 2.Aifo
the writof Accompt recitech the fato ftatute, Quare cum de communi confilio regni noftri pro-
uifum fit quod cuttodes terrarum & tenementorü quz tenenturin Socagio hæredibus terrarum
S & tenementorum illorum cum ad plenam ætatem pervenerint reddant rationabilem compotam,

Cz thereupon it is gathered that no action of account dtd 1pe agaínft the dardetn in Socage
at the Common La, bntill the heire bee of his lawtull age of 21. peateg. Wut as tothe firk
(legittima atas ) ag the ftatute ( h ) fpcaketh) o2 plena etas ( ag the Wꝛtt doth render it) arcto
be vᷣnderſtood (ecundum fübje&tam materiam, that ts of thebetre of Socageland whoſe law⸗
full ano futi age ag to thecuftodp o2 Gardeinhhipis 14. And as te the recttall of the ftatute,
C1 )ttisentdent that an action of Acconnt did ipe again Gardein in Socage at the Com⸗
mon Law, And thatthe ſtatute Was made tnaffirmance 02 declaration of the Common Lato
£02 the ftatute ſpeaketh onip De cuftodia parentum that ig of a Gardein in Fight, but pct an
action of Account ipeth again him that occupteth tbe Tanb ag Dardcir,albeit bc be not of the
blood (as hereafter ſhail be ſaid.) Bud bpon conGderation had of the fato ftatute and of ail
the boks,{t wag adiudged in the Courtof Cimon Pleas, Pafch.16.Eliz,ror.q3 5. accozding to
the opinion of Littleton, that the here after the age of 14. peares fhall haue an action of Ac=
count agaínft tbe Gardein in Socage, When be SotlLat his pleafure, andfo (g an ancient queftis
on Well refoiucd. i

Britton as of opinion that the ſtatute of Marlebridoe Which gaue the Capiasin Account,
extended to Gardein in Socage, forhe wꝛote befoze the ftatutc of W.r.ca.r:. Wut later
bokes fauc oucr-ruleo thts point, that no Capias lyeth againſt Gardein in Socage, for the
ftatute ertendeth to 1 atlifes only ; Neither Doth the ſtatute of W.z. extend to gardein in Dos
cage, for that fpcaketh onlp De {cruientibus, balivis; camerarijs, & receptoribus.


€ Mes tiel zardein fur fon account auera allowance de tonts fes reafona-


ble cofts & expences en touts chofes. Andthts is Duc to all accountants
by the Common Law, and fo it ts declared bp the fato flatuteof. Mericbridge, Saluis ipfis cufto-
dibus rationabilibus miſis fuis,


€ Mowance. What other allotoanceg fball the gardein Daue 2
BE the Gardein rcceiuc the Bents and proffits of the lands, and be robbed of the fame, whi⸗
* ther ſhall be be difcharged thereof bpon his Account - and (t ſeemeth, thati be be robbed 5pítlj-
out his default of nealigen ce hee thaibe diſcharged thereof. As (£a Bailite of a Wannoz oꝛ a
Becetuer, ora Factor of a Merchant ostbel(&e accountant be robbed, hee ſhall be difcharged
thercof vpon bis account and fetng the Gardein fall be chargenag 2batlife after the heires
âge of 14, and be diftharged bpon bis account, t£ be be robbed, Pariratione if hee bee robbed
before the age of 14, Wut otherwife tt ig of a Carrier, forhe bath his hire, andtherebp tmplt=
citely Dndertaketh tbe fate deltuerp of the gods deliuered to him, andtherefoze be fhail anfwer
oo, of eu heberobbedof them. Note the diuerſity anb fo tt wag refolucd * in the
gs bench,

So it is if gods be deliuered to a mantobelafelp wept, and after thofe gong are flolne
from him, this (ball not excuſe htm, becaufe bp the acceptance he vndertoke to keepe them fafe-
ip, and therefoze he mult Keepe them at bis perill.

Ho it ig if gods be deltu ered to be onc to be kept, foi, to be kept, and to be fatelp kept, is all
onc in Law, Wut (£ the gong be delinered so himtobe kept, ag bee would keepe big one,
there (£tbep be folne from him Without bis default o? negligence, be (halbe Difcharged, &yntt
goods bedeliucredto one ag a gage 02 pledge, and thep be loinc, he (ball be Difcharged, becaufe
be hath a property in them, and therefozc he ought to kepe tem no other wiſe then bis one;
but tf he that gaged them, tended the money befoze the Healing, and the other refuled to deliner
them, then Co? this defanit tn him be hall be chatged.

FE A. teauca chelk locked With B. tobe kept, and r3 away tbe Hep With Hin, and ace


quainteth


89


Tl. (em.


(d 18.E.2. preftntment 19.
7-€.39. 27 E.3.89.
29.E.3.5. BN.B 33.
31.E.3. Effoppel,343.
Britton 163-164.

Fleta lib. 1.cap.10.


(e) itiscalled the flatute
of Merlebridse becaufe the
Parliament in $2.H.3 was
holen there,

(t) 16.2.3. waſt 100.
18 F.3.55.77.

29. E.3.5.

v d.32.€.3.Gard. 31.
F.AN-B. 118,

6.€.3.38.

(2) 16.E.2. Accannt 120.
17.€.2.1bd.121.

(h) a E.z. .4ccouxs
14.€.5. Ibid.
3..Mar.137.

Keylwey 131.

(1) 18.2.2. 4uewry 220.


Pafih.16. EhÇ.Rn.436.
in commyai baeo,


Mirrer,ca.as§.17.
"Britton. fa. 1 63:6.
Fletalib.2.ca.64.

18.E,2. Auowtie 220.
17.E.3. $9. Merlbr.ca. 23.
W.2.ca.11.


The flatute of Alerthe.
anrendedby Lirilss ca,17.


4T-E.3.3. 22/4 [f 41.
22.€.3..Account 111.

29, Af. 28. 3. N.7 4.6.
6.H.7.12. 10.H.7.25.

10. 0.6.21. 3.£.4.15.
Dol. & $1d.c4558.fo, 130.


* Hill.38.Elig , inter
Waodliefe & ( ur iei.


29,ALp. 28.


8.£ 2,15, Daixm so.


Lib.2.


* Pafih.43.Elix inter
Sentheste à Bennet
in detima.


7.E.3.62.

19.£. 3.senin) § 6.
38.€.3.7.

31.£.3.i8, Account, 57.


3, 5,3. t 6.


AE. 3. Account. 40» Y


3. R. a. Ibid. 45.
4. R2. Account 47.


Hill. 3. E.a. Coram 'Reee,
Res. 34. Agnes Frowicki cafe
F.N.B.139.1-& 149.

36.B. 3.65. 1. E. 3. 19.20.


Trio. 1H. $. Coram "Rete
et x Mid, ae


19.2.8. Amowry, 221.
39-£.3.16.

A41. E, 3. Accommt 35.
45. E. 3,10. 18.E.3.77e
28.4. p. Y1.. Pl. 07.543.
6E. 3,38. F. M. B. 118.


Cap Of Socage.. Selt.124:;


quainteth not B Shat ig in tbe Cheſt, and tbe € cft together With the gods o£ B. are ftolne ar
Gap, B. hall not be charged there with, becaufe A. did not tru( D. Sith them as this cafe tg,
Bnd that Which hath bene faibbefoze of Healtng, ts to be onberíto alfo of other like acci⸗
dents ag Mhipwracke bp fea, fircbp lightning, andother like (nenitable accidents. Bnd ail
thefccafes were refoluc and — in the ings bench.* Bnd bp tbefe Dincrfities are all the
bookes concerning this point reconciled,

Mote, Weaver tt is neceflarp fog anp that recefueth geods tobe kept, toreceiue thers in this
fpccíall manner,viz- tobe kept as his owne, 05 to Becpc them at the per(llof theotwner, Wut
now (g Littletonto be further heard, à À

€ Et fitiel gardein maria le beire deins 14.ans dre. f02 tf hee marrp
the heire after 14. hee is ont of bis cuftobp, and noacconnt fall be made therefozo,

Il accountera a luy. Hee {hall account foz the mariage of the
heire,viz fozfomuch aganp man bona fidc had offered fo? the marfage 02 Mould gine in martage
bnto btm. 1

€ Ova fes Executors. frote that an infant of tbeageof 14, map
make bis tof (as fome bercapon haue collected ) but tbe meaning of 1 ittleton (9; that tf after
bis martage be accompltfb bis age of 18,peareg at what time be map make his Ceftament, anb
conftitute executozs £o bis gods and chattelis, and the woꝛds arefotobe brberítob ag map
and With Law andreafon. Note, Executoꝛs could not haue an action of Account at the
Common La tn refpec of tbe pziuitie of the account, but the Batute of W.2.ca.23, hath gi⸗
uen the action of account to executoꝛs the (Fatute of 25-E.3,ca.5. to Executoꝛs of Executoꝛs, and
the flatute of 31.E 5.ca. 11. to Bomiltratozs, !

Que il voile luy marier fans prender le value. So as the Gardeis
(ball not account only oz that which hee (hall recetue in thts cafe, but for which bec might
recetue.

¶ Siren que il [ny marier a tiel mariage que eff tant en value erc. This
needeth no explanatíon.

It the heire in Socage be raut(beb out of thecuftodyp of the Gardein and the rauiſher marri⸗
eth the heire, the Gardein hall haue a toztt of rauifbment of ward, anb recouer the value of
the martage,tc, and (ball account to the heire for thefame.

And the Gardein in Hocage is bounben bp Lato, that the heire bee Hell brought bp, and
that hig eutoences befateip kept. |

Che Grandmother of thefonne and heire of John Berneuill Sho held tbe Mannoꝛ of To-
tington in the County of Midd. in Hocage reconcred the beíre in a a Rauiſhment of toard ae
gaínff Simon Cheuin which had married the ftepmotber of the beírz, anb bp rulcot the Œourt
the platntife Pro nutritura hzredis, & pro cuttodia cuidentiarum invenit plegios,


Section 124.


CE Ck afcun auter
E home à neft p20-


Nd if any other
man, who is not the
next friend, occupies the


CE7 fi aſcun


auter home


que neſt pas pro-
cheine amy, &c.
FE a ranger entrcth
ínto the lands of tbe
infant ‘within age
of 14. and taketh the
proffts of the fame, the
infant map charge him
ag @ardein in Sos
cage. And thie voth
Sell agree with tbe
toit of account as
gain a Gardcin in
focage, fe? the woꝛds
be, Idem B. prefato A.
rationabilem compo-
tum fuum de exitibus


chein amp, occupie les
terres ou teneméts Del
beire come gardetne en
Socage, il ferra com-
pell de render accompt
al boire, auxi bien fi-
côcil fuiflopt prochein
amp : cat il nett pas
plee pur lup. en bziefe
32accompt adire, que il
neft procheine amic, tc.
mes tirefpondea E quel


lands or tenements of
the heire as Gardein in
Socage, he fhall be com-
pelled to yeeld an ac-
count to the heire as well
as if hee had beene next
friend, for it is no plea
forhimin the Writ of
Account to fay that he is
not the next friend,&c.
but hee fhall anfwer


il


Lib.ꝛ.
il ad occupie les terres
pele en focage
a on
: my, Sed ie ſi a⸗
es ceo que le heire ad
accompli(b lage De 14.
ang, a Gardeine en fo-
cage continualment oc-
cupia la terre tanque
lheire vient a plein age
&, 21.ang, file beyae a
fon plein age auera a=
ction 32accompt en⸗
uers le gardeine De
temps que il occupta a=
pres les Dits 14.ang,
come enuers Gardeine
en Socage, ou enuers


ents come


Of Socage.
whether hee hath occu-
piedthe lands or tene-
mentsas Gardein in So-
cage orno. But quere , if
after the heire hath. ac-
complifhed the age of
14.ycares,and the Gar-
dein inSocage, continu-
ally occupieth the land
vntill the heire comes to
full age, s. of 2 1. yeares,
if the heire at his full
age fhall hàue an action
of Account againft the
gardein, from the time
that he occupied after the
faid 14.yeares,as gardein
in Socage, or againft him


Sets.


provenientibus de ter-
ris & tenementis (uit
in N.quz tenentur in
focagio & quorum
cuftodiam idem B,ha-
buit dum pred: A. in-
fra ætatem fuit vt dici-
tur And truc it (8 that
in iudgement of Law
he had the cuftody of
the lands : and hee ts
called Tutor alienus,
and the right Gardein
in Socage tutor pros
prius, and tt if no
pica fo? him to denis
that be is Procheine
amy, but he watt
{wer to the taking of
the pzoffits ag Lirtle-
ton here faith.


€ Sead quere,


oo This Que-
re came not ont of
Littletons quiuer fet


uy come fon baplife,


as his Bailife.


itis euident that after


theage of 14 peares he fbatl be charged ag Bailife atanp time when the hette Sill, either bec
fore big age of z 1.peares ez after.


€ ye fi gardein

en cbiualríe face
{es erecutozs a de⸗
up, le beíre efteant
Deins age, ac, les ex⸗
ecntozs aucront le
garde, Durant le no⸗
nage”, ac, Des fi
Gardeinen Socage
face fes erecutors, €
Deuy, le boire efteant
Deins laged 14,ans,
fes executors naue-
tont pas le garde,
mes bn auter p20-
cheine amp, a que
le heritage ne poyt
my difcend, auctala
garde, ac, Ct la cau-
fe De diuerſitie c(t, p
€c0 que Gardeine ct


Sect. 125s


Lfoif Gardein in

Chiualrie makes
his executors and die,
the heire being with-
inage, &c.the Execu-
tours fhall haue the
Wardfhip during the
nonage, &c. butif the


Gardeine in Socage


make his Executours
& die,the heire being
within the age of 14.
yeares, his Executors
fhall not haue the
Wardfhip,but another
the next friend, to
whom the Inheritance
cannot difcend , fhall
haue the Wardfhip,
&c. And the reafon of
this diuerfitie is be-


az


€ À Son proper vfé.

B Œenant holocth

Alano of a Wiſhop
b? Knights S»cruice which
Signiorie tbe Wilhop hath
in the right of bis Bicho⸗
pricke, the Tenant dieth hte
heire Within age, the Biſhop
either befoze 6» aftcr feifure
dieth, neither the King noy


the Succeflor of the Biſhop -


ail baue the wardſhip, but
his Executoꝛs. Foꝛ albeit the
Withop hath the Oignorie
in auter droit , pet the tiDatbz
ip being buta Chattell he
hath ín bis one right, and a
Chattell cannot go in the fuc=
ceflion of a fole Cozpozation,
bnieffe (t beo in the cafe of the
ing.

Bnd pet i£ a Biſhop baue
an Aduowfon , and the
Church become botd, and the
Bilhop ote, netther the Suc-
cefloz noz the Executoꝛs (hall
prefent, but the King becaufe
it is but a Chole in action.
Audio ttisin cafe here tbe
Ring hath toarbíbip , Ee


90


33-E. 3M e iint 77;
33. E. 3.11.
ATE. 3. A cecumt 357
10. H.7.7. 4. H,7. 6.
7: H.7.9.a;


6.£.5.33.
3a. E. 3. Account 60.
g.E.q. F.N. 3.118,


7R.xbre 634
40. E.3.14. 2. H. 4.19.
10. Elit Dier.277.


7. H. 4-41, 4408 030425


24.68.3:26. 44.2.3
F.N.'B


8.33.
Seo mere of shis in the ebap=
fer of PVarvanty. S48,


Lib.2.


31. E. s account. $7»

1 o. E.3.4bid. 156. 48.1.2
2.H. 4.13. F.N.3.117*
19.H.6.«. 4.E.4.35*. -
. E. 3. aiĩ. Libra, fes 9


9 Res. parl, go, E. 3. 09,133.


(a) Tl.Com. 3%


Kayley 13 Y Lib. fel. 8g.


Vide 808.153.
Stanf. prar. 32-
(b) Fertefcue. fol. 45:


Res. Parliam.1.H. 4 02,188.


Pl. Com,23 6.

Staxf. pl.cor.462.b.
Stanf. prar.1.4.b.F 10.6.
(") Stanf. prar.5.10-


(c) Wellin. 1.47.59
(4) Britten. fel.27-
(c) fef fel 6v enn


41. B.3 barro 294. 9.24.36.
"BraG.leb.2 fel. 35.
Glamil. lib. 9.64p. 4.


——


Cas.
that (c a prerogatine that he-
longeth tothe ting , to pro⸗
mide foa the Church being
boid, for Shere the Cenure
bp nights Seruice ts of
& common perfon, tbe Exc⸗
cutours of the Œenant fall
prelent $obere the auoppance
feil in the life of tbe Œenant.
Œ Le herre eff fa-


uns remedie, ec. Foꝛ
albeit in an Action of ac-
count againft a Wardeine
in Socage, ec. the 3Dc-
fendant cannot wage big
La, pet in refpect of the pats
nitie of the matters of ace
count, anb the difcharge rez
fting in the knowledge of the
partieg thereunto, an action
of account neither líetl) as
galnt the €recutors of the
accountant, norat the Com⸗
mon Law fo? the Executoꝛs
of him to whom theaccount íg
bath benc attempted in P
Gardeine in Socage,


Of Socage.


chiuairie ad le garde
a fon proper bie, &
Gardein en Socage
nad le garde a fon
bfc, mes al bfc Del
beite, Ct en cag lou
le@ardeine en So⸗
cage Deup Deuant at-
cun accompt fait per
lup al hetve, De ceole
beire eft fang reme=
Die, put ceo que nul
briefe Daccompt gift
enuers les Crecuz
tors fi non pur lc
330p folement,


Setl.126.
caufe the Gardeine in
Chiualrie hath the
Wardfhipto his owne
vfe, andthe gardeinin


Socage hath not the |


Wardfhip to his owne
vfe, but to the vſe ot
the heire. Andinthis
cafe where the Gar-
dein in Socage dieth
before any account
made by him to the
heire,of this the heire
is without remedy for
that no writ of acconnt
lieth againft the Exe-
cutouts , but for the
King only. -


to be made ag is afozefatd but that {s boïpen bp Htatute,(*) We .
atliament to. give an action of accountagaintt tbe Executoꝛs of a
bnt neuer coulo be effected,


€ Si non pur le roy folemens. (a) Che reafon of this is becaufe


the Linge treafu
peace, firmamentum belli,
batte the ing of bis treaty
ing Was bufied about th


call big accountant to make bis account, and nullum tem
of the Kings 192crogatíuc but twice tn all his Bokes
places ag part of the Lawes o£ England. Prarogatiua f,
re, that is toafke 02 demand before hand,
the moft excellent part, becaufe though


Commons in Parli
Dev and obtained


Powers, Pzehemtnences and Pꝛiuiledges,
Littleton here ſpeaketh of onc,


uilegium Regis. (c


.


CC Erteine vent. À
(Genant holveth of

bis io» certaine
Lands ín Socage to pay
Pearelp a paire of gilt Spurs
91 &uc thillings in monep at
the Feat of Cater. In this
cafe the rentig incertaine, and
the tenant map pav which of
them be Lill at tbc fato feat,
anb likewife tbe tenant map
pap which of them be Will fe?
veliefe, but (£ hee pay it not
when e ought, then may the


Sect. 126.


€ | Tem le feignioz

De que laterreett
tenus en Socage a-
pres le most fon te-
nant.aucra veliefe en
tiel fozme, Si Ic tes
nant tient per fealtie
& certain rent.a pater
annualment ec. files
termes De paiment


te is the fine&ocg of warre, and the honour and fafctie of the King in time o£
& ornamentum pacis, and therefore the death of the partie ſhall nos

te due vnto him bpon the account, becaufe ít is intended that the
€ publike forthe good of tbe Common-Mealth, and had not leffureto
pus occurrit Regi. Littleton ſpeaketh
3 Viz. bere and Se&.178. and in both
€ (b) derived of pra .i-ante, and roga-
Sohereof commeth prærogatiua anb is denominated o£
an Adc hath paffeo both the Houles of the Loads and
ament, pet befoac it be a Law, the Kopall aſſent muſt be afked 02 Demane
> and this tg tbe proper fence of the Sword. Wut legallp (*) (t extends to all
which the Lato giueth to the Crowne, whereof
Bra&on lib. 1. ín onc place calleth tt libertatem, in
Britton (d) (following W.1.) Droit le Roy. (c) Regiftr. ius Regluim, and


ius Regium Ccrona, &c.


er Pri-


Lfo the Lord of


whom the Land -


is holden in Socage
after the deceafe of
his Tenant fhall haue
reliefe in this manner,
if the Tenant holdeth
by fealtie,and certaine
Rent to pay yearely ,
&c. if the tearmes of


fon


Lib.a.
font a paper per Deux
termes Del an,ou per


quater termes 51 an,
! Heignior aueca
Del beire for tenant


‘tant come le vent a-
mount que d papa p
an, Sicome le tenat
tient De fon ſeignior
— per fealtie & x. 9, De
tent, payable a cer=
taine termes Del an,
Donques lheire paieé
al Seignior v.s. put
veliefe , oufter les x.
s. que tl patera put
le vent,


Of Socage.
payment beeto pay at
two tearmes of the
yeare , or at foure
termes inthe yeare the
Lord fhall haue of the
heire his Tenant, as
much as the Rent a-
mounts vnto which he
payeth yearly.as ifthe
Tenant holds of his
Lord by fealtie, and
ten fhillings Rent pay-
able at certaine termes
of the yeare, then the
heire fhall pay tothe
Lord ten fhillings, for
reliefe , befide the ten
fhillingswhich he pay-
eth for the Rent.


Seël. 127.


£o diftreine for Which of
tbem be Gill, But tf the tes
nore be to attend on big Lon
at the Fea o£ Chꝛiſtmaſie,
ortopap ten ſhillings, there
the reltefe muſt bec ten ſhil⸗
lings , becaufe the other canc
in doubled, & fic de fimi-
1bus.


€ 4 paier annuel-


ment. Ik tbe tenant
holdeth of his Lord bp fealty
andtopap euerp two 02 three
peare tenne (billings, albeit
thisbeno Annuall Rent, pet
ſhall hee pap ten thillings foa
relisfe, & ficde fimilibus,
But it is tobe noted, that
befide veliefe Swbercof Little-
ton here fpeakctb , there be-
longeth to a tenure in focage
of Common right, aide for the
making of bis elde Sonne
a Knight at the age of fifteene
peares, @to marie bis daugh⸗
ter at the age of ſeuen peares.


En mele le manner eff , ft
hone foít ſeiſie De certeine terre
que ett tenus en Socage, «fait
feoffentent en fce a fon bfc a mo-
tut fei fie Del bfc ( fon beíre Del
age De 14, ans, ou pluis) a nul
bolunt pet lup Declare, le Seig-
nioz auera reltefe Del beire. fíco-
me auant cft Dit, Ct ceff perle
ftatute De Anno 19. Henrici 7.
Cap.15.


In the fame manner it is, if a
man be feifed of certain land which
is holden in Socage, and maketh a
feoffment in feeto his owne vfe,
and dieth feifed of the víe ( his
heire of the age of 14. yeares or
more) and no will by him decla-
red , the Lord fhall haue reliefe of
theheireas aforeisfaid. Andthis
by the Statute of 19. Henrie 7.
Cap.15.


p.15
This is an addition to Littleton, Wherefore 3| emit it the rather fox that the Statute of 19.
H.7.íg foatbecanfe abouc mentioned become of nonc effect,


à Seétion 127.


€E & en tid cas
apres la moot

le Œenant, tiel res
liefe et ducal Seig-
fito? Maintenant, de
quel age que lc
beite foit, put ceo
que tiel eignioz
ne poit auer 1t garde
De corps ne Dctette


Ndin this Cafe,

after the death of
the tenant, fuch reliefe
is due to the Lord pre-
fently, of whatage fo-
ever the heire bee, be-
caufe fuch Lord can-
not haue the wardfhip
of the bodie, norof
the land of the heire,

$3


€ M Aintenant, And

ag Littleton faith,

be ought not toats
tend the papment of big rez
liefe according tothe dayes of
papment,but he ought to hanes
bis teliete pactentip, andfoz
thefamehe map incontinentip
difiraine after the death of
tbe Œenant,

And therefore (n the cafe as
foxefaid, Sphere the Cenane
boldeth bp the Kent of fine
Hillings, o2 a patrc of gilt

Spurres,


gi.


Vide Set. 103.F /N.E 82;
Weft.1.cap.3 5.
25.6.3, flat. 5.607. 81;


16.H.7.4. 18 8.3.26. p.153»
Bratton. lib.2. fol, 85. dabit
hares one vice” edait m fau
oni: anni duplicatuns.
Brirton. fel. 179 ace,

Fleta lib. sap, g,


45. E.3. 9.35. H. 6. 52.


Spurres, ikthe helrt bee not
ga (tip (that (s as pacfent-
lp ag conuentently map, ail
buc cirenmitances confide:
red after the death of his 29 nz
ceftoz readie bpon the land to
pap reitefe , the Logo may btz
Graine for which of them hee
$»íil , and tf the tenant ten=
bred cither of them accozding
to the Law, and none foz the
Loꝛd ag readie there to res
cetue tt, pet the dozo may di⸗
fircine for that which was
tcnbz-0 at bis plafurc.

De quel age que
le hesre foit. AnD pet it


appearcth in our Boks that


Of Socage: -


le heire. Et le Seig⸗
nioz en tiel cafe ne
poít attendze à le
papment De fon te=
liefe, folonques les
termes a tours De
paiment De rent.mes
ü Doit auct fon relief
maintenant , & pur
ceo il poit incontingt
Diftraine apres ie
moat fon tenant, pur
reliefe,


Sed 128.
And the Lord infuch
cafe ought not to at-
tend for the payment
of his reliefe , accor-
ding to the termes and
dayes of payment of -
the rent, but hee is to
haue his relicfe pre-
fently , and therefore
he may forthwith di-
ftreine after the death


of his Tenant for re-
liefe. d


ín this cafe the King tn Safe ofa tenure in Socage (ncbícfcfbatl not bane primer feffin orta
leffc the hetre be of the age of fourteene pcares at the bcati) of bte Anceftoz, for tf bc be vnder
that age he ts in the gard and cuftobie of his prochein amy.


4but eiher wile tt (s ín cafe of a common p rfon ,


as here ttappeareth. Bnd Shere in fome


{inpreflions thefe words be added (iffint que il paffa lage de 14.ans) tbofc $0020g are added
and arcagaintt Law, anb no part of Littletons worke.


€ N lib. de pepper

V ou cumyn Here
{tis to bec obferuen that the
3020 tap rcf. tuc Peppir 02
any other things that be ex-
otica,fogrcigne,of the growth
of outiandifh Countries , 02
b:ponb S ca, al: lags of the
growth o£ England, Shere,
by Nauigation the life of cz
uerp Fiand ts imploped. And
Sobcrc Littleton here puttcth
big cafe in the DíGundtuc, tf
the tenant doth held bp feat-
tic anb onc pounb of Pepper
$1apouno of Cummin, hee
fhail pap fe; reliefe a pound of
Pepper, oz a pound of € um=
mine ouer and befidcs the
rent, But ik the tenant hol⸗
Deth of hig doro by doing of
certaine woꝛke dayes in har=
act, or to attend at Chꝛiſt⸗
matte oꝛ ſuch itke hee Mall not
Double the fame, fozof Cogz
pozail ferutc oꝛ labonr o2


Setlion 128.


HL. MPefme ie
“ E Maner eft lou
le tenant tient De fon
Seignior per feal-
tie,ævn li.de Deper,
onCummin, alete-
nant moauft, le ſeig⸗
nio2 auera put relief
bn lib. be Cummin,
ou vn lib. de Peper,
ouſter ie cómon tent,
€n mefine le maner
eftiou tenant tient a
paper per an certaine
number de Capons,
ou de gailines, ou bn
paire De gaunts , ou
certaine bufbelg De
frument, a hm̃odi.


N the fame manner

itis, wherethe Te-
nant holdeth of his
Lord by fealtie, anda
pound of Peper or
Cummin, and the Te-
nant dieth , the Lord
fhall haue for reliefea
pound of Cummin, or
a pound of Pepper be-
fides the cómon rent.
Inthe fame mannerit
is where the Tenant
holdeth to pay yeare-
ly a number of Ca-
pons or Hennes, ora
paire of Gloues, or
certaine buftels of
Cornc or fuch like.


—


worke of tbc tenant, no relicfe fs due, but Where the tenant holdeth bp ſuch prarelp rents og
profits, which map bepotd oꝛ Deltucred, whertof Littleron Fath pat his «kempleg , and bg
on is manifeftiy pzoncd that corpo, ali fcruícc, Worker, 02 labeur Mhalinot be doubled in chee


€ 0» certaine bufhels de frument. Here it appeareth that the re-
licfe of buſhels of Cone is tobe paid pzcfentip though the tenant dic in tointcr before Comme


beripe,
Hote


Lib.2.


Of Secage.


Sec .129.150.


Hote, here are examples put of fine natuteg : 1. Aromatorum exoticorum, of {pices o2 dꝛugs


af outiandith growth, z.Granorum, of Cogne of Cngliſh


growth, 3, Auium rial. cd
p


owitry ons, ens ,€c.4.. Artificiorum,of handicrafts as a patre of Gloues gen
L- of : ras RPSL fimiliü, 92 fach ithe (that ta tke of Dutlandtfh arowrh
oz of Engith growth, o: of Poultrie, oꝛ o£ Artiſices Outlandiſh o: &ngli(b , anditke herein


thatthep map be paid o2 neliucredte the


i Cs en afcun
cM cafe le ſeigni⸗
our Doit demurrer à
diltreiner put fon re-
licfe íe(quea certaine
temps, Sicome lc
teñ tient De fon ſeig⸗
nioz put bn Role, ou
p on bu(bel De 130-
fe3,a paier alfeatt De
Matiuitic de Saint
John Baprift, (i tíel
tenant deuie en puer,
Donque le fair ne poit
Diftt p fon veltefe t4-
que al tẽos q les Ro⸗
fes plecourle bel an
poiẽt aũ lour creffer,
ftt.& fic de fimilibus.


Sed. 129.


Vt in ſome caſe

the Lord ought
to ftay to diſtreine for
his reliefe vntill a
certaine time. As if
the tenant holds of his
Lord by a Rofe,tor by
a bufhell of Rofes to
pay at the feaft of St.
Iohn the Baptiſt i£. füch
tenant dieth in Win-
ter,then the Lord can-
not diftreine for his
reliefe vntill the time
that Rofes by the
courfe of the yeare
may  haue their
growth,&c. and fo of
the like.


Loꝛd €nerp peare o? euery ſecond 02 third prave er.


€ Per le courſe del
45. Lex fpectat natu-


rz ordinem , the aw res
fpecteth the oder and
courfe of nature, Lex non
cogitad impoilibilia. The
Aa compelis no man to
tmpoflible things, The are
gument ab impoffibili is fos
cible fn Rake, Impoffibile
eft quod natura rci repugnat.
nb berets to be obferned
that Littler, puts a dinerfity
betiweene Corne and oles,
fo? Cozne Will laſt and there
foze the tenant mutt deliner
the Come pzefentip before
the time of growth (ag be-
fore (o fato ) ano fo of Sat-
fron andthe like, but 1Rofeg
82 other flowers that are
fru&us fugaces , caynot be
kept, and therefore are not
tobe belíaereo til tbe time
of growing, neither ig the
tenant driuen bp Law artíz
fictally to preferue 18 ofea,foa


the Lat in tbefe cafes reſpecteth nature, andthe courfe of the peare ag Littleton bere faith,
Etarsnaturamimitatur, & fic de fimilibus,


€ [gm f afcun

voile Demand,
pnr G home poit te=
ner De fon feignioz p
fealty tantfolemét p
touts maners Des
feruices, entant que
quant le tenat ferra
fealtie. tltureraafon
Seignioꝛ (ferra a
fon fic touts ma:
ners Des feruices
dues, & quant il ad


Seti. 130.
AU if any will


aske, why a man
may hold of his Lord
by Fealty only for all
manner of feruices ,
infomuchas whenthe
tenant fhall doe his fe-
alty, he fhall fweare to
his Lord, that hee will
doe to his Lord all
manner of feruices
due, and when hee
hath done fealty in


€ Vant le tenant
ferra fealty, il
invera 4 fon Seigni-


er cc. Here it appeas
veth that the doing of the fee
altic ts both a performance
of big fcruice, and of bis oath
alfo Shen it is done fox that
v9 other ſeruice is dus. And
that one cath of fealty (g tax
hen of all that bold, and ts
not to be changed for anp moz
ucltic o; nícetp of innention,
fo; Audges ancientip and
centingallp have ſuppzeſſed


ínnonatíong amb Svouio (n ^


wo cafe change the ancient
Common Law, js


€


91


31.€.3.162.Gager deline-

vance, 6.

3g.E.3.1. 43. M f. p.12,
-£.3.e6.5.

18. E. 3.06.4. 6.

4H A002, 28,4 Fo t Bs


Lib.2.


See of thisinthe Chapter of
F ec fimpls Sel.4.


Sea wttre of this in the Chip-
scr of Warrantie, Seite


W.3.e4. 33. Flet.li.2.c4.43.
dr li. 5.64.34 32 M. . ca. 24.


(4p -5-

q i conient que il
doit faire 4 fon Seignieur
4fenn feruice. For there


can be no Œenure without
fome Seruice, becaufe the
S eruice maketh the Tenure.

«| Son efcheat de la


terre. Efchaeta tg De=
ríucb of this $0020 Efchier
quod eft accidere : Foꝛ an eſ⸗
cheat is a cafuall profit quod
accidit Domino cx euentu
& cx infperato , Which hap=
neth to the 300b by chance,
and vnlcoked for. And of this
$0020 Efchaeta, cometh E(cha-
ctor,, an Œfcheatoz, focallen,
becaufe his office (a to (nquíre
of all cafuall profite and them
to fcífe intothe ings hands,
that the fame map be anſwe⸗
reb to the King.

Lands map efcheat to the
Loꝛd twwo manner of Mapes:
one bp Attainder, the other
Withont attainder. By At⸗
tainder in three fozts : Firſt,
Quia fufpenfus eft per collum.
SHecondip, Quia abiurauit
Regnum. Œbirbly, Quia vt-
leoatuseft without attatnder,
as tithe tenant Dies without
heire.


€ ou per cafe auter
forfeiture. AS if the


Land bee aliened th Mort⸗
mattte,o; ben Little: wrote,
if the Tenaunts had erected
Crofles spon their benfeg 02
tenements, in pretudtce of the
ods, that the Cenaunts
might clatine the pztutledge of
the hefpitiers to defend them⸗
felues agatnft their iozds,
thep had fopfeíteo their Œe-
nances. abut fince Littleton
wꝛote, the Hoſpitlers are diſ⸗
folued, and conſquently that
fo2feiture (9 gone.

« Ou profit. As
Reliefe , Aid pur file marrier,
aid pur faire fitz chiualer,and
the like.


Of Socage.


fait fealtie en tiel cafe
nul auter Seruice
eftdue, Aceotl poyt
eftre Dit, Que lou bn
@enant tient fa
Terre de fon Seig⸗
nior, il couient que il
doit fait a ſon Seig-
nioz aſcun Seruice,
cac file GLenaunt ne
fes heires Deuopent
faire nul manner Be
Sernice al Seigni⸗
0? ne à fes heires,
Donque per long
temps continue il
ferroit 5028 De me⸗
mogie & De remem⸗
brance;le quel la tert
fuit tenug pet le feig-
nio2,ou Defes beíreg,
ou nemy, a Donques
pluis toft & pluis te»
Diment botlont bócs
Dire que latetre neft
pas tenus Del Seig-
nioz ou De les heires,
q̃ auterment : Ct fur
ceo le Seignioz per=
Da fon Cfcbcat De la
terre, ou pet cafe au-
ter fozfetture ou pꝛo⸗
fit que il poet auct De
leterre, Iſſint it eft
teafon que 1c Seig-
nior a fes beires ont
afcun Seruice fapt
à eux, pur pꝛouer &
teftifier que la terre
eft tenus de eur,


Se.130.


this cafe no other Ser-
uice is due, To this it
may bee fayd, That
where a Tenant holds
his land of his Lord,
it behooueth that hee
ought to doe fome fer-
uiceto his Lord: For
if the Tenant nor his
heires oughtto doeno
manner of Seruice to
his Lord nor his
heires, then by long
continuance of time
it would grow out of
memorie , whether
the Land were hol-
den of the Lord, or
of his Heires , or
not, and then will
men more often and
more readily fay,
That the Land isnot
holden of the Lord,
nor of his Heires,
than otherwife: And
hereupon the Lord
fhall lofe his Efcheat
of the Land, or per-
chance fome other
forfeiture or profit
Which he might haue
of the Land. So
itis reafon that the
Lord and his heyres
haue fome Seruice
done vnto them, to
prooue and teftifie,
That the Land ishol-
den ofthem.


Sed.


Libia.


« L« fut ceo
mo kealtie eft in=
‘cident a touts man⸗
ners De tenures. fozf=
pus le Tenure en
Frankalmoigne, (fi-
- cde Fra Dit en letenut
à Frankealmoigne)t
pur ceo que le Seig⸗
nioz ne voiloit ai cõ⸗
mencement Del Ce-
nure auce aſcun auter
feruice forlque Feal⸗
tie, il ef reafon que
home poet tener De
fon Scignio2 per fe-
altie tantſolement, &
quaunt il ad fait ſon
kealtie il ao fait touts
fes ſeruices.


¶ ITem ſi vn home leſſe à
bn auter pur terme à bic


Of Socages


Se#.13 1.
Nd for that fealtie


is incident to all
manner of Tenures,
but to the Tenure in
Frankealmoigne , ( as
fhallbe faidinthe Te-
nure of Frankalmoign)
and for that the Lord
would not at the be-
ginning of the Tenure
haue any other feruice
but Fealtie, it is reafon
that a Man may hold
of his Lord by Feal-
tie onely, and when
hee hath done his
Fealtie, hehath done
all his Seruices.


Section 132.


Lfo ifa man letteth to €
ariother lands or teneméts


Se8.131.152,


€ prs ef ind-
dent.

DE Incidents there bee
1500 forts, viz.feperabIc ano.
inſeperable.

Seperable, as Rents
incident to reucrfions, Gc.
Swhich may be fevered, infepe=
rabie, ag fealtie to a reuerſi⸗
On oztenure Which cannot
befeuerco : £0? ag alllanbg
and @enements within
England are holden of fome
ALozd o2 other, and either
mediatelp 02 immediately of
the iking,fo to certc tenure
at the leaf, fealtic is an in⸗
feperable incident, fo long
as tbe Œenure remaincs,
and all other Seruices, ex⸗
cept feaitie, are ſeuerable.
Wut where the tenure ts bp
Fealtie ontp, there is no re=
licfe due £o? the caufe aboue⸗
faid,


I un
hoe


certaine terres outenemétg forterme of life, without na- leſſe pur
fauns parier De afcun rent mingany rent to bee referued terme de
rend a le Leſſoꝛ. vncoꝛe tl to the Leflor, yet he fhall doe «ze fauns
kerra fealtic a le Leſſoꝛ, pur fealtieto the Leffor, becaufe parler de
tea que tl tient de lup, Bury he holdeth of him. Alfo if a rest dre.
fon leaſe lott fait a bti bóe Leafe bee made toa man for il ferra
pur terme De ans il eff Dit terme of yeares, it is faid that 4/1, ec
que le XLeffee ferra. Fealtie the Leffee fhall doe fealtic to A", P
ale Leffoz, puc ceo que tl tt= the Leffor,becaufe he holdeth | «caute

entdeiuy, Et ceo eſt proue ofhim. Andthisis wel proo- Posie ;
bien per les parols Del brief ued by the words of the writ feattie (ag
De Waſt, quaunt le Leſſour of Waft,when the Leffor hath n *
aD caule De porter Wetefe De caufetobring a writ of Walt cirent toat
Matt enuers lup, le quel againft him, which Writ fhall manner of
Briefe dira que le XLeffeetí- fay, That the Leffee holds his Fs Ma
ent les Tenements Dc le Tenements of the Lefour note, that


Hefioz puc terme De ang, for B of yeares. So the te p
at 6


93


U.SeF. 23a.


Lib.2.


42. E. 3. 34. 9. M. 6.51.
10.H.6.13 9.E.4.1.
31,F. 4.29. 5.H, $12.
5.H.7.11.


Vid. $28.84.


"Brail lib.2.ca.5. dr
Ib.4,c4.23.

"Britton fo.1 64.165.
Mirror ca. a. 6.18.
Glanurl, lib. 7.en. 1. cr
ib. 3.64.3. & 25.
Fleta, lib. 5.ca. 5.


a1 H.7:39. 19 E. 3.14.


4o. £3.29. 8. H.6 33.
7E, 413. 12, H. œ . 8.


Cap.6.


of the 1.025, that big Tenant
ail be fatthfuil and Topatl to
him doth create fuch a fcruice,
as the Œenant (ball bc bound
thereunte by oath.


€, Aux: fi leafe foit
fait pur ans, &c. le leſſee
ferra fealty. For there


alfo ig a tenure betweene
them. And Liuletonsopinton
inthis cafe ts holden fo; geod
Aa at rhig bap.


¶ Et ceo ef proue
bien per les parols del


breife. cre. Nota, the o⸗
rigitall Waits (are ag ft
Svere ) the foundations and
grounds of the Law, and ag
it appeares here bp Littleton
arcofgreat authozitie for the
profe of the Law in particu=
lar cafes.


Pur ceo que il uad


fuer estate. Therefore


Tenant at will fball not doe


Of Frankalmoigne.


iffint le biíefe proua
bn tenure enter eur,
Mes celup Ge te-
nat a bolunt folonc
le courte Del common
lep,ne ferva fealty, p
ceo que il nad afcun
fuer eftat, Mes au-
terment eft De tenant
à bolunt tolonqs E cus
ftome Del mannoz. p
ceo que ileft oblige
pur faire fealty a fon
Sit put Deur cau-
fes: Lun eft p caufe
Del cu(tome: a lautet
eft, purceo q il p2ift
fon eftate en tiel
fozine pur faire a fon
DSfrfealty,


Se.133,


Writ proues a tenure
betweenethem. But
hewhich is Tenant at
will according to the
courfe of the Com-
mon Law fhall not doe
Fealtie, becaufe hee
hath not any fure
eftate : but otherwife
itisof Tenant at will
according to the cu-
ftome of the Mannor,
forthat he is bound to
doe fealtieto his Lord
for two caufes,the one
is, by reafon ofthe cu-
ftome, and the other is
for that hetaketh his e-
ftate in fuch forme to
doe his Lord fealty.


Feaity ( ag hath beene fato before ) becaufe tbe matter ofan oath mutt be certaine : the ref o£
this Section needs no erplication.


CN auter hoe
T de religi-
on ou de faint efelife. It


ig to be obferued, that of Œc-
cicfafticali perfong fome bee
regular; and ſome bee ſecular.
@bep bee called regular bec
caufe thep liue vnder certaine
rules, and faue bowed thre
things : true obedfence, perpe=
tuall chaftitp and Milfull poz
nertp, And ben a man is
profefled in any of the oꝛders
of Religion, he ts faío to be
home de religion, a man of
religionozreligions. Ofkthis
fozt be all Æbbots, Pꝛioꝛs
and others ef anp of the faid
Oder regular. Secular are
perfons Œcclefafticall, but
becaufe thep líue not vnder
certatn rulegof fome of the fat
orders, oz are Woluntaries,


FE Frankalmoigne.


Zw».


zy da Cnant en
j de franbat-
eee moígne,

ett lou bn
Abbe ou Pꝛioꝛ ou br
auter hoe de religion,
ou d faint Cglite,ciét
Defon ſũr en frank⸗
almoigne, q eft abit
en “atin in liberam
eleæmofinam. Et ttel
tenure comment ade-
primes en auncient
temps en tiel fozme ;
Quant bn home en
auncient temps fuit
fci(te certain terres
ou tenements en fon
bemefne come De fee,


Se. 133.


Enãt in Frãk⸗
almoigne, is
; where an
Abbot or
Prior, oranother man
of Religion,or of holy
Church, holdeth of
his Lord in Frankeal-
moigne : that is to fay
in Latin in liberam Ele-
emofynam , that is,
in free almes. And
fuch tenure began frit
in old time when a
man in old time was
feifed of the lands or
tenements in his de-
mefneas of Fee, and of
the fame land infeoffed


&


Lib.2.


ede meſmes les ter-
res ou tenemẽts en⸗
fcotfa bn Abbe & fon
Couent, ou bn Pꝛy⸗
02,8C,8 auer a tener a
eut & lour ſucceſſoꝛs
atouts tours en pure
a perpetual alinoigit,
olen frankalin ou p
tielrparols; À tent
Dele grantoz, ou dele
feoffor,æ Dc fes tes
en frankalmoign: en
tiels cafes les tene-
ments font tenus en


Of Frankalmoigne.


an Abbotand his co-
uent, or Prior and his
Couent,to haue and to
hold to themand their
fucceffors in pure and
perpetuall almes, orin
Frankalmoigne, or by
fuch words,to hold of
the grauntor, or of the
leffor and his heires in
Free almes : In fuch
cafe the tenements
were holden in Frank-
almoigne.


Sed.133.


thep are fo; diſtinction fake
called fecular, as Withops,
Deanes and Chapters;
Archdeacons , Pꝛebends,
35arfons ; Wicars, and fac
like, Bil which Littleton here
includeth onder thefe generail
Swords, De faint Eglife, of hoz
lp Church and none of thcfe
are tn Law fatd to be liomes
dercligion o? religious,
there Littleton faith ( in-
fcotfa vn Abbe & fon couent)
his meaning is that the Ab⸗
bot only (a tnfeoffed, for be ts
onlpa parfon capable and the
Couent are dead perfons in
Law, and baue power of afz
fent only, and that thep there=
untoaffent, But fince Little-
ton $020t6; all Abbpew, 392for
ties, Monaltertes, and other


franbalmoigne, religious houfes of Monkes,


Canons, Friers, and Munnes, ac. hauc bin difloiued,¢ their poſſeſſions giuen to the Crowne.

Che EccieHafticall Hate of England, as it Landeth at this dap ( bich ts neceflarte foy ou
fudent to know ) is deuided into tive 3910u(nccg; 02 Archbithopzicks,( viz. ) of Canterbury,
andof Porke, Che Archbifhop of Canterbury is filed, Metropolitanus & primas totius An-
glix ; Andthe Archbtthop of Pozke Primas Angliz, Each Drchbithep hath Within bis Pro⸗
nince ſuſfragan Biſhops of feucrall Dioceſſe Che Archbifhop of Canterbury hath vnder
bim Within his 3920uínce, of ancient foundations,viz. Rochefter his pꝛincipall Chaplaine.
London hig Deane, Winchefter hig Œhancelloz ; Norwich, Lincolne, Ely, Chichefter, Salif-
bury, Exeter, Bathe and Wells, Worcefter, Couentry and Lichfield, Hereford, Landaffe, St. Da-
uid, Bangor, and St. A ffaphe,g foute founded by ing H,8.erecte ont of the ruines of diſſolued
Monafteries (that ts tofap ) Gloucefter, Briftowe, Peterborow, and Oxford. Che Archbifhop
of Yorke hath vnder him foure,(viz. the Withop of the County palatine of Chefter newly eres
cted by ing H.8.andannercd bp him to the Archbiſhopricke of Yorke, of the County palatine
of Durham, Carlile, and the Iſſe of Man annexed to the zouince of Yorke bp H.8. but a
greater number thts Archbiſhop anctentlp had, which time hath taken From hin, Che extent
of euet? Dioccſſe pou may elfewhere reade, the hich for bzeuitie J here omit. 2011 the fato
Archbtfhopzickes, and Biſhopꝛicks of England werefounded bp the Kings of England to
hold by Barony ag hereafter fati beſaid.* And enerp Archbtlsop and Withop hath bis Deans
anb Chapter, WheresE moze fall be fato hereafter, The Archbifhop of Canterbury hath the
precedencie; next to him the Archbiſhop of Yorke, next to him the Biſhop of London, and next
to am — Biſhop of Winchefter, and then all other Biſhops of both Wzoutnces after their
anctentneffe-

Euery Diocelleig deuided into Archdcaconries, Whereof therebe Go. anb the Archdeacon ts
Called oculus Epifcopi, and cuerp Ærchbeacenrp is parted into Deanries, and Weanrtes as
gaine into Pariſhhes, CoMnes and Hamlets. Bnd thus much foz the better vnderſtanding
of out Authoz, and how the (fate Ecclefatticall ſtandeth at thts day, hall fatfíce.

€ Prokalmoigne que eïf a dire en Latyne, in liberam Eleemofinam. In
€Englifb in fre Dimes, Chere ts an officer tn the Kings boufecalled Eleemofinarius bulgatlp
Called the Kings Bimner ( hole office and dutie is excellentip difcribed (n ancient Authors)
viz. Fragmenta diligenter colligere & cft diligenter diftribuere fingulis diebus egenis, ocgrotos;
& leprofos,incarceratos,pauperefque viduas, & alios egenos vagofque in patria commorantes
charitatiue vifitare; item equos reliétos, robas,pecuniä, & alia ad Eleemofina largita recipere,8c
fideliter diftribuere, debet etiam regem füper Eleemofinz largitione crebris fummonitionibus
ftimulare,præcipue diebus ſanctorũ, & rogare ne robas fuas,quæ magni funt pretij;hiftrionibus,
blanditoribus,accufatoribus,feu meniftrallis,fed ad Eleemofinz fuze incrementü jubeat largiri.
AB Ecclefiatticall perfons may hold in Frankalmoigne be they Secular oz Regular,¢no lap
perfon can hold (n frranbalmofgne. Chis adieciue(liber oth diſtinguiſh many things in Law
from others, ag bere libera Elecmofina are woꝛds apprepztatedte this cafe, and doth diſtin⸗
guilh (t froma tenure by diuine ſeruice, liberam tenementum , froma tenure in villenage, 92
bp Copthoid o? bafc tenure, liberam fœxdum — from a tenure in ancient Dune, li-
82 erum


94.


See the flatntes of 33. H.0.
nor printed bus sn she abridre-
mens 31. H.8.cap.13. 67
32. H.8.ca.34. 676.
Vid.Self, 6:0.


Math. Varker de vitis

A vektepifcoporum.
Linwesd.

Camden Britania,

Vid. Rer. Parliam, anno
36-H.3.1.E.5.5.E.6. dre.
Wefiminfier alfe was new'3
erected a Bifbepncke by H.8.
bur by Queene Mary tt was
reffored te be an Abby, aud by
Queene Eli created a
Deanry (ellegiate.

(Cut Fler had beene ancientlya
Bifeops fea and long finca
tran [lated ro (onsatry.

3 3. H.8.ca. 31.

Camden vbifupra.

26. H. 8. first fruites and
tenths. Vid Self. 157.

* Lib. 3.fo.73. Deane and
Chapt.of Nerwicheafe.
oi hub
31.H.$.«a.10.


Vid. more bereof, Se]. 180,
$28.648.r«.


Fletalib. 2.69.33.


Vid. Set
Braten lib. 4.c4, 37.387
Britt, 64.32;


Lib.i.


Britton.eap.66.

Bratten. lib. 4.F ."N.'B.150.
Bratt (65.4. fol. 288.247:
292. Britton. fol. 2 45-

F eta, lib. 5. cap. 21.


Fortefcuecap.26. 34-E. 3.34.


43. E. 5.eenfiir. 11.
27. Af 59. Stanf.175-
Vide Seët, 199%

EL ta.lib.1.cap. 47.


G 'anuil. Itb. 7 eap .x. fel. 44
45,400.


Britton.cap.66. fol. Y64.
Bratt. lib. . 2.cap. $. 0,10»
N.N.B.211.


Fleta lio. 1.cap.42


7 E.4.1 2.330 H.6.6.7.
39.H.6.29.

(a) Moertmaine.
"Britton. fol. 32. dr 95.
Braëon.lib. 2.cap. 5.
Fleta.lib. 3 .cap.5.


X1, H, 7.12.


39. H.6.36.5.


Vide Latt. in the Chapter of
Fee fimple, Sel, 1.2.


39. H.c. 30.


35-H.6.56.7.E.4.11-
Vide Bratton. lib. 2.cap.10,


35.H.6.56.7.8.4.11.


Bra.vbifupra.44,€.3.24.


20.H.6.fel.36


38.E.3.4.a. 14.H.6.12.
10.11.7.13. 16.H.7.g.
18. E. 3.conufans. 39.
33-H.6.23. 17.E. 3.51.
6.E. 3.54. dv.


Tr $.E. 3 Rot.4.inSeaccarto.


The Trier of Dusftables café.


Cap.6. Of Frankalmoigne. Sed i33.
berum maritagium, from other eſtates taile , libera firma, franke ferme, Wher an effate(g
changed from Knights Seruiceto Hocage,liberum focagium, froma tenure by fecutccin Cht=
Waltic. Francnsbancus to dittinginh (t from other Dowers, fox that (t commeti) Frey withaut
anp act of the buibands, o2 alliqnement of the here, Libera lex, to diſtinguiſh men, Soho entop
it, and Swbofe belt anv freck birthright (t is, from them, that bp their offence haue loft tt, ag
men attained inan attatnt, in a confpícacic bpon an Indictment, opin a 391emuntre, ec, Bad
fo of libera capella, francus plegius, frankpledge, libera chafea , free Chale, liber burgus, liber
aper, liber raurus, andthe ithe, Wut ín a matter (Lome will fap ) of curtofitte, this hall fuffice,
and pet ſeeing, tt tends to thebetter buderfkauding (others fap ) it is tolerabie,

By the anctent Common Law of England, a mancoutd not alien fuchiands ae he had bp
difcent Without the confent of bis beire, pet he might giue a part to od ín frez Aimotgne, oz
With bis daughter (n fre mar tage, oꝛ to his feruantin remuneratione (eruitij-Dureld Bokes
decribed Frankalmoigne thus, when Lands oz Cenements ere beltowed bpon (50b, (that
ts) giuen to ſuch peopicag are confecrated to tbe feruice of God. In our ancient Bokes thefe
gifts of devotion were calles Churcheilet, o2 Churchferd, quali femen Ecclefix , but (m amoge
particular fence, (t is defcribed thus, Certam menfüram bladi tritici fignificar, quam quilibet
olim fanétx Ecclefiz die fan&i Martini temporetam Britonum quam Anglorum contribuerunt:
plurestamen Magnates poft Romanorum aduentum illàm contributionem fecundum veterem
legem Moifi nomine primitiarum dabant proutin breui Regis Knuti ad fummum Pontificem
tranfmiffum centinetur,in que illam contributionem Churchfed appellant quafi femen Ecclefia.


¶ E: ricltenure. Foꝛ albeit neitber fcaltie noz any other tem⸗

poraliferniccis duc, pet it is a tenure.

€ (Er ancient temps. That is to fap before tbe ftatutes of Moꝛt⸗
mapne, viz. Magna Charta,cap.3 6, & 7.E.1. de religiofis,&c. and before the Statute of Quia
emptores terrarum ag fhall be hereafter tn bis proper place fatd tn tits Chapter,

€ E»feoffa un Abbe & fon Concent, cc. Hibeit the Couent bee dead
perfong in Law, and the Abbot oni capable (ag before te fato) pet t€ the Ecoffement bemade
to an Abbot and Couent, the fcoffement is gad, andthe ftate veſteth onip tn the Abbot, And
note a man map infcoffe an Abbot, a WBithop, a Parſon, ec. o; any other folc bodie politique bp
Deed 0? Without deed in free Dimes, and fo map a gift in frankmartage be made Without deedal=
fo: bus if Lands be giuen to a Deane and Chapter, 02 any other Coꝛpoꝛation aggregate of
manp, there the gikt muft be bp deed.

Œ 4 auer & tener a eux & a lour fucceffors. For tn cate of an
Abbot o? 392(0; and Couent regularip a fe Simple doth not pafle without thefe
Swords ( Succeflozs ) for the Díucrütic ſtandeth thus bet weene a Corporation aggregate of
many capableperfons , and afolc Lozpozation, As it Lands be giuen to a Deancand Chaps
ter, they hauea fee (imple Without tbefc Words ({uccellors )foz that the bodie neuer dies, but it
Lands be giuen toa Biſhop, Darfon, o2 any other folc Cozporation, who after their deccaſes
baue a fucceflion, there Sitiout tb:fc words ( SpucceTozs ) nothing paffctb bnto them but Foz
life, But of Cozpozattons agaregate of many there tg adiucrfitie when the head and bobie
both are capcablc, ag in tbe cafe of Deane and Chapter, and When one as hath bene fa(b is
onlp capeable, ag fit cafe of. Abbot o2 Pꝛioꝛ and couent, but pet out of the generall rules the
cafe of Frankalmoigne is cecepted ag hereafter (ball befaid, Bifo Lands mult bee ginentoa
Corporation aggregrate of many bp Ded, but to afole Corporation (t map be granted with⸗


out Ded
Bra&on lib,z.cap.10. Poteft donatio fieri in liberam Eleemofinam Ecclefijs Cathedralibus,


Conuentualibus, Parochialibus & viris religiofis.


€ Ev pure & perpetuall almoigne Here ít appeareth that à tenure in
Frankalmoigne map becreated without this Swozd ( libera) fog pura implyeth ag much, ;
Ouen Frankalmoigne. Wut one of thefe woꝛds either pura 02
libera, mutt be feb o2 elſe it is no tenure in ffrankalmoigne.
€ Ow per ceux parolx a tener de le grantor ou feffor & [es heives em Frank-


almoigne. Here it appeareth that bp thefe words a fee (imple palleth
Without thefe words ( Huccellors) albeit it bein cafe of a folc Coꝛpoꝛation. oz ag incafe of
a gift in Frankmartage,an Gſtate taile paſſeth to tbc Donees Without woꝛds of betres of their
tio bodies,as hath bence fata inthe Chapter of £e taile,fo (n cafe of a gift in Srankalmotane
(Sobich map be refembled to a Diuine mariage) a Fee (imple pafleth, as bath beencfatd, though
itbe in cafe of a fole Corporation without this $0020 ( Succeſſoꝛs.) And befides arants in
Frankalmoigne arc ancient Gants ag bath beene ſaid, and thovefozs (hall bee allexoco ag the
Law ag taken when ſuch dp;ante were made, p
[17 ·


Lib.2.


CEN. Meſme te
4 Manner cft,
lou terres ou tene=
ments fueront grant
en ancient temps a
vn Deane & Chap-
tev, & alour fuccet-
fo23,0u abn Parſon
bun Cfglis, tates
fucceflozs,ou a afcuti
auter home De faint
Cfglis, ta (cs Suc⸗
ceſſors en frankalm̃
ff il auoit capacitie
Dappredt ticisgrats
ou feoffements ac,


Of Frankalmoigne.


Sed. 134.


N the fame manner

itis where Lands or
tenements were gran-
ted in ancient timetoa
Deane and Chapter &
to their Succeffours,
or to a Parfon of a
Church & his fuccef-
fors, or toany other
manof holy Church,
and to his fucceffours
in Frankalmoigne, if
hee had capacitie to
take fuch graunts or
feoffements, &c.


€ EX CMefine le
Manner, Ce.
Were Littleton fautna put an
example of bodies tncozpozate
aggregate of manp ‘whereof
the headigonlp capable now
putteth examples, both of bo=
Dico incogpozate , aggregate
of manp ( ail being capable
anb of foie Coꝛpoꝛations of
Seculer perſons.
€ Deane. Decanus
ig deriued of the Gꝛeek $0020
dexx that fignifieth Gen, foz
that hee fs an Œcciefiafticall
Secular Goucrnowr , and
Was anctentip oner ten Pre⸗
bends o? Canons at tye leaſt
fr a Cathedzall Church, and
ts head of his Chapter,
¶ Chapter. Capitn-


Set 3415.


lum eft Clericorum congregatio {ub uno Decano in Ecclefia Cathedrali. And
Chapters be twofold, viz. the Ancient, andthe later, And thelater be alſo of two forts , firſt,
thofe which Were tranflated o? Founded bp King Henry the Eight, in place of Abbots and Lo
nents, o; Prꝛiors and Couents, Which were Chapters Whilesthep tod, and thefe are new
Chapters toold Wilhopzickes. Hecondip, wohere the Withopzicke Was neMip founded Up
Henry the Gight (ag Chefter, Briftow, &c.) there the Chapters are alfo new. There (gà
great diuerfitie between the commings (n of the ancient Deane, and of the new, -froz the ars
cient come tn in much like fort as Biſhops noc: forthep are chofen by the Chapter bpaconge
de eflier ag Biſhops be, and the King giuing bis Koyall affent, thep are confirmed by the Wis
hop, But thep Which are cítber newly tranflated oz founded atc Donatiue,andby ths Kings
Letters Patents are inſtalled, Whtchare matters neceflarp to de knowne.
qr Sil auoit capacitie a prender. for Ccclefiatticall perſons haue
notcapacitie to take tn ſucceſſton, vnleſſe they be bodies Politique, as Biſhops, Archdcacons,
Deancs, Parfons, Vicars, ec. o? lawlully incorpozate bp the Kings Letters patents op
' prefertption,as Deanes and Chapters , Colledges, «c. Wut a Colledge of religious perz
fons, Chauntric Pꝛleſts, andſuch like, that are not lawfully incerpozated, but on!p confift (is
buigar reputation baue no capaciticto take ſucceſſion, therefoge Littlecon abded matertallp (fic


ad capacitieà prender.)
Sed. 135.


T tiels q teíq- Nd they which f this Section there
ches en frank= A hold in Frankal- LA inen 8 bíuíGon of


enures,that (s to fap,
almoigne font oblige — fome
De Doit Deuant dieu
De fair ortfons, prai-
ers meſſ. a autres Di-
uine feruices pur leg
almes de lour gran-
to? ou fcoff,a pur les
alines De lour peires


moigne, are bound of
right before God, to
make Orifons , Pray-
ers, Maffes, and other
diuine Seruices forthe
foules oftheir Grantor
or Feoffor, and for the
foules of their heires
A8 3


fome be {pirttual,and forme be
temporal. And of fpirituall
ſome be incertatne,ag tenures
in Frankalmoigne, and foie
be certaine, ag tenure by dt-
uine Serutce. Againe dinine
feruice certatne (g two fold, cis
ther ſpirituall ag 492apere to
Go, 02 teimpozall , ag diftrt=
butíon of ames to poze eos
ple,

a; o5-


95


Lib.2.


(a) Vide Seft.137.


(b) Vide Sei. 119.


(c) 2. E.6.cap. 1.5.7 6.E. 6,
eap, V. 1, Eig eap. 2.


(4) 31.H.6.6. 13. X. fit,
count de yencher 118,


Cap. 6.


q oblige de droit.
Bhat (g tbep are compellable
by the EccieGatticall Law to
Doe it, and therefore tt (e fato
that thep are bound of right,
fo? want of remedp,and want
of right is all one, anb the
Common Law (ag here it
appeareth taketh knowledge
of the EccleGatticall Lam tn
that behaife. — ;

«| De faire Orifons,
Prayers , Meffes, & an-
ters Diuine Seruices,

Since Littleton Wpote, the
Aypturgicor Woke of Com⸗
mon 392atcr and of Celebza-
ting Diuine Seruice (e altez
red ; thig alteration not with⸗
ftanding, pet the tenure in
Frankalmotgne remaineth,
andfuch Prayets and divine
Seruice (ball be faid and ce⸗
lebzated ag now (s authort=
fed, pea, though the tmurebe
in particular, ag Littleton
(a) hereafter faith, viz. A
Chaunter yn mefle, &coua
Chaunter vn placebo & diri-


Of Frankalmoigne.


queug font mogtes,
a pur le pꝛoſperitie a
bon bie a bon falute
Delour beires (font
en bie, Ct pur ccoilg
nefeccont a nul tẽps
aſcun fealtie a lour
Seignior, put ceo q
tiel Diuine ferutce cft
meliour pur eux De-
uant Dieu que afcun
feafans De fealtie, &
auxi put ceo que ceux
paroly ( franbalm)
etcludele Seignior
Dauer afcun terrein
ou tempozall feruice,
mes Dauer tant(ole-
ment Diuine & {pirt-
tuall feruice deſtre
fait pur lup, at,


Sed.116:


which are dead, and
forthe profperitie and
good life and good
health of their heires
whichare aliue. And
therefore they fhall
doe no fealty to their
Lord,becaufe thatthis
diuine Seruice is bet-
ter for them before
God then any doing
of fealtie, and aMo be-
caufe that thefe words
( Frankalmoigne) ex-
cludeth the Lord to
haue any earthly or
temporall Seruice,but
to baue only Diuine
and Spiritual! Seruice
to bee done for bim,
&c.


ge, pet (£tbe tenant faith tbe 392aperg now authoꝛiſed (t fufficeth. Bnd ag Littleton (b) hath
fab befoze in the cafe of Hocagethe changing of onc kind of tempozall feruices into ether tem⸗
pozall feruices, altercth netther tbe name noz the effect of the tenure: fothe changing of fpirítu-
all feruices tnto other fpirituall feruices, altereth neither the namenoz effect of the tenure, And
albett the tenure in ffrankalmoigne ig now rebuceb toa. certaintie contained tn the Boke of
Common Pꝛayer, pet feetng the originall tenare Wags in Srankalmotgne, andthe change is bp
generall confent bp autbezitie sf Parliament, (c) &obereunto enerp man ts partie, the tenure
remapnes ag ft was befoze,

a Ne ferront afcun fealtie. Herein Cenant in Frankalmoigne
bífferetl froma Cenant tn Jreankimaríage, £o? tenant in Srankmariage fball boe fealtie, ag
hath benc fato (n tbe Chapter of Feetarle, but tenant in Frankalmoigne,ſhall not doc any, og
anp other thing, but deuora animarum fuffragia.

q Tiel diuine feruice eff melieur per eux. And ít is alſo ſaid in our
— (d) Que Frankalmoigneeft le pluis haute ſeruice, and this ag conteſſed bp the Hea⸗
then Poet.


fuithzc fapientia quondam
Publica priuatis fecernere, facra profanis.


And certaine (t ig, that Nunquam res humanz profperè fuccedunt vbi negliguntur diuinz.


Setlion 136.


€rz ff tiels que
teígnont lout
tenements en fran-
kalmoigne ne boilót
ou fatlont 6 faire tícl


€ LZ Seigniour ne


Pott eux diffrei-
ner pur ceſt non fea[ant,


6.
© Difreine. The


a if they which
hold their Tene-
méts in frankalmoigne
will not or faile to do
fuch diuine feruice (as


bís


Lib.1.


Diuine feruíce (coe eft
Dit le ffir ne poit eur
Diftrainer p cel non
fefant,&c.pur ceo que
neſt mis en certaine
quelp feruices ils
Doient fait,mes E fir
De ceo poit complatne
alour o2dinatic ou
bifitour, lup prepant
que tl boiloit mittet
punifbment & co2re-
ction ð cco, a auxy De
pꝛouider d tiel negli-
gence ne toit pluis a-
uát faít;ac, Ct loꝛdi⸗
Harp ou bí(it De dzoit


Of Frankalmoigne.


is faid ) the Lord may
not diftrain them for
not doing this, &c.
becaufe itis not put in
certeyntie what ferui-
ces they oughtto do :
but the Lord may
complaine of this to
their Ordinary or vifi-
tour praying him that
hewilllay fome pu-
nifhment and correcti-
on for this, &alfo pro-
uide that fuch negli-
géce be nomore done
&c. And theordinary
or Vifitor of right
ought to doethis,&c.


Se 136.


Word Diſtreſſe is a French
God, in Latyn it {s called
diftriétio five anguítia; bes
caufe the cattell piftrepned
are putínto a ſtreight, which
Swe call a pownd.


€ Pur ceo que nef


mile in certaine queux
féruices ils doient faire.
Ft is a Maxime in Law that
no diftrefiecan bee taken £03
anp ferniccothat are not put
tnto certaintie (c) noz can bee
reduced to anp certatntte Foz
Id certum eft quod certum
reddi poteft ; fo (f£) oportet
quod certa rcs deducatur in
iudiciü ; € bpor the auowate,
Damages cannot be recoue⸗
redfoz that, Which netther
bath certaíntíc noz cam be re=
duced to anp certaintp,and pet
in fome cafes theremap bee a
Certainty in vncertainty, as a


ceo Doit faíteat, man map hold of big 1070 to


here ail the ſheepe depafturing Within the Lords Mannoꝛ, and this is certatne cnough,albett
the 1.020 hath ſometime a greater number ,an» femetime a lefler number there, and pet this tne
certaintie being referred tothe Dannoz hich ta certaine, the Lord map diſtraine for this vn⸗
certaintie. Et ficde fimilibus, à


¶ Poct complayner. (Chat is) to complaine in courfe of Juttice,
according tothe Ecciefiatticall Law.


€ 4 Jour ordinarie. Ordinarius, and fo he (g called (g) inthe Eccle⸗
Gafticall at», Quia habet ordinariam jurifdiétionem in jure proprio, & non per deputationem;
the name We bane anctentip taken from the Canontfts, ano doe appip (t onlp to a Biſhop o2 ac
np other that hath osdinarp iuriſdiction in caufes EccleGalticall ; In this cafe of Littleton tt ig
to be obferucd that the Law doth appoint eucrp thingte be done bp tbofe, onto Whole office ít
properly appertaineth, and foꝛaſmuch ag ttbelongeth tothe office of tbc Dzdinariein this cafe
to fee Diuine feruice fatb,anb to compell them to Doe it bp Ecciefiafitcall cenfures, therefore
complaintis te be made vnto him. ere and inthe next Section itappearcth,that for deciding
of Controuerfles, and foz diftribation of Juſtice Within this Realme, therebee two diſtinct
turifdicions,the one Eccichalticall limttted tocertainefpirituall and particular cafes ( of the
one Whercof out Authoz here fpcaketh ) and the Court Wherein thefe caufes arc handled is
called Forum ecclefiafticum, (he other (uvtfoidton ts fecular and general, £02 that tis guided
bp thecommon and generali Law of the Realme, Quæ pertinet ad coronam & dignitatem re-
gis, & ad regnum in caufis & placitisrerum temporalium in foro feculari. So ag in this cafe
pat by eut Duthoz, the 1070 hath remedy foz big diuine feruice ( albett they {luc out of tempos
Fall lands ) £n foro ecclefiaftico, by the Ccclefiafficall Law, other wiſe the 3,020 fhoulb be with⸗
outremedp, Pet the Common Law, to tbe intent that Œcclefafticall perfons might the better
difcharge their dutie in celebration of divine feruice, and notto bee intangled with tempoꝛall
bufinefle, hath pzonided, that if an of them be chofen to any tempozail office bee may baue big
102ít De clerico infra facros ordines conftituto non eligendo in officium,&c and thereof bee
diſch arged.

€ 0x Vifitor. Chat is, where the King or any of his Prꝛoge⸗
nitors is Founder of the boufe, there the Oꝛdinary regularip fall not vifit them, but the
Chancciour of England ts appointed bp Law to be BiiGtor of them, o2 where a fpecíall Viſi⸗
to; is appointed bpon the foundation, the complaint muſt be made to the Wthtoz.


€ De droit doit ceo faire. De droit,of right, (that isto fap) he ought
todoc it bp the Eccleftatticall Law in theright of bte office.
Andere is implied a Marimeof the Common Law, that where the right, ag our Authoz
here fpeaketh is ſpirituall, ano the remedy therefoze onTp bp the Ccclefiatticall Raw, the conus
fansthereof doth appertatne to the EceleGaticall Court, Sect. 137.


96


(e) 35.H.6.37.

‘Br, tit. office 4.
8.£.3. 3.56.
20.£.3.4ucwrie 131;
(f£) Bralenfol. 330;
or 328.


7-€- 3,38,


(2) Mirror.ea.5.§.
Bron hb. g. fo. 405.06.
Fleta 55, 2.ca. 50.67.55
dr lib 6.4.38.
"Brittonyfo. 69.70.
W.2.ca,19.
17.E.2.bre.822.Reçiff.141
Lsndivood tir. de Conftitnt.
cap exter,

"Bratfon. lib. 5.0.2
f0.400, & 421.andtbe
other Authors aboue ſaid.


Regiff.orig. 187.


27.£.3.84.8 5. Retif. 4o.
F.N.B. ga. 10.Eliz Dier.
273. 16. E. 3. bre 660.
21.E.3.60, 6. H.J. 13.-
8.Aff.27. Brovke tit
Premunire 21e


Lib.


2, E. 3.27528.


Cap. 6.


Er certaine Di-
uine Seruicedefire


4


_ fait, ficome a chaunter


38. H. 6. 26,27.


3. E. 6.ca.13.verfiet finem.
33.E.3.ca. 5. 11.H.7.ca.8.
y. £L.ea. 3.13. €l.ca.1.
23.El.ea. 1.1.1a«6.11.dp 12.


vn meffe, crc. ou de
diftribater en. Almoign,
oc. Herebethe two


parts abouc mentioned, of di-
uine Oeruice , and for tbíg
Diuine feruice certaine, the
Zod bath big remedie, as
bere it appears by our Authoz
in foro feculari:foz here ít ap=
peareth, that (f tcd3loro di⸗
firepne to? not Doing of diuine
Seruice, Which is certain, hee
fball bpon his Auowꝛie reco=
ter Dammages at the Com⸗
Anon Law, that is, in the
Kings Cempozall Court, for
the not doing of tt. And if it
fue be taken por the perfo2=
mance of the Diuine Herz
uice,tt (hall be trted bya Ju⸗
vie of tXocluc men.becaufc ais
beit the Service be Hpirituc
all, pet tbe dammages are
tempozallano fo ts the Seig⸗
niozie alfo.

Bnd pereís implied ano=
ther Maxim of the Law,that
Where the Cominon 02 Sta⸗
tute Law giueth remedie, in
foro feculari, (whether the
matter be Cemporall oz Spi⸗
títuall the Conufans ofthat
caufe belongeth tothe Kings
Œcmporall Courts only, vn⸗
leffe the iurifoiction of the Ec⸗
clefiaffical Court be faved 07
allowed by the fame fatute,
to proceed according to the
Ecciefiakicall Lawes,


a Ou de diftributer
en almoigne al cent pours


homes. Here note that
the Bimes & Kelieke of pore
People being a Worke of cbac
titte, te accounted in Law bí-
uine Seruice, for bat here=
in ts Done to the 35€ fo?
Dods fake, is doncto God
mfeltc.


«J Poet diſtrein, Ac.
Here (&c.) includeth many


Of Frankalmoigne.


Setl. 137.


Es ibn Ab-
x My, ou 3292102
tient De fon. Seigni⸗
02 per certain Diuine
Seruice en certaine
Deftt fait, ficome a
chaunter bn meſſe
chefcun bendiDicen
le Semaine pur leg
Almes, vt fupra, ou
chefcun an a tiel tour
à chaunter placebo &
dirige, &€, ou De tt0-
uet bn chapleine De
chanter meſſe, ac. ou
De Diftributer en Al⸗
moigũ al cent pours
homes cent denters
à tiel tour, en tiel
cafe, ſi tiel Divine
Service nefoit fayt
le Seignior poet Di-
fivepner, ac, putcco
que Ie Biuine Ser⸗
uice eft mife en cet-
taíne per lour Te⸗
nute, que le Albbee
ou Pꝛioꝛ Deuoit fait,
Ct en tiel cafe ie
S»cígnio? aucta 4re-
altie, ac, come tl fem-
ble, Cttiel Cenure
né paffe Dit Cenure
enu Frankalmoigne,
eins eft Dit Cenure
per Diuine Seruice,
cat en enure en
frankalmoigne nul
mention c(t fait Daf-
cun manner De Ser⸗
uice, cat nul poct te-
nec en Frankeal=


moigne


508,157.


Vtifan Abbot or ©


Prior holds of his
Lord by a certaine di-
uine Seruice , in cer-
taine to be done, as to
fing a Maffe euerie
Fryday in the weeke;
for the Soules, vt fa
pra, Or eucrie yeare at
fuch a day to fing a
Placebo & Dirige, &c.
orto find a Chaplaine
to fing a Maffe, &c. or
to diftribute inalmes
to an hundred poore
menan hundred pence
atfucha day. In this
cafe iffuch Diuine
Seruice bec not done,
the Lord may di-
ftreyne, &c. becaufe
the Diuine Seruice
is put in certaine by
their Tenure, which
the Abbot or Prior
oughtto doe. Andin
this cafe the Lord fhal
haue Fealtie, &c. as
itfeemeth. And fuch
Tenure fhall not bee
faid to bee Tenure in
Frankealmoigne , but
is called Tenure by
Diuine Seruice : For
in Tenure in Franke-
almoigne , no men-
tion is made of
any manner of Ser-
uice : For none can
hold in Frankeal-
moigne, if there be
expreffed any manner


aaa


Lib. © Of Frankalmoigne.


SeF.138.


moigne, ſi ſoit expꝛeſſe of certaine Ser- ‘rcllent things, as Soben,
afcunmanti à ẽtain ſer⸗ uice that he ought ol ipe Nc ios


uíce que tl Doit faíte,ac, = given tr thetr proper plas
q En tiel cafe le Seignior auera fealtie dre. come femble. Foz as it hath


banc fai, Fealtic is incident toeueríc Tenure fauing the Œenure in Srankalmotgne, and


to doe, &c.


Shere the 3.020 map diftrepne, there ts ffealtie due, And Britton calleth this Cenure( bp Dis +


gaine Dermice) Aumonc, and not libera Eleemofina. And fatth he, Tenureen aumonc eft terre
ou tenement que eit done a aumone, dount afeun feruice eft retenue al feoffor.


«| cc. And here (Kc. tmplteth, Diſtreſſe, Eſcheat and the like,


« ^ : « 5 6 H.
«| Et tiel Tenure nest paffe dit Tenure en Frankalmoigne, eins eff dit tenure os


per Divine ſeruice, & c. Aud therefore our old Booke Divided Spiri-
tnall Seruice into Free almes, (Which Was free fromanyp limitation of certaintic and almes,
becaufe the Cenants Were bound to certaine diuine Seruices.

@ Sil[oit expreffe afcun manner de certaine ſeruice. Chis holdeth
Swbere the certaintic tg reſerued opon tbe oziginall Grant. Ff lands were giuen to hold In l-
bera Eleemotina reddendo, a tent, tt feemeth the refernation of herent to be void,* becaufe (t is
repugnant and contrarie to the former arant in libera Eleemofina.

Vide Tritt 4.E.5. and F.N-B.231.f, Chatan Abbot o2 392(0z that hold in frankalmoigne,
fhall not becharged With a Cozodie, Pilolands holden in Jrranbalmotan cannot(l)be antient
3Demefnc, in relpect of charges incident thereunto.


shea gral ug ;
«| Que il doit faire &c. Were bp (&c.) ig vnderſtood Tempoꝛall
€? S»pírítuall Scruice,alfo Which be ought to boc cozpozally, og render oz pap.

Chere Were Within this Kealme of England one hundzed and eighteene Monaftertes,
founded bp the Kings of England, whereoffuch Abbots and 1921018 as Swere founded to
hold of the King per Baroniam, and Were calledtotbe Parliament bp tozit, were Lords of
Parliament, and had places and bopceg there: And of them there Were tiwentie feuen Abbots,
and two 3921025, a9 by the Kolles of Parliament appeare. Wut (ince our Duthoz Swzote, all
thefe(as hath beenefatd) are diloined. 23 (ng * Stephen did found the Abbep of Feuerfbamin
ent, Et dedit Abbati & Monachis, & tuccefforibus (uis Manerium de Feuerfiam Com Kanc’,
fimul cum Hundredo, & c. tenendum per Baroniam,&c. whoalbett he held by alBaronte, pet
becaufe he as newer (that 3| (m) find) called bp Swzit,be never fite in Parliament,

All the Archbifhops and Biſhops of England baue bin founded by the kings of England
an doc hold of the Hina bp Baronie (as before hath bœncfaid) and haue beene all called bp
weit to tbe Court of Parliament, and are Logds of Parliament: Bs (amongft map ) ta-
Bing one notable Recoꝛd, (o) Mandatum eft omnibus Epifcopis qui conuenturi funr apud
Glouceftriam,¢ie Sabbathi in Craftiñ San&z Katherine, firmiter inhibendo quod (icut Baro:
nias fuas quas de Rege tenent, diligunt, nullo modo przfumant confilium tenerede aliquibus
quz ad Coronam Regis pertinent, vel quz perfonam Regis, vel ftatum fuum, vel ftatum conci-
lij (ui contingunt, fcituri pro certo, quod fi fecerint, Rex inde fe capiet ad Baronias fuas. Tefte
Rege apud Hereford, 23. Nouemb. &c. And the Withopaickes in wales Swere founded bp tbe
Princes of Wales : and the Pꝛincipalitie of Wales was holden of tbc ing of England, ag
of big Crowne: and When the Pꝛince of toales committed Creafon, Rebeliton, ec, the Prin⸗
cipalitie was fozfeitcd, and the 39atronages of the Biſhhops annexed tote Crowne of (inge
lan, fo as the King ts to bauc enfieng foz his Chaplaines,ans Coꝛodies fer bis Madelets
of them, as of Biſhops founded bp himfelfe. And vide Mich. 10.H.4. Rot. 6o. Wallia coram
Rege, that theindgement was giuen accozdinglp againt the Withop of Satnt Dauids , ín
Wales, Per Iufticiarios de vtroque Banco & alios de perito concilio Domini Regis. Bnd the


Withops of wales are allo called bp wꝛit to Parliament, and are Lozds of Parliament ag bte
fhops of En gland be.


Section 138.


Lfo if it bee de-
mand, fiteit ets + M manded, iftenant
frankmariage ferta in frankmariage fhall
fealtie ale Dott ou à doe fealtie to the do-
15b


€ [Tame itt de⸗ EL E al ferra in-


conuenient, crc.

Bu argument danse from
an (nconueníence ts fozcthie
in Law ag bath bene obfer-
wed


97


"Brit.fo.16 4.


5,0,


"Brit.ca.66.


13.E. 1. Count de Vouch. 118.
13. H. 4. t2 Mefne 74.

30. E.3.50. 19. E. 3. 4wry-
vie 224. 32. E. 1. Tile 31.
16.-^[f.66. 4. H.6.17.
Trin.4.E.3. F.N.B. 2131 .f-
1 5E. 3. Corody 4.

11,:4/.2 2.50. Aff. PL6,
(1) 32. E. i. avt. Dern 39.
8.E.3.5.


* For ex mple, Rot. Tart.
$. H.8. £r 31.H.8)ére.


(m)C&c.Paf: 30. E. t. eor.re-
gethisfoundarion & fo pleaded,


(0) Ex


ot. Pat. de avn⸗
——


17,


10. M4. fo. 6.6:


V.$e8.87.139.391.365:
449.478. 665.712.


Lib.2.


» 40.429.


Littlett fo.50.b.


42.£.3.5. 38.E. 3.395.


39.H,6.28.


Cap. 6.
tied befoze, anb fhall bee often
bereafter. Nihil quod eft in-
conveniens eftlicitum. And
the La that is the perfectton
of reafon cannot fuffer anp
thing that ig inconucntent.
Ft is better fatth the Law
tofuffer a mifcbicte (that ts
patticular to one ) then an
inconucnicnce that map pate
{udice many. Se moze of
this after tn this chapter.
Note thereafonof this di⸗
nerfitie betwene frank
almoigne and Frankmarri⸗
age ftandeth bpen a maine
Maxime of Law, that there
ig no land, thatis not holden
by fome feruice {pirituall 02
tempozall, and therefoze the
Done (ín Frankinartage
ſhall doc fealty, for other=
Swife hee fhould doe to big
1010 noferuice at all, and pet
{tig frankmariage, becaufo
the Law createth the feruice
of freaity for neceflitp of
reafon, and auopding of an
tnconuentence. But tenant th
Frankalmoigne doth fpiritu=
all and diuine feruice which (e
within the laid Maxime and
thercfoze the Law wil not co⸗
bozt him to doc any tempozall
ferutce. See the next Section,
Et enconter rea-


fo». And this ts ano⸗
ther ftrong argument in
Law, Nihil quod eft contra
rationem eft licitum. Foʒ reas
fon te the life of the Law,
nap the Common Law ít
felfets nothing elfe but rea-
fon, Which ig tobe vnderſtod
of an artificiall perfection of
reafon gotten by long ftudie,
ebíeruatíom and experience
and not of enerp mang natu-
tall reafon, foz nemo nafcitur
artifex. G big legall reafer cit
fümmaratio. And therefore
(£ all the reafon that is
difperfed into fo many fence
tall heads were vnited into
one, pet could hee not make


Of Frankalmoigne.


{es heires Deuant le
quart Degree patte,
ac,il femble que cp:
Car il nett pas fem-
bie quant a cel entét


atenant en frankal⸗


moigne, purceo que
tenant en frankal=
moigne ferra,p caule
De fa tenure, Diuine
feruice puc fon. Sir
come Deuant eft Dit,
&cco tl eft charge a
fait plalep Del faint
efglite,a pur ceo il ett
excute a Difcharge De
fealtie, mes tenant
en frankemariage ne
ferra purfon tenure
tiel ferutce, & fil ne
ferra fealtie, Dongs fl
neferraafon Seig⸗
uioz alcun maner De
feruice, ne tpírítual
nc tempozal, le quel
ferroit taconuenient
& encount reafon que
home ferta Tenant
Deftate Denheritance,
abn auter æ OncorcE
{fir aucra nul maner
De feruice De lup, a if-
fint (1 femble que il
ferta fealtie a fon
{fir Deuant le quart
Degree pafle.€t quát
il ad fait fealty tl ad
fait touts {es fer=
uices.


Seil,58.
nor or his heires be-
fore the fourth degree
be paft,&c. it feemeth
that he fhall, for he is
notlike as to this pur-

ofe to tenant in frank-
almoigne, for tenant in
frankalmoigne by rea-
fon of his tenure fhall
doe diuine feruice for
his Lord, ( as is faid
before ) and this hec is
charged to doe by the
Law of holy Church,
and therefore he is ex-
cufed and difcharged
of fealty;but tenant in
frankmariage fhall not
doe for his tenure füch
feruice,and if he doth
not fealty, he fhall not
doe any manner of fer-
uice to his Lord nei-
ther fpiritual nor tem-
porall, which would
be inconuenient, and
againft reafon, that a
man fhall be tenant of
an eftate ofinheritance
to another,and yetthe
Lord fhall haue no
manner of feruice of
him. And fo it feemes
he fhall doe fealtie to
his Lord before the
fourth degree be paft.
And when: hee hath
done fealtie, he hath
doneall his feruices.


fuch a Law ag the Law of England ts, becaufe bp many fucceflion of ages i£ hath beme fis
ned and refined bp an infinite number of grane and learned men, and bp long erperíence groton
tofuch a perfection for the gonernment of this Realme,ag the old rule map be iuſtly beríGeb of
(t Neminem oportet effe fapientiorem legibus: JQoman ( out of big oxone patuate reafon)
ought to be wiſer than tbc Law, whichis the perfection of reafon,


Se.


Lib... c


© bn Abbe
CE tient De fon
(it en krankalm. et
XLabbe et le couent
fout) lour commen
feale alien meſmes
Aeg tenements a bn
feculer home en fee
fimple, en ceo cag le
feculer home ferra
fcaltie a Scignioz,
pur ceo queilne poit
tenerde fon Siir en
frankalmoigne, Car
file feignioz ne Doit
auer De lup fealtp,
Donque tl auera nul
manner 3 (eruice que
ferroit inconuenient,
ouiteft Sũr zlete-
nement eft tenus De
lup.


Of Frankalmoigne.


Sed. 139.


Nd ifan Abbot

holdeth of his
Lord in frankalmoign,
and the Abbot and
Couent vnder their
cómon feale alien the
fame tenements to a
fecular manin fec fim-
ple. In this cafe the
fecular man fhall doe
fealticto the Lord,be-
caufe hee cannot hold
of his Lord in franke-
almoigne, for if the
Lord fhould not haue
fealty of him hee
fhould haue no man-
ner of feruice which
fnould bee inconueni-
ent where he is Lord,
and the tenements be
holden ofhim.:


Se#.139.14.0,


¢ bis cafe is woꝛthy
| of great obfernation
fo? hereby tt appca-

teth, that albeit the Alienoꝛs
held not bp fealty no? anp or
ther terrene feruice but onip
bp fptrituall ſeruices and
thofeincertaine, pes the altes
nes (hall bolo by the certaine
feruice of fealty (and of this
opinion tg Littleton tn our
bokesagreeabie With fopmer
Authozitie ) oz the La cre=
ateth ane tempozall ferutce
out of the Land to be Done bp
the Alienee Swberewith the
Abbot Was mot formerlp
charged foz the duopbíng of
am tnconuentence,viz. that the
Feottee ſhould boe no manner
of ſeruice, and confequentip
the land (houle bee holden of
noman, Wherein tt te to be
femembzed that (ag bath been
fato befoze ) alltbe lands and
tenements in England (it the
hands of any fübiec are hol-
ben of fome 1.020 02 other,and
that eucrp tenant mult Doc


ſome kinde of ferutce, Bnd


that all Lands and Tene⸗
ments are holden either me=


Diatip o2 immediatly of the King, for oꝛiginally all lands and tenements Gere deriued from


the Erowne. And it ts tobe obferue that $oben the Law createth amp new tenure, ttis the
loSweft,(viz. Œenure in Docage ) and With che leaſt feruice that can be bone, and neret to the
freedome of the former feruice, ag in this cafea Tenure in &ocagebp fealty onip tg createbbp
the Law, Which ig the loweſt and leaſt fernice tbe Law can create, becaufe Jfrealtp te inci⸗
bent to euery tenurc except Tenure tu Frankalmoigne, foz t (t fpoulo Create any other ferutce
tt muff create Fealtp alfo, Wnd the Law according to equitieand Juſtice giueth this Feaitie
to the Lord of whom the land Was before holden in Frankalmotgne, And iaſtiy that the Law
fo abhoꝛreth an inconuentence, ag tt Createth ont of the Hand a new feruíce fox auopoing
thereof, It appeareth by ourbokes that a Seignioꝛy in frrambalmofgne map bee granted
euer,andconfequentip the Eenant (ball hold of che dbrante bp jrealty omip, and therefoze
Britton ſaid Well, that no ſeruico could be demanded of a Œenant in frankalmotgue tant come
les terres remaine en les maynes les feoffees.


Sed. 14.0.


€ [Ten fi home

graunta a cel
tout a bn Abbe, oua
bn Prior terres ou
tenements en frank-
almoigne,ceur polt
(frabalmoigne) font


At® ifa man grarit
at this day to an
Abbot or to à Prior,
lands or tenements in
Frankalmoigne, thefe
words (frikalmoigrie,
are voide, Es is Or-
2


€() Radeine per leffa-
sute. Pere it
appcareth bp the authozitie of
Littleton, that this isa Stas
tute, anb pet the King alone
fpeaketh, viz. Dominus Rex
in Parliamento fuo; &c. ad in^
ftantiam magnatum regni fui
conceffit prouidit & ftatuit.
Bot


98,


31.2.3. Ceffant 15.

33. H.6.67.. 31. B.4.11.
lib. g.fe.123.

0h. Lowes cafe.


Lib.9.fe. va 3. in Ante,
Lowes cafe.


41.Af. 1.6.
Britton 164.6,


Lib.2.


Vide lio 8. the Princes cafe.


13.7. 3-814 releafs 33.
37. H.8. FN. B. 11.7.


Cap-6.


Wut becaufe ít {g Dominus
Rex in Parliamento, &c. con-
cefit, it is ag much in this
cafe being an anctent ſtatute
ag Dominus Rex authoritate
Parliamenti conceffit. Dec
condip, It is amongé other
acts of Parliament cntred
into the Parliament oil,
and therefoze fball bec inten-
ded to bee ordained bp the
king, bp the confent of the
Lozds anb ommons tn that
Parliament aſſẽbled. Third⸗
ly, 3t is a gencrall Law
Sobercof the Judges map
take knowledge, and there⸗
kore itis tobec v: termínco bp
them Swbether ft bee a ftatute
one, Now fo; the diuers
fojneg of Acs of Parlia⸗
ment, pou map reade them in
the Princes Cale vbi fupra.


Quia emptores
terrarum, bis fta-
tute is called fo, becaufe the
ftatute beginneth Sith tbcfc
500208 , Quia emptores terra-


rum.
€ Nal poet aliener,


Qc. terres in fee fimple


de tener de luy mefme.

Œbis ts (uflip inferred
vpon the Statute, but the
Icttcr of the Statute ts that
Feoffatus teneat terram illam
de capitali Domino, &c. So
ag by the authoztttc of Little:
ton, he thatcitctha Statute
is not bound to recite the be-
ty Words thereof fo long ag
he miffeth not of the ſubſtancs
and neceffarp confequence
thereupon, and pet the fafer
Way ts to vouch the words of
a Law ag thep be.


¶ Granta per li-
cence mefme les tene-
ments, cc. Were Lit-


tleton fpeakctb of a itcence oz
a difpenfation Within the fato
Statute of Quia emptores
terrarum (and mentfoneth no
ether Statut: ) Which map
beedone by the ting and all
the 10208 tmmedtate and me-
Diate, fo; ttis a vule in Law,
Alienatio licet prohibeatur,
confenfu tamen omnium , in


Of Frankalmoigne.


poides, pur ceo que il
eftozDeine per lefta=
tute que eft appelle ;
Quia emptores terra-
rum (que leftatut fuit
fait, Anno 18. Ed.1.)
que nul poit aliener
ne graunter terres
ou tenements en fee
fimple, a tener be lup
metme, ftint fi hoe
ſeiſte De certaine te-
nements quéril tiêt
de ſon Heignioz per
feruice De chiualer, &
à cel tour il ac, gran-
ta pet licéce mefmes
les tenements a bn
Abbe, ac, cn frank-
almoigne, Labbe ti-
end2a immediatment
mefines Ps teneméts
per ferutce De chiua-
ler De meſme le ſeig⸗
nioz De à fou graun-
to? tenoit , a ne tien⸗
Dia my De fon avant
en frankalmoigne, p
caute be mefine lefta-
tuf,iffint que nul po-
it tenet en frankal-
Moigne, (í non q foit
pet title De peefcrip-
tion, ou pet force Dc
graunt fait a afcun ð
fes predeceffors, de-
uant q̃ meſme Ie fta-
tutefuit fait, Mes
le roy poit Donet ter-
res ou tenements en
fee fimple, atener en
frankalmoigne, ou
per auters feruices,
cat il eft hors Decag
Del eftatute,


Sed.146,


dained by the Statute
which is called, Quia
emptores terrarũ Which
was made Anno 18.E,
1.) that none may a-
lien nor grant Lands
or Tenements in Fee
fimple to hold of bim-
felfe. So that ifaman
feifed of certaine tene-
ments which hee hols
deth of his Lord by
Knights Seruice, & at
thisday he&c.gráteth
by licence the fame
tenements to an Ab-
bot, &c. in Frankal-
moigne , the Abbot
fhall hold immediate-
ly the Tenements by
Knights feruice of the
fame Lord of whom
his grantor held , and
fhall not hold of his
grantor in Frankal-
moigne, by reafon of
the fame Statute. So
that none can hold in
Frankalmoigne , vn-
leffe it bee by title of
prefcription, or by
force of a grant made
to any of his Prede-
ceffours before the
fame ftatutewasmade:
but the King may eiue
Lands or Tenements
in Fee fimple to hold
in Frankalmoigne , or
by other feruices, for
he isout ofthe caíe of
that Statute,


que:


Lib.2. Of Frankalmoigne. Seët.141.


quorum fauorem prohibita eft, poteft fieri, and quilibet poteft renunciare iuri pro ſe introduéto:
and the licence of 3,0708 immediate, and mediate in this cafe ſhall enure totxoo intents, viz. to
8 diſpenſation both of the ftatute of Quia emptores terrarum , anb of the Statutes of Mort-
maine, as Littleton bete tinpipeth, becaufe their deeds ſhall be taken moſt ſtrongly againſt them⸗
felucs, But it is a fatc and gad policie in the Rings licence te haue a non obftante alfoof the
Statutes of Mortmaine, an not onlp a non obftante of the Statute of Quia emptores terra-
rum. But tt appeareth bp Littleton (which ts a fecret 9€ aw ) that there needeth not anp non
obftante bp the Ring of the Statutcs of Mortmaine, toz the tking ſhall not be intended to be
mifconufant of the Law, and Shen be licenceth cxpzcffelp toalten toan Abbot , &c. which ts
in Woztmaine, he neds not make anp non obftante of the Htatutes of Moꝛtmaine, fos it ts
Upparant to be grantedin Woztmaine, and the Ring is the head of the Law, and therefors
Prafumitur Rex habere omnia iura in fcrinio peétorisfui, rog the maintenance of bis grantto
be go accozding to the Law, for hich canfe of purpofe Littleton maketh no mention of any


licence in Moztmatne, Difpen(atio eft mali prohibiti prouida relaxatio yrilitate feu neceffitate
penfaca.


«| Labbe tiendra, crc. per feruice de chiualer. Foz although bp the
Death of the Abbot there ts neither Ward, Mariage, noꝛ reliefe oue, pet heholdeth bp nights
Seruice, albeit the Lozd cannot have the fruit of it, and tt he with tbe confent of the Couent
alien, the land ouer to a man and bis hetris, there ts the tard, Martage, anb Meliefe reuiued.
Wut bp prelcription ( ag it hath beenefatd ) the faccefloz of an Abbot map pay rclíefe, An Ab=
bot 01 492102, $c. that hoideth Lands bp Knights Seruice, albeit bec ought not inrefpect of
bis profeflion to ferue in Marre in pzoper perfon. pet muſt he find a fufficient man conventent=
Ip atraped Éoz the Warrete fupplp bis place. And if he can find nonc,then mult he pap Efcuage,
ec. £o? bis profellion doth not priuilebae hin, but that the kings feruice in big Sarre malt be
Done that belongeth to his tenure.

Nota (Beader) fince Littleton $020tcà man might either in his life time, o2 by his taft will
in Wetting, (m ) giue Lands, Tenements, €c. to any fpirituall bedie Politicke o2 Coꝛpoꝛate
tobe holden of hinfelfetn frankalmoigne,ozbp Diuine Herutce, as by the ftatuteo£ 1.& 2.
Phil. & Maria (Which indured Co: twenty peares) appearcth, which ftatute fince that time
hathbeenc fauourabiy and bentgnelp erpounded,


«| [Sint que nul poet tener en Frankalmoigne fi non que (ont per title de pre-


feription, ec. Ft tg to be buderftood,that a man feifeb of lands map

at this dap aíue the fame to a Biſhop, 39arfon, ec. andtheir fuccefloze in frankalmoigne, by
the confent of the dking and the Lozds mediate and immediate of whom the Land is holden, fo;
the rulcíg Quilibet poteft renunciare iuri pro feintroduéto.

So it an Eccleſiaſticall Parſon hold lands by fealtie and certaine nent , tbe Loꝛd at thig
bap map confirme ( ) bis cftate, to hold to him anbto bis fucceffozs tn Frankalmoigne, foꝛ the
tr Scruices bee ertine, and nothing is referueo but that he holds of him, anpfo hee bib

cfoze,
a Mes le roy pott , &c. car il eff hors de cafe del flatute.

Fit tg clesrethat the ting ig out of thecale ofthe Statute, for the Statute is Quod feoffa-
tustencat terram illam, &c. decapitali Domino feodi, &c. andthts cannot bee intended of the
Hing, Whois fapcríoz to all and inferiour tonone, but Where the Ling is bound bp Acs of
Parliament, and where not, Vide lib.1 1. fol.66. Magdalen Colledge Cate.


Seélion 141.


€ ET nota q nul

poit tener ter=
tes ou tenements en
frankalmoigne, forſ⸗
priſe Del grantor, ou
be les heires. Ct put
ceo il e(t Dit, que fi
foit Seignioz, meine
atenant, ele tenant
eft bn Abbe que tient


Nd notethat none

may hold lands or
tenements in frankal-
moigne , but of the
Grauntour , or of his
beires. And thercfore
itis faid, thatif there
be Lord , Mefne, and
Tenant, and the tenant
is an Abbot which

Hb 3


€ E07 del gran-
tor on de (es beires.

Che tenure in Frankals
moigne ts an incident to the
inherttable bloub of the gran
tz, anb cannot be tranfferred
19, forfeited to anp other, no
moze then a Founderſhip of
a boufe of Beligton, Which ts
intended to bee in frrankal-
moigne, 02 homage anceftreil,
0? the wꝛit of Contra formam
fcoffamenti, 0? the wꝛit of


Contra


PF


43-/f P1.x 9. 9.E.4.b.xr-
Pl. Com.502.50 3.

Grendens café. :
"Uid.li$.10.25.36, 31. & 110
VideS.H.086. — '


Listle. fol.10.4.
8. R. aseleife 14. 3.H. 4.3.4.


Vide Listel, fol.20.


(m)1.& 3.5. & Marea.
Much. &.9. Eü(. Die.
fal. 355.


12.E.4.4.


37, H.8. 2.Fs2.quewrie 184.


(n) 4. E;3.21. 32. E. 3.15.
38 H.6.25. Litt.cap confir,
mas. 02 3 .


Lsb. sa, fol. 66.
Magdalen Colledpe (4/2.


14-€.3.tit. Mefne 7.
14.H.3.8i8. difélaymer B.33-
15. E. 3.cenfirma.8.


17.H.8.5. Temps E.r.
4arr.90 4s. E.3,33-

47. H.3.garr. 99. 11. H. 4. 32
14. H. 4. 5. 10. H.J. 11.

28. M33. 18.€.3.18.
22.€.3.18. (orody broke. 5,
22. 4. 6. 50.

E. 3. anewry 201.2020
19-Ë.3.sbdem 122.
11.E.yabid.ro0, 39. H. 6. 7.
33. H. S. Dier 51.
EN.B,16, F. NB. gg 1.6.


Lib.2.


15.E.3 confirm. 8.


Vide 15.E,4.


33-E. 34tü. Anuuitie $2.
3A [7 L8.6«.


2.E.4.46.


7.E 4 12.4.


(a) Pl. Com.306.b, in
Shormgtons cafe. 33. H. 6. 6.


39.H.629. 14, E. 3 nefne 7.


(ap-6.


Contra formam collationis,
ozanyp other incident to their
inberitable bloub, Wut ít ig
no incident infeperabie foz the
Loꝛd may releafe to the Te⸗
nant in Frankalmoigne, and
then the tenure is extinct, and
he fhall hold of the 3020 Pa⸗
ramont by fcaltíc, as inthe
cafe of Littleton, Sc&,t 30.


«| On de fes beires.


Here (02) hath the fence of


(and, ) foy a man cannot at
this Dap grant lands in taile
and referue a Rent to big
betreg, and exclude the gran⸗
toz himfelfe, Éoz the hetre can=
not take any thing tn the life
of the Anceftoz , nepther can
the betre take any thing bp


Of Frankalmoigne.


de fon mefne en frãk⸗
almoigne, file mefne
deuy fang heire,Don=
que le mefnaltie De-
uiend2a per efcbeate
al bít Seignior Pa⸗
ramont, a Labbe a-
Donque tient de lup
immediate per feal-
tie tantum, a kerra a
lup fealtíc , pur ceo
que tine puit tener
De lup en Frankal-
moigne, ac.


Sell. 142.


holdeth of his Mefne
in frankalmoigne, if
the Mefne die with-
out heire, the Mcfnal-
tie fhall come by Ef-
cheat,to the faid Lord
Paramont , and the
Abbot fhall then hold
immediatly of him by
fcaltie only, & fhalldo
to him fealtie,becaufe
hee cannot hold of
him in frankalmoigne,
&c.


difcent $obcn tbe Anceftoz bímfclfe (g ſecluded. Wut {fa man had granted Lands at the Come
mon Law to hold of bis beires,thefe $0209 (to hold of his beires) are void, and he hall hol of
the aranto: ag he bcid oucr, which he ſhould haue done, tf hee had mate no referuation at all.
And albeit Littleton faptb that no man can hold lands in Srankalmotgne,but of the grantoz
9? bis hetres, pet might an Abbot by affent of bis Œoucnt, 02 a Wilhop With affent of hig
Chapter, andfuch lise by licence ag tg afozefaid, have giuen lands in Frankalmoigne, to hold
of them ano tbeit Succeſſors, and ag Littleton himfetfe agreeth ; the King may qiue Land in
Frankalmotgne, Jn Which cafe the land hail be holden of Him hts heres and fucceflozs,
€ Et pur ceo eff dit fi foit Seignior mefne & tenant, & le tenant eff un Ab-


be, cc. By this it appeareth that ifthe Seigniory be trantferred
by act in Law to a ftranger, and therebp the p2tuitietgs altered, that thetenure in Frankal⸗
moigne (e changed toatenure tn Socage by fealtíc, aſwell ag (t appeareth before when the
SHeigqniowy oz Cenancy is granted to another, andthe Law in this cafe alfo createth a nexo
fealty wherewith the Lane Spas not charged before, l

€ Dozques le mefnaltie deutendra per efcheat al dit Seignior Paramont.
This new tenure created by Law ff vil bpon the Efcheat dꝛo wne the Setgntoie, for alwapes
the Sctgntozp neerer to the land dꝛo wnes the Seigniozp, that (S moze remote of, and pet the
Load in thes cafcto Whom the Weluaitp (g efcheated, (hail bold bp the fame ſeruices that hee


held before the Eicheat.
Sect. 142.


€ ET nota gq lou
tiel hoe De veli-


Nd note that
where fuch man


«LL 10e de Religi-
H en. And pet


this cafe extendeth to all Œc-


Clefiafticall perfons that hold
in Frankalmoigne, be thep fe=
cular oz regular, £o? the meſne
ought to acquite all of them,
fo? they be bound (ato make
prayers for their founder 02
big hetres’, andin confidera=
tion of thofe papers, the
founder, ec. is bound to pay to
the chizfe Loꝛd ail Rents and
feruiccs iſſuing out of that
Land, as ít appeareth by that
hich kolloweth.


€ De luy acquiter.


gion tient fes tenc-
ments De fon Sfir
€ frankalmotgne fon
Sit c(t tenus p la
ley de lup acquiter De
chefcun maner  fec-
uice, que aleun Sfr
paramount De lup
boct auct ou deman⸗
der De mefmes les
tenements, et fil ne


of religion holds his
tenementsof his Lord
in frankalmoigne, his
Lordis bound by the
law to acquitehim of
euery manner of fer-
uice which any Lord
paramont will haue or
demand ofhim for the
fame tenements, and
if he doth not acquite


lup


Lib.2.
lup aquita pas, mes
Cuffca lup. Deftre Di-
firaine,tc,Dongs il a⸗
uera enuers ſon ſeig⸗
nior bn bzicfe De
Meine, & recouera
enuers lup fes Dam-
mages & fes coftes
De ton (uit.ac,


Of Frankalmoigne:


him, but fuffereth him
to bee diftreyned,&c.
hee fhall haue againft
his Lord a Writ of
Mefne, and fhall reco-
uer againft him his da-
mages and cofts of
fuit,&c.


Seël.142.


Acquiter {8 compounded of
ad, and the old verbe, quicta~
re, and Agnificth in Law
(b) ta difcharge, 02 biepc in
quiet, ano to fee that the te=
nant befatclp kept from any
entries oz other moleftation
fozanp manner of feruice tf
fuing out of the land to any
Zod that ts aboue the
Meine. (c) Bnd hereof com=
meth (d ) acquitall, and quie-
tuseft, (that is) that be ts


Dilcharged ; and he that fs difcharaed of a felony,éc, bP tudgement,is fato to be acquited of the
felony, acquictatus de fclonia ; and (f he be Dzatone tn queftion agatne, he map plead (e) auter-
foitsaquite. And therefore tf fuc) a Cenant, ag Littleton berefpcaketh of, be diſtrained by an
3,020 paramount, the Meſne ( to &epc tbe Cenane quíct ) map put bis beaſts in the potonbe;
in ſtead of the beafts of tbe Cenant.

Mberebethze kinde of 3 cquitallg. 1. Anacquitallbp Deve, 2.2] n acquítall bp Pꝛeſcrip⸗
tion. 3. An aquttalibp Tenure: And bp Cenurefoure manner of Mapes, 1.159 owelty of
ferutccg, foꝛ feruiceacquites ferutce. 2 Œenure tn Frankalmoigne, whereof Littleton here
fpeaketh, 3.Cenure in frran&marríagc. 4. Tenure bp rca(on of Dower,


€ De chefcun manner de feruice. (£) And pet not of feruices only
ag Dommage, Fealtp, Rent Wozkes and other fcruíccs, butalfo of impzoucment of feruíceg;ag
it he be diſtrexned for vclícfe, * Aide pur file marier,aide pur faire fitz chivaler,&c. Allo foz
Suite ſeruice to a hundzcd, (2) but for fuite reall inrefpect of refiance witht any Yundzed,


Leete o2 Turne the Melne (ball make noacquitall, fo? thatis in refpect of bis perfon and
refancie,


¶ Breife de mefie. Breue de medio, A tait of mefne, (o called by
teafon of the Words of the watt of Meſne, Which arc, Vndeidem A. qui medius eft inter C.&
prefatum B, A, which te mefne betweene C. that (s the 31070 paramont, and B. thatts the te=
Nant paranatle And note that therebed. w2tts in Law that map be maintained quia timet,
before anp moleftation, diftreffe, ozimpleading ; ag a man may bane his wꝛit of Mefne (Wheres
of Littleton herefpeakes ) befoze he be diſtreyned. 2.A Warrantia carte before he bee implea=
Ded, 3.4 Menftrauerunt before any diſtreſſe oz vexation. 4, An Audita querela before any
Exetution ſued. 5. A Curia claudenda befegeanpd:fauit of inclofure, 6. Æ Ne iniutté vex-
esbefoze anp Diſtreſſe 02 moleftation, ano tbefe be called Breuia anticipantia, Wꝛits of pic-
uention.


€ Et recovera vers luy fes damages. Jt (8 to be kuowne that there
be two fenerall iadgements tna t02ít of Mefne, one at the Common Law, another bp the
flatute of W.2 ca.o At the Common Law be fhallhaue iudgement to recouer his acquitall
anb (f bc be diſtreyned o; dammnified bis Damages and cofts ; And the procefle at the Common
Law Was Summons, Attachment and TD (ffrefTc infinite tn thefame Countie where the wꝛit
is nought. * The tudgement by thefatd fkatute of W.2.i¢ afoztudger of the Mefnaltie, and
that in two ſeuerall cafes, onc opon Pꝛoceſſe giuen by the fato ffatute,viz. Summons, At⸗
tachement and Grand diftrefic, and t£ he commeth not,and the toatt be returned be fhall be foj-
inged : the other cafe is bere the Tenant recouereth his acquítall in a to2ít of Deine, (€ hee
be not acquited afteriwards, he fhall baue a a wꝛit of Diftringas Adacquietandum agatnt the
fame Melne, and tE be commeth not, he (ball be forindged bp his default of the mefnaitte, and
foi hecommeth, and (tbe found again him bp Merdic he (ball be fortudged: but Soztudger
tn that cafe te not giuen againtt bis heire for thatthe ſtatute fpcaketh onlp of the mefne and
notof bis heires, And the tudgement in icafc of fortudgemcnt is, quod T, ( le Mefne )
Amittat fervitia de A. ( letenant) de tenementis predi@is,& quod omiflo predicto T. prefat' R,
(lefeignior paramount ) modo fit attendens & refpondens pereadem fervitia per que T. tenuit.
The laid ſtatute in cafe of forindgement doth not binve a Feme couert, and pet (£ fuc) a iudge⸗
ment be gtuen again a Baron and feme ít ig not bopde but errontoug, andtobe reuerſed in a
tait of erroz, and foa foꝛiudgement againt a Cenant intatle (ball binde the (fae tn tatle man
Businsic dntili he reuerſeth it by error, FE two (opntenants bring a watt of Meine, anb tbc
one is ſummoned, an feucrco, the other cannot foriudge the Meſne, for he ought to be attens
bant tothe 1,025 paramount, as the mefne was, andthatcannothebe alone, And ſo tt ts (£
there be two topntenants Meſnes, andina tort of Meſne brought again them, one ma-
Seth Default, and the other appeares,there can be no foꝛiudger. ar


100


(b) Flers /ib.2.c8.43.
Britton fo.58.59-
Vad.bereaí term this Seco
sn breife de Mefnc.


(c) Véd.Sel.142.540, _
(d) 3.E.2,Corone,424.
20.£.2 Ibid. 332.
Sranf.Pl.(erone,105.

(e) 4.E.3.35. 15.E.3.44.
2.H.4.18. 3 4.H.6.47.
13.E.4- 6. F.N.B.156.
Lib..fo- 110,111. 5
Trefbams cafe.


3.E.3.14.77. S, E.3.11.
4. E1.6.28. 39. E. 3.19.
11.H.4.52. 12. H. 4.9.
14. H. 4. 17. F. M. B.
136.6.h. 39. H.6.30.

33 H.6.7. F.N.B.13 5.0%
4.€.4,35. 12. H.4,9.
28.€.3 95 17.E.3.39.
(t ) 39.H.6.31.a.
9.E.4.27. F.N.B.136.19,
17-E.2.Mefüe,s.E.3.49»
* "IraBen lib. 3.fol.84.
(g) 4E.342.


Fer this Writ fos the Regifter
fel. and F.AN.B. fal.1 35.
Mirror 64.3 6.13.

Bratton lib.2 fol.84.
Britton fol.58.Fletalsb.2.
cá. 43.WVe[hn, 2.647. 9.


FV.1.64.9.
Vid.hb.8.fol.134.
Mary Shepleys cafe,


* Bratton lib. 2. fel. 8 4.
Fleta lb. 2 cap. 43.


46. E. 3. 31. 18.€.3.

tit Mefne.

F.N.B. 136.

2.4.49. 19.E.3.Contra
forma (ollat.1, F.2N. B xar.


3. AT-fif. Mefne t8.
aM iuo.
14. E, 2. ibid 0.
Lib.9 .fot.73-6.
Dokt, HafJeyt cafe


Lib,


19$.£.3.Tudim.117.


W.2.c4.9.


$6.£. 3.23. F.N. B.137.
Bra. li.4. 256.5, Brit f.5 8.6.
Fles.li. 264.43.


9.H,3. Voucb. 277.47. H. 3.

Garr-99.Temps E.1. Gar.go.
4.2. Vouch.245,45.€.3.43
11,H.4.52. 4.H.6.25,


Brit fo.170.4-


"EraB--fo.78.
Glann.li.2.e4. 4, 5,6. »


(4p.7. OfHomage Aunceftrell.  Seël.143.


Fé the Ceuant be difleifed, and the Difleifoz in a Swzit of Melne forindgethe meane, this
fhall not bind the Diſſeilee. And fo if the Meine be diſſeiſed, and a foziubgement is had agaíntl
the Diffeilor, this doth not bind tbe Diſſeilee, £02 the Words of the fais Statute are, Quando
tenens fine præiudicio alterius quam medio attornare fe potcft capital! Domino. i

Wut (f tbe daughter, the fonne being in venter fa mere, be foꝛiudged, tt ſhall bind the fon thar
is borne afterwards, becaufe he had ne right at the time of the foxiudgement. And fo tf tbe te»
nant enter (n Religion, aud bis heire fortuogeth the Mefne , and then tbc Aunceſtor ig dex
raigneb, he (ball be bound caufa qua fupra. It there be Lo, Pꝛitoꝛ, Meſns and Tenaunt,
the Meine cannot be koꝛiudged, becaufe he alone can doe nothing to the pꝛeiud (ce to the diſheri⸗
fon of bis Church : And the like Law tg of a Biſhop, Parfon, and the like.

No fozciudgment can be but Shen there tg but onemeane betweene the Lozd diftrepning,
and the & cnant, becaulethe Cenant bpon tbe fozindgement cannot bee attendant to the 3,020
dDiftrepnina,tn vefpect there (g a meane betweene them, and fo the fato Statute probideth for (mn
exprefle termes,

Nota, the Plaintike (n che Sozit of Meſne may cbufe either P2oceiie at the Common Law,
92 tpon the {aid ſtatute of W-2- Ffoze- Judgement (g called Forisjudicatio,and hee that ts foziuda
ged, Forisjudicatus. And Braëton hath this weit, Rex Vicecomiti,&c. & non permittas quod
A.capitalis Dominus feodi illius habeat cuftodiam hæredis quiain Curia noftra forisjudicatur
decuftodia, &c. Fletacalleth (t, Abiudicationem, and thereupon commeth abiudicatus ; for bee


faith, Poft Proclamationem, &c.faétam abiudicetur medius de feodo & fcruitio fuo.


Chap.7. Homage Aunceftrel. Seël.143.
3) Er title de à Cnure p atm» nat by ho-

4 Prefirip- homage mage Aun-

tion en le 2 anceftrel ceftrel is,

Tenancie eft, lou where ate-

en le fanke le tenant, & bn mant tient fa nant holdeth his land
auxy en le Seignior en le GCerre defor Seige ofhislordbyhomage,


fanke le Seignior. Bere
Litrleto Both not Define what
Homage aunceftrell (8; but
puttcth an crample in one
cafe, oz in the 146-Section
ít appeareth,that bloud {5 noz
alwapes necellarie on the
Lords fioc. Fin this erample
here put, there muft be a dou⸗
ble piefcription both in the
bloud of the 1o? and of the
Œenant , and therefore 3]
thinke there íg little 02 no
land at allat thig dap holden
by Homage aunceftrel,

And hereof tt (g fatd, Au-
tant cftle Seigniortenus a fon
homage, come!e homage a
fon Scignior forfque folement
enreuerence. And herewith
agreth Braéton, Eft tanta &
talis connexio per homagium
inter Dominum & tenentem,
quod tantum debet Dominus
tenenti quantum tenens Do-
mino preter folam reucren-
tiam.


a Treit aluy garranty.


nio? per homage, €
mefinele Œenant 4
fes Aunceftozs que
heire tl c(t ont tenus
mefme le (etre del
bít Seignior, & Dc
fes auncefto?s que
beite le Seigniour
eft, De temps Dont
memozie ne court
per homage, & ont
fait a eux homage,
€t ceo eft appel Ho-
mage aunceftrel, per
caute De continuance
que ad efte per title
de Pꝛeſcription en
le Æenancie en le
fanke le T enaunt, d
auxy en 1e Seignio⸗

vie


and the fame Tenaunt
and his Aunceftours
whofe heire hee is, :
hauc holdenthe fame
land of the fame lord,
and of his Aunceftors
whofe heire the Lord
is, time out ofmemo-
rie of man, by Ho-
mage, and haue done
to them Homage.
And this is called
Homage Aunceftrell,
by reafon of the con-
tinuance which hath
beene by title of Pre-
fcription in the Te-
nancie inthe bloud of
the Tenant , and alfo
in the Seigniorie in


Lib.z, Of Homage Aunceftrel Sef. — 144.145.


vie en le faube le
eignior, Ct tiel
Seruice De Homage
Anceftrell trait a lup
garrantic, ceftafca-
uoit, que le Seig-
nior que eft en die &
ad veceiue le homage
De tícl Gp enant , Doit
garranter fon Te⸗
nant quant il eft im⸗
plebe De la terre te-
nus de lup pet Po
mage Anceftrel,


the bloud of the lord.
And fuch feruice of
Homage Aunceftrell
draweth to it, watran-
tie, that is to fay, that
the Lord which is li-
uing, and hath recei-
ued the Homage of
fuch Tenant ought to
warrant his Tenant
when he is impleaded
of the land holden of
him by Homage Aun-
ceftrell.


Dercby appeareth what a re=
uerend refpect the Law bath
to ancient Inheritances cons
tínuco tn tbc bloud of the
Xoꝛd, and of the Tenant, for
in this example put, i£ the
continuance bath not berne in
the bloud of both foes, no
Swarrantie belongeth to 1207
mage Anceftrell, but tf ane
cient continuance hath bene
en both fides , (m) then fuch
Homage Anceltrell dꝛaweth
to it Wavrantie, fo as anctent
continued Inheritance on
both parties bath moze prints
ledge and account in Law,
then Inheritances latelp 03
within memozp acquired.

PFE the Lord grant thefers


uices of his Œenant by Dommage Anceftrel, the Cenant (ball not be compelled ina per quz fer-
uiti» to atturne, onle(Te the dLonufes will grant in Court to Warrant the Land vnto him,

FE the Cenant vouch by force of this warrantie tn Law , itis a god counterplea, that
the Œenant (02 any one of his Anceſtoꝛs) receflit de feruitio (uo & feat feruitium fuum. A. B.
fine aliqua coa&ionc propria voluntate.


€ Et ad receine homage de tiel tenant. (a) So as before homage te-


cetned, tbe Œenant could not abfolutelp bind tbe 3.020 to tDarrantíe ; and therefore of ancient
time there lap(b) a Wait De homagio capiendo, fo? the Cenant againf the 1015 to compell
dim torecetue his homage oz the benefit of his toarrantte. tohich tozit pou rball readein Bra-
&on and (c) Britton and the Pꝛoceſſe and manner of tríall thereupon , andthe fame pos (ball


find ín 47.H.5.


€ ET auxy tiel feruice per bo-
“~mage aunceftrel trait a lup
acquital.5, que le Sũr Doit ac-
quiter le Œenant enuers touts
auters Sfirs paramont lup de
chefcun manner De feruice,


Sel. 14.4.


AN alfo fuch feruice by ho-

mage anceftrell draweth to
it acquitall, s. that the Lord ought
toacquite the Tenant againft all
other Lords paramont him of eue-
ry manner of feruice.


© Treit aluy acquitall. Ot acquitall ſomevohat hath beene
fato inthe Chapter of Frankalmotgane,


CP TCietoit.g
tieltenant foit
empled p bn Precipe
quod reddat,&c. & il
bouche à garrantie
fon feignior, q bient
eins p proces, a de⸗
manda Del tenat que
tad De lup lier a


Section 145.
Ndit is faid that


if fuch tenant be
impleaded by a Pract-
pe quod reddat &c. and
vouche to warranty
his Lord who com-
meth in by proceffe &
demands of the tenant
what he hath to binde

€c


|A VEN Pracipe quod

reddat. This
íg tnderftod of the Kings
worit directed to the Sherife
of the County Where tbe land
Ipeth, Sobereby the Dbherife
ig authozifedte command the
Œenant of the land to yeu
thefame to the Demandant,
and of thefe Swords of the
wꝛit ( Pracipe quod reddat )
tbe pozitis fo called, —


101


Vide Brstten obi fupra.
14.H.6.25.18.H,6.2.6.
Glauililtb.9. cap. 4. sé 6.
9-H.3.Voucher 257.

47. H.3.V oticher 270.271.
43-E.3.3.4.


Saethe fecend part of the Infti-
tutesupon she 6.chapiet of tbc
flatmro of Bigarss.


18. H1. 6. 206. per "Newton.


9. H. 3- voncher 377-


(a) 9. H. 3. eucher 277.
Temp: E,1.Gar.90.

45. E.3.2 3.

(b) Glanusl lib.9.cap. 4.54
et lib. 1.edp. 3 .

Braëon lib.z2.fel.8 3.

(c) Britton fol. 15 3.153;
47.H. 3-garrantie 99,


SeB.142. $40.


Lib


Reifrss-


(d ).Mir.ea.5,S, 1.dr 4.
Brat. li. s. fo 380,38 1.
Brit.0a.75.de Gar. Vouch.
Flet.li.6.0.33534.2 5,26. dre.
eptime, Lamb, Explis.Verb.
vAduorare,


(OV .Reg.Iud.for altheſe Iu-
ictal wrsts.


(£)V.Vat.N. 2.175.186.
39.E.3.38.14.H.6.7.

17. E, 3.41.3. H. 4. 4s

11. H.4.72.45. B. 3. 19.
F./N,B.1544135.


(ap.7. . Of Homage Aunceftrell.


of Præcipe be of fonre kindes,
Præcipe quod reddat, Præcipe
quod faciat, Præcipe quod
permittat,@ Præcipe quod non
permittat,&c. ag appeareth
by the Regifter.

€ Et il vouche a
garrantie. A voucher,
its Latpn vocatio, o? aduoca-
tio ig a $0070 of art made
of the Qictbe Voco, and
is in (d) the bnoerftanz
ding of the Common Law,
Sohen the Tenant calleth az
nother into the Court tbat ig
bound to bím to IWarrantie,
that tg, cítber to defend the
tight agatn the Deman⸗
bant; 02 to peo htm other
land, dc. ín Value, anb exten⸗
deth to lands 02 tenements of
an eftate of freehold o? inhe⸗
títancc, ano motto anp chats
fel reall, perfonall,oz mirt, fas
uing only in cafe of a ward⸗
fhip granted with &oarrantít
(ag fbalbc fato moze at large
ín the chapter of tOarrans
tíeg ) for tn the other cafes
concerning chattels, the par-
tic, thee hath a toarrantie,
fail not bouche, but bout hts
action of Coucnant, ifhe hath
à Deed, 02 i£ tt bee by parol,
thenan action bpon big cafe,
0; an action of Decetpt, ag
the cafe fball require, 420%
ſeeing that ene Latpn, French
oz Cnglifb word can baue
this particular fignification,
therefoze the common Law⸗
per (that 3| may fpeake once
forall ) (8 dDrtuen, as the pros
felloss of other itberall fcien=
ces tfe to doe, to tfc fignific
cant words framed by art
which arecailed vocabula ar-
tis, though thep be not proper
to anp language. ce that


garranty, & il mte
coment ila fes aun-
cefters à heire il eft,
ount tenus fa terre
bel vouchee a De fes
auncefters,De temps
Dont memozie ne
curt, Ct (E <eiqnior
que eft houche ne a=
uoit reſteiue pas bo-
mage Del tenant ne
daſcun de fes aunce-
fters, le feignioz (il
boit ) poít Difclaimer
en le feigniozie & if-
fint oufte le tenant De
fon garrantie, Des
file Sũr à efthouch
ad receiue homage
de le Tenant, ou de
afcun De es aunce=
fters, Donques il ne
Difclaimera, mes tl
eft oblige p la lep Dc
garranter le tenant,
& Dongs ft le tenant
perd fa fre en Default
Del Houchee il reco-
ucta en balue enuers
le bouchee De terres
& tenements que le
boucbee auoit al
temps de le bou-
cher, ou Snques
puis,


Se. 143


himto warranty, and
hee fheweth how hee
& his anceftors whofe
heire hec is, hauc hol-
den their land of the
Vouchee and of his
anceftors time out of
minde of man. And if
the: Lord which is
vouched hath not re-
ceiued homage of the
tenant, nor of any of
his anceftors,the Lord
(if hee will ) may dif-
claime in the feignio-
ry, and fo ouftethe te-
nant of his warranty,
but if the Lord who
is vouched hath recei-
ued homage of the te-
nant, or of any of his
anceftors,then he fhall
not difclaime, but hee
is bound by the Law
to warrant the tenant,


and then if the tenant +.


lofeth his land in de-
fault of the Vouchee,
he fhall recouer in va-
lue againft the vou-
chee of the lands and
tenements which the
vouchee had at the
time of the voucher,
or any time after.


boucheth tg called the Wouchoz vocans, and be that ig bouched tg called Goucher Warrantus.
(e) Che proces whereby the Q10ucbe (a called, ig a (ommoneasad warrantizandum, Where=
upon if the Sherife returneth that the Wouchets ſummoned, and hee make default, then a
(f ) Magnum cape ad valentiam (g awarded, Shen tf he make defanit againe, then tudgement
isgtuen again the Tenant, and be oucr to baue tn value againſt the Uouchee, Ff the Wous
chee Doe appeare anb after make Default, then Parvum cape ad valentiam tg awarded, and (f he
make default agatne, then tudgement ag befoze.WBut tf the Sbherifereturne, that the Wouchee
hath nothing, then after watts of Aliasanb plures, a tto2ít of fequatur füb {uo periculo fhaïbe
awarded, anb it the like returne be made, then fball the Demandant haue tudgement againſt
the Tenant, but be (ball not haue iudgement to vecouer in value, becauſe the Uduchee was ne⸗
uer Warned. And it appeareth that he hath nothing: but in the grand Cape ad valentiam, ft
appeareth, that be hath affetts, and his making default after fummons ig an implied confellton
of the Warranty. And it is called a fequaturfub fuo periculo,becaufethe Œenant ſhall lofe big


lane


Qu AR


Libi. Of Homage Aunceftrell. — 528.145;


lanb without any recõpence in balue, vnlelle he bpon that ttozít can baing in the bouche to war⸗
rant theland onto him: and if at the Sequat {ub fuo periculo, thetenant and the Wonche make
Default, and the Demandant hath tudgement again tbe Tenant, and after beings a Scire fac:
to haue crecution, tbe Cenant map hauea Warrantia Carte, and if he were impleaded bp &
Granger, he may vouche againe, but (E hee had iudgement to rcceuer in balue,be (ball neuer banc
a Warrantia carta, 02 bouche againe, for bp this indgement to reconer in balue, be hath benefit
of the warrantic, And pou (ball finde in bokes a recouery With a fingle Woucher, and that is
Shen there is but one Goucher; and witha double Woucher, and that is Sohen the Wouches
vdoucheth oucr, anb foa treble Ui oucher,¢c, gaine, pon fall Gude thereaifo a fezreinc Lou
cher, and that is when the Cenant being impieaded Within a particular turtididion (agin
Rondon c; the like ) vouchctl one to Warranty and prapes thathe map be ſummoned in fonte
other county out of che iurifdicion of that Court: this is called a Fogrcine Gaucher, but might

moze aptlp becalled a boucher of a fozretner de forinfecis vocatis ad Warranttzandum. ote,
that bp the Ciuill Law euery man és bound to warrant the thing that he felicth oy conuepcth,
albeit chere be no ecpzel(Tc warranty, butthe Common Law bindeth him not, vnleſſe there be
a Warrantie, ether in Dede o2 in Haw foz Caucat emptor, ag fhalbefatd moze at large in the
chapter of warrantie tu tbe third boke.


a Le Sergnior (fil voet) poet difclaymer Cu) en le Seigniorie. Difclaimer,
difclamare, tS compounded of dc and clamo, and fignifieth btterly to


renounce the Seigntozte.

(a) Moterhere be diucrs binds of Diſclaymer, that is tofap , a Difclapmer tt the tenan=
cle; a Diſclaymer in the bloud; anda Dilclapmer in the Sctgníonp ; whereof Littleton here
putteth bis cafe,

(b) But ik the tenant (1 Frankalmoigne bring a tto2ítt of Mefne agafnft his Loꝛd, the Low
cannot difclapme tn the Setantozte, bccaufe he cannot hold ofanp man tn frrankalinofane, but
of bis Donoz and bis heires Andſo note a diucrfitp betweene a Cenure in Frankalinoigne,
whereby Diuine Seruice ts maintained, and homage Ænceftrell which vefpeactb Cempozail
Seruice. Wutilihe Lozd will not difclapmetn the Seigniory, tn the caſe ok Homage Buce=
Breil, then albeit he hath not recetued Homage, he fhall Warrant the land. :

«| SileSeignier que efl vouche ad receine homage, &c. il ne difclaymera.

Therekoꝛe ttis god for the Cenant, to tbe (ntent to ouft the Loꝛd of his Diſclaymer, tn big
boucher to allcoge, thatthe Lod hath taken homage of him, and if bealledge it not, andthe
3.025 offer to difciapme, che Tenant may counterpicad thefamc bp acceptance of Homage, and
the reafon that the 3070 cannot difclapme in that cafe ts, for that hee hath accepted his humble
and reverent acknowledgement to become his man of life and member and terrene honour, and
to be fatthfull and lopail to him foꝛ the Cenements which he holds of Him, and agatnf the ac=
ceptance bercof the 3.010 cannot diſclayme.


«| Que il auoit al temps del voucher. Hereby it appeareth, that the
Tenant fall notbe dzinen to recouer in value onip thofe Lands Which the orb had from that
Ancelkos Which created the Sctgntozy, for that Were in manner impollibic.foz that the Scige
niorꝛy muſt becreated befozetine of memozp , and the fir(E Creation of the Seignioꝛy dtd not
create the warranty, but thecontinuance of both fides time ont of mindecreatcd the warranty,
Bnd that is, the reafon that a wꝛit of Annuity hall not (c) lpe againſt the betre by pꝛeſcrip⸗
tion becaufe (t cannot be none, Whether he hath anp land by dilcent from the ſaid Anceſter,
that fic granted the Annuity, And here is a point Worthy of obferuatton that inthe cafe of
Homage Puccltrell, (Mbich tsa {peciall warranty in law) bp the Authoꝛity of Littleton,
the lands generally that the 3.020 hath at thetime of the Weucher {ballbe ltabic to crecation in
value, Sobcther he hath them bp diſcent ozpurchafe, But (t thecafe of an erpzelle toarrantíe
the heire thallbecharged but only forfuch lanog ag he hath bp difcent from the fame Dnceftoz,
which created the w árrantíc, -

Hote, What prtuiledgethis ancient warrantie (created bp operation of. Law) hath moze


then the ctpzotte toarrantie, And fo pou map obfcruc, that inthis cafe, firmior & potentior eft
operatio legis quam difpofitio hominis.


€ 4/ temps de voucher ou vnques pus. This ts eutdent and worthy
ofdiligint obferuation; viz that the lands of the Vouchee fhall be Ipableto the warranty, that
the Voucher hath at the time of the UW oucher ; for that the Uoucher (e in lieu ofan action, and


ima Warrantia carte, the land which the Defendant hat at the time of the watt brought, Mall
belpable tothe toarranty.


Upon a Judgement in Debt, the Plantike (4) (bal not baue Egecutton, but onlp of that
land, which the Defendant had at the time of the Judgement, for that the Action was brought
tn vcfped of tho perfon and not in refpect of the land. = t£ au Action of Debt bee brought

Cz again


102


Glene.04.1 3. F. N. Z. 6. c.


Sric.i4.


(a) 47- H. 3. Diſclaim. 15.
16. H.7.1.20.E 3. sit "Nuper
ob.X 4.F. W.B. 197. dr 151.8.
45€. 3.19. 31.6.3. $0. £-3-
2


dre.
(b) 14. H.3.nit. Difelaiva-b, 33


47. H. 3. Difalaim. 3 4.
V.Bract.l.4.25 2.5.16. H.3.X
"Brit. 173,174.


(c) 49. E. 1. 5.6010.E. 4.10.6
19.H.6.74. 37. H.6.19,
$. Hg. 8. NN; B.151.


28.E.1.Usuch. 291. 9. £d.2,
War .Car. 30, 19. Fires 127.
2g. £.3.3.18.E. 3.1 2. H. 4.
10. 23.£.3 Recou. in valu. 3«
16, € .3.Vonch.8 5.19, Ediw.3,
"Veuch. 14.22.E. 3. Fétz. Nas.
Bre.134.f.

2, H.4.14.59. P. 3. 1. 41.8f/17
9. E, 3 H5, xemd. ng.


Lib.2.


(€) 22.4f-p!.32,


13.E.1, Voucher 292,


Vide Britton. fel. 58,1160.


(£) 45.E.5-7,
32.2.4. 35.


Vide Sef .1430


14. M. 6. 12. 2.8.6.9.
38, M a22. 37-4 [f.6


Co-7. OfHomage Aunceftrel.  Seé#.14.6.


agaínft the beíre an be altcneth, hanging the wait, pet hall the Land which he had at the time
ofthe otiginall Purchafebe charged, foz that the Action was brought againk the heire in res
{pect of theland. (c) 3i£a man be Monfuit, the land only Which hee had at the time of the a=
merciament affe(Teo fpall be charged, and not that which bec had at the finding of the pledges.
For the amerctament is not (n refpec of the and, but of his Want of profecution, Which Wasa
Default in bis perfon. Wut the luce of a Juroꝛ fall be leute vpon the Feotter, albeit tbep were
not loft befoze the feoffment, becanfe be Was returned and ſworne in refpect of the land, Note


the diverfitic.


FE a man giue lands tn fee With warrantie, and bind certaine lands {pecially to tDarramtíe,
the perfon of the Feoftoꝛ (g hereby bound, and not the Land, vnlelle he hath it at the time o£ the


Goucher


€ So Seigniorie eft
extinct , & le te-
nant tiendra de Seignior


prochein paramonnt cc.

Here t&ootbíngs are tobe ob-

ferte, Firſt, that by this difs

clapmer tu the Heigntosyp, the

Seigniery {Cf )extind in the
and,


Hecondlp, That after the
Difciapmer the Cenant Mail
hold of the next 3020 Para⸗
mount bp the fame feruices,
as the imefne fo diſclayming
held before,


@ Siva Abbe on
prior foit vouch &c. vn-
core, re. uncore il ne»
poet difilaimer | Ge.
Here tt appereth of the 10208
fioc.tbat continuance of bloun
is not neceflarp, but pet there
muſt bee prinitp of fucceflion
time out of mind tn one polí-
tique body fo? tfthat bodte, be
once diflolucd, though a nexo
bee founded of tbe faine name,
and ail the pofiellions bc gran=
tedto them, pet tbe Homage
Anceltrell te gone. Wut tl a
Pꝛioꝛ and Couent be trunſ⸗
lated Concurrentibus hijs qua:
in iurerequirunturtgan Ab⸗


Lib 3.fi7:.6c. Desneand bot and Couent,o2 to Deane


Chapter de Norwich cafe.


Sec. 146.


€ E & eft afcauotr,

que en chefcun
cagoule Seigniour
poit Difclaimer € fon
feigniozie per la Icy,
& De ceo boit diſclaim̃
en Court de Kecord,
fon feigniozie eft ex⸗
tinct , & le tenant ti-


endra Del Seignior


pꝛocheine paramont
le leignior que iſſint
Difclaime, Bes ſi vn
Abbe ou 392í02. foít
vouch per force de
homage ancefivel,æc,
comment que il ne
bnque pitt homage
ac, vncore il ne
poit Difclamer en tiel
cag, ncen nulauter
cag, cat ils ne potent
anienter ou deueſter
chofe Dc fee que ad
ete beftue en Tout
meafon,


A Nd it is to bee vn-
derftood , that in
euery cafe where the
Lord may difclaime
in his Seigniorie by
the Law , and of this
hee will difclaime in a
Court of Record his
Seigniorie is extinct,
and the Tenant fhalf
hold of the Lon »
next Paramount to the
Lord which fo difclai-
meth. Butifan Abbot
or Prior bee vouched
by force of Homage
Anceftrell, &c. albeit
that hee neuer tooke
homage, &c. yethee
cannot difclaime in
this cafe nor inany o-
ther cafe,for they can-
not take away or de-
ueft a thing in fee
which hath beene ve-
{ted in their houfe,


anb Chapter, there the Homage Anceltrellrematnes,fo2 though the name bec changed, pet the
bob» Wag never diflolucd, but tn effect (t remapneth fill 3€ the body Politique Were founded
Within time of memory, there cannot be Homage Anceftrell, for thatcontinuancefatleth, and
though Anceftoz tg euer properip appipco toa naturall body, pet it (e called Homage Anceftreit
ben the tenure is of a boop 4Doltttque , for that itis Auceſtrell of the Tenants fide: but on
the other foe an Abbot 02492602 cannot bolo bp Homage Anceffrell, Éoz ag appeareth bp Lit-
tletons examples, (t mutt cuer be Anceftreil of the Cenants fide. And Where Littleton putteth
big cafe of an Abbot o2 352í02, the fame Law is ofa Withop, Deane, Archdeacon , Waebend,
Parfon, UWicar, anb tbe itke, Another thing here to be obícrueo (e, thatan Abbot ez 392í02
Cannot difclapme ec, £o? regularly (t ig true, Quod meliorem conditionem Ecclefiz fuz facere
poteft Prælatus,deteriorem nequaquam; and agatne,Ecclefiz fuz conditionem meliorem facere


poffune


Lib.2. Of Homage Aunceftrel.  Seë.143.


poffunt fine confenfu, deteriorem non poffunt fine confenfu. Bnd therefore an Abbot, 15:102;

Wifhop, Deane, Archdeacon, Pzꝛebend, Parſon, Wicar,oz anp other fole Corporation that ts
feifedin auter droit cannot difclapine, becaufe ag Littleton ſayth, thep alone cannot deueſt any
fe Which ts veſted in their Houle or Church. Foz the wiſdome of the Law Would neuer trult
onefele perfon With the diſpoſition o£ the Inheritance of bis Houſe o; Church.But an Abboe,
and 392101 had their Covent, the Biſhop his Chapter, the Parfon and UWicar their Patron
and Dzdinary, andthe like of other fole Lozpozations, Without Whole affent thep could patie
away no Inheritance·

Qs ve poient anienter ou denefter chofe de fee ec. Cheſe general words
bauecertaine crceptions fo2 ina quo Warranto at the fuite of the hing againſt a Withop, Ab⸗
bot, 03 352102 for Ffranchifes and Liberties, ikthe Wiſhop, Mbbot , oz Pꝛioꝛ diſclaime ín them,
this ſhouid bind their Succeſſoꝛs. FE an Abbot oz Pꝛioꝛ had xkᷣnowledged the Acton ina
102ít of Annuity this fhould aue bound the Succellour, becaufe hee cannot falüfic it nan
higher action, and there muft be an ent of Suites, Expedit Reipublicæ vt fit finis litium. But
it the Abbot icutcafine, oꝛ acknowledge the action tna Præcipe quod reddar, the Snccelloz
ali be bound pro tempore, but he map haue a ttozít of Right, and recouer the Land,

¶ Per force de Homage Anceftrell, cc. Here (&c.) impiveth 02 by
anp other toarrantp (i) as by the reafon Which our Authour here peeldeth, appeareth. ;

¶ Chofe de fee. (k) frog if in an Action of Debt bpon an Dbli-
gation againt an Abbot, the Abbot acknowiledgeth the Acron,and dteth, the Succetloz (Dali
not auoyd Exccution thoughthe Dbligatton was made without the affent of the Couent, for
be cannot falfifte tbe recoucrie inan higher Acton: Et res iudicata pro veritate accipitur, and
this is but a Chattell, And ſo it is ofa Statute oz Recognifance, acknowledged bp an Aba


bot 0? 192102.


€ ITem (í home d

tient fon terre p
homage anceftrel, a=
lien a bn auter en fee,
le alienee ferva Ho-
mage à fon feignioz,
mes il ne tient De
fon Scigqniour per
Homage Aunceftrel,
pur ceo d Ie tenancie
nefuit continue en le
fanke De les aunce-
fiers lalienee , ne 1a-
líenec naucta iam̃es
garrantie dlaterred
fon fir pur ceo quele
continuatice Del te-
nancie en Ic tenant
Ga fon fank per lalie-
nation eft Di(contí-
nue, Et fic vide, que fi
ic tenant que tient la
tette per homage an-
ceſtrell De fon &»cía-


Set. 147.


Lso if a Man

which holds his
land by Homage An-
ceftrell, alien toano-
ther in fee, the alience
fhall doe homage to
his Lord, but hee hol-
deth not of his Lord
by homage anceftrell,
becaufe the Tenancie
was not continued in
the bloud of the An-
ceftors of the alienee,
neither fhalthe alienee
haue warrantie of the
land ofhis Lord, be-
caufethe continuance
of the tenancie in the
Tenant , and to his
bloud by the aliena.
tion is difcontinued.
And fo fec, thatif the
tenant which holdeth


his Land of his Lord
We 3


€ AS avr auter
en fe. 40

hereby the pztuítp of the citate
tg altcred andthecontinuance
ot ít inthe bloud of the Te⸗
nant ig diſſolued. But (£ the
Œcnant mabctiya Leafe foz
life, oa gift tn tatle, this is
a Continance of the p2tuttic
anb eſtate in the Œenant in
tefpet of the reuerGon that
temapneth in him : for the
fee, whereot Littleton here
{peaketh Wags not out of Him,
Wut t£ the Cenant maketha
feofiment (n fee bpon conditt=
on, and dteth his hetre perfoz-
meth the condition, and rez
entreth tbe fomage anceftrell
is deftropen in vefpet of the
interruption of the centínuz
anccof the pziuítp and eftate,
and this cafe was put and
not dented in the argument of
(m) of the Cale betweene
the 1020 Cromwell and An.
drewes, Mich.14. & 15.Eliz.
bich J my ſelle heard € ob=
ferucd, As if Cefty & vſe had
made a feoffinent tn fee opon
condition and entred for the
condition broken hee ſhould
baue detained the Land a-
gaint


102


4e.E.3.37. $.E.4.1.
6.£.3. 51.52.


10. E.4. 2. 4.
11.H,7.20,


6.E. 3.51.52:


38.2. 3.33.

16.€.3.tit. Abbot.t3.

19.8. 3.-£if Abbot.t2.

7-R.2.Abboter.

12. H. 4. 11.

ao. H. 6. fa vltims.

4.H.7.2, 3. N.4.6.
4 [f p.7.

——

8.€.3.28. 12.H.8,7, à

©) 12.4.8.7.

(K) 7. 2.010. nbset.g,

See the Boskes next abcwe,


(m) 1-Aich. 1 4. dr 15.E live


s. H7.


Lib.


(B) §.B,3.11.per Casirel.


(0) Britten.fil.170.60.


38. E. 3.30. 11. H. 4.32.
19.E.3.47-59.7 37 4-
36.E. 3.56. 18.E.3.56.
16 E.3.Veucher.87.
18.E.3.30. 44.E,3.
List. fel.Yég,


(p) Britton. 195.126.


Cap. 7-


gaínft the sfeoffes fo» ener,


fozthat thecftate and pꝛiuitie


Gas fozthetime taken out of
the Fcoffes, andtherebp diſ⸗
folucb fo; euer. But if tye
Land ere rccouercb agatnft
the tenant bpon a faint titic,
and the Œenant recoucr the
fame againe in an action of
higher nature, there the 120


nioz, alien en fee, co-
ment que il repriſt e=
ftate De lalienze ar-
rere en fce , il tient la
terre p homage, mes
nemy per Homage
aunceftrell,


Of Homage Aunceftrell. Seé.14.8.


by homage anceftrell
aliencth in fee, though
hee taketh an cítate a-
gaine of the alience in
fee, yet he holds the
ladby homage,but not
by homage anceftrell,


mage Anceftreiirematnes,foz the right Mas a fufficient meane for the continuance: fo it is (£ be


had reuct feb it in a wait of Erroz.( n) Fe the alicnæ be impicaded tn Lircletons cafe and bouche
the alicnoz that bel bp Dommage Anceftrell, albeit hee commeth in by fiction o£ Law to manp
purpoſes in pꝛiuitie ot his former eſtate Pet to thts purpofe he cannot come imas Œenant bp
Homage Anceftrell, becaufe of the dilconttnuance of the e(Exte amo patuitie; and ag Littleton
fapth, tbc Cenancie Mas not continued tn the bloud, (0) and Britton fatth, Et come afcun ne-
quedent foit Vouche per homage, & le Scigniour tende de aucrrer que le tenement dount il vou-
che fuit tranflate hors del (anke del primer purchafer per feoffment ou per afcun auter tranflati-
on : en ticl cafe foit le tenant charger de voucher fon feoffor ou fes heires.

¶ Coment qune il reprist eſtate del alienee en fee, ce. FOZ thecaufe a=
fozefaid in refpet of the interruption of the pꝛtuitie and continuance of the eſtate. Bnd beres
With agreeth our Wokes in Cafes of warranties in Ded op Warrantics in 1.830. De moze
of this inthe Chapter of warranties.


€ NZ ferra

homage
al fitz: BEA.
holdeth of B. ag of
the Manoꝛ of Dale,
Sobercof B. tg ſeiſed
in tatle, B. difcon-
tinucth the eftate
tale, and taketh
backe an cffatc in
Fe fimplc, A. doth
homage to B. ,B.
dieth fetfed,the {Que
fntatleentreth, A.
fall doe homagea=
gatne tothe heire in
tatle of B. becaufe
hee ts romitted to
the effatc tatle, an’
the ftate (n fee that
bis father bab; in
vefpect &obercof the
homage ts bonc ig
banífheb, and the
heire in tatle is in
of anew eftate, in
refpect Sbercof hee
onght to doc a new
homage. (p) Wut
teqularlp tt íg true


Sed. 148.


Can il eft Dit, que (d

home tient fa terre d
fon feignioz per homage
& fealty, & il ad fait ho⸗
mage a fealty a fon ſeig⸗
11í02,3 le ſeignioꝛ ad iflue
fits tDeup, ate fcígnio-
ty Difcendift alefits, en
ceo cag le Œenant que
fift homage al pere ne
ferta homage al fits,put
ceo que quant bn tenant
adfatt bn foits homage
afon Seignioz tl eft ex⸗
cufe pur terme De fa bie
De faire homage a afcun
auter beire Del (cíqníog,
meg brcoze il ferra Fe⸗
altie al fits a Heire Ie
SHeignior, coment que
tl fit Fealty a fon Pe⸗
te,


AL& itis faid thatif a
man holds hisland of
his Lord by Homage and
Fealty , and hee hath done
homage and fealtie to his
Lord, and the Lord hath
iffue a fonne and dies, and
the Seigniorie difcendeth
tothe fonne, in this cafe
the Tenant which did ho-
mage to the father fhal not
doe homage to the fonne,
becaufe that whena tenant
hath once done homageto
his Lord , hee is excufed
for terme of his lifeto doe
homage to any other heire
ofthe Lord,but yet hefhal
do fealty to the fonne and
heire of the Lord , al-
though he did fealty to his
father.


hich Littleton fapth, that when a Tenant hath bonc once homage tohis Herd, he (e excuſed
for terme of bis life to make homage to any other hetres of the Lord, But be (ball Dog fealtis ta
his fenne, albett he bath) vone feaitte to the Father,


Set,


Lib.2.


€ | Ten file Sir az
pres E homage à lup
fait per fon tenant grant
le feruice De fon tenant
perie fait a bn auter
en fec, a le tenant. at-
turna,ac. Donque Ie te=
nant ne ſerra mp com-
pel De faire homage,mes
il ferra fealtie,comẽt que
il fiſt fcaltíe Deuant a le
grauntoz, Car fcaltie c(t
incident a cheſcun at-
turnement Del tenant,
quant le ſeigniorie ett
graunt, Odes ft afcun
home foit ferfie Dun man⸗
02, 1 bu auter hoe tient
bc lup la terre come Del
mano? auandit per bo-
mage, le quel tenant ad
fait homage à fon Sfr
Get feifie Del mannoz, ſi
apzes bn eftrange port
Præcipe quod reddat en⸗
uersle Sir Del manor
erecoucta le manoꝛ en⸗
uers lup, et fuift executi⸗
on, enceftcafe le tenant
ferra auterfoits homage
à cclup Grecoucra le ma⸗
1102, coment d il fift ho⸗
mage Deuant, p ceo que
le(ta£ celup que vecciuoit
le primer homage, eſt De-
fete per le recouerie.et ne
gitraenla bouche le te-
nant a faurer ou Defea-
terle recoucrie que fuit
enuers fon Seigniog.Et
fic vide diuerfitatem. en


Of Homage Aunceftrell.


Sell. 149.


Lfoif the Lord after

the homage done
vnto him by the tenant,
grant the feruice of his
Tenant by Deed to ano-
ther in fee, and the Te-
nant atturneth,&c.the Te-
nant fhall not bee compel-
led to doe homage, but he
fhall doe fealty, although
he did fealty beforeto the
grantor. For fealty is inci-
dent to euery atturnement
of the tenant, when the
feigniorie is grantedBut if
any man bee feifed of a
mannor,and another holds
of him theland as of the
Mannor aforefaid by ho-
mage, which tenant hath
done homageto his Lord
who is feifed of the Man-
nor, if afterwards a ftran-
ger bringeth a Precipe quod
reddat againftthe Lord of
the Mannor, and recoue-
reththe Mannor againft
him , and fues execution,
In this cafe the tenant fhall
againe do homageto him
whichrecouered the man-
nor,although he had done
homage before, becaufe
the eftate of him which
receiued the firft homage
is defeated by the reco-
uery, and it fhall not lye
inthe power of the tenant
to falfifie or defeate the
recouerie which was a-
gainft his lord. And fofeea


Sed.i49.


Citer f le
o. de.
grant le feruice
de fon tenant


per fait, oe.
Note a dineratic
Sober the Lord ac
lieneth the ſeignio⸗
rie, and ‘When tbe
tenant alienetl) tbe
tenancie, for when
the Œenant hath
done homage, € the
fetaniozp ts tranſ⸗
ferred to another
either bp the ad of
the partie ag alter
natíon,o2 by ad in
Law, ag difcent,
pet tye tenant (bail
mot (terat homage,
as he (hall 00 feal⸗
tp, but $oben the
@enant doth bos
mage, and alteneth
the tenancy, there
ig a new Tenant,
which neuer dtd
homage, and theres
foze be ought te doe
homage to the Low
albeit big Altenoz
had Done tt befoze,
And tt is tobe obs
ferued that none
fhali doe * homage
but tbe Œenant of
the lano to the
Loos of whom ít
tg holden, and ther=
foze {€ homage bee
due tobec Done by
the Genant, it the
@enant alteneth
the lan to another,
the Altenoz cannot
be compelled to doe
homage,


€ Attorne,
de. Here by


(&cMgtobe vnder⸗
flood that albeit hee
pap hisrét,perforss
bis Bnual ſeruices
anb Doe freaitie
which is a part of

homage,


104


Brit.176.


1 SE. r. tit. Perque $ ernit 4,
22. rt Gar.91.


8.E.4 af b.


Lib.2,


Vide Se. 551.
31-€.3.aumvrie 255.
37-4.6.33.39-H6. 34.
7ell7.01. Dil. à Stud.
Jal. 45. 28.H.8.Dser.4t


7. H.8.eap. 4


(a) 39-H.6.22. 37. H. 6. 38
35 H. 6. 22.


38.H.8.Dier.41.


31, H.B.eap.1 s.


Cep.7. Of Homage Aunceftrel.  Seël.150.


homage, pethomagehe all ep cafe lou home vi⸗ diuerfitie in this cafe,
not boc, ent ale Seigniogie whereamancommeth
b « CM5 fi afun per veconeric, lou il toa Seigniorie by re-

ome (oit fifi dun Man- ient per Difcent ou couerie, and where he
nor xc. ere tt ap- per graunt al Seige: commeth tothe fame


peareth,that tye cafe of there= er :
concrie of the &efanio:ievít- niorie. by difcent or grant.


feretl from the alienatton of the 3.010, Whichis bis owne ad, o the difcent of tbe Seignioꝛie
tothe heire, which is an ad (n Law. And the reafon of this diuerũtie ts, for that by the recon
uerte, the ftate of hint that recetued the homage, ts defeated, Foz it fball not itein the mouth of
the Tenant, to faifific, opto fruftrate o2 Defeat the reconerte Which Was again his 3.020 of
the Wannoz o? Seignioꝛie, for that the Cenant had nothing theretn,and euerp man bp Lake
ought to meddle in fucb cafes With that Which belongeth ento him, Which is Mezthy of obferuaa
tion concerning falfifping of reconertes.

Note that to falfific, in Iegall bnderftanding (8 to pꝛoue falfe, that is,toanopd, 02 ag Lits
tleton herefatth, to defeat, tn Latine, falíare, feu falfificare, (i-) falfum facere.

Wut fince Littleton wꝛote, (t is reciteo bp Ac of Parliament, Chat whereas dfuerg , ac.
bauc fufferco recoucries agatnft them of diners Mannoꝛs, ec. for the performance of thetr
wils, koꝛ the furetic of thetr Wines topntures,éc.and the recoucrozs had no remedie to compel
the Freeholders and Cenants, dc. toattozne onto them, noa could by oꝛder of Law attaine to
the rents, ferntces, ec. that Act doth gine the recouerozg power to diftrepneand auow, wheres
bpon many bauc thought, that this doth tmpugne Littletons cafe of the ARecouerte, Wut di-
ftinguendum eft : Littleton intendeth his cafe cither vpon arecouerte bp title, ( for becfaith,
that the fate of the Cenant in the recouerte ts defeated ) 02 without anp confent bpon pretence
of title, Which (g allone, forthe Œenant cannot fallefic, and the 1020 fhould avo ag one
that came in of a former title. Bnd Littleton hath god anthoritte in Law to warrant (a) big
opinton, and the Statute of 7.H.s. ertendeth to common recoveries had by confent and agrees
ment, ag appeareth bp the Ac it ſelfe, Which then Was, and yet is a common aflurance anb
conucpance, whereof the Law taketh notice, and Sobercupon (as appeareth bp the Ad,an ble
might bolimitted, So ag ít is apparant, that ſuch recouerozs came tn meerelp vnder the fate
ofthe 107b, tc. an? had no remebíc (as the Statute faith to compell the Freeholders and Cee
nants to atturne, and Sw:thout atturnement , could neither viftrepne nos ano ; t0bercfoze
this Statute gaue recoucrozg remevieto diftrepne, and a fozmeto auow and iuſtiſie, Which
thep had not before, ag (t appeareth bp the Door and Student, bo lined at that time : Che
bodte of the At tg, That fuch recouerors may diftreyne and make auowrie,&c.as thofe perfons
againft whomthe fa yd recouerie is, fhould hauc done, &c,ifthe fame recouerie had not beene
had, and haue like remedie, &c.

E a man had made a leafe fo? peares to begin at Michaelmag, referuínga rent, anb befoze
Michaelmas be hadfuffered a common recouerie, the recouero? (boulo diftrepne fo? that Rent,
Swhich the iLeffo2 before therecouerieconid not. Wut tf the reconerte had not beene had, ther
he might haue diftrepned, and fo it (s Sithin the Statute: but ff a fine had bene ieuied of a
Mannoz, and befoze atturnement the Conulee bad fuffered a common recouctie, the recouerop
fhould not diftrepne,ec. becaufe the Conuſee againſt whom the recoucrie was had,could not,

Wut this Ac extended onelp to Difireles and Auoweies for Rents, Services, and Cus
ſtomes, and gaue alſo a fozme of a Quare impedit. But vpon this Statute (t Wags Holden,
‘bat the recouerozcould nothauc an Action of Debt againft the Leſſee foi peares, moz an
Acton of waſt again Cenant fos life o2 veares, and therefore remedte Wag pzoutoeb in tbefe
cafes, bp tye Statute of 21.H.8.


Setlton 150.
Lfo ifa Tenant


q \ J lent «fon ſeigni-

our, The te-
nant ought to feeke the 3.020
te Doe him homage, tf the Lod
be Within England, for this
feruice is perfonall ag well of
the Llozds Gide, ag of tbe Te⸗
nants fioc, fox Law requi-


CT Cem ttn Te⸗
nant que doit
per fon Tenure fave
afon Seignior Do:
mage, bient a fon
Seignioz, & dit a

lup


which ought by
his Tenureto doe his
Lord Homage, com-
meth to his Lord, and
faith vnto him, Sir, I


Lib.


lup, Sir, co bo» à
vous faire homage
purles Cenements
que ico teigne De
pous, « ico fue icp
pif a boug faire
homage put mefines
les Tenements pur
que ico bous p2».que
toe ceo hotles recet=
ner De mop,


Of Grand Serieantie.


ought to doe homage
vnto you for the Te-
nements which I hold
of you, and I am here
readie to doe homage
to you for the fame
Tenements,and there-
fore Ipray you, that
you would now re-
ceiue the fame from
mice.


Sect.i51.152.


teth oder and Decencic. And
therefoze Bracton faith, Et fci-
endum, Quod ille qui homa-
gium fuum facere deber , ob-
tentu reucrentiæ quam debet
Domino fuo, adire debet Do-
minum füum vbicunque in-
uentus fuerit in Regno, vel
alibi fi poffit comode adiri, &
non tenetur Dominus quere-
re fuum tenentem, & fic de.
bet homagium ei facerc. And
the fame Law tt ( fo2 Feal⸗
tíc.ano the viuerfitíe bet weene
theſe ſeruices, anb tbe rent ig
becanfe that thefe arc perſo⸗


niall, and the rent may be papd andreccined by other, and therefoze a tender e£ the rent bpon che


lano is fuffictent.


€ ET (ile Seig⸗

niout adongs
refula De ceo recet=
uet, Donque apzes
tiel refulat le Seig⸗
niout ne poet Diftrei-
ner le Œenant pur le
homage aderere, De-
uant que le Seigni⸗
02? requiroit le Te⸗
nant De faire a tup


bomage,# E Cenant .


acco faire refuſa.


€ I Tem bone poit

tener faterre per
homage aunceftrel, et
per Cfcuage,ou per au-
ter feruice De Chiualer,
auribien ficome il popt
ten fa ff per Domag an-


teftrel en Socage,


Decl, 151.


Nd if the Lord

fhall then refufe
to receiue this, then
after fuch refufall the
Lord cannot diftreyne
the Tenant for the ho-
mage behind, before
the Lord requireth
the Tenant to doe ho-
mage vnto him, and
the Tenant refufe to
doe it.


Seil, 152.


cagc.


Dd


UR tio aman may hold
his land by homage
Aunceftrell,and by Efcu-
age, or by other Knights
Seruice, as well as hee
may hold his land by ho-
mage Aunceftrellin So-


qr No the realon here⸗

of ig, fo? that when

the Cenant wath
done his endeauour and dutie
to offe: bis coꝛpoꝛall feruice,
anb tbe oz vefufeth the
fame, 02 Boe not accept his fer=
ice bpon big tender tiercof,
(hich ig a refuſall in Law)
then tbc Law tn reſpect of the
10:08 fault, requireth, that
before the 3,020 can diftrein fop
it, that he Doth requive the te-
nant to Doe that ſeruice, and
i£ be either refufe to doe tt,
O72 Doe it not when bc ts rex
quired , it ig a refufall tr
Law,


qr £D ag Homage

Anceftrel map

belong ag weil
toa Œenure bp Eſ⸗
cuage op nights fers
Bice, ag toa Tenure
in Socage, o? to a tes
nure tn nature of See
cage Spberof there hath
bin {poken in the chap⸗
ter of £xocage,


Cuap.


105


"Bratfenfel.80.a, 77
And Britton fol. 171, agrecth
herewith.


Vid.Bralfon fo.8 3.
‘Britten 171.172.
21.€.3.24. 31.4 f. p.73.
20. E, 3. Anowrte 223.
45-E.3. 9. 7. E.4.4.
21.E. 4.17. 30. H6. 305


Lib.2.


(a) Glannil lib.ↄ.ta. 4.
(b) Zratton lib. 3.35.

dr 84.85. lib.x ca. 10.

© Fleta,lib. t .cap.xo.lib. 2.
4.9, in fine.

(c) Briten, cap.66.

fol. 164.165.

Ockam c«p.qued ni»
abfaluitur.


45.E.3.25.per Finchden.
* Fletasvbifup;a.


Bratton, lib. 3.3 4.
YnHG.Ng4

10. H.4. Auowrie, 167.
F.N 2.85.

10, H. 6 ane. deroefne 11,


23. H.3.tit, Gard Stat.de
Ward dreleviii.28.£ 1.


(4:8.


Of Grand Serjeantie.


Chap.


ren Enure per
vl ee, grand Serie-


^t antie. Serx⸗
fcantiecometh of the french
Gord ( Sergeant ) 1,Satelles
anb (a) Serjcantia idem e
quod fervitium. Bnd it ts
called (b) Magna Serieantia
02 fcrianteria , * 02 Magnum
(ervitium, great feruice aſ well
in reſpect of the excellencp and
ateatnefle of the perfon to
whom ít ig to be Done, ( foz ít
is tobe done to the King on-
ip ‘as of the honour of tbe fers
uice (t felfe, and fo Littleton
bimfelfe in this Section
faith,thatitig call Magna
ferieantia 02 Magnum ferviti-
um, bccaufc ít {g greater and
more worthy than Knights
ſeruice, koꝛ this (g Re vera ,fer-
vitium regale, and not Mili-
tareonip Fleta fatth, Magna
autem fericantia dici poterit,
cum quisad eundem cum rc-
geinexercitu cum cquo coo-
perto vel huiufmodi ad patrie
tuitionem fuerit feoffatus.

€ De noftre feignior
le roy. This tenure
hath feuen {pectall properties.
1.Œo bec holden of the ing
onlp. 2. 3t mult bee done
Sohen the Cenant ts able in
proper perfon, 3.& bís fer=
utcciscertatne anb partícu-
lar. 4.& berelíefe oue tn rez
{pect of this tenure otffereth
from knights ferutce, 5. 3t
ig to bee Done ‘within the
Bealme. 6. 3t is {ubiec to
neither, Aid pur faire fitz
chiualeir 02 file marier. And
7- tt papeth no Eſcuage.

Œ Come de porter le
banner de noftre feignior
leroy ou de amener fon


hof. This great fet-
uicetothe king map (ag ít
appeareth hereby ) concerne
the warres and matters Mi⸗
Iitarte, for fome gran’ Ser⸗


Grand Serieantie.


CE Cnure per
graunD fer=
teantie eft

lou bn home tient fes

terres ou tenements
de noſtẽ Sark 130p
ptiels feruices que

Udoiten fon proper

perfon faire al 130p,

come à porter E bau-
ner Dc noftre ſeignior
le Koy, ou fa lance,ou

ð amelner Con hoſte,

ou deſtre ſon Mar⸗

fhal,ou de porter fon

efpee Deuant iup a

fon cozonement, ou

deftre $ fewer a fon
cozonement:, ou fon

Caruer ou fon But⸗

ler ou deftre bn à fes

Chamberlaing de le

refceit de fon Œfche-

quer, ou De faire au-
ters tiels feruices
æc, Ctla caufe que
tielferutce eft appell

grand fericantie cft ,

pure queileft pluis

grand a pluis Digne
feruice que eft le fer=
uice en 1e tenure Def-

cuage, Car celup d

trent p Eſcuage nett

pas limite per fate-
nure De faire afcun
pluis e£pecíal feruice
que afcun auter que
tient p efcuage Doit
faite, Wes celuy que


tient


Seët.153.


Seël 153.


Enure by
grandSerian-
tie is where
a man holds
his lands or tenements
of our Soueraign Lord
the King by fuch fer-
uices as hee ought to
doe in his proper per-
fontothe King, as to
carry the Banner of
the King, or his Lance,
orto lead his Army,or
to be his Marfhall, or
to carry his {word be-
fore himat his Coro-
nation, or to bee his
Sewer at his Corona-
tion, or his Caruer, or.
his Butler,orto be one
of his Chamberlaines
of the receipt of his
Exchequer,ortodoo-
ther like feruices,&c,
And the caule why
this feruice is called
grand Serieanty is, for
that it isa greater and
more worthy feruice,
than the feruice in the
tenure of Efcuage.
For he which holdeth
by Efcuage is not li-
mitted by his tenure
to doe any more efpe-
ciall feruice, thenan

other which holdeth
by Efcuage ought to
doe, but hee which
holdeth by grand


Lib.2.


tient p grand Ser⸗
teanty Doit fait bus c-
fpecial uice al Roy,
que tl que tient per


Of Grand Serieantie,


Serianty ought to doe
fome fpeciall feruice


to the King which he.
that holds by Efcuage


ought not to doe..


teanttes are to be done fn the
time of warre for the fatetp of
the Kealme, and ſome in time
of peace, for the honour of the
Reaime,


«L0» defe fon Mar-


Sed 154.


eſcuage ne Doit faire, halle * JE the King


giueth lands toa manto bold of bim to be bis Marſhall of his holk, oꝛ to be Marſhallot Eng⸗
land, €? tebc Conftable of England, o tobe high Steward of England, * Chamberlatne of
England andthelikethefeare grand SHerteanties,and tbefc e fuch like grand Sxertcant(cg are
of great and high iurifoition, andfome of them concerne matters militarie tn time of Sarre and
fome feruices of honour in time of peace, And this is tobc obferucd that though there were
Divers Lows Marlhalls of England before the ratgne of (z )R.z-Pet King R.2.created T ho-

mas Mowbrey Duke of Jozfolke, and fir Carlie Marihall o£ England Per nomen comitis
Marifchalli Angliz. : à

€ 0» de porter fon efpee,Gc. ou aefte fon fewer a [on Corenement rc.
ew andfuch like grand SHerianties at the Kings Gozonation arc ſeruices of honour ín ttine
ot peace, , \ k :

€ Deffe va dc fes Chamberlaines rc. ou de faire autiels feruices. It is
alfo a Genureby grand &críantíeto hold (a) bp any officeto be done tn perfon concerning the
receipt of the Rings treafure, Quia thefaurus regis refpicit regem. & regnum; And cenfus regius
eftanima Reip.fo tt is Firmamentum belli,& Ornamentum pacis.

Milites camerarij dicuntur, quia pro camerarijs miniftrant, and concerning thetr office, this ts
the effect ag Ockam (b) faith, 2fficium camerariorum in recepta confiflit in tribus, Scilicet cla-
ues arcarum, &c. baiulant, pecuniam numerátam ponderant, & per centenas libras in forulas
mittunt. But diſtontinuance tn effect hath woꝛne out their office, And yet thep continuethetr
maine, and keepe the kepes of the Œrcafurie Where the Wecozds doe ipe.

Bud another faith, Camerariusdicitur a camera, quia camera eft locus in quem thefaurus re-
colligitur, vel conclaue in quopecunia referuatur, So ag camerarius tn legall Ganificatton eft
cuftos regij cen(us : and Willielmus de Bellocampo comes Warwici ( hel3 ) officium camerarij
in Scaccario.

D2 by any office concerning the Pominiftration of Fluftice, quia juíticia firmatur folium,

Ft appeareth bp an ancícat Recoꝛd (c) that Varianus de fanéto Petro tenuit de domino re-
ge in capite medietatem feriantiæ pacis per fervicium inveniendi decem fervientes pacis ad cufto-

icndam pacem in Ceftria. *
He Ockam of the inſtitution and ancient ozber of the Exchequer; Dier 4.Eliz. 215. the Alherie
ofthe Exchequer holden bp grand Seriantie.


€ Tels fervices,crc. eve bp (&c.) ig to be vnderſtood other like
fernices not expꝛeſſed, as partly appeareth bp that which hath bene fatd,viz. to bec. Steward
of England, Conſtable of England, Chamberlatne of England, and other henozable feruices


Swbhereof moze hall be faid tn this chapter, j
Qu vn efpeciall ftruice al roy. That is to lay, that this great


feruíce be fpecíallp fet downe, fo? it map conü(t of diuers branches, ag te goe With tbe tring in
big Sarre (n tbe koreward, and toreturnein the reareward. And alfoto pap IBentyscout vct
ít muſt becertaine and particular.


Section


€ [en fitenant q tient per
efcuage mozuft fon beire
efteant de pleine age, fil tenoit
pet bn fee de chiualer.le heire ne
paíera forꝛſq; C.s. pur velicfe,
come eft ozdeine pec E. ftatute de
Magna Carta,cap.2. Mes fi ce-
up quetient de roy per grand


154


Lio if a tenant which holds

by Efcuage dieth his heire
being of full age, if hee holdeth
by one Knights fee, the heire (hall
pay but a C.s. for reliefe, as is or-
dained by the ftatute of Magna Car-
ta,cap.2« But i£ hee which holdeth
of the King by grand Serieanty
DD 2 fericantie


106


* Fletalib.y.cop. «c.

Y r. Eliz, Dser 285.

Cam ieu Brir.286.387.
* Ockamcap. ſficium
conflabularis.


(C) Fart. patent, de anne
29.R.2,


(a) Pid. 51.N.3. flarn..5.
10.E. 3 ca,11.14.E. 3.64.14.
16.H.8.c4.2. 34-2 35-

FH 8.ca. 6. 31, E.A fo. 1.

TI. (0m.207.208.

(b) Ockam cap.qu! fit
Beaccorium.

Gernafs Tilburienfis in libero
nigro fnb cuftodia cazmerarierum


Ret.clau[f. 6. E. 1. Membr. 1.


Exleffura Marrowe.

c) Ex In sfitsone pol mey-
& Vriani de Santto ‘Petro,
4. E.3.(eftr.


Vid.7. 4 (12.7, E:3. 87.


23.8.3. £474.14 8.


Liber,


11H. 4,7 3.


4.:8.8 3. E.


4. H. ç.04p.7.
23.E. 4.eap. 8.


SO HN
Camden.in Britannia.


Cap. 8.
Seriantie moꝛuſt, fon heire e⸗
ſteant de plein age le heire pate-
ra al Bop pur reliefe le balue De
leg terres ou tenements pet an
(oufter les charges atepsifeg)
queur él tient 1 Roy per grand
Serieantie. Ct eft afcauoir,que
Serieantia en Latin , idem eft
quodferuitium, & fic Magna Ser-
ieantia , idem eft quod magnum
feruitium.


Of Grand Serieantie.


Seél.155.156.


dieth, his heire being of full age
the heire fhall pay to the King for
reliefe one yeares value of the
lands or tenements which hee hol-
deth of the King by Grand Serie-
antie ouer and befides all charges :
and reprifes. And it is to be vnder-
ftood, that Serieantia in Latine , is
the fame qued féruitium, and fo
CMagna Serieantia is the fame quod
magnum ſeruitium.


€ pesas Roy pur releift le value de fes terres, cc. Bnd hereboith


agreeth 11. H.4. 72.b.


€ Sericantiaidem eff quod feruitium. Hereby it appeareth that the
erplanatíon of ancient $0020g and the true fence of them are requtfite, anb to bee vnderſtod per


verba notiora.


€ T^ per efeuage
doient faire lour
férnice hors del Roialme.
Foz hee that holdeth by
Coꝛnage o2 Caftic-gardhol=
deth bp Knights Serutce, e
is to doe his Scruice within
the Kealme, but hee holdeth
not bp Eſcuage, and therefore
Littleton matertallp fato Te⸗
want per Efcuage , andnotte=
nant by Knights Scrutce.


@ Pur le greinder


Section 155.


€ [em ceux que

teignont per ef-
cuage Doient faire
lout feruice hors De
roialme mez ceug que
tcígnont per graund
fericantie, pur le gri⸗
enoͤr part Doient fait
lout feruices deins le
Loialme,


AX» they which
hold by Efcuage,


ought to doe their
Seruice out of the
Realme , but they
which hold by Grand
Serieantie ( for the
moft part) ought to do
their Seruices within
the Realine.


part. fo to beare the Kings Banner, o? bis Lance, 02 to lead bis
Holt, and to be hig Marſhall, ec, may be aſwell Without the Realme, andtherefoze Littleton


fato ( £o? the greateft part, )


Sett. 156.


Nlemar- ¶ II Tem il eft dit, que en


ches de
Scotland. Mar-
ches is either


a Saxon $0020 and
fiantficth , limites
bourdours , 0$ an
Engith $9010, viz.
Markes. Nota, f?
that ít lyeth nore
fo Scotland , ít íg
fato in the Mars
ches of Scotland,
and pet the Land


le Marches de Scot-
land, afcutig teignont De
Bop per Coznage, cefta-
fcauott , pur bentier bn
corꝛnu, pur garner hoes
De pais quant ilg opent
quele Scottes ou auters
enemies veignont ou
boílent enter en Engle-
terre, quel feruice eft


A Lfo it is faid that in
the Marches of Scot-
land fome hold of the
King by Cornage that is
to fay, to windea horneto
giue men of the Countrie
warning when they heare
that the Scots or other e-
nemies are come or will
enter into England, which
feruice is grand Seriantie.


graund


Lib.ꝛ.
graund Serieãty. Mes


. fíafcua tenant tient daſ⸗


cun auter Seignior que
dekKoy per tiel ſeruice De
Cornage, ceo neſt pas
grande Sericanty,mes
eft feruice De chiualer , &
trait alup garde € mar⸗
riage, car nul poit tener
per grand Serieanty ſi
nonde Koytantſolemẽt.


Of Grand Serieantie.


But if any tenant hold of
any other Lord then of
the King by fuch feruice
of Cornage, this is not
grand Seriantie, but itis
Knight Seruice. And it
draweth to it Ward and
Marriage , for none may
hold by grand Seriantie,
but of the Kingonly.


Seét.157,


Sohereof Littleton
here {peaketh,lteth
ín England.
€ Per Cor-
nage. Cornagin
tg Devine’ (ag cor-
nuare alfo tg) à
cornu , and íg ag
much, (ag befoze
hath bene noted)
ag the ferutceof the
Downe, 3t is alfo
Called in olo bakes
Horngeld.
Note a tenure


bp Cognage of a common perfon ts Knights Seruice, ofthe Ring (t (a Grand Seriantie, fo
ag the Ropall dignitic of the perfon o£ tbe Loꝛd maketh the difference of the tenure inthis cafe,
Bnd 3| Gnd that there Were Cernicularij amongft the Romans, & di&i fuerunt cornicularij quia
cornu faciebant excubias militares, and Magna Scriantia (g appzopztated onip to this tenure.


€ [Gem home poit

veier Anno 11.
H.4. que Cokayne
adonque chiefe Ba⸗
toti defchequer,bient
en le common banke,
poztát oucfqueg lup


~ la Copie Dun recorde


in hec verba; Talis te-
net tantam terram de
domino Rege per Ser-
ieantiam, ad inuenien-
dum vnum hominem
ad guerram vbicunque
infra quatuor Maria,


.&c. Et il demaunda


fil fuit graund Ser-
ieãty ou petite Ser⸗
ieantie, Œt Hanke,
adonques Difoit.que
il fuit graunde Ser-
teantie , put ceo que


il ad feruícea faire p


corps Dun bore, a fil
ne purca trouver nul
home a faire t feruice
pur lup , il Meſme
Doit faire, Quod alij


Sect. 157.
Lio a man may
fee in Auno11.H.
4. that Cokayse then
Chiefe Baron of the
Exchequer came into
the Common Place,
and brought with him
the Copie of a Record
in thefe words. Tals
tenet tantam. terram de
Domino Rege per Serie-
antiam ad snueniendum
vnum hominem ad guer-
ram vbicunque infra
quatuor Maria, Qc.
And hee demanded if
this were Grand Seri-
antic, or petite Serian-
tie. And Haske then
faid,that it was Grand
Seriantie, becaufe hee
hadaSeruice to do by
the bodie of a man,
and if he cannot find a
manto doe the feruice
for him, hee himfelfe
ought to doeit, Qued
aly Iafliciarÿ conceſſe-
Db 3


ey fil ne purra


troner nul home
a faire le féruice pur lay,


dre. Hereby it appeas
teththat Œenant bp Grand
Sertantie, map in fome Ca⸗
fes make adepntte,and tbere-
fo» the diverfitic is, that
Sberc the Grand Sertantte
is to bcc bonc to the ropall
perfon of the King, or to exe⸗
Cute one of thoſe high and
great sD ices, there big Gee
nantcannot makea Deputie
Without the Kings Licence,
and therefoze Littleton

fatd before that {uch ferniccs
are to bec bone in proper per=
fon. But be that bolbctb to
ferue bim in bis Sarre Sith-
inthe Kealme o? by Coꝛnage
inap make a 3Deputíe,

(*) Iohannes de Archier
quitenetde Domino Regein
capite per Scriantiæ archerie,
&c.in Comitatu Glouc. hæ-
res in cuftodia.


© 17/74 quatuor Ma-
ris. [hat is within


the Kingdome of England,
and the Dominions ef the

fame Kiugdome.
$3050 itis god tobee feng
Swhat perfons that bolo bp
Grand Scriantie map doe
anb perfozme that honourable
feruíce in perfon , and Wyo
ic cai
nato


107


33. K.tij. çard.148.
&.E. 3.66. m fine,
16. E, 1


11.H,4.73. 24.8.3.33.
"Vide Hil. 8.E.1, Middle
inter D lacita de Bance,


Six Tehn Moyfe Cat.


11.H.4.720


(*) Cluf18.H,3. Ms.


Rot. E/feaster.
41. H.3 21.
Stephen Haringdoni caf.


Lib...


(2) 12.3 Ret nlauf.m.4 8.


Wede 1. R2. memb. A 6,


(m) Vide 1. RB. 2m. 45.


Vide wR. 2.0045:


A6. E, 3.1.4. per Finehtten.


Cap.8. Of Grand Serieantie: Seth. 58.


unto, bnt ought to wake & [ufticiarij cócefferunt. rw”. Then faith Co-
pce ro — Cokaine) Donque faye, ought the Te-
2. lohn Wilfbire Œttisen of Doit le tenant en ceo nant to pay reliefe to
London exbibiten bis ci cas pater veliefe al the value of the land
tion to the high Steward b
of England in bis — * D * pe * yeare? Ma
Gbere the fato Lohn held cer⸗ uod non fuit 4 —
taine lands in Hayden inthe — f i quedo fart vulp
Countie of Effex, ofthe Hing IC! ponium. fum.
bp Grand Heriantic,viz. to hold a Cowen oben the Ling thouid walh bis hands before din⸗
ner the bay of hig Cozonation, €c.and prapedthat be might bee accepted to doe this sD fFicc of
Grand Sertantie , the iudgement kolloweth. Et quia apparet per record’ de Scaccario Domi-
ni Regisin Curia monftrat’ quod prædiéta tenementa tenentur de Domino Rege per feruitium
predi@um. Ideo di&us Iohannes admittitur ad feruitium fuum huiufmodi faciendum per
Edmondum Comitem Cantabrigiz deputatum fuum, & fic idem Comesin inre ipfius Iohannis
Manutergium tenuit quando Dominus Rex lauabat manus fuas di&o die Coronationis fuz ante
randium.
3 15 p hich Kecoꝛd ít appeareth that thefatd Tohn Wilfhire being of bíg qualitte,and hauing
not any dignitte,could not de and perfozme this high and honourable ſeruice to the Ropall per⸗
fon of th: King, but did make an honourable Deputie Who performed (t tn bis right which
ig Wozthp of obferuation,

Bt the fame Coronation William Furneaall exhibited bis Petition in thefame Court, That
where he held the Mannoꝛ ef Farnham , inthe Countic of Buck. Sith the hamlet of Cere
inthe fame dLountte, bp the ſeruice to find tothe ting at his Cozonation a Giouc for bis right
hand, and to fuppozt the Kings right hand the fame day, Sobílrs be held tn bis hand the Uerge
BRopall, the tudgement followeth. Qua quidem Petitione debite intellecta & fa&a publica pro-
clamatione fi quis clameo ipfius Willielmi in ea parte contradicere vellet , nemineque ei contra-
riante, confideratum fuit, quod idem Willielmus affumpto per eum primitusordine militari,ad
feruitium przdi&um admitteretur faceadum , & poftmodo (videlicet) die Martis proximo ante
Coronationem prædi@&am Dominus Rex ipfum Williclmum apud Keningron honorifice præfe-
citin militem, & ficidem Willielmus feruitium fuum prædictum, diéto die Coronationis iuxta
confiderationem prædiétam perfecit & inomnibus adimpleuit. By which ít appearth, that a
Knight tg of that dignitie, that he map perfoune thts high and honourable ſexutce in bis one
verſon, and although thts William Furncuall Swag difcended of an honourable Family , pet
befeze be Mag created Knight be could not perfozme tt.

And & (t lohn de Argentine Chiualier perfoꝛmed the feruice of Grand S»er(antíc, to bee
the kings Cup-bearer at the fame Lozonatton,

(m) Anne, which Was she Wife of Sir Lohn Haftings Earle of Pembroke Whe Held the
MBannoz o£ Afhicy in Norfolke of the Ling bp Grand Seriantie,viz.to perfozme the €D fice o£
the Mapcrp at his Cozonation, was abíubgco to make a Deputie, becaufea Soman cannot
bocít in perfon, and thereupon fhe deputed Sir Thomas Blount knight, Who performed the
fame inher right. Iohn fonneandhetre of Iohn Haftings Œarig of Pembroke, exhibited (n the
fame Courthis Petition, thewtng that by his tenure be was to carrie the great Spurres of
Gold before the ing at his Cozonation, ac. Che Judgement tg, Audita & intellecta billa
prædiéta pro co quod di&us Johannes eft infra ætatem , & in cuftodia Demiri Regis quan-
quam fufficienter oftenditur per recorda, & euidentias, quod ipfe fernitium pradictum facere des
beret. Confideratum extitit, quod effet ad voluntatem Regis, quis di&um ſeruitium ifta viceim
iure ipfius Iohannis faceret, & fuper hoc Dominus Rexaffignauit Edmundum Comitem Mar-
chix ad deferendum di&o die Coronationis prædiéta calcaria in iure præfati heredis, faluo iure
alterius cuiufcunque. Et ficidem Comes Marchiæ Calcariailla prædiéto die Coronationis coram
ipfo Domino Rege deferebat.

By Which tt appeareth, that the heire bcfozc be hath accompli(beo bis age of oncanbt&vcnt(e
peares, cannot perfozme this great and hondurabie ſeruice, but during bis minogitic the Ring
fball appoint one to perfozme the feruice.


Section 158.


CH € ET nota que Nd note that all


Ps touts  teig- which hold of


antie, doth folo bp dwights ont de Koy ꝑgrand the King by Grand
Das


|


Lib.1.


| Sevieanty,teiqnont
 Detiop per feruice De
ced aucca garde, ma=
riage, treliefe , mes
le Koy nauera De eur
Eſcuage, ſils ne teig⸗
"ont De luy per Cf-
cuage.


chiualrie s le 130p p


Of Petit Serjeantie.


Seriantie, hold of the
King by Knights Ser-
uice, and the King for
this fhall haue Ward,
Mariage and Reliefe,
but hee fhall not haue
of them Efcuage, vn-
leffe they hold of him
by Efcuage.


Seruice Which is fo {atv of
the effects. And therefore Lit-
tleton Doth abde that the Ling
fall haue toard, Mariage,
ana i eliefe, Which are the ef=
fects of knights Serutce,ec.

Sometimes (n anctent re=
c020g, Seruitium Militare, fg
Called Seruitium Hauberticum,
92 Seruitium Brigandinum, 02
Seruitium Loricatum. And à
Haubert 92 Brigandine ſigni⸗
fieth a Coat of Wale,


(hap.9.


€ Cnute p


petit fe-

ricantie,

eft lou

home tient fa terre o
nofite Seignior ie
Koy ð render al op
annuclment bu ache,
ou bu efpee, ou bri
Dagger,ou bn cuttel,
ou bn launce, ou bti
pater De Gants de
ferre, ou bn paire De
Spoures Dore, ou
bn fete, ou Diners ſe⸗
tes, ou De render au-
- £s tiels petit choſes
toucbants le guerre,


ít fefe, and not linckedD , o; tped to anp annos, ac.


Petit Serj eantie.


Enure by pe-

tie Serianty

is where a

man holds

his Land of our Soue-

reigne Lord the King,

toyecld to him yeere-

ly a Bow, oraSword,

or a dagger,oraKnife,

ora Lance, orapaire

Gloues of Male, ora

paire of gilt Spurres,

or an Arrow, or di-

uers Arrowes, or to

yeeld fuch other {mall

things belonging to
Warre.


gy sior le roy.
a lox ] And fo Little-
Md ESF} ton conciudeth
this chapter that a man can=
notbolobp grand Serteantp
02 petite Seriantie,but oftije
ing, and of the king ag o£
bis perfon, and mot of any
honour oz “Wannoz, And it
íg to bec obferned that regus
larlpa Œenure of the King
ag of big perfon is a Œenure
tn Capite fo called nara i Zone
propter excellentiam, becaufc
the headis the princtpall part
of the body, and bec that hol⸗
deth of any common perfon ag
of bis perfon he in truth boiz
bet) in Capite, but agatne
xac Cou (tS onlp in Common
bnderftanding applied to the
ing, and that Seigqntozy of
a common perfon ts called a
‘Tenure in groffe, that ig by


And this Tenure of the King in Capite, is ſaid (2) tobea Cenureo€ the king ag of big


Seët.159.


€rowne, chat is ad be ts King. (b) And therefore tf one holoeth land of a common perfon
in groffe as of bis perfon,¢ not of anp Mannoꝛ, ac.and this Seignioꝛy efcheateth to the King
( vea though ít be by attainder of treafon ) he holdeth of the perfon of the ing, anb notin
Capite, becaufc the oꝛiginall tenure was not created by the king, And therekore it is directly
faid thata Cenure of the King in Capite ig ben the land (e not holden of the King as of anp
Bono, Caſtle oꝛ Mannoꝛ eæc Wut when tbe land is belben of the Ring ag of bis Crowne.
Hote that an Honoꝛ ts the moft noble Seignioꝛie of all others, and oztginalip Created by
the King, but may afterwardbe granteo to others, & e forthe creation of an 190802. 5 1. H.8.
€2,:. 33.H.8.cap,37-38 37,H.8.cap.18,
And it is to be obferued that a man map bold of the King in capite, oꝛ of his Crowne afwell
th Socageas bp nights ferutce 2
€ De render al Roy ann alment vn arke, on vn eſpee, Ac. AS grand
Ser eantie mult be done by tbc body of a man, Hopetite Serteanty hath nothing to boc With
thebody of a man, but to renderfome things touching warre, ag a boue, afword, a Dagger, a
knife; alaunce, a patre of gantlete of tron,o2 fbaftg and fuch like,
It is to be obferued that grand Hericantic oz nights ferutce is net inlaw called Liberam
fervitium;ag Socage, is but per fcodum vnius militis, &c.but to finde the Ring fo many yos
0%


108


Britten,fol 164.
Braflon, 1tb.2.fol.3 5,
Fletalib.2. cap.g»
Ocham eap. quid da
avibus eblatis,


(a) Bratfen, lib. 2.f2. 85.
(b) 3-&.3.semures.B.g 4.
30 H.8.43.

28. H. 8. Liuery. B. 57.

29. H. 8.ibid. 58°

6. H.8.Dier, 58.

Vid. Lefiatut de 1,E.8.68. 4.
F.N.B,5.K.\


Magua Canascap.a 7.


Teriftr ſo.a. F.N. B. ſeæ. i.


Lib.2.


Braf.li.a, fo. 5.


9. H.3.Gard.145.


9 H.3. Gard. 14$.


Mag. Chart ca, 39.


Vid Sarde Wards Fl- Charter (n the perfon of the


miH. 38.6.1,


Vid. Sef.1.


Bratton lib.3.TraB., 3.
‘Britton fal. 164.
Morror.cap.2.§.18,
Lib.10 fol.123.124. The
Maser ef Lyon: (aft.
49. 4f. p.27. 43. E. 3. 32
21.Æ.4.53. dr 54.


231. H.7.1 5. 1.E, 1.49.3.


(b) Bratton lib. 3. fol. 124.


Fleta lb. X eap, 47,


Capo.


Tenureen Burgage. : Sett.160,161,162.


fo? bis paflage (9 called liberum feruitium, and therefoze tt (g faíb, Per liberum feruitium ad in-
ueniendum nobis quinque naues ad tranfitum vottrum ad mandatum noftrum. Bnd therefore —
clerelp fuch a & enurc is neither Grand Herteantic, noz Knights Seruice, becaufenotbing
ig to be Done by the bodte of ang man,noz tn that cafc,touching Darre, but Ships te be found,
And this is the reafon that Littleton peeldeth of theeramples he deth bereput, becaufe that
fuch a Genant by his Cenure ought not to gee, no? to doe anp thingin bis perfon touching
&varrc, And herewith agreeth Bra &on; Ex paruis Scrjeantijs quz nonrefpiciunt Regem;ncc Pdè


triæ defenfionem nullum compctere debet maritagium nec cuftodiam, Kc.

BE a man holdeth land of tbe 3a (ng, to find an bozfe offuch a price, and a Saddleanda bats
dle by fo:tíc days, oz any other time When tbe ing goeth With bis Armie agaínft 10 ales ths
ig Petite Sericantic, and no Grand Seriteantie for the caufe atoꝛeſaid. "i


q Te fernice neft
forfque Socage,
oc. But agit hath


beencfapd, the dignitte of the
perfon of the King, gtueth the
Rame of Petit Scrjeantie,
Sbich in cafe of a common
perſõ Mould becalled plain ſo⸗
cage ab affc&u:fos it fbal haue
fuch effects o; incidents ag
belong to Socage, and net=
ther Ward nor marriage, c.
fo; thep belong to nights
Seruice.

Ot this Tenure the great


King ſaith thus, Nos non ha-
bebimus cuftodiam heredis,
&c. occafione alicuius paruæ


Section 160.


CET tiel feruice

E né forfas So-
cage en effect, pur
ceo que tiel «Tenant
per fon Cenure ne
doit aler ne fapre
afcun chofe en fon
proper perfon, tous
chant le querre mes
De render a paicr an⸗
nualment certaine
chofes al 130p, ficde
home Dopt payer bn
ent,


Nd füch Seruice

is but Socage in
effect, becaufe that
fuch Tenant by his
Tenure ought not to
goe nor doe any thing
in his proper perfor
touching the war, but
to renderé pay yearly
certaine thingsto the
King, asa manought
to pay a Rent,


Serjeantia quam tenet de nobis per feruitium reddendo nobis cultellos,fagittas, &c,


gq F this fufi-
ctent hath
benc ſayd
befoze , faning that


graund Serjeantie, ne


Sechion 161.


€ ET nota que hoe


nepopt tener per


Nd note that a man.
cannot hold by grád


Serjeantie, nor by petite


parua Serjeantiatgone wer petit Serjeanty, ſi⸗ Serjeantie, but of the

1 { , ?
— RAS non De 130p, ac, King,&c.

(hapio. Tenure en Burgage. Setl.162:

ZV reage, in La⸗ 2:3 Enure | in

IE 3 tyne Buroagiun, íg Burgage

Bia. Sebich ig views oe is where

an antiét


gus, 0? Villa,a Cowne, and
{tis called a a Burgh, becaufe
tt fendeth Wurgelles to Ware
liament.


Df Burghs ſome be incoꝛpoꝛate, and fom € not, an


Burgh cft, de quele
Lop e(t Setgnior, a


à fome be Walled, andfome not. (b) Fe
ceur


Burrough is, of the
which the king is lord,


Lib.2. Of Tenure in Burgage.


ceug que ont Tene⸗
ments Duns le
Burgh teignont del
Koy tout. Œenañts
que chetcun Œenant
pur fon Tenement
Doit payer al 130p bts
certains Kent per an,
ac, Ct tiel Cenure
nett foz(que Tenure
en Socage,


and they that haue te-
nements within the
Burrough, hold ofthe
King their tenements,
that euerie Tenant for
his Tenement ought
to pay to the King a
certaine rent by yeare,
&c. and fuch Tenure
is but Tenure in So-
cage.


Se6.163.164.


Wag tn former times takert
foa thofe Companics of ten
Families , Swbich were one
anothers pledge,and therfore
a Pledg in the Saxon tongue
& Borhoe, whereot (fome take
tt Ithat a Burgh came, wher⸗
of alfo commeth headbozough,
01 Boꝛowhead,Capitalis Ple-
giusja Citefe pledge, viz.the
chiefe man of the Wosbee,
whom Bra&on calleth Frith-
burgus, and hereot alfo com=
meth Burghbote, wbich ag
Fleta faith, Ggutfieth Quietan-
ciam reparationis murorum
ciuitatisaut Burgi.


Euerie Citic ts a Burgh, but eucrie Burgh (e nota Citte, xobercot moze Mati befato heres
after, Bnd the termination of this woꝛd Bureagium, (ag befoze bath beene noted) fignificth
tbeferuice Wyerebp the Burgh ts holden. BWndot this $0010 ( Burgh) two antient and noble
families take their names, viz. de Burgo, and de Burgo caro, Burchier.


«| Deque le Roy eff Seignior. But it map be holden of another ag by
that which immediatlp follotweth appcarett.


CET eme le

manner eff,lou
vn auter Seigniour
Eſperitual ou Tem⸗
pozall, ett Scignior
Detiel Burgh, ties
Œenants de Cene=
ments en tiel Burgh
teignont De Tour ſeig⸗
nío2 a paper, cbefcun
deux bnannualikét,


CET eft appel
tenureen Bur⸗
gage, pur ceo que les
Œenements Deing
le Burgh font tenus
bel Heigniour del
Burgh per certaine
rent, ac, Et eft afca-
uoite que les antícat


Sed. 163.


Nd the fame man-

ner is, where ano-
ther Lord Spiritual or
Temporall is Lord of
fuch a Burrough, and
the Tenants of the Te-
nements in fuch a Bur-
rough hold of their
Lord, to pay each
ofthem yearely an an-
nuall Rent.


Seilion 164.


Nditiscalled Te-
4 Anure in Burgage,
for that the Teneméts
within the Burrough
be holden ofthe Lord
of the Burrough by
certainerent,éccs And
itis to wit, that the
antient Townes called


billes appel Burghs Burroughs, bee the


And itis to be obferucd, that Burgh am» Burie haue ail
butie, Buric Saint Edmond ;


Sudburic, Salisburie, Banbury, Heytesbury ,
Ec


« ij ici {5 entbcnt , and


needeth no erplanatt=

on, onelp this bp the
Say ts t0 be obferued, That
Wiſhops being Lords of
Parliament, baue not bene
called Los Spirituall fo
latelp , ag fome baue tmas
gtned,


Er Certaine Rent,


q

oe. By (&c.)
here {8 tmplted fcaltie,oz otber
ferntce, ag to repairethe boufe
of the 102d, ¢c,


«| Les antient Villes
appel Burghes.

So as a Wurgh ts an ane
tient Downe holden of the
dking oz any other 1020, Which
fendeth Wurgeiles to the
Parliament.
one Gignification , ag Canter-
Malmesburie,


Shaftesbury,


109


F.N-B.64.d,


16. R.3.c8. 5.
1. H.4.ca, 3. &c.


Lib.2.


Lamb. fo.125.


Mirror cap.2 6.18.
Britton, fe.87.


Mich-7.R.1.Ret.1. (whieh
was in anno Dom. 1195. )

in a» Aff.of darresne prefent-
nent for the Church of 51,
Peters in Cambridge.


«.


Lib. 10.f5. 123.124."
Vide Devant, Sell. 97.


Cap.10.


Shaftesbury, Teukesbury anb
others fond Burgeſſes to the
Parliament, Vide pro Villis,
Parochijs & Hamlettis po-
fea, Sect.171. V

Cities, Ciuitas,
#Obereof commeth the $002b
Citic. A Citieis a Boꝛough
incozpozate, which hath, oz
hauc bad a 1ifbop : and
though the 25(fbopztche bee
Diffolued, pet the Citte re=
inapneth.

In tbc time of William the
Conquerour ttis declared tn
thefe words, Item nullum
mercatum, vel forum fit, nec
fieri permittatur nifi in ciuita-
tibus regninoftri, & in Bur-
gis claufis & muro vallatis &


”


Of Tenure in Burgage.


font les pluis anciẽt
billes que font deins
Engleterve, car ceux
billes q ore font ci-
ties, oucounties, en
auncient temps fuc-
rontburghes, tap=
pelles burges, cat De
tielx auncient billes,
appelles Burghes,
beígnont les Bur⸗
gefles al Parlia⸗
ment, quant te Rap
ad fummon fon pat-
liament,


Seil164.


moftanciét towns that
be within England, for
the Townes that now
bee Cities or Coun-
ties,in old time were
Boroughes,and called
Boroughs, for of fuch
old Townes called
Boroughes, come the
Burgefles of the Parli-
ament, to the Parlia-
ment, whenthe King
hath fummoned his
Parliament.


caftellis, & locis tutiffimis, vbi
confuetudinesregni noftri, & jusnoftrüm comune, & dignitates coronæ noftræ que conflitutz
funt à bonis prxdecefforibus noftris deperire non poffunt, nec defraudari, nec violari, fed onmia
rite, & per judicium & juftitiam fieri debent : & ideo caftella & burgi & civitates funt & fanda-
tz & edificata fcilicet ad tuitionem gentium, & populorum regni. & ad defenfionem regni, &
idcirco obfervari debent cum omni libertate & integritate, & ratione. $90 ag by this it appea-
reth that Citics Were inflituted for thee purpofeg: Sirk, Ad — — noltri, &
jusnoftrum commune & dignitates coronz noftra conferuand’. 2.Ad tuitione## gentium & po-
pulorumregni. Bnd thirdly, Ad defenfionem regni. Foꝛ conſeruation of Lawes, whereby
cucrp man entopeth bis owne (n peace: fo tuition and defence of the Rings fubfetg, and for
keeping the Kings peace in time of {udden vpzores, Bnd lafllp for defence of the Kealme
agatnft outward o2 inward hoſtilitp.

Civitas & vrbsin hoc differunt, quod incole dicunturcivitas,vrbs vero comple&itur edificia,
but With bs the onets commonip taken £oz the other, Villeins (ont coultiversde fiefe demur-
rants in villages vpland, car de villeeft dit villen,& de Boroughes Burgefles, & de citie:,citizens,

Guerp Borough cncoapozate that had a Withop Within time of memory ís a Citie, albeit the
Biſhopꝛicke be diſſolued, as Weftminfter had of late a Biſhop, andthereforcit pet rematnes a
Citte. The Wurgheof Cambridge, an ancient Citie, as (t appearcth bp a tudtctall Record
( tohbtch ts to be preferred before all others ) where Mos civitatis Cantabrigix íg found bp. the
oath of 12, men the recognitors of that afftfe, which ( omitting manp others ) Jthought gap
to mentton,inremembaance of my loue and dutic Almæ Marri Academie Cantabriniæ,

There be Within Englandtwo Archbithopricks, and 23, other Biſhopricks therefore fo
manp Cities there be, and Cambridge and Weftminfter being added, thercarc in all 27, Citics
Within this Wealme,and may be moze, then at this time 3| can call to memozy.

It is not neceflarp that a City be a County of {ticlfe, ag Cambridge, Elve, Weftminfter,
are Cities, but areno Counties of themfclues, but are part of the Œounticæ Swhere
they be.


¶ Counties, 02 Shires, the one taken from the French, the other
from the Saxon, in Latyn Comitatus.Counties arc certaine circutts osparte of the kinadome,
into the which the Whole Kealme Has diuided fo? the better qoucrnment thereof, foas there ts
no land, but it (s Within fome County. And eucry of them is gouerned by apeariy officer Which
WecallaShireue, Hob{ch name tscompounded of thefetwo Saxon words Shire anBreue, (.i.)
prz pofitus 92 præfectus comitatus ; but hereof moze hereafter tn his proper place fhalbefpokerr,
There be in England 41. Counties, and in wales twelve,


€ Veiguont les Burgeffes al Parliament, &c. Parliament ts the higheſt,
and moff honourable and abfolute Court of Fultice of England conũſting of the King,
tbe Lozds of Parliament, andthe Commons, And agatne, the Lozdg are here deuided (nto
two forte, viz. Sptritualland Qr cmpozall; And Cd mons are deutded ínto thres parts,viz. inte
Knights of Shires o: Counties, cttisens out of Citics, and Burgeſſes out of Boꝛoughs.
The Words of the tit to the Sbéréffe for the election being, Daos milites gladijs cin&os ma-
gisidoneos, & difcretoscomitatustui, & de qualibet civitate comitatus tui duos ciues, & de
quolibet


*


Lib. Of Tenure in Burgage.


quolibet Burgo duos Burgenfes de difcretioribus, & magis fuf&cientibus,&c. Bil Which baue
voyces, and fuffrages in Parliament ; Pou Hail reade in the Parliament 18 ollg that (ag hath
benefatd ) there ig Lex & confuerudo parliamenti, quz quidem lex quærenda eft ab omnibus,
ignorata à multis, & cognita à paucis. SDÉ the members of this Court fome be by difcent, as
ancient Noble men, fome by Creation,as Robles newly cteatcd, fome bp ſucceſſion, as Bl⸗
thops,fomeby Clction, ag knights, Citisens, and Wurgelles.

_ Beis called Parliament becaufe eucrp member of that Court Mould fpncerely and difcrectip
Parler la ment fo? the general god of the Comon toealth. which naine tt hath alfo in Scotland,
and this name before the Conquett was bled fm (a ) the time of Edward the Wonfefloz, Willi-
am the Conqueronur,é. It was anctentip before the Conqueſt called Michel Sinoth michel
gemote,<alfa Witenage mote, that is tofay, the great Court o2 mesting of the Ring and of all
the to ife men, fometime of the king With the counfell of his Withops, Mobiles, and Swifeft o£
big people. & bis Court the Frenchman calleth Les Eſtates, 03 Laflemble des Eftates) Jin
Germany itigcalicda Diet : foztbofeotber Courts tn France that are called 39atliamentg,
d are but oꝛdinary Courts o£ Juſtice, and (as Paulus louius affirineth ) Sere firlk efta=
blifbe» bp bs.

The ting of England is armed With diners councellg, ene whereot is called Commune
concilium, and that ts the Court of Parliament, andfo it (s !egallp called in wits and iudi⸗
Chall proceedings Commune conciliamregni Anglie, And another is called (b ) Magnum con-
cilium: this ig fometine applied tothe bpper boufe of Parliament, and fometime out of Par⸗
líamenttimcto the Peres 95 the 18 calme,Lozds of Parliament, who are calleo Magnum con-
cilium reois, £02 the pzofe Sober cof take one ( c) 1Recozd,foz many in the Aft pearc of ting H.4.
at bat time there Was an exchange madebetweene the Ling, andthe Carle of Northumber-
land, Whereby the King promtleth to deliuer tothe Earle lands tothe baluc,#c, Per advice &
affent des eftates de fon realme & de fon Parliament (parenfi que Parliament foit devant lc feaft
de St.Lucy ) ou auterment per advice de fon graund councell, & auters eftates de fon Realine;
que le Roy ferra affembler devant le dit feaft, in cafe que le Parliamentne foit. Bnd herewith
agreth tbe Met of Parliament in 37. E.z.cap 18. Where it (9 faío, before the Œhanccliour,
Æreafurcr, and great Councell. Thirdly, (as euerp manknoweth ) the king bath a p2tuie
Œounceli fo? matters of (Fate, (as for example ) (d ) Henricusde bello monte Baro de magno
& de privatoconfilio regis juratus ; and many others befeze and after. Che fourth Councell
of the ing are bis Judges of the Law for La matters, and this appcarcth frequentip ia
our (c) bokes, aud muft be intended, when tt ts ſpoken gencrallp bp the dconncell ít is to be
vnderſtod Secundum fubiectam materiam ; foz example {Fit be legall, then by the Kings Coun
celi of the Law,viz, bis Judges. À

$302» fo; the Antiquitie of this high Conrt of Parliament, $obereof Littleton here fpea-
Beth ; 3t appeareth that diners Parliaments haue beenc holden long befeze and vntill the time
of the Conquersur, Which be in print, andmany moze appearing in ancient Records and Ma⸗
mufcríptg. (£) Le Roy Alfred affembler fes Comities,&c & ordeina pur vfage perpetual que
deux foitz per an ou pluis fovent pur mifter in temps de peace fe affemblerent a Londresa Parlez
menter fur le ouidament del people de Dieu, & coment foy garderent de pecher, viueront en
quiet, & receiueront droit per vfages & fanits judgements per cefteeftate fe fieront plufors ordi-
nances per plufors Roys jefquea temps le Roy que oreeft, que fuitle Roy E.1. Che conciufion
of that great Parliament holden by King Ethelitan at Grately te berg remarkeable, Which 7]
haue ſeene in theſe words: All this was enaéted in that great Synod or Councell at Grately,
whereat wasthe Archbifhop #v/febelme with all the Noblemen and wife men which King
Ethelftaa called together.

Chere haue beene in the time of, and fince,the Œonqueft ti the raigneg of H.1-%tng Stephen,
H,2.R.1 Hing Iohn, H.3.&c.280. &yeffíong of Parliament, and at euery Heflion diners
Dds Parliament madz,no {mall number bercof are not in print.

The turifdicion of this Lourt is fotranfcenvdent, that tt maketh, tnlaryeth, diminiſheth,
abzogateth, repealctb and reutueth Lawes, Statutes, Acts and Oꝛdinances concerning mat=
ters Ecciefiaficall, Capital, Criminal, Common, Ciuill, Martiall, Warttine and tbe reff.
Mone can begin, continue oz difloluc the Paritament but bp the ings authority. DE Which
Court tt is ſaad (a) Queil eft de trefgrand honor & Iuftice, de que nul doit imaginer chofe
difionorable. (b) Habct rex curiam fuam in concilio fuo in Parliamentis fuis; prefentibus prz-
Istis, comitibus, baronibus, proceribus, & alijs viris peritis vbi terminate fant dubitationes judi-
iorum, & novisinjutijsemerfis nova conftituuntur remedia, & vnicuique iuftitia prout. merue-
rit retribuetur ibidem. But this properly doth belong to tbe Juriſdiction of Courts, anb tbercz
fo;s this little tate bercot (pat fuffice.


&e 2 Sed.


Se#.164..


IIo


Vid $8.5.


4 H.B.eap.8.

(3) Tretsfe de mode teuend.
*Parlism. 21.E. 3 fe.6o,a,
Tohannes de Rupscella terapore
regt Tohannis,

Poll. Virgs (2b. 3.1¢7apore
H. i. WS. 3. E angle
title.


(b) Broëfes, lib. v.ea.3.
"Regi 380.


(c) 27. Aug. 5. H.


(d) In Do f. Clauſ.
16 E.2. 4M. S.


(e) 43.0: 15.27 H.6.g.
LR.3.1tR giff.121.122.
123. 4.E.5.2.19.€,3.3 5.
3 Aff. 1$. 1g. E. 3.
1ndgevsent 174.

W.1.€a. 1. Laflat .d- templar.
3 6.R.2. flat. de Premature,
See the fame publifbed

by Mr. Lambirt,

(E) Afsrior,ce.1.§.2,


Vid.Sratutes de 4.E.3.
64.14.@ 36.E 5.ca. 10.


Mirr.ca.2.§.4.7 10,14.
exp. 4. de defaults, & cap.de
Homicide.cap.t §.13.04.4.de
"Peyns. Ockam quid cum Ven,
Math. Pariſ. 212.213.


(a) Pl.Com.398.6.

Daler & Stud ca, 55 -£2.164.
(b) Fletalib.3.ca.2.
Fortefcue de landibus legura
Anglia. Bratton, tib. 1.0.2.


(*) Brat. lib. v ca. 3: fila.


(©) a1.E.4.54.. 15. E.4.29.
X1.H.7.14. 44.E.3.18.


3o.E.3.35. 39.F.3.6.9.10.
37.E.35.27. 21.€. 4.38.


39-E.3.33- 34.4.8. Dier. 54
FN.B.122. s. E.3.trefj.13.


Hide Glawuil.lib.7.cap.3.9.


Bral¥.lh.4, track. 04.1 3.
F.N.B.150.0, Pl. (0m,413-


Cap-1o.


CC fme e vfa-
ges. Confuetu-
do,is encof tbe mainetrtan=
gies of the Lawes of Œng-
land, thofe Lawes being de⸗
uided into Common Law,
Statute Law and Cuftome,
DFwhich it is fato, ^ that
Confuetudo quandoque pro
lege fervatur, in partibus vbi
fuerit more vtentium appro-
bata, & vicem legis cbtinet,
longevienim temporis vfus &
confuetudinis non eft vilis au-
thoritas (c) Longa poffzffie
( ficut jus ) parit jus poffiden-
di, & tollita&ionem vero do-
mino.

O f cuerp cuftome there be
two eilentiall parts, Cime
and Qifage, Œime out of
minde, (as fhall be faid here⸗
after) anb continuail and
peaceable Uifage Swithont
lawtull interruption,


€ Que nont pas


s.


Set. 165.


€ [Œen, pF grein-
ber part tiely
burghes ont diuers
cuftomes & bflages
que nont pag auters
bílleg, Cat afcuns
burghes ont tiel cu⸗
ftome, à fibome ad
(fuc plufozs fits d
moazutt, le puifnefits
enberitet touts les
tenements que fuet
afon pere deins m
le burgh come beire
afon pere per force
De cuftome, Ct tiel
cuftome eft appel
Burah Englifb,


Of Tenure inBurgage. Seél.165.166:


AS for the grea-
ter part fuch Bo-


roughes haue diuers
cuftomes and vfages,
which bee not had in
othertowns, forfome
Boroughes haue fuch
a cuftome, that if a
man haue iffue many
fonnesand dyeth, the
youngeft fon fhall in-
herit all the rencments
which were his fa-
thers within the fame
Borough as heire vn-
to his father, by force
of the cuftome, the
which is called Bo-
rough Englifh.


anters villes. It is neceflary to bee knotone what cuffomes map bee
alledged in an bpland towne Which is neither Citic noz Wozough, * In an vpland towne,thae
{8 neither in Litie noz Wozougy,fucha Cuſtome to deutle lands eannot bealicdged. Neither
inan bpland teSne can there be a cuftome of Boꝛough Cnalith o2 Gauelkinde, but tbefe are
cuftomes which map be in Cities 02 Wozoughes. (3) Aifoifiands be within a Wannoz,
Fee, 0 Deigniow, the lame by the cultome of the Wannoz, Fee, oz Seignieꝛy may be deut=
fable, or of the nature of Gauelkinde o2 Worough Engithh, * Wut an vpiand Towne map
alledge a cuftome to haue a wap tothetr Church, o2 to make Wy-lawes fo the reparations of
the Church, the well ordering of the Commons andfuch like things. And it is to bee obfere
ued, that (n fpectall cafes a cuftome may be ( c ) alledged Within a Hamlet, a ŒoSone,a Burgb,
a Citie,a Dannoz, an Bonour, an Yundzed, anda Countie: but acuftome cannot be alicdgea
generally within the kingdome of England, fo? that ts the Common Law.
€ Le puifue fits enberitera. And yet by fome cuftomes the youns
qcft brother (ball inherit, foz Confuctudo loci eft obferua nda, à
Touts les terres ou tenements: Either in fee ſimple, fee taile, 02
anp other inheritance. It lands of the nature of Boꝛough Engith be ictten toa man and
bis heires during the life of (.S.and the e(Te dieth, the poungelt fonne ſhall entoy it.


€ Borough Engh; So called becaute this cuſtome twas firkt,


(ag forme hold ) in England.


€ Ndo this ts called

Frank banke,Fran-

cas bancus. Con-
fuetudo eft in partibus illis,
quod vxores maritorum de-
fun&orum habeant francum
bancum fuum de terris Sock-
mannoium tcnent' nomine
dotis.


Seth. 166.


«]&enm, en atcun
burghes per le
cuftome feme auera
pur fa dower touts
les tenements d fue-
tont a fa baron, ec,


At” in fome Bo-
roughes by cu-
ftome, the wife fhall
haue for her dower all
the tenements which
were her husbands.


q Que


Lib.2.


Of Tenure in Burgage.


«p Que fuerout a [a baron, dre. Mere is implied bp (&c.) that in
(ome places the wike Mall bauc the moítp of thelands of her bufbano fo long ag the lues vn⸗
maried, ag in Gavelkinde. Bnd of lands in Gauclkinde aman fhall bc Œenant bp the Curtevie
Sithont bautng e£ anp iſſue. In ome places the widoðw fhall auc the whole; 07 halfe Dum


fola & cafta vixerit, andthe ltke.


€ [Semen afcung

butgbeg per ie
cuftome hoe poit De-
uifer per fon tefta-
ment les terres a te⸗
nements quetladen
fee fimple deins met-
ge E burgh al temps
De § mozant, a per
korce de tiel Deuife,ce-
lu» a que tiel Deuile
eft kait apres le mort
le deuiſor poit enter
Efs tenements ifint
a luy deuiſes, aauct
& tener à luy ſolon⸗
que la fozme a effect
Del deuife Cans afcun
liuerie ð ſeiſin deſtre
fait a lup, ac.


Sed. 167.


Lfo in fome Bo-

roughs by the cu-
ftome, a manmay de-
uifeby liis Teftament
his Lands and Tene-
ments which hee hath
in Fee fimple with-
in the fame Borough
at the time of his
death, and by force of
fuch deuife , hee to
whom fuch deuife is
made after the death
of the deuifor, may
enter into the Tene-
ments fo to him deui-
fed, to haue & to hold
to him afterthe forme
& effect of the deuife,
without any liuerie of
feifin thereof to bee
made to him, &e.


€ [ )*»/*. This

tg a french $0020

ano fignifieth ſer⸗
mocinari to fpeake, fog tefta-
mentum eft teítatio inentis, &
index animi fermo. $9 ag
a deuifer per fon teftament, íg
to {peaks bp his Teſtament
bat his minde is to auc
done after hts deceale


¶ Per fon teflament.
Teftamentum eft (ir ) duplex
1. in fcriptis. 2. nuncupati-
uum feu fine fcriptis. Bud itt
fome Cities and Wozoughs
Lands map Cn )pafleag cate
tels bp Will nuncapatíue 02
paroll without Swziting. Re-
uera (0) terminatum elt quod
poteft legari vtcatallum tà hæ-
reditas quam perquifitum per
Barones London , & Burgen-
fes Oxon.ideo verum cft quod
in Burgis non iacet affifa mor-
tisantecefforis. But in Law
mot commonip, Vltima vo-
luntas in fciptis , fg vſed
Swbere Lands 01 Genementg
are deuiſed, and teftamentum
ben tt concerneth chattels.


€ Ses terres ou tenements. And bp tbefame cuftome he map Deuife
a Bent eut of thefame Lande and Tenements.


«| Que il ad en fee fimple. For Lands in taile ave not deuifable bp
Holl, and therefore he in this place neceffarílp andeb (que ilad en tee fimple) and purpofelp o⸗
mitted the fame tn theclanfe concerning Borough Engliſh, becanfe there an eltate tatic ts in⸗


cluded,


«| Poet enter.Note the cuftome of a Citie 0? Borough concerning


Sect.16 7...


the denife of lands (g, Quod liceat vnicuique ciui fiue burgenfi, &c. eiufdem ciuitatis fiue bur-
gi tenementa fua in eadem ciuitate fiue burgo in teftamento fuo in vltima voluntate fua, tan-
quam catalla fua legare cuicunque voluerit, &c. (p) snow (£a ian deuiſeth either by fpectall
name oz gcnetallp, goods 0? chattels realloz perfonall, and dieth, the deuiſee cannot takctbem
without the aſſent of tbc Erecutozs. But When a man (s fetfed of lands in fee, and denileth
thefame in fee, tn taile, for life, 02 for peares, the deuiſee (hail enter, for in that cafe the Execu⸗
tors haueno medling therewith, Bnd (n tbe cafe of a denife by roll of lands, Whereof the Des
uifor ts fetfed in fee,the freehold oz (nterefE ín Raw (9 in (a) tbe Deuifæ befoze hee doth enter,
andin that cafe nothing (r) (hautng regard to the cftate o2 intercft deutſed) diſcendeth tothe
beire, Wut tf the heire of Deuiſor entreth and holocth the Deutfe out, hee may etther enter ag
Littleton herefatth, oz have bis watt called cx graui quærela, and this watt (Sithout any par=
ticular bfage) is incident to the cuftome to denife, for other wile, (£a difcent ere caft before the
deuilee did enter, the dewifee Mould auc no remebíc, After an acuall poflellion chig porte ipeth
uot, £o? then the dentle map Dane his oz inary remedie by the Common Law,


Ee 3 And


111


(1) F.N. 3.1 50,


LOE. 3.4840, 129.


(a) Vide Seff. 586.


(n) Britton fol. 164.31 2.6.


(0) Bratt.tsb.4 fol. 372.
Fleta (tb. 5.cap.5. & lib. a»
cap. 30.


4.£.3.53. 7. H. 6.1.

14 H 8.5. 22.4[f.78-
Abbr A 8.1 18.6.

4. €. 2. mordane. 3 9.
49-£.3. 17. E N.B. 196.
21. H.6. 38. a.

g. € .2.ti.merdane.


F.N.'B.1 99. Regift, inex
gran Querela.


(p) 2.H.6.16. 27.H.6.8.
2.E.4.13. 21. E, 4.31»
4: H.g.16.


(q) 4. Mar."Br.tit.dewife 49.
(1) Reg f.fol.244

39. Aj. pl.6.3. E, 3. deuiſe 12
29. 4/31. 34. E. 3 rit form-
den. Pl. poft ems.

30. H.8.dewifs 28.
F.N.B.198.199.6
Britten. foi, 21a.b.


Se OS c


Lib.2. (ap.10. Of Tenurein Burgage.  Sef167.


' f) 27-H.8.cap.10.
‘Britton.fol.212.78.6.164.
"Vide. be rein thu Sefton.
32.H.8.ca 3. 34. H.R.cap. $.
(t) Vide lib. 3 . fol. 25. oe. th
Butler & Bakers cafee
Lib.6.f2l.16. & 76.
Lib.8.foí.94.85. 15.9.13 3.
Lib.10.8 1.8 3.84. Lib. it.
f9!. 24. Lib. T.fol. 35.4.

(u) Dier 4. & $. Dh. &
Mar.x $ 5.42.6. Eli. Dalifen.
"afi. ao. E liz. betweene
Barber asd bu wife plantiffe
and William Leone defendant in
4 Wrtt of partition,
Bendlees adudged.


(x) Lib 6 fol.17.18.
Sir Edw. ( leres cafe.
Lib. 5. fel. 34.6. Butler &
"Baker: caf.


Lib,ro.fol.8o.811
Leon, Loueyes cafe.


Leon. Leueyet cafe, & Butler


dr Bakers cafe. Vs fapra.


Lem, Leueyes eafe, Ubi fupra,
fal. 816


Lib.8.fol.84.85. Sir Richard
"Pexbals cafe.
Lib. 3-fel. 35. Butler & Ba-


kers safe.


Lab. 6. fol.17.18, in Siz Edy.
Clereseafe.


And Well faid Littleton that Lands and Cenements Swere deuifable in Burghes bp cu-
ftomt, Cor that (f) at the Common Law no Lands 0? Cenements Swere Deutfablcbp any.
iat will and Œctament , noz ought tobe tranfferred from one to another, but by folemne la
uerie of feifin, matter of recozd, o2 fafficient Swztting,but ag Littleton here faith.that by certaine
pꝛiuate cuftomes infome Burghes they arc dcuifable, But now fince Littleton Wzote bp the
Statutes of 32.anb 3 4.H.8. Lando and Tenements are generalip deutfabie bp the Taft wit
in Writing of the tenant in fee imple, berebp tbe ancient (r) Common Law (g altered, Where
bpon manp Difficult queftions, and moſt commoniy otthertfon ef beíreg (when the Denifore
are pinched bp the meflengers of Death) doc arife and happen. Wut (u) thefe Statutes take
not awap the cuftome to deutfe, &obereof Littleton fpeaketh : foz theugh Lands peutfablcbp
cuftone be Holden bp Knights Sernice, pet map the D ner deutle che Whole Land bp force
of the cuſtome, and that all land gwd agaínft the heirc £02 the whole. Wut the deutfe of lands
holtenbp knights Seruice bp force of the Satutes ts btterly botd for a third, and thefame
ſhall diſcend tothe heire. FE be hath anp Lands holden bp Knights Seruice in Capite, and
Lands in Socage,he can deuife bat two parts of the whole, but tf be hold Lande bp Knights
Seruics of the king, and not in Capite, 92 of a meane 1.020, and bath alfo Lands tn Socage,
be may deuife tivo parts of his Zand holden bp knights Herwice,and ali his Socage lande,
IE be holds any Land of the ding in Capite, andbp Ae crecuted in hts life time he conuepeth
anp part of bis Lauds tothe ble of big wile, opof bis children, oxpapment of big debts,
though ít bee with power of reuocation, hee can deutfe by his will (x) no moze, but
to matte bp the Land fo conneped two parts of the Whole. And tf the ands fo con-
ueyed amount to two parts ozmoze , then hee can deuiſe nothing bp his will. But if hee
hath land only that is holden in Socage,then he may deuife by his totlalihis Socage lande;
foas tt is apparant that the bencfit of the Lords was moze carefully pꝛouided foz,then the go
of the heire. Wut (E a man holding ſome Land ef the King by nights Sernice in Capitc,con=
uey two parts of hte Hanvto the tfc of his Swifc for life, now (as hath beene ſaid) heecande=
uife no part of therefidue, but pet he map bp his to(itocuife the reucrGon of the tho parts fo
conueped to his Swtferfos the intention of the Ac (g to giue power to diſpoſe t wo parts intircly,

3f the Deuiſoꝛ 1eauca full chirdpart of the Land immediatly to diſcend in Fee Gmple ott
tatle, be map deuiſe the other two parts in Fee Gmpie it a third partbe noticft, tt (ball be made
bp according tothe At, Wut hereditaments that are not of anp pearelp baluc, ag bona & ca-
talla felonum & fugitiuorum , $vaífeg, cffrapeg , andthe like can neither be left to diſcend foz
any part of the third part, o? deuiſed as part of the two parts. Wut pet (£fucb Franchiſes o£
bucertatne value be holden of the Hing in Capite, thep Mail reftratne the deuiſe of all his ands
and make tt botd fo athird part. Soit ts (£a man hath areucrfion expectant bpon an eftate tatle
day € fruitics holden of the ring by Knights Serntcein Capite,pet that (ball reftraine him to
deutfe but two parts of bis lands only. And where the Statute ſpeakes of a rematnder, (t is
tobe intended only of fuch a remainder, as map dꝛaw ward æ Mariage by the Common Law,
Is (£a reuerſion vpon a ſtate for life be granted to one for Itfe,the remainder in fee, During the
life of the grantee For life it (s not Swithinthe Statute, but (€ he dieth his ts (act) a remainder,
as is ithin the Statute, although (t be drp and fruttleffc, Bf a gift in tatle 02a leafe for life be
made, the remainder (n fee, this rematnder in fee ts not Sithin the Statute. Wut tf a man hath
Lands holden bp Knights Seruice in Capite in poſſeſſion, reucrfion, o: remainder, and alfo
fetfed o£ Socage Land, and deutle bp bis will all hig lands, and after be felleth away the Ca-
pite Land, 02 that land is recoucred from hins,the totll (e good £o: the whole Hocageland. Zhe
balucg both of the third part, and the tivo parts of the lands [Dati be taken ag thep happen to bc
at thetímc of the death of the Deutfor,foz then his twill takes cffe.

Be that holds by Knights Seruice in chiefe veutfeth bp hie will Bent, common oz other
profit ag fballamount to the balucof two parts out of all his Lands,this ent iſſueth onip ont
of the two parts, e the third part (s free of ít. And (Fhe hath lands Doreen bp Knights Seruice,
€ not in Capite, he map charge two parts of the Knight eruice Land ag is afezefatd, and all
bis Socage Land, &c. And ik he hath onip Socage Land, hee map bp his will charge it at his
pleafure,foas the Kings end Lords third part is fre, andthe heres two parts charged, and
this ts onlp onlp bp force of the Statute of 34 H.8. í

It a man make a Écoffment in fee of his Lands holden bp knights Serutce to the tfe of
ſuch perfon and perfons, and of fuch eftate and eftates, tc. ag he fhallappoint bp bis will, in
this Calebp operation of Law, the ofc and (Fate cffe in the Feffoz , and be (& fetfed of a qua=
Iified fee. 3m this cafe, if the reoffos limit Eftates bp his ww til, bp fezcr, and according to hie
power, there tho vſes and eftates growing ont of the fcoffinent are gad foz the Whole, and the
laft tio tli (s but directoꝛie. But in that cafe tf the Fcoſfoꝛ had deuiſed tbelanb( ae D ner theres
of) without any reference to the feoffincnt and power thereby ginen then taking effect bp tye
will, it is votd for a third part, Wat it he had formerly conueped two parts to the bfeof bia
Soife, €, and after oentfeb the refiduc bp bis wilt without anp reference te bis posoer ri =

$


Lib. OfTenurein Burgage.  Seël.168.


feoffiment , pet this Will (ball enure to declare theble vpon tbe fcoffement , becaufe hee had no
power ag 30 ner of the Land to deuile any part of tt, Wut (the feoffemént had beene made to
the die of bis laft will, although be deuiſeth the Land With reference to the feotkment, pet (t ta=
keth effec only bp the will, and not bp the feoffement. Bil which and manp other points of
intricate and abſtruſe learning pou fall mozelargelp reade in mp Reports. — gp
¶ Sauns aſcun liuerie de feifin defte fait a luy, cc. For in big life
time Liuerp of ſeiſin could not be made becaufe his will is ambulatoꝛie till his beath , and mo e⸗
ftate padeth during bis lite, neither can Liuery be made after big Deceafe , forthen itcommeth


to late.
Here (&c.) impipeth that the deuiſe íg gos Without anp Dtturnement of anp Leſſee oz


Tenant.


Mtacoment à
€N home nc pott
granter ne doner fc
tenements à (a feme,
Durant le couverture,
pur ceo que fa feme a
lup ne font foz {as bn
perfor en ley, vncore
per tiel cuftoe tl pott
Deuiter per teftamêt,
fes tenements a fa
feme, a auct ttener a


Section 168.
^ oan deg


may not grant nor
giue his tenements to
his Wife during the
couerture , for that
his Wife and hee bee
but one perfon ia the
Law , yet by fuch cu-
ftome hee may deuife
by his Teftament his
tenements to his wife,
to haue and to hold to


Cor: ne poet


graunter ne do-
mer fes tenements a fa


feme, dc. This opi-
nion is (a) clere, fo bp no
conucpance at the Common
Law aman could during the
couerture either tn poffeliton,
vcuerfion 0? remainder, limit
an eftate to bie Wife, But a
man map bp his ved coucnat
With others to (Fano fetfed to


112


404.38


(x) 4.H.7.


the vic of bis wife, o? makea a


dfeoffement o2 other dLonz
ucpanccto the ofe of his Wife,


lupenfeefimpte, ou herin Fee fimple , or fo y wt bp the Statue
en feetaile, purtertit in Fee taile , or for (bof 27318. fo an ets
: 1 Wt a truſt and confidence

De bie ou put terme He of life Dir Which bp fuch a meanc might
Des ans, pur ceo - iua ; js i y? —* — bp 3
tiel Deu‘fe ne pꝛiſt ef= deuiſe taketh no ef- the wife, But a man cannot
co t With his wife t

fect foufque apres ia fect , but after the fanpfeentoher oe, beaute


moztie Deuifoz, car
touts Deuifes ne
pꝛeignõt effect fortas
apꝛes la moꝛt le de⸗
uifoz, Ct fi home fait
adiuers tẽpz diuers
teftaments, a diuers
deuiſes tc, bncope le
darrein deuiſe  bo-
lat faitp lup eſtoiera,
a lauters ſõt voides.


death of the Deuiſor.
And if amanat diuers
times make diuers.
Teftaments , and di-
uers deuifes, &c. yet
the laft deuife and will
made him, fhall ftand
and the other are
voyd.


be cannot concnaut Sith her
fox the reafon that Littlecon
here peeldeth,

€ Durant le coner-


ture. That ts During
thecontinwance of the Marz
riage, Foꝛ to coucr ín Eng⸗
ith ig Tegere in Latine, and
is focalleb, for that the totfe
tg ‘ub poteftate viri,and the ts
bifableb to contrac With anp
$oítbout the confent of the
bufbanb. (c) Omnia que
fant vxoris funt ipfius viri,non
habet vxor poteftate fui fed vir.


€ 77 perfon en ley. Vir & vxor funt quafi vnica períona quia caro
vna, & fanguis vnus,res licet (it propria vxoris, vir tamen eius cuftos, cum fit caput mulieris.

FE Ceftey quevfe had deuiſed, that bts wife ſhould fell his land, and made her executtír and
died, and fhe tobe another hufband, the might fell tbe land to ber huſhand, foa fhe did (t in auter
droit, and ber hufband fhouid be tn by the deutfoz, P ;

€ Per teſtament. Teftamentum (8 (ag is faid before ) teitatio
mentis, anb is fagopably tobe erpoundedaccozdingte the meaning of the Œeftatoz. Incon-


tractibus


(b)27-8.8.cap.10.


Bralt.lib.2.ca.0 5.


Idem Jib, 5 .trabt. §. 94 6350


10./1,7.20.


Lib.2.


(d)4.€.2.TH#.Denife 23.
^" (e)44. fr p.36-
* 44.E.3 33 18.E.3.8.
(£) Britten 364.


2.H, 5.8. 3, R.3 23.


* 33, H. 8.cap. 2,
34. H.8.eap. 5.


49.E.3.16. 29.4 [f.17.
39.4.17. 9. H.6.24.
15.H. 7.12.2 T. 14.H.8. 6.
30-H.8. Tit.Deuife Br. 31.
2.Eliz, Dier 177.


(apc. Of Tenure in Burgage. Setl.169;


tractibus benigna in teftamentis benignior , in reftitutionibus benigniffima interpretatio faci-
enda eft.

€ A fon feme. And Littleton himfelfe peeldeth the reafon, (d) be-
caufc tbe deuiſe doth net take effe till after the deceaſe of the Deutfoz, Andin fome (c) places
the cuftome ts general, that he may deuile any lands, ec. In fome (f) places Lands onip
Sohichthe Denifor purchatcd, Fn fome place that he map btuíft any eftate, in fone places fog

lp, qc

Mur but tbe laf so (ll Doth not take effect ontíllatter his deceaſe, pet (fa Feme Couert bee
feifed of Lands in fee, fhe cannot deuile thefame to ber hulband, bccaulc at the making of ber
1411 fhe had no poter being (ub poteftate viri to deuiſe the fame, and the Law intindethit


ſhould be bonc by cocrtien of her huſband. ; ;
Diners teftaments. oz Voluntas teftatoris eft ambulatoria vfque
ad mortem (ag hath bene fato bcfoze ) and the latter wul doth countermand the firft, And it


ig truly fato that the ſirſt grant, and the laft worl ts of greateſt fo
KL Diners deuifes, ec. Herebp (&c.) 18 to


ACE,


bee bnderftoo afiwell


deuifes of Chattels reali oz perfonati, as of freehold and inheritance. Allo that in one motil
Soherc there be diucrs deuiles of one thing the la(t deuife taketh place, Cum duointer fe pug-
nantia reperiuntur in teftamento vltimum ratum eft.


4 Vefes executors
poent aliener on
vender fes temements.
Andthat Which th Littletons
time & man might doe by Cu-
ftomcínfome particular pla⸗
es bc map now doc by the
Statutes of 32-& 34.H.8. ges
nerally.
aq Les Executors a-
pres le mort lour teftator


potent vender. Pere it
appeareth, that the Erecutors
having buta power, as Lir-
tleton putteth tbecafe) to fell,
thep mutt all topne tn the fale,
Œben put the cafe that one
dieth, ít a regularly truc,that
being but a bare authozttic,
thefuruiuozs cannot fell, Wut
íf a mam deutfeth his land to
A. foz terme of itfe, and that
after bis deceafe, tis lands
fball be ſould bp his executors
gencrallp, (ag Lirtleron here
putteth bis cafe ) and make
three og foure Executoꝛs, and
during the life of A. onc of
the Executoꝛs dieth, and then
A. dieth, the other two oz thre
Executozs may fell, becaufe
the land conto not befould be-
foze, and the Plurall number
of big Executoꝛs rematne.
Wut (Ftbep bad bene named


, bp their nameg,ag by I.S.1.N.
( LD.anèl. G. his Execntozs,


Sed. 169.


€ jo p tiel cu-

ftome hoe popt
Deutler per fon tefta-
ment que fes Crecu=
tors popent aliener a
bender fes teneméts
que il ad en ree fim-
ple, put étain fumm
De money à Difiribu-
ter p fon alme, Cn
cett cag, coment que
le Deuifoz Deuic fette
Deles tenements, et
les tenements difcé =
Dont a (on heire : vn⸗
coze les executoꝛs a=
pace E mont lour te=
ftatoz , poient ben-
der les teñts iſſint a
eut deuiſes, a ouffe E
bt,a ent fait feoffmt,
alienation, # eftate p
fait,ou fag fait a cur
a q̃ux E benó eft fait,
Ct iffint pois beter
icpbn cas ou hoepoit
fait loial eftat, & bn-
cor ti nauoit pd :

e


e by fuch cus


ftome a man may
deuife by his Tcfta-
ment, that his Execu-
tours may alien and
fell the Tenements
that he hath in Fee
fimple , for a certaine
fum, to diftribute for
his Soule : In this cafe
though the deuifor die
feifedof the teneméts
and the tenements dif-
cend vnto his heire,
yet the executors after
the death of the tefta-
tor may fell the tetie-
méts fo deuifed thé,&
put out the heire , and
thereof makea feoffe-
ment, alienation , and
eftate by Deed , or
without deed,to them
to whom the fale is
made. And fo may
yee here fee a cafe
where a Man may
make a lawfull eftate,


I riba .. Of Tenure in Burgage.


leg Tenements al
temps Del cftate fait,
€t le cau(c cit, pur
ceoque ia cuſtome a
bfage ad efic Ciel,
Quia confuetudo ex
certa caufa rationabili
vfitata priuat commu-
nem Legem.


& yet hee hath naught
in the Tenements at
the time of the; eftate
made: and the .caufe
is, for that that the cu-
ftome & vfage is fuch.
For a cuftome vfed upon
a certain reafonable caufe
deprineth the comen law.


thers in that cafe the furut-
11028 could not feli the faine,
bccaufc the words of the Te⸗
fEatoz could not be fatiffien;
€ 3| inp felt knewthis cafe abs


iudgedꝰ: A fpeciai Verdict was * Hu.26.E bn er Vincent $


Seël.170.


113


found, that A-Wasicifcd OF Leesnthe King: Beah,


certaine lands in fe, and de⸗
uifed the fame in taile, amu if
the Done died without Tne,
that bis fato lano ſhould bee
fould bp bis fonnesin La,
be in truth hauing &ue fons


ín Law) onc of his founce in Law died inthe itfe of the Done, and after the Done died
Sithout (fue, and then the fourcofthe fonnes in Law {ould tbe land, and (t Was adtiudged
that the ſale was god, becaufc thep Swere named generally bp bis fonnes in La, and the
Lands couldnotbefauld by than all. And the words ofthe wil, in a benigne tnterpzetation
ate fattfüeb ti the plurali number, albeit thep had but a bare authogitic : but (£ thep had bin par=
ticularly named, ít had bene otherwife. Wut (£a man deutfeth lands to his Erccutors to be
foro, and maketh two Exccutoꝛs, and theone dteth, pet thefurntuoy may [cll the land, btcaufe
as the ttate, fo the truft (ball furuiue ; andfo note the diuerGitte betweene a bare truft, and a
cruſt coupicd Sith an iaterelt. In both tbofe cafes the Crecatozg may (a) fell part of the
land at one time and part at another ag they map Gnd purchaſers.
In Litletons cafe admit that one Executor had retutedto fell, then Cas the Law fav when
_ Littleton $p20te ) it was cieare that the others could not fell, but now by the ftatute (b) of
- 2r.H.s8. (tío proutded that Where lands ave Willed to be folo by Œxccutozs, that though part o£
them rekule, pet the reüdue map fell, And albeit the Letter of the Law cxtendeth onip whers
Executoꝛs haue a power to ſell, yet being a benefictall Law, it ts bp confkructon extender
here lands are deuiſed to Executoꝛs to be fold. Pet in neither of thofe cafes, albctt ene vc-
fufe,can the other make fale to him thatrefufed, becaufe bois party and pꝛiuie ro the la worl,
andremaine dexcento? Mill, Miae aduice to tem that make fuch deutſes by will is, tomake
Ít ag certaine as they can, as that the fale be made by his Executoꝛs o2 the Suruituoꝛs oꝛ ſur⸗
uíuo; of them, {€ big meaning be fo, 02 vp {uch 02 fo many of them, as take bpon them the pzo⸗
bate of jis will, oz the like. And it tg better to giue them an Authority then an effate, vnlelſſe
bis meaning be they ſhould take the profits of bis lands tn the meane tine, and then (t to ne-
ceſſary that he Deutieth,that the meane proffits till the fate ſhalbe aſſets in their hands, top other=
Swifethep fballnot be fo, Wutbercof thus much ſhall ſuffice


€ Extent faire feoffment. Foralbeit the Crecutors in this cate
baue no cftate o2 intereſt in the lan, but onip a bare and naked power, pet this Feoffment
amounteth to an alienation, to boit the land in the Feoſtee, ag (t appearetl here, and the Feot⸗
fee fhalbcin bp the Deutfoz,


€ Per fait on fauas fait. And therefore if by the cuftomca man de⸗
niferk that a Reuerũon o2 anp other thing that 1peth in Grant (ball bee fold bp tbe Executors,
they may fell the Laine without Derde toz the Wender (fall be in bp the Deutfoz, and not by the
Executoꝛs as hath bene fato.


€ Confuetndo ex certa. caufa. rationabili vifitata prinat communem


legem. Quiaconfuetudo contra rationem introducta potius vfurpatio
quam confuetudo appellari debet, Confuetudo prefcripta & legittima vincet legem.


> «(D Priuat communem lezem. For tio cuftome 02 pꝛeſcription can
takeaway the force of an Ac of Parliament, ana therefoze Littleton mater(allp ſpeaketh here


of the Common fas.
Seil, 170.


Nd note that no
cuftome is to bee
allowed, but fuch cu-
ftomeas hath bin vfed


Ff


39-4 p17.

4. Eli. Oser 210.

23-Ebix. Deer 371.

"Pafcb. 31. Els. Re. 1107. 1%
Communi Banco. and fa refól-
ued ia Vincent sesf?.

(a) Lib.1.f2l.173.18

Dig ges cafe.

(b) 31. H.8.cap.4.


Tr.27.H.8. in the Commer
Place. Seriant Bend oes reports


49.E. 3.16. 38. A073.
39«][:17. 13. E. 3. deuifo. 2,
14.H,8.10. 15.4.7, 12.5.


19.H.6,


El


MA:


11.H.4.7.
39. 7. H. 6. 1.8.
56 8.H.7.4-
Dier. 347.


Ww +
—28

mat
Se


li


CH € neta q nul
cuftome c(t a⸗
lotoable, meſq; tiel
cuttome dao eſte bfc


€ D Refeription.Bpe-
ſeription (a a title ta=

bing his fubftance of

bie and time allowed bp the
Law; Præfcriptio eit titulus
ex vſu & tempore fabftantiam
capiens


Lib.2.


13.E.4.1 2. Marie, Br.


Trefer.t00.


6.E.6.Dyer 71. 14.Ed. 3.


‘Bar.277. 43.£.3.32.
7. H.6.26. 22. H. 6. 14.
16.E.2 tit. Preſcript. 53.


45.4/[.8. 40.Af. 37.41.


21.K.4.53.54-


"Eras. fo, 51,52.


Cap-1o.


capiens ab authoritate legis.
Ain the Common Law a pꝛe⸗
{cription Which ts perlonai ts
fuz the moft part applied to
perfons being made (m the
name of a certaine perfon and
of bis Anceftozs o2 thofe
Sobofe eftate he hath, o2 in bo-
Dies politique, 0: Coꝛpoꝛate,
and their pzedecellors, koz as a
naturall body ts fata to haue
Ancefto2s, (o a bodp politique
0? co;pozate tg fato to have


- predeceffors. Bnd a cuftome


Swbich ig locall tg alledged in
no perfon , but lat within
fonce Wannoz oz orber place.
As taking onc example for
manp, 1.5. feifed of the mánoz
of D. in £e preſcribeth thus :
That 1.5. hts Ancefiors, and
all tijofc wyoſe eftate hee hath
in tbe faío Mannoz boue
time out of minde of man had
and vled to haue Common of
pafture,ec, infuch a place,ac,
being theland of fomc other,
€c. ag pertatning to the fato
Mannoꝛ. Chis propcrip we
calla pzefcription. Æ cuffome
ts in this manner, A Lopi-
holder o£. the Wannoz of D.
Doth pleade, that Within the
fame Dannoz, there ig and
bath bene fuck a cuftome time
ont of minde of man vſed that
all the Copiholders of the
fato Dannoz haue had and
bfed to bauc common of pas
ſture· Ec. mfuch a waſte of the
1070 parcell of the faid
Mannoz,¢c. Where the pers
fon neither Doth o? can pre
ſcribe, but alledgeth the cu⸗
ftome Within the Aannoz.
abut both to cuftomes and
prefcriptions, thefe two
things arc incidentinfepara=
bie,viz. pofleflion, oz tfage:
and Time. 39ofeffíon muft
haue three qualities, it muſt be
long, continuail, and peaccae
ble, Longa,continua, & paci-
fica: fo? it ig faid, Transfe-
runtur dominia finetitulo &
traditione, per vfü captionem,
$. per longam, continuam; &
pacificam poffeffionem. Lon-
gai. per fparium temporis per
legem definitum , of Which
hereafter (ball bee fpoken.
Continuam dico ita quod
non fit legittime interrupta.


Of Tenure in Burgage.


per title De preferip-
tion, 3,0 temps Dont
memogie ne curt,
Mes Diuers opini-
ons ont efte d temps
Dont memorzie, zc. a Ü
title p prefcription,
qeft tout bn en ley,
Car afcuns ont Dit
que temps De memo⸗
rie ſerra Dit o temps
bc limitation en bn
bricfe ó droit, fcilicet
Dc temps le 130p 15,
le i, puig le conqueft,
come eft Done per le⸗
ftatute De nocamín-
fter 1,put ceo que 1e
briefe De Doit eft le
pluis bault bzicfe en
fa nature que poit e-
fire, & per tiel briefe
hoe poit recouer fon
droit De {a poſſeſſion
fon aunceftozs De
pluisaunciét temps
que home purroit p
atcunbatefe pet E ley,
ac, Ctentant que il
e(t Done p le Dit efta-
tute que en briefe De
Droit nul (oit ope a
demander De Ie ſeiſin
fon aunceftorzs De
pluis longetemps à
De temps le 130p 15,
auantdit, iſſint ceo eft
pioue à continuance
bc poſſeſſion, ou au-
ters cuftomes, a bfa-
ges vſes puis le dit
temps, eft le title de
prefcriptiô,æc, & hoc
certum eft. €t auters


ont


Setl.170.


by title of prefcripti-
on, that is to fay,
from time out of
minde. But diuers o-
pinions haue beene of
time out of minde,&c,
& of title of prefcrip-


“3
3
D]

Li


|


tion, whichis all one !


inthe law. For fome :


haue faid, that time
of minde fhould bee
{aid from time of li-
mitation ina Writ of
right, that is to fay,
from the time of King
Richard the firft after
the Conqueft, as is gi-
uen by the ftatute of
Weftminfter the firft,
for thata writ of right
is the moft higheft
Writ in his nature that
may be. And by fuch
a writ aman may reco-
uer his right of the
poffeffion of his Ance-
fters, ofthe moft anci-
ent time that any man
may by any writby the
Law,&c.
much that itis giuen
by the faid Eftatute,
that ina writ of right
none fhall be heard to
demád of the feifin of
his anceftours of Ion-


gertime, thanof the :


time of King Richard
aforefaid, therefore
this is prooued, that
continuance of poffef-
fion, or other cuftomes
&vfages vfed after the
fame time is the title


And in fo :


Lib.2.


ont Dit,q bien & verity
eft,que ſeiſin a. conti-
nuance puis Ie Dit li-
mitation eſt bn titie De
prefcription, come eft
auantdit, & pet caute
auandit, Wes ils ont
Dit, que il p aug» bn
auter title De pꝛeſcrip⸗
tion, que fuit ala com-
mon ley Deuant afcun
eftatute De limitation
De briefe, ac. a ceo fuit
lou 6n cuftome, ou bn
pfage, ouauter chofe
adefte bfc De temps
Dont memozie Des
bomes ne Curt a la
contratie, €t ils ont
Dit,que il eft proue pet
£ pleder,lou home boit
pleder bn title De prez
Ccription De cuftome il
Dirra d tiel cuſtome ad
efte bie, detempore cu-
ius contrariü memoria
hominü non exiftit, & €
eft autant a Dive, quát
tiel matter e(t ples, q
nul home adongs en
bie ad oye afcun
proofe af contrarie.ne
auoit afcun conufans
at contracte. €t entat
que tiel title De pre⸗
fcription fuit a le com-
monlep, Enient oufte
patcun eftatute, ergo,
il demurt come (1 fuit
à lecommon lep,a 1c
pluis toft, entant que
la Dit limitation De
brieke 8 Droit ef De cp
longtépz patie, Idco de


Of Tenure in Burgage.


of prefcription, and this is
certaine. And others haue
faid, that welland truth ic
is, that feifin and continu-
ance after the limitation,
&c. isatitle of prefcripti-
on, asis aforefaid, and by
the caufe aforefaid. But
they haue faid that there
is alfo another title of pre-
{cription that was at the
Common law, before any
eftatute of limitation of
writs,&c. Andthat it was
wherea Cuftome or vfage,
or other thing hath beene
vfed, for time whereof
minde of manrunneth not
to thecontrary : And they
haue faid that this is pro-
ued by the pleading: where
aman will pleadea title of
prefcription of cuftome,
hee fhall fay that fuch
cuftome hath beene vfed
from time whereof the
memory of men runneth
not to the contrary, that is
as muchto fay, when fuch
a matter is pleaded, that no
manthen aliue hath heard
any proofe of the contra-
ry, nor hathno knowledge
tothe contrary, and info-
much that fuch title of
prefcription was at the
Common Law, and not put
out by an eftatute, Ergo, it
abideth as it was at the C6-
mon Law, and the rather,
infomuch that the faid li-
mitation ofa writ of Right,
is of fo long time paf-
fed, Ideo quere de hoc. And


FEz


Seil.170.


Pacificam dico, quia fi
contentiofa fucrit, i-
dem crit quod prius;
fi contentio fuerit
iufta. Vt fi verus do-
minus ftatim cum in-
trufor vel diffeifor in-
greffas fuerit (eifinam,
nitatur tales viribus
repellere, & expellere,
licet id quod inceperit
perducere. mon poífit
ad cffetum dum ta-
men cum defecerit dis
ligens fit ad impetran-
um & profcquen-
dum, Longus vfus
nec per vim, nec clam;
nec precario, &c,

FE a man pꝛeſcri⸗
deth to aue a ent,
andlikewife to takea
Dilſtreſſe Co) the fame;
itcannot bee auopded
by pleading, that the
Bent hath bene als
Swapeg paid bp cos
berfion, albeit tt be-
gan by Wong.


@ vatitle de


prefcriptio. See⸗


ing that p2efcription
maketh a titie, it is to
befeone, fir to bat
things a man map
make a title bp
preftription without
Charter, And fecond=
1p, how it map be loſt
bp interruption.

Foꝛ the firtt, ag to
fuch Sranchifes and
Aiberties ag cannot
befeifed ag fo2rfetted,
befoge the caufe of oz
feiture appeare of 18 c-
cord, mo man can
make a Title bp pre-
ſcription becauſe that
prefeription being but
an Ufage in pais, ft
cannot * extend to
fuch things ag cannot
bee feifed noz hab
Sitbout matter of
Kecord: ag to the
gobs and chattels of
Traitozs, felong, fes
long of themfciues,
fugitiues,of thofe that
be pat in exigent, De⸗
odands, —


114.


Idem fe. 222.5.


13. E. 4-6.


131.H.6 Preferip 45.
21.€,4.6. 1.H.5.23.
9.H.9.11,20. 7.H.6.45.
6.E.3.32.42. 45. E. 5.2.
2.£.4.26.


(9) Fleta li. 1.629. 15.

"Brit. fo.6.& 15. A4 «ff. p.8
49. E. 3. 3.SrAf. Pl. Cir.a1.51
Lib.5.fo.109. 110. Lí.9.f. 29


Lib. ꝛ.


(6) aa. E.3. Coron. 241.
9. H.7.11.20.

18. H.6.prefr. 45.

Y1.H. 4.10. 21,H.7.33-
9.E.4.12.. 39. E. 3.35.
46.E 3.16. 11. H. 6.25.
E.N.B.91. 1.H.7.24-
Granf.pl. Cor. 38.

44 6.3.4. 22-F, 4-43-44.
3: E. 3. Brook prefc.57.
. If. pl.

(*)8.H.6.16.

(£) 124 E. 4.16. 32.H.6.25.
12. Eliq. Dier. 288.389.


tr. E. 3,01 Hfat 40.


15. E, 3. tif. tudgement 133.
14. E. 3 ibid. 15 5e


[i9] Mich.4 3.87 44.Eliz, in
« prehibitionbetwne Nowell pl.
end Hicks Vicar of Edmonton

defendant inthe Kings “Bench.


(€) Bra. fel.314.


(£) Regif.158.

PUES Re) 5 Afr. p.a.
34. H.6.40.

(g) Stat.de Mert.

20. H. 3.ca.8.

(ho Weft. 1.an. 3. E.1. ca. 38.
Vide PV.2. 13.E.1.ca,46,
(i) Manrer, ca. 5.S.1.


(Cap1o. Of Tenure in Burgage.  Seël.170"


of pleas, tomates hoc quere. Et plufo?8 many other cuftomes and
i scm autergenftomes a bla= víages haue fnch ancien


aWCoroner,tc.tomake ges ont tiels auncient boroughes. 1155
Confleruators of the butabe g. re
peace, tc.

(c) WBntto Treafure Trove, watfes, Cftrates, wzecke of Sea, to hold Pleas, courts of
Lets, Hundzeds, ac. Jnfange thtefe, Outkange thiefe, to haue Parke, warren, I opall files,
ag whaies, Sturatons,ec. Jraireg, Markets, Franke foldage,the keeping of a Goale, Coite,
a Cowozation by pzefcription, and the ithe, a man may make a Citle by bfage and pzefcriprion
only Without anp matter of tecozo, (*) Vide Sc&,3 10.$wbere a man hall make a Title tolandg
bp p2efcription.

But it ig te bcc oblerued (fF) that although a man cannot ag. (s afozefatd pacfcribe in the
faid Franchiſe to have Bona & catalla proditorum, felonum, &c. pet map thep and the like be
had obliquelp o2 bp a meane by prefcription; Foꝛ a County palatine map beciatmed by pꝛeſcrip⸗
tion, and by reafon thercof to haue Bona & catalla proditorum, felonum,&c ;

. Ais to thelecond, by what meanesa Cite bp prefcription, o? Cuftome map beloft by inter=
ruption ; Ft ts to be knowne that the Citic being once gained by paefcrtptton oꝛ cuftome can=
not be lott, by interruption of the poſſeſſion for 10. 02 20. peares, but bp interruption ín the
right, ag (£ a man hauchada Went oz Common by prefcription, bnitp of poflellion of ag high
and perdurabiceftate (s an interruption in theright.

Ana watt of Meſne the Plaintife made bis title bp preleription,that the Defendant and hie
Anceftorzs hadacqutted the Dlatntife and his Anceftozs, and the Terre-tenant time out o£
minde,€c.the Defendant toke iſſue,that the ED efendant and big Anceltozs hav not acquited the
Plaintite and his Anceſtoꝛs @ tbe Cerrestenant, and the Jury gaue a fpeciall verdict, that the
®randfather of the Plaintike was enfeoffed bp enc Agnes, and that À gnes and her Anceftors
Were acqutted by the Anceftozs of the Defendanttine out of minde before that timc, fince
Sohich time no acquitall hadbeene ; and ít Wags adindged and affirmed (ra Wait of erroz, that
the latntife ſhould recouer his Acquitail, fo; that there Mags once a title by pacfcription vez
fte, Which cannot betaken awap by a $o1ongfull Cefloz to acquite of late time, and albeit the
berdict had found againft the letter of the iſſue, pet for that thefubfance of the (flue Was found,
viz. a fuffícient títleby p2efcription, it Wag adiudged both bp the Court ef Common pleas,
and inthe toit of crrozby the court of Kings bench for the Plaintife, which (s worthy of eb=
feruation, So a modus decimand: Wag alledged (*) bp prefcziption time out e£ minde foꝛ tithes
of Lambeg, and thereupon tue topned, andthe Flurp found that befoze 20. peares then lat
pat there Was fuch a prefcription, and chat for rhefe 20. peares be had paid tithe Lambe ia
Specie, and tt Swag obtceted firft that the iſſue Was found again the Dlaintife, for that the prec
{criptton was general for all tbe time of prefcription, and 2 o.peateg faíle thereof. 2, hat the
party bp papment of tpthes in Specie had Watuedthe pzefcription o2 cuftome, Wut it was aba
tudged for the Dlaintife tn the probtbition, For albeitthe Modus decimandi had not bene paw
by thefpace of 20. peares, pet the prefcrtption being found, the fubftance of the iflue (e found foz
the Plaintife · And (£a man hath a Common by pꝛeſcriptton, andtaketh a Leaſe of the lano
fox z0.peares, whereby the common is fufpenven, after the peares ended, hee map clapme the
common gencrallp by prefcriptton, for that the fufpenfation was butte the pofleflion, and not
to tberíabt ; and the inheritance of the common pfo alwayes remaine, and Shen a prefcription
ozcufteme doth makea title of inheritance ( ag Littleton fpeaketh) the partie cannot altes oz
walue the fame in pajs.


€ Temps dont memory, cc. & de title per prefcription que eſt tont un en
ley. Soas the tine pretcribed o2 Defined by Lato is time, whereof


thereis no memory of manto the contraric, (c) Omnis quziela , & omnis aétio iniuriarum
limitata infia certa tempora- Sn


€ Temp; de limitation. Limitation ag it ig taken in Lato isa
certaine time pacfcríbeo bp Statute, within the which tbe demandant (n the acion mutt prone
himfcife o? forme of his Anceſtoꝛs to be ſeiſed.


¶ Exbriefe de droit. Fu f) ancient time the limitation in a Mꝛit
of Kight was from the time of H.1. Swbercof it was fad, à tempore Regis Henrici fenioris.
After that by the Statute of () Merton the limitation wag from thetime of H. 2. and by the
Statute (hb) of W.:. the limitation Was from the time of R.r. And this ts that limitation
that Littleton hore fpeaketh of. tohercof in the Mirror tnteprofe of the La% (t is tug fata,
(i) Abufion eft de counter cy longe temps dount nul ne poet reftmoigner de vien & de oyer qué
ne dure my generalment oufter 4e. ans.

Bing


4
L/


Libr. Of Tenure in Burgage.


Time of limitation 18 two fold, Firſt, in wrlts,andthatis by diners Acs of Sarliament.
SHecondlp, Co makeatitistoanp Inheritance, and that (ag Littleton here faith is by the
Common Law. t ;

Limitation of times tn writs are pꝛouſded by the fatd Statute of Merton, anbafter by the

fais Statute of W.:. Which Littleton here ctteth, and Sobich was in Force ober: hee Sozote,
but (g Ance altered bp a profitable and neceflarp Statute (k) made Anno 32.H.8.and by that
Bet, the former limitation of time in toit of Right is changed and reduced to thzælcore
peates next before the Tefte of the to2it, andfo of other adiens as bp the Statute at large
appeareth, But itis to be obſerued, thatthis Act of 32-H.8. extendeth (1) not to bea Forme-
- don, fit the Difcender, noꝛ to tbe Serutces of Efcuage,Homage,and Fealtie,£o2 a man map ltue
abouethe time limited by the Act, neither doth it extend to anp other feruice which by common
pofliblitie may not happen 02 become due Sithin Artic peares,as to coucr the hail of the 1.020,02
to atteno on big Lord Wher he goeth to Marre 02 the like, noz Where the fctfiníg not trauerfas
- bic o2 iſſuable, neither Dott) (t extend toa Rent creatco bp Deed, no toa Rene tefcruco vpon
anp particular eftate, for (m ) in tbe one cafc tbe Deed is tbe títle , and in the other the reſer⸗
uation, noz to any toit of Right of Aduowſon, Quare impedir, 07 Alſſiſe of Darreine prefent-
ment (foz there Was a parfon ofone of mp Churches that had bœnc Incumbent there abouc
fiftíe pearcs, and died but latelp ) oz anp Watt of 18 (gbtof ward, oz rauthhment of ward, gc.
bnt thep are left as thep were before the Statute of 52.H.8. Wut hereof thus much £z the bets
ter vnderſtanding of Litleton fhall fuffice,


€ De temps le Roy,R.1. And that was intended from the fick day
of his raigne,foz( from the time being indefinitely doth include the $obole time of bis Ratgae,
Swbich is to be obferued.


€ Brice de droit, brcuc de recto, a Wꝛit of Right fo called, fog that
the Swords in the wꝛit of Right are, Quod fine dilatione plenum rectum teneas.


€ Title de prefcription al common ley, crc. de temps dont memorie des bo-


mes ne curge al contrarie. Docere oportet longum tempus, & longum
vfum illum;viz. qui excedit memoriam hominum, tale enim tempus fafhcit proiure,


(L “us proofe al contrarie. For if there bee any tfficient proofe
ef Recoꝛd oz writing to the contrarp, albeit it exceed the memory, 02 proper Knowledge of
any man liuing, pet is tt within the memozy of man : for memozic o? Knewiedge ts two fold.
Firkk, By knowledge bp poffe, as bp Record o2 {uffictent matter of wetting, S cconplp, Wy
bis one proper knowledge. 20 Kecoꝛd o? fufficíent matt-rin Writing ave god memoꝛials foz
Litera fcripta manet. And therefoze tt (g fatd, When We Wilby any Record 02 Waiting comz
tit the memozy of anp thing to 4ofterttic, (t ig ſaid tradere memoria. Bnd this is thereafon
that regularip a man cannot prefcribe o2 alleage a Cuftome agaínft a Stature, becawlethat ig
matter of Record, and (9 the higheſt profe and matter of Recozd in Law, Wat pet a manmap


prelcribeagaintt an Ac of 39arlíament ben bis 392cfcriptton o2 Caftome is fauc o? pꝛeſer⸗
ned bp another Act of Parliament,

There is alfo a diucrfitic betXoeene an Act of Parliament tn the negative and (n the affírz
mative, fo; anaffirmatiue Adc doth not takcawaya cuffomcas the Statutes of wils of 32.
and 24. H.$. Dot not take away a Cuſtome to deuifc Lands, ag it hath bene often adindged,
Moꝛeouer, there is a diuerfitie betweene Statutes that be in the negattue toz (£a Statute in
the negatiue be declaratiue of theanctent Law, that ig in affirmance of the Common Law,
tbercafsocil aS a man map prefcribe o2 aliedge a cuffome agatnft the Common Law, foa man
map doe agaínft fuch a Statute, foꝛ as our Authoꝛ faith, Confuetudo, &c. privat communem
legem. Bs the Statutcof Magna Charta prontdeth, that no Leet ſhali be Holden but twice in
the peare, pet a man map pꝛeſcribe to held ft oftcner, amb at other times , £o» that the Statute
(n) as but ín affirmance of the Common Law,

Sothe Statute (0) of 24.E.1. pꝛouideth that none (ball cut Done anp trees of hig one
Sithin a Foret without the biew of the Foꝛeſter: but inafmuch asthis Da ts tn affirmance
of the Common Law, a man may prefcribe to cut downe bis wads within a Foꝛeſt without
the biew of the Fozefter. And fo Was (t adindged in 16.Eliz. in the Exchequer bp Str Ed-
ward Sanders Chiefe Maron, and other the Barons of the rchequer, ag Hiv Iohn Popham
€bícfe 3 nftice of the Kings Wench reported to me,

In the Eire of the Foꝛeſt of Pickering befoze Willoughby, Hungerford and Hanburie,lufti-
ces Itinerants there, Anno 8.E.3. 3] reade(p) a clapme made bp Henry de Percy, Loꝛd of the
Mannoz of Semor Within the fato Jrozcft, tbe Foꝛeſters, Werderours, and Wegarders found
big clayme to be trae, viz. Quod prædiétus Henricus de Percy, & omnes anteceflores fui tenen-

FE 3 tes


Seth170:


5 -
Glanmil.ib.1 3.ca. 3-7 34.
"Mirrer.ca. 5. S. 4.
Flata.lib.2.ca. 38. & li, 42a. 8
Britton. fel.79.82.
"Bratfon.lib.. fol $3.dr fol.
179.253.371.

(K) 32.H.8.ca,2.

See the/econd part of the Infs-
tutes. Merton.ca.8.


(1) Michb.1o. Zr 11 liv.
"Dier.258.
Fu ævilliams eafe.


16,4. fol.1o.dr 11.
"Benilicafe,


(m) 45.8. fol. v.
Sir Williams Feflers cafe,


1..Mar. Parliam. 2 ca 5.
Vide 17.E.3.11.
Pl. Com. 371.0.


Vide 34.H.6. 36.


Bralf.lib.4, fol.230,
Fietalib. 4.cap.2 4.


28..4[[2 5. 38.4 ff. 18.
45.E.3.16. 5.H.7.i0.
8. H.7.7. 11.H.7.21.
Dier 33.€li.373.


Magna Charta eap. 35»


(n) 6. H.g.3. 8. H.4,34.
12.H.7.18. 31 H.6. leet 1I,
18. H.6.13. A

(0) s4. E.1.tir. foreft. Raf.
1, E. 3. cap. 2.


Cp) Iti. "Pickering. anne 8.
E,3.Rop. 38. —


Lib.2.


Vide Linwood verbovieus,
Bratton lib. 5. fel.434. &
heb. 4. fol.311.

Fortefcne cap.2 9.

7-E.6, fines lewis de terre.
Br.gt.


34.8.1. quare Imp. 187.


Fertefcue eap.19.


Ferte eue cap,34.


(p.10.


Ww


Of Terniie inBurgage. ^ Sefl.r71,


tes manerium prædiétum à temporc quo non extat memoria & fineinterruptione aliquali tenue-
rurtprædiétum manerium cum pertinentijs extra regardum Foreftæ, & habuerunt Woodwar-
dum portantem arcum & fagittas ad prefentandum præfentanda de venatione tastum; &c. &
habuerunt in bofcis (uis de Semere forgeas, & mineras, & amputarunt , dederunt, & vendide-
runt bofcum fauminfra manerium pr di&um fine vifu foreftariorum pro voluntate fua; & fuga- —
runt,& ceperunt Vulpes, Lepores, Capriolos, &c. ficut idem Henricus Percy fuperius clamat.
which clapme by prelcription, and found ag ts afozefatd, the Juſtices doubted onip of two
points, Thefirtk, foralmuch as the fato Mannoꝛ was ithin the limits of the oft, it
Gould net onip bc Contra aflifam Foreftx , fo? bis Wæbwarbtobeare 150% and Arrowes,
Shere by Law he ought to beare but an Hatchet and no Wow noz Arrowes within tbe fozeft,
but alfo de facili cedere poffit in deftru&ionem ferarum , &c. and therefore doubted whether tt
might beclapmed bp preleription, Œbetr fecond doubt vas concerning fugationem ; & cap-
tionem Capriolorum in boſcis ſuis predictis, eo quod elt beftia venationis Foreftæ, & tranfgreí-
fores inde conuiéti finem facerent vt protranfgreffione venationis , and foy that diſficultie, the
clapme Wag adtourncd (nto tbe ings Wench, Wut of the other parts of tbe Pꝛeſcription no
Doubt at all Mas made: andthe like had beene allowed tn thefame Circ, as tn the caſe of Tho-
mas i930 Wake of Lydell, and of Gilbert of Acton, in tbe fame Gire, Rot.37. and of others,


a Il eff proue per le pleader. Frote one of the belt arguments og
profes in La is drzawne from the right entries o2 courfe of pleading, foa the La it felfe ſpea⸗
Keth bp got pleabíng, and therefoze Littleton here fatty, It isproued by thepleading, &c. ag
it pleading Were ipfius legis viua vox.

Entant que tieltitleper prefcription fuit al comon ley Gc. Note all the
preftiptions that were limited from acertaine time Swere by Ac of Parliament, as from the
time of H.1. Sbich $vag the firfE time of lünttationfet Downe by any Act of Parliament, and
foftom the Raigne of R.1.&c. Wut this Pꝛeſcription of time .out of memozp of man Wag
(ag Littleton here fatth) at the Common Law, and limited to no time. Bile here is implpeda
marime of the Law, viz. Chat wbatfocucr was at the Common Law , andis not ouffco oa
taken away bp anp Statute remapneth Gill, : )

«T Common ley. The Lato of England ig deuided, as hath beene
fatd before into thre parte ; the Common Law, Which (a the moft generalland antient Law
of the realme ; of part whereof, Littleton Swzote, 2. Statutes 02 Acs of Parliament and
3. particulier Cuftomes ( Whereof Littleton alfo maketh fome mention) 3| fap particuler,
foz it ít bc the gencrall dLuffome of the realme, ít is part ofthe Common Law,

he Common La hath no controller in any part of it, but the high Court of Parliament,
and ff it be not abrogated oz altercb bp Parliament, ttremapnes ftillag (Littleton bere faith)
te Common Law appeareth inthe Statute of Magna Charta and other ancient Statutes
(Dhtch fo; the moft part are affirmations of the Common La ) in the ostginall wꝛits in ius
déctall Records, and tn our Wookes of termes and peares, Acs of Parliament appeare ín the
Kolls of Parltament, and foa the mol part are in print. Particular cuſtomes ave tobe pzoncd,


Section 171.


€ 1€". chefcun


lío euety Bo-
Burgh eft bn A


rough isa Towne


EX 7 Uie. Villaquafi
V vehilla quod


in eam conuchantur fru@us.


bílle, meg népe con-


but not é cemwerfo:


bos Moe tig viue derſo Pius fetta Dít more {hall bee (aid
pluribus mancionibus vicina- De cuftome en le te- of cuftome in the te-
ta & collata ex pluribus vici- nure De bíllenage, nure of villenage.


nis. Ff a Œowne be decaped
foas no houſes remapne, pet itis a Cowne in Law. And foíf a Boꝛough bee decayed, vet
fall (¢fend Wurgedles tothe Paritament, ag old Salisbury and others Doc. At cannot bee a
Œ one in Law, rile(Te (t hath, of (n time pat hath had a Church andcelebzation of Diuine
Seruice, Hacramentg anb Wartals: toyat alteration hath bene made ín Sownes, heare
Sobat a great Lawyer faith, In Anglia Villula tam parua inueniri non poterit , in qua noneft
Miles, Armiger,vel Paterfamilias, &c.magnis ditatus poffeffionibus,nec non liberi tenentes alij &
valc&i plurimis fuis patrimonijs fufficientes, & c. Anbitappcareth bp Littleton, that a Comune
fg the genus, anda Bozough (d the fpecies, fos be faítb that enerp Worongh fs a Cowne, bat


encrp Towne (g nota Wozrough, Et (ub appellatione Villarum continenter Burgi & Ciuitates.
Berc-


| Lib.z.:


Of Villenage.


Sedi 172


Berewica, 02 Bercwit in Dome'day fiqnifieth a QE osone, Ha Berewice pertinent ad Berchley.


(Er fic recitat plus quam viginti villas.)


Chere be tn England and tales eight thouſand, eight hundzed anb thzæ Townes, 02


there abouts.


Se moze De villis, parochijs & Hamlettis in the ancíent Authozs of the Law, and plentí-
Gully in our other bookes. But let vs now heare what Littleton faith,


Chap.


€ Sea) Enure en
A Willenage
eft plus
propermét quant bn
billein tient De fon
Sfira queil eft bíl-
lein, certaine terres
ou tenemẽts folonqs
P cuftome Delmanoz,
ou auterment a la
bolunt fon Seigni-
02, De faire a fon
feigniog billein ſer⸗
nice: Come De porter
& De carier le fime le
f£» üt hors Del Citie
ou del Manor fon
Seignioꝛ iefques a
Etect fon Seignior.
eu gifant ceo fur le
terre, & buiufmobi,
€t afcung franke
bomes teíquont lour
tenements ſolonq; le
cuftome Del certaine
mano2s pet tiels ſer⸗
uices, Ct lour tenure
aur» eff appell te-
nureen bíllenage, %
bnco»e tls ne font
pas billetnes : Car
nul fre tenus en bil-
lenage, ou villeine
tette, ne atcun cu-
ftome turbant De la
tre, ne vnques ferra


Villenage.


"ras Enure in ville-
v4nage is moft

v properly when
a Villeine holdeth of


his Lord,to whom he


is a villeine, certaine
lands or tenements ac-
cording to the cu-
{tome of the Mannor,
or otherwife at the
willof his Lord, and
to doe to his Lord
villeine feruice : As to
carry and recarry the
dunge of his Lordout
of the Citie, orout of
his Lords Mannor,vn-
to the land of. his
Lord, and to fpread
the fame vpon the
land, and fuch like.
And fome free men
hold their tenements
according to the cu-
ftome of certaine Ma-
nors by fuch feruices.
And their tenure alfo
is called Tenure in vil-
lenage, and yet they
are not villeines. For
no land holden in vil-
lenage or villein land,
nor any cuftome ari-
fing out of the land,
fhall euer make a free
man villeine, but a


Se8.172.


VU Enure en
HA ia Villenace.
ay ee Uilleine tg

m5 the french
S020 Vilaine, and that A
villa quia villa adfcriptus eft,
fo; thep which are now called
Villani of ancient times
Were called Afcriptitij, and tn
the Common Law hee ig cal-
Ico Nativus, quia pro maiore
parte natus eft feruus, and thig
is ee hich the Ciuilians
call fervus. (a) Theynin the
Saron tongue (8 Liber, and
Then fervus. Theme (fames
time Swzitten Thcame coz⸗
ruptip ) ig an olb Saran
50920, and fignifieth Porcita-
tem habendi in nativos five
villanos cum eorum fequelis,
terris, bonis & catallis. But
Teame fomettme cozruprip
Written Thea ig of another
Ggnification, foz it is alfo an
old Saxon $0010, (b) and
fiqnifieth Where aman cannot
produce his warrant of that
Sbich he bougbt accozdtng to
bis Voucher.

Œ Villenage. Ville-
nagi.m, (ag tn like cafes
hath beene fatd when the ter-
mination ts in Age ) te the
feratceof abondman, Bnd pet
a free man map doc the feruice
of htm that ts bount. Bnd
therefoze a tenuve in Ville⸗
nage is twofold, onc Where
the perfon of the Tenant is
bound,anbd the tenure ferntie,
the other where the perfon tg
fre, and the tenure feruile.
(c) Serva terra liberos de fan-
guine exiftentes, villanos fa.
cere non poteft. And theres
fore it is fatp (d) Eft enim
ratio & regula generalis in
iftis duobus cafibus quod liber
homo nihil libertatis propter
perfonam


—


Deomeflay. Glouc.


BraG.ebifup. Fletl. 4.6.15.
dr lib.6.ca. 49. But fe 124,
& 274,06.


Lib. Rub .76, 2r 57°

G laru.[i. 5.62.1. 7 2. r6.
Vide Bratl.ls. $.ca. 6,276.
"Dri. fo.7 7.67 67.8 2.57.58.
115.136.147. Flet.lt.1 c.5.
Flet.!1.2.cap.44. Idem lib 4.
ca. 11,q7 12.

M r.a. 2. S. 13.0 ck m.


(a) F-et.li. 1.64. 24-


(b )V'ide Lamb inter 1.eger
SanB Edw. fo. 152. m5 5.


(c) Hil. 29 E. 1.catam Rege
Ebor. in Thefanr.


Cd) BraB. li 4 fo. 170,


Lib.2.


(e) Idem lib. 1.ca.6.Brit.e.31
cx 66. Flet.li 1.e2.3.


(£) Braë.f9.26.
45-E. 3.5. acc.


(g) Bratt.li.4,fe.208.
"Brit.ca. 51.


(b) Era. li 1. fo.7-


(i) Fortefe.ea.Az..


(k ) Erit.ea. 5 t.

(1) BraR.ls 1.02.6.
Flet.li. 1.68.3. 67 ca.5.
Mir.ca.2 S.18.


Bratton Lib. 1 .eap.6.


‘Brittoncap.31. dr vbl fupra,


Fleta Lib.y.cap 2. & 3-
(m) Mirrer cep. 2. S18.


(n) Mirror cap. 2.S. 18.
Genefis 9. verf: 10. 131. ce:


vmirefe.


Cap ii.


perfonam fuam liberam con-
fert villenagio,nec liberum te-
nementum € contrario mus
tat ftatum. aut conditionem
villani. Bnvagaine, (e) Vil-
lenagium vci feruitium nibil
detrahit libertati, habita ta-
men diftisétione vtrum tales
fint villani, & tenuerunt in
villano focagio de dominico
Domini Regis. And agaínc,
(f) Tenementum non mut t
ftatum liberi non magis quam
ferui, poteritenim liber homo
tener: purum villinagium fa-
ciendo quicquid ad villanum
pertinebit, & nihilominus li-
bererit,cüm hoc faciat rationc
villenagij, & non tatione per-
fonz fuz, & idco poterit qua-
do voluerit villenagium defe-
rere, & liber difcedere nifi illa-
queatus fit per vxorem nati-
uam ad hoc faciendü ad quam


Of Villenage.


franke home billein,
Mes bn villein puit
faire franke terre De-
fte billein terre a [on
Sfr, Sicome lou
bn billeine purcbafc
terre en fee impr, ou
en fee taile, le Seig⸗
nioz Del billein poet
enter en la terre, &
oufte le billeine a ſes
heires a touts tours,
a puis ic Seigniour
(fil boloit) puit leſ⸗
fer mefine là terre, a
le Villein à tenec eu
Villenage.


wna


à (4 ct e 172,
Villeine may make
free land to be Villein
landto his Lord. As-
where a Villeine pura
chafe land in fee fim-
ple, or in fee taile, the“
Lord of the Villeine


may enter into the ©


land, and outthe Vil-
leine and his heires
for euer : And after,


the Lord (if he will) -


may let the fame land
to the Villein, to hold
in Villenage. |


ingreffus fuit in villenagium,& qua præftare poterit impedimentum, &e. Bnd agatne, (g}
Purum villenagium efta quo præftaturferuitium incertum & indeterminatum vbi {cire non pow
terit vefpere,qualeferuitium fieri debet mane, viz. vbi quis faccre tenetur quicquid ei preceptum
fuerit, Bnd another faith to the fame intent, Ceux nc fcauoient le vefpere de quoy ils ferue en
la Matyn. (h) Fueruntin Conqueftu liberi homines qui liberetenuerunt tenementa fva. per li-
bera feruicia, vel per liberas confuetudines, & cum per potentioresciecti effent poftmodum re-
uerfi receperunt eadem tenementa fua tenenda in Villenagio, faciendo inde opera feruilia fed cere
ta & nominata, &c. & nihilominus liberi, quia licet faciynt opera feruilia, cum non faciunt ca
ratione perfonarum ſed ratione tenementorum, & c.

Dow Nillenage o? feruitude began, and fo? What caufe, it (6 fat, (1) Ab homine, & pro


vitio introduéta cft fervitus, fed libertas à Deo hominis eft indita natura, quare ipfa ab homine .


fublata femper redire glifcit, vt facit omne; quod libertate naturali piiuatur. And another faith,
(k) Chat the condition of Willemes from freedome vnto bondage, of antient time gres by cone
ftitutions of s2attong, (1) Fiunt etiam ferui liberi homines captiuitate de iure. gentium ; And
not by the Law of Nature, ag from the time of Noahs Floud forward, in Which time ail
things were common to all, and free to all men alike, and lived vnder the La% Maturall, amu
bp multiplication of people, and making proper and ittiate thofe things that Swcre common,
arelebattelis. And then (t Has ozdatne bp conftitution of Nations, Gat none Mould kill
another, but that he that was taken in batteil, hould remaíne bond to bis taber fozeucr,andto
Doe With him, and all that Mould come of him, his Will and pleafure, as With his bealt, 02 any
other Chatteil, to aíue, 02 to fell, opto kill: Andafter it Mag ordained forthe crucitie of fome
1.0105, Chat nonc ſhould kill them, anb that the life and members of then, as Mell ag of free=
men, Were (n the hands and protection of Kings, andthat be that billed his Uilletne, houid
haue thefame tudgement ag tt he had killed a Freeman. Chereupon tbe» Were called, Serui,
quia feruabantar a Dominis & non occidebzntur, & nonaferuiendo. He is called, Nativus a
nafcendo, quia plerumque natus cft fervus : Bnd bc tg called Villanus, for that he doth hig Vil⸗
leine fertsice in Villis.

Ettautem libertas naturalis facultas eius quod cuique facere libet nifi quod de iure, aut vi pro»
hibetur.Seruituse(t conftitutio deiure gentium qua quis Domino aliene contra naturam ſub-
jicitur. And againe, (m ) Et tout foyt que touts creatures duiflontefte franks folonque le Ley
de nature, per conftitution nequidant, & fait de homes fontauters creatures enferuies ficome eft
dit beaftsen Parkes, piffonsen fernors, & oyfcaux en cages.

(n) Chis tgalured, Chat bondage oz ferutture was firkk inflicted fo? diſhonouring of pa-
rents : £02 Cham the father of Canaan ( of whom iſſued the Canaanites ) fecing the nakednefle
of his father Noah, and ſhewing it in derifion to bis bacthzen, was therefore punifbeb in his
fenne Canaan, With bondage. Bud herewith agreeth tbe Diuine, Ante Vini inuentionemin=
concuffa libertas: non effet hodie feruitus fi ebrietas non fuiffet.


«p Hors del citie on del Mannor, &Ic. This ig fallepainted, fog the
oxiginall


à.


|


Lib.2. Of Villenage.


o1(gímall (8, Hors del fcite del Mannor, anb fo would it be amended at the Impꝛeſſtons of the
Woks hereafter, :

«| Etafcuns frank bornes teignont, &c. This (8 apparant enough, eſ⸗
pectallp bpon that which barb bene fai, ssi!

«| Ow vn Villeinepurchafe terre en fee fimple. Pet the Uilleine map
purchalefome kind of Inhexitances {n fee (iplc, which the 3020 of the Villeine cannot bauc.
Bs t£ a Willeine purchafe a Common fauns nomber,the Lo (ball not baue tt,fo2 the Lozd map
furcharge the fame, which ſhould be a ppetudice to the Terre-tenant, and the fame laxo of a Co-
rodie in certaine granted toa Gillette, and fncb like 3Inberítanceg, And therefoze Littleton
materially fapb, Purchale terre : Shen the Gilleinchath an effate of anp thing certaine, the

. 3020 hall hawe it ag a rent granted to the Utileine, Commons certatne,E{toucrs certatne, and
fuch like. Co) Wut that whtch iteth in action ag a Warrantie made to the Villeine, his heres,
end Aſſignes, the 3.029 ihall nettakeaduantage of bp Voucher, becaafctt (e in lieu of an actt=
en, neither fail the Lozd take aduantage of anp Dbligation o» Ceuenant , o2 other thing in
Adion made to the Willetne, becaufe thep ite in pꝛiuitie, and cannot be tranfferred to others.

(p) Fla man be iciiee of a Villeine £02 life, foa peares, o2 at Will, andthe Us ine purcha=
feth lands in fee, tf tbe Lefles entrcth inte the Lands, bc all hold the lands as a perquifite to
Him andhis heives forcuer, But ik a Wilhop path a Villeine tn the right o£ hte Biſhopricke
and he purchafeth lands, and the 25t(bop entreth, the Biſhop {ball baue this 39erquifit to hin
and his fucceflois, and not to him and his heires, Coz the Lake reſpecteth the qualttic, and mot
the quantitic ef his eſtate. So it Executoꝛs haue a Wilicine £02 peares, and the Willeine pur⸗
chafe ands tn fee, and the Exccutors enter, they Mail bauc a fec imple, but ít fall be aſſets.

a Fectaile. Wpthisitis apparant,that i£ lands be giuen to a
Uiflicine, aub te the heires of bis bodie, tbe LozD map enter anb putout the Unleine and the
beires of big bodie, for, Quicquid acquiritur feruo acquiritur Domno. Bnd tn this cafe the
1.020 gaines a fee fimpie determinable bpon the Dping of the Villeine, without etre of bis boz
bie, ano tbt abfolute fec fimple remaineth fill inthe Donez, And if tbc 1070 enter, and after
infranchife the Done, and after the Donc hath (Ine, pet chat due Hall neuer haue remedie ets
ther by Formedon 0; entrie, torecouer this Land, bp fozce of the Statute of Donis Con.
ditionalibus, fo that Statute giueth remedie to the iſſues of the Done that haue capacitts
and power to take anb retaine fuc a gift. Bnd the title of tbe 3070 rematnes ag ft did at the
Common Law,forthe Statute relrainethacs done onely bp the Cenane ín tatle, And foít

. 1g, it lands be giuen to an alfen,andto tbe heires of hig bodice, bpon office found, thelandis

feifed forthe Ling, afterwards the hing makes the Biten a Denizen, who hath Mine and dieth,
the dking all Detaine the land againſt the Flue,


Setlion 173.


€ ET nota, ft feoffintfoit fait a
8 certaine perfor ou per-


Nd note, if afeoffement be
made to acertainie perfon or


Seil.173.


fon sen fee al efe Dun billeine, ou
ff dn bílleíne, oue auters perfons
foient enfeoffes al vſe le billeine,
quel eftate que le villeine ad en le
bie, en fee Œaile, pur terme de
bie, ou Dang, Seignioꝛ del bil-
keine poit enter en touts ceux
terres a tenements, come E vil⸗
leín bft efte fole feifte Del demeſũ.
Ct ceft per Leftatute De Anno
19.H.7.cap. 15.


perfons in fee, to the víe of a Vil-
leine ; or ifa Villeine with other
perfons, be infeoffed to the vie of
the Villein, what eftate foeuerthat
the villeine hath inthe vfe, infee
taile,for terme of life or yeares,the
Lord of the Villein may enter into
all thofe landsand tenements, as if
the Villeine had been fole feifed of
the Demefne. And this is giuenby
the ftatute of Anno 19.H.7.64.15.


LI T Bis tg an addition ta Littleton, anb the Statuteof 19 H.7.ca.15. therein mente
ene, fop the canfe that hath beene afozsfatd bath loft his fexce,


Gg


Sed.


119


Mirror ca.a. S. 18. Ace.


Mirror cap.2, §.18 .


23:74 p.37-
(0) Defer & Siud.cap.43.


(p) L« $.B.4.61.18.£.3.19.


21. H.6.37. "Breo.is.V il. 50-


15.E.4.9.b. "Pl.Com. 555.
in Walfinghasi cafe.


Lib. ꝛ.


(q) v$.E. s-fit.aid. 33.
Braflon, lib 2.fe.26.
Adirrereap.2.§.18.


See more of skis after inthis
chapter , Sett.194-


(x) Eleta, lib. 3. cap. 13.
Mirror sap.3-§.18.


Lib. Rub.cap.7 6.77.
BraBien ib. 1 cap 6.
Bra. jel.77.


(f£) Bra. lib. v. eap. 6.
Fleta lib. 1. eap. 5.
8.4f:P.13. 15..4f 11.
24 4ff.1.73.-4f-1.


17.E.3.78.7 9. 27.£.3.89.


18.€.4.215. 37. H.8.7. 6.


Le flatuta de 17. E. 3.ca 19.
(1) 17. E.3.31. 11. H. 4.26.


T1.Cem. 73.67 c.

Cu) Glanusl.lib.9.eap.8.
‘Brahor,lb.3.fo.1 56.
Britton,fo.121.

(W) Lih.6.fo.11.@r 12.in
Ientlemam cafe.


Capa.


Cc Paier vn fine
pur lt mari-


«ec dc. (q) Bnd this
billeine and ferutle tenure is
called in old bakes Marche-
tum 92 merchet Marchetum
vero pro filia dare non com-
petit libero homini inter alia
propter libeii fanguinis priui-
legium,&c. And this (s true
De Communi jure,fed modus
& conventio vincunt legem.
Bnd ag Littleton here faith,
it ig tye follp of a fuch a free
man to take fuc) Mannoꝛs,
Lands oz Œencments to bold
of the 1020 by fuch bondage,
And pet this doth not make
fucha fre man a billeine,
(r) Quia hujufmodi præfta-
tiones fiunt 1atione teremen-
ti & non ratione perfona in
donatione comprehenfa & re-
fervat, non enim vnum & i-
dem eft, ed lonoe aliud,tenere
libere,& per liberü fervitium,
&c. for the Ggntfication of


Of Villenage.


Setl. 174.


Es ff afcun
€M franke home


boile prender afcun
fres outenements à
tener de fon Sũr p
tiel billein fernice,s,
8 paper bn fine à lup
put le mariage de fes
fits ou files, Dong; il
patera tiel fine pur le
mariage, a nient ob-
ftant que (lett le fol-
lie be tiel frank home
De prenDer en tiel
form terres ou tene-
ments a tener De la
feignioz per tiel bon-
Dage, biicore ceo ne
fait le franke home
billeine,


this $0010, vide Sect, 194 & 74 & 441.


Hefcun  villeine
‘ow eft villeine per
title de prefeription ,
oc Œucryp villeine


is either bp pzelcription o2
confeflion Servi autem naf-
cunturaut fiunt. Bp prefertp=
tion, either regardant to a
Mannoꝛ, tc.oꝛ in groſſe. In
grouc etther bp pꝛeſcription
02 bp granting away a vil⸗
leine that ig regardant o2 bp
confcllion. (f ) Fit etiam fer-
vusliber homo per confeffio-
nem in curia Regis fad’.


Set. 175.


€ pe chefcun

billeine, ou eft
bn billeine p title De
paetcription, ceftaf-
cauoir, tl a fes aun⸗
ceftozs ont efte bil-
leines ó temps Dont
memozie ne curt, ou
(left billein per fon
confeffíion Demefne
en Court De Recozd,


$08.17 4.175.


Vt if a free man

willtake any lands
or tenements to hold
of his Lord by fuch
villeine feruice,viz. to
payafineto him for
the marriage of his
fonnes or daughters,
then hee fhall pay fuch
fine for the mariage,
yet notwithftandin
though it be the folly
of fuch free man to
take in fuch forme
lands or tenements to
hold of the Lord. by
fuch bondage, yet this
maketh not the free
mana villeine.


A oeuery villeine
is either a vil-
leine by title of pre-
{cription, to wit, that
heeand his Anceftors
haue beene villeines
time out of minde of
man, orhee is a vil-
leine by his owne con-
feffion in a Court of
Record.


€ Ex court de Record. Record ts deriuedof tbe Latpn $0010 Re-
cordor, that (e to epe in minde ag the 19 cet faith, Si rite auditarecordor. Andthereforea Res
coꝛd 02 3inrolment tg a memoꝛiall oz monument of fobígb anature, (t). ag ít impoꝛteth in it
feifefuct an abfolute verity, ag if (t be pleaded, thatthere te nofuch 18 ecozd, (t (ball not receiue
any trpall bp witneſſe, Jury 62 orher wile, but onlp by tt felfe, (u) Andeuerp Court of Ke⸗
cod (s the kings Court, albeit another map haue the profit, Wherein (£ the Judges boe erre,
a wꝛit of errozdothipe. (w) But the County Court, the Hundꝛed court, the court Waron,
and fuch like are no courts of 18 ecozd, and therefoze the proceedings therein map be r enítb.anb
tryed bp Jury, and bpon thetr tadgements a tipzít of erro? Ipeth not, but a Wꝛit of talſe iudge⸗


ment


Lib.2. -


Of Villenage.


Sed176.177.


ment fox that they areno Courts of record, becauſe they cannot held ples of Debt oy trefpalle (€
the debt 02 Damages boc amount to 4.0, iilings,og of amy trefpatle Vi & armis.
Monumenta que nos recorda vocamus funt veritatis & yetustatis vefligia,


oett,


€ MASSE ftans home ad di-
uers (ffueg, & puis d
confeſſe lup m̃ deſtre billein a bn
auter en Court De 130c02D , bris
coze les tues que fl auera Dez
uant le confef, tont franks. meg
les iffueg que tl auera apzes le
confeffion ferront villeines,


176.


Vt if a free man hath diuers

iffues, and afterwards he con-
feffeth himfelfe to bea villaineto
another ina Court of Record,yet
thofe iffües which he hath before
the confefiion are free, but the
iffues which hee fhall haue after
theconfeffion fhallbe villaines,


This is fo cu(bent ag (t nesdeth mo crplication,


€[gan, (t le vil⸗
. Meínpurcbate tre
g alien Ia terre abn
auter Deuant que le
feignioz enter, Don-
ques le Seignior ue
poit enter.cat ilferra
adiudge fon follie à
il nentra pas quant
la terre fuit en le
maine le billein, Ct
(fint et Des biens
fi le villein a-
chate biens , & eur
bend ou Done a vn
auter Deuant que Ic
SHeignior ſeiſiſt tes
biens, adonques le
feignioz ne pott eur
feitet, Wes (t le (eig -
nioz deuant afcit trel
hHender ou Done, viẽt
deins la bille la lou
tielx biens font, ela
Ouertinent enter les
bicines claima les
bíeng et ſeiſiſt parcel


Setlion 177.


Lfo if a Villaine

purchafe land and
alien the land to ano-
ther , before that the
Lord enter , then the
Lord cannot enter, for
it fhall bee adiudged
his folly, that hee did
not enter when the
Land was inthe hands
of the Villaine. And
fo it is of goods: If the
Villaine buy goods &
fell or giue them to
another , before the
Lon» feifeth them,
thenthe Lord may not
feife the fame : but if
the Lord before any
fuch fale or gift,com-
meth into the Towne
whete fuch goods be,
and there openly a-
mongft the neighbors
clayme the goods,arid
feife part of the goods
in the name of feifin

Gg z


€ A this cafe before the

Lo® doth cntcr , dee

hath ne(ther [usin rence
ius ad rem but onlp a Qoffíb(s
lítís of an eftate , which efkate
hee mutt gainc by bis entrie,
and therefoze (£ the Willatne
doth bp Swap of prsuention
alten before the 1020 doth cus
ter the Hozd (g barred of the
voſſibilitie Which be had to the
Zand fos eucr (a) Si autem
feruus védiderit feodum quod
fib1 & heredibus perquifiuc-
ritantequam Dominus feifi-
nam indc ceperit valer donatio
& Dominus fibi ipfi imputet;
quod tantum expeétauit. But
(b) 1€ the Willaine of the
ing puschafeth Land and
alteneth before the Hing (bpon
an office found foa hin ) doth
enter, pet the ting after office
found fhall bauc the Land,
Quia nullum tempus occurrit
Regi, ag Littleton Himfelfe
faith in the next Section. Ana
pet after office found the King
fball not haue the mcane pro⸗
fits becaufe the title (a by the
fcifure,

Purchafé terre.
Œbelike Law is of Seigni⸗
ones , Aduowſons, Reuer⸗
fiong, 1$ cmaynberg , Rents,
Commons certaine , and
fuch ithe cettaine Inherttan⸗


cea, Therein the Qillatne
à atts


18


(3) Flers lib. 3.06.13.
Britton, fol.98.a. — '
19.E, 3. Dower 171.


(b)35.P.3. ris. Villeugge 22.
9. H.6.21. per Batsmg ters.
12,H,7.12.


Cap. r1.
bath anp eftate ot intéveft. It
the Willaine purchafe Land
titherin fe ample, Fe tatie,
02 for life, 1f the Dillaine Doth
alten befozc the Loꝛd Doth en=
ter, he doth pzcucnt the 3020.
Wut pet thetilue of the Q1tl-
Jatae ſhall recoucr the Land
intayled in a Foi medon, and
tben the 1070 may enter,
Alien la terre.
Alien commeth of the Uerbe
Alienare, id eft, alienum face-
re vcl ex noftro dominio ina-
lienum transfeire, fiue rem a=


Of V illenage.


Des biens en noſme


De (cí(in De toutsies


biens d le bilicine ad
ouauer poit ac. Ceo
eft Dit bon feifin en
lep,et le occupation
que le billeine ad a=
prestiel claime en fs
biens ferra pris en
le Daoit le Seigni⸗
our,


Secla77.


ofallthe goods which:
the Villaine hath or
may haue, &c. thisis a
good feifin in law, and
the occupation which
the Villaine hath after
fuch clayme in the
goods fhall bee taken
in the right of the
Lord. «


liquam in Dominium alterius transferre. It a freeman hath iſſue and afterward bp confeſſion
becommethbond, and purchafe Hands in £e, ano befoze the Lord enter hee diet feífco , and
the Land difcends to his iſſue Which te free, in this cafe the 3,020 fhalinot enter bpon the hetre,
amo pet this ig adifcentand no alienation. The like Law tt (s tf the land fo purchaſed bp the
Aillatne doth efchcateto the 3,020 of the Fee befoze any entry made by the 3,020 of the Willaine;
fo as the act of the Law that (s the difcent 02 efcheat map al well / pꝛeuent the Lord of his en=
tric, as the act of the partíe bp altenatien,

It a Villaine be difletfed before the Lord doth enter, the Loꝛd map enter into the Land in the
name of the Q1 (Hatne, and thereby gaine the Inheritance of theland, but tf there bec a diſcent
catt, fo ag tbc cntrie ofthe Millaine be taken away, then tbe Q1 tllatne mult recontinne the citate
of theland by iudgement anderecutton, befoze tbc 3,020 of the Qiíllatne can enter, and tbig
{020 alien Doth not onlp exteno to alfenattons of land in deed, butalfotoaltenations tn law,ag
ifthe Q1 (tlattie purchafe land and dieth Without heire, andthe lano efcheate, o2 {€ there bearez
coucrp agatnt the Villaine in a Ceflauit 02 the like,


«p Et ißint eft des biens, &c. Biens, bona includes all chattels afwell
reall ag perfonall, Chattel: (ga french Sv02d, and fignifieth goods, which bp a woꝛd of art Wwe
call Catalla. $3030 Woods 02 Chatteis are ctther perfonall 92 reall, perfonall ag hoꝛſe and other
beafts , houſholdſtuſfe, Bowes, weapons, and fuchitke, calledperfonail becaufe for the
moſt part thep belong to the perfon of a man,oz elfe fo; that they are to berecouercd by perfonall
actions, Reall, becaufe they concernetherealitic, ag tearmes for peares of ands oz Cenex
ments, 10 ardihips, the intereft of tenant bp Statute Staple, by Statute Merchant, bp
«legit andfuch like.

Bona diuidunturin mobilia & immobilia, mobilia rurfum diuiduntur inca que fe mouent,
& quz ab alijs mouentur: but by the Common Law, no eftate of Fnheritance 02. rre-yelo ig
comprehended onder tbefe woꝛds bona oz catalla. And tt is tobe obferucb , thatasthetitie of
the Lord torts billaing lands beginneth bp bis entrie,fo big titieto the gods beginnett by the
fetfurc of them. And bercagatne tt (s tobce obſerued, that Where our Authoꝛ in this branch
concerning gods bleth tbefe Words (fell oz giue) that the fame eptendeth al well to gífta im -
La ag aíftein ded, Andtherefozetfa neite hath gods , and taketh Waron by this rft in
Law by force of the Marriage, the Lois barred. And fo itictfa Villaine make big Exe⸗
cutors and dicth, by thts gift (n law the 1020 is barred as fhail be fatd hereafter.


«| Et claime les biens & feifift parcel des biens. Foractaime only of
the gos of the Utilaine ts not füffictent in Law, but he muft fcíse fome part in the name of all
therefioue;as here tt appeareth, 02 that the gods be within the vie w of the Lo, foztheclaime
andhts diet amount toa leizuve, as theclapme of a toardbeing prefent bp $0020 is afuffictent
feifure, albeit the Gardeine lapeth no hands of him. See hereafter Se&.221. And ſo note a df-
ucrütic bet weene a clapme of Lands 0? & cncmeng, anb gabs. (c) In an Betton of trefpalle
02 Detinue brought bp the UWillaine, a releaſe made tothe defendant by the 1020 is a god barre,
fox that amount toa fetlure and grant, 3f tbe Villaine doth bup gods and make bis Erecys
eid ana m befoze the Loꝛd doth ſetze them,the Œrecutoze fhati detaine them agaínft the Lewd
of the atne


«| Ad ou «uer poet, cic. Bere (&c.) Doth imply an excellent point
of learning, for that fuch a claime doth not ont» belt the gods Which the Qi ileine then hath,but
alfo which he after that Mhallacquire anb get. Wut otbersotfcit tg of lands of fræhol oz Fine
beritance, fox there fuch a generall entrie 02 clapme extends onip to tbe lands the Q3(lleíne hath

at


3. H.4.1 €. 46.E. 3.barre 217
Delt. & Stud.cap.43.f0l.1 39
21.E 3.6, Baldiyn

Freuils cafe.


(c) 18.H.6.2 3.6. pr
Acough. 3. H. 4.16.
46.6.3 farre 217.


Lib.


OfVillenage.


Seét.173.179.


at that time, anb not to any other which be Gall purchale after , as by our Ruhe in this


Section may tuftly be collected.


Cg file Koy

€ Mi bn billein
que purchateterre, a
alien Deuant que le
 topentra, brcoze 1e


top poit enter en que |


maines que la terre v
deuiendra. Du fi le
bílleín achata biens,
& cuir vendiſt Deuant
que le top ſeiſiſt les
biens, bncoze le roy
. poit feifer les biens
en que maines que
leg biens font , Quia
. mullum tempus occur-
rit Regi.


Sed. 178.


BYt if the King
hath a Villeine
who purchafes Land,
and alienit before the
King enter, yet the
King may enter into
hole hands foeuer
the land (hal come. Or
if the villeine buyeth
pee and fell them
efore that the King
feizeth them ; yet the
King may feize thefe
goods in whofe hands
foeuer they bee. Be-
caufe Nallum tempus
occurrit Regi.


villein,


egy le "a ad
This is e-


uldent ge J Which hath


den⸗ fatd before.


«| On fi tiel villeine


achata biens &c. PE the


Kings Willeine acquire anp
gods o, chattels, the proper=
tte of them ts in the dking bez
£o2cany fetfureoz office, and
it {8 well fato of an ancient
Autboz, (d) Alroy quantal
droit, de la corone ou a franch
eftate ne poct nul temps oc-
curre , and another (c) ſpea⸗
king tn the perfon of tye
ing fait); Nul temps neft
limit quanta mes droits.


€ [Ten fi home leſſa
cert terre a bu au-
ter pur terme De bie fa-
uant le ceucr(tou à lup, &
bn villeine purchafe Del
leſſor lereuerfion; en ceſt
' cag tl ſemble que le feig-
mío? Del billeine poit
. maintenant veñ ala tet-
_te, æclaime le reuerfion
come le Seignioz le dit
billeine, a per cel claime
le reuerfion eff mainte-
nant en lup, Cat enauter
forme tl ne pott bener a
le reuerfion, Car fl ne
pott enter fur le tenant a
terme de bie, Ct fil Doit
Demurrer tanque apees
le mort le tenant a terme


Sed. 179.


Lfo if a man let cer-
taine land to another

for terme of life fauing to
himfelfe thereuerfion ‘and
avilleine purchafe of the
leffor the reuerfion:In this
cafe it feemeth that the
Lord of the villeine may
prefently come to the land
and claime the reuerfion
as the Lord of the faid vil-
leine, and by this claime
the reuerfion is forthwith
in him. For in other forme
or mannerhe cannot come
to thereuerfion. For hee
cannot enter vponthe Te-
nant for life. And if hee
fhould ftay vntill after the
death of the Tenant for

Gg 3


4pr# main-


tenant ve-
ner à la terre.


For hee cannot
claime the teuerti-
on but bpon the
Land, and bee bp
bis comming bpon
the Land fo; that
purpofe is no trcf«
patfo; , becaufe the
Law gtucth brum
power to claime the
renerfion , left hee
ſhould bee preuen⸗
ted, arid claimehee
cannot bnlc(fe hee
commeth to the
Land, So itke=
Wife ££ the villtine
purcbafe a Seig⸗
níozie, rent, GLom-
qon 02 anp other
freehold o2 Ainbert-
tance ont of anp
Lands o; Œene-
ments of another,

the


119


Vide Sell a5.
Vide Stanford prar fol 32.4.


35. E. 3. tit. Villenage 22,


(4) AMirrer eap. 3»


(e) Britton, fol. 88.
Brak lib Y. Que res Domini


pofint.


ss


Lib.2.


Vide 41.€. y.ti4. Aude
4.18.


13.H.4 ts. Execution,
28. F. N 8.104.
Ye H.7. 134.


v y Hac.


Fila. lib. 5,047.14.


Seét.180:


life, then perchance hee
fhould ccmetoo late. For
peraduenture the villeine
will grant or alien the re-
uerfion to another inthe
life of the Tenant forlife,
&c.


Of Villenage.


Debie, bonqueg prt cag
Lay rrabei tl viendea trope tarde,
ciate —— Car peranent le villeine
neicrmt QUE Hole grantee ou alicne
ofi of ;

dan. But i£ ^a le reuerſlion abn auter en
bilicine purchafe a je Hie le tenant a termed
Seignioꝛie —
t . bit, aC, :
ther inheritance fuing out of the Land of the Loꝛd bimfelfe, it ig faid that the
ient common 02 fuch other 3 nbentancc ts crtinguifbeo tn the Lords pollefion Without any
clatme.

€ Grant. Here mutt be intended an attosmment, foz after the
grant and befoze attozument the Load mag claime the reuctfion, ——

¶ En la vie del tenant per vie, orc. Hereby, (&c-) is included tenant
ín tatie, tenant pur auter vie, tenant by Statate Warchant, Staple, Elegit, ant for peares, for
during all thelc eftates the Lod map claime the Keuerſion affosll ag in cafe of the Œcnaut


Cali 1.


the Lord map law⸗


foz life.


€ A Daowfon. Ad-
uocatio fo called bes
caufe the right of
vreſenting to the Church
was firft gatned bp fuch ag
Were founders, Abencfac-
tozs, o? Maintapners of the
Church, viz. rationc fundati-
enis , ag bere the Anceftoz
Swas founder of the Church,
0? ratione donationis , Shere
Be endowed the Church, oz
ratione fundi ag Where hee
begauc the fotie whereupon
the Church was butit, amb
therefoze they were called Ad-
vocati : thep Swere alfocalleb
Patroni , and thereupon the
Bouowfon (c cailed Ius Pa-
tronatus. Bnd in ene 50020
Aduowſon of a Church ig
the right of pzefentation ez
collation to tbe Church. Ad-
uocatuscít ad quem pertinet
ius aduocationis alicuius Ec-
clefiz , vt Ecclefiam nomine
proprio nonalieno poffit præ-
fentare. Guerp Church (s et=
ther prcfentatiue, collatiue,
bonatínc oz electiue. Vide Se-
ation 645.648.


Seétion 180.
€r? Mefine Tt


maner eff, lou
bn billein pᷣchaſe vn
Aduowſon dun efgt
plein Dun incumbét,
le Seignioz Del bil-
lein poit vener al Dit
efglife,a ciaime le Dit
aduolwfon, a per cel
claim laduowſon eft
en lup, Car fil Doit
attẽdre tangs apres
le most lencumbent,
& adonque à prefen-
tet fon clerk a le Dit
efglife, Donque en le
meane temps Ie bíl-
leine poit aliener le
abuotofon, a iffint
oufte le Seignioz de
fon pacfentment,


N the fame manner

it is, where avilleine
purchafes an Aduow-
fon of a Church full
of an Incumbent, the
Lord of the villeine
m:y come to the faid
Church, and claime
the faid Aduowfon,
and by thisclaime the
Aduowfon is in him.
Forif hee willattend
tillafter the death of
the Incumbent , and
then to prefent his
Clarke to the faid
Church, then inthe
meane time, the vil-
leine may alien the
Aduowfon, & fo ouft
the Lord of his pre-
fentment. |


QD, Plein dun incumbent. JE the Church bee prefentatiue, tbe


Church is full bp a: míffton and Inſtitution againf anp common perfon,but agaínft the hing


it ig not full vntill induction.


Incumbent, commeth of the berbe incumbo, that ts to be bílí-
gentlp refident, id eft,obnixe operam dare. and Sohen tt ts Witter encumbent it (s falfeip
ten, £o? it ought to be Incumbent,ag Littleton doth here, Bnd cherefoze the Lak soth intend
bin to bee refivent on bis Werefice,


€ Le


Lib.2. Of Villenage. Se8.181.


Le Seignier del villeine poit vener al eglife & claime le dit advowfon.
Mote albeit the Aduowſon (c a thing incozporeall, anb not bifible, pet becaufe tbe pꝛincipall
Duticof the Pꝛeſentee of the Patron is to be done tn the Church tbe clapme of the Loꝛd of
the Qi (lice mut be madethere, and by that clapme the tnberttance of tbe Aduowſon fall be
belted ín the 1.020, £02 euet y clapme 02 Demand to deueſt anp e(tate oz intercf mut bee made in
that place Which ts mol apt £o? that putpofe,


€ Apres la mort del incumbent. Nota,a Church pretentatine may
Ee — of —— by Death whereof Littleton Bere abketh. 2.215»
creation. 5.25» refignation. 4. bp Deprivation, 5. Bp ceſſion ag bp taking a
EINER. boiicfice incompatible, s


UE. Et adongues a prefenter [on Clerke al dit egliſe, &c. Apretentation
fg deriueD A prefentanco, quia prefentare nihil aliud eft quam prz fto dare, feu offerre, Bud Lit-
tleton here bziefely expꝛeſſeth the effect of a prefentatten, for (t (g the act of the Patron offering
bis Cierke to the Withop of that Dioceſſe tobe inſtituted to ſuch a Church in thele o» the like
Goopds directed to the Bihop, Præfento vobis A.B. Clericum meum ad Ecclefiam de Dale,&c.
bts may be done afweil bp Word, as bp waiting, andiE ttbe bp wꝛiting ít (e wo Derde, foz
the pzclentation ts of tbe Clerke, and the direction tothe Biſhop, fo as this Writing ts t» na⸗
turc of a Letter to the Biſhop: andthis tethercafonthat the King himfclfe may prefent bp
God ag elfewheretsfatd, A Villein atthis vay purchafeth an Aduouſon tn fee, the Church
Becomes bopde,the 1020 fez 100.pounb given bp A.B. Clerke prefents himto the Church, and
bis Clerke ts admitted, inſtituted and inducted, petthis gaineth not the Aduowſon to the
Hod, (d ) And fo it ts in thatcafe (£ any on the bebalfe of A.B. had giuen o» contracted Sith
the 1029 in conf@deration of any baluable thing to pzefent A B. to the fatd Church, albeit ít had
banc Without the confent o? Knowledge of A.B. pct ít Gould not haue vetted the Aduowſon in
the 102d. Wut this Was not Law When Littleton $020te; (c) Wut now bp the fatute of
31, Eliz. the paclentation, admiſſton, inftitution and induction in both tbefato cafes and in the
like are made boide, Where before the fato (Eatutetbey Were but vopdable bp depztuation, And
t€ aman pꝛeſent by bfurpatíon to a benefice bp reafon of anp coꝛrupt contrac, agreement, ec,
that p:cfentatíon,ano the inftitutton and induction thereupon are bopde,foz that act extends to
all Patrons aſwell bp Wrong as by right; but where any pzefents by vfurpation, the rightfull

atron and not the King (ball pzefent, Foz othcrwife enery vígbt£ull Patron map lofc his pres

tation. And ſuch an incumbent that commeth in bp reafon of anp fach cozrupt agreement
ts fo abfolutelp difabled £01 euer after to be pzefented to that Church, asthe ing bímlelfe, to
Whom the Law giueth the title of Pꝛeſentation in that cafe, cannot pzefent him againeto that
Church, for the De being made for fuppzeflion o£ fymonie, and fuc) corrupt agreements fo
binds the Ring in that cafe,as he cannot piefeng hin that the Law hath difabled,fo2 the words
of the Bc be, Shall thereupon and from thenceforth be adjudged a difabled perfon in Law to
hauc or enioy the fame benefice. (f) Bndthepartic being diſabled by the Ac of Paritament,
(bich being an abfolute and direct Law ) cannot be difpenfed &ottbalibp anp grant,æc, With
& Non obftante, ag tt map be, Shen anp thing ts prohibited Sub modo ag bpon a penaltíe gis
men tothe ing. Andthelatd Ac doth not only extend tobencfüceg With cure, but to Digni-
ties, Pꝛebends, and ail other Ecclefiatticail liuings. j à
€ Clerke. Clericus ig thoofold, Ecclefiafticus ( tobicy Littleton
ere intendeth) and bets either fecular, os regular, fo called becaufe he (g Servus & hereditas do-
mini: and Laicus, anb ín thisfenceis fignifcda Pen⸗man, Sho getteth bis lining in fome
Court oz otherwile bp the bie of big pen.

Nore f£ the Church becommeth volde, albett the prefent anopdance be not bp Law grantable
ouer, pet map the 1020 of tbe Villeine pzefent in his oxone name, and thereby gaine the inhe⸗
titance of the Aduowſon to hin and bis hetres for albctt tt be not qrantable oucr, pet it is not
meerely a Chole in action,(g)for tf a Feme couert be feifed of an Aduowſon, and the Church
becommeth boide, anb the Wife dieth the husband Mall prefent to tbe Aduowſon, Ch) but others
ile itis of a bond made to the Wife, because that te meerelp in action,


Sedion 181.


€[ga tl y ab A Lfothere is 4 vil- CY Ille» regardam.


2 pilleift regard, leine regardant, e oe
& billeine en gros, and à villein in groffe. hoz, bscanfe he ——


120


Doct & Stud. [ib.2.ca.31.
5.E. 3.180. 1o.E.3 482.
25.E.3.49 9 E.3.46a.
11H. 4. 37. 59.6776.
41 E. 3:5. EN. 8. 51.32.


(d) Adindge in communi
bance. Mich. 41.67 42 EL.
inter Baler d ‘Rogers.

(c) Adiudyed inthe K ngs
bench, Mich.13. Tatin a quare
Imp: broug't by the Ksxg
acasn|! the Bx!) op of Norwichs
T heroas Cole & Robert Secher
Clerke far the Vicarage of.
Hauerell in Suff.


(F)PL Com. $02. 27. H. 8.
2.H.7 6. 11.H.7.37.

13. H.2 8.6. 11.H. 4.76.
$E. 3.29. FN. B. 311. E.


4. H.4.ca. 12.


(g 14. H.4.12.38.E. 3.35.
13.€.3.quare.imp 57,

(h) 43. € 3.10. 39. E.3.5.
4.H.6.5.


3.4.7.4.


Tibi}


"BreB li a fo. a6. Mir.ra.s.
§.18.


Vid. Soff, 184.


(1) 30.2. 3 4i) Ife 30.


sMir.ea, 3.6.12.


Vi. del. Ag1.154. 174.9 4.
(1) Braft.li.§ Tra@,5.ca,28,


(m) Glen. L,04, 1,


Capi.


tons all bale oꝛ billenons fers
wices Within shefame, anb te
gard and Keepe the fame from
all &itbís oz loathiome things
that might annop (t, and bis
fernice is not certaine,but hee
malt baue regard to that
$obích íg commanded bnto
him, Bnd therenpon he íg
called: nt, A quo
preftandum feruitium incer-
tum X indcterminatum , vbi
fcire non poterit vefpere, quale
feruitium fieri debet. mane,
viz. vbi quis facere tenetur
quicquid ei præceptum fucrir,
Bs bcfoge hath beene obfer-
wed. Bnd Littleton fayeth
hereafter , Ghat no other
thing tg fata to be regardant
bnt onelp a dillane: (1)
Pet in olo Wakes ít wag
fomctímeg applied to Serut-
ces,


q Ingrofe,igthat
which belongs to the perfon
of the lozd, and belongeth
not to anp Wannoz, Lands,
ec.


Pis nebeth

no explanas

tíon. but to
abdve tbe fapíng of ati
antient Author, Scr-
uage de home eft fub-
ie&ion, iffuantde cy
grand antiquitie, que
nul franke coppe poet
eftre troue per humane
remembrance.


d


gro


TO F fine. Bn La⸗
tyne, Finis. (1) Ideo
dicitur finalis. cone

cordia, quia imponit finem li-

tibus, & eft exceptio perempe

toria. (m) Finis cft amicabi-
liscompofitio & finalis con-
cordia cx confenfü & licentia


tl eft, ount efte feifies

bun billein et De fes an⸗

ceftozs, come Des Vil⸗

leins en groſſe, De tépg

dont memozie ne curt,

fe font Willeines en
e


Of Villenage.


billein regardant eft
ficome home eft (eit
Dun Manũ à que bn
billein eft regardãt,
& celup que eft feifie
Del Dit manítou ceux
q̃ eſtat il ab en meſm̃
le mannoz ount efte
feifes Dele Dit billein
&Dcfeg Aunceftors,
come bílleíng a ntefs
regardants a mefme
le manno? De temps
Dont memozie ne
curt, Ct villeine en
groffe eft, lou bn hie
feifiedun Mannor a
que bn billeine ett re-
gardant, & il graunt
mefit le billein p fon
fait abn aut, Dongs
il eft billein en grofie,
& nemy regarDant,


Sed. 182.


Tem (f bn hie a fes
Anceftorzs que bre


Sel. 183.


CE T hic nota, que
Fe chofes d
nepoiétefte grants,
ne aliés fang fait ou
fine, home que boile
auer tiels choles per
pie


Seé.182.183.


Avillein regardant is,
as if aman be feifed of
a Mannor, to whicha
villeine is regardant,
and he which is fcifed
ofthe faid Mannor,
or they whofe eftate
he hath in the farte
Mannor, haue beene
feifed ofthe Villein &
of his Anceftours as
villeins & niefs regar-
dant to the fame man-
nor time out of me-
mory ofman. And vil-
leinin groffe is, where
a man feifed of a Man-
nor wherunto a villein
is regardat,& granteth
thefame villein by his
Deed to another, then
heisa villeiningroffe,
andnot regardant.


Lío if aman and his
Anceftours whofe


heirehe is, haue beene
feifed of a Villeine, and
of his Aunceftors as of
Villeines in Groffe, time
out of memorie of man,
Thefe are Villeines in
Groffe.


AN D heere note,

that fuch things
which cannot be gran-
ted nor aliened with-
out Deed or Fine, a
man which will haue


Lib.2.


pretcription, ne poct
auterment preſcriber
fozique en lup, een
fes Aunceltozs que
heire ti eft a nemp pet
ceux parols, ceu iup
fet ceuz que eftate tl
ad, P ceo Gil ne poet
auer lour eftate fans
fait ou auter efccip-
ture, le quel couient
dette monfire a le
court, & il boile auer
afcun aduantage De
ceo, Ct pur ceo que
le grant + alienation
dun Hilleineen gros
ne gift fas fait ou aut
 efceiptut boe ne poit
pſcriber ẽ vn billein €
gros (as mõſtrãs ð⸗
fccíptut, finon en (op
meſme que clatme le
billeine, a en (eg An⸗


. £efto?9 que beire tl


eft, Mes tiels cho
fes que font cegat-
pants ou appendats
a ou manno2, ou à
auters terres x Te⸗
nements home poct
prefcriber que il et
ceux que eftate tl ad,
queurfueront ferfies
De le Mannoz, ou de
tiels terres a Tene⸗
ments, ac, ont efte
{eifies Detiels choles
come regardants ou
appendants a £ma-
1102, Ouatiels reg x
tenements,oe temps
Dont memozic, ac,
€t lacanfe c(t, put
ceo que tíel Mano,


Es


Of Villenage.


fuch things by pre-
{cription, canot other-
wile prefcribe, but in
him and in his Aunce-
ftors whofe heire hee
is, and not by thefe
words, In him & them
wife eftate hee hath,
forthat he cánot haue
their eftate without
Deed or other Wri-
ting, the which ought
to beefhewed to the
Court,if hee will take
any aduantage of it.
And becaufethe grant
and alienation of a vil-
leine in groffe ; lieth
not without Deed or
other Writing, aman
cannot prefcribe in a
Villein in grofle,with-
out fhewing forth a
Writing, butin him-
{elfe which claimsthe
Villeine, and in his
Aunceftours whofe
heire hee is. But of
fuch things which are
regardant or appen-
ding to a Mannour,
orto other lands and
tenements, aman may
prefcribe,that hee and
they whofe eftate hee
hath who were feifed
ofthe Mannour, or of
fuch lands and Tene-
mernts, &c. haue bin
feifed ofthofe thines,
as regatdant or .ap-
pendant to the mannor


Sec 185.


Domini Regis, vel cius Iufti-
ciariorum. (n) Talis concor-
dia finalis dicitur eo quod fi-
nem imponit negotio, adeo vt
neutra pars litigant ab eo de
cætero poterit recedere, DE
thefenerall parts of a fine,
amb manp incidents to the
fame, pou fhaliread in my Re-
ports.


« Que eflate, &c.
Quorü tatum,as much to fap,
Tobofe cffate he hath, bere
Littleton Declareth one excel⸗
lent rule, (o) Ghat a man
cannot picfcríbe inanp thing
bya que eflare, that lyeth tin
giant, and cannot paffe With:
out Ded oz fine, but (n him
and his Dunceltezs he map,
becaufc he comes inbpotfcent,
Without anp connepance.
Neither can a man plead a
que eftate in Htufelfe, of anp
thing that cannot pa(Te with⸗
out Ded, (p) but in anoc
ther he map, ag tn barre of an
auoweie, the qDiaintife map
Plead, a que eftate ín the ſetg⸗
niozie in the auowant, Wut
Littletons $po30g are to bee
obfertied, ( Home que voile
auer tiels chofes per pre(cripti-
on) Gherefore (q) ben a
thing that lieth in graunt te
but a conuepance to the thing
Claimed bp prefcription, there
a que eftate map bee alledged
of a thing thatlicthin grant,
as aman may pzefcríbc , that
he and big Anceſtors, and ali
thole whoſe eſtate hee hath in
an Bundzed, baue time ont of
mind, hada Let, ec, this
is god, Ec.

(r) Kegularly tbe Plain⸗
tife (ball not intitle him bp A
queeftate, but hee muft thew
how be cameby it, but after
Auowꝛie made, the Diaintife
fbail plead a que eflate , bes
cauſe he is now becomeas a
Defendant,

(f) 31 man map plead, A
quc eftate of a tenure in tatle,
020€ an cítate foz life,fo as be
auerreth the lifeofthem , but
be cannot plead a que eftate, of
a at foz peares, 02 at

{ 12


orto fuch lands & te- wii


nements time out of
mind of man: And the
Dh


(t) A 3Dfffeifot, Abatour,
Intruder, iñccoueroz. 02 anp
other that commetb in the —


121


(u)Lib.9.cap.3.Sratue. de
Modo lewandi Fines. .


Pl.('em.357.


Lib. 5 . fol.38.Tayes cafe.


(0)23..4f 53. 33.4ff: 6.
12.H.7.x0.18.


(p239:H.6.8.18.E.4.21;


(ari. H. 4.89. 19.R 2.
AGtion fur be cafe AA
13.6.3. Br.6 24.


(r)o.E. 4.3.6.29. A590
2. H.6. 10. 48. E, 3. Tit, 33-
3.H.28.


(£) 41.4] 2.40. Mas.
2.H.4.20. 1$. E. 4.1,
5.H.7.39. 18.E.4.10.

3. €.6.Tit. Que e[late Br. 31,
27.H.6.3. 7. El. Dyer 238.


(t) 23. H.6. 34 6. E. 4.15,
31. H.8. Que eflate Br.48,
39H. 6.14. 9. H. S. Eflop.a «


Lib.2.


(u)rs. H.4.81,27. H. 6.33.


9. E.4.3. 3.2.6.111.que
effete,. 1. E.6.qne «fate,


Bir.45.


Vide $48. 1.

(W) s. Ap. 8H. 4.5.
28.H,8.Dier.30.b.

PI, Com.381.F.N.B.
fe.385. =


(x) 43. Afp10.
43,E.3. 22.


(y) Hill & Granges safe.
renal


(2) 1 H.7.34.Pl. (om. 169.


(a) 5.4. 9.


(b) 10.F.3.5. 37 H.6.34.


26.H,8. 4. lib. 4. fo. 36.37.
in Tirringhams cafe.


(apii.


ſhall plead a que eftate.

(v) 2 que eftare mu
alledgen (m the Œenant 02
Detendant himſelte, and not
in one in the meanc conuep=
ancefrom whom hee clapmeth
and pet fome bakes be to the
contrary,


-


Of Villenage.


ou tres 3 tenemts,
popent pallet per a⸗
lienation fang fait,
tc,


Se#.184.,


reafonis for that füch
manor or lands and te-
nements may paffe by
alienation without
deed, &c.


¶ Le quel covsent deffe monſtre al court. @bhe reafon tobeteof a


Dede that is pleaded onght to be thewed to the Court is,becauſe eucrp Dede mult prone tt
fcifc to auc fufficient words tn Law Sohereof the Court mult adiudge, and alfo to bee pzouen
bp others ag bp witnelles oz other preofetE the Dede be denied wyich is matter of fac.

€ Per alienation ſauns fait, &c. Hexe by (&c.) 18 implyed, that
Ghatioener palleth bp Liuery of leilin either ts Deede oꝛ in Law, map falle without Deve,
and not only the Rents andferuices parcell of tbe Mannoz hall with the vemeanes ag tbe


moze principal and worthy patle bp Liuerp without Desde,


bat ali things regardant, appens


dant, and appurtenant to tbe Mannoꝛ as incidents 07 adlunds to the fame ſhall together with
the Wannoz pafte Without 3D coe, all which, ag here it appcarctb, and elfe-Sobere tg Said (all
pafle without faping Cum pertinentijs. — —


CR eed , Vi-
de Secf. 181.

€ Appendants. Ap=
penvantis anp tnberitance
belonging to another that
is fuperiour 02 moze woꝛ⸗
thy. Jin law ít te called
Pertinens quafi invicem te-
nens holding one another, a
oz indifferent both to
things appendant and things
appurtenant, the quality and
nature of the things bot make
the difference, but regardant


Setlion 184.


CE Cettatcauoir,
E que nul chofe
e(t nofine regardant
abn mano2,ac.fozfqs
billein, mes certeine
auters choles come
abuotofon « cõmon
be patture, ac, font
nofmes appendants
almannoz ou al fres
ætenements.#c,


Nd itis to be vn-


derftood that no- '


thing is named regar-
dant to a mannor,&c.
butavilleine, but cer-
taine other things as
an aduowfon, & com-
mon of pafture,&c.
are named appendant
tothe mannor or to
the lands and tene-


(ag our Authoz fatth) (e onip
appited to a bilicine. (w ) Ape ments, &c.
pendants are ener bp preſcription, but appurtenantg map be created in fomecafes at this dap.
Bs (£a man at this dap arant to a man andbis hetres common tn fuch a moore foz bis beatae
lcauant 02 couchant vpon bts mannoz, 02 {€ be grant to another common of Eftouers of tur
barp in fe fimple to be burnt o2 {pent within bis inannoz, bp tbefe grants thefe Commons
are appurtenant to the mannoz, and {hall paffe bp the avant tbercot Jin the cíattl Law (t is Cale
Jed Adjunctum. ;
(x) Ff A. beſctſed ofa mannoz Sobereunto the franchife of Soaífeanb flrap and fuch like
are appendant, and the hing purchafeth the mannoz With theappurtenances,neW are the rops
all Franchtfes reunited to tbc Crowne, and not appendant tothe Wannoz,but (£ he arant the
mannoz in ag large and ample manner ag A- had, ac, tt (g fato that the ffranchifeg ball bec aps
pendant ( ozrather appurtenant ) to tbe Mannoꝛ.

Concerning things appendant e appurtenant,two things avc implied, ( y ) Firſt that preſctip⸗
tion (Which regul rip te tbe mother thereof ) doth not make anp thing appendant oz appurte=
nant, dniefle the thing appendant 63 appurtenant agree ín qualttp anb nature to che thu wher⸗
unto it is appenbant 02 appartenant, as a thing cozpozeall cannot properip bee appen tea
thing cozpozeall, noz a thing incozpozealito a thing incozpozeall, But things incdfageeall
Spbíct ipe tn grant ag Aduowſons, Willeines, Commons and the like, map bee appendant ta
things cozporcall, ag a a Mannoꝛ houſe 02 lands, o2 things cozpezeall to things tncosporeall, ag
lands toan D ffíce, (2) But pet/as hath beene fato) thep muſt agree in nature and quality, fos
(a) common of Œurbarp o? of Eftoners cannot be appendant oz appurtenantto land, but toa
boufe, te be fpent there. (b) Noꝛ a Leete that ta temposall, toa Œburchoz Chappell which te
Ecclellaſticall Metther cana Mobleman, Efquire,gc, clapme a feate in a Charch bp paefcrips

tton


0


Lib.2. Of Villenage. Se#18 4.


tion ag appendant o? belonging to land, buttea honfe,foz that ſuch à feat belongeth to tbe houſe
inrefpes of theinbabitancie thercof, andtherefore tf the boule bee part of a Mannoꝛ, pet tn
that cafe he map clapme thefeate as appendant to the houfe £o? the reafon a£osefato,

Secondip, that nothing can be properly appendant op appurtenant to anp thing vnleſſe the
principal ozfuperíonr thing bee of perpetuall fubfiftance and continuance, fo example. 2n
Aduowſon, that (s fatd tobe appendant toa Mannoz, (gin rei veritateappendant to the De⸗
mefnes of the Mannos, Which are of perpetuall ſubſiſtance anb continuance, and net to Rents
opferuices, Which are ſabiect toertinguifhment and deftruction.

An Aduowſon is appendantto the Mannoꝛ of Dale, of Which APannoz the Mannoꝛ of
Sale ts holden, the Wannoz of Sale tg made parcell of the Wannoz of Dalc by wap of Œfchcat,
the Aduowſon tg onlp appendant to the Mannoꝛ of Dale.

And Where it tg fato that a chambet may beparccilof a Coꝛody, and paflebp the name of the
Coop Which map be cetinguithed, there be thathaththe Cozodp hath but his habitation in
the chanber,ag a jreiloxo of Trinity Collenge in Cambridge hath in bis chamber, o as one
that hada Coꝛody and a chamber in an houfe of Religion, hehad but his habitation onlp. Bs
£o: D ffíceg of fee Whereuntoland map appertaíne thep are of perpetual fubüftance;citber being
in effe, o1 in that they are grantable ouer.

otethatan Aduowſon at one turne map be appendant, and at another Curnein grofle,
ag tf the Maunoꝛ be deutded betwWeene Coperceners, anb euerp onehathapart of the Man⸗
hoz Without faping any thing of the Aduowſon appendant the Aduowſon remames incoper-
cenarie, and pet in everp of their turnes, tt (g appendant to that part Which thep baue ; and fo
ttts (€ thep make compofitton to pꝛeſent againſt cominon right, pet it remaines appendant. But
{€ vpon fuch a partition an expꝛeſſe exception be made of the Aduowſon, then the Aduowſon
remaines in Sopercenarie ano ín grofle, and foare the bokes reconcticd,


¶ Comon de paffure. (c) Communia, Ft commeth of tbe Engliſh
$0010 Common, becaufe tt ts common to many, anb thereupon, and accozdingip (s here caller
bp Littleton Common of palture, for that the feeding of beaks in the land Swbercin the Com⸗
mon ts to be had belongs to many. fas Y

(d) Chere be fourekindeg of Common of paffure,viz. Common appendant Swbich te of
common right, ( and therefore a man need not prefcribe foa (t) for beaſts commonabie (that is)
that ferue fos the matntenance of the plough, as bozfe and oxen to plow the land, and foz kine
arid fheepe to conipelter the land, and is appendant to arrable land.

(e) Gt be fecond ts Cõmon appurtenant that ts foꝛ beaftg not commonable,as ſwine, goates,
and thelike. (Ff) It aman purcbafe part of the lanb wherein dLonimon appendant is to bee
dad, the Common fhalbe apportioned, becaufe tt ts of commonright, butnet fo of a Common
appurtenant, o» of any other Common of what nature ſoeuer. Wutboth Common appendant
and appurtenant, ſhalbe appoꝛtioned bp alienation of part of tbe land to Which Common ts
appendant 02 appurtenant,and fo? Common appurtenant one mult pzefcribe,

(2) Che third is Common per caufe devicinage, Which dtfereth from beth the other Com⸗
mons, £o? that no man can put bis beaffs theretn, but thep mult efcape thither of themfclues
bp reafon of vicinity, th which cafe onemap Incloſe againſt tbe otber, though ít bath beene fo
bien time out of mide, fo? that tt és but an ercufe oz trefpalle,

Eheiakis Common in grofle, Which te fo called for that (t appertatncth to noland,and muſt
be by writing o2 pacfcription. xDf Common appendant, appurtenant, and tn grofle, fome bee
certaine, that is for acertatne number of beatts, fome certaine by confequent,viz. foz{uchag be
Tenant and couchant bpon the land, andfome be moze incertaine, ag common (auns number in
grotte, and pet the Tenant of the land mult common o? feed there alfo.

& pere bee alfo (h ) diners other Commons as of Eftouers, of Turbary, of Wifcharpe, of
digging fo? Coles, Mineralis andtheitke. (i) FE Common appendant beeclapmed to a
Mannoz, pet in rei veritate it (a appendantto the Demeſnes and net to the fernices, and
therefore i£ a Tenancie efcheate, the 3,070 fhalinotencreafe his Common by reafon of that
(k) 3f à man clapme by Pzeſcription anp manner of Common tn another mans land, and
thatthe ojoncr of the land fhall beercluded to baue Paſture, Eſtouers e» the like, this te a


prefer oz cuftomt agaínft the Law, toercludethe owner of the foyle, fez (t ts againſt the
nator His Wo2d Common, and tt wag tmplpeo in the firft graunt that the owner of the
fople Ib take his reafonable proffit there, ag (t hath beene adtudged. * (1) But a man


may preferibe o? alledge a cuftome to haue and entop Solam vefturam terre, from fuch a bay
tili fucl a bap, and hereby the owner of the ſople ſhall beetcinde to paſture oꝛ fede there, ann
fo hee may pzefcribe to haue Seperalem pafturam, and exclude the owner of the fople from fee
Ding there, Nota diucrfitatem. (m) Soa manmay prefertbe tohane Seperalem pifcariam frt
fuch a$vater, and the owner of the fopic hail not fib there, but (fee clapme to baue Commu-
niam pilcharix, 02 Liberam pifchariam, the oxoner of the fople (ball fif there, and all ago

z ene


122,


5.2.6. Dier.90.b.


31.H,6.15.5.


1 3.£.2.qnar.Ipp. 170. *:
43-E. 3. 35. 13. E. 3. quar,
Imp.58. 17.E.3. 38.
9-&liC. Dier.25 9.7.E. 3030.
19. E. 3.guar. Imp.59-
35-H.6. 33.33. 38.H.6.9.
2.H.7.5.


(€) Glanuilllsb. 13.64. 36,
1 ract. Lb.4.ca.19 & 40.
THF.€4p. 55.66.57.
—— *
Mirror.ca.s §.3.
(d)r0. E.ʒ3 4dmefurement,8.
Temps €.1.Cemmon 24.17.
&.2.1bid,23.4.H.6, 22.H.6.


(e) 37.H. 6.34. 36.H.8.4.
F.*N./B.181.


(f) L155.4.f0.37.38. dre.
Torrsnghams cafe.


(p) £55.8.fo.78.79.
W Wildes cafe.


(b) Fletàvbi fapra.
(i) 18.E. s. fe. 43-


(k) 15 E.2."Prefeript. $1.
12,H.8 fs. 2.

*. Pafch. 26.Eli(.im the
Kings Bench, inter White [d
Stirlond in Com.Oxen.

Vid. Sect.1. & 2.

(1) Vid. 3.E.3.29,30.

4 E.3.7. 46.€. 3. 23.

I1 5. E. a. Prefeript.5 1.


(rm) 30. H.6. 4,
19. H.7.24.
Temps E.1, Afife 422,


Lib.2.


C i Inter Chinery & Fifben
in le Common Banke inrepleuin
er Mich.ag.& io.Eli(. in-
ter Shirlond & White wm (om,
Oxon. € inter Foifios &
Crachrede eodem termino in
Effex.

(n) 19. H.6.33.

(0) Vide Self. 541.


"Erall.lib.v.cap.6.
Brirt.fol.58.

Fleta lib. y cep. 3.43.E. 3.4.9.
19 E.2.131.v10,1 4.
18.E.4.39.

(p) 19. H.6.33. 36.4.63.
37-417. |

11. H, 4.6. in Appeale.


AUGE, s.tít vill. 6.


19.H.6.32.6.


F.N. B. 161. 4
Ragikt.132.07 275.

"Britton. fel.20.

"Brad. lib. 3.tra.2.caeol 2.13
Fletalib.1.cap.18.
3-H. § ts. wrlawrie Statham.


Wecift erige 32.


(Cap.11. Of Villenage.  Seil185186:


benerefolned, (*) Bnd therefore tt is neceffary for euerp man bp learned aduice to pleadeaccos=


Ding to the truth of hts cafe £02 Parols font plea. W-
(4) À man fetfco of land $of;crcunto common ts appendant, andis difleifed, tbe Difleifeæe


cannot bfc the common bnttll he cntretb into the land Sohcreunto (t is appendant, (o But it a
man be dideiled of a Mannoz whereunto an Aduowſon ts appendant , hee map prefent bnto
the Douowfon before he enters into the Mannoz , andthe reafon of this bínerfitic ia becaufg
in the cafe ofthe common tt Mould bea pretudice tothe Eenanto€ tbefoile, Foꝛ (Etbe Diflete
fee might doc it the Diffetfoz alfo might put enbis Cattle; Sobich fhonid be a Dowblecharge ta
the Genant, but not fo of tbe Aducwion,


Setl- 185.


CITem ſi home
voile en Court ð
recozd ſoy conufter
Defite billein, quene
fuit billein adeuant,


Lfo if a man will

acknowledge him
felfe ina Court of Re-
cord to bee a Villeine,
who was nota villeine
before, fuchaoneisa
Villeine in groffe.


€ E bigs is tntendedin
fome action brought
again him that
made fuch confeflion , (p ) 02
where bec ts brought into
Court hp courfe of Law, for
tEhe commeth (ntotbc Court
extrainudictalipandnotbpanp fi Hier
due courfe of Law, fuch cons tiel cit villeine en
feffíon tg without warrant groſſe.
of Law and bindeth not the
partie, becaule the Court hadno warrant to take it. But tf a Præcipe be brought againſt one
be may confetle htnfelfe villeine to an eftranger,and that he holds the Land in dillenage of him,
and this ig god anb ſhall bind him. And tf in that cafe the Demandant replp , that bec the dap
of hig tozit purchafed was a free man, andtherenpon iſſue ts taken, and heets triedto bee free
yet he (bail temapne villeine to the Granger in refpect of bis confeffon,
fa wortt of Natiuo hibend’ be brought againt onc; and the Plantilfe as he ought offereth
in bis Count to prouetbe villenage bp the Coufins and Kindred of the Defendant, and there=
bpon produceth the Uncles of the Defendant Who vpon examination confelle themfelucs tobe


billetnes to the Demandant, this confellton being entred of Record , doth fo bind, that albeit


thep Spcre fo free before, thep and the heires of their bodies are by this confeffion bondand
Uilleineg for cucr , forthe Uncles came in by oucconrfe of Law in an Deion depending in
Court,


Sed. 186.
€ NI D? Naife € JE bome que


Lfo a man which


is tn Latine sus eft billein cft ap- is a villeinis cal-
is, feu natiua, bez "Mer led a Villeine , and a

ufetor the mot part iors Pelle billets , a feme le ine , and
arebomby oai. queeftbilleieftap- woman which is Vil-
«| Feme que efl vt- pellenypefe : Sicome lein, iscalleda Neife.
lage eff dit waive. ome que eft btlage As a man which is
Waiuc, Wauiata andnot eft Dit btlage, a feme outlawed,is called out-


vtlegata oz exlex, fox that wo⸗
menare not ſworne in Lets,
O9» Tones, ag men Which
be ot the age of 12, peares oz
moze be, and therefoze men


map be called velegati, 1d eft, extra legem po


que eft btlage eft Dit
toaiue,


lawed: anda woman
which is outlawed, is
called Waiuedy


fici, bnt Svomen are Waiuiate,id eft, derdlifæJeft


out 0? not regarded, becauflerhep Were not ſwoꝛne to the Law, wherein it is to be noted that of
ancient time a man was not fato to bee Withinthe Law , that Was not fwornete the Law,
Whici is intended of the Dath of Pileagiance in the Lect,

And the Outlawꝛie of a Woman tg legally called Waiuiaria mulieris.


4.


Sect.


‘


Lib.2.


- «Qm ( bn Lil:
. . Ait», paent frank
femeafeme, & abit-
fucenter euv, liſſues
ferront Wiilleines,
Mes ſi nicfe pent
franke Dome à fa ba-
ton, lour ifues fert
franke,

* €t ceft contracte
a le ley ciuill, carla
eſt dit, Partus ſequi-
tur ventrem. *


Of Villenage.


Seit, 187.


Lío if a Villeine
taketh a freewo-
manto wife, and haue
iffue betweene them,
theiflues fhall be Vil-
leines. But ifa Niefe
taketh a freeman to
her husband, their if-
fue (hall be free.
* This is contrarie
to the Ciuill Law, for
there itis faid , Partus


fequitur ventrem. *


Se187.188.


€ GR totum ali-


mentum à flipite ca-
pit poma tamen edit
fua. he fcience takes all his
nourtthment from the ftocke,
pest produceth his own
tt


(q) Si quis de feruo patre
natus fit & matre libera pro
feruo reddatur occifus in ea
parte, quia femper à patre,non
à matre generationis ordo te-
xitur, fi pater fitliber & mater
ancilla pro libero reddatur oc-
cifus. (r) Lex Anglia nun-
quam matris fed femper patris
conditionem imitari partum
iudicat.


(C) The huſband and wife are all onc perfon in Law, aub tbe 2 (cfe marrping a freeman (s
infranchifed during the coucrture, and thercfoze bp the Common Law of England, the iſſue


(t) Si mulier ferua copulata fit libero, &c. quod partus habebit hæreditatem , & mater nul-


lam dotem,quia mortuo vire (uo libero redit in priftinum ftatum feruitutis nifi hæres ei dotem fe-
ceritdegratia. And When a bondman marricth a free woman, they are all one perfonin Law,
and Duz animz in carae vea, and vxor fubiedta eft viro, & fub poteftate viri.

(a) Obferuatur in Com’ Cornubiz de tali confuetadine,quæ talis eft quod fi liber homo du-
cat natiuam aliquam in vxorem ad liberum tenementum & liberum thorum , fi ex ea dua: pro-
creantur filiæ, vna erit libera & altera villana, quia ibi partiti funt pueri inter liberum patrem &
Dominus vxoris villanz.


(x) Qui vero procreantur ex natiua vnius; & natiuo alterius , proportionabiliter inter Domi-
nos funt diuidendi.


€ Et ceo eff contrarieal ley ciuil. For true itig that bp that Law
Partus fequitur ventrem, aſwell Shere a free man takes a bond Woman to wife, as here a
bond man takes a free Woman to wife, Fn the firſt cafe the tue te bp the Ciuill Law bond,
anb in the other free, both which Cales arc contrartetothe Law of England: but this isno

. part o£ Littleton, anb therefoze We in tbís manner patte (t ouer.


« [Gem nul ba-
*  ftatD poit eftre
hillein , (( non que tl
boíle fop conufter
eire billeine en court
De reco2d, car il eft en
ley quafi nullius filius,
pur ceo que il ne poit
enberiter a nulluy,


Seélion. 188.


Lfo no baftard

may be a villeine,
vnleffe hee will ac-
knowledge himíelfe
to bee a villeine in a
Court of Record, for
heis inlaw, quaff wul-
lius filius, becaufe he
cannotbe heiretoany.


€ N Ss (a) fins.
Cui pater eft popu-
lus,patereft fibi nul-

lus, & omnis,

Cui pater eft populus , non
habet ille patrem.

(b) Home hold that the
Baſtard of a niefe ſhall bee a
villeine. (c) And others bolo
that t£ a villeine hath a Ba⸗
ſtard bp a Woman, and after
marieth the Woman, that this
Balſard is a villeine, but the


law ig contrarie in both cafes, for in both cafes, the ifue by the Common Law isa Baltard,


and conſequently, quaſi nullius filius,
reputed fonne, pet is be not fuch a fon:


ag Littleton here faith, (d) Though a Waltard be a
ne in confideratton Swbereof an bfe can bee rapfcb foz the
Yeafon that Littleton here petidg, becaufe in tudgement of bos be ig Nullius filius. (c) And


3


fox


123


Fortescue cap. 43.

G anwill. lib. 5 .cap.6.
Hill.29.E.1. ceram Rege
Ebowro im Thefaur.


(4) Lib.rub.cap. 77.


(r) Forteffse vbi fupra .


(0) Herewith agreeth
Brittonfol.78.b.


(t) "Erat. lib.a. fol. 298.6.
Idem lih. Y .ca.6.
Mirror.cap.2.§.18.


(n) Bract.lib. a. fol.27 1.


(x) Glanwill. lib, 5.cap.6,


Fertefcwe ca. 42.


(a) Wide Se. 195.
1 3: Ex tit.villen. 36.


(b) BraR.lib.1. fel. 5.5.
Fletalib, x .cap. 3+
Britton, fel .78.

(€) 39.E.3. 34: 41. E.3. 4.


"Brtton.vbi ſuvra.


(d)33.Eli7. Dier. 374.


(6) a3. Eix Dicr. ayẽ.


Lib.2.


14.Eliz "Dier.313.
18. Elis; Dser.345.


Set?.189.i90, |


l


-


Capi. Of Villenage.


fo? the fame reafon Sobere the Statute of 32.H.8.ef wils fpeaketh of Chtidzen , baftard chil=
dzen arc not Within that Statute, anb the baftard ofa Woman ts ne child Within that Stas
tute bere the mother conueps Lands bnto him.

(£) Ft was found bp verdict that Henrie the fonne of Beatrice Which Wag the wife of Robert
Radwell deceafed, ag bozne per vndecim dies poft vltimum tempus legitimum mulieribus con-
ftitutum. Bnd thereupon ít Was adiudged, Quod diétus Henricus dici non dcbet filius przdi&i
Roberti fecundum legem & confuetudinem Angliz conftitut’. Qow Legitimum tempus tn that
cafcappotntcb by Law at tbe furthett is nine moneths, 02 foꝛtie weekes, bnt ſhee map He delle
ucrebbefoze that time, which tubgement 3] thought aoo tomention. And this agretb With

that in Efdras. Vade & interroga pregnantem, fi quando impleuerit nowem menfes fuosad huc
poterit matrix cius retinere partum in femetipfa ? & dixi, non poteft Domine.


Sed. 189.


€ I Cem chefcun
billein eft able &


CE) Trin.18.E.1.Rot.61,
"Bedf. coram Rege.


4. Efdeas 4.41.
Vide Pancirell, nena reperta,


p4g-48 5.06.


€ Cds Villeine


AES euery Villein
eff able & franke


is able and tree to


(p) Brall.lib.4. fol 1 96. fue all manner of A-


de [ner dre. (g)^dn an
Adton brought by a vilicine.
Verfusnon Dominum , non
valebit ei exceptio , quia eft
cruus alienus ex quo nihil ad
ipfum vtrum liber fit an fer-


¢h) 14.2.4.6.5. 15.E. 432. vus. (b) And it isto bee obs


obſerued, that hee that hath
but a particular eftate in a
villeine, az tenant foz life oz
fo? peares ſhall bifable the
btlicinett be bzings an action
againft him, but the Aeftoz
fbali not (as it is fato )difable


franke de fuer touts
manete Dactions cn-
uers chefcun perfon,
korſpris enuers fon
S»eignío? a que tl eft
billein, Ct vncorꝛe en
cettein chofes il poit
auer action enuers
fon Seignioz, Car
il poit auct enuers


étions againft euery
perfon, except againft
his Lord to whom he
is villeine : and yet in
certain things he may
haue againft his Lord
an Action, for hee
may haue againft his
Lordan action of a


bim, Ci) Examinaio villena fon Seignioz bnac= peale for the death of

gi) non tenet, má exore vert tion Dappeak ö mort his father, or of his o-
i fueri . 5

pu RU p a fon pere, ou dauters ther Anceftors whofe


€ Appeale. Appel-


lum commeth of the french


De Ps auncefters que


heire he is.


woꝛd A ppeller, that fignificth bette il eft,
teaccufe, 0? toappeach, Bn Appeach, (k) An Appeale (g an accufation of onebpon another
Swith a purpofe to attatnt him of felonicbp Swords ordained fog (t. A

€ De mort (|) for a villeine fball not haue an appeale of robberie
agatntt big 1,025, fo? that he map laSofulip take the gods of the bíllcine ag big owne,(m) And’
{Finan Appeale of death it be found foz the Plaintiſfe, he is enfranchifed for cucr, Hinc enim
eft quod co ipfo funt huiufmodi Domini feruos fuos amrífuri cum de irfiurijs fucrint conuiai.
Dndthere ig nodiuerfitie herein Whether De bea billefne regardant, 02 ingroſſe althenghfome
haue ſaid the contrarie.


(ic) Britt cap.11.f0l.38.
‘Bratton, lib.1.fol.6.

(1) 18. E. 3. 32. 11.H.4,9 3.
1. H.4.6. 29.H.6.tit.
Corene 17.


(m) Fleta li. Yea 5.1, H. 4.6


Seétion 190.


€ A d bn faicfe Lfo a Niefe that

que eft rauie is rauifhed by her
per fafeignioz, poít Lord, may haue an
gaín(t her Soil, auct bn appeale De Appeale of Rape a-

CC Appeale de rape. vapeenuersluy, gainft him.

15» the aencrall puruie of the Statutes, (*) that gine the Appeale of Rape, tbe Niete
fhalihane an Appeale o£. Rape agaínft the lord. (o) And it feemeth bp tbc ancient Author
of the Law, that this fo hatnous an offence was feuerelp puntihed by lofíc of cpc and pztute


members, but of olb time (t Sag Felony Which pou map reade at large in the fecond part of the
Inſtitutes W.1-cap.13.
Cp) Bad


(n) Mirrer.ca.1.§.12.
Cap.z.derape. dr cap.4.de
mieide,


€ R Ape. (n)raptus
{s when a man bath
carnall knowledge


of a Woman bp koꝛce and as


(9 Hirct.13. W.2.64,35.
6.R.2.6a.6, 11:H.4.64p.13.
x, F. 4.eap, 1.

(0) 29. H.6.tit. ('eren.17.
Brali. lib, 5. fel. 147.


|


Lib.


Of Villenage.


Secl. 191.195.


Dthis word Rape Which our Author here vleth{e fo appropriated bp La to this
oan — ) itcannot beexpzeſſed bp anp PeriphzaGe oz circumlocuti⸗
ont, £g? Carnaliter cognovit cam 6; the ithe will not (true,


Up ( n bill
€A foit fait ere-
cut à bn auter, & le
Hiir del billeine fuit
en Dette a le teftatos
en bn certeine fumme
Dargent que net mp
paie, en ceo cafe le
Yilleine come erecu-
toz Dele teftatoz aue-
ra action De Det en-
uers fon feignioz, pur
ceo Gil ne recoucra le
Debt a fon ble Demefne,
meg al ble le teftatoz.


[Cem le Sũr nt

poit prender hors
Del poffe(fíon De tiel
villein G eft executor
les biens le mort, &
fil face, le billeine coe
epecuto? auera actí-
on Dc trefpafle De
mets les bñs (Mint
prifes enuers fon
Sfr, a recouera daz
mages al bfeletefta-
to», Des en touts
tiely cales, il couiẽt
quela Sfr que eft
Defendant en tielx
actions face paote-
ftatíon, j le plaintife
eft (on billein, ou au-
terment le billeine
fertà enfranchife,co-


Section 191.


Lfo if a villeine

be made executor
to another,and the Lord
of the villeine was in-
debted to the teftator
in a certaine fumme of
money which is not
paid, In this cafe the
villeine as executor of
the teftater fhall haue
an action of debt againft
his Lord , becaufe hee


€() this matter


fuffictent bath

bene fpoken in

thie chapter before. Œho
villeine fhall have am
Scion as Executoꝛ as
Zain bis Lord, amb ít
ig no plea fo; the Loꝛd,
to fap that the 391aíntífg
ts bis diileine, for be
fall not be enfranchi⸗
fed bp the bfer of this
adíon, becaufe hee bath
ítbpa gift (m Lawe to
€ ble of the Geffatos


fhall not recouer the and net to bis one


debt to his own vfe, but


fe,


tothe víe ofthe teftator.


Sed, 192.


Lfo the Lord
may not take out


CE Seignior ne poes
L prender. bors del


of the poffeffion of peffefsiem,dc. DE this


fuch villeine who is
Executorofthe goods
of the deceafed,and if
he doth, the villeine
as execntor fhall haue
an ation for the fame
goods fo taken againft
his Lord, and fhall re-
couer damages to the
vie of the teftator. But
in all fuch cafes, it be.
houeth that the Lord
which is defendant in
fuch actions maketh
proteftation that the
plaintife is his villein,
or otherwife the vil-
leine fhall bee infran-


alfo fuficient bath bene fato
before.

@ Et reconera. da-
mages al vſe del teffator,
(q) Mote damages recoue⸗
red by the Executor in an
adíon of treſpaſſe fball bee af
fets, and ee thep Mere never
tn the teſtatorꝛ · Bnd fe it is
in other libe cafes ag bp our
bookes tt appeareth,

(1) FE an Exccutoꝛ hath a
billeine fo? peares, and the
dilleine purchales lands tn fe
the Erecutoz entrech, he halt
haue the Whole fe Gmple, but
becaufe he bab the billes in
auter droit,viz. ag Grecutop
tothe bíc of the dead ít thall
be aflets in bis bands, Note
a Diuerfitie between the quans
titie of the cftate and the
qualit ie of ít, £o» the daw res
{peaeth wot the quantity of
the etate , foz mot onip

| (f) Senant


14


(p) 9.2.4.26.
Miren ca-i. S. 13.


LL
21, E. 4.50.8,


\


(9) 31. E, 4.4.6.
11 H.6. 35.5. 3.H,6,2.
3.H.4511. 1. H. 4.6.


(e) DoF. & Sid. Brooke
nir. Vallonage,7@.


Lib.2.


(f) L:5.E.4.ér.


(t) a R.6.37.


(à) 41.E.x1.


(1) 18.53.29.


Vi. Se®.193-
(x) PL. Com. 276.5 In Greif-


broks cafe.


Britt.fal.79.125.6.126.6.


(a) 7.E.3.56. 26.€.3.73.
38.E.3.34. 40.E.3.36.
43.E.3.4. 31. 44.6. 3.36.
47. E. 3. 26. 32. H.6. 52.
35.H.6.12. 39. H.6.14.
"Vide Se. 534.


(b) 2. Mar. Dier. 112.


(e) Fortefine,c4.42-


Cap i1.

(€) Genant ín taíle and Te⸗
want Foz life of a villeine {hall
haue the perquifite of the vil⸗
leine in fee, but (t) Œcnant
fo) peares and Œenant at
Swill alfo fbatl haue tt tn fee.


Wat the Law refpecteth the qualit


Of Villenage.


ment que Ie matter
foit troue ÿ le Sir,
a encounter E bitletn,
come eft Dit,


te, fo2 in Sobat right he hath the Hi illeine, in thefame right
fhati be have the porquifite, ag tn the cafe of the Execute; aboue faid,and tn the cafe of the Wis
fbop Cu) that hath the Uilleine in right of his Church, he Mall baue the perquifite inthe fame —


ri t. 1
Ke So tf aman bath a Uilletne in the right of his Wife, be ſhall haue tbe perquifite alfo —


!


SeH.193:


chifed although the |
matter bee found for
the Lord,& againftthe
villeine as itis faid.


in her right. Wut (£ the purchafe be after í(iue had, then the Maron thai hauctheperquifitero —
bím ano bis heiress, becaufe bp tbe (Inc hee is intituled to bee Tenant bp tbe Curtefie in big —


owne right.


«; Prote[lation.(x)Proteftatio (g an excluſion of à conclufion,that & «
partie to an Action may by pleading incurre, 02 itis afafegard to the pattie Which keepeth hins
from being conciuded bp the plea be (s to matic, tf the iſſue be fonnd fo» him: but in this cafe


without a proteftation, albcit the tue be found foz the 3020 , the Villeine thai be enfrancht-


fco, ag it appeareth hereafter in thie Section.


CCE ferra trie ett le
le Countie, cc.
Be tried, that is ag tt ts in-
tended bp the verdict of rti.
men, that is calied in Law a
trial triatio.

(a) In this cafe tbe La
Doth fauout the bilicine in the
lue, fo; otherwife by the
vulc of iu tn like cafes hee
ougbttoanfsoer to the ſpeci⸗
all matter,viz. to the regar=
dancy, but in kauour of itber=
tphee map reply that bee ts
free and of free eftate, and
confequentlp this tine con-
cerning the perfor hall bee
trted where the Wait ts
brought. (b) he like law
ít ig, t£ ifluc bee fopned port
the Ideocy of the Plain⸗
tife oz 3Defenbant (t hall bee
rico where the ait íg
bought becaufc tt concerneth
the perfor,

In fauorem liber-


tatis. Ft (8 common-
ipfatd that three things be fa-
uoured tn Law, Like, Libertp,
Dower,

(c) Impius & crudelis iu-
dicandus eft qui libertati non
favet: Anglix iura in omni ca-
fü libertati dant favorem.

, Erpail ts to finde ont bp
buceramination the truth of
thepoint tn iſſue o2 queftion
betwerne the parties, Wheres


Setl. 193.


€ jaan fi billeine

ſuiſt bn actio De
trefpaffe.ou bu auter
action enuers fon
Sat en bn Countte,
a le &vüt bit Gil ne
{crrarefpondus, pur
ceo qui e(t fon villein
regardant a fon ma⸗
102 cn auter Coun-
ty, ele 3Dlaíntite Dit
quetlett franke a De
franke cftate,a nemy
villeine, ceo ſerra trie
en le Countie Tou ie
laintife auoit con-
ceiue fon actíon,a ne⸗
mpent county lou le
manoz eft, a ceo eft in
fauorem libertatis, &
put cel caufe bn efta-
tute fuit fait an.o.R.
2.cap.2. te feto? De
quel enfuift en titel
forme, tem pur la
ou plufozs billeins,+
Neikes, fibien Des
graundes Seigni⸗


028


Lfo if a villeine

fueth an action of
trefpaffe or any other
action againft his Lord «
in one Countie, and
the Lord faith that he
fhall not bee anfwered
becaufe hee is his vil- |
leine regardant to his
mannor in another
County, & the plain-
tife faith that hee is
free, and of a free c-
ftate, and not a villein,
this fhall bee tried in
the Countie where
the Plaintife hath
conceiued his action, -
and not in the County
where the mannor is,
and thisis in fauour of
liberty. And for this
caufe a ftatute was
made anno 9.R.2.64.20 —
the tenor whereof fol-
loweth in this forme.
Alfo for that where
many villeins & neifs;


\


Lib.2.


o28,come Des auters
gentes, (ibit efpirt-
tualg come tempo-
vals fenfuent, deins
cities billes, a lieux
enfranchife, come cn
la citie De Londzes,
æauters femblables,
& feignont diuers
fuits enuers lour
S» ürg a cauſe de cur
fait franks pet Le re-
{pos Delout Sirs:
‘Accozde eft a aſſen⸗
tus, qies ſeignioꝛs.
neauters, ne fovent
my fozbarres de lour
Willeines per caufe
Dc lour refpons en
ley. Per force De quel
eftatute, ſi aſcun bít-
leine voylloit fucr
afcunmaner De acti-
onafon ble Demefne
en afcun Countic, ou
left fozt a trier en-
uers fon Seignior?
Siar port eflper de
pleader que le plaín-
tife eft fon villeine ou
De faire proteftation
que tl eft fon billets,
& De pleder fon auter
matter en barre, Ct
fiis font aíffuc, &
liffue foit trouc put le
St, Dong E villein
eff villeine come tl
fuit Deuant per force
De mefme leftatute,
Mes ( le iſſue foie
troue pur le billeine,
Donque le hilleine eft
franke,pur ceo que le


OF Villenage.


afwellof great Lords
as of other men afwell
of fpirituall and tem-
porall flye and goe in-
to Cities, Townes and
places franchifed as
intothe Citie of Lon-
don and other like
places,and feyne di-
uers fuitesagain{t their
Lords becaufe they
would make them-
felues free by the an-
fwer of their Lords. It
is accorded and affen-
ted, that Lords nor o-
thers fnall not be fore-
barred of their villeins
by reafon of their an-
{wer in Law. By force
of which ftatute ifany
villeine will fue any
manner of action to
his owne vfe in any
County where it is
hard to trie againft his
Lord, the Lord may
choofe whether he wil
pleadthat the plaintife
is his villeine,or make
proteftation that hee is
his villeine, and plead
his other matter in
barre. Andif theybe
at iffue, and the iffue
be found forthe Lord,
then the villeine is a
villeine as hee was be-
fore by force of the
fame ftatute. But ifthe
iffue bee found for the
villeine, then the vil-
leine is free, becaufe
that the Lord tooke


3


Seé.193.


upon tudgement may bee gís
uen, Andas the queftion bes
tíocne the partics (c two⸗
fold, fo ts the tríall thercof:
foz either it tg queftio iuris,
(and that thailbetriedbp the
Judges either bpor a Des
murrer, ſpeciall berdic o2 ex⸗
ception, fo» Cuiliber in fua
arte perito eft credendum : &
quod quifque norit in hoc fe
exerceat, and ít is commonip
andtruly fato, Ad queftionem
iuris non refpondent iurato-
res; )O2 ft is quæftio fadi. Bnd
the triail of the fact to in bte
uers forts Sobereof a light
touch ig giuen befoze, Sect.
102. of thele a tríall bp rif.
men ( here intended bp Litrle-
ton ) ts the moft frequent and
common, Bnd fone fe rules
of Law, are neceflarp here to
beremembzed ( for the better
vnderſtanding of the bokes
of Law bercafter ) where and
from What place,viz. De quo
viceneto, out of what neigh⸗
bourbo tbe Jury chall come,
a neceffary point to bee
knowwne,fo2 if there bee a miſ⸗
treat, (that ts) tf the Jury
commeth out of a wong
place, oꝛ returned bp a Wrong
officer and gine a berdit,
tudgement ought not to bo
given vpon fuc) a verdict.
( d )wherein the mo(t generall
tulc tg, that euerp trpall (bali
bcoutof that Cowne, Pa⸗
rith, o: Damict, ov place
hnoxoncout of the towne, ac,
Within the Kecord, within
which the matter of fact (itus
able (s alledged which ig moſt
certaine and neereſt thereun=
to, the Inhabitants Whereok
map haue the better and moze
certaine knowleoge of the
tad: ag tl the fact be alledged
in quadam platea. vocat
King (reet in civitate Weftm.
in com’ Midd. tn thts cafe
the Viſne cannot come out of
Platea, becaufe (t is neither
Œowne, Parith, Bamict,noz
place ont of the ncighbour-
hod whereof a Fur? map
come bp Law;but tn this cafe
it ball not come out of weſt⸗
mínfter but ont of the arith
of Sf, Margarer becauſe that
íg the mof certaine. But

therets


125


Vid.Sc8.234.


Vid.5e4.101.


Vid.Seld, 23 aumoreof this


matter.


(4) 31.8.3473. 22. H.6. 30.
7.H.4.27. 9.4.5.8.


Lib,


(e) 4.2.3.30.8.2.3.68.
37. H.6.13. Brooke pleading
61.


(€) 4.E.4.41. 5. E.4.20.
22.E.4.2.35 H,6.30.
32.H.6.47. lib.1.162.
Dagęes cafe.lib. v y.fo. 25.
bb.6.f1.14.

(g) 1.E.5.8. 7 H.6.58.
(h) 22.E.4.rit.uife F.27-
6.H.9.3.b6 11.H.2.7.22.b.
9.E.4:3.4.1.£.4.26.

39. H.6.trefp.9 3.4. E. 3.30.


*. Lib. 6 fo. 34. Arundels cafe.
(i) 45. E.2.5.a.

46.E.3.6. dr 7. Gernons cafe.
13. E. 3. 58. 11.H.4.56.5.57.
17. E.3. 306 39. Maso.
38. M. 50. 3 5-AI-7-


(k) Mish. 31.2 33.Fliz.
Rot. 365.in the Kinos bench
inter Edan cr Franklyne ad-
tudge. 3. Mar. Dier. 129.
38.Eliz Dier,3 53.
17.Els¢ .Dier.342-


(1) 8.E.4.24. 9. H.€.46.47.
21, H.6.4. 18..Aff:7.
30.£.3. 16.17. 7.E.4.31.
27.H.8.3o. 11.H. 4.68.
(m) 15.E.4.25.6 9. H.6.46
26.E. 3. 7.E.4.31.

39.8.1, 16.17.


(n) 9. H.6.46.
39.€.3.16.17.


(0) Lib.10.fe. $4. and the
bookes there cited.


Of Villenage. Sedl.193;


Seignioꝛ ne pꝛiſt al not at the beginning
commencement pur for his Plec that the
fon plee que le villein villeine was his vil-
fuit fon billcíne, mes leine, but tooke this
piece ceo paift per paotes by proteftation.&c. |
been efteemed tn lat a ton: t Ks
(1 fo: puces wer place is ftation,ac,
alledged generally in pleading (without fome addition to Declare the contrarp agin thts cafe it
íg )1t bal: betaken toꝛ Œowne. (f ) Andalbeit Parochia generally alledged ts a place tncerz
taine, and map, (as Swe fee by experience ) include diuers Goines, pet if a matter be alledged


in Parochia, ít ball be tntended in Law that tt contatneth no moze @ownes then one, bniefTe
the party doth thew tbe contrary. (g) Wut when a parifh ts alledged Within a Citp, there


(ap.11.


thereinalfott is to bee noted,
that tf it bad beene alledged in
Kingftreet in the pariſh of
St-Margarerin the County of
Middlefex, then ſhould tt bane
come out of Kingftrecr, foy
then fboulb Kingftreet have


Without quettion the Aiſne (ball come ont of the parith, oz that is moze certatne tben tbe City. —


Ch) 3ifa trefpafte be alledged in D, and nul uel ville ig pleaded, the Flurp Mall come out De
corpore comitatus,but (f tt be alledged in S. and D, and-nul tiel villede D. fg pleaded, the Jurp
fhailcomeout de Vicencto des. fozthat is the moze certaine. Do tf a matter be alledged Diths
ft a Mannoz, tbc Jury fall come de Viceneto manersj, but tf the annoz bee als
ledged within a towne, it [ball comc out of thetownc, becaufe that te melt certaine, fog the
Mannoꝛ map extendintodiuers tones. Bnd alltbefc potnts Wererefolued by ali the Jud⸗
geg ot England vpon conference betweenethem tn the Cafe of lohn Arundel Eſquire invited
fo2 the death of William Parker, *

(i) In a reatL action Shere the Demandant demands land tn one County, ag heire to his
father, and alledge bis birth inanother County, tf tt bee dented, that he is heire, it fall mot be
trped wherethe birth was alledged, but where the land iyeth,foz there the Law piefumes tt hat
be belt knowne Whois heire. Wutif the Demandant make himlelfe beíre to a Soman, for
that (e the furer and moac certaine fide and the mother is certaine, Shen perhaps the father te
incertaine, ano therefore there tt hall be tried, Where the birth is alleoged, becaufe tbcp haue
mozecertatneconufance then Where the landipeth, And foít is where gencrallp baftarop is
alledgcd, tbe trpall fbaï be in like cafe Mutatis mutandis. (k) JE a man pleade the Kings
Letters patents, andthe other partie pleade Non conceffir, tt (hall not be trpen, where the Lets
ters patents beare Date, £02 they cannot be Denped, but Where the land Ipcth,

Œuerp trpall mutt come ont of the neighbourhood of a Calle, Mannoꝛ, Towne oz Hamlet,
01 place limotone out of a Cattle, Wannoz, Towne o? Wamiet, ag fome forretts and the like,
as before and by the Puthoritpes thereupon quoted appeareth.

€ ucrp plea concerning tye perfon of the Wlaintife,ec, fball be tried Where the wait (g
brought as it appeareth before.

0 ben the matter alledged extendeth tnto a place atthe Common Law and a place Within a
Franchtfe, tt (ball be trpcoatthe Common Law.

(1) Jin an acttonagatntt two the one pleads to the tait, the other to the action, the pica to
the Weit Mail be firſt tryed, foz (€ that be found, all the Swbole Wait (ball abate, and make an
end of the bufinelte.

(m) 3m aplea perfonallagaínft diuers Defendants, the one Defendant pleades in barre
to parcell,oz Which extendeth onip to him that pleadeth it, € the other pleades a plea Which gocth
to the whole, the piea that gocth to the Whole, (that íg ) to both Defendants Mhallbe fick tried,
and of this opinion Sag | itleton tn our bokes, fo? the trpall of that goeth to the Whole, and
the other Defendant fball baue abnantage thercof, fou ti a nerfonall action the bilcharge of
one ts the vifcharge of both. Ag for erample, tf onc of the Defendants in trefpalle pleabe a
releafeto bimfelte, ( Mhtch tn Law crtends to both ) and she other pleades not guiitie ( which
extends but to btufelfe oz{f one picade a plea Which excufeg bitifelte only, and the other pleade
another plea, Which goctb to the Whole, the plea Which goeth to the Whole hall bee firff tried,
fo? if that befound ít maketh an end of all, andthe other defendant fball take aduantage heres
of, becaufctbe difcharge of one ts the dtfcharge of both ; but tna plea reall it is otherwife, Foz
eucrp Tenant may Lofe his part of tbe land; (n) ag f£ a Præcipe be brought as hetre to hig faz
ther againſt two, and one pleade a plea Which ectendeth but to himfelfe,and the other pleads a
plea Which ertends to both as baftardie in the Demandant, € it is found for bim,pet the other
{lue ſhall be trped, fox be fhall not take aduantage of the plea of the other, becaufe one (opis
tenant may loſe his part bp his mtfplca, (0) Wut Mherean iſſue ts topned foz part,and a Wee


(p)eMich.21.e022.€lix-Di- mutrer for the reGoue, the Court may direct the trpall of the tue, o2 iudge tbe Demurrer firtk
er 367. Lib.g.fo.36... Pav;- at their pleafure,


ham: cafe 39.E.3.2.b.
44.F.3.6.31H.6.13.. Lib. 5.
19.40. Dormers (afte


(p) £a Venire fac. beawarded to the Coroners Where it ought to bc to the Shtriffe o: the
Niſfne commeth out of a wꝛong place,pet f£ (tbe Per affenfum partium,and fo entred of 18 ecozB,
tt


Lib. Of Villenage.


ít fall ffanb, fo? O mnis confenfus tollit errorem, Bud thng much of tbefe excellent points of
learning : anb tf pou Befire to know the (nftitntion andright bfe of tbíg trpall by 12,men,and
of theantiquitiethercof, and mox of tbig matter, reade the 234, Section bercafter Which ts
Sporthp of pour obſeruatton.


€ Effatute. Or ftatute, [his commeth of the Latyn word Sta-
totum, which is taken foz an Act of Parliament made by the Ring, the 30208 and Commons,
and ig deuided into two bzancbes gencrall anb fpectall, This ſtatute here mentioned ig a ge-
nerail ftatute, and is darkely and obfcurclp penned,


€ £ fits font a iffue. (q) Iſſue, exitus, a ingle, certaine, and mate-
tíall point ſſuing out ofthe allegations o2 pleas of the 351atnttfe and Detendant confifting rez
gularlp bpon an affirmatiue and negatiue to be tried bp twelucmen, Andit ig twofold, a fpcz
Ciall iſſue, as bere (n tbe cafe of Littleton, o2 generall, ag tn. trefpalle, not quiltp: imafitfe, nul
tort, nul diffcifin, &c. And as an iſſue natarail commeth of tio feucrall perfons, fo an tue ies
gall iſſueth out of two fencrall allegations of aduers parties.

Bnd to make our bookies moze eafic tobe vnderſtood concerning this point, tt ts gad to fer
Downe fomeneceflarp rules ( among many other ) concerning tapning of iſſues An (fiue bec
tng taken generallp referreth to the Count, and notto the Wꝛit: Asin an Acceunt the Wait
chargeth bün generally to be hts recciuer, the Count chargeth him fpecíallp to be bio receiuer
by the hands of T. the Defendant pleadeth that be Was neuer his recetuer in manner and
this fall referre to the count, fo as hecannot be charged but bp the receipt by the

ands of T.

(:) Bfpectall iſſue mult be takeu in onecertatne matertall point which map bee belt vnder⸗
ſtod, and belt tryed,

(f) Anilue (ball not be taken bpon a negative pregnant, Which implyeth another fufficient
matter, but bpon that Which ts Tingle and fimple, ag Né dona pas per le fait, impip a gift by pa-
rol, therefore the iſſue muft be Ne dona pas modo & forma.

(t) Bn Bue iopneb bpon an Abfque hoc,&c ougbtto Datican affírmatíue after it : two af-

ines (hail not make an iſſue, vnleſſe (t be leſt the iſſue ſhould not be tried,

(u) Some ifues bec god bpon matter affirmative and negative, albeit the affirmat{uc
and negative benot tn pzccífc woꝛdðs,as in Debt for rent bpon a leafe fo» peares, the Defendant
pleades that the Plaintit had nothing at the time of the dLeafe made,the DlainttE replyeth that
he was feifco in fee,ec. thts 19 a goon tue.

Cw) tobere the iſſue is topned of the part of tie Defendant, the entry ig Etde hoc ponit fe
fuper patriam, but it (t be of the part of the Dlaintife, the entrte is Ethoc petit quod inquira-
tur per patriam.

(x) QE bere be fonte negattue pleas, that be {lues of themfelues, Xobereunto the Deman⸗
bant, 02 Diaintife cannot reply, no moze then to a generalli([ue Which is Et prædictus A fimi-
liter. Ag {€ the Œcnant doe bouche, and the Demandant counterpiead that the d1oucbe 02 ang
of his Anceftors had any thing,ec. whereof he might make a Feofment, hee [jail conclude, Et
hoc petit quod inquiratur per patriam, & prædi@us tenens fimiliter. &oína Sine pleaded by
the Tenant, €.the Demandant map fap, Quod partes finis nihil habuerunt, & hoc petit quod
inquiratur per patriam & prad’ tenens fimiliter. And ſo in a Writ of 3DoSoct;tbe Cenant plead
Vnques feifie que dower, he ſhall conclude, Et de hoc ponit fe fuper patriam, & pred’, petens fi
militer, and fo in many other cafes, and of this opinion Was Littleton in our bokes. (y ) A
inan leaueth bis wife enfcint Sith a childe, iſſue hall not betaken that the was not enfeint
by ber bufbanb on the day of his death, fo? Filiatio non poteft. probari, but the tue muſt be
Swbhither the Was enfeint the day of big death,

(z) 20 proteftation auapleth not the partte that taketh tt, {€ the (flue be found agatnft him, and
therefore i£ the {Tue be found foz the billetne, he {9 infranchifed for euer. And pet in fome {pes
Call cafe albeit the {Tue be found againſt hin that maketh the proteftation, pet he (ball take be=
ntfit of his pꝛoteſtation, (*) ag {fa manentreth inte warrantie, andtaketh by pzoteffation
i baluc of theland, albeit the plea be found again him, pet the pzoteftation (bati ferme bím fop

t value.


Section 194.


¶ Temle Sãr ne A Lo the Lord

poct maphemer may not mayme

fon billeine, Car (fl hisvilleine. Forifhee

mathema (on billets, mayme his villeine,
3 íf z


(CMM Aphemer,(a) 92
Meo 3
French Word of Which coms
ineth Mayhim, mahemium
(id eft) membri mutilatio,

an’


Seé.194.


126


Vid. SeB.2 34.


Vid.25.E.3.¢a,18,
F 'N.B.77.c.
26.E.3.75-


(q) Vid.$e8. 214.7. Hi. 6.43.
9.E.4.36. 36. H.6.1 5.
5-£.4.2G. 11.H,4.79.


7-E.3.34.


(r)10.€.3.1ffue 31.22. £d.
4:28. 8.2.3.8. 9.H.6.18.
38.E.3.33.
(1) 11.H.6.9 b, 16 E.4 $.
34-£.3.32.33.7 5 31.E. 3.
Une 17. 13.E, 3-L!.27.
21.€.3.49. 30.E,3,8,
10.E.5.32, 22.E,3.13.
28. E. Ue 35. 5, Hu 8,
31... :2.E.4.4.8.
2.H,4.23. 38.H.6.32.
40.E.3.5. 5.€ 3.24.
(1) 18. El. Dyer 253,
12.He.r.€,19. 31.H.6.25
2/R.3. 5.4.7.5. 11H. 4.79
iM) 2.4.7 4. $.H:7.12.
26. 11.H.483. 6 E.4.6.b.
a6.H 8, Dyer 6. in Fermeden,
28.1.8. Dyer 31. 18 Hen.5,
8,9. 15-E. 4.32, 32 H. 6. 23.
7-H.6.27. 43.Aff4 9. E.4.
35. Pl. Com. 173.4. 36. H. 6.
15.
(Ww) 26.H.8.3.
18.El Dyer 353,
(*)22.4.6.57.59. 33-H.6.
21. 3.4.7.9. 13.E.4 13.
HE 53 77,78: 22.£.3.
17. 24. E. 3. j0. 40 E. 3.1
(ÿ)41.E.3.116. ——


(2) 10.€.4,Proteft. c.
10.Ë.4,13. 32. 4ff.9.
30. E.3. 14. 9.H.6.55.
Vid.$elf. 192.
* 39. E, 3. 14.


(3) Staimf. li. 1 .ca.41.
Glanuit.lib. 1 4.ca.7.
Brall.lib. 3. fol. 144,1 4$.
Brit.cap.2 5» fal. 48542.
Files. ls, 1 ca. 58.


Lib.2.


Mirror.cap.1.§.9.


Vide Sel. t.


(b) Lamb.Tuft. of Teac’.


(c) Vide 1. H.4.6.b.


(d) Fleta lib. x.cap .40.
Brite.cap.2§. Brat. i45.
«Mirrercap. 5.


(e) Regift.Iudsc.2 5.
Li5.8. fol. $9. Beechers cafe,


(E) Vide $e8. 74.174.441»


(g) Lib.8.fol, 59. "Beechers
Cafe. F.N.B.76.


(h) Glanwill. lib. o. cap. 1,
Magna (hartacap.14.
Fleta lib.a.cap. 43.0 62. &
lib. x.cap.43-

Braëf.lib.3 fol.116.

(i) 22.€.3.1-& 2.
14,Ë.3.amerctam,16.
8,R.21bid.16. rc.

(k) DI. (Cem. 401. Coles cafe.
37. H.6.21.

Lib. 5. fol. 49 V aughauicafe,
(1) Vaughans cafe vbi fapra.
Beecheys cafe vbi fapra-


Capi.


anb membrum eft pars corpo-
ris habens deftinatam opera-
tionem in corpore. Mayhe-
mium vcro dici poterit vbi ali-
quisin aliqua parte fui corpo-
ris cffectus fit invrilis ad pug-


'nandum. And the Law hath


fo appropriated this word
Mayhem , Sbich our Authoz
bere bfeth, to this offence, ag
mayhemauit cannot becrpzef=
fed bp any other 50020.a8 mu-
tilauit, truncauit, 02 detrunca-
uit, 02 thelike. ;


€ / ferra indite ,


02 tattjct endite, andfots the
u2iginall,foz it commeth of the
French Word cnditer,and figz
nifieth in La an accufation
found bp an Œnqueft of 12.
02 moze bpontheir D ath, and
theaccufation tg called Indic-
tamentum. Bnd as the Ap⸗
peale (8 ener the fuite of the
partic, fo the enditement is
alwapes the fuit ofthe King,
anb ag ít were bis declaratt-
on, (b) Some derine (t from
the Greeke $0020 94er to
accafe,


¶ (ONanera ee. Ap-
peale de mayhem. Be⸗
caufcín that 3! ppcale be ball


Of Villenage.


il ferra Dc ceo enDite
a le ſuit le Koy, a (il
foit De ceo attaint,
il ferra puc ceo bn
grieuous fine tran=
fome al Boy, Des tl
femble que bílleine
nauera pag per le lep
bn appeal De May⸗
bem enũs fon Sfr,
Car en appeale De
9paybane home re-
couera fofo Dams,
a file billeine en ceo
cas recoũa Dams en-
uers fon ſeignior a
ent auoít erecution,
le &»fit poít prender
ceo que Ie villeine a=
uoit en erecution De
le billtene , a iffint
le vecoucrie ÿoide,
RC,


Sel. 194..
he fhall of that be in-
diéted at the Kings
fuit. And ifheebe of
thatattainted, he fhall
for that make grieuous
Fine and ranfome to
the King. But it {ee-
meth that the Villeine
fhall not haue by the
Law any Appeale of
Mayhem againft his
Lord, for in Appeale
of Mayhem a man fhal
recouer but his dam-
mages. And if the
Villeine in that cafe
recouer dammages a-
gainft his Lord , and
hath thereof executi-
on, the Lord may take
that the Villeine hath
in cxecution from the
Villeine,and fo there-
couery is void, &c.


o eod TEN


recoucr but Damages, Which the 3,07» after execution might take againe, and fo the tudgement


inutile and (llufozp, and Sapiensincipit à fine. And tbe Law neuer atuctl) am adton Where the
end of (t can being nopzofit o? benefitto the Plaintite. Wut here it is to be obſerued that albeít:
the partie grieued can haue no action for the Mayhem, vet at the kings fuitehee ſhall be punt=
ſhed therefore, £02 the reafon hereafter ecprefled inthis Section. (d) And in anctent time there
ile hed aig de plagis & deimprifonamento, butthep are out of bfc andturncd to actions of
Œrefpafte.

¶ Fe, finis. Here fine fiqnifieth a pecuntarie punifbment foy,
an offence, ozacontempt commttcd agatntt the ing, anb regularly to ít impzifonment apper⸗
tapnetb, Bnd it tg caille finis becaufett tg an end fozthat offence. (c) And tn this cafe a man
ts fa(D Facere finem de tranfgreflione, &c. cum Rege, tomeke an end, 02 fine Sith the king
forfuchatranfgreflion, "Xt is alſo taken fozafumme giuen bp thetenant to the Loꝛd for con=


co2d, anb an en to bee made, (f) It is alfo taken fosthe bígbeft ann beft alurance of -


Lande, ec.

Here it t$ god to ſee What a fine differcth from an amerciament, (¢) Amerciamentin La=
tine is called mifericordia, for that it ougbt to be allefled mercifuliy, and this onght to bee mo=
derated bp. afferement of his equals, o? elíca togit De moderara mifericordia , doth ites and
thereof Glanuillfaitl) thug. (h) Eftautem mifericordia Domini Regis qua quis per iuramen-
tum legalium hominum de viceneto catenus amerciandus cft , ne aliquid de fuo honorabili con-
tenemento amittat. ;

(i) Thecanfe of an amerciament (n plea reall, perfonail oz mict ( Soberctbe ting (a tobagc
no fime) is for that the Grenant oz Defendant ought to render the demand (ag hee (8 commana
Ded bv the Kings watt the fir dap: which if he do, he (hall not be amerced( fo ag for the delap
that the Cenant 02 Defendant doth ofc he fballbe amerced, (k) And aibeit the amerctament
cannot be tmpofed, no? the King kully intitled thereunto bntill iudgement be given, becaufe bp
the tudgement the zona is difcerned, pet a pardon befoze indgement, after iudgement giuen,
fbatl difcharge the partic, becaufe the oziginall canfe, viz. the belap, @c, ig parbonco, (1) tohat
then (f a Precipe be brought agaínft an Intant, and hanging the plea, he commeth of fall -


i


Liba. Of Villenage: $e8.194.


| he fhall be amerced fo; the delay after his full age, So like wite (E the 3Demanbant oz Plan⸗
tiffc bee Nonſuit o; Judgement giuen again& him, hee hail bee 1t&csoife amerced pro falío
clamore x :


(m) Bnd fo? the payment of this amceciament the Demandant 02 Plantiffe, ec. (ail find
pledges, and thofe Demandants o 391antift.s, that (bali inb no pledges, (as the king, the
Queene, an Fnfant, ec.) Ibat! not be amerced, And therefore when fucb are Demandant 07

"3oiantiffc, the wztt (ball not fap , Si Rex, &c. fecerit te fecurum declamore fuo profequendo.

(n) Bea tort boc abate bp the Ac of the 3Demanbant o? 33 lantíffe, o2 foz matter of fozme,
the Demandant 02 Plantiffe (atl be amerced, but (fit abate by the Ac of Wod,a9 by the death
of one bere there fs two 02 the ithe, there fhall be noamerciament. And to an amerctament,titi=
piſonment belongeth not, ag ít doth to a fine oz ranfome, JE pou befire to reade moze of fines

‘andamerclaments, Vide lib.s.fol.38.39. &c.Greflyes cafe, & lib.11. fol 43-44. God freyes cafe,

(0) Bt is to be knowne that Wit, Wita , {8 an old Saxon Wozd,and figntfictl an amercia⸗
ment, ag Fledwite anamerctament foz fleeing o2 being a fugitiue, and fo ig Flemifwice,Blodwite
an amerctament fo dꝛawing of blouo, Ferdwite concerning Swarfarc, andfo Letherwite,Child-

-wite, Wardwire and the like. Sometime (t Gianifeth forfeiture, ſometime freedome, oz ac-
uitall.

5 Cp) Bnd Bote is alfo an ancíent Saxon Sword, and fometime fignifieth amerctament, 92 com-

penfation, ag Theitbote Manbote, 02 frebome from the fame, ag Brigbote , Cafilebote,

Burghbote.

Wera 92 Were(q) ſometime fignifictl) amerctament 02 compenfation.but pzopetlp Wera An-
olice idem eft in Saxonis lingua vel pretium vita hominisappretiatum. #0b{ch & the ike words

‘pou fhall often reade in ancient Charters,


@, Ranfome. (r)Redemptio ig here taken fo? à grand fumme of

monep for redeeming of a arcat Delinquent fromfomehepnous crime, who ts to bee captiuate
in prifon vntill he papeth it, fome hold it toamount to bia Whole cffate,and others hold that ran⸗
fome is atreblefinc, (f ) But in Legall vnderſtanding a fine and ranfomeare all one, foz vp⸗
on the Statute of Merlebridoe cap 3 pon thele Svozng, Non ideo puniatur Dominus per Re-
demptionem. (t) The Tenant fpall not bane. ( where the 3Loro diſtreyneth Within his fe
SHherenothing is behind) an Action of Treſpaſſe, quare vi & arms agaínft his 302b , fo;
therein the 3.025 ſhould be punifhed by revemption,thatis by ine, and in that action tbe fine
ig very finall. Andthis is maniteſt by many Authoꝛities tn all iucceflion of ages: dnb this
Sppeareth bp our Autboz in thts place, £02 he ſaith, ll ferra pur ceo vn greivous fine & ranfome.
where fine and ranfome mutt of neceflitic in bis opinion hetaken for all onc: foz (£ thefine and
vanfome Merc divers, then fhonid tbc partie, that maphemed the Villeine pap two fumimes,
one foz a fine, and another foz aranfome , Which neuer Was donc, And aptlp a redemption
anda fine is taken to bee all onc, £02 by the papment of the fine hee redeemeth himſelke from im⸗
prifonment, that attendetl the irre, and then there is an end of the bufinelle.
-— "ait Gantfictl pzopcrlp a ſumme of a money pato for the redemption of a captiue,and is com⸗
pounded of re and emo, that {s torcdeeme 02 buy againe. And ttis to be knowne, that (u) bp
the ancient law of England,tfthe Defendant in an Appeale of Maphem had bin Cound quiltie,
the iudgement again the Defendant had beene, that hee ſhould 1ofe the ite member, that the
Plantiffe loft by his meanes ; ag tf the Plantiſſe had loft an band , the Defendant alfo Mould
lofc one, & fic de cæteris : In refped whereof the weit fai ( w ) Felonicæ may hemauit, fog that
the Defendant fboulb jofe a member.

Alwapes at the Common Law, ben the Defendant ſhould loſe like o2 member , the wo2te
faid Felonice, &c. And now albeit the Law be changed ( £02 at this dap, the Plantiffe hail, ag
our Authoz faítb, recouer but damages ) pet the tozitof Appeale fatth Hill Felonice.

Note the life and members of euerp fubíed are vnder thefafegard and protection of tbe hing,
fozag Bra&on(x )faítb, Vita & membra funtin poteftate Regis. And therewith agreeth a mota-
bie iRecozb, Pafch.19.E.r. coram Rege Rot.36. Northt. vita & membra fünt in manu Regis, t9
the end that thep may feruc the King anb their Countrie ben occafion (hall be offered. May,
the Lord of the Willeine for thecaufc afozefaid cannot mapheme the Gitileine,but the King (ball
puniſh him for mapmbing of his ſubiect (oz that hereby hee hath diſabled him to doc the hing
Serutce) bp fine, ranfome, and tmpztfonment bnt(ll the fine and ranfomebec pato, Ho ag
there is a manifeft diuerfitie betivænc a ranfome and an amerctament. Foꝛ ranfome ts cuct
$oben the law inflicteth acozvozall puntihment by tmpztfonment,( & fo (g alfo a fine )but otber-
Swife it (g of anamerctament ag hath bin ſatd. And (y Ancients haue ſaid that Ranfome neft
forfque redemption de paine corporell per fine des deniers. Œbts offence of mayhem is vnder all
felonies deferuing death, anb abone all other infertoz offences, fo ag tt may be trulp fatd of
tt, that (t is, Inter crimina maiora minimum , '& inter minora maximum. Bnd in mp Circatt
in Anno 11. Iacobi Regis in the Countie of Leicefter one Wright a poung ſtrong and la(fíe

Ft 3 Bogue,


127 ^


(m) FN.B.31. f-47.(.
€ 101.4.

Bro. l1b.4 fol.254.
17.£.3.75. 18. F. 3.2.
Brttt.amereiam.s 3.

43 4f. 45. dre.

(0) "Becher cafe lib, 8.f.60.5,


(0) Fleta lib. 1.64), 43. '
Stat.de expe[it verba; nm.


(p) Lamb.explication of


Saxon words.
Leges Ina.cap.19.


(q) Lamb. «bi fupra & F leta
lib.1.6ap. 23.


(1) Dier.6,Eli£.2 32.


(0 See the fecor dpart of the
Infittutes Merteby.c ap.3.

(0 5.H. 7.10. 48.E.3.5.6.
41-8. 3.36. 44. E. 3.13.
2.1.4.4. 11.H.4.98.
1.H.6.6. 5 H.g.14. 8.E.4.
15-10.£.4.5, 20.€ 4.3.
21.E,4. 3. Mteh. 17. & 18.
Eli(.Beuels cafe lib. A. fol.11.
& lib.9. fol.76. Combs cafe.


(u) 4. Ars. Mirror tap. 4.
€ £a. $.S.18. Britton cap. 25
fel. 48, Bratl. lib. 3 f:4.144.
145. Fleta lib. oap. 38.


(w) Bra&fen.vbi fa: va.
"Britton cap.3 fol 77.b.


(x) Brat.lib.1.fol.6.
"Pafch.13. € .x . coram Rege
Thot. 3 6. North.


(y) Mirrer.cep.5,G.x. dr 3.


Lib.2


(2) PideSelt.27 3.¢> $78.


à Lost Nob vs H 4


1. SM ty. p SERT Le,


(2) 40. E.3. 30. 14.H.6.18
35.H.6.12. 1.F. 4.15.


(b) 39. .3. 23. 8.H.€.;.


(c) 36.4.6. indgement 58.


(d) 18.E.4.6.& 7.


(a) Braft.tsh.5.fol. 421,
riston.eap.49.fol.135.
AMirrercap.3.§.18.


Ca Of Villenage. ^ Se£495.196..


Wogue to make himlelfe (potent therebp to haue the moecolonr to begge 02 to bee relfeued
pic md * bimfelfe to any labour, caufco his companien to ſtrike off bis left hand, anv


both of them Were indited, fined, and ranfomed thercfozc, and that bp the opinion of che reft of


the Xufkices for the caufe atoꝛelaid. ÁN d
€ Voyde,cre. Were by (&c.) ig impiped a marimein Labo Quod.

inutilis labor & fine fruétu non eſt effectus legis. And againe, Non licet ; quod difpend.oïicets

And Sapien: incipit à finc, anb Lex non præcipit inutilis. (z) Theretoze the Lak forbiopcth


fuch recouertes $oljofe ends are bate, Chargeable and bnpzofi table.


Emannaant,pe-


tens, 48 bee
Swhich is Acoꝛ in a reall acti=
on, becaufc bee demandeth
Lande, gc. Bnd Piaintf,
querens tn adíong perfonalg
and mitt, quia quaritur de in-
iuria, &c. Tenant, tenens (n
reall actions, and defendant,
defendens {n actions perfonall
and mírt,

@ Defence. Com-
meth of th: Sozddefendo, fe
called of the manner of the
pleading , viz. predict" A.B.
defendit vim & iniuriam, &c.

Foꝛ exampicin a perfonall
action brought bp A. .againft
C. D. the defence ig, & præ-
dictus C. D defendit vim &
iniuriam quando, &c. & dam-
na, & quicquid quod ipfe de-
fendere debet, &c.

Zn this vcfence there b:e
three parte to bee confidercd ;


Sed. 195.


4 [an fibn Wil:

lein foit deman⸗
bant € action real,ou
plaíntife en actíon p-
fonal, éuers fon fiir,
file Sfr voile plebe
en Difabilitie Dc fon
pfon , il ne poit faire
pleine Defence, mes il
Defendera fozfqs tort
æfoice a Demandera
iubgement (i ferra
reſpondus + monftre
fon matter maínte-
nant. comt il eft {on
bilicín,a Ddcra iudg⸗
ment fil ferta re-
fponbue,


AT ifa Villeine
bee demandant in
an action real,or plain-
tiffe in an action perfo-
nall againft his Lord, if
the Lord will plead in
difabilitie of his per-
fon, he may not make
plaine defence, but he
fhall defend bur the
wrong and the force,
and demand the iudg-
mentif he fhall be an-
fwered , and fhew his
matter by and by how
heisvilleine, andde-
mand iudgement if he
fhall be anfwered.


Firſt, when he defendeth the wrong and the force , this hath a double effect, viz. to make hits
felfe partie tothe matter, and this is thereafon. that tbe Defendant in this and the like act=
ons can plead no pleaat all before ye makes bimfclfe partie bp this part of the defence, ag it
appeareth here bp I ittleron, that (a) (£ tbe Defendant il picad in diſabilitie of the perfon of
the Dlaintife he mutt Grff make himfelfe partie bp thts ſirſt part of the Defence, Neither can he
plead to the turtfotaion of the Lourt without this part of the defence, Decendlp, (b) Wp the
defence of the Damages, be affirmeth that the Plaintiffe tg able to ſue, and ( bpon (ufr cauſe)
torecoucr Damages. Chirdlp, And by tbelaff part, viz. and all that which he ought to de-
fend, when and where he oughr, he affirmeth the turtidicion ofthe Court; Et fic de fimilibus.
And of fuch neceflitie (e tt £02 the Tenant 02 Detendantto make a lawful defence, ag (c) ale
beit he appeareth and pleadeg a fuffictens barre Without making defence ; pet iudgement hall
be giuen agatnt him,

(d) Ff Utlienagebe pleaded bp the Lord ín an Actton reail,mict 02 perfonail, and it is found
that hets no Villaine, the bꝛinging of a Wzit of Erroz ts no enfranchtfement, becaufe thercbp
he ts to defeat the fozner tudgement, ano if in the meane time, the 391ant(ffe or 3Demanbant
bring an action agatnft the Lozd, be need make no proreftation,fo long ag the Recoꝛd remapnes
in force, foz at that time he ig free, but the Lozd fhallbe reftozed to ali by a tiozít of Erroz,


Setlion 196.


€ Vi eft lou vil. & | & em 6,maners
leine ſuiſt action de homes y ſont
de. Littleton here queux, fils ſuont ac⸗


Lfo there are fixe
máner of mé who
ifthey fue, iudgement
tíon


Lib.2.


tion, iudgement poit
eftre Demaund fils
ſerrõt refpondus,zc,
Un eff, lau billeine
fuiff action enuers
fon Seignioz, come


Of Villenage.


may bee demanded,
if they fhallbee an-
fwered, &c. One is
where a Villefne fueth
an Action againft his
Lord, as inthe cafea-
forefaid.


$ed 197.


rebearfeth .6, kind of diſabilt⸗
ties of the perfon , difabling
bim to fue anp action reall,
perfonall 92 mire.


4L 5/5 ferrot refpon-
dus. Œbis is the le-
gail conciufion of the plea,


Soben the plea (s tnt tfabilitie
of the perfon. Bnd of the


en le cag auantdit. |
berbe refpondere came reípon-


falis often vſed in the ancient Authoꝛs of the Law.(f )Refpon(alis Mag be. that was appoin=
ted by the Tenant o2 Defendant, in cafe of ertremitteand neceflitie to alieage the caufe of the
partics abfence, and to certifie che Court bpon Swhat triall, he will put bimfel£e, viz. the Coms
bate oz the Countrie. Do as his power was moze then the ŒAoinez which caftethan Eſſoigne
only to excuſe the abfence ofthe partte,as an eftranger which caffct a protetron, doth, #02 by
- the Common Law, the 391ainttfe oz Defendant, Demaundant of Conant could not appeare
by Attornie Without the Kings fpectall Warrant bp w2it o? Letters Patents, but oucht to
follow his Duitein bis owne proper perfon (bp reafon $oljercof there Were but few Suites)
(2) Abufion efta reteinerattorny fans breue de la €hanceric. Bud therefoge EraGon faith
truly (h) Attoinatus hæc omnia facere poteft (that (g, pleab all manner of pleag ) Eft igitur
magna differentia inter Attornatum & Refponfalem. So ag the ftatutes that giue the making
of Attoꝛneys, hane orne out Refponfales. 20% What manner of men Attozncps ought to be,
MO rather What they ought not to be,heare bat Antiquity hath fafd,(i)A ttorneyes poient cítre
touts ceux aux queux ley voile fuffer, fems nepointeite Attorneyes,ne enfans, ne ferfs, ne nul
que eft en gard ou auterment faut de foy, ne nul criminous, ne nul efloigne, ne nul que neft a le


foy le Roy,ne nul que nc poet eite Counter, &c,


€ Lt iireſt lou bn

home ef bt-
lage fur action à Det,
ou Crefpas, ou fur
aut act, ou Indict⸗
ment, le tenant ou
Defendant poít mon-
five tout ie matter De
record, & lutlagaríc,
& Demaunde iudge⸗
ment fil fevt vefpon-
Due, put ceo que ti c(t
hors De lalep De (aet
afcun action Durant
le temps que il foit
ptlage,


feuerall mens fuites, he ſhould never reuers any of them.
39 laíntite cannot be pleaded tn difabtlity o£ the perfon
mot difable the 39 laintífe in any Court at weltminter,
12 annorum fucrit, vtlagari non potcft, nec extra legem
fub lege aliqua necin decenna. (r) De that is abtured
Ágextra legem, and pet he (e not properly outia wed.
€ Monftre tout le matter de record.


this $9015 (Monftre) that (€)


Section 197.


He 2.is, where a

man is outlawed
vpon an Action of
debt or trefpaffe, or
vponany other action
or indictment, the Te-
nant, or the Defendant
may fhew allthe mat-
ter of Record and
the outlawrie, and de-
mand iudgement if he
fhall bee anfwered,be-
caufe he is out of the
Law to fue an action
during the time that
he isoutlawed.


qj € 2.6/8 (k) low vn


home eft vtlage,


oc. But thele gene-
tall Swozds recctuo à diitincti⸗
on,viz. (1) {€ an Erecutos o2
an Pominiltrator fucth anp
action, Utlary in the Plain⸗
ttfe {hall not difable him, bez
caufe the fuite tg In auter
droir, that is in the right of
the Œcftatez, and not ín bis
owne right. And fos thefame
teafort, (m) a Matoz and
Lomminalty (ball baue an
acton, though the Matoz bee
outlawed, (n) Fra tozie of
Œrrozto teuerfe an Qitlarp,
Qitlary in that fuite,oz at ang
frangers fuite all not difas
ble the Pla intike, becauſe tf he
ín that action ſhould be diſa⸗
bien, tf he Were, D utlawed at


(o0) Fn au Ittaint ontlarp in the
(p) Dutlary in Chefter oy Durham fhal
8C, (q) Minor vero & qui infra etatem
poni, quia ante talem ætatem, non eft


the realme may be bifableb, fo? that hee


Here note too things, fir by
when any man pleads an Atlary in bífabilitp of the perfon,that


bec


128


13. H. 4. Smerty,13.4garden
fées PDT


(£) Brak, lib. 4.fo. 212.6.
& lb. $. 0.549.

Fleta ib 6.62. (1.
Glanuill hib. x j.ca.f.
‘Brscton ea. 126.

Vid W.Y.«4.4 3.
E.A2NB.2 s C. Regifl. 9.


(g) Mir.ca.5.S.
(h) "Bradf.n,vbs (upra.


(i) «Mirror ca, 2.8.21.


(Kk) "Era&fen lib.5.fe 421.
"Britton 6a,22.f0.39-
VMirrer,ca. 1,4c Excepttont
a provors €. 4» d. faulrs

puni foable.


(1) 21.£.4.49.5.
21.H:6:30.b. 14. H. 6. 18.


(m) 12.Æ.4f.12.


(9) 7.H.4-40.


(©) 23.H.8.c0. 3,2. H.7.7.
(p) Mirror,cap.3.4c¢.
12.Ë.4.16. 33. H. 6. ca. 2.
(q) Braff lib.3.f0.125.
3-H.5. "U lagary.11.
38.E.3.5.

tr) Britton. fe. 39.

(€) 20.E.2.( rene 232,
Y9..Aff. p.10. 3. H.6. (Sb,
35. H. 6.33. 5. H.7.

6.€ liz, Dier. 228. F. N ,B,344
Sranf.pl.coren, 105.


Lib.2.


(t)38. Afi 49 .12.E.5.Vtla-
gare 3« Mig. & 5.81.
Dyer 222. 38.E. 3.13.


(u) Tr.44.El.in Com. Banc.
snter Mere dr Dolburse.
33-H.6.1. 11.H.4.34.
Dyer 3. El. 192. 5.El. 223.
4.H.4.le 1,cafe. 8.H.4.f7.
37.H.6 17. 33. E. 3. Err.77.
21.46.20.

(w) 33-4. €. 19.b. dre.
(x) 44 E. 3.27.


(y) 9.El.'Dyer 162.
g.H.4. 4... Sraxf. P1. Co-
ron. 188. Lib.5. fo.109. 1n
Foxleyes cafe. 28.E. 3.92.
39. Aff-p.47.63. 32. H1. 6- 5


(z) Mir.ca.s.§. 3. dr e. 5.
& 4. fige ca. 5. S.1.


(*)Flet.D.v.ca.27.
— i
Brit. fe. 20.b.

(a) AMir. ca.4. S. de faults
pnnifbable.


(b) Lemb.fso!. 128.
| (6) 2A .5.
2. E. 3 tit Coron. 1 48.


© "Brali.li. 5. fo. 421.
8.H.6.9.b. 40.E.3.5.
35-H.6.6, 40. E.1.2.


(a) Bralt.li.5. fo. 415. 427.
Mir.ea.1.$,3. ta 5. G. n.
Qr ca, 3. except.aprowors.
Flet.li.6.ea.47. Brit fo. 19.
13. E. 3. Bré.677.25.Ed.3.de
"Natisvltra mare. 31. E. 3. (C6-
fostc 5. 42. E. 1:3. 9.E,4,7.


Cap.


Of Villenage. Sett.198.


he mutt thei forth the Record of the Outlawaie, maintenant fub pede figilli, ( becaufe the
Plea is but dilatoztc) bnlefle tbe AR ccozo be ín the fame Court, Wut (£ he plead an Dutiaswe
rie (n barre, if it be dented, be (ball have a Dap to b2ing tt tn,

Secondip, (t) before the Defendant can difable tbe Piaintife, tbe sDutlasos(e mult aps
peare of Wecozd, and the Judgement aftey tbe quinto exadus gtuen bp the Coroners tn the


Countie Court, is notfufficicnt , bnttlithe 102it of Exigent bereturned , athe Dutiaweie —


appearc of lccozd : Which ts manifelt bp Littletons owne woꝛds, (viz-) Matter de Record,
Svbercof fee moze hereafter, Sect.503.
Ft ís to be ovferucd, That there be two kind of appearances before the Quinto exa&us; to


audyd the D utlawete,viz.an Apparance in ded, that ig, to renderhimfcife, ec. Andthe other «


ig bp anapparance in Law, (v) thatis, bp purchafing a Superfedcas out of the Court Where —
the iReco2d is, which is an apparance of 1Reco2d : and therefore though tt bee not deliuered ra
the Epherite before the quinto exaétus, pet (t hall auopo the Outlawaꝛie, and foare the Bokes
that ſpeake hereof to be intended.

(w) Jaman be outlawed at the fuit of one man, all men ſhall take aduantage of thts perfo=
nall difabilitic. And ſo ít (8 in cafe of Alien nee, and of Excommengement : but ether wile tt (ig
fn cafe of Qillenage.foz that diſabilitie is onelp giuen tothe 1.020.


«r Duraunt le temps que il eft vtlage. (x) BE the Defendant plead
an Dutlawnrte inthe Plaintike, tn dtfabilitie of his perfon, andthe PDiatntife after that Piea
pleaded, purchafe a Charter of Pardon, bccaufe tbe Charter bath reſtorꝛed him tothe Law, the
Defendant ſhall anſwer. Honote, the difabilitie abateth not the wit, but difinableth the
3olaíntifc, bntill he obtaineth a Charter of Pardon, and fo it appeareth hereby Littleton.


qr Indgement [il ferra refpondue. (y) Ifthe ground o? caufe of the
Action be forfeited bp the Dutlawete, then map tbe Dutlawzte be pleaded in barre of the A⸗
ction,as tran Acton of Debt, 3Det(nuc.ac. Wut in reall Actions, o2 in perfonall, where dam⸗
inages be incertaine, (as tn Erefpaiie of Batterie, of Hwds, o£ breaking his Ciofe, and the
like) an» are not fozfeited by the xDutlaSozie, there Outlawꝛie muft be pleaded (n ptfabílitp o£
the perfon.

(z) And ít (Sto be obferucb, Chat in the raign of King Ælfred,and ontill,and a god While
after tbe Conqueft, no man could haue beene outlawed but for Felonie, the punifhment where⸗
of Sas dear’): but now the Law is changed, ag tt appearctb by that Which hath bene ſayd;
and hereby pou ſhall onderftand old Bokes and Kecords witch fap, Chat an outlawed man
had Caput Lupinum, becaufe he mightbe putto death bp anp man, as a toolfe that hatefuil
beat might. (*) Vtlagatus & waiuiata capita gerunt Lupina, qux ab omnibusimpunè potc-
runt amputari, merito enim fiue Lege perire debent, qui fecundum legem viuere recufant. Bnd
anotherfaith, (a) Vtlage pur felonieteigne leu pur loup, & eft criable Woolfefhered, pur ceo
que loupe eft beaft hay de touts gents, & de ceo en auant lift al 5 fcun de le occire ou foer del lou
dont cuftome foloitefte de Porter les teftes al chiefe lieu del countie, ou dela Franchife, & foloic
leu auoiredun marke del Countie pur chefcun tefte de vtlige & de loupe. Andthts agceth Sith
the Law bcfo2c t) C onqueft, (b) Velagatus lupinum gent caput, quod Anglicè, HoolfetheaD
dicitur, & haceft lex communis & generalis de omnibus vtlagatis. (c) But in thebeginning
of theratgneof king Edward tbc third, it was refolucd by the Judges, for auoyding of in=
bumanicte, and of effuſion of Chꝛiſtian blond, Chatit ſhould not beelasofull for anp man
but the Sberife onclp , (having lawtull toarrant therefoze) toput ro death anp man outs
lawed, though it Were for Felonie, andi£ be did, be ſhould vndergoe fuch punthhments and
patnes of death, ag if he had killedDanp other man ; and fo from thenceforth the Lat continues
bntill this dap.( Nora, 1 oolfefhead,and Wulferfod {8 all one )* Bnd after in Bractons time, and
ſomewhat before, Pꝛoceſſe of Dutlawzie Wag oꝛdained to lic in all Actions that Were Qua-
re vi & armis, Which Bra&oo calleth Dili&a , foz there the King fbali baue a one, Put «
(incc;bp diuers Statutes, Pꝛoceſſe e£. Outlawꝛie doth lic (rt Account, Debt, Derinue, Annui-
tie, Couenanr, Aétion fur le Statute de s. Rich. 2. Action fur le Cafe, and tn diners other
Common o Ciutle Actions, Wut now let da heare what Littleton Lill fap onto bg.


Sed. 198.


€ J E3. eſt, vn A⸗
Alien que eff nee
hors De la ligeance


noſtre


Lien.(a) Alieni-
gena íg deriucd
from the Latpne

59010 Alienus, and according


He thirdis , an A-
lien which is born
out of the ligeance of


Lib.2.
noüte Seigntoz le
Kop, fi tiel alien boile
fuer vn Action reall
ou perfonall, le Te⸗
nant ou Defendant
poit Dire que il fuit
nec en tícl pais, que
eft hors Ô la ligeané
le Koy, a Demaund
tudgement (il Cerra
refpondue,


Of Villenage.


our foueraigne Lord
the King, if fuch alien
wil fue an Action reall
or perfonal, the Tenat
or Defendat may fay,
That hee was borne
in fuch a Countie
which is out of the
Kings Allegeance,and
aske Iudgement , if
he (ball be anfwered.


$e&l. 108.


fo the Gepmologte of the
Sword, ít Agnifieth one bonne
in afrange Countric, bnder
the ebedience of a firangc
Prince 0? Countrie, ( And


129


11.H.4.36. 1404.4.19,20>
3-H.6.55,. 22.4.6.38. |
Seanf,T'l.Cor.197.4.

Lih.7. fo.1. Calutos cafes
Pl. (Com.368.per Sanders.
Vid 88.1.43 9, 44094416


therefore Braéton faith, Ghat -


this exception, Propter defe-
€&um Nationis; Mould rather
be, Propter defectum Subieéti-
Onis) 03 ag Littleton faith,
( Which is the fureff ) Dut
of the lieqcance of the dking.
Note, here Littleton fatth
not, Hors dcl Realme, but
Hors de liegeance ; fox he map
be bone out of the 38 calmc of


England, pet Within tbe liegeance, Bnd he that (s borne Within the i ings Liegeance ts calc
led fometime a Denizen, quafi deins nec, boꝛne Within, and thereupon in Latpne called Indige-
na, the dings Liegeman, for Ligcus (8 ener taken for a naturail bone Subied. Wut many
times tn Acts of Parltament, Denizen (g taken foa an Biien borne, that is tnfranchtfed o2 des
nísatc» bp Letters Patents, Seberebp the ing doth grant onto Him, (b) Quad ille in omnis
bus tractetur, reputetur, habeatur, teneatur, & gubernetur, tanquam ligeus nofter, infra didum
Regnum noftrum Anglix oriundus, & non aliter, nec alio modo. But the Ring map make a
particular ZDenísatíon: (c) As be map arant to an Alien, Quod in quibufdam Curijs fuis
Anglia audiaturvt Anglus, & quod non repellatur per illam exceptionem quod fit alienigena
& natus in partibus tranfmarinis, to enable him to fue onelp, he feucrali fences of which
5002» muft be gathered, ex antecedentibus, adiunctis, & confequentibus, and thep that take him
fn that fence, deriue the $0070 from Donaifon (i.) Donatio, becauſe bis freedome {5 giuen vnto
him by the king.

There ts another kind,andthat is an Pliers naturaltsed, and that muſt be bp Ac of Warlta-
ment, And this Piten naturalized to all intents and purpotes, ig as anatur ali bone {ubiec,
and differcth much from dentsatton by Letters Patents, for if he had tue in England be-
fore his dentsation,that iſlue (g not inberitable to his father:but if bis father be naturalized bp
Parliament, ſuch ue Hatlinhertt. Sotf an iſſue of an Englithman beboncbepond Sea,
t£ tbe iſſue be naturale bp Ae of PDaritament, he Hall inherit bis fathers lands ; but tf hee
be made TDeafsen by Letters Patents, he (ball not,and many other differences here bec bez
tweene them,


q Ligeance, à Ligando, Being the highett and greateſt obligati-
onofduticand obedience thatcanbe. Liegeance is the true and Faithfull obedience of a Liege
man o? Hubiec,to his Licge 3070 oz Soweratgne. Ligeantia eft vinculum fdei, ligeantia eft
legis eſſentia.


f 1 Originaria, (iue naturalis, fiue nata, (d) and this is al⸗

5oapts abfolute and incident infepcrable, nemo patri-
am in qua natus eft cxucre, nec ligeantiæ debitum eiura-
re poffit.


€
petua. mies —
Perp | 2 Data, aut per denizationem , aut pef naturalizationem


Ligeantia do- (vt ſupradictum eft) & ifta ligeantia per denizationem
mino Regi de- pote(t effe fub conditione.
bita eft dnplex


f


Localis, quia quilebet alienigena qui in hoc Regno fub
protectione Regis degit, Domino Regi ligeantia debet.
And it he be indicted of high Creafon, tbe Indictment
fhall fap, (c) Contra Ligcantiz füz debitum, & ideo di-
citut temporanea & localis; quia non durat. nifi quouf-
que infra Regnum moratur.

Limitata, As when one (s made Denizen fog life où (ti
tat'e, (F ) but one cannot be naturalized etther Sith iis

mitation £o? life, 07 (n tatle, 01 bpon condition : fox that is againt the abfoluteneffe; puritie, and

tndelfbilitic of naturall Allegeance.

* Bn Abbot, 352í0) , 01 Pꝛioꝛs Allen, Hail have Bciong reall, perfonall, o? mírt, foz anp
thing concerning tbe po'iciTiens o gods of hig 9I onaffertebere (m England, though he becan
Biten bonne out of the ings Ltegeance, — n bringeth (t not (n bis owne right, butin

tbe


Temporanea,


<
aut


|
|


(b) gE 4.f.8,
'Pl. Cops. 30 6,


(c) Rot Parl, 31€. x. Elsas
de Danbente,


Vid. Caluins cafe ybi fuptae


(4) 13-EL, Dyer f 300.6.
Do&ler Storses cafe.


(6)3-€ 4.P. 6. )M. Di. 144.
Li.7. fe.6. dre. Caluini safe.


(£)9.E*4.7. (aluins cafe
vb; fupra.

*1 y E. 3 br 264-20. E, 3.4
wuitse 24.17. E. 3. 21. 40. E, 3.
10. 37.4 /[ 48. 14. Hi 4.39.
21.E.4.44. 21.47.97.
Sranf Prer. 54. Leflat. de
Carl fle, 55. ET,


Lib.2.


(h)'BraBien, 426.417,416.
8.E.3. 51. $.E.2.- Ael. 8.
13.E.3. Dre. 677.

22. E, 3.14.20. 31.€.3-
Cofinage,5. Az. E. 3.2.
13.E.4-9. 11. H,4.26.

9. E. 4.7. 19. E, 4.7. 30. E. 4.6
13. E. 4.9.10. 32. H. 6. 23.
38. H.8 "Br.'Deni(eu. 10.
1.E.6. Nonbab. Br.Y 3.67.62.
Vid.4.H., 3. Dowsr 179.
6.£.3.263. 31. H.6.ca.4.
Liure de Entries in ciel...
6.H.8.Dier. 2- 6.H.7.15.

*. 39.E. 3. Br.Denizzn,15.


Usd. Stanf. Tl. or.197..


(i) Lire de Entries Alien 1.


For Statutes:
Vid.35.8.x. Stas.de Carlile,
25.£.3.c4.22.25.E. 3-
faiut.de prouifors, 37. E. 3.€. Y
38. E.4.ea.3. 2. R. 2. ca. 12.
3.R .2.64.3. 12.R.2.64.5.
16. R.2. 64.5. 2, H. 4. ca. 3.
Or 4.6.H.4.4 1.24. H.8.
«4.12. 25. H,8.c4.19.20.
26. H.8.ca. 16. Y Elis.ca.1.
5.Ehf.ca.1. Y3.EhiQ. ca. t
2.8. a7. 8 liz ca.2.

39. Elif? .ca. i8,


For Prefidents.
Vid. Mich. 29.E.3.coram
Reve in Thefaur.Pafch 44. E. 3
Ibid. Melbernes Cafe.
Mich. 38. H.6.ibid.tbe cafe of
Richard Beauchamp and others.
Hill, 15.H.8. Coram Rege.
The (Cafe of Nicke Bifbop of
Norwich. Trin.36.H.8.Rot,9.
Coram Rege, The (afe of the
Biff op of “Bangor.
Mich. 36.67 27-Elsz. (Coram
Rege, Perret again D. Be-
ance and others. Booke of
Entries, fo. 42). & 430 &
ibid. Mick. 9. H.7. fo033.


Wecker (Cafes.
31, E.3. 40.5. 15. H.6.6.
9. E 4.2. 35 E. 3.7.24. H. 8.
Hi, Prasmunire, 16.10. H. 4.115
27. E.3.84. 6. H 7.34:
44 £3.36.


Capa.


Of Villenage. Seél109,


the right of bis Monaftæy, and not in big naturall but in bis politique capacitie.


€ Reall ou perfouall. (h) In this cafe tbe Law doth biftinguifh 4


bet Seene an Biten that is a fubiect to onc that is an enemp to the Ring, and onc that tg {ubiet
to one that (s tn league With the Ring, and trucitig that am Alten enemic, (ball maintaine


neither reall no2 perfona! action Donec terra fucr’ communes, that is bntili both j2ationg beg —


ín peace; butan Alien that is in league (ball maintaine perfonall actions, foz an Alien mag
rave and traffique, buy and fell, and therefore of neceflitp he muff be of ability to auc perfos


nallationg, but he cannot maintatne either reall o; mixt actions. Bn Alien thatiscondemncd —


ín an tnfozmatton (ail have a toit of errop to relieue himfeife, Et fic de fimilibus.
* FE an Alien be made a Pꝛyoꝛ 0? Abbot, the plea of Alien ace ſhall not difable him to bꝛing
anp reall 03 mixt action concerning bis boufe,b ccaufc he is in auter droit, ag before ts fato


€ Hors del ligeance noftre [eignior le Roy ete Littleton Doth notfap, —


out ot the Kealme 02 bepondthe Sea, ( ag he doth Sc é,439.440.441.677-) Wut ont of the
Ligeance ; for (as hath benefatd befoze ) a man map be borne out of the 18 eaime,viz.of Eng⸗
land, as in Breland, Jerſey, and Gernep,éc. and pet feeing hee is not bozne out of the Lige=
ance of the ting, as Littleton here fpeaketh be is no Alien. Wut hereof there is fo much, and
fo plentifully fpoken (n our bokes, and efpeciallp in the cafe of Caluyn vbi fupra, ag thig
fbail fuffíce,


€ Et demaund iudgement fil ferra refpondue. Saas the Tenant og —


Defendant {ball neither plead Alien mec to the w2it orto the acton,but in diſabilit y of the per=
fon, ag in caſe of billenage and outlawꝛie before. (1) And Littleton is te bee intended of an


Alien tn league, foz t hee be an Alien enemp the Defendant may conclude to the tion.


q PRemunire Some

hold an opinion that

the Waitig called a
Premunire, becaufe tt doth
fozttfic Iurifdiétionem jurium
regiorum Corone fus: of the
ingly Laws of tbc Crown
again fezreine iuriſdiction,
and again the bfurpers bp-
onthem, ag bp diuers Acs
of Parliaments appeare.
But in truth it is ſo called of
a Dorp inthe w2tt, fos the
Words of the Watt bee Pix-
munite facias prefatum A.B.
&c. quod tunc. fit coram no-
bis,&c. where Pramunire is
vſed fez premonere,and{o doe
Diuers interpreters of the c t=
niano Cannon Law bfc it,
foz thep are premuniti that
arepremoniti. By the fta-
tutes befoze quoted ín the
margent pou fhall percetue
5vbat ftatutes were made bec
foie Littleton Swzote, and
bat haue bene ordained
fince to make offences in dan
ger of a Premunire,


€ Hors del protecti-
onleroy. The tudge=


ment in a Premunire {g that
the Defendant thaibe from


Section 199.


€( € 4-eft, bu hoe

q ꝑiudg. Donc
enuers lup fur bn
baicfe De Præmunire
facias,&c. eft hors De
protection le Koy, ft
ti fuitt acuti action,«
le Tenant ou le def,
mta tout le reco20
enuers luy.il poit de=
maund iudgement
fil fetta refpondu,car
lalep le 130p, & les
bts le Roy, font les
chotes per queut
home eft protect &
aide, a tint Durant
E temps que home en
tiel cas eſt hoꝛs dela
protection le Koy, tl
eft bozs De eftre aide
ou ptect per le lep 1e
Bop, ou per bte le
130p.


sj 4.15, a man
who by iudge-
ment giuen againft
him vpon a writ of
Pramanive | facias eye.
is out of the Kings
protection, if hee fue
any action, and the te-
nant or . defendant
fhew allthe Record a-
gainft him, hee may
aske iudgement if hee
fhallbe anfwered, for
the Law & the Kings
writs be the things by
which a man is prote-
&ted and holpen, and
fo during the time that
amaninfuch cafe is
out of the Kings pro-
tection, hee is out of
helpe and protection
bythe Kings Law, or
bythe Kings writ. .


thence forty out of the rings protection, and big ands and tenements, gods and chattelg


fosteiteb


—


7


Liba. Of Villenage.


foztcited tothe King, #that bis body (ball rematne in paífon at the Kings pleafare. Soodtous
Sas this offeitce of Piæmunire, that a man that Was attainte of tbe fame might hane bin fain
bpanp man Without danger of Lat, becaufe (k) tt was pꝛouided bp Law, that amaninight
doeto him as to the ikings enemy, andanpman maplasofullp Kill an enemte. Wut Queene
Elizabeth and ber Parliament * itking not the extreame and inhumane rigor of the La. tis
that point did pzowide that it ſhould not be laxofull for any perfon to fay anp perfon in anp
maner attainted (n 02 bpon anp Premunire,&c.Cenant in tale tg attainted in a premunire,he
fall forfeit the land but during his life, foz albett tbe ftatute of 16. R.2.ca. 5 enacteth,that tn that
tale their lands and tenements, qoos anb cbattellg hall be tozCeítto the king, that mutt be
vnderſteod of fach an eftate ag ye map Taxotullp fopfette, and that (g during his one itfe, And


thele generall Swords Doe not take away the fozce of the ftatuto De donis conditionalibus, but he 7


thalifozfette all his Fee ample lands, ſtates £62 lite, gods and chattells, and fo was ft reſolued
fn Trudgins cafe. ;


@, Car la ley le Roy & les briefes le Roy, &c. There bee three things
ag here tt appeareth wherby euery {ubtect (s protected,viz. Rex,Lex, & Refcripra regis,the king;
the Law and the Rings wwzits. Che Law ts the rule, but tt is mute; Che Ling tudgeth by
bis Judges, and thep are the fpeaking Law, Lex loquens. The procefle and the crecution

- hich is the life of the Law confilketh inthe ings Watts, So as he that is out of the 205
tection of the ing cannot be arded 02 protected by the kings Law, oz the Kings Wait, Rex


tueturlegem, & lex tuetur jus. (1) Beũdes men attatnted in a Præmunire, euerp perfon thar’


fsattatnted o£ high treafon, petit treaſon, o felony ts difabled to bzing ant action for hee is
* Extra legem pofitus, and ts accounted in La Ciuilicer mortuus.

Ft isto be vnderſteod that there is a generall protection of the hing, hereof Littleton here
fpeaketh, and this extends generally toallthe Kings Iopall fubtects, Denizens and Aliens
Within the Realmc, Whole offences haue not made them bncapable of it as befoze it appcaretl),
And tbercíg a particular protection by Wꝛit, whichis oncof the ikings toits that Littleton
herefpeaketh of, Chis particular protection is of tive forts, onc to giue man an immunity
oꝛ freedome from actions o fuites ; thefecond for the fafety ef bis perfon feruants and gode,
lands and tenements whereot he te lawfully poſſeſſed from violence, vnlawtull moleftation 02
Gong. Che Sr is of rightand bp Law, the fecondare all of grace ( fautng one ) forthe ges
nerall protection implycth as much, Othe frit ſoꝛt fore are Cum claufula (volumus ) fo cal⸗
ied becaufe the tozit hath this word ( volumus ) énit,viz, Volumus quod interim fit quierus de
omnibus placitis & quzrelis, & c. And the other agzotedíon Cum claufula (nolumus) fo called
forthe like reafon, Df protections Cum claufüla (volumus ) fuz Raping of picag and fuites
there be foure Rindeg,viz-Quia profecturus (fo called bp rcafon thep arc part of che Words of the
tozit) 2. Quia moraturus (ſo named fe? diftinction fo2 the itke caufe) 3.Quia indebitatus nobis
exiftitof the matter. 4. 10 ben any fent into the Kings feruice in Swarre ig tmpzifoned bepond
fea. Che tozmer are foz ſtaying of actons and ſuites in general, Che third is foz ftaping of
faites of the fuctiect fox Debts & duties Duchy the Kings debtoz tothem, D fthe fourth pou (bal
reade hereafter in this place. Foꝛ the former two, theſe nine things are to be obſerued fixit,
fo; bat caule thep ateto be granted, 2-fo2 what perfong they are allowable. 3,4 tbgecfolo time
is to be conSdered,viz. the tine of the purchafe of them, the time of the continuance of then,
and the time when tbep (ballbeca(t. 4. In what place the ferutceíg tobc perfoyawm, 5. 315
Swhat actions thefe protections are allowable. 6 Under What fcalc and to whom thep are di⸗
rected. 7.1050 isto allow, o2difallew of them, 8. 25p Whom thepareto be caff and in What
manner, 9.130% bpon tuft caufe thep may be repealed 02 diſallowed. 3] mutt but point at thefe
matters to make the ſtudious reader capable of them and referre him to the bokeg and
other Puthoztties at large being excellent points of learning. As to the firlk, tt a of two na⸗
tures, the oneconcerneferuices of Mar ag the tings fouwidier,æc.the other Motfedortte and coun-
cell, as tbc Kings Pmballadoz o2 Meſſenger Pro negotijs regni, both tbcit being for the pub
lique gwd of the Realme, paiuate mens actions and fuites mut be fufpenpes fo a conuentent
time; £02, lura publica anteferanda privatis, and agatne, jura publica ex privatis promifcue de-
cidi non debenr, (a) And the caufe o£ ‘granting of the protection muff be expꝛeſſed in the pro-
tecion, to the end (t map appeare tothe Courtthat tt ts granted Pro negotijs regni & pro bono
publico, (b )02 as fome others fay, Pur le common profit del realme. And Britton fafth Noftre
feruice, ficome eltreen noftre force, & le defence de nous & de noftre people, &c. * Aman in
execution in falua cuftodia hall not be delinered bp a Pꝛotectton.

(c) Eo the lecond thefe 392oted(ong arc wot allowable onip £02 men of fullage, but £o? men
Withing age, and for women, as necellary attendants pon the Campe, and that tn thie cafes,
Quia lotrix, feu nutrix,feu ob fterrix.

(d) Coꝛpoꝛations aggregate of manp are not capable of thefe two protections either Pro-
fc&utz, 02 Morature becaufe the — it felfe is tnutfibic, ano reſteth only ts

n2


cons


Setl 199.


130
1171.7. tit. Premhnire,F .5
17. H.7. Iuflice Spilmansin
Turberuiles cafe.
Kelwey, fo.195. Do. & Stud,
Lib. 2.cap. 32. «
Brooke,tir.P remunire, 2 V-
Temps. E.o. Bi] epBarloezcafe.
(k)3.4.H.8.Bre0k: Co en 196
* s. Eliz.en.1.


Biill,2x.Eli(. Hugins cafe
refolued per les Tujisves.

. H.4.20.S1mon
"Bewerleys cafe.


(1) 4. E.4.8. 1. €.4.1.5
30.2, 3.4. 8. Elif Dier. 245.
* Mich.9.€.3 eoram reges
‘Rot 84.Wars. $


Prote-§ Generall.

fron Particular.

Of the Generall, vid. lib.
(almyns cafe per totum.


(2)39.H.6.39. 3-H.6.

#18. Protectiom a. 13. R.2-
£4.16.

(b) Mirror cap.3.S.
Bricton,fe.281.Flera lib. 5.
cap. 7.8 dre. Braten

* 5 Marie ‘Dicer, 163.

(8) 19.H.6. 51. 30.£.3.2X
F.N.B.28.1. 6 1 £.3. Rot paw
3-part for the (ownte[fa of
War.

Cd) 3o.E.3,1, a1.£,4. 36.
21,£.3.97:


Lib.2.


(6) 35.4,6.3.43.E.3.23+
48.E.3.7. 4. H. s. protection.
107:

(£) 45. E. 3. prote! 37.3. H.6
18 30. 8. H.6.16:9.H.6.36.
49 E.3.18.33 £.3. preted,
54.21, E. 3. 14. H. 4.16.
45€. 5L protect. 40.

14, E. 3. prorell 66.

(g) 24. E. 3.26. 47.£.3. 5.
5.H. 505. 38. E. 3. 1. FAND.
28.4. ao. R. 2. prorect. 106.
22. H.6.28. 9. H,6.36. 43. E.
3:36.17. E. 3.34.3 5.E. 3.43
24-E,3.26. 1 3. E, 3. protetts-
1.7 1,14. €. 3.21065 63.
20.E,3 15i. 84.

(h) 7.H 4.3.4.

(1) 19. E. 3. pretctf. 80.8 t.
33.E 3. ibid. 5 5.16. E,2. i'd.
77 13,E.3.ib1d.70.41.€. 5.
sbid.9 4.41. E. 3. 32. 42 F.3 9.
$.H.5.7.3. H. 4.15.2. .2.
protel?.45.43.E.3.1bid 31.
2.H.6.22.21. H.6.41. 38. E.
312.7. H 6.21.33. E. 3. pron
Tell. 116.4.H.4.4. 29. E.3.
41.4 $.E. 3.24.28. 11. £4. 7.
F.N.B.28.4


(SC eee
6.39.44. E.3. 12.13 'R. 2.€8.
16.3. H. 4. 36.11. H. 4.7.
7.E. 4:17.38. H.6. I.
17.H.6.protect. $6.
10.E,3.54.13.€. 3. amercia-
ment 18.Lib.7.fol.7.8.Cal=
nint cafe. 1 3.R.2.cap 16.

(1) 4.4.6 22.17. E. 3.76.
33-E.3.tit.protelf. 11 5.
34.E.3.101d. 124. 37.E.3.79
29. E. 3.prote#.85.88..2.E,
A- 15-19. E. 3.proteéf 82.79.
Y3.€.3.i01d 73.9. E. 3.21.
3.H.6.55.4.H. 6.22. 11.H.
6.14.1 4 H.6.22.21.H. 6.10
27. H.6.4.28. H.6.1.3 5. H.6
58.44.E.3.2. 16.48. E. 3.8.
g. H.4.5.14.H.4.23.


27.E.3.98.

(a) 22.E.3 4.16.E.3,
protet.47. 44.€.3 16..3E.3
amerctament.18. 34,€,3.
Proteéfion. 12 3.

(n) 39.H.6. 35.F."N.B.
fol.28. Fleta,lib,6.cap.8.
Temps € 1 grand cape 26.'
(0) Bett fe.232.28 3.67 280,
Fleta lib.6.ca.8.aceerd.


(p) 1-E.3.25.-

(q) Lb.7.fel.8. Caluins cafe.
7. E.4.29. RN. B. 38.c g.5.
g.H.4.14.19.1. 6.35.
38.H.6.3. 33. H.6. 3.R.2.
Rot. Parliam.m.21. 32.£.4
prote#.18.8.R.2.ibid.125.
11.H.4 57, Regisft.indic.14,
36.H.6ai.protelf.27. 6.R.
2.thid.14.Regift.orse.88./ape.
(1) Brat. lib. 5.1 39.140.
"Britton. i81. Fleta lib. G.can.
7.8. dre. 14. £. 3. prete. 195
34.E.5.ibid. 122. 19. E. 3.
$bid.78. 3 3-E.3.tbtd. 99.


21.E. 3.13.
(f) 10. H.5. prote®.105,.


Capa.


Of Villenage. SeH.199.


conüberatíon of Dawe. (c) Protection for the Dufbanb fhall ferue alfo foz the wife, —

(£ ) Albeit the Vouchee, Tenant by refccit, preter in aide 02 garnilh be no parties to the tait,
pet before thep appeare a 3920tectton map be caft £02 them,becaule Shen the Demandant grants
the Wouchoz 02 reccit tn indgement of Law thep are made patute, but tf the Demandant cours
terplead the Vouchoꝛ 02 refceit, then ontíll ít beabiubgeb foa them, and fo pꝛiute in Lato,a 3920x
tection cannot be caft £o; them. And fo tt ig of rhe garniſhee, a protection map becaft for bim at
the day of theretozne of the Scirefac: (g) No Pꝛotection can beecatt foz tbe Demandant og
Plaintife, becaufe tbe Œenant 0? Defendant cannot fue a reſommons, 07 a resattachment,
but the Piaintife only that {ued out thefommons o? Attachment, ec. mult {ue alfo tbe refoms
mong ozresattachment. Andfo itis of an Acozin nature of a391aíntife tc, ag the Darntthee
after appearance, and anauowant,andtheitke. (h) An officer of the tings refceit 02 anp
other officerin any Court o£ Recoꝛd, whoſe attendance ts nece(Tarp for the Kings feruice op
adminiftratton of Juſtice being fued, cannot bauc a Pꝛotecton catt foꝛ bus,

Ci) In euery action o2 plea reall oz mixt againt tio ( Shere a Pꝛotection doth ipe) a vpꝛo⸗
tection catt fo? the one doth put the plea Without bap foz all. Doit is in debt, detinue anv
account. but intrefpatle, o5 anp Action immature of treſpaſſe, which ts in law feuerali Where
euerp one may anſwer without che other, there a Pꝛotection caft for tbe one (hall ferus foz him
only, vnleſſe they topne in pleading, 02 tf thep plead ſeuerall pleas, and one Venire facias is az
Warded againt all, there a Pzotection caft foz one, (ball put the plea without dap fo? all, and
thevefoze tn fozmer times, the Diainttfe bfeb tofuc out fcuerall Venire fac’ in thofecafes fos feare
of apaotcctíon,gc.

(k) Ag to the threefold time, Firſt, a 3920tecton profe&urz reguiarip muſt not be purchafen
hanging the plea, but this fapleth when he gocth in the Kings feruíce in a Uopage ropall, and
that is twofold, sither touching warre, and that only ts ben the 3s (ng himfelfe oz his Lieute⸗
nant, that ig prorex goeth, o? Shen anp gacth inthe kings Ambailage Pro nepotio regni, og
f0) the matrtage of the kings Daughter 02 the like, this allots called a Mopage ropall, Buta
Protection Moratur map be purchaled, and caſt pendente placito.

(1) Regularly a protection cannot becatt, but Swben the partie bath a day (n Court, and
Sohen tf he made default, tt ſhould faue his default : therefore When Execution is to be granted
agaítnft body, lands oꝛ gods, no protection can be caff becaufc the Defendant hathno dap in
Court. 3f a protection be cafkat the Nifi prius foz one, tEbefore the Dap inbanke ft be rcpea-
led bp Innotefcimus, pet becaufeit Was once well calf, it (bail fase bis default, but t the pꝛo⸗
tection be diſallowed, either for bartance, o2 that (tlap not in the action oz the like, there it ſhall
turne to a default.

Fla man hatha protection, anb notwithftanding pleade a plea, pet at another dap of contía
nuance,after that a protection map be caft, fo at a dap after an Œrigent,butafter appearance be
cannot ca(t a protection in that terme bnttll a new continuance be taken.

(n) Thirdip, Mo protection etther Profc&ture 02 Morature, ſhall tndure longer, thers a peare
anda Dap next aiter the teſte o2 date of (t, And fo itis of an Effoigne de feruice le Roy. Ff a
protection beare tefle 7. die lanuarij Bnd baue allowance pro vno anno, the refummong, re-ats
tachement ozregarntfhment map befucd s. Ianuarij the nert peare , andpetthat to the laff dap
of the peare.

And Where Britton treating ofan Eſſoigne bepond the Grecian Sea fn a Pilgrimage, ee.
faith thus, (o) Afcun gent nequident fe purchafent nous letters de prote&ion patents durable a
vn an oua 2.0u à 3. ans, & ialameyns fontattorneys generals, aufi per nous letters patents : &
ceux font bien & fagement, car nul grand Seignior ne chiualier de noftre realme nedoit prender
chemyn fauns noftre conge, car iffint poet le realmeremainer difgarny de fort gente.

Three things are herenpor to be obferned, Firſt, that this Was a protection of grace, where=
of moze ſhall befatd hereafter. Secondly, that (t was for fafetie of the great men of the realme,
and that thep ſhould make gencrall Attornies,ſo as no actions, oꝛ ſuits fhould be therby flayed,
Thirdly, (bp the Wap) that great men could not pafle out of the Realme Swithont tbe Kings
licence, (p) A protection granted to one; €c, vntill be returned from Scotland ,wasg difallomed
fo? the incertatntte of the time:

(q) Goethe fourth, the protection afiwell Morature ag Profe&ure muſt bee regularly to forme
place out of the Reaime of England,and that matt be to fomecettatne place, ag fuper falua cu-
ftodia Caliciæ,&c. and not to Carlifle 92 Wales, Which are Within the Realme, o2 tothe itke,
But tt map be to Ireland oꝛ Scotland, becaufe thep ate diſtinct Kingdomes, 02 to Callice, A qui-
taine, 02 the itke, but a protection, Quia moratur fuper altum mare ill not fcruc, not only, bez
canfe (ag fome thinke ) that mare non moratur, bat fo? the incertaintie of the place, and fo that
à great part of the Sea (g Within the Realmeof England. —

(r) Gothe fifth. In fome Actions.Pꝛotectlons (lal not be allowed by the Common Law,and
ín forie ations tbep are onfted bp Bat of Parliment, Actions at the Common Law, ag all
Actons that touch the Crowneas Appeales of Felonie, and appeales of Waphem, ( $, RÀ

ere


v2


Lib.2. Of Villenage. Setl.199.


Soberethe ing to folepartíe no protedion (s to be alloxocbín like manner inadeciestantum,
Sphere the Ling and the fubiec ave Plaintikes, but in late Ads of Parliament 3920tettong in
—— actions are erpzeilp oufted, A Pꝛotection map be caſt againſt tbe Queene the Conſort
of the Ring, ;

' Fn a wꝛit of Dower vnde nihil habet,no Pꝛotecion (s allowable,becanle the Demaundant
hath nothing to liue bpon, Otherwilſe it is ina tozttof right of Dower. Likewilein a Quarc
impedit, o2 ailife of Darreine pzefentment a Pꝛotection lieth not, for the eminent danger of
the laps. either lieth a Pzotecion in an Affife of Nouel diffeifin , becawfe tt (g feftinum re-
medium, to reftoze the Diſſeiſee tohis freehold, hereof he is wꝛongkully and Without iudge⸗
ment diffetfed, (u) In a quare non admifit , a 3920tedíor is not allowabie becaufe it ts
grounded bpon the quare impedit, andthe like tn a Certificate opon an allife £o? theltker:afon,
and fic de fimilibus. A Pꝛotection, quia profe&urus , ig not allowable (ag hath beenefatd) in
anp Acion commenced before the date of tbe 3920tetíon , vnleſſe it bee tna Wopage Kopall.
Cw) An Inkant is vouched, and at the Pluries venire fac, ayzotection was caft for the In⸗
fant, and difallowed, becanfe bis age muſt be adtudged bp the infpection of the Court.

(x) Bp Ac of Paritament no protection fhallbe allowed in anattaint- ¶ But at the Com⸗
mon La a Pꝛotection £02 one of the petite Flurie bad put the plea without Day for all) noz in
an Action againft a Gaoler foz an efcape, noz £o victuals taken o bought bpon the bopage oz
fcruíce, noz in Pleas of Œ refpalle, og other contract made 02 perpetrated after the date of the
fame Pꝛotection.

Cy) In a writ of Erroz brought bp an Jnfant opon a fineleuted, the Plantite {wed a Scire
facias againf the dLonu(e, fo; Whom a Pꝛotection Was caft , and she Court cramined the age
of the Plaintite, and bp infpecion ab(ubaeb him Within age, and recozoc® the fame,and then al=
loWed the Pzotection, and this can bee nomilchtefetothe 391a(ntife, Whereupon tt followerh,
that albett the Wlatntife dieth afterwards before the finebercnerled,pet aftcr big age adtudgedD
andrecozrded) his heire hail inthat cafe reucrfe the fine for the nonage of his Anceftoz.(a) And
foít Was refolued inthe cafe of Kekewiche ina tt2ít of Erroz bought bp him by the opinion of
* hole Court of the Kings Wench, otbersotfe it is, 1€ the Plaintike dyeth befoze big age
inſpected.

(b) Pete in tubictall its, which are in nature of Actions, Where the partie hath dap to
appcare an? plead, there a Pzotection doth lic, as tn waits of Scire facias bpon KRecoueries,
Fines, Judgements, dc. albeit by the Statute of W.ꝛ. Eſſoignes and other delayes be ouften
tn wꝛits of Scire facias, peta Pꝛotection Doth lictn tbefame, Doit (s (na Quid Iuris clamat
andthelike. Wut (n Wzits of Execution , ag haberefaciasfeifinam, Elegit, Execution vpon a
Statute, Capias ad fatisfaciendum, Fieri facias and the like, there no Pzotectton can bec caff fog
the Defendant, becaufe be hath no day in Court, andthe Pꝛotection ectendeth onip ad placita
& querclas, and mutt be alo wed bp the Court, Which cannot bec but bpon a bay of appeac
tance,

(c) Fin a wꝛit o£ Difccit bzought agatnft him that obtained and caff a Pzotection vpon an
bntrue furmife in Delay of the Plaintife, that Pꝛotection te allowable. Fin an Action brought
vpon the Statute of Labourers a 1920tedion doth ite, & fic de fimilibus.

(d) Cothe Seth, no wꝛit of 3920ted(on can be allowed, vnleſſe it bee vnder the great Seale,
(*) and ft ig Directed generally,

(c) Cothelenenth, the Courts of Juftice Where the Pꝛotection ts caſt, are te allow, oz diſ⸗
allow of thefame, bee they Courts of Recoꝛd of not of Recoꝛd, and not the Sbherife,oz anp o⸗
ther D fficer o2 Miniſter.

(f) Co the cighth,the Pꝛotection may be caff etther bp any franger,oz by the partie bünfelfe,
an Fnfant, Fem Covert, a Monke oꝛ any other may caf a Pꝛotection for the Cenant 02 Dec
fendant : and this difference there ts Shen a ftranger cafteth it, and When the Cenant o» De-
fendant cafleth ithtmfelfe. (2) Foꝛ the Defendant oz Cenant cafting tt , hee malt ſhew caufe
Swherefoze he ought to takeaduantage of the Pꝛotection, but an eftranger, need not (eM anp
canfe, but that tbc Cenant oz Defendant ts here bp 3920tedíon.

(h) As to tbe ninth, A Pꝛotection map be anopded three manner of Swapes: Sirk, vpon the
cafting of it before itbeallowed. Sccondip, by repeale thereof after (t bee allowed: bp difal=
lowing of it many waves, ag foz that (t lpeth not in that Action, o1 that be bath no dap tocaft
tt, ox £02 matertall bartance betweene the J zotccion and the Record, 02 that tt ts not vnder the
great Seale, 02 the itke. (i) Chirdip, Pfter it be allowed bp Innotefcimus, ag tf anp tarrie in
the Countric Without going to the ferutce for Which hee Wag retained, ouer a conuentent time
after that he had any Pꝛotection, o» vepatre from the famefernice, vpon infozmation thereof to
the Lord Chancelloz,he (bal repcale the Pzꝛotection (n that cafe bp an Innotefcimus. But a 39202

tection fball not be auoyded bp an auerment of the partie in that cafe,becaufc the Recoꝛd of the
Protection mus be auoyded by matter of ag High nature.
ké 3 (k) Ghere


131


(0 39.H.6.39, 43.8.3.6.d-
32.27. H.6.1 F.'N.B.28.
17.E.3.23.l1b.4. fol. 1 5. Dao
Cons cafe, Bratt. lib.5. fol.
139.140.


(u) t3. E.3.rir. proredtion. 63,
12,2. 3.:bid.69.
31.E.1.tbid. 112,


(w) ig. E. 2. prorelt. 111.
31, E. 3. tbid. 54.

(x) 23. H.8.cap. 3. 3 4.E.1.
protectio 38. 7. H.4.0ap. 4.

1. R. 2.cap. B.


(v) 21.3.24. 31.E. 3. pre.
fet. 97, L. 5.£.4. 50-3 s. H.6.
43:46. 8.E.4.8. 19.E.3.22,
13.E.3 proseë.73.


(a) Pafch. 1 2,14, Regis, in
the Kings Bench, a j


(b) 1 3-E.3, prere B. 72. Fleta,
lb.2.cap. i2, 40,E 3 18.
48.£.3.18.:9.37.H. 6,32.
21.£. 53.19.15. H.7.8.47.E,3
5:17-E.3.68.14.E. 3. pro.
Te8. 64.W. 2. cap. 45.


(c) 29.£. 3.proteéf 33.


(d) 35. H. 6.2. Artic. fuper
Cart.6.46.€.3. yetition 19.
(*) Lib.2.fol.17. Lanes café.
Lib.8 fol.68. Trallops cafe,
30. H, 6.25. 2.E,4,4,
ee 6.23.

€) 43.E. 3. protel¥.g6.
(f) 21-£.4.18,


(g) 38.H.6.35.


(b) 44.8.3.12.47.6.3.66


(i) 13. R.2.c4.16.11.H.4.g0
7.H. 6.22.22. H.6. 50.

3e. H.6.1. 19. H.6.3 5.
21.Ë.4.20. —
.44-E.3 2.39. E. 3. 4.5*
PE 3, pretel 86. 1
34.E.3.6hl. Tags


Lib.2.


(k) 44.E 3, 4.18.47.E. 3.5.
34.E 3.pretve@. 110. 28. H.6,
3+ 14. H.6.33, 30. H.$.5.
32.4.6.4.


(1) Regifirur.281.6.
F.N.B. 28.6.

33- H.8.ca. 29. in the preamble
41.E. 3 tit. executron, 38
18.€.3.1bid.56.27.E 3.85.6,
AE. 4.16, 3. li. Dier. 197.
Ror. Dat. 27. F. 3. part xm. 2
(mn) a5. E.3.62p.19.


(0) 41. E. 5.1 5. 17.E.5,75.
29. E,3.1 3. 4. E, 4.16.


(0) Regif. fape.
F.N.B.18.(.

(p) Vide lib,7.f6l.8,9.
Caluins cafe,


(3) Regifter.280 érc.
FW.B 39.1.8. (.D.2,


F.G.H,
Xenifier. 280.
Starut de 1 4.F. 2.
FN; 8.30.4.


Capt. Of Villenage. Seé.200:


Ck) There is a claufc in the Pꝛotecton tothis effect, Przfentibus minime valituris, fi con-
tingat ipfum, &c.à cuftodia caftri predi&i recedere. Oꝛ fi contingat iter illud nonarripere , vel
infra illum terminum à partibus tran(marinisredirc. Whereupon there be two conciuGons to be
bbferueb, a 5
Fick, That though the Protection be allowed by the Court foz a peare , pet (£ (t be repealed
by att Innorcfcimus, that the refommons 021Re-atatchment hall be granted bpon the Repeale
Sithin the pcare, for the 3920tedton that was allowed had the fato claufe (n tt, And ot that


opinion be our latter Bookes, and the repeale bp Innoteícimus Hould ferue foz itttie purpofe, -


it the La ſhould not be taken fo,

Sycconbiy, That albeit hee that had the Wzotecton cither Morature 02 Profecture, returne
into England, and baply be arrefted and in Prilon, pet if he came ouer to provide Munition,
iabiitinents of tibarre , victuals oz other neceilaries , it ts no breach of the fato conditionall
claufe , noz againt the Ac of 13 Richard.2. foz that in iudgement of Law comming fog
fuch things ag arc of neceflitic foz the maintenance of the Marre, moratur, accogding tothe (nz
tention of the Pzotectton and Statute afozefaid, And thus munch of the two firft4320tectiong,
Cum claufula volumus, Profeéture and Morature. ^

(1) Be to the third 3920tetíon Cum claufüla volumus , the King by big Pꝛerogatiue regu⸗
larly ig tobe preferred in papment of big dutte o2 Debt by his Debtor befoze anp fubiec, ais
though the Kings Debt o2 dutie bethe latter, andthe reafon hereof ts, fes that Thefaurus
Regis eft fundamentum belli & firmamentum paas. Bnd thereupon the Law gaue the ing
remedie by weit of Protection to protec his Debtor, that bee (boul not bee ſũed o» attachen
bntill he pato the kings debt, buc hereof grew fome inconuentence , fo2 to velap othermenof
thetrf{utts,the Kings Debts Were the moze ficwly pato, And for remedie thercof ( m ) it is
enadc bp the Statuteof 25 E.2. thattheother Creditors map aue their actions again the
Linge TDebto2; and to pzoceedto Fudgement, but not to Execution vnleſſe bec will take vpon


din to pap the Kings Debt, andthen he ſhall haue Crecution againk the Kings Debtor fez


both tbct$oo Debts. ,

This kind of Protection hath (as itappeareth) no certaine time limited in tt, Wut in fome
cafes the fubiect (bai be fariffied befoze the Ming, (n) For regularly whenſoeuer the King ig in⸗
titled to anp fine o? dutte bp the fuite of the partic.the partie fhall bee ſirſt fatiffied, as ina De-
Gestantum. And ſo ik in an Acton of Debt, the Defendant denie his Ded, an» tt ts found
again him he ſhall papa fine to the Hing, but tbc Plantite [bati be ſirſt fattffen , andioin aii
other itkecafe, Andfottis in Bils paeferred bpfubtets in the Starchamber there colts and
dammages (if anp be) ſhall beanfwered before the Kings fine ag it ts daily in experience,

The kourth 4320tetíon, Cumclavfulayolumus, ts Whena man fent into the wings Ser=
ice bepond Sea is tmpzrifoned there, fo as neither Pꝛotecton, Profecture, 07 Morature, Silt
fcruchim,and this hath no certaine time itmited init, (o) &obertof pou fhalireabe at largein the
Kegiſter and F N B.

(p) 0% are We at length come to Wzotecions, Cum claufula Nolumus, Bi Whtch fauing
onearcofarace, and ag hath bene fato are implyed vnder the generall Pzotectton, for ag Fitz-
herbert fapth cuerp lopall{ubtec ts inthe Rings Peotection. DE ticle Pꝛotections of grace,
pou [ball not reade much in our peare Wookeg, becaulethep taped no Actions 02 Duites(q)of


‘the diuers formes,of thefe pou fhall reade at large tn the Kegiſter, and F. N, B. which Mere to


long and needleſſe to be here recited, !

Æ be 3910tction um claufüla nolumus; that is o£ right (s that eucry fpirituall perfon may
fac a Pꝛotection foz him and hig gods, and forthe fermoꝛs of thetr lande and their gods, that
they fball not be taken bp the Kings Wuruepor , no2 their carriages oz chattels taken by other
Miniſters of the king , Which watt doth recitethe Statute of 14.E.s.

DF thefe 3910tetíong 3| cannotfap any thing of mine owne crpertence , fo albeit Dene E-
lizabeth mapntapned many warres, pet the granted fe 02 no Wzotecions , and ber reafon


v


Was, that he was no fit fubtect to be tmploped in Set feruice, that Swag fübted to other mens


actions, ieft fhe might be thought to delap Fuftice,
^


Section 200.


Neve d "€ 6, eft, bn home He fifth is , wherea
CF profelfe €L à eft enter & p20- man is entredand pro-


en Religion.  feffecnreligion: — feſſed in Religion, if -
U


Lib. ꝛ.


ſuiſt vn action, le tenant
oudefendant poit mon-
- firetque tivl ett enter en
‘religion en ticllieu, en
lorder De Saint Benet,
la eft moigne paofelfe,
Quen lorder Des Friers
- Preachers, ou minors, &
ta ctt freve paofctte, a iſ⸗
fint Des auters orders
De religion, ac, & De-
maundera tudgement ſil
ferra cefpondue, Ct la
caufe eft , pur ceo que
quant bn ome entra en
religion, a cft profeffe, il
e(t mozt en ley, a fon fits
ou auter coufin mainte=
naut lup enbetitera au-
xxbien ficde il fuit mort
en fait, Et quant il entra
en Religion t1 poit faite
fon teftament, a {es exe⸗
. tuto28, les queux epecu-
tors auctont bn action
De Det Due à lup Deuant
lentre en Beligton, ou
auter action que erecu-
- £023 potent auct. ficome
ilkuit mont en fait, Ct (il
ne fait tes executors
quant iLentra en religt-
on, Donques Lordinarie
poít commit? ladmini=
flratíon de tes biens a
auters homes , ficome tt
fuit mozt en fait,


Of Villenage.


fuch a one fue an acüi-
on, the Tenant or Defen-
dant may fhew thatfucha
onc is entred into Religi-
on infuch a place, into the
Order of Saint Benet, and
is there a Monke profef-
fed, or in the Order of
Friers, Minors and Prea-
chers, & is there a brother
profeffed, and fo ofother
Orders of Religion, &c.
and aske iudgement if hee
fhall bee anfwered,and the
caufe isthis , that whena
man entreth into Religi-
on, and is profeffed,
hee is dead in the
Law , and his Sonne or
next Coufin incontinent
fhall inherit him,as well as
though hee were dead in-
deed,and when he entreth
into Religion, hee may
make his Teftament and
his Executours, and they
may haue an action of debt
dueto him before hisen-
try into Religion,or any o-
ther action that Executors
may haue, as if he were
dead indeed. And if that
hee make no Executours
when he entreth into Re-
ligion, thenthe Ordinarie
may commit the Admini-
{tration of his goods to o-
ther, as if he were dead in
deed.


Setl.200.


(a) Jit (ato bc obfer-
ued tbat a ma doth
enter into Keligi⸗
onat bis firft com
ming, and liucth
vnder ebedtence,
but bcc is not pro⸗
fefled till a peare be
paff, o? fome time
of probation, And
he is fato tobe pro=
kelled when hehath
taken the habit of
Religion, € bowed
three things ,SDbc-
Dience, wilful 49 0=
uertie € perpetuz
ali Chaftitie, And
therefoze our Aus
thoz fait) bere cn-
ter & profeffe.


€ En Lor-
ders des Freres
Preachers , 0n


(b) Minors.
Ft appearcth tn
our Bokes that of
Friers there Mere
foure Divers. viz.
Minors, Auguftins,
Preachers and Car-
melites , and the
Francifcani, Capu-
chini, and Obfcr-
uantes are included
Onder the titic of
Minors, and they
Were called Obfer-
uants;becaufe thep
bee not Conventus
all 02 ioyned toges
ther in a Bꝛother⸗
hod, but liue ſepa⸗
rately, and bound
themfelues to obs
ferae moze ftrictip
the rights of thetr
Mader, (c) Cum
quis femel fe reli
gioni contulerit re-
nuntiat omnibus
que feculi funt,ha-
bita diftin&ione,v-


trum habitum probationis fufceperit, vel habitum profeffionis.


© Weft mort en ley. Ciuiliter mortuus


,02 mortuus feculo. (dy) here


ts a death (n bebe, and there is a ctutll Death oz a Death tts Law, Morscivilisand mors natura lis,


ag bete tt appeareth, and therefoze to ouft all fcrupics,
naturall lífe ec, FE the father enter into 1Religion, then
Mordancefter anb tbc weit fhailfap, (c) Si W, pater,
fumpfit, in quo habitu profcíTus fuit yt dicitur.


Leafes fo? life are ener mate during the
hall big fonne and hetre hanean afTife of
&c.die quo obijt habitum religionis af-


Œ Auxibien


132


(4) Br. G. lib. s.fo. 415.421.
ri1f.c4. 22. ſo. 39.

Fleta,lib.6.ca.41.

5. 8.2. tif. oral, 26,

3: H.6.24. 1.8.3.9.

7-H 4:2.Doëter & Std. 141.

24. R. 2 indgerment, 16 y,

11. R. 2, ibid. 107,


(b) 4.H.4.ca. t7.
354 H.8.ca.12,


(c) Zra&, fo. 421.6.


(d ) BraGon, fo. 391.426.
‘Britton fe. 236.250.251.
Fleta, lb. 6.04.41.

(e) F.N.2.196. 5.8.4.3,


*


Libr, Capit Of Villenage. Seét.200,
f «| Auxibien come il fuit mort en fait. But pet totheee purpofeg,


profeffion, that (8, the cintle death, hath not the effet of a natural death.
Firk, This ciuile death fall neucy derogate from bis one grant, noz be anp mean to atiopb


ít, Bnd therefore tf Cenant tn Catie maketh a feoement in ter, and entreth into Religion,
his iſſue fhal baue no Feꝛmedon during his itfe,becaule that ſhould be (n derogation of bis on


(f) m — "du Grant, and be a meanc to auoyd the fame, :
es —— (f ) Secondip, Ht ſhall ncucr giue her auatle, Without Whole confent hee could not bane
214E.4ud4e entred into Religion, andtherefore his wife after his ciuile death Mhallnot bee endowed, bnt(li


bis naturall death. But (f the wife,after herhufband hath entred inte 18 eligton,alien the Land


Sohich ig her owneright,and after her bulband tg deraigned,thehufbandmay enter and auo®


the altenatton,

Chirdly, It thail not woꝛke any Swzong 62 preiudiceto a ftranger that hath a former right,
and therefore tf the Dilleifoz entreth inte theligion, and (s pzofcfíco, fo ag theiand difcends te
bis heire, pet this difcent fball not toile the entrie of the Dilleifer,

(Q) (E43 (2) 4 $»oman cannot be pꝛokeſſeda Nunne during the life of ber hufband: but fome doe

(h) 18.H.6.33-perForte bolo a Diutrütic,(h) that ante carnalem copulam, the hufband 02 Wife map enter into Religion

without any confent, but poft carnalem copulam neither of them can without confent of other,

(i) 31.E.3-Cellufion 29. (1) But (£a man holdeth lands bp Knights feruice, and is profeffed in Religion, his bepre

(K) 34-€.3.Garanty7s. within age,he (ball be in Ward, (k) It 3| be dilletfod and mp brother relcafes With Warranty,

Vi S thi Chapiero| ra^ and is protested in Religion, anb the Warrantie difcendeth bpon me, this warrantie (ball bínbg

gn. me, becaufe 3] ambis hetre , and fuch 3inberítance ag my bzother had (ball difcend bpon mee,

(1) 21. R2. Tudgm.265. (!) And ifone 3iopntenant be pzofe((co fn Weligton, the land fball ſurutue to the other. FE a

man 02a woman be profeledin Religion tn s2ozmandie, oꝛ in any other foꝛreine part, fuch a

p2ofeflion fhali not difable them to bzing anp Action in England, becaufe it Svantetl) tríall,

but thep mult be pꝛofeſſed in fome boufe of Religion Within this IK calme,foz that map be tried

by the Certificate ofthe Davinartc,fo ag of foꝛreine pzofc(tione the Common La taketh no

(m) ro.F.3.511. 14-F 3. knowledge, (m) And pet infomecafe one that is profelle in Religion Within the Kealme

kae — Ci fhallhauc an Action, ag ££ bebe made an Œrccutoz, o2 t£ he be an Adminiſtratoꝛ, be Hal main
HR 370 T0 taine an Action not in bis oSone right, but fn right of the Dead.

(2). 44.8.3.9.Nenabilty 3 (n) Fea Monbe be made a Wihop, o» a Partſon, 02 a Vicar, he fhall bauc an Action cone


|


1 4.H.8. 16, cerning his Wihopricke, Parſonage, 02 Wtcarage, & fic de fimilibus.

(0) 2.H.4.7. 8.H.5.6. (o) Andifa Monke be Farmer of tbe King,veelding arent, be (all aue an Action concer= |
7-E.4-30 4463.4. ningthat arme, And albett Littleton fpeaketh gencralip of one that is profeffed in Religi⸗
cam — Nonabili- on. pet mul tt not be vnderſtood of the Soucratgne o2 Head of the religious Yonfe , as of tbt —


(*) rali. fo. 155316, 429. Abbot, Pꝛioꝛ, 02 thelike, (*) foz albett they be profelled ix Religion, pet by the policte of the
Mir.c.2-§.14. 14.4.4.37-6. Lato, they are perfons able to purchafe, and to (mplcab, and to be impleaded, toſue, and to bee
5.H.7.36. Vid.Seit.196.  fued foranp thing that concernes the boufe of Religion, for otherwiſe the fjoufe might be pre=
14.E,4.36. {udiced, and other men alfo of their lawtull Actions. And this is theantient Law of Gng=
(p) Mir.vb.fupra. land,ag tt appeareth tn thefe M0208, (p) Des biens des gents de Religion appent laétion al Chiefe

en fon nofmc pur loy & fon Couent. Wut bat (£a Monke, ec, Were beaten, Wounded, o2 im⸗
(q) 22.47.87. 21.E.3.41, patfonco, ac, Doth the Law gine no remedie therefore : Pes verilp, (q) fozin that cafe the Ab=
43. — — 5 — bot and the Monke ſhall topnetn an Action againſt the wꝛong doer, and ik the $ozít bc, Ad
Hi E = egeta > damnum ipfius Prioris, the Waꝛit ($ god; and (f {tbe ad damnum ipforum, tt ig god alfo, Alſo


Ed.i.n. 19.0.6.7.b. {fa Wonke be by confptracte falfelp and maliciouflp indicted o£ -Felonte and Wobberte,and af=

24.E.3.34.6.45- terwards (8 laxofullp acquited, bis Soueraigne anb he (ball topneina wait o£ confpiracieand

77-R. 2. Nenabiluy 3,9. thelike, Bnd Where Littleton fpeaketh of a man that (9 profelled in 38 eligion, the fame Law (c
of a Nunne, fanétimonialis mutatis mutandis.

(t) 4H. 3-Br.766, (1) @ wife (c difabicd to fue Without her bufband, as much ag à Monke to Without his
Syoucraígne, and pet Weread in bokes, that in fome cafes a Wife hath had abilitie to {ue and

(Q 3-H.4.f-7.0. be fuco Without her bufband: (^) Foꝛ the wife of Sir Robert Belknap, encof the Juſtices o£


the Court of Common 191cag, Whe was exiled op baniſhed bepond fea, did ſue togit in her
one name, Without her hulband, he being altue ; Mbereof onc fapo, Ecce modo mirum,Quod
foemina fert Breue Regis non nominando virum coniunctim robore Legis.

(¢)10.E.3. 53. (t) King Edward the third brought a Quare impeditagaínff the Ladie of Maltrauers anb thea
pleaded that the ag Couert of Baron; whereunto (t wag replpco fo: che Bing, that her huſ⸗
band the 1010 Maltrauers, Mag put ít exile for a certaine canfe,and the was ruled to anfwer.

(à) 1.H.414 Cu) ing Henrie the fourth brought a 102ít of ward againſt Sibel B. Soho pleaded that

1 fhe was Couert Baron, ec, hereunto (t was replied fox the ting, that ber bufbano for a

crime that he had committed againt the King and the Peres, Wasrelegate oz ecticd into Gaſ⸗

coigne, there to remaine dntill he obtained the Kings grace: And Gafcoigne cbtefc Juſtice, x
affenfu fociorum, awarded,that (be ſhould anfwer.

Mit Th Egerton 3,02 Chancelloz, in his argument Which he publithed apart bp himſelle in

Calg


Lib. Sei#.200%


: OF Villenage.


gf tbe Ladie Relknaps cafe in 2.H.4.7. which occafoned me to fearch,and opon search 3| found
shat the like Judgement had bin given before at the Parliament holden. in Cro Epiph, v. 19.
Edw.1. Wherethe cafe Was, Tyat Thomas of weptand being abiured the IR calme for Felo⸗
nie,in the pear befoze, Margeriede Mofe bis wife, and Richard fone of thefapd Thomas,ers
hibited their petition of Right into the Parliament, foz tbe Mannoꝛ of Sobbit, wherein her
bufbanb bab but an cffate fo: life topntlp Sith her, e the inheritance in Richard tbefonby fine.
The Earie of Gloncefter , Loꝛd of tbe fee, (Who claiming the land bp Eſcheat, had taken the
poſſeſſion thereof) alledged, Quod non fuit iuri confonum quod aliqua foemina intraret in ali-
- quas terra; viuente marito fuo, eo quod prefatus Thomas abiurauit Regnum & adhuc viuit, &
afferitidem Comes nunquam huiufmodi cafum aceidiffe & inde petit poft multas allegationes
‘quod poffit predi&um manerium tenere vt eíchaetam fuam; (uper quo per ipfum Dominum re-
gem praeceptum fuir, quod tam Iuftic fui de vtroque Banco quam czreri de Regno fuo tam mili
tes quam Seruientes in legibus & confuetudinibus Anglic experti mandarentur, quod effent co-
ram Rege & cius Confilio, &c. ad certiorandum ipfum Kegem qualiter & quomodo in cafu ifto
fuerit procedendum, & qualiter temporibus. prateritis: &  antecefforum forum in cafibus
confimilibus fieri confueuit , & interim fcrutantur Recorda de confimilibus, vbi recitantur
duo vcl tres confimiles cafus. Er quia licet prius non videbatur aliquibus iuri confonum fuiffe
quod vxor in vira virifecandum fàn&tam Ecclefiam,qualitercunque deliquiffet quoad forum Re-
git, non poffet nec debereta viro fuo feperari, & fic quicquid foret in poffeffione vxoris, conuer-
-teretur in poteftatem viri fi, & hoc manifefte imminucret contra confuetudinem Regni. Et ctie
 amquia quidam dubitabant quod de poffeffionibus & bonis vxoris vir poffit aliqualiter fuften:
"tari, Tamen coram Confilio Domini Regis vocitis Thefaurar & Baronibus & Iufticiarijs de
vtroque Banco concordatum eft, quod pradiéta Margeria rehabeat ta em feifinam, &c fecun-
dum purportum finis prædict. &c. pater ctiam confimile exemplum tempore Henrici patris regis.
F boueciteo this folemnerelolution the more at large, becaufe there be many excellent chings
- £obt obferaco in it: foag bp that Which hath bene fapb, it plainip appeareto, that this opinion
concerning the habilitie ofthe wife of a man abiured og baniſhed, was not ft hatched by the
^ Judges in Henric thefourths time. And tere is to be obferged, that an abiuration, that fg a
Deportation foz eucr into a forreine Land, Itke to zofellion , (whereof our Puthoz fpcaketi)
here) is a ciuile death, that ts the reafon that the wife map bring an : dion, oz map be implea=
Ded during the naturalliitc of bcrbufbano, And foít is, (£ bp Act of Parlt iment the hulband
-beattainted of Creafon op Felonie, and ſauing bis life, is baniſhed fox euer, as Belknap, Ec.
Sas, this is a ciuile death, and the Wife may fue ag a Feme fole. Bnd hereby poumayp vnder⸗
ſtand pour Bokes Which treat of this matter. Wutil the huſband by Act of aritament,yauc
indgement to be exiled but for a time, which fore call a WRelegation.that ts nociuile death. And
in8.E.2. ait Abiuration ts called a diuozce betweene thehufband and Wife, Sed opus eft in.
terprete; for by daw no Subiec can be ertled o2 banthhed big Countric, w'yercby he ſhall per-
dere patriam, but by authozitie ef Daritament, o2 (n cafe ef Dbiuration, and that mult be bpon
an ordinarie proceeding of Law, ag (t Wag in this cafe of Weyland.
Another erample We haue in our Bokes totbís effet : Ifthe hulband had aliene the Land
of bis wife, and after had committed felonic and bene abturedthe calme, the wike fball hauc
— a Cuiin vita in big life time, agreeable Sith thefapd refolutton in Parliament, £o? that the ab=
turation Was a ciutie death, j
Se in the Regifter, a oman Was banifhed out ofthe Towwne ef Caltce fos adulterie, by
the Law oz cuffomeof that pl: ce,and there appeareth Carta pardonationis p:o mulierc bannita.
Sed nos non habemus talem confuctudinem.
(a) Wut by the Common Law, the Wife of the King of England ts an exempt perfon from
the King, and igcapable of lands o2 tenements of the gift of the King, as no other Feme couert
18, and map fueand befuen Without the King, forthe wiſedome of the Common Law would
hot baue the ting (whofe continuall care and ſtudie (3 foꝛ the publique, & circa ardua. Regni)
to be troubled anb difquicted fozfuch prtuate and pettte caufes : fo ag the wire of the iking of
England t& of abilitie and capacitic to grant and totake, to fue and befued ag a Feme fole bp
the Common Law,
(b) And fuch a Quene hath many pꝛerogatiues, as the (ball find no pledges, Foz fuch (e her
dignitie ac be (Dallnot be amerced.
The Dueene no: the Kings fonncare reſtrained bp the Statute of 1.H 4. cap.6. concerning
grants by the King.
(c) Ana Quare im
tbt cafe of the king,
(d) FE any 2Batlffe of the Ducenes bringan Acton concerning the Bundzed, he ſhall fay,
In contemptum Domini Regis & Regina.


COT T eek nt p


pedit brought by her, lome fap that Plenartie (g no plea, no moze than in


LL


i! & be


Caluins cafe De Pott-Natis , demanded What former Prefident there was tot the Warrant or, 5, pesi


T4


133


x?


Note the antient triall of diffi-
quit raatiers in Law,


"The great shthoritie of Iudicis


all Records and Prefidents.


A fülemserefülutian of she *
Lay in hu point


8.E.2 feron.4a$.


So refalusd 1n Parliament, vp-
onthe wiaking of tae Statute off
35-El.ca.t.

€xilium Hugonu de Spencer
patru & fiii tempore E.2.

gi E. n ( wrinvtis 1t.


Regis fe. 312.b.


(a. )Videin my Preface tothe
fixe boske, This was Law be-
fere the Conquelt x
16. E. 3.27.0. 508. 3o. E. 3. y.
18.E.3.1. 32 E.3.21.
49.E. 3.4. 49 Aff. 8.
11. H. 4. 67. 14. Ed. 3. Vou-
cherr10. 20.E.3. Newabsl.ge
31-E.3. Quar. 1mp.1 46.
3.H.7,14.19. H.6.2.
28.H,6.13. 7. H.7.7.4.
26.H.6. Aid ie 324.
Elet.l.2.c4.63.m Fine.
Pl.Crm.231.5tanf. Prer. 10.6.
(b) 8.€.3.2:33.€.3, Brie
916. F.'N.B.i01.4.

(c J18.£.3:32:34.6.3.3 50


75
32 E.3. Brẽ. 346.
9.8.3:33*


£u


IC


Lab


à (€) F.N.B. 235.4.


(f) F.AC3.1.F.


(g) 14 E. 3. V eucher, 110.
21.E.3.53. 22.8. 3.3.6.
17-E. 3.65. 16,€.3.17.
.E.3.4.15.E.3. Aide del
966. 10.E.3.18.
26. H.6. Aide le Rey 24.
(h)a1.E.3.13. 34. E. 3.
Prorect. 123. 11. H. 4.67.5.
1) 3o. E.3.5.
dra: de 25.E. 3. de
Predisianibus.
(1) Res. Parliam.
3.4.6.7.9.
(m) 4.E 4.35. 6.E.4.4-
4$.£. 3.10.4. 18.E.4. 19.
22.H.6.5. 5. H.7.25. 5.


Pl.(em.180.281.
(dao safe.


(3) Braften, lib. c. fo. 41 5
46. 427.F leta lib.6.ca. 44.
Britten, 00.49 0.135.


SEN.B.64.F,


(b) BraBen,426.b.acr.


Caps.


Of Villenage.


be Duane (ball pay no Colle,


(c) Bethe Cenantof the Queene alten a certainepart of his tenancte to onc, and another …


part toanotbcr, the Queene mar otftrame in any onepart foz the Whole as the Ling map boc ;


but other Lords (halt diſtreyne but foz the rate, anb therefore where the Queene fo diſtreye |


neth, there Ipeth a togtt Deoncrando prorata portione. (f ) Che wꝛit of rightthall not be dix


rectedtothe SQ ueneno moe then tothe hing, but tober Bailite, otherwile (p ig When anp ——


is Lord.
ics 3m cafe of aide prier of tbe Duene, itíg Domina regina inconfulta, and the caufe of the


aide pater (ball not bc Counterpleaded no moze than in the sings cafe. And ſee where the aide
fbalbe granted of the Xing and Queene, and Where of the Queene only, and the of the King.


(h) Wut a3920tecíon thailbe allowedagaint the Queene, but not againk the ting, neither
chall the Queene be {ued bp petition but bp a Præcipe. (1) Che Queene is not bound bp the


ftatute of Merlebridge fog datuing a Diſtreſſe into another County.
(k) 3ifanp doc compalle the death of the Queene, and declare it bp awp ouert fact, the very
intent is treafon, ag in the cafe of the Ring.


(1) 420 man mag marry the Queene Dowager without the Kings licence. But ict 03 now


returne to Littleton,


€ I| poet faire fon teflament & fes executors,crc.(m) If A.be bound to
the Abbot of D. A.(g profefleda Monke tn the ſame Abby and after 19 made Abbot chercof,
be ſhall hauean action ef debt again his one Executoꝛs.


© Donques lordinary poet commis adminiftration,erc.ficome il fuit mort
en fait. (0) Note the ftatute of 31. E.5.ca. 11. that giueth actions to


the Domntnifratozs fpeaketh of a man that dies tntclate, Which bp tbe Puthozity of Licrleton
extendeth afSwelitoa ctutll death agtoa naturall.


(C E Xcommenze, ex-
Communicatus ,


excommunicatio. (a)Si-
cut quis poterit habere lepram
in corpore , ita & in anima.
Excommunicato interdicitur
omnis actus legiteimus, ita
quod agere non poteft nec ali-
quem convenire, licet ipfe ab
alijs poffit conveniri.
Excommunicatio eft nihil
aliud quam cenfüra a Canone
vel judice Ecclefiaftico prolata
& infli&a priuans legitima
communione Sacramentorü,
& quandaque hominum.
* Pt ts ocutbeb into the grea⸗
terano tbe leffet, Minor eft
per quam quis à Sacramento-
rum participatione confcientia
velfententia arccatur. Maior
eft qu non folum à Sacra:
mentorum verum ctiam fidc-
lium communioneexcludit,&
ab omni actu legittimo fepa-
rat & dividit, but either of
them doth btfabictl) the party,
(b) Cum excommunicato au-
tem nec orare nec loqui nec
palam, ncc abfcondite, nec
vefci,licet excepris quibufdam
perfonis. Wut enerp Œrcoma


Sed. 201.


Cf Coviet,loubn

by poe eft ex⸗
commenge pet la ley
De faint Eſgliſe, a il
fuit bn action real
ou perſonal le tenant
oudefend, poít plede
que celup que ſuiſt eft
excommenge, t ð ceo
couient mie Ictt De
Leueſq; fouth fon
feale , tefimoignant
lercommengemet, &
Demaundera iudge-
met (il ferva refpon-
due,tc, Mes en ceft
cas fi le Demandant
ou plaintife ceo ne
poit Dedire.le bte na-
batera mp, mes le
iudgement ferra, que
le tenant ou Defen-
dant alet quite fang


four,


He vi.is, wherea

man is excOmuni-
cated by the law of ho-
ly Church, & he fueth
an action reall or per-
fonall, the renant or
defendant may pleade
that he that fueth is ex-
cómunicated & of this
it behoues him tofhew
the Bifhops letters vn-
der his feale, witnef-
fing the excómunica-
tion &ask iudgement


ifhe fhal be anfwered, !


&c. but inthis cafe i£
the demandät or plain
tife cannot deny it,the
writfhalk not abate,
but the iudgement
fhall be, that the tenant
or defendant fhall goe
quite without day, for


i
i


——
p:
Lib.2.
four,pur ceo d quant
ie Demandant ou
plaintife ad purchafe
les letters De abfo-
lution, a ceux font
monftres a le court,
il poit aii vn reſom⸗
mong, ou tcattacb-
ment fur fon ozigt=
nal,folonque la na-
ture de fon bte, Wes
en ies auters b,ca-
fes le bre abatera, tc,
fi le matter mte ne


Of Villenage-


this, that when the de-
mandant or plaintife
hath purchafed his let-
ters of abfolution,and
fhewed them to the
Court, he may haue a
refummons ora reat-
tachment vpon his o-
riginall, after the na-
ture of his writ, &c.
But inthe other cafes
the writ fhall abate,
&c.ifthe matter fhew-
ed may not bec gain-
faid.


Seti.201.,


municatton difablcth not the
partte. (c) It Walites and
Commons oz any other Coꝛ⸗
poration aggregate of manp
bing an ion , Excom-
mingement tn the Bailikes
fbati not difable them, foz that
thep fucand anfiwer by At=
tozney , other wife it ts of a
folc Cozpozation, But it Ex⸗
ecutoꝛs oj Adminiſtratoꝛs
be excommunicated, thep map
bee diſabled, becaufe they
which conuerſe Sith a perſon
excommunicate are ercommu=
nicate allo. (d) 31£ a Biſhop
be Defendantan (ercommunt=
cation bp tbe fame) WBiſhop
agatntt the Plaintike thal not


Dilable him, ano it (ball be tn=


tended for tie fame caule, tf


poit eftre Debit, -another be not fhewed,


€ Letter del ene(que defouth fon feale. (c) one can certifie excom-
eneugeiment but only the Wilhop, vnleſſe the 1Bifbop be bepond fea of in remotis, 02 one that
hati) ordtnary turtfoicton,ano is immebtate D ficer tothe ings Courts, Ast c Archdeacon
of Richm. oz the Deane and Chapter tu time of vacation, (f) Wut tn ancient time euery
D ffíctall oz Commiflary might teftific Excommengement in the tings Court, and fo? the mifz
chiefe that enſued t)ercupon tt was oꝛdained bp Parliament, that none ſhould teſtiſſe Œrcom-
tengement but the Biſhop only.

(s) FE a Withop certifie, that auot her Wilhop hath certifted him that the partie Which ts his
3D iocc(an (3 Excommunicated, thts Certificat opor anothers report is not fuFicient. (Ch) Fe
the Biſhop of Rome, ozany other bauíng fozreine Anthortty Dot!) crcommunicate any ſubiect
of this Realme, and certtüetb fo much tinber bte feale of Leade, this ſhall not vifable the party,
Foꝛ the Common Law dilalowes all Acts done in difability of any fublect of this dA calme by
anp foraine power ont of the Bealme,as things not authentique whereot the Judges Hold
giue allo wance. (:) BF the Withep certificth the Œxcommunication onder feale, albeit je dy⸗
eth, pet the Certificate Mall ferme (k) Si quis innodatus foerit per excommunicationes diuerfas
pro diuerfis delictis, & profert litteras abfolutionis de vna fententia non erit abfolutus quoufque
de omnibus alijs abfoluatur.


¶ Esefque. Epifcopus, a Biſhop ts regularly the kings imme⸗
Diate D Ficer te the kings Court of Juſticeo in caules Eccleliaſticall, And all the Withopricks
én England are of the Kings foundation, andthe Bing ts Patron of them all, (1) anv at the
Grif they were Donatiue, and fo (t appeateg bp ovr bakes, and by Acts of Parliament and bp
Billozp , and that Sag Per traditionem anuli & paftoralis bacculi.i. the crofier. ‘nd
Bing Henry the Arf, being perſwaded bp the Wilhop of Rome to make them electiue by eheir
Chapter ez Couent refuled it. (m) Wut King Iohn by hig Charter acknowledging the cuz
Éome and right of the Crowne tn former times, yet gran ed De communi concenfu Baronum,
- that they thouid be eligible, which after Was confirmed bp diuers Acs of Parliament, And
afterward the manncr and oder afwell of election of Archbifhops and Biſhops, ag of the
Confirmation of the election, and dLonfetration (n) igenaced and expꝛeſſed tn the ffatute of
25.H.8, Wut bp the fatutes of 31.H.s, and 1.E.6.thep Swere made Bonatine by the Rings
Letters patents, both which ſtatutes are repealed, and the flatute of 25.H.8. Both pet remaine
tn kull Force and effect,

Aud Where Littleton faith, thatthe Biſhop vnder his feale muft teftific,ec. (t ts fo bee
Enoione, (o) that none but rhe ings Courts of record, ag the Court of Common pleag, the
Bings bench, Flufkices o£. Gaole deltuctp, andthe likecan Wetteto the Withop to cettífie ba=
Gardp, muliertie, lopaiticof Matrimony andthcitke Ecclellaſticall matter: forttis a rule ín
Law, That none buttbe King can weite to tbe Biſhop to certifie, and therefore no tufcrtour

„as London, Norwich, Yorke, oz any other Fncozpozation can Write to tbe Biſhop, but

Cp) inthofe cafes the plea muft be remoncd inte the Court of Common pleag, and that Court

mutt Gite to the Biſhop, andthen remaund the Record againe. Bnd this Was done tn refpcit

of the honour and reverence which the Law ae * Biſhop being an Ecclelalticall Juve:
z an


34


(¢)30.P.3.1 5. 42. E. 3. 13. m
31, H.6.30. 21. E,4,49.


Cd) See Artic. Clerí.ca.7.
5.Ë.3.8. 8.E.3 70.

9. H.7.21. 10.H.7.8.dr. 9.
18.E.3.55. 28.€.3 97.
16.€.3.Excom, s.
20.E, 5 ibid. 9. 3. H. 4.3.


(e) Bratt ce lits c fo. 425. b.

32. 4.15. 20. H.6.17.

20.E. 3. Excemmiengement 10. ,
3i-E. 3. bid. 29. 44.€.3.
Pad1;. 11. B. 4.14.

F.'N.B 64.65.2139.

7.E. 4.14. 8.H.6.3.

"Regiir.67.

(t) 11.H.4.62.1m Debt,

(g) 33-E. 3. Excom. 19,

F.N.B.65.


(h) 16 E.3 Excom.4.
31.E. 3.sbid. 4. & 6.
30.497 ig. B.N.B,64,
4-H.7.15. 12.E. 4.15,
14.41.4014,


Ci) 14.€.3.Exrom.8,

8. E. 2.sbid. 26.

(Kk) Hill. (4.£.3. Coram
"Rege, Lenden in Toefanr,


(U) 17.E.3.f.40. 2 5.E.3.
cap.de Prom, 25 H.8.
ca,10.159.3.fo.7 3 decafe de *


‘Deane & (h:prer de Norwich
Matt.Par.pag.62. *
Vid. Seſt. 33.134. og 4


2^
(m) Ror. Parent. vs, Ianary wat oy,


17. Regis Iobamars. Oye

die 252. (] ct L s
35-E.1. Lejlat.de (arlifie. Q ge Aen of
25-€.3.Leflarur de Prouiff. y 4


13. R. a. ca. 2.
(n) 25.H.8.c.22.


Dr ;
e L2
(o) 2.E,3. (erone,160.
8.E.3.59. 24.E.3.33.
44.E. 3.28. 8.2.2.
Conufans 88.


(p) 4x.E.3. 42.E.3.fo.6.

18.£.3.61, 14. H.4.25. 7"
3. H. 4.12. Regif.7.6, 1
F.N,B.6.E.


-


Lib.2.


(a) 8.E.3. 52.36. H. 6.31.
111. Quar. Imp, Brooke 109.
35.H.6.30. 11. H. 6. 3.
14.£.3.3 3.

(b) 15.E. 3.Conufans 4t.
urifat#.24.49.€.3.2.
Vide SeH.1 34.

(€) Braff. lib. 3.106.

(d) Fleta lib. 5.cap.24-
Britton. fol. 248.5.


(*) Brat? lib. . fel.435.
YI Ra Excom.15.13.E.4.8
3A [[ p.a.


Vide Self. 61.


(e) 51. H. 3.cap. 1.7. 1-
Marlebr.ea.13. 32 H.8.e4.21


CF) Articul fier Cart.ca.Yg
28.E.1.
(g) 8.H.6.20.30.H.$.35.
8. Eli( . Dier. 552.


(q) JMirrer.cay. 2. S. 15.
"Erat lib. S. fel. 3 34. & lib. 4.
fel. 5 5. "Britton.fol. 179.5.
Fleta.lib. 6.cap.6.Y3.E. 4.15.
(*) 11. H.6.23 «15.8.3.
sour,22. 31. E.3.29. 15. Aff.
Bruton, fol. 10.6.


ét) Fertefcue im libro delau-
abus legs Anglia.

Mirror .ca.4.§. Sept ebofe: di-
furbent iudgement mortels.


Af) E:b.9.118.b. Zanchers


cafe.


(a) Attic fapercart.whi fupra.
Bie mirc
Y3. Mff. 4.22..4/:79. 3. H6.
"fifa 2.9. E. 4. 5.2.27. €. 3.
1.3. t eap. vltimo.

€) F-2N.3.177.D 5.4 ff.
7-14. Ma.24. E 3.31.
39.E.3.20.9.£.4.18. 13.€,
4.15.8. H. s.Error.85.


12.E 4.15.


(b) 41. E. 5.Tour.16. 8.E.4.
4. 1.H.6. 4.27. 4ff:33.

(c) 3.E.2.auowrie,188.

I g- £.3.fewr. 26.32, F. 1.20.
YE. 3.3.05. o. fel. 40, (Cotintee
de Salops cafe, 33. H, 6,42.


(Capt. Of Villenage. Seét.201.


anda Lezbof Parliament, bp reafon of the Waronte which eucrp Withop hath. Bnd this wae
the reafon (a ) a Quarc Impedit did Ipc of a Church tn Wales in the County next adiopning,
fo; that the Lozbthips Warchers could not Swzite to the Withop, (b) neither (ball conufance be
granted it a Quare Impedit, becanfethe tnferiour Court cannot Sozíte to the Wiſhop. Ans
herewith agræth Wntiquitis. (c) Nullusalius preter regem potcft cpifcopo demandare inquifi-
tionem faciendam, (d) Bnd another {peaking efiopaltie of marriage, Necalius quàm rex fü.
per hoc demandaret epifcopo, quod inde inquireret, epifcopus alterius mandatum quam regis
non tenetur obtemperare ; and therewith agreeth Britton alfo,


€ Le Briefe nabatera dre. Abateríg à French 10020, and (igniti-
eth Deftruere og Proftruerc to deftrop ox pzoftrate, Ant Abatement de bricfe is a proftration gg
ouerthrowing of the wait. d . ! 2

€ * Alera quite fauns iour, &Ic. That is to goc quiet without any
continuanceto anp certaine Dap, and therefore the Defendant ig not bound to any Certatne ats
tendance, onttli tbe party purchafeth his Letters of abfolutien, and the reattachment o rea
— be ſued, the entrie of which award is Idco loquela pradiftaremaneat fine die quo-
ufque, &c.


€ 7er. Dies (e) in legall vnderſtanding ts the Dap of appea-
rance, ofthe parties oz continuance of the plea. And pou (bail bnderftand that ſirſt in reall aca
tions there are, dies communes , Common Dapes , Mbereof pou hail reade in diuers ancient
Statutes,

(f£) foin al Sommong pon the originall there muſt bee ſifteene dayes after the Som=
mons befoze the appearance. (g) Wut if theoziginall be returned tarde anb Sommons alias
gocth forth, there mutt beentue Returncs betweene the Teſte and the returne, Bnd foin other
{udictall pzocefic in reall actong , fautng t£ Conufans bee demanded to bee holden Within hie
Mannoy, there procetle (bail be awarded from tyze weekes te three weekes.

And before the Statute of Articuli luper cartas , tn all Sommons and Attachements in
plea of Zand there fball be contained the tearme of ifteene Dapes- (q) Andtt appeareth afspell
bp the Statute,as bp the ancterit Authors ofthc Law Who Wrote before the Htatute , that
this was the ancient Common aw : and thereafon of thefe long daves giuen (n reall actions
Gas( the recouerp being fe dangerous) that tbe Œcnant might the better pꝛouide him both of
anfWere and of profes, (*) butbp coniint thep map take other then common dapes,

And ít tg not amifle to note bat the ancient Law Was in proceeding again a wan for big
life. And therefore beate what Britron faith, Sur le prefentment de ceft felony (uber which hee
includeth alfo Treaſon) voilons nous (for he W2otetn the ings name) que treltous ceux que
entferr’ endites, face le Vifcont haftiment prender, & fatement lour corps en prifon garder &
que ilz font menes deuant nous, ou deuant nous Iuftices: & pur ceo que nulluy ne foit difgar-
nis de lour refpons, voilons que ceux que iffint foient prife queilz eynt temps de purveyer Jour
refpons t $. ioursan meynsfilz leprient, & en dementiers foient fafemen: gardes : (r) Vide For-
tefcue of tbíg matter, And fee the Mirror that (t fome cafes the partic conuiced hav foztíe
dayes, oz at lea(t thirtte d1pes to fhe fome matter to Difturbe (that (s toarreft) FJurgement,
which now 3 know fs goneindefuctudinem and great expedition is now made in pleas of
the Crowne concerning the life of man. Sed de morte hominis nulla eft cun@ario longa.

(f) And the bfe of the kings Wench at this dap te, that (£ the offence be committed in ance
ther Conntie then Where the Wench ſits, and the Inditement be remoued by Certiorari , there
mutt be fifteene bapeg betweene eucrp procefle andthe returne thereof, but (€ (tbe commtttep tn
thefame Lountie where the Wench üt tcp map proceed dedic in diem, but fo thep Will bog
rarelp : but let be returneagaine to tie Common 191639.

Hecondlp, There is adap called dies (pecialis, (a asin an Alliſe in the ings Wench oz
Cominon 391cag, the Attachement need not be 15. dapes befoze the appearance, D theriwile ít is
before Juſtices aligned, but generally in Aſſtzes, the Judges map giwea frecíali dap at thetr
plcafure, andare not bound tothe common dapes,(*)and thele bapes thep map giue af well ont
of terme ag within. So bpon an (mpar'ance the Court map giue any {pectall oz particular dap,
but that muft be tn the tcarme time, and like wiſe ina Scire facias , bpona fine o2 a recoucty tn a
reconerp in a reall action, becaufe it is a tozit of Œrecution, and lo ít is in a per que ferujtia
and the like and fn all tudiciall weit⸗, in pꝛoceſſe againft an Infant to tudae of his age,o Where
the hufband p;apetl fn aid of big Gife,oz ina poncat thefutte ofthe Defendant there need nog
b:cfiftene dayes. Bifo after Demurrer in Law tbe Court map gine What dap tbep will.

(b) And it is Worthy the noting, that if in an Aſſiſe che parttes be adtozneo to Weltm. vfque
15. Pafche,theretiep benot Demawind 1ble tél the fourth Bap , but {it be adiorned vfquc diem
Lune, oz Diem Martis, there the parties are demaundable on that dap,

Chirdiy,(¢) There is a dap of grace, dies gratix, 02 adap ofcourtefie, the name Doth thew
of what kind ít (9; anb regulari this dap (g granted by the Court, at the 322aper of the Wee

maundans


Lib.2. Of Villenage. Se. 201.


maunbant op 19 lantíte (tv whole delap tt is, and neuerat the prayer of Cenant o: Defendant,

But itis Wozthp of obfcruation (d) that a dap of grace is neuer granted ‘where the ing is

partic bp Aide prayer of the Œcnant op Defendant , no Where anp 1Lozd of Parliament oz

39 ere ot the Realme is Cenant o2 Defendant, (c) And fometime the dap that is 4. die poit
is calleo dies gratiæ, fo? the berp day of returne is the dap in Law, and to that bay the Andge-
ment bath relation, but no defauit [ball berecozded till the fourth bap be paſt, nice irbeine
tout of right, wherethe Law alloweth no dap, but onip the dap of returne. Chis day is ſome⸗
time called dics amor:s, and fometime a dics datus, but tt Were teo long to enumerate all, G big
fpati be fuficicnt togine the Reader a tafteto vnderſtand the reGdue concerning this matter.

_ (f) There is alío à day of appearance in Court by the t02ít,ano bp the Rol, bp tozit when
the Sherite returns the tozit, Wy the Roll,when be hath a dap bp the Roll, and the S bertfe
 teturnenot the wꝛit, therethe Defendant to Cane bímfelte from cozpozall paine ag bp impꝛi⸗

 fonment, 02 to pzeucnt the loſſe of iſſues, o1 to fauc bis frebotd oz tnbcrítance map appcare op

the dap he hath by the 18 oll.

(g) Mote, tt is fato commonly that the day of Nifi prius, and the bap ín banke (c all one
Dap, that ts to be vnderſtood ag to pleading, but not to other purpoles,

There are dies iuridici (Which (h) Britton calletl) temps difcouenables )and dies non iuridici:

dies iuridici (except (t be in Aſſtſes) arc onlp tn thetearme, (1) And tbere be alfo in thetearme
dies non iuridici. As ín all the foure tearmes the Sabbath bap tg not dics iuridicus, fox that
ought to be confecrated to Diuine Seruice. Aifo in Michaelmaffe Œearme the Ffeafts of All
Saints and of All Soules:in Hillarie @ earme, the Purification of theblefled Virgin Marie, and
(ti Eafter Cearme the Feaſt of the Afcention are not dies iuridici, but fet apart bp the anctent
Judges and Sages of the Law for Divine Serutce, Foꝛ Trinite Tearme (Which forme
time had ſeuen dayes of returne, and was ag long ag Michaclmafle Cearme (a now : but foz
auopoing of infection (n that hot time of the peare,and that men might not be letted to qatber in
Harnekk, three returmes (ncc Littleton $p20tc )viz.Craftino Sanct Iohannis Baptiftæ, O&tabis
San&i Iohannis Baptiftze, and r5. San&i Iobannis Baptifta,are bp the Statute of 32-H.8. cut
off and become dics non iuridici ) And in tbofebapes the Falk of Saint Iohn the Baptift Wag
not dies iuridicus. Bnd the ſaid Statutecalleb, Dies Communisin Banco, ts fn Diners points
(ünce Littleton wꝛote) aitcreb, ag by tbe fato Statute appeareth. And in anctent timerefpec
anb reucrence Was bad bp Law to certainetimes, ag (t appcarctb (k) by tbe Statute of W.1.
cap. s. Which hath a host but an excellent preamble, viz. Et pur ceo que grand charitie ferra de
faire droit a touts in tout temps, ou me(tior ferroit : puruieu eft per affentment des prelates , que
Affifes de nouel diffeifin, mortdauncefter, & darreine prefentment fuiffent prifes en le Aduent,
en feptuagefime, & en Quarefine, auxibien come (le home) prent lenqueftes, & ceo pria le Roy,
as Euefques.
' (1) Chis Statute te erpounded is Bokes, which J haus only added, to the end the ftu-
Dious Reader might vnderſtand the Bokes that darkly {peake of this matter, and besignos
tant of nothing, that belongs tothe vnderſtanding of any part of the Lato. 20:0 Aduentíga
moneth before the Feaſt of the Natiuitie of our Sauiour Chꝛiſt, focalled, de Aduentu Domi-
ni in carne. Septuagefima beginneth ever on the Sabbath Day, andés thethird Sabbath be-
foze Shrouefunday, fo called becaufett is the 70. dap before the Feaſt of Eafter. Scxagefima
is thefecond Sabbath before Shroucfunday fo named, becaufe (t is the Go, Dap before Eafter,
anb fo of Quinquagefima, and Quadragefima (m) whereot pou (ball veadein Ads of Parlia⸗
ment, andancient Authorꝛs. Now ag there bee dies iuridici , fo there bee hora conuenientes,
Swhereof the Mirror faith (n) abufion que len tient pleas per dimenches (id eft, Sabbaths) ou per
autersiours defeudus, ou deuant le foliel leuy,ou no&antre, ou en difhoneft lieu.

(0) Furthermeze there are (as ancient Authoꝛs terme them) dies folaris aut dies lunaris fe-

cundum quod Deusdiuifit lumen à tenebris, ex quibus duobus diebus efficitur vnus dies qui di-
citurartificialisex die praecedente & no&e fubfequente, qui conftat ex 24. horis.
« But $ocat this dap retapning thefame method doe viffer{n Swords, oz Xeccfap, Dierum
alij funt naturales, alij artificiales, dies naturalis conftat ex 24. horis, & continet diem Solarem
& no&em and therefoze in Inditements of Wurglarie,anv the like Wee fap in nocte eiufdem
diei. Iſte dies naturalis eft (patium in quo Sol progrediturab Oriente in Occidentem, & ab Oc-
cidente iterum in Orientem. Dies artificialis fiue Solaris incipit in ortu Solis, & definit in oc-
cafu, and of thts dap the Law of England takes hold (n many cafes, Now diners Âations
beginne the dap at diners times. Gr he lewes,the Chaldeans and Babylonians beginne the dap at
the rifing of tbc Sunne, the Athenians at thefall, the Vmbri tw Italie beginne at mibbap , the
Eoyptians and Romans frommionight, and fo doth the Law of England (n manp cales, «Df
all Which pou (all reade plentifull matter in our Bokes, ano in mp Reporꝛes Which bp this
fboit infraction pou thall the better bnderftand.

C») (t berc (a alfo ^ nnus minor and maior. Che leflo, peare confifteth of 365. dayes and
fire houres, whereby tu euerx fourth peare, there te dies — » Which makes that Lire

3


135


(QD 14. E. 5. four.24.15.E. 3,
3bid. 31.22.€. 3 9 a7. E. 3.88


(€) 22.E.4.sonr.39.18.E: 3.
1bid.30.38.E, 3.30. 9. Aft
10 E.3.13. 41. E. 3.00id.16.
33. H.6.41. 34. H.6.27.
10.£ lip "Dter.26). 39.H.6.
39.14. E.3.38. 34. E. 3. breue
$56. Bratt.htb. 5. fal. 367.


(£) 21 E. 3. 43.3. H.6. 3.6
31. H,6.20.3. E. 4.1§.6.£.4
g.E-4.15.8.8.4.18.3.H.7.8
10.H.7.11.5.37. H.8. 14.
Lib, 11.40.17.E. 3.2.
11,Eli( .Dier. 386.

(£g) 21-H.6.10.20. ^
4.1. 6.9. 45 E. 3.31,


(h) Britton. fel. 134. 4.
(i) Mirror. cap. 5. S. exception
de temps Qr eap. e. G. 1.


32.H.8. esp. 21,


(k) WT esp irit,


(Y) 7. Aff p.714. 7-5.
F.N.B. 177. crc.
Brirtén, fol. V3 4.5.


(m) WA 1.eap. 5 1. fait anno 3.
E. 1, Britton. fol. 1 34.cap. 53.
(n) «Mirrer lib. 5. S. 1.


(0) BraB.lib. 4. ſol. 64.
‘Brisson fel. 20 9.


Gen.eap. 1. erf. 4,5:


(p) Bra. hb. 5 fal. 399.
Brisoen, foi. 30g.6.


Lib.2.


(q) 17. Eliz.Dier.345.
(r) 31. H. 3. fat. de auno
bigexssli,


(C) Lth.6 fol.6 2. Catesbyes


cafe.


(t) Brat. lib.5, fol. 42 «.
"BMriten.ce.7 A. lib 7.fo.29.30


(4) Brak. lib. e . fel. 431.


(x) "iritten fol. 5 9.dr 88.


) Fleta lib.6,cah.39.
— clauf. 10.
art. Hi. LA.


F.N.B.234-Rerifler.


a) Cambden.in Leiceſter-
ire verbo. Burton.


(b) Lewit.cap. 3. verf 44.


45-46.Numeri cap.5.verfe 1.


2. 4, Regnmcap.15.


(c) Brali.1.5,430.421.

Britton, fol. 19.

Fleta lib.G. eap. 37.

(2 33-H.6.12,
.N.8.37.G.

(e) 27-H.8.11. 40.€.3.16.

20, E42, F. M B. 27. H.


(a) Minor cap.2.§.18.
"Do. cr Stud.fol. 141.
4.E.4.25.per Danby.
27. pl. 49.


Cap.


Of Villenage. Sett.202.


Haue in rei veritate 366. Dapes , anb that ig called annus maior. (q) A quarter ef vince
taineth by legall computation 9 1, bapeg, and balfe a pearecontaineth 182. dapes fox the onde
Houres tn legall computation are reiected, and by (7) the Statutede anno biflextili tt tg pꝛoui⸗
Ded, Quod computentur dies illeexcrefcens & dies proxime praecedens pro vnico die, fo ag in
computation that day ercrefcentis not accounted, A moneth menfis ig regularlp accounted its
Law 28. bapcg , and not accozbíng to the Solar moneth , noz according to the Kalender.
(f) bniefle tt bee fox the account of the laps in a quarc impedit. @ here is menfis Solaris, ‘an’
menfis Lunaris. Solaris eft 12.pars anni; viz.fpatium 30. dierum, horarum 10. & minutorum 30.
& Lunaris eft fpatium 28. dierum.

€ Reforsmons on re-attachement. Cheſe are Waꝛits that tbe De-
maunbant 02 Plautite after he hath obtained his Letters of abfointion may fue eut to being
the Œ cnant o2 Defendant againe into dLourt to baue Dap, to make anfwere onto him.(c) Bnd
thefe wzits doc lie in all cafcg When the pleats difcontinued o? pnt Without dap ettber tn thie
cafeoz in cafe Swben the Demaundant 0? Cenant hath his age, 02 for the non venuc of the Ju⸗
ftítes, 02 in cafe of a Pꝛotection 02 Effoine de feruice le Roy &c. DE tbefe Waits therebe two
forts, viz gencralland fpccíall, hereof pou may fee 192efioente , and reade moze at large in
the cafe of diſcontinuance of Pꝛoce ſle tn mp Reports, and need not here to betnferted, j

€ Sur fon original. Chis is intended of bis oziginall Wꝛits, 02
of that which is tn ſtead of an oxíctnalltiozit, Wut note thatdn the other fine cafes the wate
thailabate, and inthe cafe of Excommengement the t02ít fball not abate, but the plea tobe pat
Withont dap bntilithe Wiantife purchale his Letters of abſolution, anb fuc out his reſom⸗
mong 0? tccattacbement, :

Fin ancicnt times moze perfongfemed to be difablen then thefe fire recited bp Littleton. Ag
firff hethat wag a Leaper, and bp the Wzit De leprofo amouendo Swag propter contagionem
morbi prædicti (ag the tozttfapth) & propter corporis deformitatem (ag others fap) to be rez
moued from the fociette of men to fomefolítarp place, andthereupon (u ) it is fatd, Datur ctiam
exceptio tenenti, ex perfona petentis peremptoria propter morbum petentis incurabilem & cor-
poris deformitatem, vt fi petens leprofus fuerit, & tam deformis quod afpe&us cius fuftineri non
poffit, & ita quod à communione gentium fit feparatus , talis quidem placitare non poteft , nec
hæreditatem petere. (x) Bnd hereWith Britton agreetb treating of pífableb men, as men outs
lawed, abtured the 18 ealine, attatnted of Jreloníe, #c. addcth ne mefel , cufte decommon gents.

Cy ) Bnd Fleta fapth, Comperst etiam ci exceptio propter lepram manifeftam vt fi petens lepro-
fus fuerit & tam defi rmis quod à communione gentium merito debet feparari, talisenim mor-
bus petentem repellit ab agendo.

And tf tbefe ancient wziters be vnderſtood of an appearance ín perfon, 3l thinke cbett opinions
arc god Law,foz thep ought not to fue noz defend tn proper perfon but bp Attarny, for they are
feparated à communione gentium propter contagionem morbi & deformitatem corporis.

Before the Conqueft this btícafe Wag not knowne (t England. Foz Maker Camden
Watting of Burton Lazers in Leicefterfhire fapth, (a) Primis Normannorum temporibus
colle&a per Angliam ftipe nofocomium hoc conftructum ferunt,quo tempore lepra (quz à non-
nullis Elephantiafis) grauiffimevi contagionis per Angliam fcrpfit. Bnd (t ts called Morbus
Elephantiafis, becauſe the fkinnes of Leapers are like to Elephants. (b) Bnd tbe Law of
England foz the temoutng of the Reapers from the foctette of men to fome folitarte place is
grounded bpon Gods La,

(c) Bifo there was a time Swben Ideots, Wadmen, and fucb ag Sere deafe, and dumbe, na⸗
turalip were difabled to fuc, becaufe thep Wanted reafon and bnderitanding, (tales enim non
multum diftant a brutis) butat thts dap thep all map fue, foz the fuite muſt bee in their name,
but tt hail be followed bp others.(d) And note, that when an Ideot doth fue o2 defend,he Hail
not appeare bp Wardeine 2 Pozcheine Amy, oz Atturney, but he mat be euer in perfon, (bat
an Jnfant 02 a Minoꝛ fballfue bp Porcheine Amy, anb delend bp Gardeine bat now let og
beare what Littleton will fap vnto tg.


Section 202.


Cj Cemiion billein
, eftfaitbn chap-
leine feculer, bncosc
fon feigniog poit inp:
fetes


Lfoif a villeine
be made a fecular
Chaplaine , yet his
Lord may feife himas


CC Por» (a) fecu-

ler, 48 he that
tg Infra facros ordines, bnt he
ig not regular, (that ig) its
ueth not bnbercertaine rules,


ig


Lib.2.
feifer cde fon billeine,
æfeifie les biens,ac,
Mes il femble que li
le villein enter en Ke⸗
ligion, æeft potete,
quele Spar ne poit
lup prender ne ferfer,


- put cco que il eſt moze
- enlep, nient plus q


{ibn frank hoe pent
bn niefe a fa feme, le
Seignioz ne poit
prendze ne ſeiſer la
feme De le baron,
Wes fonremedp eft
Dauer bn action en⸗
ners le baron puccco
que tl p2ttt fanicfe a
feme fans fon licence
& bolunt,ac, Ct iſſint
poit le Sũr auec a-
ctionenucrs le fouc-
raign Del mefon que
prt a abmíttatt fon
villein deftre prokeſſe
en meſme le meaſon
fang licence a la bo-
lunt le Seignioz, a
recouera (es dama⸗
ges a la balue De le
villein, Car celup que
eft profcffe Moigne
ferra bn Moigne, &
come bn Moign fer=
tapais pur terme De
fa bienatural, finon
queil foit Deraigne
per la lep De faint Eſ⸗
glife, Ctilefttenus
perfon iseligion De
garð fon clotfter, tc.
Ct il Sũr lup purl-
foit nzender hoꝛs De
fa meafon, Donques


Of Villenage.


his villeine, and feife
hisgoods, &c. But it
feemeth that if the
villeine enter into Re-
ligion, and is profeffed
thatthe Lord may not
take nor feife him, be-
caufe hee is dead in
Law, no more then if
a freeman taketh a
neife to his wife the
Lord cannot take nor
feife the wife of the
husband,but his reme-
dy is to haue an action
againft the husband,
forthat hee tooke his
niefeto wife without
his licence and will,
&c. And fo may the
Lord haue an action
againft the foueraigne
of the houfe which
takes and admitteth
his villeine to bee pro-
feffed in the fame
houfe, without the li-
cenceand leaue of the
Lord, and hee fpall re-
couer his damages to
the value of the vil-
leine. For he whichis
profeffed a  Monke
fhalbea Monke, and as
a Monke fhall be taken
forterme of his natu-
ralllife, vnleffe hee be
deraigned by the law
of holy Church. And
heis bound by his
Religionto keepe his
Cloyfter,&c. Andif
the Lord might take
him out of his houfe,


Sei.202.


no? bath bowed thofe thes
things aboue fpecifiep,
€ (b) Enter enreli-


gion & ef profe/fe.
Chat ig intended (ag hath
beene ſaid) ben hee ts regu⸗
lar and pzofeft bnder certaine
tulcg;ag to become one of the
foure ogders of Friers ( that
íg tofay ) Freres minors, Au-
guftines, Preachers,02 Carme.
lites, 9? become a Monke,
Cannon oz f2unnegc, Qui
ad viuendum regulariter fe a+
ftringunt, fiue funt Monachi,
fiue Canonici,regulares, fiue
fan&imoniales. fon all thefe
Bre regular and @otaries,
andare dead perfons tn Law,
bnt fo are not the fecular pera
fona,as Pꝛebends, Parſons,
Uicars, ec.

Bnd therefore tt is holden
in our bokes, (c) that i£ a
fecular 392teft taketh a Wife
and hath tfluc and dicth, the
fue tg lawtull and (ball in⸗
beríte ag betre to his fac
ther,€c, faz (as tt was then
holden ) the mariage as not
voide, but bopdable bp diuorce,
and alter the death o£. eiher
E no diuozce can bee

a .


Wut í£ a man marrieth a
Nunne, oꝛ a Monke marríz
eth, tbefe mariages ere fole
ben votde and the iſſues baz
farts, becaufe Cas ít wag
then holden ) the marriage
was bttcrlp voive ; for that
the Nunne anb the Monke
"(ag Littleton here fatth )Snere
beabperfong in Law. And
thatis the reafon peeled bp
Littleton, &pbercfo:t a filz
leine being profefled (n religts
on cannot bee ſeiſed bp the
Lo2d, becaufe hee ig Dead tm
laxo, and pet bis blod 03
bondage ts not therebp altes
red, but bis perfon in refpet
of bis prefeflion onlp prints
iedged, (d) In Decretal bus
ftatutum eft quod nullus cpif-
copus fpurios aut feruos donec
à dominis fais fuerint manu-
miffi ad facrosordines promo-
uere prafumat. But note
Withftanding bis perfon ts
pꝛiuiledged till hee be diſgra⸗


ded, Bnd fo it tg holden fn
ssa


136


(b) Britton, cap.31.fe.79.
‘Deiter & Student, fo. 142,


4-H, 4:04 17.


(¢) 21.8.7.3 9.
19.4.7. tB bajlardg.33e
5. E.a tit Nenabilsey,26,
47 B.3.( fuis,


(4) Gama! lob. 9.09. Fo
Britienfo.79.dr B20


Lib.2:


(e) Fietalib.3.eap.44.
————


(£) E.N.B.78.b. 30.E.1.
Prin 46.33.F. abid.21
18.E, 2. ibid 30.46.E.3.6.
4:E.4.25.1.H,4.6.13.E x.
Vilm.36.18.Af 10. Dod.
dr Srud.1 41..Mirrer.cap.2.
§.18.acc.


(8) 16.1.3. nuper obit 17.
8.H,3.breue 789.


Vide Britton fol.82.
Forte/cuceap.43- 46.€.3,6.4.


(i) 7eR2tit barre 240.

(Kk) Britton, fol.82,5.

31. H.6.cap.5. 13. H.7. ca. J.
6.


X1. H.4. 5.5.


31-H.8.cap, 23.


do A f 27 per Finchden,


Capa.

our old bokes. (c) FF a vit
icine be made a Knight for the
honour of big degree, his pers
fon ts pzinticdged, and the
Loꝛd cannot feise him vntill


Of Villenage.


tine biueroit coe bn
mozt perfon, ne fo-
iong fon Religton,le
quel ſerroit inconue=


Seil.203.


then he fhould not liue


as a dead perfon, nor
according to his reli-
gion, which fhould be


be be diſgraded. Nullam vi y
lem Hber n nitione {purity nient, 1C,

velferuilisconditionisad mili-

tix ftrenuitatis ordinem promoueri licebit fed cum à Dominis fuis petantur vt natiui ipfisprime
degradatis (tatim ad iudicium procedatur


€ Siva frank home prent n niefe. (F) Some have holden that bp
this marrtage the wife hail be free for ener, but tbe better opinion of our Bokes is, that the
fhall be paiuiledged During the coucrtureoniy, onlefre the 3.020 yimiclfe martieth bis Mieke,
and then fome hots, that (be {hall be free foz euer.

fa Niete be regardant toa Mannoꝛ, and he taketh a freeman to bufbanb by licenceof the
19:0, andthe 1020 maketh a feoffment in fee of the Dannoz, the bu band dicth, the freoffae
ſhall not haue the Miefe but the Feoffoꝛ, for chat outing the marriage thee was feucreo from
the 9Dannoz, And fo is the Woke 29, Atl. (Sobit ts falüp pzint.D ) to be vnderſtood.


inconuenient, &c.


(2) It two Coperceners beofa V eine, and one of themtaketh himtohufband, fheand — —


her bufband thai not haue a nuper obijtagaint ber Copercener , but after the Deccafe of her

hufband the fhail. =
€ (lo Mes [on remedie es dauer un action vers le Baron, cc. Albeit

marriage is lawful, pet ben tt wozacth a pzctubice to arhird perfon , an action ín this Cafe


Ipeth agrinf the hufband tothe bine: of sis lolle. And albeit bec did not know her to bee -


Ji tcfe, pet the action ipeth agatnt him, for hee muſt take notice thercefat his pertil, (1) vnleſſe
the be out of the feruice of the Loꝛd and bagarant , andthenif one mot knowing berto beca
icée marrieth her,fomefay that in chat cafe no action lyeth agaínft the bufband,(k) And like⸗
2. the 1,020 fball haue an action againft thofe that ere the meanestomake the Villeine a
night,

Souereigne, Præcipuus, Chiefe, as here, fouercigne del meafon

ig the Chicfe of the boufe, : :
€ Sinon que il foit deraigne. Chis word (deraigne) commeth o£


the French $0028 deri ver , 9a deraigner, that tg tofay, to difplace 0? to turne oncout of his oꝛ⸗


der, and hereofcommeth ceraignn ent a diſplacing, og turning out of his ozocr, So Whena
Monke is deratned, hets begrabeb anb turned out of hts Oꝛder of Weligton, and become a


lap man. i

Le quel férra inconuenient. Ab inconuenienti {8 à good argument

inlaw, ag Litleton often obferueth. Bnd bere Littleton concludeth that the 3020 cannot

take a Monke out of his boufr, for that (t Mould be inconnentent, which Littleton here ewe

eth, £o? diuers reafons, and therefore vnlawtull. And the inconuentence ts, that where a man

^ Religion ſhould liue according to bts pofefiton tn Religion, bp the taking of bim entbea
ould not :

q Si le Seignior luy puiffoit prender , crc. Wy this tt appeareth,
that tf aman detapneth a UWillaine in bts houſe the Lod of the Willaine map t- ke him ont of
the houfe, for here the (mpcotinent Sberefoze the 3.070 could not take him out of the houfe, ag
He Wan the Nillaine was a Monke profelicd, And fe in cafe ofthe ardſhip here next fol-
owing,


Section 203.


N the fame man.


€ BR de ranifh-
ment de garde.

hts mitis giuen by the
Statute e£ W.z cap 35. in
verbis conceptis , tbe wordes
of Which waꝛit bee that the des
fendant, Talem haredem cu-
jus maritagium ad ipfum A.


€ "Y
E mener eft, fi


foit gardeine en chi-
ualtíe De corps a de
tte Dun enfant deins
age, & lenfant quant


ü


AL meme te €]


ner itis, if there
bea Gardein in C hi-
nalrie of che bodie &
land ofan infant with-
in age , if the infant


Lib.2.


i| vient al age de
14.808 entra en Re⸗
ligion, æeft profefe,
le garden nad auter
temedie (quant à le

tDe De le cozps)

que bte De rauiſh⸗
ment De gard enuers
le Soueraigne de le
meaſon. Ct i afcun
eſteant de plein age,
que eft cofin a bte Del
- enfant enter en E ter-
- te, le gardein nad aſ⸗
cun remedie quant al
garde dla tre, D ceo
qlentric Del bte len-
fante(t congeable en
tiel cafe,


Ot Villenage.


when he comes to the
age of 14.ycares en-
treth into Religion,
and is profeft, the gar-
dein hath no other re-
medy ( as to the ward-
fhip of the body ) but
a writ of rauifhment
de gard acainft the ſo-
ueraigne of the houfe.
And if any being of
full age who is cofin
and heire of the enfant
entreth into the land,
the gardein hath no
remedy as to the
wardfhip of the land,
for that the entry of
the heire ofthe infant
is lawfull in fuch cafe.


: Seil.204.


pertinet, &cyrapuit & abduxit
&c. contra pacem. f20$p Ra-
pere fignifieth pzoperlp ta
takeaway bp biolence and
force, Bnd When the Douce
raigne tee and admittes the
Ward inte bis boufe to bee
profelles, this in iudgement
of Law ig a Rauthhment of
the Ward, and ag (t appearcth
ín Our bakes befoze the fata
ftatute, there lap a generall
action of trefpaffe in that cafe,

€ Apres lagede 14.
ans dre. Dur Author
mentioneth this age becaufe
tt ts probibiten bp tbe ftatute
Of 4.H.4. that no childe fhall
berecetucdintoanp houfe of
religion before that age with⸗
out confent of big parents
and gardeins, tc.


€ Legardein nad af-


eun remedy, ce. Pere
(t appeareth that bp the pzo⸗
feilion of the Hoard, tbe 1.025
lofeth the wardſhip of the


land, becaufe he (8 Civiliter mortuus, 4 Dead man (n law and cannot hold anp inheritance, net=
- ther can the gardein continucthe Wardfbip oftheland, becaufeby tbe ciuill Death of the Ward
the inheritance ts difcended to another. whois etther to be (n tard, o2 pap reliefe. So as in
- this cafe the gardein bath Damnum, but ft is Ab(que iniuria, becaufe belofeth the toarnihip of
tbe land bp ac of 3a$,viz. the vífcent thereof to another, and therefore the La gíuctb to
him no remedy in thiscale, neither bp anp formed watt, noz bp action opon big cafe, fo? Little-
tons woꝛds are generall, ( he hath not any remed{e, ) .


€] Tem, en mults

> Diuers cates le
Sfr poit faire ma:
numiſſion a enfran-
chifement a fon bil-
lin, DMDanumiffion
eft pzoperment, quát
le S iia fait on fait a
fon billein De luy en-
franchifer Per hoc
verbü ( Manumittere)
quod idem eft quod
extra manum, vcl ex-
tra poteftatem alterius
ponere. Et pur ceo q̃
pet tiel fait 1e villein


Seël. 204.
—— in many and


diuers caſes the
Lord may make ma-
numiffion and enfran-
chifement to his vil-
lein. Manumiffion is
properly when the
Lordmakes a deed to
his villeineto enfran-
chife him by this
word ( Manumittere )
which is the fame
as to put him out
of the hands and
power of another,
And for that that by


D m


Pr
€ Ne (D
L Manumittere quod
idem eft quod extra
manum vel poteftatem. pos
nete.

Quia quamdiu quis in fer.
uitute eft, fub manu & pote.
ftate domini fui eft.

Qui in poteftate domini fui
eft, in manu domini fui effe
dicitur, fed poftquam Manu-
miffuseft, ab illo liberabitur;
ergo dicitur quafi extra ma-
num, id eft, extra. poteftatem
domini fui miffus. And bete
ig tobee noted ( agin many
other places (8 obferned )
$pbat regard Littleton hath to
the true Ctimologies of
Swords.

€ (m) Enfranchife-


ment. Hereby Little-
bd ton


57


Lib.9. Dates Huffeys cafe,
el.y2.


4 H,4.eap 17.)


(1) Glannil I5. 5 cap. 5.
"Britton, fol 78.67:.82.97-
110.

Fleta lib. 3.cap.12.

& lib. a.c2,44.


(m) Mirre sa. 8. $.18,


Lib.2.


(n) Mirror pap. 2, S. 18.


(0) Fenefeue 64.400


4p) 39-5. 3.6.5. F. N. B.79.4.


(q) Glanuil bio. 5.04. 5.
Pita lib. 3 62.44. Britt fe.79
Mirror, ca. 3.S. 8.


(D 27-Af pa.
CC) Glaxmil. sb. 5 eap. 5.


(t) Brisson obi fupra.


Lib, Rab.e9p.78.


Cu) so.E.3.tit.vil.25.
11,H.7.13.


(apu.


ton erplaneth Danumillion )
€ (g derined from the french
$0020 Francbife ; that ig, ite
bertp, and in the Common
Law it bath diuers Ggnifica-
tions, fomstimes the incoꝛpo⸗
tating of a mantobe fre of a
Company 02 bodp politique,
ag a fre man of a Citic, 0x


Of Villenage.

eff mis hozs De la
main x Dela poter
fou Sũr il c(t appelE
APanumiffion, Ct
iffint chefcun maner
De enfranchifement


Sect.205.


fuch deed the villeine
is put out ofthe hands


and of the power of |


his Lord, it is called
Manumiffion. And fo
cuery manner of in-


Wurgelle of a burronghe,ec, iit Abn villein poit. franchifement madeto

Cometic te pon an Bien eſtre Dit Manumiſſi⸗ avillein, may bee faid
tzen. and here to manu⸗ 1

Wife a bilicíne oz bond man. on, tobea Manumiſſion.


So as this word (Enfranchifement) (g moze genetall then Manumiffion, foz that (g properip
applyed to a villeine, andthereforcenery Mauumilſion {5 an infranchtfament, but eucrp In⸗
franchifement is not a Manumiflion, (n) Chere be two kindes of Wanmutllions, one ex⸗
pelle, and the other implied. Expꝛeſſe, when the villeine by deed in expaefie Words is manurats
fto any made free, the other impiped by doing fome act, that makcth in tadgement of Law the
villeine Creo, albett there beno exprefle Words of Manumillion o; Enfranchtlement. Co) Ze a
billeine be manumtled, albeit he become ingratefull to tbe 3,070 in the highelt degree, yet the
Manumiflion remaines go : andherein the Common Law difereth from the Ciuill Law,
foz, Libertinum ingratum leges ciuilesin priftinam redigunt feruitutem, fed leges Angliz femel
manumiffum femper liberum iudicant, eratum & ingratum.

There be allo femccafes Where the villeine ſhall be prtutledged from tbe feifure of the 1,01,
albett be be not abfolutelp manumtfed oz infranchifed, Sometimes Ratione loci, (p) ag ifabif=


— Ce


d


*


leine remaine in the ancient demeane of the King apearcanda Dap without clayme o» fcüuro —


of the 3.070, the 1.029 cannot auc e wꝛit of Natiuo habendo 02 feife him fo tong ag bec ree
matnes and continues there, and the reafen of thés Was in reſpect of the feruíce hee did to the
ing ix ploWing and tillage of the demeanes and other labours of hulbandzyp foi the Rings
benefit. Bnd herewith agreth old bakes (q) Mbich fay that this tmmuntty ag fomceime
granted bp common confent to the ding fo2 bis profit, and Fo the helpe o2 eafe of his vilicineg
(r) Fla ditietnebe a Pꝛieſt ofthe Kings Chappell, the Lord cannot fcife hins inthe pzcfence
ef the ting, £02 the kings prefence ts a pꝛtuiledge and protection for him. Sometime Ratione
profeffionis, (f ) ag if a billetne be pꝛoteſſed a Monke, oz a Metfe a $2unnejag bath beene fafo,
Cr) Sometime (ag fome hath fatb ) Ratione dignitatis, ag (f the billeine be made a Tsníabt,sc,
Hometime Ratione matrimonij, ag {£a Jefe marry a free man the és priviledged daring the
martage,but not abfolutcly enfranchifcd, for tf her bufband die (be ts #2 tefe againe, vnle de the
Loꝛd himlclfe maricth tbc 43 (cfe , and then fhe is enfranchiled £o? cuer as hath been faíb before.
Andit Hall not bec amifle to obferue the wiſedome of our Ancients With What folemnity (Fos
mozefurctic therof) Manumifliong were mave: Qui (ervnm fuum liberat, in Ecclefia vel mer-
cato vel comitatu vel hundredo coram teftibus & palam faciat, & liberasei vias, & portrs coa-
fcribit apertas, & lanceam & gladium vel que liberorum arma in manibus ei ponat. Dur Bee
shozhauing ſpoken of an expacfle manumif{ton, herefollawes infranchifements tn Law.


Section 205.


€ AU fi le Sar
fait à fon vil-

leit bu Dbligation De
certeine fomme Dargét
ou grant alup per fon
fait bu annnity, ou
le(fa a luy per fon fait
terres ou tenements
purterme des ans, le

Eid Spree re billeineft enfranchife,


Deed pet ít is an infranchifement fo: ener,


€ Dz When the 1020
enableth the vil⸗
leín to haue an

Action agatnft him as fo?

debt o? Zinnuítip,sc. oz

giveth te the billein a cere
taine and fred eſtate ín
ands, Genements, of
hereditaments aga Leaſe
fox peateg, ‘this amouns
teth to an infranchifes
ment not only daring the
Bears but for ever,(u)and


Lfoifthe Lord ma-

keth to his villeine
an Obligation of a cer-
taine fomme of money
orgranteth to him by
his Deedan Anuuity, or
letsto him by his Deed
lands or tenements for
terme of yeares, the vil-
leine is enfranchifed. —


Sed 2060


- Liba.


€ Atte tile Sñũr fait bn fe-

offancat a fon villein daſ⸗
cuntertes ou tenem̃ts per fait ou
fans fait, en fee imple, fee tate,
ou pur terme De bie, OU ang, a a
lup liuera feifin,ceo ef bn enfran⸗


chifement,


Set, 206.


:


Ae if the Lord maketh a
feoffment to his villeine of
any lands or tenements by Deed
or without Deed, in fee fimple,
feetaile,orforterme of life or
yeares, and deliuereth to him fei-


fin,this is an enfranchifement,
This ts entdent and agreth With our bakes.


Setiton 207.


€, AACS i le Sfr
Minit a lup biu
leafedes terres ou te-
nements, atener a bo-
lunt le Sar, per fait,
ou (ang fait, ceo nett
- afcun enfranchifemét
pur ceo gil nad afcun
manner à certainty ne
fuertie Dc fon effate,
mes le &üc lu» poit
oufter quant tl voylet.


Vt if the Lord ma-

keth to him a leafe
of lands or tenements,
to hold at will ofthe
Lord by deed or with-
out deed, this is no en-
franchifement for that,
that hee hath no man-
ner of certaintie or
furetie of his eftate,but
the Lord may ouft him
when hee will.


€ ps fait. SO

as a Ded made

to a billetne bp
the Lord is no ínfrans
chifement , when the
Deve tranfferreth no
certaine o2 fired cftate,but
teuocable at the Loꝛds
Swill, FE the Lozd relcafe
to bis villein ali his right
ín lache acre, and the
billeine ig not thereof
fetteo, this is no infran-
chifement becaufe (t ts
botde aud can aíuc no
caufe of action, It the


Urv HE Sir
Jet enuers
fon billein bn Pra-
cipe quod reddat,
ffl recouer, où foit
nonfue ap2e8 appea-
tance, ceft on maniu-
miffion, pur ceo il
puítfoít lopalmét en⸗
ter en Ia terre (ang
tiel ſuit. En melme le
manner eft, fil Cuift
enuers (on billein on
action à Debt ort Dac-
count, ou De coucnat,


Lord attozncth to big


villeine, thisis no tnéranchifement,


Settion 208.


Lfoif the Lord

fueth againft his
villein à Precipe quod
reddat, if hee recouer
or bee nonfuite after
appearance, this is a
manumiffion, for that
hee might lawfully
haue entred into the
land withoutfuite. In
the fame manner itis,
if hee fue againft his
villeine an action of
debt, or account, or
of couenant , or of


Wm 2


cs! Seignior [aisi en-

uers fon villeine
v Precipe quod red-
dat,&c. ceo eſt va ma-


numi(sion. And the
pzincipall vcafon hercof ts, foz
that by this fuite hee enableth
the villetne to bea perfon able
to render bim the land bp
courfe of law Wherethe Lord
without any fucb {utte might
baue entred. (w) But (€ Te⸗
nant in taple be of a Dannoz
wyhereunto a villein is regar⸗
bant, anb enfcoffeth the vil⸗
leine of the Dannoz and dpe
eth, the tilue (ball baue a for⸗
"bon agaínft the billeine,
and after tbe recoucry of the
tmanoa be ſhall feife the —
n


Cf Villenage. $e. 206,20 7,268. n8 :


Vit.24.€.3.33.
12.H.3-5it. Vill. 42.


11.4.7.


(w) 24. E. 3. Diſont. 16.
Vid. Britton 78.27 x36.


(x) Lsb.8.fe.58.62, Be~
cherscafe. 3-H.6.13.Breeke


Capi.
And the reafon (e £o? that he
Could not feifc the Vſlleine ttl
be bad recoucreo tbe Wannoz
which was the patnctpall,ano
at the time of the wait
brought, be Was no Villeine.

Æbe Cenant tnfeokes the
Villetucofthe Lod, andan
eftranger bpon collufion , in
this cafe although the Lez
map enter bpon tbe Willetne
for the moptíe, pet map bee
haue a Wait of toard agaínft
them both $oítbout infran=
chifement of the NVilleine, for
tf the Lozdfhonld enter bpon
the Utieine , then fhould hig
Seignioꝛie be fufpended,and
then could not he haue a Wꝛit
of ward againt the oother.

Che Loꝛd spon a Wꝛit of
Œouenant bought bp the
Uilleine , lewieg a fine tobis
Billeine o£ Land Which ts
ancient ZDemefne, the Low
of whom the Land te holden
reuerfeth the fine tn a Wꝛit of
3D Kceit, albeit the Authoritie
and Juriſdiction of the Court
is difpzoned , and that the
Loꝛd of tbe Willetne fall bee
reftozed tothe Land gtuen bp
the fine , pet (g (t an enfrans
chifement, £o: that he anfiwe=
red to the tozitof Coucnant,
and the fine was bopbable,
and not bopbc, and therefore
being once an enfranchifes
ment , tt cannot bee auopded
bp the renerfing of the fine,

€ Soit non fue (id
eft ) non eff profecutus
breue (num, for by the
Law the Plaintike bec firft
Agent at cuerp continuance,
and therefore the Record
fapth, quod petens feu que-
rens (naming them) obtulit
fe, Soho tf hee bee called, and
make default, then be (s faib
tobe Montuit, id cft, non eft
profecutus, &c,

135p Littleton here tt appeas
reth that there t¢ a Nonſuite
before appearance at the res
turne of the t02(t;02 after aps
Pcarance at fome eap. of con=
tinuance, (x) he difference


Of Villenage.


ou De Treſpaſſe, ou
De butufmoDi, ceo eſt
br enfranchitement,
pur ceo que il puiſſoit
empzifon le billets, &
prender fes biens
fangtiel fuit, Mes
fi 1e feignioz fuí(t fon
pilleine per appeale
Defelony , ou il fuit
enDict De ceo Deuant,
ceo ne enfranchifera
pas le billein coment
que le matter De lap⸗
pelle foit troue en-
counter le feignioz,
pur ceo que le Seig-
nio? tie putffoit auct
lebillein Deftre pen-
Due fág tielfuit, Mes
fi le billeine ne fuit
enDict De mefme le
felonie , Deuant 1ap-
peale fue enũs lup,
puis eft acquite De
cett felonie.iffint que
il vecouera Damma-
ges enuers fon feíg-
nío? pur le faux ap-
peal, Donques le bil-
leine eft enfranchife,
pur là caufe De le
iudgement Dc dam⸗
mages a lup Deftre
Dont enuers for feíg-
fioz.€t pluſoꝛs auts
cafes a matters y
font, pet queug bn
billeine poit eftre en-
franchie enuers fon
Deignior,e, Sed de


illis quere.


Sect.208.


Trefpaffe , or of fuch

like , this is aninfran-
chifement, for that he.
might imprifon the
villeine, and take his
goods without fuch
fuite. But if the Lord
fue his Villeine by
appeale of Felonie,
where he was indited
of the fame before,
this fhall not enfran-
chife the Villeine, al-
beit that the matter of
appeale bee found a-
gainft the Lord, for
that the Lord could
not hauc the Villeine
to beehanged without
fuchfuite, Butif the
Villeine were not in-
ditedof the fame Fe-
lonie, before the ap-
peale fued againft him,
and afterward is ac-
quited ofthis Felony,
{0 as he recouer dam-
mages againft his Lord
for the falfe appeale,
then the Villeine is
infranchifed, becaufe
of the iudgement of
dammages to bee gi-
uenvnto him againft
his Lord. And many
other Cafes and mat-
ters there bee by
which a Villeine may
bee enfranchifed a-
gainft his Lord, &c.
But enquire of them.


bet weene a Nonfuiranda Retraxit on the part of the Demandant o2 49laíntifo(o this. A Non⸗
faite is euer bpon a Demand made when the Demandant 02 Piaintite homd appcare,and bec
makes default, 9 Retraxit (g ewes Shen tbe Demandant oz Piaint iſe ie prefent in Court(ag res


gularig


Lib.2. OF Villenage: Seé.208,


gularip be ig exer bp intendement of Law vntill a dap be giuen one ; bielle it be when á dere
Dicis to be giuen, kor then he is demandable.) And this te (n tivo fores, one 392(natineano the
other 39 ofitiue, Pꝛiuatiue, ag bpon demand made, that bc make Defauit,and Depart in defpite of
the Court, ano then the entric is, (y) Et poftca codem die deuenit ad barram przdicttenens, &
przd' petenstunc folenniter exadtus non venit iſed à fe&ta fua prædiéta in contemptum Curiz fe
retraxit, idco confideratum eft, &c. Pofitine, as When the entricis j Et faper hoc idem querens
dicit, quod ipfe non vult vlterius placitum faum prædictum profequi , fed abinde omnino fe rc-
traxit, &c. ideo, &c- Pnother forme thereof (s , quod idem querens fatetur fe (feu cognouit fc)
vlterius nolle profequi verfus predié. defend, &c. de placito pradi&o. (z) 28 departer (m dea
fpígbt of the Court (s on the part of the Cenant,andts, oben the Cenant oz 3Dcfenbant after
&ppearance and being pacfent in Court bpon demand makes departure fn defpight of che
Court, and then the entrie (e, Et predi@ tenens feu defendens licet folenniter exaétus non re-
uenit; fed in contemptum Curie receffit & defaltam fecit,ideo, &c. It is called a Retraxit, bec
£aufc that woꝛd ts the effeduall $0020 vſed in theentris ag before (t appcarctb , and tt is cuce
où the part of tbe Demandant 02 Plaintife. (a) Another Difference betweene a Retraxit and a
Nonluite is , thata Retraxit ig a barre of all other Actions of like of tufertour nature: Qui
femcl a&ionem renunciauit amplius repetere non poteft. Wut regularly a Nonſuite is not fo;
NU REDE map commence an adíon of like nature, 2c, againe, Foꝛ (t map bee, that bec hath
miſtaken fomewbat in that ation, 02 wag not pꝛouided o£ His profes, oꝛ miftaking the bap oz
che like. Wut pet for fome fpectall rcafong, Nonſuite in fome actions ts pexemptoꝛie.

ina Quare impedit, f£ the Piaintife bee Monſuite after appearance , the Defendant fhall
make a title,and aue a Wait tothe Biſhop(b)and this (s peremptogte to the Plaintike, and is a
gwd barre in another quare impedit, and the reafon (s Foy that, the Defendant had bp tudge=
Went of the Court a Wait to tbe Biſhop, and tbe 3incumbent that commeth in by that tozit
fhallnener be remoued; Which is a flat barreas to that pacfentatíon , and of this opinion is
Littleton (n ont Beokes. Andthe fame La , and fog the fame rcafon tt 19 in the cafe bpona
diſcontinuance.

In a wꝛit De Natiuo habendo, Nonſuit after appearance (s peremptoꝛie, foꝛ thereby the
Aulle in (g infranchiſed And fo (t (s tE¢wo be Wiatntifes ina Natiuo habendo.ff one be nonfuit
this is the f2enfuite of both, and no ſommons and feuerance doth lie in that cafe, albeit it be
&rcalladíon, Bnd this is in fauorem libertatis, foz (rà Libertate probanda, sNonfutte after
appearance is mot peremptozte, neither (8 the f3onfutte of the one, the Nonſuite of both,

(d) f3onfuíte in an appeale of Murder, Rape, Robberie, ec. after appearance íg perempto-
vie, and this tg in fauorem vitz, foy (£tbe Defendant beacquited, and take out pꝛoceſſe bpon
the Statute of W-2. agaínft the Bbettozs, 0216 he parchale bis original noatt , Foz that cauſe
he may be fDonfuite.

(e) 3I£tbe Plaintike tram appeticof Mayhem be Monfuite after appearance tt (8 peremp=
topte foꝛ the toztt faith, Felonice maihemauit, and therefore the srontuite ts peremptozie.

) 3In an Attaint (£ the 391antife after appcarancebe Monſuite, ít í& peremptozte, andthe
Paton is fez the faith that the Law giues tothe verdict, and fos the terribie and fearefull tudge=
tment that ſhould be giuen againt the &rft Juric tf thep ſhould beconutetcd; and therefore bpor |
the Monfuite, the Plaintike thailbctmpzifoned, anb bis pledges amerced. Wut i£ the proceife
in an Ættaint be difcontinued, the 39latnttfe map bauc another toztt of Attaint, becaufe bpon
the Menfuitetherc ig a (ubgement atuen but not bpon the bifconttmuance, Note, tt ig truelp
ſaid that Exceptio probatregulam,foz tbefecafeg excepted ffano bpon their ſpectal and particular
reafons, and fall not Within the gencrall reafon of tbe rule, It (s a generat! rule, that sone
fuite befoze appearance (c not peremptozte in aup cafe, £o; that a Hranger map purchafc a wꝛit
fn thename of bim that hath caufe ofaction,ag fall be fato hereafter tn this Section.

(g) Fin reall o2 míct actions tbe Monfuite of one 3Demanbant ig notthe onluite of both,
but he that makes default (hall be ſummoned and feucreo , but reguiarlp (n perfonall acttong,
the Monfuite of the onc ts the Monſuite of both, bnicfle (t be (n certatnc particular cafeg,

(h) Jn perfonait actions brought bp Executoꝛs there fhall bee Sommons and ſeuerance be-
cauſe the beft thallbe taken fo? the benefit of the Dead. Bnd fo íttg tn anacion of Treſpalſe ag
Executoꝛ for gods taken out of their owne pofleflion, Like Law in account as Executoꝛs bp
therciceit of their otone bands,

(i) Jn an Audita querela concerning the perfonaltie, the sonfutte of the oué is not the
onfuite of the other, becaufe tt gocth by Swap of difcharge and freeing of themfeines , and
therefozcthe default of the onc {ball not hurt tbe other.

(k) Fn a Quid iuris clamat , the fonfuite of the one is the Nonſuite of both, becaufc the
Tenant cannot attorne according to the grant.

(1) Some actions follow the nature of thofeactons Whereupon they are grounded ag the
Wꝛits of Error, Attatnt,, Scire facias , and the like. It᷑ a reallacion be brought by feuerati
Trzcipesagatuft two oz moze, (£ tbc Demandant bec — againſt one, beíg iig *


139


(Y) Tr. 5 HE. Rot.320, %
(io Rare Bi iio


(2) F..2.58 fie 108,4.
1g E. 2 V then. 1 1.


(a) L85,8 ubi fupra,


(b) 5.5.3.5. 2.4.5,

31. H.6, 15. 22. H.6.44,4 5.
33H. 6.1.55. 19.E. 4.9.
21.E.4. 2.6. &c. F. N. .ʒ 8.
Lib.7.fo.a7.b. Sir Hugh Pert-
mans cafe.


(c) 6.E.a.Vil.36. 12.E.2.
tbid. 28. 19.€.2.1hid.31.
F.N.B.58.e. 4.6.2. Non-
fuit 29.


(d) 9.H.4.1.12. Stamf,
PLCor. 148.0. & 171 .c.
22..4ffo7. Fst(.Cor. 1846
22.E.3.6, 47.E.3.16.
7-H.7.5. 40 E.3. Dom.ny,
17. E. 3. (Ceron.3 86. 3-£,3.
Aëlionfur Left. 28.
——— 40, Aff:1e
(£) 32.13.19. AT 13,
20.£.3 att in543,32,£,3.7,
E,N.B,108.4,


(g) 11.2.6.25.55.
F.N.B.35.b. 19.E.3.154.
Seue7 14.3, £ a3 Nonſuit 18.
19^. 3.Geuer. 16.1.6. 3. tb.
38.E.3.9. a9. H.6.45.
38.E,3.35. 41.8.3. Nonfui)
10. 45.E.3, I0. 2.H.4.2,
(h) 42.€.3.13.48 E.5.14.
28. H.6.3. 11. E. 3. Sener. 26.
13.E.3.1b.15. 18. E. 3. ib. ab.
5.E. 3ubid. 19. 7.E. 3.13.
(4) 15.E.3.Seuer.23.
Lib.6. fo.2 5. Ruddosk: cafe.
(k) 10.E.3.Sewerasce 17.
(1) 47.E.3.6.b. 47. Af.3e
29./Af.34.7.H.445.
34.H.6,31. 25.H.6.19.
29.E.3.37. Lib. 6.vb.füpre.
22.H.6.42. 4 E.4.35-

19. E. 2. Nonflut 32.
18.E.3.5bid. 31.20.6.3.55. 26
27. 19.E.3.5bid.12.

3. E. 3 bid. i17. ‘
38.£.3.9. 20. H. 6. 45-
ME. 3. 10. 19.E,3.S 6884
vanes 16,


Lib.2.


(m) 6.R.3.Nenfüit 13.
25.H 8. Nonfist Br.68.
30. H.5.5.


(n) 2.H.4.ca.y.. 3.E.3.21.
47-E-3.1,3. 3-E.4f 11,


(o) 2-H.5.5. 8.R.2, Nen-
Suit 34. :


(p) x.H.g.1. 21.€.3.32-
Lib. x1. fo. 39.41. Metcalfes
cafe.


Vid.Sol.748. Lib. 4. fa.80.
"Nekeseafe, F.N.B.145.


Cr) WF.2.cap.12.

$2.4 f. p.39. 33. H,6.2.
14.H.7.3. 40.497 18.
4e. E.3.42.


(£) Kelvqj.134.


(a) 10-E.3.23.R eger de P ales
Cafe. 15. E.3.a)de. 33+


(b) 34:H.61 $a per Lith


Capa.


gaint all, for ag tothe Dens
twofold,viz. bp Sommons ad


Platnttfes neucr appeared,and bp a$odr


that is after appearance,


Of Villenage.


$ed.209:


ndant it (g but one tait Onder one Tefle. Note, Scucranceíg
fequcndum fimul,and that is Soken one of the Demandants og
» of tbc Courtof f2onínit without any ſommons, and


(m) Ghe kings Wateltic cannot bee faonfuttc , becanfe (n tndgement of Law bec ts cuew
paefent in Court, but the ings Attorney, Qui fcquitur pro Domino Rege may enter att vie
terius non vult profequi, which hath the effec of a 42 onfuite, but in an tnfojmatton bp an Fins
fogmer, qui tam, &c. the 3infouner may be Nonluited.

(n) Be tbe Common Law pon cuerp continuance oy bap giuen ouer before iudgement,the
39 lafntife might hauc bene Nonſuited, and therefore before the Statute of 2-H.4 atter verdig
gtucnif the Court gauca dapto beadutfed, at that Dap the Piaintife ag demandable, and


therefore might bauc bene J2onfurte , which is now remedied bp that Statute,
(o, But after Demurver in Law topned, if the Lourt doth giue a Day ouer,at


that day the


Demandant 92 Plaintite ($ demandable,and theretoae may be Jrontutte,foz that is not holpen


by any Statute,


Cp) Bnd after an award to account,the 35 Tatntífe may be Monfuite, and fo note a diuerũtie
betweene an Fnterlocutozte award of tbe Court, and a finall iubgcment, '

Wy thefe feds inftructons pou (bail the mozeeahip vnderſtand the Wakes of tearmes and
peares, and other authoꝛities of Lat, And here (to returne to Littlctop ) it ig to bee noted,
that albeit the Lord be £2 onfuite, yet the infranchifement of the ittleine doth remapne fo? thas.
grew by the appearance to the wait, andcannotbhetaken away bp the Nonſuite fubfequent.
So ít ts (f tbe tout docabate,pet the infranchifement remapnes. i

€ (qp Apres apparance, fox othertoife a ſtranger map purchale a


tout in his name, and therefore Littleton matertallp added thefe Wezds, after appearance,


Œ Pracipe. There bee three kind of 391ecipeg, 1, A Præcipe


quod reddat, Swbereof i


1cdevon here fpeaketh. 2. A Pracipe quod permittar, and 3, À Præcipe


quod faciat whereof pou may reads plenttfuilp in the Regifter,and Fitzherberts natura breuium,
and belongs not propetly totbts Œreatile.


Œ Account.


MOF thig fufficient hath beene fatd before,


@, Conenant. Conuentio. Hereot there bee tto6 kinds, viz. à
Cournant perfonali, anda Covenant reail: and a Coucnant in Ded, anb a Coucnantin


Law,


€


Ou il fuit endite de ceo. (v) og AE the Willeine be not Ark indited


of it then bpon the acquitall of the Villetne, the Qilleine Mall recouer Dammages agatnft the
Loꝛd by the ffatute of W-a-(r) quia multi per malitiam,& c. and confequentip {ball be enfrana
chticd, Wut (f the Nulleine be koꝛmerly indtted of tbc felony, then though the Uitileinebe acqui⸗
ted bpon the 2! ppcale, he ffali recouer no Dammages againft the Lord. for Wwherefocuer the
Lozo cíactl tothe Uitiletne aint caufe of action bec (9 enfranchifed. (£) And therefore t£ the.
Lord ki his Uilicine bis fonne and hetre Mali haue an appeale , and thereby his heire Mali bee
enfranchifed, becaute the offence o£ the 3020 gaue to the hetre a inf caufe of ation againk the


io».


Ve il ad effre
Cuflome, crc.
Here fome map obied that
fuch a Cuftome may bauca
laSwfull beginning fog Lirtle-
ton {n the beginning, of this
Chapter, Sc&.174 alloweth
that (a) afreeman map take
lands of the 3020 to bee hol⸗
ben of Hin, that 8 topapa
fine fot the marri ge of bis
Sonne o: Daughter, and
therefoxe (+) fome banc
thought that fuch a Cuftome
generally within the Mans
no; ſhould bee gad, Wut the


Sed. 209.
€ [&en fi Seige


nio? bun mato?
boíle prefcriber, que
il ad eſtre cuftome
Deins fon manoz De
temps Dont mcemo-
rp necurt, que chef-
cun Œenant Deins
mefme lemanno?, q
maria fa file à alcun
home fans licence De
le feignioz Del man⸗
1102


Lfo if the Lord

of a Mannor will
prefcribe that there
hath beene acuftome
within his Mannour, —
time out of minde of
man, that euery Te:
nant within the fame
Mannor, who marieth
his Daughter to any
man without licence


of.the Lord of the


Lib.


1103, fett fine, et ont
faire fine al Seigni⸗
our Del manno? pur E
temps efteant, ceſt
prefeription eft void,
Car nul Dott faire tí-
els fines fozfq; tant-
ſolemẽt villeing,Car
chefcun franke home
poit frankement ma-
tier fa file a que pleiſt
_alup #fa file, Ct put
ceo que ceft preſcrip⸗
tion ef encounter
teafon, tiel preſcripẽ
envord.


OF Villenage.


Mannour , fball make
fine, and haue made
finetothe Lord ofthe
Mannor for the time
being, this prefcripti-
onis voyd: For none
ought to make fuch
fine but onely Vil-
leines. For euery free
man may freely marrie
his daughter to whom
it pleafeth him and
his daughter : and for
that this prefcription
isagainft reafon, fuch
prefcription is voyd.


$et.210.


anfSoer ts,that though ít map
befoin a particular cafe bp-
on facta ſpeciall referuation
of ſuch a fine bpon a atft of
land,p.t toclatme fuch a fine
by a genecail cuftome Within
the Wannoz, is agatw che
freedome of a freeman that (&
not bounDthereunto bp pars
ticular Cenure. Wut a cus
ftome map bealledged within
a Wannoz,(b) Chat euerte
tenant (albett his perfon be
free) that holdeth in bondage,
oz by natiue Cenure, the kree⸗
hold being inthe Lozo, ſhall
pap tothe Loꝛd foz the marrt=
age of his Daughter Without
licence, a fine: amo tt is calz
ied Marchet, ag tt were a
Chete 62 fine foz marriage.
And here Littleton fatth, that
none ought to pap ſuch fines


but Uilleines, (thatis )cither Milicineg of bloud, 02 freemen holding in Villenage 02 bafe Te⸗
nure. So notea diverfitic betWweene a fræboloer and a free man holding tn Ulllenage: Nil⸗
leines fe to pap tothetr 20208 tn acknowledgement of thetr bondage for their {eucrall heads,
and thereupon it is calcd Cheuage Cheuagiun of the french $0020 Chicfe, ag (t Were the fere
nice of the head. Ot which Bracton faith, (c) Chinagium dicitur recognitio in fignum fubieéti-
onis & domini) de capite fuo. Andfometimes tt ts Written Chiuage, but moze properly Chic-


fage.(d) Cheuagium fignificth alfo a great Q9ifpztGion for any fulsíec to take fummes of money,
9? other gifts pearelp in name of Cheuage, becaufe thep take bpon them to be their chiefe beads


0? Leaders,


«| Purceo que ceft prefcription eft encounter reafon ceo eff voyd. This
containes ent of tbe marimes of the Common Law, viz. that alicuftomes and pacícrtptíong
that be agaínft reafon,are voyd.


(UN 4 CS ar Coü-

M ty De kent,
ou Eres tenements,
font tenug en Gauel⸗
kind la ou per le cu-
ftome # bfc à temps
Dont memozie uc
curt, les fits males
boíent ouelment en-
bitíter, ceo cuſtome
eftallotoable,put ceo
que il eftoit one aſcun
teafon , pur ceo que
chefcun fits e(t aurp
graunde gente home
comeleique fits eft,


Sect. 210.
B in the County


of Kent where
lands and tenements
are holden in Gauel-
kinde, there where by
the cuftome and víe
out of minde of man
the iffues male ought
equally to inherite ,
this cuftomeis allow-
able, becaufe it ftan-
deth with fome rea-
fon,for euery fonne is
as great a gentleman as
the eldeft fonne is and
perchance will grow


qj ounce
Kent. 02 that
fn no dLountíc of England


140


(0) .43.E.3:5.. 14.H. 6.15.


(¢).Braffon lib. x.cap.18.


Britten fol.79.6. :


Cd)27..4f°44.


(e) Vide Leffatute de
tudinibus Kancis ann


(Confuc-.


21.€,1.


2.E.3.12.3-E. 3.21. 38


214. pl. 12. 8. Eʒ


3 .
42.6.


lands (f) at this Dap bee Of (()Vide Mirror cap. vi.


the nature of Gauelkind of
common right, ſauing in Kent
onelp, Wut pet in diners
parts of England, Within
Divers mannozs and Seigni⸗
ories the itke cuftome is in
force.

«| Ex Ganelkinde,
that te, Gaue all kind: fox this
qu gtueth to all the fons
abe,


Les fitz males in-
heriter. And this is


the gencrail cuftome extending
to fonnes, Wut pet (2) bp
cuffome when one bzotber
dieth Without (Inc, all *

other


(g) 35 Aff. platz,


Lib.2.


Ch) Fertefene es p.t


Horace.


ge HB, 2 V YR NO gn


V.SecB. i65.


(1) 32.3 HI Age Sr.


) Mis. vo. Ta.Eliotsoafé
in Briefe de Faux iudremens,


(1) "rit.87.h.


Cap. ii.

other brethren map (nbetít.
« Chim fitz eft

auxy grand gentlehome

come leigne fitz et. IBY


this ít appeareth , that Dens
tri¢an® Armes (a of the nas
ture of Gauelkind, for tbep
deſcend toalltbe fonnes,euc=
tiefonne beeing a Gentleman


"4
alike. which dpentric and Armes doe not delcend to all the bzethzen alone, but toall thett po=


Of Villenage.


& per cafe a pluíg
graunde ono: € bà-
jour creffera fil auoít
vien p es ancefters,
ou autermét, perad=
uenture il ne puiſſoit
tielment creffer,ac.


Sec.ꝛu.


to greater honour and
valour if he hath any
thing by his anceftors,
or otherwife perad-
uenture hee would not


encreafe fo much, &c.


fterítít : but pet Iure primogeniture, the eldeft [bali beare as a badge ot his bixthꝛight, his faz


thers Armes without any difference, foz that ag Littleton fatth Scétionc


of bioud ; but all the ponger brethzen thal give ſeuerall Differences, & additio probat minorita~
tem, and (h ) hareditas inter mafculos iureciuili eft diuidenda.


«| Onanterment peraduenture il nepuiffoit tielment creffer. Whe vea= —
fon of this is rendzed by the Poet:


Hand facile emerguat quorum virtutibus obflat
Res angu[la domt.


Wut now bp the Statute of ;1.H.8 a great part of Kent {9 made defcendableto tbe eldeft
fonne, — — courſe of tbe Common Law, fog that bp the weanes of that cuftome,
Diners entient and great Samiltes after a fco diſcents came to berie little oy nothing,


In pluves quoties rinos deducitur amnis,
Fit minor, ac vadd deficiente, perit.


4; Pp” cuftome appel

Burgh | Engli[b.
ME this caftome | ittleron
bath fpoken betoze in the
chapter of Burgage. Bnd in
out bokes there is a fpectall
kind of Bozough Engith, (i)
ag tt hall difcend to the pons
get fonne, tf be be not of tbe
balfe blowd , and if he be, then
to the eldeſt ſonne. ;

(k) within the Mannoꝛ of
B.in the Countie of Werke,
there ig {uch acuftome, Chat
{£a man haue diners daugh⸗
ters, anb no fonne, and bíctb,
the eldeft nangbter ſhall oncip
inherit; and {€ hee haue no
daughters, but Afters, tbe els
deft aſter by the cuftome hail
enherit,and fometime the pon=


Sect. 211.


Cc pem lot per

cuítome appel
Burgh Œnglifb en
alcun Burgh, le fits
puiif inherifa touts
leg tenements, ac, c€
cuftome eftoit ouc aft
certaine reafon , put
ceo que Ic fits puifne
(fil fault pere a mere)
per caufe De fon iu-
uentute poit le pluis
meins Detouts fes
freres lup mefme at-
Der, ac,


A Lío where by the
Cuftome called
Burrough Englifh, in
fome borow the yon-


geft fon fhall inherit :


al the Tenements,&c.
this Cuftome alfo
ftands with fome cer-
taine reafon , becaufe
that the yonger fonne
(ifhe lacke father and
mother) becaufe ofhis


yong age, may leaft of
all his bretheren helpew


himfelfe,&c.


he ts moze Sworthte —


geft. And diuers other cuftomes there be in like cafes, Bnd herewith agreeth Britton , who


faith, (1) De terres des ancienes demeynes foit vſe folonque le antient vfage del lieu, dount en
afcun lieu letient leu pur vfage : que le heritage foit departable entre touts les enfants freres &
fores, & en afeun lieu que le cigne aucra tout, & cn afcun lieu quele puifne frere aera tout.

«| Pur canfe de fon inuentute poet le pluis metas de touts fésfreres luy mefme
aidre, &c. Here bp(&c.)ateimplieb thote caufes toberefoze a youth
is leſſe able to ago bünfelfe, ec, which tbe Poet bricfely and pitbilp expactleth thas: EC

mberbis


Ÿ
[


|


|


Lib.2


Of Villenage.


Imberbie Inueais tandem Cuftode remoto,
Gaudet Equis,Canibufque de Aprici gramine Caps
Cereus in vitium flectit, Monitoribus afpery
Vtilium tardus prauifor prodigus ris,
Sublimis,cupidulque, ci amata relinquere pevnix.


And againe, no liuing creature moze infirme than Man:


Nil bomiae infirmum,tellus animalia mutrite
Inter cuncta magis.—


€ Cg (í home
More pꝛeſcri⸗
ber, que ſi aſcuns atts
fueront fur les Dc-
meſnes De fon man⸗
10? là Dammag fea-
fants, quele Seig⸗
nio? Del mannoz put
ic temps cfteant, ad
vſe eur De Difirepuer,
& le diſtreſſe retapne
tauque fine fuit fait
à lup pur Ie Dammag
à fa bolunt, ce(t pꝛe⸗
feription ef botd,pur
ceo que ti ett incoun-
terreafon, que (coat
foit fait à bu home,
que il De ceo tert fon
Judge demefnc:Car
per tiel bop Gi aucit
Damages fojfque
al value pum mail, él
puifloit aſſeſſer a ait
gut ceo CF, que ſer⸗
toit encounter rea-
fon, Ct iffint tiel
prefcription, ou aſcũ
aut pzrefcription ble
(fi ceo foit encounter
reaſon) ceo ne Doit
eftre alloto Denaunt
Judges : Quia malus
víus abolendus eft.


Seél. 212.


BY: if aman wil pre-
{ctibe, that if any
catel were vpó the de-
meanes of the Man-
nor, there doing dam-
mage,that the Lord of
the Manaor for the
time beeing hath vfed
to diftreyne them, and
the diftreffe to retaine
tillfine were made to
him forthe dammages
athis will, this pre-
{cription is voyd : be-
caufe it is againft rea-
fon, that if wrong bee
done any man, that
hee thereof fhould be
his owne Iudge, for by
fuch way , if hee had
dammages but to the
value of an halfepeny,
he might affefle and
haue therefore C. li.
which fhould bee a-
gainft Reafon. And
fo fuch prefcription,
orany other prefcrip-
tion vfed, if it beea-
gainft Reafon , this
ought not, nor will
not be allowed before
Iudges , Quia malus
vfus abolend us eff.
fin


Seé#.212.


© Y Stencounter rea-

(fora que fi tort foit
fait a vn home, que il de
ceo ferra fon iudge de-


meme. For it is a
Wartime in Maw, Aliquis non
debet effe iudex in propria cau-
fa. * Bnd therefore a fine lez
nied before tbc Waplifes of
Salop, Was reuerſed, becaule
one of the Bailifes wag par=
tie to the fine, quia non potett
effe iudex & pars.


a Malus vfus abo-


lenduseft: And eue-
rie bfc (d euill, that is (ag our
Buthorfaith) againt reafor ;
Quia in confuüetudinibus noa
diuturnitas temporis, fed fo-
liditas rationiseft cofideranda.

Bud by this rule cited bp
eur Author at tbe Parlta⸗
ment boloen at Kilkenny in
Freland, Lionel Duke of
Clarence becing then Lieute⸗
nant of that 1Rcalme, the
Frith cuffomg called therethe
Brehon Law , (fo; that the
Frith call their Judges, Bre-
hons) Swag wholly abolt{ben,
for that (ag the Parliament
fapd) ít was no Law , buta
lew cuftome, & malus vfus
abolendusett.

Wat our Student mot
brow, Chat King Lohn in
the twelfth peare of biz
raign ent (nto Ireland, and
there bp the aduice of grauc
and learned men in the Laws
whom bee carried Swith bin,
by Parllament de communi
omnium de Hibernia confenfu
ovainen andeftablifhen, that
Freland fboulo bec goucrne’
bp the Hawes of Œnglann,

Shich


141


&oesc,


vis, qu. E, 3.42 Kilkeony.


The Brebon Law.


Vid. Se. 165.


Lib.2.


Rott. pat, 1 1. H. 3.
L@.7 fo. 22. b. Calnyns cafe.


‘Tet.patent.1 8.73.
Magaly


Ret, Tatert.30.H.3.


9 Trim.13.E.1. Coram Rege
$n Thefaur.in longo plaesta.
(m) 2.8.3 f». 12.

In camera jtel'ata,
1.4.9.5


$23) Flata,lib 3.04.14.
"Brittrn,ea.41.
Mirror ca. 3. S16.
Pl.( om.131.5.

* Lib. 10.148. (lunscafe.


(b) Pl. em.138.135 de.


In Brownings & Befloni ca(e.
33- 6.346


(4p. 12.


Swbich of many of tbc Frith men, according to thetr oone defire, was iepfuilp accepted a
obeyed, and of many the fame as fone after abfolutelp refufed, preferring their Bree |
hon La% before the iuft anb honourable Lawes of England, Rex, &c. Baronibus,militibus, See


Of Rents.


Sedl.a13. |
ue


& omnibus libere tenentibus L. Salutem ; Satis vt credimus veſtra audiuit difcrerio, quod quan- í
do bonz memorix Iohannes quondam Rex Anglia: patcr nofter venit in Hyberniam, ipfe duxit
fecum viros difcretos & leg's peritos, quorumcommuni confilio, & ad inftantiam Hybernenfiurm
ftatuit & præcepit leges Anglicanasin Hybernia,ita qnod legeseafdem in Scripturasredaétasres M
liquit fub figillo fuo ad Scaccarium Dublin.

Rex Comitibus, Baronibus, militibus, & liberis hominibus & omnibusalijs de terra Hibernia |
falutem. Quia manifeftè effe dinofcitur contra coronam & dignitatem noftram & confuetudi-
nes & leges regni noftri Angliæ quasbonz memori Dominus Iohannes Rex pater nofter, de
communiomnium de Hybernia confenfu,teneri ftatuit in terra illa quod placita reneantur in cus
ria Chriftianitatis de aduocationibus Ecclefiarum & capellarum vel delaico feodo vel de catallis
quz non fünt dc teftamento vel matrimonio. Vobis mandamus prohibentes quatenus huiufinc-
di placita in Curia Chrifhanitatis nullatenus fequi prz fümatis in manifeftum dignitatis & Coro-
næ noftræ przeiudicium, fcituri pro certo, quod fi feceritis, dedimus in mandatis Iufticiario no-
ftro Hyberniz, Statura curiæ noftre in Anglia contra tranfgreffiones huius mandati noftri cum
Iufticia procedat, & quod noftrum eft exequatur. In cuius, &c, TefteRegeapud Winchcomb,
28. die O&obris, annorcgni noftri 18. Et mandatum eft lufticiario Hyberniæ, per literas clau-
fas quod predi&as literas patentes publice legi & tencri faciat.

Rex,&c« pro communi vtilitate terre Hyberniæ, & pro Vaitate terrarumyproui(um eſt, quod
omnesleges & confuetudinesquæ in regno Anglie tenentur, in Hybernia teneantur, X cadem
terra cifdem legibus fubiacear, ac per eafdem regatur, (icut Iohannes Rex cum illic effet, tatuit &
firmiter mandauit. Ideo volumus, quod omnia brenia de communi iure que currunt in Anglia
fimiliter currantin H ybernia fib nouo figillc Regis: In cuius, &c. Teíte me ipſo apud V/ood>
ftocke. tio bereín ít ig to be obſerued, Chat onion of Lawes te the belt meanes foz the vnttie
of Œountricg. * Voa vtesdem lexefle debet tam in Regno Angliz quam Hyberniæ. (m) Ter-
ra Hyberniz inter fe habet Parliamentum & omnimodas curias prout in. Anglia, & per idem
Parliamentuyn facit leges & mutat leges, & illi de cadem terra non obligantur per ftatuta in An
glia, quia hij non habent. Milites Parliamenti.

25p an Ac of Parliament (called Poynings Law ) holden in Ireland in tbe tenth xeare of
Hen:ic the feuonth, it is inaged, Chat all ffatutes made in this Realmeof England before
that time, ſhould be of force and be put in bre Within the 1$ ealme of Fretand, which (though it
be bp Way o£ digreflion) (S not onncceffarie foz our Student te now, Wut now let vs heare


our Auto.


Cnuar. n.


5x qj Dime hane dente
;2,| dew Rents into
V4 foure kindes,
viz. Rent fer=
: tice, Kẽt charge
AR ent diftrepnabic of common
right ( whereef ſomewhat
hall be faid in this chapter)
and iR cnt fecke.


€ rex. In Latpn
( Redditus, (a) bp fome Di-
citur àredeundo, quia retroit,
& quotannis redit. * And o-
thers fap (t {6 deriued of red-
dere, for that the Rent ts re=
ferucb out of the proffits, of
the land, and is not due ttil the


tenant 02 ilefie take the pꝛof⸗


fits, foz reddendo ind: 92 fol-


uendo, 02 referuando inde


0?
the lige, (b) (d ag much to


Of Rents.


Roys ma=
ners De
Kents p
font, ceft=
afcauoir, Went fers
uice, Bent charge, &
Bent ſecke: Kent fer=
uice cft lou le tenant
tient fa terre De fon
fr p fealtie, a cer⸗
tain iRent, ou per ho⸗
mage, fealtie, & cet-


tain Bent, ou p auts


feruíceg 3 certain
ent: (C vent Ceruice


Sed#.213.


E Hree manner
a of rents there
bee, that is to
fay, Rent fer-
uice,Rent charge, and
Rent fecke. Rent fer-
uice is,where thetenát
holdeth his land of his
Lord by fealtie , and
certain rent, or by ho-
mage, fealty, and cer-
taine rent, orby o.
ther feruices, and cer-
taine rent, and if rent
feruice at any day chat


foít


B  —


| veve, le Sfr poit Di-
ttrainer pur ceo, Dc


+


OfRents..


it ought to bee payed,
beebehinde,the Lord
may diftraine,for that
of common right.


Lib.2. T
(Sit a afcun tour (que
Doit eftre pay) ade⸗


Seé.213,


fapagtbe Œenant o? Leite
hallpap fo much out of the
profits of tbe lands, foz Red-
derenihil aliud eft quam ac-
ceptum aut aliquam partem
: ciufdem reftituere. Seu redde-
common Doit. re eft quafi retro. dare, and
hereofcommeth Redditus fora Rent.

Here note forthe better bnderfkanding of ancient Mecozds, Statutes, Charters,c. Gabel,
ot Gaucll,gablum, Gabelli, Gabelletta, Galbellettum, and Gauillettü Doe fighiífie a Rent, Cu⸗
ffome, Dutie, oz feruice, peelded o; bone tothe Ring o? any other 1070, ag Wallingford conti-
net 376. Hagas.i.domos reddentes 9, liberas de gablo.i. de redditu. Bnd Oxford, hee vrbs red-
debat pro theolenio & Gabloregi 20. f. & Sextarios mellis; cometi Alpharo 1o.libras, And this


> fgtbc legall fignification thereof,


€ Rent feruice. It is called a Kent Ceruice, becaute it hath (ome
Coꝛpoꝛall feruice incident onto tt, Which at the Icaft (s fealtie, ag here it appeareth.


 Saterre.(c) A Rent ſeruice cannot be reterucd out of any in-
beritance but fuch as ig manurable Sohercinto tbe 3020 map enter and take a diftrete, ag tn
Lands and Tenements, Keuerſions, remainders, and ag fome haue ſaid, out of the herbage of
lands, anb rcgularip not out of any inberitances incozpozeall, o? that 1pe in grant, (d) By
at of Xa$» one rent oꝛ ſeruiee map t(Tucout of anorher, ag if A befoze the flatute of Quia
emptores terrarum hap given lands to B. ta hold tohimbpfeaitie, anb tcn Millings rent, and
B. had made a feoffiment in Fee to C. & c. Sobercby there Wasa Mefnaltp created, tn this cafe
C.fbouib bolo of. B. either by the fame feruices the Law created,o2 fucb ac he fpectallp referued
and B. dtd bp operation of Law bolo thofe leruices of A. bp fealty and ten ſhillings rent,that is
tofay,rent and feruice out of rent andferutc ; anb (£ the rent be bebinde, the Lozd paramount
map Ddiftreine bpon the iand fos his rent, for voth Meſnalty and Seianterp doc iſſue out of the
land, the Wetnaitie tmmedtatip, and the Hetgntozp medtatly, which tg worthy of dueconſide⸗
ration and obferuattorr, s


¶ Certaine rent. (6) For tbe Rent mult be certaine,oz wobich may
be reduced to acertaintie, foz Id certum eft, quod certum reddí poteft. (f) Continetur carta
reddendo inde annuatim ad tales tecminos vel faciendo inde talia feruitia vel tales confuetudines,
quz omnia debent effe certa & in carta exprefla,&c. Wut of this J baue fpoken, Sect.136.
And the rent may aſwell be in delinerp of Hens, Capons, Rofes, Spurres, owes, Shafts,
Holes, Hawkes,pcpper, Comine, Mheat,oꝛ other profit thatipeth tn render, office, atten⸗
dance, and {uch like: ag in payment of money, (2) Buta man bpon bis feoffment o2 con=
Hepance cannotreferuc to him parcell of tbc Annuall profite tbemfelucg, ag to referne the ve⸗
fiurc oz herbage of the land 02 the like, £o? that fhould be repugnant tothe grant, Non debet
eaim elTe refruatio de proficuis ipfis, quia ea conceduntur,fed de redditu nouoextra proficua.


¶ Poet diftreine pur ceo. Fox where there ts fealtie,æc, incident to
the rent, there is a diſtreſſe incident alfo thereunte. (Ch) Wut it is to bee vnderſtood that for a
rent 02 fernice,the 31020 cannot diffrepne tn the night, but in the dap time, and fo tc te of a rent
charge: but £o? Damage feafaunt one map diftretne in the night, other wiſe tt map be the beaſts
Swill be gone before he can take them,


€ De comon droit. DE common vight,(i) thatts bp the common
Law, fo called becaufe the Common Law (g the bef and mot common birtheriqht, that the
fubtect hath foꝛ the fafegard and defence not only of gode, lands, and reuenueg;but of his wife
and chilozen, bis body, fame and lifealfo, Hoag the meaning of Littleton tn this particular
cale ig, that the 3,015 map diſtreine fos this rent of common right,thatis, bp the Common law
Soithont any particular referuation oz proutton of the partie, And it is to be obferucd that the
Common Law of England fomctime tg called rigbt, fometitne common right, and (ometime
Communisjuftitia. In the graund Charter, the Common Law te called right, rectum. Nulli
vendemus,nulli negabimus aut differemus juftitiam vel re&um. In tbeftatute of W  1.cap.r. ft
ig called Common droit. En primes voet leroy,& commande quele peacede St, Efglife & de la
terre foit bien garde & maintaine en touts points, & que common droit foit faitsa routs auxibien
anx poures,come aux riches (aunce regard de nulluy, which agreeth With tbe ancient lao (n the
time of King Edgar, Porro autem has populo quas feruet proponimus leges; primum publici iu-
risbeneficio quifquam fruitur, idque ex æquo & bono fiue is diues fiueinops fuerit jus redditur.
Bnd Fleta faith, Item quod pax Ecclefix & terrz inuiolabiliter obferuetur, & quod communis
jufticia fingulis pariterexhibeatur. Bnd all te Commiflions € Charters £02 evecution of Iu⸗
att Fa uri quod ad juftitiam pertinet fecundum legem Ei confuetudinem Anglia. £0 *
"2 t


142


Damefday.
Staturum de gau lert⸗
anne 10,€.3.


Vid ScB.21*.

(€) 44. E. 4. 35. lib. 5. fo. 4.
Seiguior JMounrtoy:s cafe.
9-424. 30. f5-
17.E.3.75. Lib 7.fo 23.
Buts cafe. Pl.Cim,: 39.
(d) 3. H.6.2t. 5 H 7:56.
a1 H.7.39. 1. H.4.03.
I0o.H.6,12. 19. E. 3. cu
Gard 4o. 21. H. 6.11.


(e) Britton, ſo. 100.2.
EFleta, lib.ʒ3. ca 14.


(g) 38. H.6.58.«.


(h) -Mirrer.ca, 2. S. 16.
10.E. 3. Amory 137.
11, H.7.5*


(i) 9.1.6.1. 2. H.4.ca.1.
24H 4.e4,1. 4.H.8.68.8.


Lamb fo.78. inter
Leges Reges Edgart,
Fleta,lib. 1 .c4,29.


Lib.2.


Vid. Sel.214,216.226.


252: 3316


354 H.6.34.


VideSeR. 151.133.


Capa.


OfRents.


Setl. 214.215.


truth Jullice (s the daughter of the Law, kor the Lak byingeth ber. forth, Andinthts
aoe taken, aíSvell the ftatutes anb cuftomcg of tbe Realme, as that Which is p20
ip the Common law is included Within Common droit. Littleton in this his €reatifenameth


Common droit fretimes,


€ Su fait.

Foꝛ it is a

rule in Law that a rent

Seruice may bcereferz
ued without Ded,

€ E» mefme le

manner fi leaf foit


fat.oc. For thele
be ents Serutces,be-
canfe kealtie is incident
to thefe Rents , foo (ag
tt hath bænefaiobefoze )
a Leſſee fon life oz peares
fball doe feaitie, And tf
aman make a Leafe at
til, referuing a Rent,
the Leſlee fball not doe
fealtic,and pet the Leſſor
fall bílraine for the
vent of common tight.
€ Rendant, com-
meth of the word reddo,
sie rem pro re dare, and


Sei. 214.


€ cit home voy⸗
Bist Doner terres
putenements abn au-
ter entaile, renbant a
lup certain Bent p an,
il De cmon Dzoit poit
diſtreiũ pur levent ade-
tete, coment que tiel
Done fuit fait fang
fait, put ceo que tiel
ent eft Went feruice,
Cn m̃ le maner eft, ff
leas foit fait a bn boc
pur terme De bie, ou
Dautet bie, rendant al
leſſor certaine Bent.ou
pur terme De ang ren⸗
dant certaine Kent,


EU


Nd if a man will”
giue Lands or Te-


nements to another in
thetaile , yeclding to
him certaine rent by the
yeare, hee of common
right may diftraine for
the rent behind, though
that fuch gift was made
without deed, becaufe
that fuch Rent is Rent
Seruice: Inthe fame mã-
ner itisjifaleafebemade
to aman for life orthe
life of another rendring
to the Leffor certaine
Rent , or for tearme of
yeares rendring Rent.


fignífict) yeelding ez repaping,but of this 3| hauefpoken before tn this Chapter. Sedt.213.


€ R Enertion. Re-
uerfio com⸗
meth of the Latine Sword re-
uertor , and fignifieth a retur=
ning againe, and therefore
reuerfio terre eft tanquam ter-
ra reuertens in poffeffione do-
natori fiue heredibus fuis poft
donum finitum, &c. ag ín the
cafes that Littleton here hath
pur,
€ Z content que le
venerfion , &c. foit enle
donor ou leffor erc.

Œbis (e not to be vnderſtod
only ofa renerfion immediatly
€rpetant bpon tbe gift oz
leafe, Foꝛ it᷑ a manmaketha
gift in tayle, the remapnder
ín tapie referuing arent, and
Beepe the reuerfion in bimfelfe,
this ig a Rent Seruice,

€ Refernant.Refer-
uer commeth of the Latine


Seclion. 215.

CrAACSEtiel cas
M ou home fur
tiel Done ou leafe
boile veferuer a lup
rent feruice, tl couiẽt
que le reuerſiõ de les
terres a tenem̃ts foit
en le Dono? ou leffo2,
cat ff bome boile fair
feoffement en fec, ou
voile Doner terres en
taile, le remaindze
ouftre en fee (imple
fans fait, veferuant
à lup certaine vent,
tiel referuat eft boid,
pur ceo que nul re⸗
uerſion remaine en le
Donor, a tíel tenant
tient


Vt in fuch cafe

wherea man vpon
{uch a gift or Leafe
will referue to hima
Rentferuice, it beho-
ueth that the reuerfion
of the Lands and Te-
nements be inthe Do-
nor or Leffor. For ifa
man will make a feoff-
ment in fee , or will
giue Lands intaile,the
remainder ouer in fee
fimple without Deed,
referuing to him a cer-
taine Rent, this refer-
uation is void, for that
no reuerfion remaines
inthe Donor,and fuch


^
2


1
N
a


d


paren


Of Rents. Setl.216.


tient la terre imme⸗ tenant holds his Land ‘word Referuo, that ts to pros
Díatr De E feignioz immediately of the sonores wher
Mw fon Donoz t€ Lord of pum .his bec referuerh oz proutneth fox
Joi aC, Donor held, &c+ :


dimfelfe arent fo2 bis one

liuelihcod. And ſometime tt
bath the fozce of fauing 02 excepting: So ag (k ) fometime tt ferueth to referne a new
thing, viz. a Rent, and(!)fometimeto except part of the thing ín efTe that is granted.

And itis to be vnderſtood that in the cafe of tbe gift tntaple, leafe fox 1tfe oz peares, the feal=
tie ts an incident infeparable tothe rencrfion, fo ag the Donoꝛ 0? Aefloz cannot grant the rez
verfion ouer, and fauc to himfelfe the fcaitie o2 {uch like ſeruice, but the Bent he map except, bez
tanfe the Rent although it be inctdent to the rewerfion pet it is not infeparably incident. It a


“man maketh a gift in taplc Without any referuation, the Done bal holo of the Donoz by the


fameferuices that he held ouer. (m) But otherwite itis of an Œftate fox life 02 peares, foz
there tf he referucth nothing, be hall baue fealtie onip Mbich is an incident infoparable tothe
tenerfion, ag hath been fatd,


€ Le remaindre onfter en fee fimple fans fait. Pere it appeareth that
(fa man maketh a gift tn tatle, theremainder tn fee Without Deed, (n) the remainder ts god,
and pafleth out of the Donozby the liuerie of feifin , aubfo tt (s of a leafe £o? lift op pcares the
remainder oucr in fee £o? the particular effate and the remainder to many intents and purpofes,


make but one effate in iudgement of Law. Vide Sec co.


€ Remaindre , Ju legall Latine ig remanere comming of the
Latine 30020 remanco, fo? that(o) ttig a remainder of remnant of an eſtate ín Lands 02 Ges
nements expectant bpon a particular effate created together with tbe fame at onc cime ag tn the
cafes here of Littleton appearcth.


€ ET ceo eft pet
force De leſta⸗
tute De Quia empto-
resterrarum , cat de⸗
uaunt le Dit eftatute
fi hoe feſoit bn fcoffe-
ment en fee fimple,
per fait ou fans fait,
tendant aluy a à (eg
heires cevtaine rent,
ceo fut rent feruice,
& pur ceo tl puiffoit
Diftreine De common
Droit, & fl fuit nul
referuation Dafcun
rét ned aſcũ feruice,
bncoze le feoffee te-
nuft Del feoffoz per
autiel feruice que le
feoffer tenuft ouftre
Sion Seignioz p10-
cheine Paramont.


Seclion 216.

AX D this is by

force of the Sta-
tute of Quia emptore:
terrarum , for before
that Statute, if aman
had made a feoffment
in fee fimple by deed
or withont deed yeel-
ding to him and to his
heires a certaine rent,
this was arent feruice,
and for this hee might
haue diftrained of
common right. And if
there were no referua-
tion of any Rent nor
of any Seruice,yet the
Feoffee held of the
Feoffor by the fame
Seruice as the Feoffor
did hold ouer his
Lordnext Paramount.


¶ Via emptores
terrarum.
Hereot is ſpoken befoze tr


the chapter of Frankalmoigne
Sc&ione 140.


@ Per fait ou fans
fait, cc. Forall vent
Sersices map bee referued
without Ded ( as hath bene
fatd) and ag it appearethhere,
Bnd at the Common Law
{fa man bad made a feoffment
in feo by Parol he might upon
that feoffiment have reſerued
a Rent to him and his hetres
becauſe it was a tent. ferutce,
and a tenure thereby created,


€ Et fil fuit nul re-
feruation, &c. le feoffee
tenuſt del feoffor per au-
tiels feruices,rc. QYtS


is entdent and agreeth With
our Bokes (*) that tn tbíg
cafe the Law created the
tenure, wherein (t íg tobe obs
ferned how the Law regar-
Beth equitie and equalítíe
without anp proutfion o? res
feruation of the partic,


Ipfz etenim leges cupiunt vt iure regantur.


fin 3


“Sect,”


143


(Kk) 8.E.4.48.
26.-A4/f. 1.66.


(1) 35. R.6. 3 4.


(m ) Litt.fol.4.
Old tenures 5.
38,8.3.7. 33. H.6.7.


(n) 40.€.3.10. 10. F.4. 1.
12.€.4 16. 1 S. E.4.18.
18.E. 4. 12. 18. H.B.4.
3-H.7.13. F.N.B.219.
11.H.4.39. 38.E,3.26,
44E.3.8.

(©) Lib.2. fol. st,
Chelmelies cafe,


(*) Brittonfel. 100.
2.E.3.33-. 25.E. 3-.gerd. 21,
49.E.3.10. 29 :Aff. Pl. 530:
g.H.y1$9 SN m

232E 3344007 54s
Littl.cap t6ile, Seid,


^
wb T


ia


‘
»


i)


Vis


^ tot. ev
446v LM
Jos


Lib...


Britten. fol. 190.
FletNib. 3 cap, 14.
Vide $e. 376.


(p) 3.E.4.8. 11. H.7.23.


3$. H.6.34. 20.£. 4.13.
17.5.3. 12H. 4.17.


(q) Fleta Itb.3.eap 14.
"Brsten, fel. 100.


! (r) 12.€.2.Feffment:8,
18. E. gf. 581.


(f£) 35.8.6. 36.


Old tenures. 4
Britt ^n.eap. 66, 164.
FN. B. 210. Brad. $6.


Capaz.


ŒDEr fait indent.
P It cannot bee


a Ded invented, vnicile tt be
actually indented, foz albett
the wordes of the Weed bee
Hæc Indenrura, &c pet t£ tt
be notindented in Ded it (c
no ZFndinture , but if the
3D «b bee inbenteb, albeit the
ozdg of the ded be not hac
Indentura , petítíg an In⸗
denture,
And it (e holden that (p)tf
a feoffmunt in fee bce made bp
Ded poll referuing a Rent
this referuation ig gad, foz
Sohen the Feollee accepts the
Dev ane Liuerie of the iand
be agreeth to the rent, andthe
tent ig rcferucb by ‘he Mods
of the Feoffor, anb not by the
grant of the Feoffee but of
thts moze hereafter. Jin the
meane time it ts tobee no-
ted, that of ancient tinea
Wed indented as called
Charta cyrographata,02 © har-
ta communis, becaufe exch
partie hada part, And a Ded
poll was cailco Charta de vna
parte (q) Chartz autem de
pura donaticne de fimplici
penesdonatorium & eus hæe
redes debet remarere, com-
munes vero duplicari debent
ita quod quilibet haber par-
tem fuam. Vel fi vna fittan-
tum tunc in zqua masu com-
munis amici vtriufq; ponatur
faluo cuftodiend’ dun cuilibet
partiü neceffe fuerit exhibedü.
€ Refernant a luy.
(1) Note, ít ts amortme in
Law that the rent muft be rez
ferneo to him from Whom the
fate of the Land mouct:;, and
not to a ffranger, (1) abut
fome Doe hold that otherwife
{tis ín the cafe of the King.
Œ Et del rent eff


rent charge. It tS cal=
lcb à Rent charge, becaufe


the Land fo: payment thereof


1s charged wrth à wift: efTe, FE
“tbe to the Whole balue of the
Land, oꝛ to the fourth prrt of


the dal then therent is callepa fes farme,
c.


Of Rents.
Settion 217.

€s fi home
TM pet fait en-
Dent a cel tour, fait
tiel Done en fee taile,
I remainder oufter en
fee, ou leafea terme
De bie, le remainder
oufter en fee, ou vn
feofment en fee a per
fh lendenture il te-
ferue a lup, aateg
beites bn certaine
rent aque filerent
foit aderere, (j bien
lirrott à lup a à feg
heirs a Difireiner.ac.
tiel rent ef rent
charge , pur ceo que
ticlg terres ou tenc-
ments font charges
ouetiel diſtreſſe per
force De le fcripture
tantfolement, æne-
my à common Doit,
Ct fi tiel home fur
fait endent referua


aluy, tafes beires


certain vent fans at-
cur tiel claufe mife
enle fait, queíl poit
Diftreine, Donque tícl
rent eft rent fecke,
pur ceo que il ne poít
bener De auct le tent,
fi ceo foít Deuy pet
meane De Diftrefle, à
fil ne fuit buques en
ceft cas fei(íe De là
tenti en fang reme=
Die, conte ferra Dit a-
p2es,


Seti. 217.


BV if a man by
deed indented at
thisday maketh fuch
a gift in fee taile, the
remainder ouer in fee,
oraleafe for life, the
remainder ouer in fee,
ora feoffement in fee,
and by the fame in-
denture hee referueth
to him and to his
heires a certaine rent,
and that if the rent be
behind, that it thallbe
lawfull for him and
his heires to diftreine,
&c.fuch arent is a rent
charge, becaufe fuch
Lands or Tenements
are charged with fuch
d ftrefle by force of
the writing only, and
notof common right.
And if fuch a man
vpona deed indented
referue to him and to
his heires a certaine
rent without any fuch
claufe put inthe deed,
that hee may diftreine
then fuch rent is rent
fecke,for that hee can-
not come to haue the
rent if it be denied by
way of diftres. And if
inthis cafe hee were
neuer feifed of the
rent, he is without re-
medic, as fhall be faid
hereafter.


Here Littleton putteth hig Cale, anb fo oid bec ie
t


i]


* Liba.


the next Section before, of a claufe of diftrefle generallp granted, (t) À man granted arent


Of Rents. Setl.218.


out ofcertaine land, pro concilio impenfo & impeadendo, Go have and to hold to him anb to
big Allignes foz terme of his life, papableat foure Feaſts in the peare, and £02 detault of pap-
ment bpon Demand, ít fhouid be lawful fog him to diftrepne ; the Gantes granted the cent oucr :
the Alſignee after one of the dayes Demanded the rent,and diftrepned, and che diſtreſſe adiudged
lawtull, for he neds not make a Demand at anp of the dayes, as in thecale oc re-eniric, but
hemap demand tt when hee will, kor itio onclp to entitle him to his remedie foz bis neere
dutie.


- « Diftreyneerc. Here by (Sec.) is tmplied topat things are di-
firepnable, which elſe where is exprefledatiarge. Allo wherethe diltrelle is to be taken m the


fame land, and in fome other, Which with manp differences ts fct downe in his proper place,


«c Uferrafansremedie. Note that bpona releruation of a Rent
bpon a Écofcment in fe bp deed indented, (w) the feoffor ball not bauc a wꝛit of Annuttic,be-
caufc the Wozds of referuation,ag Reddendo, foluendo, faciendo, tenendo,refeyuando,&c are


- the Swords of the Feoltor, and not of the Soffer, albcit tbe Feotfee bp acccptanceot the ttate,ts


bound thereby.

Bnd Where Littler. putteth his cafe, when a reſexuation is made bpon aneftate that palleth
bp linerte, the fame Law it (8, (Fa man at this dap boe bargaine and fell his land bp bae in-
dented and inrolledaccozding to tbe Statute,a rent map be referuedthereupow, £oz albeitan ble
had onclp pafled bp the Common La, pet now by the Statute of 27-4 8. cap 10. the fe and
poſſeſſton palle together, and fo i£ Wag adindged, ^ And foit ts of a grant ofa reuerfion oz re⸗


mainder, and any otherconucpance of Lands oz Cenements, wyhereby any citate doth pale.


€ Aut ft bowie

feilie De cer=
tain terre graunt per
bn fait polle, ou per


indenture bn annual


tent ifuant hors De
mefme la terre a bn
auter en fee ou en fee
taile,ou pur terme Dc
bie, ac, oueſq; claufe
De Diftreffe, ac, Don-
ques ceo €cét chat
& fi le graunt foit
fans claufe 8 diftres,
Donques il eft Bent
fecke, Et nora, que
Bent fecke idem eft


Seif. 218.


Lfo if a man fei-

fed of certaine
land, grantby a Deede
poll, or by Indenture,
ayearely rent to be if-
fuing out of the fame
land,to another in fee,
orin feetaile, or for
terme of life, &c.
with aclaufe of diftres
&c. then this is arent
charge, and if the
Graunt bee without
claufe of diftreffe,then
itisa Rent fecke. And
note that Rent Secke
idem efl quod redditus


quod redditus ficcus, ficews : For that mo


pur ceo que nul Di-
fives ctt incident à c,


diftreffe is incident
vnto it.


«4r SE: de Terre. (x)

Note that a rent can-

Hot be granted out of
a Pilcharie, a Common, an
Aduowſon, o» fuch ithe incoze
pozeall inheritances, but out of
lands o2 tcnemcntg whereun⸗
tothe Grantee map haue re-
courte to diftrepne , 02 which
map be put in bic to the re-
cognitozg of an Alſiſe, as hath
benc fatd befoze in this chap=
ter. Bnd thonah ít be eut of
lands oz tenements, (z) pet
it muft be out of an eftate that
pafleth bp the conuepance,( ag
by all Littletons eramples ap=
pearcth ) and not out of a
tights Ds if the Dilcifæ rez
leafe to the Diſſeiſor of land,
referuing a rent, the relergas
ttontg Dopp: Et fic de fimili-


us.
[Grant per fait.*
Ana man map hane a Rent
by pzefcription,


«| Rent fecke idem eft


quod redditus ficcus. (His needs no erplanation,fo2 Littleton ex⸗


pounds ít htmfclée,


Sect,


144 Mid
G)Li.7.f0 38.0. Mawnds cafe
H. 43. El.t5 Com Bance, Ter.
1 108 tater -Maund
wo eerie.

M.40. 4 41.El.in Com. Bã-
c?» inte Stanly dr Read.
18. El. Dyer 348.


Vi.Setfaat.


Cw) 33. E. 3. "Emme 52.
1.4.4.5. 26.4 ff. P hoe.
21.€.4,


& Mich.39. cr 40. El is Cho.
"Banc. inter Wickes dr Tillers


(x) 32.E.3 tit.Seir.fae 3000
4 E.3. Pl. «m.139.


Vid. Se& 213,


(2) 10.£. 4.3.6. 3 3. H.6.5.
50-E. 3.9, 8.6.4.8. 5.£d.3.
Fines 4.9.E.3.7.46.E.3.37.. -
11. H.6,8. Temp: E, 1.4]-424


*19, E. j.Title 34;


Lib.2.


(4) 16. E.3.tit, Annuity 47.


Vid.6cR. 314.


(b) "DéH. dr Sind.ca.3.
17. £l. Dyer 344.6.
4 s E. 3. Exeeutor. 73.


(c) 3.2.6. Dyer 65. And

Sergeant Bendlecs reporteth,

That fo was the opinion of the
eurt.

(d) 3.H.4.13.

Dyer 15, El 344.5.


(8) ss A 7-23.


(^p.


ENT Charge.
Here it appcaretb by


TR
Littleton, that thig

Prima facie is a Rent charge,
Soherof in this Chapter {ball
be ſpoken moze at large.

And fo tt íg of a tent

ecke,
«| Home grant. Put
eaſe that ^ befetfed of iands
in fee, and be and E. grant a
Rent charge to one in fee, this
Prima facie ts the grant of A.
and the confirmation of B.but
pet the Grantee map baue a
Swrit of Anuitie agatnff both,
(a) Cwo men grant an an⸗
nuitic of t&entíe pounds per
annum, te another, although
the perfong be feuerall, pet he
fall bane but one Annuitie :
buttfthe grant be, Obliga-
mus nos & vtrumq; noftrum;
the Ozantes map baue a toit
of Annuitie agatnft either of
them, but hee (ball have but
one fatiffadton.

«| Bricfede Annuitie
iga wꝛit forthe recouerte of
an Ænnuitic. (b) An An⸗
nuitie tg a pearcly payment of
8 certaine fume of money,
granted to another in fee for
life op peates , charging the
perfon of the grantos onelp.
(c) But not onelp the Gran⸗
te, but his beire and bis and
their Grante alfo fball baue
a ait of Annuitie.(d) Wut
£a Bent charge be grantedto
aman and his heires, bc fhall
not bauca Swzit of Annuttte
againt the hetre of the Gran
to, albeit he hath Aſſets, vn⸗


Of Rents.


Set]. 219.


€um fi bone
granta per fon
fapt bn rent charge a
vn auter, a le rent ctt
aveve, le grantee poet
eflier fil boet fuer bri
baiefe De Annuitie
De ceo enuersf gratic
t0? ou diſtreyner pur
le tent arrere, & E Di-
ftreffe retaine tangs
tl loit De ceo pay,mes
ine poit faire ne a-
uerambideur infem-
ble, ac, Car fil reco-
uct pet briefe Dan⸗
nuitte, Donques là
terre eſt difcharge,
De lc diſtreſſe ac, Ct
fil ne Guth Briele De
Annuitie, mes Di-
ftreine pur les arre⸗
rages, &le Cenant
Mitt fon Replegiare,
&eDonques le grantee
auowa le puifel De le
Diftreffe en la Terre
en Court De 13eco20,
botiqueg eff la terre
charge, a la perfon
Del grantoz difcharg
ð Action 0 Annuity,


leffe the grant be for bim and his heires.
«| Pocteflier. Che Grantee hath election to bring a tozit of


Annuitte, and charging the perfon oncly to make tt perfonall, o2 to diſtreyne bpon the land, and


to make it reall.


Secl.219.


ATP if a man grant
by his Deed a
Rent charge to ano-


ther, and the rent is -


behind, the Grantee
may chufe whither he
will fue a writ of An-


nuitie for this againft —


the Grantour, or di-
ftreine fot the rent be-
hind, and the diftrefle
detaine vntill hee bee
payd,bur he canror do
or hauc »oth cogether


&c. forif he recouers «


by a Writ of Annui-
tie, then the Land is


difcharged of the di- |
ftrefle, &c. And ifhe :


»


doth not fuea Writ of -


Annuitiesbut diftreine
for the arrerages, and
the Tenant fueth his
Repleuin,and thenthe
Grantee auow the ta-
king of the diftreffe in
the land ina Court of
Record, then is the
land charged, and the
perfon of the Grantor
difcharged of the A-
tion of Annuitie,


Wut t£ a man grant a Bent charge to a man anb hishetres,and dieth, ano his wife being a
Wait of Dower againſt the hetre, the heire in barre of her Dower, claimes the fame to bean
Annuitte, and no Rent charge, pet the wife Hail recouer her dower, fos bee cannot determine
bis election by clatme, but bpfuing of a Wꝛit of Annuitie (ag Littleton ſaith) neither can the
boire bauc after the enbosomcnt an Annuitie £01 the two parts, for that fhouid not be acoꝛding
to the deed of arant, fox either the whole mutt be arent charge, 02 the whole an Annuitie. Was
Littleton {8 to be buderftmd with fomelimiration: (c) for of a rent granted fos oweltie of partts
tion, a sit of Annuitie doth net le, becaufe tt ig of the nature of tbe lan diſcended. "e


Lib.2. Of Rents. Se&.219.


fuch a bv Nd map be arantco Without ved, a watt of Annuitie doth not lie, though tt be avana
ted by DB

CE) Bnd here is to be noted, Chat here is nocletion giuen of two fcuerall things, as tf the

Were ot an Annuitie, e2a Robe pearelp, ec. fox there the zantoz bad election at the dap

to Dclíucr Which he Would, But here ts tive remedies atucn fos onc pearelp fumme,and confe=

quentip the zante {ball at any time haus clection to take Which of the remedies he Will, for tn

. allcafes where feucrall remedies be ginen, the partie to Whom the Law aíuett the remedies, it
giueth him withall election to take Which of the remedies he Will,


«| Mes il ne poet faire ou aner ambidenx enfemble. Forthenhe fbould
Yesouce one thing twice, which ſhould be a double cbavaeto the Gzantoz.

Note.as to clecions,thele diuerGties Following :

Firk,when nothing paſſeth to the Feoffee oz Grantee befoze election to aue the one thing 02
the other, there the ciection ought to be made in the life of the parties, and the etre oz Crecutoz
cannot make election. But Dien an cftate 02 intereſt pales immediately to the, Feoftee, Done,
02 Prante, there election may be made bp then, oz bp their Beires o2 Executoꝛs.

. Hecondip, tohen one and the fame thing palleth to the Done o; Grantee, and the Done 02
Geantee hath clection in What manner op Degree be will take this, there the interett palleth im⸗
mediately, andthe partie, his heires, o2 Exccutoꝛs, wap make election When thep ii,
Œbirolp, tohen election is gtuen zo feucrall perfs, there the firſt clecton made by any of he
perfons fball ſtand.
… fouthly, 3n cafe ax election be giuen of two ſeuerall things, alwapes he Which is the firk
agent, and wbich ought to doe the firſt act, ſhall haue the election : 208 tf a man granteth a Rent
of twentic (billtnag, 02 a robe to onc and to his heircs, the Gꝛantoꝛ hall hauetheclecton , foz
$e is the fitft Agent, by payment of the one, o2 deliuerie ofthe other. Soif a man maketh a
cafe, rendzing arent 02a robe, the Leſſee ſhall hauc tie clection caufa qua fupra,and With this
agræthebokes inthe* margent,(g) Wut { Jgiue bnto pou one of mp hoꝛſes in mp Stable,
there pou ſhall haue the clectton, £02 pou fall be the firſt Agent bp raking o2 feifure of one of
them, AndtE one avant to another twentic loads of Wa5til, 02 tXocntte loads of Maple to be tax
… kon inbis wodet D. therethe Grantee Mail baue election,foz he ought ta doc the rft ad, s. to
fell and take the fame.
Fiftip, when the thing granted ts of things annuall, andare to haue continuance, there the
election remaineth to the Gzantoz, (incafe where thelaw giueth to him election) az Well after
the dap, ag befoze, otheriwile it is when the things are tobe performed vnica vice. And theres
— foreif 3| arantto another £o? life, an Annuitie o2 a Kobe at ihe feaff of Calter, and both are
behind, the Gzante ought to bring bis wait of Annuitie in the difiunctiue, for tf hee bring his
toit of Annuitie oz the one onelp,and recover, thisiudgement [ball determine bis election foz
enter ; foz be (ball neuer haue ait of Annuitie afterwards , but a Scire facias bpon the ſayd
iudgement. which reafon Fiizheibert in his Natura Breuium not obferninag, held an opinton to
thecontraric. Wut if 3| contract With pou to pap nto pou twentie thillings o» a robe at the
Fea of Eater, after the Fea pou map biingan Action of Debt foy the one 92 foz the


Sictip, The 4rcoffee by his act and wzꝛong map lofe his election, and giue the fame to the
fcoffoz : As (£ one infcoffe another of two acres, To haue and to hold che one fozlife, and the
other in tatle, and he before clection maketh a feoffement of beth, in this cafe the Jreoffoz ſhall
enter into which of them he will, koꝛ the act and Swzong of the Feollee.


€ Sil recouer en Briefe de Annuitie donques eff la terre difcharge de di-


firefe. Berets te be obferucd, Chat this determination of the

election of the Grantee mult bc by action oz fuít tn Court of Recoꝛd; Ch) for albett the Gran=
tee diftrepne £02 the Kent, pet he may bring a Soztt of Annuitie and difcharge the land. And
Littleton putteth his cafe here furclp bpon a Recouerie in a to2ítof Annuitie, (1) Wut ffthe
Grantee doth bring a tozit of Annuitie, € at the returne thereof appcare and count, this ts a
Determination of bis cletion in Court of Record, albeit he neuer psoceedetl anp further. (k)
As (£ a Wife be endowed cx affen(u patris, and the bufband dieth, the wike hath cletíon etther
to bauo her Dower at the Common Law, of ex aſſenſu patris, (f the baing a wꝛit of Dower at
the Common La, and count, albett fhe recouer not,pet fhall the neuer after claime her Dower
exaffenfu patris.

(D Soit the Grantee bring an Alife Éoz therent, and make his plaint,hee (ball neuer after
bang a tozir of Annuitie. Wut the purcbating of a tto2ít of Annuitic, and entrie of (tím Court
9f Record, oz of an aſſiſe, is no determination of the eletion,becaufean eltranger may vurchafe
a Moritin the name of the Gzanter,and enter tt of Becozd, but tf tbe Gꝛantee appeare thereunto,
9c, then this doth amount to a determination of bis clection,ag hath beene ſayd


Qo « Son


14.5


(F) Sir Rewland Heywards
efe li. 2. fo. x6.
28.E.3.98. 41.E.3.10,4.
2.H. 4.12. 6,H.4.10.
36. H.6.10. 9.E.4.46,
ar E. 4.55.5. 1, E.g. 1.
FN. Ba21.


Lib.2.fo. 36,37. in Sir Row
land Heywards cafe.


* 9.€.4. 36.0.13. E.4. 4.b.
15-€.4.6.b.11.E. 3. Annus.
te 27. L1. Aff p. 8. 39. aff. $5.
3E. 3. tit. 49-175. e
43-E.3.tit "Barre 194,


(8) à H 7-23..


9.E.4.36. 13, €.4.4.and the
ether aboue ſaid Booker,


(h) 17.El.Dyer 544.5.


(i) F.N.B.152.4.
$«H.7.33.5.


(K) 12. E. a. Dower 1 58.


(1) 19. 5.4.17.


——— utn


MERC — d E


Lib.


G'axuill lib.13. ca.12.
Meillir.ea 21.


W.1.c4.16.17. W.2 c4 39.


Fleja,lsb.2,08.40,


Merlbr.es.31

21.4.6, Return: de Viewn7
(m JF. 2.64.2.
Fleta ib, 4.4.5. 4.H.6.15-


* Regift.F.'N.2.68.


(n) 3 E.3.73. 6H. 2.67
39. 9. 1.6.39. 20. H.6.19.
(©) 33-€.3.Replew. 43.
42. E. 3.18. 9.11.6.25.
F.Y.8.69.F. 6,H.7.9.
19. E. 3. Rep. 33.

(p) 42-£.3- 18.

31. H. 4.17.23. 47. E.3-12.
43 E.3.20. 7. H.4.17.


.Marlbo.ca. 12.


(q) 30.6.3.22. 31.E.3.
"Replew 31$ &.4.

7.H.4 26.38. 31. H.6.
Prop." vob. $, 1.E, 4.9.
21.€.4 64. 2. Eit "Dier,
173. at. E. 4.66.


(1) 5.E.3.38. 1 1. H. 4.4.
17. 8,3. Prepr.P 9). 6.


o 34.H.6.47-


414 E. 3. Gagedelíner. 5.


Brakon lib. 4.f0.23 3.6. b.


Regift.fe.133.
Bra®.fo.12t. & 154
Wri.ea 11. Fleta lib.a,
ca,.2.F.N,B.66,6,


((ap.12.. Of Rents. Seé.219.


: : : E

€ $0 replegiare. Littleton ſpake immediatly befoge of Vn bricfe |
Daunuity, but erc he faith, Son replegiare, becaufe gods may be repleuieo tio manner of
Soapco,iz. bp weit, anto that is bp the Common Law, 02 bp the pleiate, and chat 13 bp the
fatutes £o the moze ſpeedy hauing agatne of their cattell anb gods. Æ Kepleeiare {pet rag
Littleton erc teacheth 02, Where qos are diſtreyned and tinpounded,the owner o the gods
May have a zit De Replegiari ficias, where bp the ferite is commanded,taking farcies
in thar bohalke, to redeliver the gods diftrepned to the owner, 02 bpon complaint mave tà tye
Syerite be vught to make a Kepleuy in the Countrey. Replegiare ts compounded of ican
plegiare, ag much ag to fap, ag to redeliver bpon pledges 02 furctics ; and in the ffatute E
Merlebridgc, Deliberare is feb fo? Replegiare (m) Bnd the Sbherife ought to take txoo.—
kinde of pledges, one bp the Common Law, and thep be Plegij de profequendo, and another 1
by the (Fatute, viz. Plegij deretorno habendo. Vide Sect.5. what things map lawfullp be biz
Grepned, whereupon a Replegiare map bc ſued. The toꝛmes of the weit pou fall reade in
the Regifter and F.N B. * ^ /

(n) It is a generati rule that the Plaintife mult haue the property of tbe qos tn him at «
the time of the taking. (o) Wut pet tf the gods ofa villeine be diſtreyned, the 3070 of tie —
villeine Mall have a 1Repleup, becaufe the bꝛinging of the Repleup amounts to a clapme in
Law andbelts the propertp inthe Piaintife Wut in that cafe i£ the gods of the dilictns be
taken bp a trefpaffe the 3,010 (ball baue no Kepleup, becaufe the villeine had but a rt ibt.

(p) But there ts tio kinde of properties, a gencrall propettie, which eucrp abfolute owe
noz bath, and a fpeciall properticas gods pledged 0; taken to manure bis lands 02 the like,
and of both thele a Repiepiare Doth Ipe.

And albert it be proutded by the Statuteof Marlebridge,cap 22. quod vicecomes poft queri-
moniam inde fibi fa&tamea fine impedimento vel contradictione. eius qui dicta aueria ceperit |
deliberare poffit, & c. (3) Pet Where the Defendant clapines property, the Svertfe cannot pros
ced, for ít is arulein Law, that pzopertie ought to be tryed by 10zit, Bud thereloge in chat
cafe Wherethetrpallis bp plemt, the Piaintite map haue a Wait De propiietate prob. nda di⸗
rected tothe Sbherite to irie the propertie, and ti thercupon it be found fez the Wiatntife, then
the Sherife to make Deliverance, ( oz fo be the 100208 of the 1021£) and tf forthe Defe, dint, v
he can no further procerd , but that (e but an enqueſt of office, and therefore tf therebp tt bee
found againt the 19 laintiée, pet he map haue a tout of Repleuy tothe Sherite, and if he re=
turvetie claime of propertte,tc. pet fballít proceed tithe court of Common pleas Where the ”
propertie hall be put ia iſſue and finally tried , And the D sertfe may take a pleínt bpon the.
fato act out of the County, and make repleuyn peefentip, foz tt ſhouid be ínconuentent for the
owner to toꝛbeare his cattell ttil the County Day,

(1) Itis to be noted that a man cannot clapme pzeperty by his Watlife o2 feruant, anv the
teafon (a for that t£ the ciapme fall out to b: falfehe (ball be fined fo; bis contempr, which the
Loꝛd cannot be vnleſſe he maketh clapme bimfelée, fo? Nemo punitur pro alieno delicto.

In a fpeciali cafe a man map hane a Repleuyn of gods not deſtreyned, as tf the Meine put
in bis catt i in lieu ofthec:trell of. the tenant paranaiic, that he ig bound to acquite, he (hall
haue a repleupn of tbofe catteli that never Mere diſtreyned.

FE a man by his Deve arant a Rent With claufe of diſtreſſe, and arant further, that hee
fball keepe the goods diſtreyned agat?ft gages and pledges, vntill the Rent bee payd, pet (ball
the Dherife 3 cpleup the gods oiftrepnen, Foz it is again the nature of fuch a Diftrefle robe
trrepicutfable, and bp fuc an ententíon the currant of Kepleuyns fhould be oucrtbzotone to
the hindzance of the Common wealth, and therefore ít Hag difsllowed by the Whole Court,
and awarded that the Defendant fhould gage deltuerance, 02 clfe goeto patton, And Eradon
is of the fame opinion, foz he fait), Eodem modo de via obftru&á, per breue quod iufticiet
propter communem valititew, netranfeuntes ire diu impediantur, quia hoc effet commune
damnum, & in hoc vicecomes & Iufticiarij faciant ficut füper detentionem aueriorum contra
vadium plegij, propier communem vtilitatem, ne animalia diu inclufa pereant, which in mine
opinion fg an excellent point of learning.

Fé the beaftes of dtucrs fenerall men be taken, they cannot iopne fn a Repleo. but euerp
one muſt haue a feuerall Repleuyn: And fo ín a Repleuyn it is a good plea tofap that the pro⸗
vertp isco the Plaintite and to a ftranger, and Where there be tio 19 latntifeg, that the pre=
pertie ts to one o£ them.

Œ here is alfo a Wꝛit De homine replegiando. Wnt Littleton tg readp to gine pou further
inftrucion,therefoze beate him.


¶ Et axowa le prife rc: en court de record. Pere it appeareth that ant
auowep in Court of Record hich ts in nature of an action íg a determination of his election
beco;e anp tuo gement giuen. And tbig (g a god profe of that which bath bene foznierlyp Lai

of the wozits of Annuity and Alſile.· rie
CCNO


Lib.2.


Of Rents.


Se#.220.


Ele&tio femel facta & placitum teftatum non patitur regreffum.
Quod femel placuit in electionibus amplius difplicere non poteft.


Fes Ment charge be granted to A.anb B. anb tbeír beireg, A. diftrepneth the bealts of the


@rantoz and he fueth a Repleuin, A, auoweth fox bimfelée and maketh conufance fo? B. A.


DpethandB. ſurutueth, B. {ball not baue a writ of Anuitp, foa in that cafe, the election and


anowz2p for the Rent of A. barreth B. of any clectionto mabe it an Annutty, albeit he aſſented


not to the auowzp.


But here is another diuerfitp to be obferued bet weens the cafe afozefaid of the grant of the

- Rent where he ( ag hath bencfatd) map make (t either reall of perfonall, and Soben a man

tap bauc election to haue feucrall remedies foz a thing that (8 meerelp perfonail oz mestelp tex

all from the beginning. Bs i£ aman map have an action of account o? an action of debt at bis

pleafure, and be bzingetb an action of account and appeare to it, and after ts ffonfuite, pet

may be haue an action of debt afterwards becaufe both actions charge the perfon, Che ithe
Faw ts of an Alife and of a wꝛit of entric in the nature of an Aſſiſe and the ithe,


[Cem , & home

voile à bn auter
aueroit bn rent
charge tfuant hors
bc faterte, mes tine
boile à fa perfon foit
charge ea aſcun ma⸗
ner p biete Dannui-
tic, Donques ti pott
auer tiel claufe en 1a
fine de fon fait, Pro-
uifo femper , quod
| præfens fcriptum, nec
aliquid in eo fpecif-
catum,non aliqualiter
feextendat ad oneran-
dum perfonam meam,
perbreue, vel actio-
nem de annuitate, fed
tantummodo ad one-
randum terras, &te-
nementa mea de an-
nuali redditu predic’,
&c. Donques 1a ter=
ve eft charge, tle per=
fon Del grantoz diſ⸗
charge.


Sed. 220.


Lfo if a man

would that ano-
ther fhould haue a
Rent charge iffuin
out of his land but
would not that his
perfon bee charged in
any manner by a Writ
of Annuity, Then hee
may haue fuch aclaufe
inthe end ofhis deed.
Prouided alwaies that
this prefent writing
nor any thing therein
{pecified fhal any way
extend to charge my
perfon by a Writ or
ana&ion of Annuity,
but only to charge
my lands and tene-
ments with the yeare-
ly rent aforefaid, &c.
Then the [and is char-
gedand the perfon of
the grantor difchar-
ged.


appeareth,that when
ín a gencrall grant,
the Law deth gine two res
medies, that the Grantoz
Map prouide that the (brane
tes fballnot tfc onc of them
and leaue the partie to the 0s
ther. Wut where the Gran⸗
tee hath but one remedy, there
that remedy cannot be barred
bp any prouifo, for fuch a
t1ouifo fhould be repugnant
to tbe Grant,
Œ De annaali red-


ditu cc Werebp(&c.)
anb the confequent of this
Sectton be ímplpeb divers
excellent points of learning,
viz, It a man bp bis Dede
granteth a Rent charge out
of the Mannoz of Dale
( herein the Grantoz hath
nothing ) with fuch a proui⸗
fo that it hall not charge hig
perfon albeit the repugnan=
cie Doth not appcare tn the
Ded pet the proutfo taketh
apap the hole effer of the
Grant, and therefore ts in
tudgement of Law tepug-
nant, fo; spon the matter {£
is but a grant of an Annui⸗
tp,pzontoed that tt {ball not
Charge bis perfon, for Which
caufe out Author putteth
bis cafe of a Rent charge tfz
fuing trulp ont of land,


eRe this Section it


But (£a man bp his Dede qrant a Rent charge ont of land, pzoutded that ft fpall not

Charge the land albeit the Grante hath a donb e remedy ( as hath beene fatd ) pet the Pzouts

fo is repugnant, becaufe the land ts expreflp charged Stth the Rent, but the watt of Annnts

ty is but implyed in the Grant, and therefore that may be reftrained Without any repuguan⸗

cie, and fuffictent remedie left for the Grantee, foz Which caufe our antboz putteth his cafe

of the reltraint of beinging a tait of Annuity, And or tn fome cafe where there ts a —
02


146 à:


21.H.6.24, per Newtotte
37. H.6.4. ;


28.H.8./Dim.9.b.


Sois warrefolned by the Ditis
fitces im H.8.as Lupttse
Spilman reportoth,

9.81.6, 53e


Lib.2.


4. Elit. Din 317.


33 Mf. p.1.
Vide $ «8.514.


© Lib 3.4. de conde.


$eH.362.


(4p.12.


Of Rents. ScEl.221.


in the Deed that the grantee fball not in anp fort charge the perfcn of tbe dorentoz generally,
notwithftanding the perfon of the drantoz fhall be charged: Bs if a man arant a Rent
charge out of certaine lands to another foz life with ſuch a Prouifo, the Rent is behtnde, the


®ranteo dpeth, the Crecutozs of the Grantee fhail bauc an action of debt againit the Gran⸗


toz, and charge his perfon for the arrerages in the life of the (rante, becaufethe Executors
fauc no other remedp againſt the rantoz for the arrcrages, for diftrepne thep cannot, bez
caufe the eftate in the Went {9 determined, and the Prouiſo cannot leaue the Œrecutozs with⸗
out remedy, ag appeareth bp that Which hath benc faid. And therefore our Author putteth
bis cafe of a Rent charge continuing. And here ts to be obleryed that this 020 ( Prouifo )
hath dtuers operations, fometime it wozketh a qualification o2 limitation, and fo tt (s taken
here and often in our bokes: Somtimea Condition, and fometime a Coucnant, whereot
pou fball reade moze hereafter, Sc& 52e.


€ Eve fine de fon fait. Were Littleton putteth his cafe of one
Ded, but though the grant be generali; and Want fuch a Wzoutlo, pet map the Grantee bp
another Ded bp Wap of Defcafance arant that he fhali not charge the perfon of the Gran⸗
toz, anb that tf he bring a wꝛit of Annuity, that the Rent {hail ceafe í

€ Nec aliquid in eo (pecificatum non aliqualiter fe extendat dc. Here is
to be obfcrued a Double negatiue, Nec, and Non, which in Grammatical conftrucion amoun⸗
teth to an affirmatiue, fo? Negatio deftiuit negationem & ambo faciunt affrmatiuum, pet the
Lao that principally refpecteth fubftance, doth (ubge the Pꝛouiſo to be a negatíuc accozding
to tbc tntent of the parties, and not accozding to Grammatical conftrucion, to the end the
Pꝛouiſo may take effect, and the like pou fhall finde bercafter in Littleton. * Mala Grammati-
ca non vitiat cartam. Were our Authoꝛ putteth bis cafc of one Grantoz, pus then the cafe,
that A. and B. being topntenante of lands in fee bp their Dede grant a Rent charge out of
thofe ‘ands, proutded that the Grantee fball not hargethe perfon of A, In this cafe t£ the


Grantee bzingeth a wait of Pnnuity, he muft charge the perfon of B. onip,


Fe fi Ae de


B. Pere wan⸗
teth words to preceade thefe,
viz.queil grant al 4.de B. &c.
que fi 4. de B. &c. ag ít ape
Peareth in the o2tginall & fo it
appearcth in the clofe of this
Section,viz Mes granta tant-
folemét que il poet diftreyner.
lo without fuch a grant
the claufc fhould beimperfert .

€ Purceo que le
mannor eff charge oue


le rent per voy de di-
ſtreſſe. And pet no


Rent is cxpzellp granted ont
of the Wannoz, Wut by the
grant that pee fball diftrepne
fo? fuch a pearelp fumme of
monep in iubgement of daw
the Mannoz is charged With
the Rent, but the perfon of
the Grantoz cannot be chars
ged becaufe he erprelp gran⸗
tct!) no Rent, foz tiat Donia
Chatge bis perfon, but that
the Grante ſhould diftrepne,
5 “aus onlp chargeth the
anb,


Sect. 221.


Ca, (í bone
fait tiel fait en
tielmaner, q ſi A.de
B.ne foit annuelmét
pay al feaft De Joel
purterme De fa bie
Ex, 8, De lopal mony,
que adonques bien
líttoít a m ceftup A.
De P. à diſtreiner pur
ceo en le manoz De
F.ac. ceo eft bone
rentcharge, purceo
& Emano? eftcharge
oucie vent per bop
De diſtres, & vncore
la perfon 5 celuy que
fait tíel fait, eft Di(-
charge en tiel cafe De
action Dannuitie, p
ceo que il ne granta
per fon fait afcun


Lfo if one make

a Deed in this
manner, that if 4, of
B. be not yearely pay-
ed at tie fat ^
Chriftmaffe for terme
of his life xx.s. of
lawfull money, that
thenit fhall be law full
for the faid A.of B.to
diftreyne for this in
the manner of F.&c.
this is a good rent
charge, becaufe the
Mannor is charged
with the rent by way
of diftreffe, & yet the
perfon of him which
makes fuch deed is
difcharged inthis cafe
of an actionof Annui-
tie, becaufe hee doth


€ 2:


[


Lib.2. Of Rents. Sett.221,


Annuitie a le dit AG not grantbyhisDeed | Qwe il poet di-
B.mes granta tants any Annuitie to the freine pur tied Annuitie,
folement, que tipoit {aid 4.of 8.butgran- &c.ereby(&c.)manp
diſtrainer pur tiel teth only that hemay points worthy of obfernation


P. . : aret 1€ fet=
Annuitie, ac, diftreine for fuch An- feof dents fn fe, bíntetly
nuitie, &c. bis gods and Lands to the


payment of a pearelp Rent to

Aide B. this ig a geod Rent charge With power to diftraine, albeit, there be no expꝛeile woꝛds

of charge, noz to diſtraine. D2 in thefe woꝛds, Obligo Manerium mreum de C. & omnia bona

in di&o Manerio exiftent A. de B- inannuo redditude xx.s.ad diftringend’ per Baliuum Domini
Regis pro redditu predicto By this grant a Rent chargciffueth out of tbe WDannoz,and Where
tbe $0109 bee ad diftringendum per Baliuum Domini Regis, tbíg (a fo? thcabuantage of the

Grantees. And therefore the ings Watlp ſhould be but bis Miniter to diſtreine for bis Went,

and that Which be may do bp bis feruant he map do bp bimfelfe, o bp anp other of his ſeruants.

Ita man bp Dedgrant a Bent of fortte fbtllíngs to another out of his Mannoꝛ of Dale
to haue and to perceiuc to him and his beires, and grant oucr by tbefame Deed, that if the Rent
be behind, that the Ozantee thall diftreine in tbe Mannoꝛ of Sale (be the Mannoz of Sale in the

fame Œountie oz iu another Countie, andbecthis grant by one Deed oz diners Deres ) the
Rent is only ifluing out of the Wannoz of D, and itis but apaine, that hee (ball diſtreine in
the Mannoz of S. but both the Wannozs are charged,the one With the Bent, € the other With a
diſtreſſe for the rent , the onc iſſning out of the Land and the other to bee taken bpon the Land.
And Whereas our Authoꝛ puts bis cafe ofa grant foalife, So it ts if 3] arant to pou, that pou
and pour heires, o» the bcirce of pour bodie Mall diſtreine foa 3A ent of fortic Hhillings within
mp Dannoz of 5. this by conftruction in Law all amount to a grant of a Bent, out of mp
Mannoz of 5, in Fee Simple oz Fe Catle foꝛ tf this ball not amount to a gzant of a Rent,
the grant fbail bec of líttle Force 02 effect tf the Gꝛantee fball have but a bare dfftreïle and
no 18 ent in bim, Foꝛ then hee (ball neuer hauc an Affife of this, ec. And thts is the reafon,
that tt is fo often ruled and refolued, (*) that this amount toa grant of a ident per conftrucion
of Law, V cres magis valeat, and all this is neceſſarily impiped inthe ( &c. and in thts cafe the
€pzante (ball not haue a wꝛit of Annuitieas our Author fapth, Bnd wbercas our Authoz
putteth his cafe where the diftrellets to be taken inthefame Land out of which the Rent bp
Conftruction of Law is iſſuing, bercby ts implyed that £a Went begranted, outof the Man
no2 of D. and the Grantoz grant over, that tthe Rent be behind, the Gzantee (ball diftreine
foz the fame rent inthe Mannoꝛ of S. this (s but a penaitie in the Mannoꝛ of S. for three caufeg:

Firk, The Law neds notto make contruction that this fballamount toa grant of a Rent
fo? bere a Rentis erpreflp granted tobee ifluing out of the Wannoz of D. and the psrties
haue erpzeflp itmitcd out of what land the Went (ballifue, and bpon What Land tbe diſtreſſe
ſhall be taken, andthe Law will not makean erpofitton agaínft the erpzefle Words and intens
tion of the parties when this Wap ands With theruleof the Law, Quoties in veibis nulla
eft ambiguitas, ibi nulla expofitio contra verba expreffà fienda eft.

econbdip , Ffintbis cafe this hall amountto a arant ofa Rent out of the Wannozof S.
then the Grantoz (all be twice charged. Foz tf the zante bringeth a weit of Annuitie this
fpall extend oniy tothe Mannoꝛ of D. Foꝛ opor the grant of a diftreffcin the MWannoz of S.
no to zit of Annuitie lpeth, becaufethe Mannoꝛ of S. ts onlp charged, and not the perfon of the
®@zantozragtothis ; and for this cauſe the banging of the to2ztt of Annnttte cannot difcharge
the Dannoz of S. of any Rent:and fothe Law by confrudíon againtt the words and the in⸗
tention of the parties fhall voc inturte tothe dbzantoz tocharge bim twice,

Thirdlp, It in fuch cafe the Mannoꝛ of S. in Which che diſtrefle tg only limited, hail bee tre
another Countie, then tt bath beene often adtudged, that the Kent fball not tue out of the
fame, but the diſtreſſe hall be as a meane, and remedie to compell the Cenant of the Land to
pay the Rent, And it wagfatd, that there Was no D(uerfitic tn reafon , that the Law in conz
ftrudíon {ball make the Rent to betfluing out of this when it ipeth in the fame Countie, and
not When (t lyeth in ſeuerall Counties £02 the Words in both caſes areallone , and there te no
teafon to fay that he (ball fayle of a reconcrie bp Aſſiſe. Ana the Bokes tn 1.A f.p.ro. and
1.E.3.21. and other Weokes voe not fap that tho Rent iſſueth inthis cafe out of both, but that
the Land in which the dtftrefle Mall be taken te charged, and this is truc,foz itis charged with
the diſtreſſe. And inaſmuch as (t Has charged With the diſtreſſe, their opinion was that the
Tenants of both of thers Mall benamedinthe Aſſiſe. And the opinion of Finchden (n 41-E.3.
13. ag altir med tobe gad Law, Chat ifthe Mannoꝛ of D. out of which the Kent te gran⸗
ted be recouered by an cloer Citle,that allthe Rent to extinct but tf tbe Wannoy of S. in which
the diſtreſſe ig limited, be euicted, yet all the Bent rvemapns.* Ho if the gsantes purchaſe parccit


OF the Mannozof S. the Went (g mot ectinc, fog that He Ae (Tuetly onip out of the "
| 25


»


47


18.4ff p.13. 18.E.3, 33
344.7. 3,£.3.12.
Io.4/f24. 31. Af. p.17.
33. 4f: Ammtie s 2.

16 E. 3. gram. 4.


Lib.7. fel. 33.34. is Buts
bis ( «fe.


CF) 3.€.3.12. 3. Aff...
14. VEL
grati 64. 8. E.3.33.36. Af
38.30. ^ff:12 46.E.3.18.52
8.H. 4.19. 9.H.6 g.

22. H.6.11.


Vide Bulwars cafe,
Lib, fal.3. 1. 7f. p. 1o
E, :


17.E.4.6.10.4f.4.

10 E.3,18. 2.6.2.4 ff 362^
1.4f.10. 3..4f:7- 32. H. 6.
27. a2, Aff-66- 31. 74]f:27.
29.E, 3.4 fife 366...
41. E, 3.13. per Fenehden,
*Vide 17. E.4. 6. femblablecafl
Vide Sel, prove fequen,


Libi2. Capi. Of Rents. Sect.222%
of D. And it (s fat that (fa man grant a Rent out of thꝛee Actes, and arant oncr , that
ifthe Rent be behind, hat ap biftreine Foz the, Rent in one ofthe Acres;this Went is entire
and cannot be a Rent fecke out of tivo Acres, anb a Bent charge out of the third Acre, and
therefore ít is a ident feche £o? the wbole, and ct be hall diftreine foz this in the third Bere,
So i£ à Rent be granted to twe and to thetr beireg ont of an Bere of Land,and that tt fhallbe
law fri £o; one of them and bis beíres to diftreine foz this in the fame Acre,this 18 a Went fecke,
2 infomuch ag tbep and iopntiy fetfed of one tntire Rent, it cannot be ag to the one a Went
e and ag to the otber a Rent charge, anb this diftrefle tg as an appurtcnant tothe Rent:
and therefoze (£ he which hath the Rent dieth,thefuruinoz ſhall diſtreine, and t£ both grant omer
the rent to another, he ſhall diſtreine for this. 2butíCamangrantarent out of Wiacke Acre -
to one and tobis heires, and grant to him that he map diſtreine foz this in the fame Bere fox
terme of bis life, thts ig a Rent charge for his tfc, anda Went fece after,diuerfis temporibus.
MD therwife itis if the diſtreſſe be limited foz certaine peares in tbe fame Land, there thig
remapnes a Rentfeche intirelp, Co? that the fee and the freehold (g ſecke infuch cafe,

FE a man fcifeo of Lands in fee, and pofteflen of a tearme fog manp peares arant a Bent ont
of both £o? life, in taple o2 in fee, With claufe of diſtreſſe out of both, this Went being a Free⸗
hold doth tue onlp out of the freehold, andthe lands in leafe are only charged Sith a diftreffe,
Wut (£c had granted the Rent onip out of the Lands in cafe fog terme of the life of the Gzans
tee, this had iſſued ont of the tearme, and the Land bao bene charged during the tearme tf the

a iued folong. :
| H * —2 twentie Acres of Land, anb grant a Rent of twentie ſhillings perci⸗
piend' de qualibet acra tfc mex (that is) out ofeucrpone Acre o£ my Land, this ts a ſcuerall
grant out of euerp fcucrall Acre, and the Grantee all bauc twentte pounds in ail,

A. doth bargaine and fell lano to B. bp Indenture, and befoze inroïlment thep botharant a
Bent charge bp Weed te C. and after the Indenture is inrolied fome hane fato, that
this Rent charge (s anopded, foz fay they (t Swag the grant of A. and by the intollment ít bath
relation to tbe deliuer y, which (fap tbep) {ball auopoe tbe grant, notwithttanding the confir=
ination of the other Mhich hadnothing inthe Land at that time. Wut the grant is god, and
after the inrollment bp the operation of the Statute, it {ball bethe grant of B. and the confit.
mation of A. Wut tEthe Deed bad not bene tnrolled, it had beene the grant of A. andthe cone
Girmation of B. and fo quacunque via data the grant (g god,


23.H,6.46.b.


Seti. 2226


(1) eB. & Stud, hb. 2.0np.
16, 31, N y.3. 21. E. 3.58.


Cb} se t f15. 9 fa2.


(e) 44.E.3.33.14-4ff


Xtiuci. Com-
meth of the


GWerbe Extinguere , to Deffrop
02 pat out, anb a Rent ig fato
to bee extinguilhed when it
isdeftroped andput out, —

«| Apportion. Chis
commeth of tbe woꝛd Portio
quafi partio , which Gantfieth
apart of the Whole, anb Ap⸗
Portion fignificth a Dtutfion
0? Partition of a Rent, coms
mon, tC, 02 a making of it in⸗
to parts.

(a) Œbereafon of this ex⸗
tinguifbment is becaufe the
Bent is intire, and agatnt
common right.and iſſuing out
of cutry part of the Land, and

ebp purchafe of part
{tis extinct in the Sohole and
canuot bee (b) apportioned,
but bp ad (n Law it may, ag
hereafter fail befato, (c) It
the Gꝛantee of a Rent charge
vurchaſe parccil of the Lan»,
and the Grantor by bis Ded


€ [Gan , (i home
abu cet charge
à lup a ales beites
iſſuant bozs De cet-
tein tet£, {il purchate
afcun parcel De cela
lup, # a {es heires,
tout le vent charge
ett extinct, x lannui⸗
tie aug», put ceo que
rent chatge ne poit
per tiel maner eftre
appostion, Mes (
home que auet vent
ſeruice purchaſepar⸗
cel de la terre dont le
rent eſt iſſuant, ceo
nextiendra tout mes
putle parcel,car rent
fernice en tiel cag

port


Lfoif amanhath

a Rent charge to
him and to his heires
iffuing out of cer-
taine land, ifhee pur-
chafe any parcell of
thisto him and to his
hcires , all the Rent
chargeisextin&, and
the Annuitiealfo, be-
caufe the Rent charge
cannot by fuch man-
ner bee apportioned.
But if a man which
hath a Rent Seruice
— parcellofthe
and out of which the
Rent is iffuing , this
fhal not extinguifh all,
but for the parcell. For


Lib.2.
poit effre appoatíon
folonque le balue De
laterre, Mes (bn
tient fa terre De fon
Seignioꝛ per le fer=
. uice De render a fon
SHeignior atiucimét
à tiel feat bn chiual,
ou bn efperon Do? ou
bu Ciouc, Gyloker t
huiuſmodi, fi en tiel
cask Seignio2 pur=
chale parcel De la
terre , tiel ferutce e(t
ale, put ceo queticl
feruice ne poit ette
ſeuer ne apportion.


Of Rents.


a Rent Seruice in fuch
cafe may be apportio-
ned according to the
value ofthe Land. But
if one holdeth his land
ofhis Lord by the fer-
uice te render to his
Lord yearely at fuch a
Feaft a Horfe,a golden
Speare , ora Cloue,
Gilliflower, and fuch
like, if in this cafe the
Lord purchafe parcell
of the Land, fuch Ser-
uice istaken away, be-
caufe fuch feruice can-
not be feuered nor ap-
portioned,


Seël.221.


recitina the fato purchale of
part granteth that bee map
Biltrepne For thefame Rens in
therefidue of the lano, this
amounteth fo a nex grant,
anb tbe fame Kent fball boc
taken fo? the like dent oz
the fame in quantity. Bud fo
it is (d) if aman bp Dede
granteth a Kent chargz out
ofhislandtoa man foz itfe,
anb aranteth further by the
fame Dede that hee and his
heires map diftrepne in the
land foz thefame iKent, this
amounteth te a new avant of
a Rent in fe (imple, :

But peta Rent charge bp
the ac of the partic map ín
fone cafe be apportioned. As
ff a man bath a Bent charge
of xx.ſhillings, he map releafe
tothe Œénant of the land
x.ſhillings oz moze o2 leffc,
and referue part, foa the
Grantee dealeth onlp With.


that which (s his owne,viz. the Rent. and dealeth not With the Land ag in cafe of purchate
9f part. And fo was it holden in the Common place, Hill.14.Eliz. Which ^] my fcelte heard
and obſerued. So (e)it the Grantee of an Annuitp oz Went charge of tr.pound arant,
x.pound parcell of the famc Annuity 0; Rent charge, and the Cenant attozne,herebp the An⸗
nuity c; i5 cnt charge is deuided.
Bnd (f ) When the Rent charge ts extinauifbe bp his purchafe of part of the land, bee ſhall
heuer aue a watt of Annuity, becaufett Sas bp the grant a Rent charge,andhe hth diſchar⸗
ged the land of the Kent charaebp bis owne act bp purchafe of part. And therefore he cannot
by Writ of Aunurty difchargethe land of the diftrefle as Littleton hath befozefaid, Wut it tbc
Bent charge be determined by the act of Wod oz of the Law, pet tbe Grantee map haue a tozít

. of Annuity. As tf Cenant fo; another mans lifcby bis Deed gran: a Wet charge to one fez
. 21.peares, Cefty que vic dieth,the Rent charge is Determined,and pet the Grantee map bane
During the pears a tout of Annuitp fo? the arrerages tncurrco after the deat!) of Cefty quevie,
becaufc the Rent charge did determine by the act of Godand bp the courte of Law, Acuslegis


nulli facitininriam.


The like Law (g i£ rheland out of Mich the Rent charge (s aranteb


be recoucred by an elder title, and thereby the Rent charge is voyded, pet the Grantee fall


14.8


(d) 8.H. 415.


Hill.x4. Eli.
(€) 9H. 6.13.53.
E (Ba 52. D.£.


(£) 14. E.4.4.
32. E. 4. Le darvem caft. $15
7-H.6. 9. H.6, 1, g.H.7.33


Wards cafe citedin lib. 3,
In Heywards cafe, fe.36.


haue a tait o£ Annuity, for that the Rent charge ts auopded by che courfeof Law, and fo (t
as holden in Wards Caſe aboue remembzed agatntt an opinion Obiter in 9.H,6 42.3.


0 | Car rent fersicein tiel cafe poet efle apportion. Whether this ap=

~ Portion Was at the Common Law o2 by the fozce of the Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, x Brooke tit.apportienmess
bath benc a queftton in our bakes. * Anditappearethbp Littleton that (t ag fo atthe 28. 18.2.3.49.
Common Law, for when beciteth anp thing proutded bp anp ftatute,he citet) the ftatnte, ag ai de 5 pi
bebat done this very at before. 2,Litrlecon fpeaketh here inocfnitelp of Rent fernice, and *
there be btuerg kindes of Rent ferutces W!;tch are not Within that ftatutc.and pet fuc Rent 5s, cafe. :
ſeraices are appoztionablc by the Common Law, ag (fa man maketh a Laaſe fo; itfc op peareg Vid.ub.8.fe.105.106.
teleruing a Rent, andthe Leſſee furrender part to te Leſſor tye Rent ſhall be apporttoned. So — ^ Talbess cafe.
it the LL c(Toz recoucreth part of the land in an action of watte, oz entreth fora fozfcíture in part ;
the Rent ſhan be apportioned. (e) 14. H.8.13.

(2) So Ukewile it the Leſſor granteth part of thereuerfon toa franger the Rent (all be dd a
apportioned fo? tbe Rent isinctdenttothercuerGon. Ch) Doit is it &cnant bp dsníghtg 77, o PCT =
feruice bp his laſt will and teftament in weiting deutfeth tbc reuerfion of two parts of the Si was ad udged mier
lands tbc Deuiſe ſhall haue two parts of che Kent, ; , Collins dr Harding.

Bnd thcfe cafes arc in mine opinton rightlp adiudged agatn a fudden opinton tn Hill.6.& (h ) Te) —
7-E.6 reported by Serieant Bendloe tothe contrarp. Note What inconuenience ſhould £oiz — Rot.108. in Com
10% if bp the fencrance of the reuerfion the Rent ſhould be extinct. il 1e Tee


… © Purchafe parcell de laterre. [his ig intenden of a fee fimple, Merle,


9. H.6,42.4.


A


Lib.z.
Gi) 32.H.8.tit, Extinguifs-


mnt Br.48. Ya Ed. 3.Ceffa-
ait 21. 17.E.3.57.4.


V 21.F.4.29. 9.8.4.T.
7.H.6.26. 4. H.7. 6.
11. E, 5. Ce[fauit 2.1.


© 33. E. 3. Doyer 138.
© 3o. 4f p.12


6 ay. E.5.88.


(k) 12.H.4.17.. v7. Ed.2.
Dower 164. 30. Mff p.12.


) 20.H.6.3- 9.E.4- 1.4,
35.H.8.Dyer 56. 7. E.€.
Dyer 83. 9.E.3. 6..4,17.


(m) Dott. ér Stud.li.2.c. v7


© Dyer Mich gece 9.Eliz.
Manuscript. The Earle of
Huntingdons cafe.
Vid.F.R.B.23 4-4. Briefe de
Onaranite, pre rata porc,


(ap.i2.
foa (f there be a X020 and Genant of 40 acres of Land bp fealty ander. fillings ient; (1) it


Of Rents. Secl.222,


the Œenant maketh a gift in tatle, 02 a Leafe fox life oz peares, of parcell thercof to the 1,928;
ín this cafe the rent (ball not be appogtioncd foz an part, but the rent {hall be fulpended fo? the


Soboie : £02 a Rens feruice (faith Littleton) mag be extinct foz part andapportioned foy the —


refl,but a Rent feruice cannot be fufpended in part by the act of the partie, and in Efle for other
part. So it is i£ the Leſſor enter opon the Leflefoz life oz peares into part, and thereof Dit
feife 02 put out the Leſſee, therent ts fufpended in the whole, and (ball not be appoztioned foi


any part. And where our bakes* ſpeake of an apportionment (n cafe where the Leſſor enters


bpon the Lefle tn part, they are to be vnderſteod where the iefloz enters lawtullp, as bpon afurz
render, forfeiture, oz fuch like, where the rent is lawfully ertinc in part, And pet bp Ac tn
Law a Rent feruice map befulpended in part, and in ellc fog part. * As When the Gardeine


|


in Chiualrie entreth into theland of bis Hoard within age, now ts the Seigniozie fufpended: |


but tf the wife of the Cenant be endowed of a third part of the Cenancte, now (ball he pap to
the Lozd thethtrd part of therent, * Andfo itis ifthe Cenant giue a part ofthe Cenancie to
the father ofthe 3,070 (n Œatle, the father dicth, and this deſcends tothe Lozd,in this cafe bp
i6 in Law tbc £xcíantozte ig ſuſpended in part ano ín cflc for part , and tbe fame La tg of
a Rent charge,

LikeSoife a Seqnioric map befufpended in part by the acta flranger: * As tf two Floyntez
nante 02 Coparceners be ofa Seignioꝛie, and one of them diſſeiſe the Cenant ofthcland , the
other Jopntenant 02 C oparcencr (ball diftreinc foz his oz her mottie.

Concerning the apportionment of Rents, there ts a Difference betweene a grant of a Went,
andarcferuation of a Rent: for ( k) (£a man befetfenof two acres of land, of one in Fee
fimple, and of another in Catle, and bp his Ded qrant a rent outof bothinfæ, intatic, fog
life, Ec. and dieth, the land intatled (s dilcharged, and the landin fe Gmple rematnes charged
With the whole rent, foz againft bis owne grant be (ball not take aduantage of the weake⸗
nefle of bis one eftatein part, (1) Uuttf be makea gtftin taile, a leaſe for life 02 foꝛ peares
of both acres, referuing a rent, tbe Donoꝛ 02 Leſſoꝛ dicth, the Iſſue in tatc auopdeth the gift
03 leafe, the rent ſhall be appoztioned, for fing therent {s referucd out of and for the Whole
land,tt ig reafon that ben part is euicted bp an cider title, that the Done oz icflee ſhould not


becharged with the whole rent, but that it hould be appoztioned ratably,accozding to the value


of the land, ag Littleton herefaith,

(m) £a man granta Rent charge out of twoacres, and after the Grantee recoucreth one
of the acres agatnít the Gzantoz by a titic pavanrount;tbe whole rent hall {lue out of the other
acre: but (£ the recouerte bc by a fatnt title bp Couine, then the rent is extinct fo» the whole,
becaufc be claimeth vnder tbe Gzantee.

FJla man tnfcoffetf B. of one acretn fee bpon condition, and B. being ſeiſed ofanother acre in
fee, granteth a vent ont of both acres tothe feoffoz, Sho entreth into the one acre £o? the condt=
tion broken, the wholerent fbatl {Que out of the other acre, becaufe his title is paramount the
grant, But ik a man maketh aleale for life of Wiacke acrcano tobite acre, referaing two ſhil⸗
lings rent, bpon condition that tf the Leſles doth fuch atr act, ec. that then be thailhaue Fee tn
lack acre,the Lelle perfosmes the condition, albeit now bp relation be Datbtbe fe imple ab
initio,pet Thall the rent be appogttoned,fo2 that the reucrfion of one acre Whereuntothe rent Was
incident, is gone from the Leſſor, and fo note a Diuerfitic betieene a rent in grofle, and a rent
incident toa reuerfion,concerning the appoztioniment therof. And pet infome cafes arent charge
ſhall not be wholly extinct, Where the Grantee clatmeth from and bnder the Grantor, As (f
B.maketh a leafe of one acre foz lifeto A and A ts fcífeo of another acre (n fee, A.grantetharent
charge to P. out of both acres,and doth alt in the acre Which he holdeth £o? itfe, B recoucreth in
Swat, the whole rent tg not extinct, but fhali bee appoztioned, and pet b. clatmeth the one acre
vnder A. And ſo tt ig (£ A. bab made a feoffement in kee, and P. haventred forthe fozfetture,the
rent t¢ Wholly appoztíoneb, and is not wholly extinct: andthe rcafon hereof ts, fozthat itis
amarime fn Law, G bat noman fball take aduantage of bis one W2ong,Nulluscommodum


capere poteft de iniuria fua propria : And therefozefeeing the walk and forfiture were coms —


dE ac


mitted by theac and Wrong of the Lefer, hee fpatinot take aduantage thereof to extinguiſh tbe -


Wbole ront : and the $obolc rent cannot iffue onelp out of the other acre,becaufe the Leſſoꝛ hath
theone acrc vnder the eftate of the XLe(Tee, and therefore tt ſhall be appoztioned. * ZF the ting
gine two acres of land ef eqnall baluc to another in fee, feetatlc, Foz life oz peareg , referning a
pt of two fhillings, and tbe one acre is euttcdby atitle paramount, the Rent fall be appoꝛ⸗
oned.
«| Mes fi vn home tient [a terre, &c. per ſeruice de render annuelment &c.
vn Chiual ou un Eſperon dor, &c. fi en tiel cafe le Seignior purchaſe parcel del


terre, tiel fermice eft ale.


«r Chinal.


Lab Of Rents. Sell.203,


«| Chinal. Nota, In Latpne Deftrarius i$ à great Bose, 02
horſe of feruícc, of the french $0020 Deftrier. Palfridus, a hoꝛſe to tranell en , of the french
$9010 Palfray : Bud Runcinus, a Nagge, (pou fball often read of them ín Wecozds ) it com⸗
- methof the 3italían $0970 Roncino. Kut admit that parcell of theland holden bp fach entire
… fernicecometo the Lozd by difcent, tobether fhall the entire feruice Sobollp remainc, oz bee exe
tind? and ít is holden that infome cafe (t fballbe extinct foz the Whole, as Suit feruice, and
- fncb other entire annuall Suit feruices, WWruttE the feruice be, to render pearely at fuch a fcaft

ahoric, op the like, andthe Cenant infcoffe the father of the d020 of part, which difcends, pet
the Jrcoffo? (ball hold by a bozfe, becaufe the ſeruice Mas multiplied, and each of ther, vize the
Feottoꝛ andthe Jreoffo held bp a hoꝛſe.

A. bath common of pafture fauns nombre, intientie acres of land, and ten of thofe acres deſ⸗
¢endto A: the Common fauns nombre tg entireand incertaine, and cannot be appozttoncd, but
Mhaliremains Wut if it had bene a Common certaine, (as for ten Beaſts) in that cafc the
Common (boulo beapportionco. And fo tt (s of Commonof Eſtouers, of Œurbarie, of Piſ⸗
charte, ac. and pet in nonc of thele cafes, the diſcent, which (s an act in Law, ſhall woꝛke anp
Svioua to the Terre tenant, Fo be ſhall bauc that Which belongeth to him, for the act inlaw fhail
$0025c no wrong.

BFE three Joyntenants holy bp an entire pearelp rent, ag a bozfe, o1 of a graine of Wheat,and

the Genant celle bp two peares, and the 3020 reconcr two parts of the land agatnff two of
them, andthe third faucg bis part bp tendzing of therent,ec.and finding furctic, albeit the 1020

come tothe two parts bp lawtull recouerte, grounded bpon the Defaulé and $ozong of the two
Fopntenants, pet thall the entire annuall rent beertinct.

Itthe Tenant holdeth bp Fealtie and a bufbcll of Wheat, 02 a pound of Compn, ozof Pe⸗
per.o2 fuch like, and the 1030 purchafeth part of the land, there fball be an apportionment, ag
Sell as {€ the rent were in money : and pet tf the rent were bp one graine of wheat, o2 one feed
of Compn, o? one Pepper coznc, bp the purchafe of part, the wholefhouldbecrtind, Wut (fan
entire ferutce be pro bono publico, ag Knights feruice, Caſtle gard, Loanage,ec.foz the ocfence

- of tbe Realme, 02 to repaire a bꝛidge o2 a ay, to keepe a Beacon, oz to keepe the tings Re⸗
coꝛds, oꝛ foz aduancement of jufHice and peace,as to aid the Sbherif:,o2 to be Conſtable of Eng-
land, though the Lord purchafe part, the feruice remaines, So tt ts (£ the tenure be Pro opere
deuotionis fiue pictatis, a8 to finda Pꝛeacher, 02 to pzoutoc the oxnaments of fucha Church:
02 pro opcre charitatis, ag to marriea poze Virgin, oz to bind a poe op Apprentice, oꝛ to
feed a poc man. And fo note a dinerfitte bet weene tbefe cafes, and entire ferutces £02 the pꝛiuate
benefit of the Lozd.


Section 223.
Ee if a man hold


his land of another
by Homage, fealty, and


q pre parcel del
ter orc. Bere by


this &c-is implied, that the re⸗


€ Cs ſi vn hoe
Miet fa terre
- Dun auter, per Ho-


mage, Fealtie, a Cf-
cuage,t per certaine
‘tent, file Sfir put-
chaſe parcel dela £t,
— RC, cn tíclcag E rent
— ftà appoztion, come
ef auantoit mes bn-
core en ceft cafc E bo-
mage 3 fcaltícómut-
ront entier le Sfr,
cat le Seigniog aue⸗
tale homage s feal-
tie De fon tenant pur
le temuant De leg


Efcuage, and certaine
Rent, ifthe Lord pur-
chafe part of the land,
&c. in this cafe the
rent fhall be apportio-
ned, (asisaforefayd)
but yet inthis cafethe
Homage and Fealtie
abide entire. to. the
Lord : For the Lord
fhall haue the Homage
and Fealtie of his Te-
nant for the reft of the
Landsand Tenements
Pe


fons wherfoꝛe homage « fcal=
tie remain € arenot extinct tn
thts cafe, are, Firſt, becauſe (t
canbenolofleto the Cenant,
as (t m(gbt in the cafe of an
hoꝛſe op other entire ferntce,for
there it map bethe remnant is
not fufficient in balue to pap
ít, Secondip, there í9 no
land but (tmuff be bolden bp
fome ferntce o2 other, and ho⸗
mage and jrealttc are the fre-
ett and leaſt chargeable ferut-
ces to tbe Œenant,


«| Pur ceo que tiel


ſeruices ne font paffe an-
anal feruices orc. Œ bis
ig Ratio vna, but not vnica,
ag (tappraretb bp that —


14.9
vnuo 6.R.1. Ret. $. Warr,
Bruertonreafe lib.6.fo. 2...
34.4 f. 15. 35. H. 6. Exee at
‘Plo. (om.71.40.E 3.40.
$E 2. Tit, LAwowris 206.


PLR. B, 209. 49. E. 3.40


Vid. Litt. (ap. Teuantin (em.
mon 71.6.

115.6. fo. 1.2.8 Bivertonseafè
Lit.f.49.Y1.H.5.32.b.

24.H 8. Teuwres 53. Brooke
35. H.6.6. 1i. El. Dy.a8 gs
16.8.3. Amewrie 93.


M s
"Brsertons cá/e vb fura,


5. E.a.dkowrie 206.


Lib.2.


Bretons («fe bb. €.


Talb.t1: Cafe ib. 8.fe.104.


$.H3.11.


£2 E. 8.29. Talbotti. Cafe


fe. 104.


(9 Braves CA Lib. 6. fo.
1.2. Talborts Caf: lib. 8. fo 104


g.E.s..Auswrie 368.


31. E.3.48 6 34.
Ti. - oper:
9. Mar ·


30.4f. T 1,19.


44. Hab A1. b,


Ass.
.8.28.


Capa.


bath bene fapd, It there be
Loꝛd and Cenant by Feal=
tie and Berrtot feruice, and
the Lord putcbafe part of the
land, the Herriot feruice is ex⸗
tinct, ( anb petit is notannu-
all, but to be paid at the death
of the Tenant) bccaufc tt is
entire an. valuable,

a Solonque laffe-
rance cy rate de la terre,


de. Here ts bp this
(&c) implied, Chat in tome
cafe Sobere ít is entire anb
baiuable, and not annuall, tt


Of Rents.


terres et tenem̃ts te-
nus Delup.come tla-
uoít adeuant,pur ceo
que ticls Ceruices ne
font paffe annuals
ferutceg,et ne poyent
eftre appoation, mes
lefcuage poit, a ferta
apportion folonque
lafferance et vate De
1a terre, ac,


Se#.224,


holden of him,as hee
had before, becaufe
that füch feruices are
no yearely feruices,
and cannot bee appor-
tioned, but the Efcu-
age may and fhall bee
apportioned — accor-
ding to the quantitic
and rate of the land,
&c.


fhall not (as bath beenefapd) be extingutthed by purchafe of part, * as Knights ferutce which
is tobe perfozmed by the bobíco£ aman, it the Loꝛd purchafe part, per the tenure bp Knights
feruíce remaines fez the reſidue, Quia pro bono publico, & pro defenfioneregni, but the Œftu-
age (ball be appoztioncd,ag here Littleton fatth, becaufe that (s £oz the bencfit of the iLozd, and
pet itta cafuall, andnotannuall, And Where our Authoꝛ fpeaketh of Seruices it (a implted,


thata Herriot cuftome, though (tbe enttre, valuable, and not annuall, bptoc purcbafe a£ pare”


Chall not be extinct. Dn the other part, ben the tenure ts by an entire feruice, and the tenant
alien part of the tenancte, in what cafes the rent (ball be multtpited (chat (& where the jreodog
andthe liene hall pay the entire rent ſeuerally, (fo regularlp tt heldeth, that que in partes


diuidi nequcunt,folida à fingulispræftantur) and where not, pou may readat large in mp Re


orts. *


Bud by this (&c.) igallotmplted, that the apportionment (ball not be accozding to the
quantitic of theland, but according to the qualttte o2 balue thereof, ag bp that which hath been


fapd appearcth,


€ Dte heere a divers

tic, Swbhen the qran=

tes of a Rent charge

commeth to a part of the lano

charged by big owne act, and
Sober by the courfe of Law,

4 Purchafe parcel de


les Tenements charges en


fee. And fo itis tf tbe

Tenant giveth to the father of
the Wzantee part of the land
tn Œ aile, anb this deſcend to
the Grantec, therent fhall bee
apportioned, and fo by act in
Law a Kent charge may bee
fufpenden for one part, anb in
cffe fos another,

And fo tt to, tf the father be
®aantee of a rent, and thefen
gurchafe parr of the land
charged, and the father dteth,
after whole death the rent def=
cends to thefon, therent thal
be apportioned, andfo it ie tf
the Grantee arant the rent to

"tbetenant of the land,and to a
franger,the rent ig ertine but
fora moitie,


Setlion 224.


€ Tem , fí home

ad bn cet charg,
& fon pter purchafe
parcel pe leg Tene⸗
ments charges en
fee, & mozutt, a cel
parcel defcend a fon
fits,q aD F rét charg,
02€ cel charge GE ap-
portion folonque lc
balue De la tt come €
auantdit 5 Bent ſer⸗
uice, pur ceo que tiel
portion de là terre
putcbate per la picre,
tie bient al fits per (0
fait Demefne,mes per
d æp coutfe del


De


Lfo,if aman hath

a Rent charge,
and his father pur-
chafe parcell of the
Tenements charged in
fee, and dieth,and this
parcel defcends tohis
fonne, who hath the
Rent charge, now this
charge fhall bee appor-
tioned according to
the value of the land,
as is aforefaid of Rent
feruice, becaufe fuch
portion of the Land
purchafed by the Fa-
ther , commeth not to
the fonne by his owne
fat, but by difcentand
by courfe of law.


3t


[om od mtm nra


Lib.2. Of Rents. Sed. 215. 150


Beaman hath (ftue tivo Daughters and grant a 18 ent charge outoFh{s land to oncofthem 9.4 22.
aud dpeth the Rent fball be appoztioned, anb if the Grantee tn this cafe enfeoffeth another of .
her part of the land, pet the moitp of the Kent remaineth tiluing outof ber ſiſters part,becaufe
thepart of the Grantes (n the lans bp the difcent was Ddifcharged of the Bent, Wut in all
thefecafos Where the Bent charge is apportioned by at ín daw, pet the tait of Annuity
tapleth, foz (€ the drante ſhould bring a t:02ít o£ Annutty he mutt ground tt vpon te grant
bp Deede, and thon mult be as (t hath beenefatd bring (t foz the whole. \ "

Annua nec debitum Iudex non feperat ipfum.

Allo in refpect of the realtp the 18 ent ts appozttoneb; but tbc perfonalty is indtutible,andbp
actin Law fball not be deuided. FE Execution be fued of bodp and lands bpon a ffatutc
Merchant oz Kaple, and after the inheritance of part of thofe lands difcend to the Conufee all
the Execution isauopded, for the ontíe ts perfonall and cannot be dented by act in Law,


Œ Ne vient al fitz per fon fait demefne mes per difient & per courfe
del ley. FE the father within age purchate part of the land char⸗


Ged, and altencth Within age and dyeth, the forme recoucreth in a tozitef Dum füitinfra æta-
tem, oz entreth: In this cafethe at of Lawis míxt withthe act of the partie, and pet tbe
Bent (ball be apportioned, Foz after the recouery o2 entry the foune hath the land bp difcent.

So (t is ín cafe the fonne recoucreth part of the land bpor ar alienation bp hig father,Dum
non fuit compos mentis, the Rent (Dal be appozttoned fog the eaule afozefaid,

B man feifed ofiands in a fee taketh wike and maketh a Feolfment in feo; tfe Feoffee grants
a Rent charge of x pound out of tbc land to the jrcoftoy and bis wife, and to tbe heives of the
bufbanb, the huſband dieth, the Wife recouercth the moítp foz her Dower by che cuftome, the
Rent charac fbalbcappo:tíonco, and the may diſtreyne fo; fue pound Which (e tbe moítp of she
Rent. Jn Which cafe two notable things atc tobeobferuco. Firſt, albeit the Dower bee bp
relation o2 fiction of Law aboue the Went, pet Whew the Wife recouereth her Dower, He (ball
not banc ber entire Rent out of the refiduc, for a relation o2 fiction of Law ſhall neucr woꝛke a
Wꝛong 02 charge toa third perfon,but In fictione iuris femper cft Equitas. SDecondip,that albeit


5. R. 2. Annuity ii.


Pl.( om.73.
35. H.6. tit, Execnt, 21.
15.E 4.5.


5.€.2.Amewry, 2c 6.


Lib. 3-fo.29. in Butler et Ba:
hers cafe.


ber one act doe concurre with the ac in Law, pet the Rent fbalbe appoztioucn,


«L| Tem, 6 foit Chir
æteuant, ele te=
nat tient des Seig⸗
nío2 per fealtie a cer⸗
taine vent, ale Sũr
grant Ic vent p 8 fait
à bu autec,ac, veter-
ant alu» le fealty,
le tenant atturna al
grantee del rent.oze
tiel rent eft rent feck
ale grantee, pur ces
que les tenements
ne font tenus Del
grantee De le rent,
mes font tenus del
Seignior d reſerue
alupfcaltíe, -


Section 225.


Lfo if there bee

Lord and tenant,
and the tenant holds
of his Lord by fealtie
and certainerent, and
the Lord grants the
rent by his deed to
another referuing the
fealty to himfelfe,and
the tenant atturnes to
the grantee of the
rent, now this rent is
rent fecke to the gran-
tee, becaufe the tene-
ments are not holden
of the grantor of the
rent,but are holden of
the Lord who refer-
ued to him the fealtie.


CRT le Seignior gra-

ta le rent, crc.
So it ig (£ the Lord relcafc
tbe Kent to the Œcnant fac
sing the fealty, the Rent is
extind, Wut íCtborcbe Los
and Genant by jfcaltp ano
Bent, and the Lod bp his
Ded rectting the tenure re=
leale all his right in the land
fauing bis fato Kent, the
Seignioꝛie remaines and hee
fhall haue the Ment ag a
rent feruice, and the feaitte
incident to ft, foz the fan
AB ent ig as much to fap ag
the Rent feruice $obereunto
fealty ig ínctbent.

Bnd fo it is it the Lov
hath ifue two daughters and
dieth, and bpon partition the
fealtp t& allotted to the onc
anb the 18 ent tothe other, the
fball banc. the Went ag a
3 ent fecke,

It there tee Lod of a
Mannoz and Cenant bp


fealtie, Suit of Court and Rent, the 102b grant the Écaltp fanin to him the fuite of Œourt
and Rent, the fauing is geod Foz the Rent bat not for the faite to Court, becauſe the dran-


s»:


fa


1 2.E. 4.11, 9. E.3.1.


40. E .3.22.5,
Releases 36.


17-E.3.72.6:


17.6, 3772.5,


13.E.3. fil;


Lib.2.


7-€.3 2.6. Fite Warrens cafe
E.3.2.3.Adindged.


30.431. 17. Mio. 12
eMe. E.N.B.178.D.
32. H.6. 3.5. 4, E.3.4[[ 449
38.H.8.'Dier 31.


(seas. 22 Aff 53.


(a) 46. E. 3.22 per (uriam.


(b) 44 E. 3.19.30.
39. H.6.25. 39. 47: pl.20,
36, Af. p. 39-


Capa.


Of Rents. Se8.216.


te can keope no Conrt, and there is no tenure of the Grantoz, and therefore the fuite of Court
oft anb perifhed in that cafe.
ke pris — bold of the Donoꝛ by fealty and certaine Rent,and the Dono; grant thefer=
uices to another, and the Cenant atturne, fome haue fatd the rent ſhail not paffe becaufe the
rent cannot pale but ag a Rent ferutce being granted bp the name of feruíceg, and the fealty
cannot paffc becaufe as hath beene faíb the fealty te incident infeparable to the reuerſion.
But it fameth that the rent (hall pale ag a Rent ſecke becaufe at the time of the grant tt
Gas a Rent feruice inthe Grantoz, and therefore there be words fuffictent to pale tt to the
Grante, and it {9 not of neceflity chat (t fbaibca Rent feruice in the hands of the Grantee,

BF there be 3020 anb Cenant bp fealty anb certaine rent, and the 13020 bp Deed grant the
rent in fee fauing the fealty, and grant further bp thefame Dede that the Grante map dic
freine for the fame rent in the tenancte, albett a Diftrele were incident to the rent im the
hands of the Grante, andalthough the Cenant attozne to the avant, pet cannot the (rante
diftrepne,foz the Diſtreſſe remaines ag an incident infeparable to the Seigntozry, for then
the Œenant fhould be fubtect to two feucrall diftrefles of txoofcuerall men, And fo tf
ig it the 3,020 in that cafe grant the 18 ent (n taple o» for life, ſauing the fealty, and farther
grant that the rante map diftreine foy ít; albett the reucrfion of the rent be a Kent ſeruice,
pet the Done oz Grantes fball haue ít but ag a. Rent fece, and {hail not diftrepne fo; it.

Ft is tobe obferuco that Where a Rent feruice ts become a Rent feche bp fenerancc of the
fame from the Setgntozy, that now the nature of the vent is changed, for ifthe Grantee pur⸗
chafe part of the land the Whole rent {hall be extinct. Bnd $obercas in an Aflife for a Rent
ſeruice all the Tenants of the land need not tobe named, but fuch as dtd the difleifin: Pet tn
Alife fox the Rent {ecke Which fometimes was a Rent feruice, all tbe Cenants mutt bee nas
med,ag in cafe of a Rent charge, albeit he Mere difletfed but bp one fole Cenant, * but tf the
1.025 of a Mannoꝛ relcafe the fealty to bis Cenant faving therent, o that a Meſnalty be-
come arent bp furplufage, thofe that are mof» Secke (and fometime were feruice) are part


of the Mannoꝛ, but a Rent charge cannot be part ofa a Mannoꝛ.


€ Arrorne dre. DEAttognement {ball be hereafter {aid in big


proper chapter and place,


aS! le Seignior voet
granter per fon


fait lebomage, &c. Ft


íg to be obferued that Where
the Seigniory is bp homage,
fealty and rent, (a) tf the
Logo grant away the Woz
mage, the fealty fhall pafle,
fo; fealty is an incident infe=
Parable to Homage(b ecan=
not by anp fauingin anp grat
be feperated fro tt,foz homage
cannot bc fole o2 alone, but the
rent (though tt be not faved)
fall not paſte in that cafe be⸗
caufe the rentig not incident
tobomage. And fo tt (gí£ there
be Loꝛd and Tenant bp feat
tpandrent, the 3020 grant
ouer the fealty Without anp
fauings, the rent paffeth not,
but fealty hath an inctoent
infeperable belonging to it,
wyhich bp no ſauing can be
feparated, and thatis a Di-
ſtreſſe, forag Littleton faith
here, a ſeruice cannot be focke
Cthat ($ ) Without fome


Setl. 226.


€i $2 meti Ieman-

ner eft lou home
tient fa terre per bo-
mage, fealtie, & cer=
taine vent, (i 1c Sfir
grant la cent, fauant
aluplehomage, tiel
tent ap2es ticl grant
eft rent fecke, Des
ja ou terres font te-
nus per homage, fe-
altp.a cecteín rent, fi
le Sfr boit granter
per S fait le homage
De fon tenát a bn au-
ter, fauant alup te
tennant De les fer=
uices, ale tenant at-
turnaa luy, folongs
le fozme Del graunt,
en ceft eate le tenant

tiendza


IN the fame manner,

where a man holds
his land by homage,
fealty and certaine
rent, ifthe Lord erant
the rent,fauing to him
the homage, fuch rent
after fuch grant is rent:
fecke. But there where
lands are holden by
homage, fealty, and
certaine rent, if the
Lord will grant by his
deed the homage of
his tenantto another,
fauing to him the
remnant of his ferui.
ces and the tenant at-
turne to him accor-
ding to the forme of
the grant, in this cafe


Lib.2.


tiendza fa terre Del
grantee, tle Säãr à
grantat le homage,
tiaucca forſq; le rent
come vent feck, a ne
paques Difirepnera
pur le tent, pur ceo
que homage, ne feal=
tie, ne efcuage, ne
poit eſtte Dit feck car
nul ticl feruice poit
eftre dit feck. Car ce⸗
lup que ad ou Doit a=
uct homage, ou feal-
tic, ou efcuage De fa
terre poit per com⸗
mon dꝛoit Diftreiner
purceo fil ſoit ade-
reve, car homage, fe-
altie, & efcuage font
fevuices, per queug
terres ou tenements
font tenus,tc, a (ont
tiels Gen nul manet
poiét eftt prites foꝛſ⸗
£p come feruices, ac.


Of Rents.


the tenant fhall hold
his land of the gran-
tee, and the Lord who
granted the Homage
{hal haue but the rét as
a Rent feck, & fhallne-
uer diftrain for the rét,
becaufe that homage
nor fealty nor efcuage
cannot bee faid fecke
for no fuch feruice
may be faid fecke.For
he which hath or
ought to haue ho-
mage, fealty, or efcu-
age of his land may
by common right di-
ftreine for it, if it bee
behind. For Homage,
Fealtie, and Efcuage
are Seruices by which
Lands or Tenements
are holden,&c.and are
fuch feruices as inno
manner can bee taken
butas Seruices, &c.


Secl.227.


diſtreſſe belonging toit, for
then it ere not a fermíce and
fo of ibomage and Eſcuage.
€ Terres en tene-
ments [ont tenus , Cc.
By this( &c. )anb out of thts
Section ít map beecollected
that t€ (c) there bee Loꝛd anb
@enant bypSfeailtie and Rent,
the Annuall Rent hich ts
a profitable Seruice ta of
bigber and moze refpect tn lake
then the Fealtie, and there=
tore by the grant of the Kent
the Fealtie fall pafle ag an
incident thereunto, but itis
an tncident feparable , and:
therefoze map bee bp a fauing,
ag Littleton hath faib,be fepa=
ratedfromit, Bnd fo When
the tenure is bp Jrealtío and
Bent, andthe Rent be recouc=
red, the Fealtie (hal included⸗
lp bee recouered, ( d) And
where the tenure is bp Hes
mage, Feaiticand Went, bp
therecoucric of the Rent with
the appurtenances pon a
former right, the Homage and
Fealtie alfo ſhall bee reſtored
bp neceſſitie and indulgence
of the Lacy, for ſeeing the law
Stueth no Præcipe fo? the 1304
mage anb Sealtic, but for the
Rent onip,rcafon would that
by the rccoueríe of the tient,
the Whole entire Seigniozte


hall be incinfucip reftozed in that cafe, Wut (€ the recouerte be without title there the Rent is
recoucred ag a Rent feckc, for that woꝛketh no moꝛe then a grant, (*) but bp the recouerte ofa
Mannos Whether it bebp title o2 Without Citic, Homage, frealtie anb ail other Seruices par=
cellof the Mannoꝛ arerecouered. And albeit jrealtíe cannot bee deuided from Homage by
grant (as hath beenc fato) pet bp extinguifhment tt map:(¢) As (£ there be Loꝛd and Œenant
by Homage, Fealtic, and Rent, andthe 1,020 relcafe the Seiqntozie and Seruices, oꝛ all his
right (n the Land faving the Fealtieand Rent, o1 fauing the fatd Ment,oz tf hee bp expreſſe
Swords releafe the Homage faving the Fealtie and Rent, there the Fealtie and Rent remapne,
forthe Hhomage is extinct. And fo notea diucrGtiebetweene a dbzant and a Keleaſe tn that
Cafe. But folong as Homage continues the Jrcaltíe cannot be dentded frem ít,


€ For {que come feruices, &c Berets implied a Diuerfitie bettocene
thefe co:posail ferutces of Homage, Fealticand Eſcuage, which cannot become fecke oꝛ dep,
bnt makea tenure Whereunto Diftrefles, Efcheats, anb other pofits be incident, Ænb other
copozallferuices, ag to plough, repatre, attend and tbelíbo ano all Rents Sobatfocuer, for thep
map become fecke 02 02 and make no tenure.


Sect, 227.


BY otherwife itisof qq E le Seignior
a Rent which was ue poet grant
once Rent Seruice,, be- fie rent oue diſtres,
caufe when itisfeuered come eſt dit. (£501

Pr; tbe


€ M auterinent

eft De rent que
fuit bn foits vent ſer⸗
uice, put Ceo que quant


151


(c) 44.83.19. 26.4938.
19.4 f. p.30. 9, E, 3.2.
39.H. 6.34.25. 27. H. 8.20.
8.24.28.


(4) Temp sH.8.Br.tit,
incidents,2 4.
44.£.3.19.29, A420;
39. H.6.24.25.


(5) Vide Se. 149,


(€) 9. E.3.1.


(£) 7.8.3.3-3»


Lib.2,


(g) 7. 5.4.11.


8.H.7.4.5-


(b) 41 E. 5.16.


(D rz. E. 4.3. 32. H.8.tit.
Parents Br. 26.4[.66.
48.E. 3.9.5.


"Dot Cr Stud 'th..3.cap. Ge


Cap 2.
the diftreffe ig am inch
Dent (nfcparablc to the
feaitieas hath benc fato
(g) and therefoze a re⸗
leafe of Diftreffe is void.
Incident. In-
cidens à thing appertap=
ning too2 following an-
other ag a moze woꝛthie
0? principall , ‘whereof
pou fe here, and (m df-
uerg other places of Lit-
tletons examples, And
of incioentg fome be fe»
parable, and fome infes


Of Rents.


il eft fener per 1e grant
le Seigniog Deleg au-
ters (etuiceg, tne poit
eftre Dit rent Scruice,
pur ceo que él ne ada
ceo fealtie, que eft inci-
dent a chefcun manner
be vent feruíce , pure
eft dit tent fecke, & le
feignio ne poit grant
tiel vent oue Difirefle,
come cft Dit,


pane ag bath benc


b,


CS a luy le
reuerſion, &c. By


this word ( &c.) tg to bc ob⸗
ſerued (h) that this Rent vez
ferucd is a Bent SHeruice,
and bath fcaltic incident to tt,
and both Went and fcaltíc are
incident to the reucrfion, viz.
(1) the Rent (nctoent tothe
Reucrfion feparabip , but the
fealtie (nctoent to the Reuer⸗
fion infeparablp, but bp the
grant of the Rent , the feaitte
in this cafe fball not paſſe be=
caufc the fealtte is infeparablp
incident to the WB euerfion,but
the Grante fall hancthe rent
ag arent fecke. Alio bp this
(&c )ig implyed an attorne⸗
ment of the tenant, for with⸗
out that, although bp the
grant the Rent is turned toa
Ment feeke, fo ag the tenant
cannot bee charged With anp
diftrefie , pet to the palling
thereof, there muſt beean at=
toznment.


¶ Attorne, dc.


Here (a implyed by thts¢ &c.)
an attornment in the itfe of


Seif. 228.


€ [@em fi hoe leſſa

abn auter terves
put terme De bie, ve-
feruant a lup certain
tent, fil grant Ie rent
abn auter p fon fait,
fauant a lup le reuer⸗
(ion de la terre iffint
leffe, ac, tiel vent nett
forfque rent feck,pur
ceo que F granteenad
riens en Ie reuerfion
Del terre, ac. Mes fil
grant le reuerfion
Del tette a bn autet
put terme De bie, ele
tenant atturne, ac,
donques ad le gran⸗
tee le rent come rent
ſeruice, pur ceog il
ad le reuerſion pur
terme de vie.


Sech.228.
by the grant ofthe Lord


from the other feruices,
it cannot bee faid Rent
Seruice, for that it hath


not fealtie vnto it, which .


is incident to euery
manner of Rent Seruice,


n


and therefore itis called “


Rent feck. And the Lord
cannot grant fuch a Rent
withadiftreffe, as itis
faid.


Lfoifamanletto

another lands for
tearme of life refer-
uing to him certaine
rent , if hee grantthe
rent to another by his
Deed fauing to him
the Reuerfion of the
land fo letten,&c.fuch
Rent is buta Rent feck
becaufe that the gran-
tee had nothing in the
Reuerfion of the land,
&c. but if he grant the
Reuerfion of the land
to another for tearme
of life, and the tenant
attorne, &c. then hath
the grantee the Rent
asa Rent feruice, for
that he hath the reuer-
fion for tearme of life,


the Grantee, and other incidents to an attoznment whereot pou (ball reads at largein the


Chapter of Attoznment,


Œ Donques ad le grantee le rent come vent feruice pur ceo que il ad le rewer-


fon pur terme de vie. Aud the reaſon hereof is becaufe the Kent is
tacident to the Renerfion ag bath beene fatd, and (ag Littleton faith here) paReth awap by the
grant of the Reuerfon, ag With the Superior without faping , Cum pertinentijs, &c. foz tbe
Renerfion cannot bcfech: But bp the grant of the Rent the BeuerGon doth net patie,


Self.


Lib.2.


Of Rents.


Seil. 229.


€ ET iffine eft à entendue à

{i Dome Dona terres ou te=
nements en le taile, renDant a
lup æa fes heires certaine Rent,
ou leſſa terre pur terme De bic,
renDant certaine vent, fil granta
le reuerſion a bn auter ac, Fle te=
nautatturna, tout le vent a ſer⸗
uice paſſe per ceft parol (reuerfi=
on) pur ceo quetiel rent a feruice
£n ticl cas fontíncibents a le ve-
ucrfion, a paſſont pet Iv grant De
lercuerfion, Mes coment que il
grantaic vent a brrautec , lere=
ucrfion ne pala mp per ticl
grant, ac,


ANd fo it isto be intended, that

if aman giue Lands or Tene-
ments in taile,yeilding to him and
to his Heiresa certaine rent, or let-
teth Land for tearme of life ren-
dring a certainerent, if hee grant
the Reuerfion to another &c. and
the Tenant atturne , all the Rent
and Setuice pañle by this word
(Rcuerfion)becaufe that fuch Rent
and Seruice in fuch cafe are inci-
dent to the Reuerfion,and paffe by
the grant ofthe Reuerfion. But al-
beitthat hee granteth the rent to
another, the Reuerfion doth not
paffe by füch erant, &c.


€ Bis neds no crplication, but is euident bp that which hath toꝛmerly beene fatd,
| faning bp tbís( &c.)in theend ts implped the old rule, That the incident (hall palle by
thegrantof the pzincipati, but not the pzincipall bp the grant of the incident, Accct-


forium non ducit, fed fequitur fuum Principale.


Setlion 230.


$66.229.230.231.


CJ Stine nota te di-

ucrfitie, Ct tint
eft tenus + a I. ES

es il cft adiudge,
ps 26. Lib. aes
rum, ou les ſeruices
Del teaát en taíte fue=
tont grants, q̃ ẽ fuit
bone grant,nient ob⸗
ftant que ie reuerſion
demurt, «|


€ [Term fi toit teig-

nio?, mefne, a tc-
nant, tle tenant tiẽt
del meſne per feruice
De 0,8, alc meſne tis
ent oufter per feruice


O note the diuerfi-

tie. And foit is hol-
den, P.21.£.4. But it
is adiudged 26. of the
Book of Afüfes,where
the feruices of tenant
in taile were granted,
that this was a good
grant,notwithftanding
that the Reuerfion re-
mayne. 4


Sechon 231.


Lío if there bee
Lord, mefne and
tenant , and the tenant
holdeth of the mefne
by the feruice of fiue
fhillings, & the mefne


€ Dis te added to Lic-
tleton, Bnd theres
fore ag 4| 5aue done
heretofoze, and hall dec here-
after tn like cafes J patTctt
ouer, Andthe cafc here cites
ín 26.A(T p.66. Soag contra
opinionem multorum,and af=
terwards that Judgement
as reuerſed bp writ of Er=
toz, fo: that the Serutces res
mapned with the Renerfon
ag incidents infeparabie, —


as! ſoit Seignior ,
mene & tenant,
cre. fi le Seignior Para-
mont purchase le Seigni-

orie en fee, rc.
(k) Some hauc fatd s
ic]


152


(K) 20. £.5-auoyrio 126.


Lib.2.


2, F.2,fif, Extings6.
26.4.6. ihid. 7.


(3)7 Aff a. n. E. 5.28.


(m) 4.£.3.19.—
See for this hereafter im the
Chapter of Confirmation Self,


(n) B.H.6.24-
(0)4.& 5.2. & M.Dy.154.
Vid Sedi. 1385135.


(p) 13. H.4.3. 46.47: · 27.
13.3. 2. Usu. T1.


Capaz.


ín this cafe (t were reafon,
that bp the purchafe of the
Loꝛd paramount, bis Seig⸗
niogie ſhould bee onelp ectínd,
and that hee ſhould become te=
nant to tbe Weine, and the
Meine to bolo outer ag the
Hod paramount bed. Wut
that cannot be, fo» that one
man cannet be both 10275 and
@enant, noz one land’ imme⸗
dtatelp holden of diuers 10208,
(1) GE the Cenant infcoffe
the Lozo Paramount and bis
Swife and theirhetres, in this
cafe the Mefnaltic is but fuf-
pended, fox tf the wife fur-
utue,both 9Defnaltíc & Seig⸗
nío2íc are reutued,

Ft is ſayd, that if there bee
io; Mefne and Cenant,
cach of them by Fealtie anb
fire pente, the Lord confirme
the ftate of the Œenant, to
hold of him by Jjrealtíc and
three pence, that the Meſnalty
ts extinct, (m) And fo tn the
fame cafe, í£ the @enant bee
an Bbbot, and the 1070 cons
firme bis effate to hold of him
in Frankalmoigne, the Meſ⸗
naltíc tg extinct. (n) So it is
tf the Lord releaſe to the Te⸗
nant, For Whither the on
purchafe the Œenancie, oz the
@enant the Hetaniozte, the
Mefnaïtieis extinct. And al-


Of Rents.


de ti, 5, file Seig⸗
nioz paramont put-
chafe le tenancie en
fee, Donques le fer=
uíce De le mefnaltie
eft extinct, pur ceo ü
quant le Seignior
paramont ad lege⸗
nancie il tient De toti
Seignioꝛ procheine
paramont alup, a fil
Doit tener ceo Delup
que fuit meine, Don-


Seë.232.


holdeth ouer by the
feruice of 12. pence,


ifthe Lord Paramont «


purchafe the tenancie
in fee, then the feruice


ofthemefnaltie isex- «


tint , becaufe that
when the Lord Para-
mont hath the tenan-
cie, heholdeth of his
Lord next Paramont
to him, & if he fhould
hold this of him


ques il tienD2a bn°which was Mefne,


mefme tenancte im-
mediate De Diners
Heigniors, per Di-
uers ſeruices, à ſer⸗
toit inconuentent , Æ
la ley boit plus toft
futfet bu mifchtefe q
bn inconuentencíe, &
put ceo le Seigniory
Delmefualtie eft ec-
tinct,


then hee fhould hold
the fame tenancic im-
mediately of diuers
Lords by diuers Ser-
uices which fhould be
inconuenient, and the
Law will fooner fuffer
a mifchiefe then an in-
conuehience, & there-
fotethe Seignioric of
the Mefnaltie is ex-
tind.


bett tbc Meſne grant the Mefnaltie for life, and then the Lozdreleafe to the Tenant, both the
teverfion and the eſtate fozitfcare dꝛowned. (o) SHotf there be Led and Cenant,and the tc-
nant make a gift in tatie, the rematnder to the king, the Seigniozie ts extinct.


«| Que ferra inconuenient. Here tt appeareth, Chat Argumentum
ab inconuenienti {g fozetble tn La, as bath beene fapd before, and ſhall bee often obferued


hereafter.


€ (p) Leley voet pluis toft fuffer mifchiefe que inconnenience. Lex citi-
us tolerare vult priuatum damnum, quam publicum malum. Bere be two Maximes of the


Common Law:


Fir, Chat no man can hold one and tbe fame land immedtately, of two feneratl 30298.
Secondip, That one man cannot of tbe fame landbe both 1o: and Œenant, And it ts to


be obferucd, That it is holden foz an inconuentence, that any of the SDartmeg of the law ſhould
be boken, though a patuate man fuffer loſſe: fo? that bp infringing of a Maxime, net onelp a
generall pretudice to many, bat inthe end a publique incertaintis anb confufion to all would
follom, And the rule of law is regulatip true, Res interaliosa@aalteri nocere non debet, Et
factum vnius alteri nocere non debet, Which are true with this exception, buiefle an incennents
ence ſhould folloSo,ag out 29 ntbo? bereteacheth bs.


Sec, 222.


€ AACS entant q
Mi tenant te
nus


Vt in as much as


LII I «nera le iW. s.
the Tenant holds


come Rent Secke,


Lib.z.


nut Del mefne p v. s.
ele meſũ tenuft torſ⸗
que per rij, 5, (Mint
que il auoít pluis en
aduantage p iiij. 8,
que.il papatt a fon
Seignios, il aucra
leg Dits itij, 5, come
Rent Seck annuel-
ment dele Seignioz
que purchate le Te⸗
Hance,


Of Rents.


of the Mefne by fiue
fhillings, &the Mefne
hold but by twelue
pence, fo ashee hath
more inaduantage by
foure fhillings,than he
payes to his Lord,hee
fhall haue the fayde
foure fhillingsas a rent
Secke yearely of the
lord which purchafed
the Tenancie.


the vent, becaufe be commeth to tt bp courfe of Law.
(f) But (£a Kent feruice be made a Went focke by the grant ofthe Lord, tbe Gzantee (ball


not diſtreyne Foz tt, for that the diftrefle remaines With the Eceltic. (x) It there be Lod, Meine (


Sei, 233.


(q) And pet be halt bí-
ſtreyne fos tt, for ſeeing the fe⸗
altictg ectina, the La re-
ſcrues the diltrefle to the rent,
kor, as tt hath beenefapd tn the
like cafe, ſeeing the feaitic ts
extinct, the viltretic bp Ac in
La wap be preferued, Quia
quando lex aliquid alicui con»
cedit, concedere videtur & id
fine quo res ipfa effe non po-
teft. (r) Bnd therefoze i£ a
man maketh a leafe £o life, ves
feruínga rent, and bind him⸗
felfe in a ftatute, and hath the
rent extended and delinered
tobim, be (ball diftreyne fos


and Tenant, andthe mefnaltie ts a Mannoʒ bauing etuerg freeholders, andthe Lord pur=
chaſe one of tie Tenancies, and there is a rent by furplufage, this rent albeit it be changed into
another nature, (as hath beene ſayd) is parceil of tbc Wannoz, Wut pct bp purebafe of part
ofthe land, the whole rent isertint, albeit the Law oto paclerueit,


€ [Tem 6 hoe que

adwent Secke
eft on foits ſeiſi daſ⸗
cun parcel Dele Bent
eapeesl Cenant ne
boit paper t rent ade=
vere, ceo eſt ſon reme⸗
die, il couient de aler
per lup ou per autg,
ales terres ou tene⸗
ments Dont E cent e(t
ifuant,zlademaund
leg arerages dl rent,
& file «Tenant denia
cea de paper,ceft De-
nier eft bn diſſeiſin ð
levent, Bury GE te-
nant ne foit adongs
prift a paper,ceo € bn
Denier que eft bn Dil-
ſeiſin de rent. Auxy ſi
tenant ne nul au-
ter bone foít Demut-
taut, fur les terres


Sell. 233.


Ifo ifaman which

hath a Rent fecke
be once feifed of any
parcell ofthe rent,and
after the Tenant will
not pay the rent be-
hind, this is his reme-
die, hee ought to goe
by himfelfe or by
others, to the lands or
Tenements, out of
which the rent is iffu-
ing, and there demand
the arrerages of the
rent, and if the tenant
denie to pay it,this de-
niall is a diffeifin of
the rent. Alfo if the
tenant be not then rea-
die to pay it,this is a
deniall,which is a dif-
feifin of the rent. Alfo
if the Tenant nor any
other man bee remai-

aa


TS Eifin,02 Seifontg
common ag Sell to the
Englilh, as to the french, €
fignifes tw the Common
Law, 39 o(Tc(T(om So bct cof Sei-
fina a Latpne $0030 (s made,
and Seifirea Werbe,

Dafiun parcel.
(vu) A feifon of parcel, is a
fuffictent feifon in La, to
haue an Bilife of the whole
rent,

Concerning the general
learning of fcífong , pou may
read Lib. 4. Beuils cafe, fol.8.
lib.5.fol.98. lib.6.fol.57.lib.7.
fol.2g.29. lib.g. fol.;3. Bnd
manp authorities of Law
there cited, but fuffictent is
fato here to explaine Littleton.

«| 4 les Terres, &c.
(w) Foꝛ a demand o£ the tea
nant out of the land {g not
fuffictcnt :but t€ there bee a
boule andiand, ademand on
theiand is fufficient , bnt fog
aconditton brꝛoken, it ought to
beat the houſe, as bath beene
faid befoze,


«p Arere. his
Sword Arcre, (gto bec obferz
cd, foz tt (g viet necelTaty p


152"


(0) 13.22, 4 arse 237-


(£)28.E. 3.93.
DH EID
21,744.53. 2.H.6.14


(05. E. 4.2.


T. 18.E.1. com Rega Nos.
án Thefaur.


(wr) 49. E. 3. t4.6
14.E.4,4.. "Pl Cam 7 10


Lib.2.


(x)29..Ag qx. $.H.ó.1Y.
Kb. de Ensrias 75.5.


(p) Mich. a1, E. 3 ram Re-
g'édindg. exco d img ly.


(x )Vid. BraBI b a fo i81.
262.204.

‘Bris ca. 42.43.8706. f. 83.196,
114.115.118.

Mir. ea. 2.6.1.

© Firi,lj. 4.68. X, Bra.vbi fupra


Mirror ons, 2.6 15.
"EraBon lib. 4. cap. 4.
"Britton eap. 44.4 5. Cre.
Fleta,hb. 4.02. 5.7 3. 36


eMirrer, eoo. 3.6.1 €.


Cap.


the grantes of the rent (houïn
Demand itat the berp time
Sobhen ít becommeth due, but
at anp time after ít is fuffts
Cient, foy this (d not like a
Demand of a rent bpon a con-
Dition, becaufe that ig penall
and oucrthzoweth the Swbole
ftate and (x) therefore the
time of Demand muft bee cer=
taine, to the end the Acie,
Wone, oi SFeofke map be
theretopap therent, but a
bemand of a Rent fecke o3
Bent chargeis but onip a
fozmal meane to recoucr that
Swbich ts due, (y) and thcre-
fore in that cafe tt map be
Demanded after itis behtnde
at anp time Sbether the
Æenant be prefent op no foz
remedies fo? rights are ever
fanourablp extended.


€ Ceo eft vo denier
en lev. Foꝛ woherefoe=


utr there ig a lawtull Dez
mand of a rent, and the fame
is not paid whether the Œe-
nant be prefent oz abfent, pet
thig is a Denpall in La, al-
beit there bee no words of


Of Rents.

ou les tenemẽts pur
payer le rent quaunt
il demaund Ies arte-
rages, ceo eft bn ðni⸗
et enlepæbn Dí(Icí-
fin en fait, 4 De tiels
diſſeiſins tl poit auet
Aſſiſe de Nouel diffei-
fin, enuers F tenant,
recoucra le ſeiſin Del
rent,# fes arrerages
& fes Danumages , &
les cottages 05 br
58 plee, at. Ct (Caps
tiel recouerp a execu⸗
tion etoele rent fopt
autfoits a lup Deníe,
Donque il auera bn
redifleifin, & recoue=
rafes Double dama⸗
es, ec,


Sed. 233.


ning vpon the lands or
tenements to pay the
rent when hee deman- |
deth the arrerages,

this is a deniall in law,
and adiffeifin in deed,
arid of fuch diffeifins «
he may haue an Affife
of Nowel diffeifin againft
the Tenant,and fhal re-
couer the feifin of the
Rent, and his ar-
rerages,& his damma- _
ges, & the cofts of his
writ & of his plea,&c.
And if after fuch reco-
uery & execution had,
the rent beagain deni-
ed vnto him, then hee
fhall haue a rediffeifin,
and fhall recouer his
double dammages &c.


Denpall. Ft appcareth here that the demand muſt be made vpon theland, and albeit tbe Te⸗
nant noz ang fo him be there pet mult tbe Grantee demand ít, becaufe Sotthout a Demand
there can be no denier ín Deede, 02 tn Law,


 Diffeifiz. (z) Difleifina, ig a putting out of a man out of feifin


and cuct implpeth a Wrong. Wut difpollelling 02 etecmcnt (ga putting ont of pofleflion, and
map be by right 02 bp 302018; * Omnis diffeifina eft tranfgreffio,fed non omnis tranfgreflio cft
diffcifina , & fi co animo fortc ingrediatur fandum aliennm, non quod fibi vfurpet tenemtum,
vel iura, non facit diffeifinam, fed tranfgrefsionem, &c.quzerendum eft a iudice quo animo hoc
fecerit, &c. ABndof Ancient time a Diflcifine was defined thug, Difleifin eft vn. perfoncl
trefpaffc de tortious oufter del leifin.


€ Moe de nouel diffeifin. Aſſiſa noux diffeifine. Afifa properlp
commeth of the Latpn Word A(fidio, Which ts to aſſociate op fet together, Daas properip DE
fifc is an afloctation o2 fitting together. And the wꝛit whereby certaine perfons arcauthoztfen
€ called together is called A fifa noue diffeifine ; ſo as Affifa is but Ceflio. But becanfe Ceffio
íg but a generall $9010, therefore in this Ance aſsiſa tg vſed in La foz a particular Ceflten bp
force of the wꝛit De affifa noue diffeifinze, and accozdinglp it Was — fato Affifein vn
cafe neft auter chofe que ceffion des Iuftices, and ft is called A fifa nouz diffcifina, foz that the
FJuttices of Eire befoꝛe whom tbefe AMifes were taken in the proper Counties did ride
thetr Circuits from 7.pearcs to 7.7 carcg,anb no 3D ((Tet(im before the Cire tf tt were not coms
platned of in the Eire could be queftoncd afterthe Cire, and therefoze a Difleiin committed
before the laff Cire Was called an ancient Diſſeilin, anda Diſſeiſin after the laf Eire was
called ane Diſſeiſin oz Noua difleifina. A fifa alfofignifieth a Jury of thetr fittína together,
and alfo a Ceftion of Parliament ag Littleton hereatter in thts chapter heweth.


€ Etrecouera le feifin delrent. Pere, and bp the (&c.) in the end
of this Section ig (mplpeb, that our Bnthoz intendeth bis cafe, where the rent iſſueth ont of
lands ín one County, for if a man befeifed of two acres of lan tn two féuerall Counties,
end maketh a Lcafe of both of them referuing two ſhillings rent tn thts cafe, albcít fene
rall Liucrpes be made at fencrall times, pet (a tt but one entire rent in refpect of the necelitie
of the cafe, and be thall diftrepne in one Conntp for the Whole, anb make one Auswete foz the


Wwhole. Bus he fbail bans fenerall Bailes in confinio comitatus, an’ (n either Countie fait


Lib. : Of Rents. Sel. 233.


make bis plepnt of the whole rent, but there fball be but one 39atent to the Juſtices. (a) And
this Bilife in confiaio comiratus is given bp the ffatnte of 7.R.2.cap.10. fo? no Bile jap. in
thatcaieat the Common Law, but the partp might diftreine, (b) Wut toz a common of pa-
ture, of Œurbaric,of Pilcharte, of Eftouers andthe like in one dLountie, appendant op aps
purtcnant £o land in an other Countie,an Bile in confinio comitatus, didipe at the Common
daw ( c) anb fott is of a Quſans Done tu one Countp.tolands lying in another Countic,the
like Alliſe did ipe at the Common Law,

(d) 3i nb albeit the Counties doe not adtopne, but there be 20, Counties meane betweene

them, pet the Alſiſe in confinio comitatus dothipe, andthe Juſtices hall (it bet weene the fato
Counties. (e) Bnd Where it is fafo befoxe of two Counties, the like law it ts if the fame ex-
tend intomoze Counties.
Cf) Sita man hold diners Mannoꝛs or iands in diners feuerall Counties bp one tenure
and the 3.020 (e dsfozccd of bis feruices, be (ball haue feuerall tozits of Cuſtomes and ſerui⸗
€: 9, foz cuerp Countic one ꝛit returnable at one bap in the Court of Common pleas, and
thereupon count according to bis cafe bp the Common Law,

(2) Wut t£ the Cenant in that cafe boc ceafe, the XLoio Mall not haue feucrali toztts of
Ceffauit ve Cupra, fox the Wait of Ceflauit ts giuen bp Statute * and the forme and manner
of the tozit therein pꝛeſcribed, and thereupon tt is holden tn our bokes that in that cafe a
Cefiauit doth not ipe,

€ (h) 1 anera un rediffeifin & vecouera fes double damages,crc. Bere bp
this ( &c. ) is alfo to be vnderſtod, that a watt of Revitiletfin ts gtuen bp the ſtatute of Mer-
ton * (fo called becaufe the Parltament was boiden at Merton in Anno 29.H,3. ) the Letter
herok is, Item fi quis fueric diffeifitus de libero tenemto & coram fufticiarijs itinerantibus fei-
finam fiiam recuperauent per aflifam noue diffeifina: vel per recognition’ corum qui fecerint dit
feifinam, & ipfe diffcifitus, per vicecomitem feifinam fuam habuerit, fi ijdem diffeifitores pottea
poft iter Iufticiariorum vcl infra de codem tenemento iterum eundem conquerentem diffcifiue-
rint, & inde conuicti fucrint, ftatim capiantur,&c. Wut the double Damages are giuen by tye
flatute of W.2-cap,26.

Bnd Littleton in fem Words hath made a god expoſition of this ſtatute Foz here the flac
tute faith Diffeifitas de libero esto. Littleton expounds tt, to ectend toa Rent fccke o2 Rene
charge, albeit, as hath beenc fatd,thep be againſt common right , peta man hath a freehold in
them,(k ) Bnd be that granteth Omnia tenemta ‘ue, a Rent charge 02 a Licnt fece doth patte,

Coram Iufticiarijs itinerantibus, &c. faith the ffatute, Wut Littleton fpcañcth generally ana
fots the ſtatute to be intended before any other Juſtices chat hauc authozity to take Dihiics,
aud Juttices Itinerant are fet downe but fo? an example which is worthy ot the obicruation
CL) being a penall Law.

Recupcrauerit per afsifam, &c.faith the ftatute,here afsifa is taken Foz the berdict of the Aſſiſe
ag Littleton hereafter in this chapter ecpoundeth tic fame Vel per recognitionem,;&c. 87 bp
confeftion. Chen the queftion is what ££ the receuerp were bpon a Demurrer 92 bp pleading
of a Kecozd and fatier of ít, o2 br anp other manner. And teeing Liulston ſpeaketh genc=
rallp (t muft be vnderſtod of all manner of recoucries ta an Alliſe of novel diffeitin ; And fo
it ig confirmed bp tly: fratute of W.2.ca.26.

€ Recouerie. Recuperatio commeth of the Verbe Recuperare,
i.ad rem per iniuriam extortam fiue detentam perfententiam Iudicis reftitui. And Recuperatio
inthe Common XLa$, is all one With Euicto (n the Ciuill Law, Which ts, Alicuiusrei in cau-
fam alterius abdu&z per iudicem acquifitio 1
Et execution ewe, Per vicecomitem feifinam habuerit, faith the
Statute,but Littleton fpeaketh generallp, (Et execution ewe) Bnd execution had,fo ag whither
ithe by the Sbherife o: bp the partie, fo as execution o2 poſſeſſion be bab, it ſufficet h.


¶ Execution, Executio, And fignifieth in Lato, Che obtaining
of acuall poffellion of any thing acquired by tu sgement of dao, oꝛ bp a fine exccutoꝛie leuted,
Em tebebp the Sherife, oz by the entrie of the partic, whereot pou (ball read moze
cafter.
ote, it appeareth hereby Littleton, That (m) therecouerte in a fozmer tiozít mult bes tn
Bilife o£ Nouel Difleifin, wherein theſe 020g (Tiel recouerie ) are to be obferued, And there=
fore i£ (n a toait of Right clofe inantient Demefne, the Denandant maketh his psoteltatton,to
‘Thein the nature of Alife of Nouel Diffeifin, and after ts rediffetfed, be fball not have a wꝛit of
Kediſſeiũn, becaule the fir(f recoucric wag not bp Wait of Aiifeof Nouel Diffeifin, (n) And
Toít is (£ the recouerie Were in BAile of Freſh force bp Will, according to the cuſtome of fome
Citie oꝛ Burrongh, alfo in antient Demefne there be no Cozoners,
Si ijdem diffeifitores, faith the Statute, (o) Hoag
qa


be tbe fame Xof(Te(foog : but here
Ijdem


154.


(a) 10. 4ffpl.4.
18.4 f p.1.& 18.E.2, 33,
22.H.6.9.10.

(b) F.'N, 8.180.4.


(4) E.N.E.18 3.4.


(4) 5.E.4.3.


(ERB, 180.4,


(£) 30 €. 1. tis. Dieit,
F.NCB.151.m,


(g) 18.4 pl.x.
* W.2.cap.21.


(h) BraBon. f». 318,
Brition, 133.246.

Fleta lib.q. cap. 29.
Aerton cap. ã. S. 1 5.

Reiſt. 206,207.

* Mirror cap. 3.2.0. 46. /
Vide $. Poe 5


Vid Regift. 206.5.


(1) 49.4.13 ac,


(k) 14.E.4.4, 11. H.6.33,


(1) Fé N.2. 15.5,


Vide fe&, 50.4.


(m) 14.E. 2.118. Red ff. 9.
F.N.B.1§9.2.


(n) 14.E.3,th Red 8,
Vide the 2. part of the Infli<
tutes Stat. de JMertenya. 2,
(0) 9. H.4. 5.

F.N.B. 189.60

23s Agl.7>


Lib.2.


(p) 33-E-3-redfeifin.y.


(q) 9» H-4.5.F. N.B 188.8,


(r) F.N.B.188- E.


*


egiftr. 9. H.4,5.


F. X. 2. 188.6.


( ( )26.H. 6.1, Aide ony,


8.
F


F, 3-tit. Rediffafin 6,
‘NB. 189.F.


Capiz.


Of Rents. - Seël.234.


Tjdem tg taken foz non alij : And therefore if the recouerte in the Wile were againit t$vo Dit
ſeiſors, anb one of them rebílTetfc him againe, he Hall aue a Rediſſeiſin againt bim , for heets
not alius. Wut if the recouerie had bene againft one,and he and another rẽdiſſeiſe the iaintife,
be fhail not bauc a 18 edifleifin, for hers is alius,and he cannot haue a RediMeifin againtt the foz>
mer Diffeifoz alone, becaufe he ts Joyntenant With another. (p) Foꝛ Fopntenancte ina torte
of iRebi([ciün 18 a geod pica, anda ftranger fall not befübtea to double tmpaifonment and done —
Dammages,

NS Fe — be ao againſt a woman in an Alſiſe of Nouel Diſſeiſin, and the Plaintike
recouereth and hath execution, tbo $ooman taketh huſband, and both of them redideife the
P aintike, he fbati not havea TR cotflciin, becaulethe huſband is alius, (+r) And perté a eme
recouct in an Affife, and after take Maron, and thep are rediſſeiſed, the hufband and Wife (ball
haue a Rediſſeilin, becauſe the hufband topneth £o» confogmitic,and itis in therightofhis Wife
Who was difleifeo befoze, fo in effec (t is idem diffeifitus & idem conquerens.

FE two Coparceners be difleifed, andrecouer in an Aſſiſe, tfatter thep make partition, and
after thep be ſeuerally diſſetſed, thep (ball have feuerall 18 cdiffetfins; andfo it is of topntenants
fo thep be |jdem conquerentes& non alij. Allo a Rediſſeiſin dott lie agatnft the ot(telfoz Mhichy
doth revifletfe, and again another to whom he made feoffiment after the fecond déffcifin, £02 o⸗
ther wile the rediſleiloꝛ might prevent the Plantike of his redifeiin. Wut in an Alife againtt
A-andB A.íg found 3Dí(Teifoz, and B. Cenant, and the Piaintife doth vcconcr, and after he
Which Was found Tenant diffeifes tbe Plaintife, he Hail not havea revifietGn,becaule hee viv


diſſeiſe bim but once,


Deeodem tenemento, faith the Statute, FE the 9 ainttfe be rediſſeiſed of parcel of the Tene⸗
tent formerly recouered, he (ballbaue a rediſſeiſin

FE the Mefne recoucreth a Kent ben (t (s a Rent Seruice, anb after the rent becommeth
a Bent Hecke by furplufage, and vorh reviflerfe him ofthe Bent, be all banc a rediffeifin, fog
thefubftance of tbe Rentremapnes though the qualitie be altered.

CC) FE tenant in {pectall tatle recouereth tu Adife, and after becommeth Cenant in tafleaf=
ter poſſidilitie ot iſſue ext inct, andthen ts redifleifed hee Mail haue a rediſſetſin. rop albeit the


ftate of Inheritance be altered, pet thefame freehold rematneth.


£a man recover Land tu an Aile of noucldiflefin, Sobereunto thereisacommon appen⸗


bant 0; appurtenant, and after ts rediffeifed of the common, hee fall bane a reotüeífin of the |
common, foz tt as taciteip recoucred in tbe Aflife.


CAE 2rivocum. For

the better vnd erſtan⸗
Ding hereof, «D Etbefe there be
two kinds, viz. Æquiuocum,
JEquiuocans ; and Æquiuo-
cum Æquiuocatum.

Æquiuocam ZEquiuocans
eft phariuocum; Polyfemus, a
50010 of diners feuerall igntz
ficattong, !

Ædquiuocum æquiuocatum
eft vniuocum, that is to fap,
reduced to a certaine fignifiz
cation ag here in Littlerons
txample, Affifa cit nomen a.
quiuocum zquiuocans , foz
fometime (t fignifieth a Furie,
fometime the nostt of Wife,
and fomctime an sDadinance
0: Statute.

0% Alife, lurata {8 Æ-
quinocum Eqniuocatum; and
fo ig breue de AG fa nouæ dif
{eifina, and A fifa panis, &c.
cuen ag Canis eft nomen x-


Seétion 234.


€ FT memoran⸗
dum que ceſt

noſme Affife, eft no-
men a quinocum cat
alcun foits c(t patto
pur bn Jurie, carle
commencement dele
Kecord Dc Alſiſe de
nouel Diffeifin (fint
commencera : Affifa
venitrecognitura, &c.
quod idem eft quod
Jurata venitrecognitu-
ra, &c.&t la caufe etf,
put ceo que per Île
briefe De Alſiſe, il ett
command a la Ute
cont , Quod faceret
duodecim


Nd memorandum,

that this name
Aflife is momen Equi-
nocum, for fometimes
it is taken for a Iurie,
for the beginning of
the Record of an Af
fife of Nenel diffeifin
beginneth thus. A/sifa
venit recognitura, OC.
which is the fame, as
Iurata venit recognitu-
ra. And the reafonis
for that by the Writ
of Affife it is comman-
ded to the Sherife,
Quod faceret. duodecim
liberos c. legales bomi-


Lib.2.


duodecim liberos &
legales homines de vi-
cineto, &c. videre te-
nementum illud,& no-
mina illorum imbreui-
are, & quod fummo-
neat cos per bonos
: fummonitores, quod
fint coram lufticiarijs,
&c. parati inde facerc
recognitionem , &c.
Ct pur ceo queper tís
el oziginal, bn panel
per force De mefine Ie
briefe Deuoit eftre re⸗
turne, ac. tl eft Dit en
Ecommencement del
Record en le Alife,
Affifa venit recognitu-
ra,&c. Bury en betefe
De Droit tl eft com-
munement Dit, que le
tenant lup poit mit-
ter en Dieu & grand
Aile, ac, Aury ü p
ad bn betefe en Ie Re-
gifter, que c(bappel
briefe de Magna A ffi-
facligenda. Iſſint eft
ceo bien prone que
cett noſme Aile, ali-
quando ponitur pro
lurat’. €t afcun foits
Ulett prife pur tout Ic
breife baffífe,a folon-
que cel entent il eft
pluis properment, &
pluis communement
prife, ficome Aflife de
Nouel difleifin eft
prife put tout? bꝛeue
de Aſſiſe de Nouel dif-
feifin. Ct en metme
le maner Alife de


"Of Rents.


nes de vicinete, dre. vi-
dere tenementum illud,
€ nomina illerum im-
breniare, & quod fum-
moneat €05 per bonos
fummonisores, quod fint
coram Iufficiarÿs, &c.
parati inde facere recog.
ustionem, orc. And be-
caufe that by fachan
original], a pannell by
force ofthe fameWrit
oughtto be returned,
&c. it is faid in the be-
gianing of the Record
in the Affife. Ajfi/fa
venit recognitura | &c.
Alfo ina writ of Right
it is commonly faid
that the Tenant ma
put himfelfe on God
and the great Affife.
Alfo there is à Writ
inthe Regifter which
is called a Writ, De
magna Afsifa cligenda :
So as this is well
proued that this name
Affife,fometimes is ta-
ken for a Iury , and
fomtimes it is také for
the wholeWrit of Af-
fife, and according to
this purpofe it ismoft
properly and moft cé-
monlytaken, as an Af-
fife of Nouel diffeifin is
taken for the whole
Writ of Affife of No-
uel diffeifin. And inthe
fame manner an Affife
of Common of Pa-
fture is taken for the
whole Writ of Affife
235


Sec. 234.


quiuocum , Canis latrabilis,
Canis marinus, Canis Cale-
fhs funt zquiuoca zquiuo-
cata.


€ Aife de nouel
diffecfin. Protea)there


bee fonte Affifes. Viz. tbig
Wait, an Ailife of Mordan-
cefter, of Darreine præfent-
ment, aid of Vtrum.


€ Vicount. Vide
Sect. 248. verbo (54i-
rene.)


€ Quod faciat 12.
liberos & legales bomi-
wes de Viceneto, (rc.

(b) Aibett the wordes of
the tt02ít be duodecim, pet bp
ancient courte the fhertfe mutt
teturne 24. and this is foz ex⸗
pedition of Juice, for (€ 12,
Mould onip be returned, no
man ſhould bauca full Jurte
appeare, oꝛ be ſworn in refpect


Y of challeges,withouta Tales,


Swhich ſhould bee a great delap
of trpals, So as tn this cale
bfage & ancient courfe mak ctl)
aw, And tt femeth to mee,
that the Lao in this cafe de⸗
lighteth her felfc in the num⸗
btt of 12, for there mutt not
onip be 12, lurors fo; the tris
all of matterg of fact, (c) but
12, ludges of ancient time foz
ttíall of mattersin Law, in
the Exchequer Chamber. fo
fo; matters ef State there
Were in ancient time twelve
Counfellors of State. Bethat
Swageth bis Law mult auc
cleuen others with him which
thinke hefapes true. And that
number of 12. is much refpcz
cted in holy Writ, ag 12. Apo-
ftles, 12. Stones, 12- Tribes,


ac.

(4) «Bee tbat te of a Jurie
muſt be liber homo, that ig not
enip a freeman, and got bound
but alfo one that bath fuch
free? ome of mind as be ftande
indifferent as hee ftsnd tns
ſworne. Sccondip, bee mnt
beelegalis. And by the Law
euctp Juroꝛ that is returned
fox the trtall of anp iſſue og
cauſe ought to aue three pꝛo⸗
pertíeg,


C Five,


1 &


174.


(a) Bra&en.lib. 4. fel. 160.
Britron.cap.42 fol. 105.1 34
F.N. B. Fletalila4 ca. 5. dre.
<Marrer,cap.2.6.1 5.


(b) 1.4.7.3:


(€) Videpl.com.ixproamio,


Tofbns 4. Genafcag.


(4) 9. E. 4.16,


Lib.2


(9 ) Antic. fupor (Cart.44p.9.
Regyt.178. 8.E. 5.50.


Vide Sell. 102.191.


9.H.6. 37.


(e) Vide Artie. faper Cart.
44.9. Fartefome (4.2 5. 676. 22^


CE) Glewil ib ap. xA x 5.
Bratton. lis,3, fol. v1 6.«.


(e) Larnb verbs ( amunia.


(h) Lamb fel.91.3.


(2) W.2.cap.32, Vide Seat.
de 13. E. 2.de effon.calwmmian-
du, Fletalb. x .cap.32.
Britton.f2l.6. 4. x 3.2. 118.7
134. 12. 4f. 10.

(b) Brad. hib. 3. fel. 37


(c) Bralon. lib. 4 fol 2. $7.
Va.N.8. fsl.76.


Capi.


(*) Fir, bee ought to bes
Divelling moff ner to the place
Sobtrc the queftion is moued.

Sccondip, 1e otigbt tob æ
inoft fuffictent both for bnder=
flanding , anb competencie of
etate,

&btrolp , hee ongbt to bee
leaſt ſuſpitious, that tg to bee
indifferent as bee ftands vn⸗
ſworne, and then hee ts ac-
counted in La Liber & le-
galis homo, otherspife he map
be challenged and not fufferen
tobe fworne, The molt vfuall
tríall of matters of fac tg bp
12, fuch men, Foz ad queftio-
nem facti kon refpondentlu-
dices. Bnd matters tn Law
the Judges ought to dectde
and diſcuſſe, fox Ad queftio-
nem iuris non refpondent Iu-
ratores.

(c) Sfoz the infitutton and
right bfe of this triall bp 12.
men, and wherefore other
Countries hae then not,and
this tríall ercels others, Sce
Fortefcue at latce,cap.2 5. & c.
29.(f ) Bnd ín anctent time
thep were 12. Knights. Chis
tríall of the fact per duodecim
liberos & legales homines íg
berp ancient, for heare bat
the Law ag before the
Conqueſt. ( 2 ) In fingulis
Centurijs comitia funto, at-
que libere conditionis viri
duodeni ætate fuperiores vnà
cum przpofito facra tenentes
iuranto, &c. fap, thetrpail
ín fomc cafes, Per mdietatem
linguæ (ag Wwe fpcake ) Wag
ag ancient (h) Viii duodeni


Of Rents.


common de pafture
eft pris pur tout le
baiefe daſſiſe De com-
mon De pafture;a AE
fie De moꝛtdauceſter
eft prife per tout le
bte paffifc De PMort-
dancefter a Alife De
Darraine preſentmẽt
eft prife per tout le
breue Daffife De Dat-
raine p2efentment,
Mes il femble quele
caufe pur Gtiel bzic-
fes al commencemét
fneront appels Aſſi⸗
{es fuit put ceo que p
chefcun tiel baiefe d
eft commande al dif:
cont, Qua’ fummoneat
xij. 1e quel eft atant
adit , que Doit fum-
moter bn Jurie. Ct
afcun foits Aile eft
prife pur bn o2Ddi-
nance, 3, puc mitter
cettaine chofes en
certaine rule 4 Difpo-
fition, ficome ordi⸗
nance q eft appel Af-


fifa panis & Ceruitiz.


Sedi. 234.


of Common of Pa-
fture. And Affiie of
Mortdaunceffer is taken
for the whole Writ,
of Affife of Mort-
dauncefler and Atfife
of Darreine prafént-


ment, is taken for the —


whole Writ of Dar-
reine prafentment. But
itfeemes that the rea-
fon why fuch Writsat
the beginning were
called Affifes, was for
that by euery füch
Writ it is commanded
to the Sherife, Quod
Jummoneat 12. which
is as much to fay, that
hee ought to fommon
a Iurie. And fometime
Affife is taken for an
Ordinance, to wit, to
put certaine things in-
to a certaine rule and
difpofition , as an Or-
dinange which is cal-
led Afsifa panis c Cer-


uitia.


iure confulti, A ngliz fex, Wallize totidem, Anglis & Wallisiusdicunto , and of anctent time tt
ag called, duodecim virale iudiciu.n.

Now fering we arc iuſtly occafioned, anb the rather forthe (*c-) herein, tofpeake of a chal⸗
lenge to Jurors , to make the ftudious Keader capable of the vnderſtanding of the Bokes
of 105» concerning this matter, it (ball be necc(Taríc to fap ſomewhat of challenges ; and firlt
Sohata Challenge ts,

Challenge tg a $0020 common aſwell to the Englifh ag tothe french, and fometime figni=
ficth to clapme, and the Latine $0020 ig vendicare,fometime in refpect of reuenge to challenge in⸗
to the fici, and then it is calles in Latine vindicare 03 prouocare. Sometime in refpect of pars
tialitie, o2 infuffictencte, to challenge in Court perfons returned on a Juric. And fleeing there is
no proper Latine $0620 to fignifie this particular kind of challenge, thep have framed a Word
ancíentlp waꝛitten (a) Chalumniare, and Columpniare, and ——— , anb now Sozitten
Calumniare and hath no alftnit te with the Uerbe Calumnior 02 Calumnia Which is Dertued of
that, £o: that ts of a quite other fencefignifping a falfeaccufer, @in that fence (b) Bra&on bfetl
Calumniator tobea falfe accufer: but t: is derived of the old $020 Caloir 92 Chaloir, which in
one fignification (s to care £02, o2 fozefec. And for that to challenge Juroꝛs ts the meane to care
fox 02 fozefer, that ^n indifferent trpail be had, tt tg called Calumniare, to challenge, thatis to
except againtt them that are returned to be Jurops,€ this (s bis proper fignification (c) r Wat

ome⸗


-


Lib. ꝛ. Of Rents. Se8.234.


(c) ſometimes a Sammons, Somonitio ig fatd (d)tobe Calumniata;attb a Count to be chal⸗
lenged, but this is improperly. And forafmuch as mens lues, Fames, lands, and goods atc
tobe trped by Jurors, it ts moft ucce(Tarp that thep be Omni exceptione maiorcs,and therefore
FP Will handle this matter the moze largely. {

B Chalienge to Jurors (g two fold, either to the Drrap, oz tothe Polls : to tbe Array of
the pzincipall 33annell,ano te the Arrap of the Tales Bnd herein pou Mall vnderſtand, that the
Burozs names are ranked in the Pannell one bnder another, which order oz ranking the Ju⸗
tic is called the Array, and the Serbe, toartay the Furie, and fo $ocfap in common ipech, bat-
tailearray, fox the ogder of the battatle. And this Brrap we call Arraiamentum, and to mabe
the Array, Arraiare,dertued of the French $0079 Arroier, foas to challenge the Array of tbt
Pannell, ig at once to challenge 02 except agaínft alt the perfong foarraped o? ftupanelied tn rez
ipect of tive partialitic o? default of the Syerife, Cozoner , oz other <DÆicer that made the
teturne.

And itis to be knowne, that there is a principallcaufe of challenge to the Array, and a
chalienge tothe fanour : principail, in reſpect of partialitie, ag firft (£ the Sherife oz ether Ot⸗
ficer beof (a) kindzed oz affinitic to the Plaintiéc oz Defendant, (£ the affinitte continue. (b)
Hecondiy, FE anp onc o2 moze of the Furie bes returned at the denomination of the partic,
Polatnttfe oz Defendant, the Whole Arrap ſhall be quathed. So it is ifthe Sbherife retarne
anp one, that bc be mozefanourable tothe one than to the other, all thearrap ſhall be quathed,
(c) Œbiroip, i£ the Plaintife oz Defendant baue an Action of Watterie again the Sberife,
oz the Sherifeagaint cither partte, thts is a god cauſe ot challenge, So tf the Wlainttfe o2
Defendant haue an Acton of Debt againk the Hherife, (but otherwite it ts (£ the Sherike
haue an Acton of Debt again either partie) opt the Sberife baue parceil of the land dcpeu=
ding opon the fame title, (d ) oz tithe Sbherifeor his Waplife which returnedthe Jurte, be vn⸗
der the diltreMle of etther parte, ot tf the Shertfe oz his Baplike be either of Louncell, Attur⸗
nty, D ffíccrin Fes 02 of Robes; 02 feruant of etther partie, Goffip, o2 Arbitratoz tn rhe fame
twatter, andtreaten thereof, (c) Bnd where a Subice map challengethe array £02 onindiffe-
tence, there the thing betng a partie, map alfochalienge fez tbe famecaufe, as fc) Kindzcd , oz
that be hath part of the land, 2 the like: and where the arrap (ball be challenged againft the
king, pou Hallwad tn our Bokes.

(f) Wy default of the S herite,as when thearrap of a Pannell ts returned bp a WBailtfe
of a Franchife, andthe Sherifereturne itag of himfclfe, this hall bee qualbed, becaufethe
partie Houldiofe bis challenges. Wut (£a Sbherife rcturne a Jurie Within a Libertie, this (g
go», and the Loꝛd of the Franchiſe is dziuen to bis remedte agatnft htm.

PFE a Piere ot the Kealme o2 Lord of Parliament be Demandant 02 Wiaintife, Tenant 02
Defendant, there mutta ik night be returned of his Furie, be he Loꝛd Opirituall o? Tempo⸗
tall, o2 clfe the Array map be quahhed : buttf be be returned, although beeappeare not, pet the
Furte may bc taken of the reſidue. Bnd f£ others betopned With the d,02b of 39 aritament,pet
t£ there be no Knight returned, the Array ſhall be quafhedagainttall, (b) Soin an Attaine
there ought tobca Rnight returned of the Furie.

(i) Bnd when the Wing is partie, as intrauers of an xD fiice, b: that tranerfeth map chale
lenge the Arrap,as bercattcr in this Section fball appeare: Andie tt is in cafe of itfe,and like⸗
Soile the Ring may challenge the Arrap, and this Mall betried by Tziers accezding to the vfual
courte. (k) Che Array chatienged on both Foes hail be quaſhed.

(1) Bnd ff wo eftrangers makea Pannell, and not in favourable manner fo? the one partic
or the other, and the Sherifereturnes thefame, the Drrap was challenged fog thts caufe, and
adjudged god.

(m) if the Waplife of a Libertie returne any out of his Jrranchtfe;tbe Arrap thail bee quas
hed, as an array returned by one that hath no Franchiſe (hall be quathed,

' Challenge to tbe Array for faueur : (n) Dc that taketh this, mult (beso tn certaine the name
of bít that made tt, and (n Whole time,and all in certa (tte : this kind of challenge beeing no
Principal challenge, mutt be icft to the diſcretion amo confctence of the Triers, ag te the Diatn-
tifeo: Defendant be G enant to the Hberife, this is nopatnetpall challenge, for the Lod tg in
no Danger of his Œenant,but e conuerfo (t ts apztnctpall challenge, but tn the other hee map
challenge fo: fauour, and leaue ít to tríall, Soaftinitiebetwene the fonne of the Sherife and
the Daughter of the partie, oꝛ e conuer(o, 02 the like, is no patuctpall challenge, but to the fauoz :
but t€ the Sherike marrte the daughter of either partic,oz c conuerſo this (ag hath been fapb )
ig a principal challenge, o2 the like. (0) «but Where the ting (s partic, one ſhall not challenge

Array fo? Favour, tc, becaule in refpect of big allegeance he ought to favour the King meze:
Wutif the £yberífc bea Vadelect of the Crowne, oz other mental {eruant of the ing, there
the challenge is qed, and likewiſe the Ring may challenge che Arrap for fauour.

Note, bpon that Which hath beene layd itappearcth, Chat the challenge to the Array (a in
tcfpet of the cauſe of bninotfferencie oz Default in tbe Sbertfc on other Dicer that made the

returne,


(a) 12.4f 36.26.

AGi31. 3.E. 4.52.
31.Af.7. ay. Aff 2.

22. E, 4.2. 12, E. 3. Chall 114,
21,E.3.5.b, 3. H.7.5, 7L,
(C m.73- 5. H.7,9.

7.6.6. Dier78.12.H.6.
Chal. 159.

(b) 21.E.4,74.49.E, 3.1.
15.E.3.43.23.E. 3.13.
9.£.4.46. 9.H.5.5.
23.4[f:22. 41. E. 3. C)all.99.
(€) 11.H.4.26. 32.E.4.1.
38.E.3.35. 38.H.6.6.

(4) 44.E.3.5.€7 38.
44.4]: 23. 22.£. 4.1.

3 H.6.39. 15. H.7.9.b.
37.4f.18.7. H.7. 16;
26.^ff 56.32. 20. H.6. 34>
33-4 [1a 45-7 ff.1.

. 8.8. ff.1 4. 7. E. 3. 36
21. M.7. 32. 2. H. 4. 13.
44. E. 3. 3. 20. H. 6.39-
44-AG- 18. . H.6.24.

17.E. 2. Chall 168.4. E.4, 1x.
(€) 4.4.7. 44.E.3.38
38-4/f 19. 33. E.4.( hall. 63.
Stanf. 162.c.

(£) 39.4]: 2. 17.E. 3.506
17.7 ff.11. 30 Aff. 5.

8.49: 3.


3
(8) 13-£.3-Chall 115. Br,
€nqueit. 100. Lib. 6.fo. 54.
Connteffe de "Rutlasds Cafe
Pio. (em.117.27.H.8.22.
4-Elig "Dier208.8. Eli( Di.
246.14. Eli C . Dier 318. 10.
Eliz "Dier 265.6.
Ch )17.€.2 Attatnt 69.
(i )33.E.4.tit.( hall. 63.
Stamf. Pl. (or, — 19..^ff.
6.6. 4.4.9.8. 44.E 3.58
(k )8.H. 4.22.
(1)6.Ri2:C4al.102
13.£3-sbid.108. ~. '
(m )32.E.3. (hal 110.111.
32.4916. 38.4136
(n ) 34-H.6. hall. 69.
$.H.4.23. 17..4[.20.
22,B.3.12. Vid. 26, Aff.ate
38,H.6.9. 7.H.6.25. 19.
H.6.48. 20.H.6.38. ae,
E.4.2. 22.£.4.Chal.63.
(o) 22. E. 4 (bab 6 3:
4. H.7.8.


Lib.2.


(p) 1.H. 5.Chal.163.

9.1.5.7. 315.E.4.33.

14.H.7.7.19. Dob. & Stud.

lib. 2. Fortefeuecap.27.

3.H.7.3. 2. R.3. 13.

33. H.6. 16. 17..4.6.

37. H.6.8. 22. H. 8. c4. 14.

3 3-H.8.tit.Chal. Br.217.

33. H.8.«4.23. 1 & 2. P. &
64.10. 32,H.6.16.

14.H. 5.14. Stanf.Pl. (or.

137,138.

* Hil. 1. Ta.


9B 4270


(q) 33.2.1.Ordinatie de In-
quiftionbus. Stanf. Pl, Cor.
162


Lib.6. fo. 62,9 3.Ceunte[fa da
csv RR 48.E.3. 39.
48. 4[- 6.35. H.€. 46.
2254.34. FN. B.165.d.a
dr 166. R epi. 175.


(a) Li.7.f.18. Caluins cafe,
Li. 10.fe. 104. 14. H 4.19.6.
(b)'BraB.fo. 18 5.Brit.f.135
Flet.B.4.«4,8. 26.A/-28.
3.H.6.39. 9.€.4. 16.5.
31.H.6,20. 10. H.7.25.
(©) Vid. Set. 464.38.4f 19.
17-4G-15. 4.M.6.38.
g.H.5.$. 10. H.6.7. 8.18.
3.H.7. 1.10. H.7.14. 19. H.
6.9. 7. H.6.35.40.44.
Y3.E.4.13.. 3. H.4.4.
C*)9. H.6. Chal. 27. 9. H.7.1


Capn. | Of Rents. Scdl.2343


returne, and not (n relpec of the perfons returned, There there is no brindifierencie op Default
in the Spbertfc, ec. £02 if the challenge tothe Array be found againlt the partic that takes it;


pet he (ball hauc his particular chatienge to the Polls.
In Come cafes a challenge map be had to the oils, and infome cafes not at all, Challenge


to the {Soils is a challengeto the particular perfong,and thefe be of foure kinds,that (9 tofap, à


Deremptorte, Pzincipall Sobicb induce Jrauour,anb for defanitof Hundrꝛedors.
(p) Peremptoste, this is fo called, becaufehe map challenge peremptozilp pon bis oxone
Diflike, without being of any caufe, and this oncly (8 tn cafe of Æreafon o? Felonte, in fauo-


rem vitz, and by the Common Lawthe priſoner bpon an Cndicment 07 Appeale might chal⸗


lenge thirtie fiue, which Swag vnder the number of thie Juries , but now bp the Statute of
22.H.8. the number íg tebused to twentie tn petite Creafon, Warder and Felonit, and in cafe
of high & reafon , and mifprifion of high Œrcafon (t was taken away by the Statute of 33.
Hs, but now bp the Statute of 1. & 2. Phil.& Mariz, the Common Law (g reutned, for any
Œreafon, the Datfoner thail hauchis Challenge to the number of tbirtp fiuc, and fo ít bath
benc rcíoluco * bp the Jullices bpon conference betsoemc them in the cafe of Str Wal-
ter Raleigh and Gcorge Brookes. But all this is to bee bnderfteod when any fubiect , that
ig not a Pare of the Kealme ts arraigned for Œreafon 07 fFelontc; Wut tf hee be a
Lozd of Parliament and a Peere of the Wealme , and ts to bee tried bp his Peres,


be (ball not challenge any of his Peeres at all, fox thep arenot ſworne ag other Juroꝛs be, |


but fib tbe partite quiltie 02 not guiltie bpon their fatth oz alleatance to the wing, andthep are
Judges of the Fac, and every ofthem doth feperateip giuc his tudgement beginning at the
fowelt. But a fubiect onder the degree of Nobilit ie may in cafe of & rcafor o2 Jrelonte chai-
lanae for (uft catfeag many ag he can, ag ſhall be fato hereafter, In an Appcale of death as

gaintt divers they pleade not gutitte, and one ioynt Venire facias tg awarded , f£ one challenge

peremptoztiy, be ball bee Dane agatntt all, Otherwife ttis of ſeuerall Venirc fac.

Mote, that at the Common Raw before the Statute of 33-E.1.the Ling might bane chal-
lenged peremptozüp without thewing caufe,but onlp that thep Sere not geod foz the King, and
Without being limited to any number, but this Mas mifchicuous to the ſubtect, tending to
fnünítc deiapes anb Danger. Bnd therefore it is enacted, (a) Quod de cetero licet pro Domino
Rege dicatur quod iuratores, &c. non funt boni pro Rege: non propter hocrqmaneant inquifi-
— &c. fed affignent certam caufam calumniz fuz , &c. whereby the ing ts now re⸗

taíneb.

§92inctpail,fo called becaufe (Fit be found true,it ftandeth fuffictent of ít ſelle without leauing
any thing to the confctence oz difcretion of tbe Criors. Da principail caufc of challenge to the
atrap, We have faid ſomewhat alreadie,no% tt Collokoctb With like breuitte to fpcalic of pan=
cipall Challenges to the Polles, (that is) feuerallp to the perfons returned,

Pꝛincipall challenges to the Poll may be reduced to foure heads: Firſt, Propter Honoris re«
{pectum, Foꝛ refpest of Honour ; Secondip,Propter Defectum, Foz Want oz default ; Third⸗
tp,Propte: Affectum, ffoz Wfectton oz parttalitte ; Fourthiy, Proprer Delidum, Foz Crime
02 Delia,

Firlk , Propter Honoris refpectum, As any Wiere of the Bealme, 02 Lord of Parliament,ae
a übaron, Uifcount, Earle, Marquefle, and Duke, fo? tbefe in refpect of onour and Nobili⸗
tis, are not be ſworne on 3iuríeg ; and i€ neither partic Soil challenge him, he map challenge him⸗
felfs, fox bp Magna Charta (t (g pzoutded, Quod nec (uper cum ibimus, nec fuper cum mittemus
nifi per legale iudicium parium fuorum,aut per legem terra. $2.01» the Common Haw hath di⸗
ulded all the fubiecs into Lords of Parliament, and (ntotbe Commons of the Realme. Che
Piseres of the Realme are diuided iato Warons, Viſcounts, Earles, Marqueſſes € Dukes :
The Commons are diutdedinte Knights, Efquires, Gentlemen, Citifens, Yeomen, and
Burgeſſles, and in tudgement of Law, any of the fapd degrees of Nobilitie are Pieres to ano⸗
ther, As i£ an Earle, Marquefle,oz Duke beto be tried kor treaſon o2 feloníca Maron oz any
other degree of Nobilitie is big Wier. Fn like manner, a Knight. Œfquire, sc. (fall bee tried
per Pares, and that is bp an of tbe Commons, ag Gentlemen, Œitifens, y comen, o2 Wargel=
fes, fo ag When any of tbe Commons is to haue a trial either atthe kings fuit, oz between pata
tie and partie, a Piere of the Kealme (ball wot be (mpanelleb (n. any cafe,

Secondip, Propter Defectum,

1 Patriz, (a)as Meng borne.

2 Libertatis, (b) ag Gilletnes 03 ABondimen, and foa Champion matt be a Freeman.

3 Annui cenfus, i.liberitenementi. (c) Sfirft, what pearelp Free hold a "duro: ought to hane
that patleth bpon triall of the life of a man oꝛ in a plea reall,oz ina plea perfonall, where the debs
02 dammage in the Declaration amoantcth to fostic Markeg,Vid.Set.464. (*) Hecondip, thie
Freehold muft be in his oone right,in Fe Ample, feetatic, fo? terme of bis oSone life, 02 fos
another mang life, although ít be vpon condition, 02 in the right ef his wite out of antient Des


meine, £02 freehold within anticnt demelne Will not ferae, but tf the Debs où dammage —
t


Y Lib.2. Of Rents. Seël.z34.


teth not to festíe Markes, any Frechold fafficeth. (d) Chirdip, he mull have freehold tn that
Countie where the caufe of tbe Hcionarifeth, andthoughhe hath in another, tt fafficett) not.
(c) Fourthly, it after his returne be felieth away bis land, 02 it Ceſty quevic, 02 bis ‘wife
Dieth, oz an entris be made for the condition broken, fo ag bis freehold be determined, be may be
challenged foz infuttictencte of freehold,

4 Hundredorum : Firſt, by the Common Law tx a plea reall mixt, and perfonall,there ought
tobe foure of the Hundzed (Shere the caufe of Nation arifeth) returned £oz thetr better notice
of the caufe, fox Vicini vicinorum fa&a prefumuntur fcire. Wat noMefince Littleton wꝛote, (f )
in a plea perfonail (£ two hundzedozs appeare; (t fufficeth, and (nan DAttaint, (g) althongh the
Jurie is double, pct the Hundzedoꝛs are not double, Secondip, (b) Be be hath etther frees
hold in the Hundꝛed, though it beto the balue but of balfe an acre, 02 {fhe Diwell there, though
bebat no freehold init, ttfufficeth,(i) Chirdip, (f tbe caufe of the Acion rifeth in diuers Duns
biebg, pet the number ſhall fuffice, ag (£ (t had come out of one, and not feucrall hundzedoꝛs ont
ofeachhundszev. (k) Fourthly, (there be Diners Wundzeds Within one Let o2 Rape, {€ hee
hath any Freehold, o? dwell in any of thofe undzeds, though not in the proper Wundzed , (t
ſuſticeth. (1) jrittip (E the Furie come de corpore Comitatus, 92 de proximo hundredo , Swhere
the onc partie is Loꝛd of the Hundzed, oz tbe like, there na no Hundꝛedoꝛs bee returned at all,
(m) Sitti, f£ a Bundzed02 after be be returned, fell awap his land within that Hundred, pet
thail he not be challenged foz the Hundred, fos that thts notice remainesothet wife ag hath been
fap for his infuffictencte of freehold , for his (care tooffend, anb to auc lands Walked, ec.
Svbích is onc of the realons of Law, is taken away, (n) Seuenthlp, he that chailengeth foz
the Bundzcd, mutt (be in What hundzed itis, and not dztue the other partie to thew tt.
Cighthip, bis challenge Foz the hundzed is not (implicitér, but ſecundum quid foz though ít bee
found that be hath nothing in the Hundzed, pet (hall not he be Dane, but remaine preter H.
that t¢,befioes fo the Hundecd, and albett he dwelleth o2 haue land fn the Bundzed, pet muſt he
haue ſufficient Freohold.

3 Propteraffe&um : And this te of two forts, either working a Principal chalienge, o» to
the Fauour. Andagaine a paínctpall challenge is of two forts, either bp Judgement of Law
Without anp Act of his, o? bp Judgement of Law bpon his osone Ae.

And tt is fato that a princtpall challenge (o , When there is expꝛeſſe fauonr o2 expꝛeſſe malice,
Firk, without any Act of his, asit the Fluroz bee (a) of bleut o2 Kindzed to either partie,
Confanguineus Which ts compounded cx Con. & fanguine, quaficodem fanguine natus , as it
Were iſſued from tbe fame bloud, and this is a principal challenge, fog that the Law prefumcth
that one Kinſman doth fauour another before a ſtranger, (b) and how farre remote foeuer te
tg of Kindzed, pet the Challenge (s god. And (E the Wiaintife challenge a Juroꝛ, for kindzed
to the Defendant, it is no Counterpleatoflap that bec ig of Kindzed alfoto the Diaintife,
though hee bein a neerer degres, Foꝛ the woꝛds of the Venirc facias forbideth the Juroꝛ to
be of kindred to cither partie, s;

(c) Fifa bodp 35olítíque oz Incoꝛpoꝛate, fole 02 agategatcof manp ; bzíng anp adíon that
concernes their bobp 3 olttique o2 Incoꝛpoꝛate,it the Juroꝛ be ofkindzed to any, thatis,ofthat
bobie, (although the beop 39olítíque oz Incoꝛpoꝛate) can hauc no kindred, pet Foz that thofe
bodies confit of naturall perfong, it ts a principal! Challenge, (d) A 2ibaffarb cannot bec
of kindzed toanp, and therefore it can be no patnctpall Challenge. And here tt is to be kuowne
that A ffinitas, Affinitie hath in La two fences, In his proper fence (t is taken for that
Neereneſſe that ts gotten by marriage, Cum duz cognationes inter (e diuifæ per nuptias copu-
lantur & altera ad alterius fines accedit & inde dicitur Affinis Jn a larger fence Aſſinitas is ta-
ken alfo fo; Confanguinitcand Kindzed, ag inthe wꝛit of Venire facias, and other Where,
(c) Affinitie oz Ailtancebp Marriage is a principall Challenge , and caufualent to Confana
guinitte ben (t ts betiweenc either of the parties, ag tf the Plaintife o2 Defendant marrp the
Danghter 02 Coufin of the Juroz, o2 the Juroꝛ marrp the Daughter o2 Coufinof the Piain=
tife 0? Defendant, andthe fame continucs o» tluebehad. But tf the Sonne of the Juroꝛ hath
married tbe 3Danabter of rhe Dianttfe, this (g no principall Challenge, but tothefanour, bec
€aufe (t not between the parties much moze may befaid hereof, fed fumma fequor faftigia rerum.

CF ) FE thers be a Challenge for Cofinage , bee that taketh the Challenge mult ſhew how
the Jurozts Contin, But pet it the cofinage, that te the effect and fubftance be found, tt fut-
ficeth, for the Law preferreth that which ie materiall befoze that which ts foꝛmall.

(g) JE the Juroꝛ banc part of the Land that dependeth bpon the fame Title.

(h) Fla 3luroz be within the hundsed, Lect 0? anp Swap Within the Seigniory tmmedfateip
02 mediately, oz any other diftrefle of sither party, this (s a pzincipall Challenge. Wut ff either
party be Withinthe diſtreſſe of the Jaroz this is no pꝛincipall Challenge but tothe fauour,

(i) Pla witneſſe named in the Deed be returned of the Furie tt is a good caufe of Chailenge
of yim. (k) So it is if onc Mtthin age of one and twentr be returned, tiga god caufe of


€ e,
halleng Br 2, Apon


157


(d) 19.H.6.9. 17.4915.


(6) 12. H.7.4.2x,H. 6,38.
7:48.41.


(f) 27.8 lis. cap. €,

(8) 7-H.2.47.

Pee 7- Mir Tr,
48.216. 31,E.4. 74. c,

9.H.6.66. MA.


(i) 20. H.6.23.4. Mars Br,
Chal.216.

(k) 10.H.6.5. 13.H.4.14.
19.E.4.5,


(D. sy.H.6.11.2 s. E.3.43.


(m) a1. H.6.38. 13.H.7.4.


(n) 7.EliQ.Dier. 231.


Bra. fol. 185.
Britt fol.s 34.135-
FEleta lib. a.c 2.8.
21.E.4,11.12,


(a) Britton. fal. 13 5.


(b) Mirror. caf.3.deordinance
datraine,
Bratton
‘Bratron
Flets
14. Eli. Dier.3 40, 21.E.4s
40, 4f 30.1 Compl 7


vbi fupra,


AE, s, ( ball.o9.21.E.4,
(6) 7.E. 4.4.17 E. 47- 2
21.€.4.20. 38. H.6.10.
28.49 18. 34... 6.

(d) 4r.E.3.(hall.99. 41.€,
3-9: 36. H. 6. h:l. 163.
(e) Miror *

Bratton >

Britton Gun fupra,
Fleta .

3-€.4 14. 21.E. 3.5.41.
43E.3.Chall.93. 43.41.35
26. 31.E.4. 3. 14,H.7.2.
15. H.7.9.

(E) 19. H.8.7. 38. H.8.
"Dier.37. 1..Maria Dicer 91.
2. Eliz. ibid. 177.

(B) 5rakken

Britton vli füpra.
Fleta

Mirrer vbi /upra.

(h) 9. H.6.tit. Chala.
38.€.3.25. 23E. 4. Chal. 6t,
4.H.6.25,3 H.6.39.36.H 6
Cha. 46. 33, E. 4.1.87 Aff.
38. 22. E. 3.1 3.


co —


on?
Lib.2.

(1) 8.H. 5.10. 33. H.6.1.
10.H.6.24. 7. H. 4.11.


18.E.4.12. 3 I.E. 4.74.
Yr R. 2.0. Challenge 1 06.


27. A[f.13.
(m) 43. E.3. (ball. 3.
$.H.5. 19.


(n) Mirror bi fupra. Britton,
folia. x. 36. 8. H.4.2-
7 · E.4. 4.12. ANas. 19 4 [Jj
6.40. Af 10. 25.E,3.cap.5.
(©) 40.4ff:20.2. H.4.1 5.
10. H,6.Cball. 40. 7.H.6.49.
19. H. 6.66. 4 €.4.11.
7-E.4.4,

(p) 20. H.6.39. 9.E.4.46.
35.H. 6. 19.H.6. 3.H.6. 34.


7.H.7.10.
(q) Leb.9. fol.71. Peacocks
Cafe.


(x) Mirror
Brafon vbi fupra.
Britton 12. M36.


26,-4/.56.28..4[T.16.

31. 4/7. 44--4[f-18.

Cf) 15. H. 4.15. 11. R.2.
Cball.164.

(t) Grafton à vbi fupra.
Fleta 44.€.3.5. 38.
A423. 8.8.3.25.

43 E. 3.31. 22. E.4. 1.
38.H.6.6. 41. E.3. (hal,93.
11.H.4.26. 11.H,6.15.
32. E. 3. Chall. 189.
24.€.3.37. 32. Ma.
20.4. 11.43..4/f.46.

(u) 17..4f.15.

(w) 8.€.3.39.20.H.6.39.
33:H.8. Dier. 48.

(x) 22. £li( Dier. 367.
Bracton


Eritton vbi fupra.
Fleta
(y) 4».E. 3.1.


(a) 9. E.4.6.21.E.4. 31.
21.E.4.3. 14. H. 6.2.30. P. 4
2. 3. H.7.5. 22. Elit. Dier.


367.


(b) Mirror eap. 3.dordinance
dattianr. Bract. lib. 4. ſol 185.
Britt.fol.134.135. Fleta lib.
4:c29.8.7.H.6.25.

(c) 9.H.7. 3. 10.H.7.20.
3-H 7.3. 10.8. 4.12.15. E.4
18. 13.-4[: 33.


(D 6. R.3.Chall 141.
19,-4/f.6. 38.-4f[ 22 11.R.2
(hall. 16 5.4. H. 5 ibid. 155.


(Copa.


à
j


Of Rents. Sell.234,


2, (!) Upon bis own At, ag it the 3uroz hath giuen a verdict before Co? the fame canfe,atbett
tt be reuerſed bp t02tt of Erroz, 02 (f after verdiet, Fudgement Were arreſted. Soi hee hath
giuen a tozmer verdict bpon the feme Title o2 matter though bet weene other perions. (m ) B


-{tis to be obferned, that 3] map fpcake once foz all, that in this and other like cafes, hee that tas


keth the Chatienge mult fhew the Becozd tEhe Swill haucit take place ag apzincipal Challenge,
otiver Wife be mulf conclude to tbe fauour, vnieſſe it be a Recogd of the fame Court, and then be
mu thew the day and tearme. |


(n) So likewile one may be challenged, that he was Inditoꝛ of the Piainetfeog Defendant


cpther of Œreafon, Felony, 9Di(patfion, Treſpaſſe, oz the like in thefame caufe,
(0) 3i£tbe Juroꝛ be Godtatherto the Child o£ tbe Wiaintife 02 Defendant, oz éconuerfo;
this is allowed to be a gwd Challenge tn our Bokes.


(p) Ea Juroꝛ hath bene an Arbitratoz chofen bp the 391aíntífe ez Defendant (n the fame ”
caufe, and hauc beene infozmed of, ox treated of the matter, this {g a paincipall Challenge, Ds _


theriwife if he were neuer infozmed nog treated thercof, and otber&otfe tf bc Swere invifferentip


chefen bp epther of the partics, though he treated thereof, Wut a (4) Commiflioner chofen bp |
onc of the parties fo craminatton of witneſſes fn thefame caufe,ts no principal caufe of Chale —
lenge foz he ts made by the dking buderthegreat Seale, andnotbpthepartpas the Arbitras M


tozis, but he map bpon cauic be challenged foz fauour. 1
é : : It hee becof Counfatic, Seruant, 02 of Robes, or Ser, of ether party tt isa paincipall
alicnge,

(£) 3i£anp after he be returned doceate and dainke at the change.of cítber party, it (s a pꝛinci⸗
pall caufe of Challenge otherSwite (t is ofa Crioz after he be ſworne.

(t) Adions brought epther bp the Juroꝛ agaínft eyther ofthe parties, o2 bp epther of the par=
ties againt him, which implp malice oz diſpleaſure, are caufcs of principali Chellenge, bnicffe
thep be brought bp Coupn eptiier before 07 after thereturne,fcz if Couin be found, chen it ts no
caufe of Lhallenge; other Actions Which doe not implp maiice oꝛ difpleafure , are but te tic faz
uour. x
(u) 31a cauſe where the Parſon of a Warth tg partie, andthe right ofthe Church commeth
ín Debate, a Darifhioner is a pꝛincipall Challenge. £D tbersotfc it ig in Bcbt,02 any other Acion
here tye right of the Church commeth not in queftion.

(w) GIE epther party labour the Juroꝛ and giue him any thing to giue his verdict, this {sa
prncipall Challenge. Wut it epther party labour the Juroꝛ to appeare € £o doc bis confcionce,
this ig no Challenge it all, but lawtull fo2 him to dec it.

* Pies the Jurozisafeliom Heruant with eptbcr party, is no principal Chaliengebut
to the fauonr.

5 ( p Mepther of the parties can take that Challenge to the Polls, Which he might hauchad to
the Array.

(a) Note it the Defendant map haucapincipall caufe of Challenge to the arrap, if che
HOherife returne the Jurp,the Plaintike in that cafe map foy his one expedition alledge the
fame, and pap 392ocefíe tothe dLozoncrg , Which hee caunct auc, nice t)e Defendant
Willconfelle tt, but tthe Defendant Will not coniellett, then the Plaintile fhall haue a Venire
facias to the Sbherife, and the Defendant fball neuer takeanp challenge for that caufe,and fo (i
ltkecafes. Wut on the part of the Defendant anpluch matter (all not be alledged, and Pec⸗
celle prapedtothe Coroners, bccaufe he may challenge the Jury for that caufe, andcanbeeat
no pretndice,

(b) Challenge concluding to the fauour, when either partiecannot take anp pꝛincipall Chal⸗
lenge, but ſheweth caufes of fauour, Which mult bee lekt to theconfcience and diferetion of the
Œriozs pon hearing their entdence to find him Fauourable 02 not fauourable, Wut pet foc of
them come neererto a prncipall Challengethen other. (c) Bs tf the Fluroz be of Kindred, oz
bnder the diſtreſſe ok himin the RencrGon ez remapnder , o2 (n Whole right tbc Auowꝛie oz
Juſtification is made, 02 tbe ike: Chele be no principal Challenges, becanfe he tn Reuerſion
Remapnder , o2 in Whole right the Buowzre o» Fluftification is not partie to the 1Rc=


£020, otherwiſe it ig tf thep Swerve made partico hp Aide, Relccipt, oz Woucher,and pet the cauſe


of fauour is avparant; foitis of ali pzinctpallcaufes, it thep Were party to the Record. $2030
the caufes of fauour are infinite, andtbereof fomeSwbat map bee gathered of that Sobich hath
benefaid, andthe ret 3| purpofclp icaue the Reader to the reading of our Bokes concera
ning that matter, Foꝛ all which tberuic of Lao ig, that bee muft (tano tet Rerentag hee
and vnſworne.

(d) The fabiec map challenge the 3 olles, Where the Ling te party. And {fa man be out⸗
lawed of Creafon oz Felony, at tbefuite of the king, and the partp foz auopoíng thereot
aliengeth tmpsifonment o2 the like at the time of the D utlawwate,though the (luc be fopned ope
on a collaterail point, pet ſhall the party bauc {uch Challenges, ag (£ bec bad benc arraigned
bpon the crime tt felfe, fox this by a meane concerneth bis life alfo,
4, Propter


NY


zm


Lib.2. Of Rents.


€ Propter dclicium. (c) 23g if the Juroꝛ bee attainted o? conui-
«tb of treafon, oz felony, oz £o) any offence to lífe 92 momber, o2 (n attaint fos a falfe berdict,
92 koz pe ag a Witnelle, oꝛ tn a confpiracieat the ſuite ofthe Hing, oz in any fuite ( cither
foz the thing, 02 fo2 anp fubicct ) be adiunged to the 39 (102p,tumbzell,o) tbe like ; 02 to be bzan=
ded, 82 £0 be Higmatique, orto auc anp other coppopail punifbment whereby be becommeth


. fnfamous ( £o; it (g a marime in la Repellitur à (1cramento infamis ) thefeandthe like are


principall caufeg of challenge, Soit (g (£a man be ontlawen (n trefpalle, debt o2 anp other
adion, fox ho (d Exlex, and tberefozeíg not lcgalis homo. Andold bokes haue fatd that {€ be
be excommunicated, he coul not be of a lurp. 2

(He the ftatuteg of W.2-and Artic, (upra cartas, what perfong the Sberife ought to re<
turne on Juryes, And feo F.N.B. breue de non ponendis in Afsifis & iuratis, anb the Regifter
in the ſame weit. Andfeethere What remeop the party bath thatis returned again Law.

Ft is neceflarie tobe knowne the time when the challenge (s tobe taken. (2) Sirk he
that hath diuers chalienges mult takethem all at once, and the Law fo requtreth indifferent
trialls, as Divers challenges ate not accounted double. (h) Secondip,if one be challenged bp

- ene party, tf after he be tried tn different, (t is time pnough £o? the other party to challenge him.
(i) &bírblp after challenge tothe Array, and tríall ducip returned, if the ſame partp take a
challenge tothe polleg; be mutt thew caufe pꝛeſently. (k) Fourthly, foif a Juroꝛ be koꝛmerly
fivozne, if he be challenged he mut (exo caufe pzefentip, and that caufe mutt rife ince he ag
ſworne. (I) Fiftlp, When the wing is party, oz inanappeale of felonp, the defendant that
challengeth fo? caufe, mutt thew bis caufe prefentiy, Sixtly, SE aman tn cafe of treaſon og
felony challenge for canfe,and be be tried indifferent, pet hee map challenge htm peremptoztip.
Heuenthip, a challenge for the undzed mult bee taken befoze fo many bee ſwoꝛne, ag Will
ſerue for bundzedozs,oz clfc be looſeth the aduantage thereof.

8 (m) na Quit o£ Right,the graund Jury mult be challenged befoze the foure knights
before they be returned in Court, for after thep be returned in. Court, there cannot anp chalz
lenge be taken onto then,

9 Nota (n) (fe Array o£ the Tales fall not be challenged by anp one party, tntill the
Array of the principall be tried, but tEthe plaintife challenge the Prrap o£ the principall,the


_ defendant may challenge tbe Array of the Tales, Pfter onehath taken a challenge to the polie,


be cannot challenge the Array.

Now it is ta bee feene how challenges to the Arrap of the pꝛincipall Wannell, op of the
Tales, 02 of the polleg ſhall be tríco , and who Mhall bee triozs of thefame, and to Whom pꝛo⸗
ceffe fball bee awarded,

I (0) FE the platnttfe alledae a caufe of challenge again the Sberife, the paccefle {hail be
Directed to the Cozoners, it any caufe againft anp o£ the Coroners, pꝛeceſſe (ball bes awarded
to the reſt, it agatnft all of them, then the Court (ball appoint certatne Œlifozs o2 Eſltoꝛs (fo
framed ab cligendo) breaufe tbep are named by the Court, againtt whole returne no challenge
fhail be taken to the Array, becauſe they Sere appointed bythe Court, but hee map vane hts
challenge tothe polices. (p) Note it pꝛoceſſe be once awarded for the partialitie o£ the She⸗
rife, though there be a new Sbertfe, pet pzocefle hall neuer be awarded tohtm ; foz the entrp
Íg ita quod vicecomes fe non intromittat. But otherwiſe itis , for that he was tenant to etc
ther partie o2 the like.

(q) 2 the Array be challenged tn Court, it fball be tried by two of them that be impan⸗
nelledto be appointed by the Court ; fos tbe trioꝛs in that cafe (ball not ecco the number of
two, bniefle it be bp confent. But ben the Court names tiwo £02 fome fpecíall caufe alleds
Bed by cither partic, the Court map name others, tf the Array be quaſhed, then pzoceffe (ball
de awarded, vt fupra. ;

(r) 3ifa pannel! bpon a Venire facias be returned,anda Tales, andthe Array of the princt=
Pall is challenged, the triozs, which trie and qualh the Array, hall not tric the Array of the
Tales, for no ítíg ag tf there bad beene noappearance of the patuctpall pannell, but tf the
triors affirme the Array of the princtpall, then they ſhall trie the Array of the Tales. FE the
platntife challenge the Breap of tbe principal, and the defendant the Array of the Tales, there
the one of the principall, and the other of the Tales {halltrieboth Arrapes, Foꝛ other matter
concerning the Tales, fee (£C) tn imp Reports matters 5voztbp of obicruation. (t) then anp
challenge ts mane to the polices , two trtozs (hall bec appotnted bythe Court, and f£ thep trie
one tndifferent,and he be fwosne, then bz and thetwotrioss (ball trie another , anb (£ another
be tried tndifferent, and be befworne,then the two triers ceaſe, and the two that bee fonce on
the Furie fball triethereft. (v) Itthe plaintife challenge ten, andthe defendant one, andthe
twelfrh is fworne, becaufe one cannot trie alone,there fhall be added to him one challenged bp
the plaintife ano the other by the defendant. When the tríall is ta be had bp txoo Counties, the

tanner of the triailts Svozthy of obferuation, anb apparant in our (w) bokes. (x) FE the
foure knights in the iozit of Right be dream they (ball tpe themfelues,and tbep (ball e
tz 59e


Set. 234.


158


Ce) Mirror
"Bratfen n
Britten Vbi fupra. —


Flera
11. H. 4.41. 12, H. 4.10.
33. H. 6, at.


(£ ) PF 2.04.38. Artic.
Super cars 4.9.F,.N. B. 168.
166. Regiftr.


(8) 9-€.4.16 10.4. 5.9.
37.H.6.8. 3. H.6.58.
Broole tie chal.8.
g.H.5. 49, 14  H.7.5.6.
(h)9.E.4.16.. 17.H.8.2.
(i241 E.5. (hal.o3. 2e.
E.3.1bid. 116. 32. E, 4 ibid.6x
7. H«4.41. 34El. "Dew.r 2016
( K)2a.E.4.1.. 9.4.5.6.


(1)1.H.s.10..— 38.422.


(m)2.H.4.30. 15.E.4.1.


(n) 9.E.4.37. 9.H.s. tf.
34] 6.13.E.3. (hal 108


(0) 8.2.4.8.


(p)15s. H.7.9. 14.H.7. 3t.
18.E.43. dde


(q)29. ^ff. 3. 19.H.6.48.
21. H. 6. (7541.38.33. H6. 31
4E. 4417.43 E. 3 (hal. 95,
2.R.2. ibid. 108. 34. zr. 6.
27 A 18. 43 4S 16.


(r) 9-E. 4.46. 19. H. 6.48.
34:06. 7.E.6. Dier.78.
p.H.5.11.


(f£) Lib.to.fe. 10 4.10$.
Denbewd: cafe.

(t) 19.H.6.9, 22.E.4,
Chal . 61.62.


(u) 7. B. 4.4Y.
(w ) 11.H.4.61.48,6.3.30
11, H 4.63. :


(x) 23. 6.3. 16. 39. E. 3.27


Lib.2.


(y) 49.8.3. 12.


(z) 2. H, 4.14. 4.F.4.1.
10.E. 3,32. 32, 40:28. 31.
21.H.6.56. 16..A]f.1.
5E.5. 35. 36.


(a) 8. H. 5.tit. hall.v67.
30H.4.3. 34.E.3 Chall.175.
21.H.6.56. 8.£.4.3.


16.€.4.1.
* "Bralfon lib, 4. fe.185.


Co) Graton lib. $ fe. 353.
334. Aur. cap. 2.8.19.
Flesa Lb.6.6a.6.
Britr.cs,v211.


Fleta.

rine
«Mirror
8.H.6.1.b. F.'N.B.o7.


Bratton

(d) Regift.indictal.1.2.107.
(e) Mirror

Braktes tw fupra


(c) BraBon
Britton Vbifupra.
Britton

Flers

43-E.3-32+ 24.€. 3.35.
3.E.3,48. $0. E.3.16.
Britton

Fleta


Regifer 225.


(f )Bralfen Lib. ç.fe.373.
"Britton fol.siy. Fleta lib.6.
ea.1, Glanuil lib.x.c.4. 5. dre
lib.2.ca.7. Ub. x2. cap.t


* Britton, fe.116.
Fleta lih.2.ca.1.


(g) Fleta.lib.G.ca.t.
h) Mirrer,ca.2.§ 16,
er eap. 5.S.2.


Cap.


OfRents. Seël.134,


tbe graund Alife, and trie the chal'engeg of thepartics, Cy) FE the canfe of challenge tonch
the difhonour oz diſcredit of the Furoz,he fbatinet bee examined bpon bis oath, but in other cae |
fce he (ball becramined bpen bis oath, to informe the tries. (2) 3t an fnquelt be awarded
bp defauit,the defendant hath io hig challenge, but the platntífe map ch € fo? tutt cauſe,
and that all becramined and tried. 4. 590 +
toberefocmer the platntífe ts to recouer per vifum iuratorum , there ought to bee Gr of the
jury that haue had the view, o? known the land in queſtton, fo ag he be abletoput the platne
tife in pofleilion tf be recouer, +
In a Proprictate probanda,and a watt to enquire Foz Swatt,the parties haue been recelued to
take their challenges. (a) But palling ouer manp things touching this matter, 3| ill concinde
Sith tbe faping of * Braëton, Plures autem alia tunt caufa: recufaudi iuratores de quibus ad
præfens non recolo, fed que iam enumeratz fant, fufficiant exempli caufa. Bnd fo let bs rez
turne to Littleton. ;
;


¶ De viſueto, &c. Ft fhould be Viceneto : Vicenetum tg Deriued
of this $9075 Vicinus andfignificth Neighbourheod, ora place nere at hand 07 a Neighbous
place, Bnd the renfoa wherfore the Fury muſt be of the netghbonrhwd,ts fozthat Vicinusfa&a
vicini præfumitur fcire; all which ts implied in this Swo2d( &c.)


€ Qu0d fammoneat eos &c. Summoneo (8 compounded of Sub &
monco, & Euphoniz gratia ft ig fatd fummonco;to warne o2fommen,as (n this cafe the Shea
rife mutt Warne oz fammon the Kecognitoꝛs of the Aſſiſe to appeare before the Juſtices of
Aife,ec. And tt ts trulp fao (b) that in this caſe Legittimam fummonitionem recipere, im
propria perfona vbicunque inuentus fuerit in comitatu in quo fucrit res petita,qui quidem finom
inveniatur fufficit (i ad domiciliü fiat,dü tamen alicui de familia fua manifefte fuerit relata, &c.


€. Per bonos fummonitores. Perethoo things areto bee obferueD, —

SFivtk, chat the fummonerg muft be Boni ( ideit ) fide digni vt valeant legittimum teftimo=
nium perhibere, cum inde per Lufticiarios fuerint requifiti. (c) And another faith, Fems, ne
ferfs, ne enfans, ne nul enfamys,ne nul que nett fife renant, ne poet efte bonc fummoner. 2.31€
is ſpoken inthe plurali number Per bonos fummonitores, and therefore there mutt bee two at
the leak, Necfufficir quod fummonitio fiat per vnum tantum,&c. neceffe eft igitur quod per
duos ad minus fiat, & c. bereíg alfo a ſummons of atenant in a reall ation, Sohereof, and of
45 ernozs and Qicíoz pou thalireade (d ) pientifullp and platnelp tn ent bakes, whereunto
being matter of courfe 3 referre pou,

Item Summonitionum alia eft Generalis,alia Specialis, whereof pon hall finde excellent mate


ter in our ( c old bakes, where pou Mall alfo reade at large De Sümonitione; Pra fümmonitio-
ne, & Refummonitione,


€ Facere recognitionem. Cognitiots knowledge, o? knowledge⸗
ment 02 opinton,and Recognition ig aferious acknowledgement ez opinion pon fucl) matters
of fat as tbey hall hauctn charge, and thereupon tbe Juroꝛs are called Recosnitores afsifæ,
Vid. Seé.233 Recognitio taken fog theconfeflion of the Œenant.


€ Pannellig an Cnglith word, and fignificth a little part, fo
a Panois a part, and a Panneũ is a little part (aga Dannel! of toatnfcot, a Pannell of a
ſaddle, anda panncll of Darchment Wherein the Jurorg names be weitten and annered to
the wꝛit. Anda Jury (s fato to be impannelled, &oben the Hherifehath entrod thetr names
into the pannell, oz little peece of 39arcbmentin Pannello afsifz.


¶ Briefe de droit. Breuc de Reto, Mꝛits of right be oftioo natures
1,a Wait of Right, hereof Littleton Here ſpeaketh, whichts the highelt t02ít of allotber re=
all tite wbatfoeuer,and hath the greateſt refpect, ec. and the moft aflured and final tudge=
ment and therefore this wꝛit ig called a wꝛit of Right right,andthis in (f ) olo bokes tg caiz
ied Dreitdreit, andthig wꝛit Eft darrein remedie de touts recoucries enter touts ordres des
pleas, and the Fury in this wꝛit is called Magna afsifa oy magna Iurata, ag Littleton here
faith. z.tozits of Right in their nature, ag the Rationabile parte,and Ne iniufte vexes.


@ 2e Recto. Rectũ, is a proper and fignificant 15020 fo? the right
that anp hath,and Wong 02 Jniurp,ts tn French aptipcatled Tort -becanfe Fnturp € Wrong
ts Swzeftcd o1 crooked, being contrarp to that whichis right and freight. $209 the Lat that
ig Linca recta eft index fui & obliqui. Bnd Britton * fateh that Tort a la ley eft contrarye, and
ag aptlp fo2 the caufe afozefatd ts iniury tn Engliſh called Mong, Bud Iniuria f$ derined o£
In and jus, becaufc tt (c contrary to right, fo ag A faire tort tg facere rortum, and Ficta faith,
(g) Eft autem ius publicü & priuatü quodex naturalibus praceptis aut gentium, aut ciuilibus
cít colle&tum, & quod in jure fcripto ius appellatur, id in lege Angliz re&um effe dicitur Bnd frt.
the(h) Mirror and other places of the 1aS ít (9 Called, Droit,ag droit defend the Law defendeth,


@ En kerezifter, Regifter, igamoft ancient booke of the common
aw


m wn


Lib.2. Of Rents. Se8.134.


aw, and it is t$oo£olb, viz. Regi(trum breuium originalium, and Regiftrum breuium iudiciali-
um.3it isa French Word and Aguiticth a memozlall of writs. ometimes the Regier of
eitginail wꝛits ts called Regittrum cancellariæ, becaufe all oꝛiginall wꝛits doe iſſue out of the
Chauncey, ag Extra officinam luttitia, for the antiquity and eftímatton of whith boe; $ re⸗
ferre the reader tothe Epiſtle before the tenth part ot mp Commentaries.


€ Magna LA fn eligenda 48 a iudiciall Wait to the Sbherife to
returne foure latofull Xantabts before the Juſtices there bpon thetr oathes te recurne twelue
nights of the Nicenage to triethe Miſe in a wztt of Right.


€ Afitfedecommon de paſture, &c. DE what things an Affife of
Nouci difici(in lap at the Common La, and of what bp the ftatute, pou map reade at large
in my (k) Reports tn Iehu Webbes Cafe, where the Authorities of 1.360 are plentifullp cited,
and thep and the fatute well explaned. Wut ince Littleton wzote, a man map baue(l)an Bitte
Of Nouell diffeifin, Afsife o£ Mordanc, o2 ap Præcipe quod reddat,Quod ei deforcear, tt02ít&
of Dower, es other wꝛits ozigtnall, as the cafe fall require of Epthes, Pencions og other
€cciefiatkicall o2 Spiritual proffit, t£ be be diſſeiſed, defoꝛced, wWzonged, oz otheriwife kept, 02
put from the fame, Which by the Lacs and Statutes of the MR calme are made tempozall, 02
admitted tobe o2abinc in tempozall hands, fo ag by the fato Act a Lay man having tptyes 02
offerings map cítber fue fox the ſubſtraction oz With-holding of the fame in the Eccleſiaſticall
«Lourt, og at the Common law at his election, And fœing no fpeciall Wzit is ginen * bp the (fas
tute, the partie muſt baue a generall to2(t of Atsife de lebero tenemento,and make a ſpectall
gicíat, Wut his Præcipemuft be Quod reddat omnes & omnimodas decimas maiorcs,mixtas,
& minutas, infra Dale quoquo modo crefcen' contingen’ acannuatim renouan', 02 the like,
accoꝛding to his cafe. (m) Wut netther Ailife noz anp Præcipe did ipe of them as of Tpthes
92 any other Eccleliaſticall dutie at the Common Law for the Pile bzougbt of the Tenth
part of all manner of Lozne growing in C. acres of land after the Tythes of the Parſon taz
ken Wag a Lap pzoffít Apprender, anb no Eccleſiaſticall dutie.

Wut Tythes 0; other @ccichaficall dutics, rhat came to the Crowne by the flatutes (n )of
27-H.8.31.H.8.37.H.8,and 1-E-6. ate by thofe fatutes and this of 32,H.8. and of 1.anb z.
Ph.X Marie tn the hands of Lap men tempozall inheritances and fhall be accounted Affects;
and bufbanos Gall be &enants by tbe € utte(ic, aud Sviucs endowed of them, and (ball baue
sther incidents belonging to tempozail inherttances,onlp this Œccicafticali quality thep h-ne,
E the owner 02 poſſeſfoꝛ thereof may fuc £oz the fubtraction of the fame in the Ecclellaſticali

ourt.

But by another (o) fratute,remedy is giuen aftoell tothe Lap perfon,as to the Eccietatticall
perfon for fubtvacion of all manner of pzedtall Tythes, and he fhallreconer the treble value (£
they be not tulip deuided oz fet forth, an» albeit the treble biluebe not erpacdp giuen to the
paopitctaríc of the Tythes, pet fozalmuch as he te the partie qrieucd, € he hath the propertte
an intereft in the typthes,the treble balucts given to him,t Sobenfoeuer a ftatute gtueth a kor⸗
fetture oz penalty again him which Wrongfullp dctaineth oz diſpoſſeſſeth another of bis Duty
92 interctk, in that cafe he that hath the wꝛong (all baue the fozfetture o2 penaltíc, € ball haue
an action thercfoze bpon the ftatute at the Common Law.and the King (ball not haue the fore
feiture in thatcafe. Bnd fo it was (p) adiudged inthe Exchequer vpen conference With other
Judges in an information for the treble value for not fetting outoftpthes (n Iclington tn the
County of Cambr.Hnd tE the propztetarte Will {ue For ſuch fubtraction of tythes tn the Ecclefi-
afficall Court,then he (bal recouerbut the double brlue bp the expꝛeſſe words of the Ac, wo bere
tn it ts to beobferned.that the act of 39 aciíament doth auc a tempozall remedp atthe Common
laxor to Parſons and Wicars and other Ecclefialkicall perfons foz an Eccleſiaſticall durte,and
to Lap men proprictartes of tythes the like remedy,but ag (t hath bene fatd,chep haue election
either to fue foz the treble baluc at the Common La, o2 foz the Double value in the Ecclefac
ficall Court, 03 Foi fubtraction of tptbes there alfo.


€ Afsife de Mordancefter. Atfifa mortis anteceffores.(q) This nait à
tian may haue after the deceaſe of his tmmedtate Anceftor,as Where hig father, mother, bzotber,
Ger ,brcle 02 aunt dte ſeiſed of any lands and an eſtranger abate,æc,

€ ff de darreine prefentment Aſſiſa vitime præſentationis, whetof
vou hallreade (r ) plentifully in ont bokes.

Go thefe may beadded A (sa vtrum 02 uris vtrum (1) Sobícty is the biabeft wett a Darfon,
icar,€c. can hauc for the recoucring of the Gleebe laud, ec. in right of his Church. Wut ít
tap be Demanded Wherefore theſe oꝛiginall toztts, arecalled bp the fpectail name of Aſſiſes
Moze then other o7iginall t02ít&, and here Littleton peeldeth the rcafon, becanfe that by thete
Toríts;ít is commanded tothe Sherife Quod fummoneat 1 2 Whichig ag much to fap, ae to
fominon a Fury. £0 as inthefe cales, there is adu returned the irk pap, anb $)Cp are to


,3 8pptare


159


143 £1. £4.24.
Ti. («m.238.5,


(k) Lib.8.f6. ag.


(1) 32-4804. 5,


* 7.E.6.Dier.8 3.07


(m) 44.F.3.5.

Vid. Regt fh.165.Vid.le briefa
de indicauit MW. 2.ca. 5.
Coniurn clima facffatss ea.
Virime.
Bratton,lsb.5.fo.402.
Britton, fo. 160. Regift.
f0.35. 4.E. is

16 E. 3. quar⸗ Imp.147.

Vid 2.H 3.tit.Granr. $ 9.
(n) 27.4.8.0f Monafterses
uot printed,

31.4. §.00.13.37.H 8.ca.4.
I] E.6.ca.14. 1. & 3. "Pb.
Mar.ca.8,2.€. 3.08.13.
(0) 2.€.6.08.13.


(p) Paſeb. 29. Eli etween⸗
the Queene and Mod im the
Exchequer, and /o st was refal-
wed by all the Indies vpon
cenfaicuces Mish, 4 La. Regi.


(aYBritton, fo 15 8.199.078.
Brallon kb. 4 aiat. 3.
per to ww, fo. 2.53. dre.
Mirror ea, 2.S. 15.
F.N.B.114.dre.

(r) Brtton ea. vo ſo. 3 22.
BraG.lib 4./0.338.

Mirror vbi fupra-
F.N.B.195. Regift.orig.30°
(f) Bran, fo.285.286.
Britton,ea.95 [023 40

M rer, vbifupras

F. NB. 48.49.


Of Rents. Seël.235:


appearc ag ſoone as the Defendant, Andbecaule by tbefe tozite a Fury is to bercturnedthe —
Raw calleth them au Ab effectu,becanfe an Bate ( Smbich inthis fence fignifictha Jury) |
is to be returned. Wut bellde the figntfication ef the wꝛit * of Alliſe whereot Littleton here
fpeaketh, it fignificth the Whole proceeding bpon the watt. a)
In other oziginall wzits regniarly no Burp ts to be returucd beforethe appearance of the
—— and an íffue loyned betweenẽ them, andthercfoze theſe other oꝛiginalls are not called
Rifeg, m i à ^
€ Pur vnordinance. Pere Afila figntfieth, an Dadinance, ac. —
Dydinance, Ordinatio (8 Deriued of the berbe Ordinare, Œo ogdaine og fet in 0:0... And note,
an Act (1) of Parliament (ag Littleton here proueth) ig an Dzdinance, Foz it lets Downe ope
bers Which arcto be kept as Lawes : and fo (g Ordinatio Foreftæ, Ordinatio de Inquifitioni- M
bus,and Ordinatio contra Scruientes and other Statutes many times called Dadinances,and «
ít tg ſaid almoft in euerte Act of 39arlíament, We tt theretoꝛe oꝛdained, Ec, bp autbozítie of thig —
35ariíamcnt, o2 the like. Wute conuerfo enerte Oꝛdinance is nota Statute, ag that of 8.H.c.
cap.29. oz ouerte ftatute mult be made bp the Ling, With theallents of the Lode and dLom-
mong, and (Fit appeare by the Ac, that it wag made bp two of them onelp,itis no ftatute,
he example put bp Littleton, tg Aſſiſa panis & ceruitia, (f ) This Dibinance Mas made
at a Parliament holden anno 51. H.3. andthe like Ozdinance was made, entitled Aílifacer- -
uitiæ, Which pou may fee in old Magna Charta fol. 57.b. (t) And fo Affi(à de Clareden, whieh
as in 10.H.2. and Affifa Foreſtæ, oꝛdatned fanno ; 4.E-1. anb fucbl(ke, And aptly an Davi=
nance of Parliament Æntiquitie hath called an Aile, for that an Act of Parliament doth 022
Datnefuch a certaine oꝛder, ag nothing can be Done moze o2 leflebp right, (u) And Flcta faith,
Et habct rex in poteftate fua, vt leges & confuetudines & affifasin regno fuo prouifas & appro-
batas & iuratas,&c. where Alſiſes atc taken Foz ſtatutes, which ave the effect of the Seſitons
of Parliament.
= ponderibus & menfuris, DE weights and Weafures ts a moft neceflarte learning to bag
knowne, and daplp in bfe,but tt belongeth not totbíg Œreatife. In fome other (if Gov fo pleafe)


ſomewhat fhalibe fapd of ther,


Lib. Cap.n.


* Mag. (hart sa. 1$.
And VF .3.62, 15.


(r) 19.4.3. Turis otium 16,
3s. E.5.1.5. 41.E.3.38.
353.8.3.7. "Kepifl. oriz.189
33-E.1. §-R.3.04.2.
Vid.li.8.le Princes cafe.


(£) Masrca 1.8. 13.07 64.4
de Articles de Etre.
"BraBl.li.3.f2.136.

(t) ranf. fo. 118. Mir.ca 2.
6.15. Houeden 115.
Regift.crig.27 9.

(u) Flet. ir, v ea. Vy.


Sea meo of thisin dhe Chapter
of Atternemast 868.565.


T le tenant attor-


na. Here ít ap-
geareth that an Attornament
(thatigan Agrecment to the
grant) tg no fetfin of the
rent,


€ 7! ve «4 aſtun re-
medic, oc. which is


ag much tofap , as hee bath
not any temcbte either at the
Common Law, op in anp
Court of cquític, which ig
woꝛthie of obferuation,


@ Voile doner 4i
grantee vn denier, ou Un
aile rc. en nofme de


ſeiſin de rent dre. Bere
it tg to be obferued, that pap-
ment of anp monep in name
of feifin of the rent,befoze any
rent become due, (g a gon fets
fin of the rent to haue an Aſ⸗
Me When it {s bue, and that
Sobich (8 giuen tn the name of
feifin of the rent, Worketh hie


Seclion 235.


€ [Ten fi foit ſeig⸗
nioz & Cenant,

tle Seignioz gran-
ta le rent fon tenant
per fon fait a bn au-
ter, fanantalupleg
feruíceg,a E'Œenant
atturna , ceo eft bn
Rent Secke, come
eft Dit adeuant. Wes
fi Event a lup foit De-
nie al prochein tour
de payment, il ny ad
afcun remeDdie , pur
ceo que ilauoit 5 cco
afcun poffeffió, Mes
ff le @enant quaunt
il atturna al grantee,
ou apres botle Doner
al grantee bn Denter,
oubnmalle, ac, en
notine


Lfo if there bee

Lord and Tenant,
and the Lord granteth
the rent of his Tenant
by Deed to another,
fauing to him the o.
ther feruices, and the
Tenant atturneth,that
isa Rent fecke, as it is
aforefaid But if the
rent be denied him at
the next day of pay-
ment, hee hath no
remedie, becaufe that
he had not thereofany
pofleffion. But if the
Tenant when heattur-
nethto the Grauntee,
or afterwards, wilgiue
apenie or a halfe-pe-
nie to the Grauntee in


* Lib 2. xe
nofine de ſeilin De le
vent, Donques ff a-
pres a le peocheite
jour De payment le
vent a luy foit Denie,
il auct Aile De 430-
ud Difleifin. Ct if-
fint eft lou hoe gran-
‘taper fon fait bn an-
nual rẽt iſſuant hors
de ſaterre a bn auter,
ar, file Geantoz à-
donques ou apres
para al Grantee bn
Denice , ou bn maile
en noſme De fetfin de
Te rent, donques (i
“apres al procheine
tour De payment le
rent foit Dente, le
Grantee poet auct
- atte, ou auterment
Hemp, 3,


€ 1 Cem De Bent
= Meche bone poct
- &uct Aile De Moꝛt⸗
Dancefter, ou Brieke
De Apel, ou de Cofi=
“nage, a touts auts
‘Manners Dactions
“Beals, come Ia cafe
Gift, ficome tl poet a=
ner Dalcun aut tent,


Of Rents. |


name of Seifin of rent,
then ifafter at the next
day of payment the
Rent bee denied him,
hee fhall hane an Af-
fife of Wow Diffa-
fia. And foitis , if a
man graunt by his
Deed a yearely Rent
iffuing out of his land,
to another,&c. if the
Grauntour then after
pay to the Grauntee
a penie or an halfe-
pennie in name of
Seifin of the Rent,
then if after the next
day of payment the
Rentbee denied, the
Grauntee may haue
an Affife , or elfe
not,&c.


Sell. 236.


Lfo of Rent fecke

a Man may haue
an Affife of cMort-
dauncester, or a Writ
of Ayel or Cofinage,
and all other manner
of Aüions realls, as
the cafe lieth, as hee
may haue of any other
Rent.


Sech. 236.


effect to atte ſealon, ann yet is
no part of the rent, nos thal
be abated out of the rent: but
pou fhail read moze hereof
bercafter,Sc@.s65.


€ 77 denier, ou vn


male, exc. Heere by
this (&c. ) fs implied, that
fo tt ig of thegift ofa Sheep,
oz an Dre, 0; a Ring, 07 a
patre of Gioues, 02a pound
of Pepper, o20f any baluable
thing,


€ [Gin fi home grat
per fon fait va annual
rent ifjuant hors de fon
terre a vn auter , CPC.
25y this (&c.) fg tmplied,that
the grant and deliuerie of the
De to no ſciſm of the rents
and that a feifin in ia, which
the Greantee hathby the grant
is not fufficient to maintaine
an Aile, o2 any other reall
Action, but cheremu beau
aduall Sein.


€ Bre de Ayel.
Breuede Aue, This
toate lieth Where the
Drandfather of Ozandince
ther Swag fcíf:D of any land
in fee the Dap that he died, and
aneftranger abate, the hepze
fhall baue this weit, Cw)
And (£ the qreat db;anbfae
ther, Befaiel, Proavus,oz great
®zandmother Befaieles Proa-
uia, be feifed, ag fo afozefapa,
and ofc, ac.tbe hetre fhall aue
a Wꝛit De Bafaiel,proauo , 02
befaicls,proauia, & c.


¶ Briefe de Cofizage. Breue de Confanguinitate. (a) [bis Wꝛit

lieth bere the great Grandfathers father, Tritavus, (id eft) tertiusavus, 0j abavus, (id eft)avus

“ auivagfcifen ag 18 afozefayd, 02 Where grandfathers o2 grandmothers mother, ec, vt fu-
pra. Andfo itis of thefetfin of the o2otber of the grandfathers grandfather, tc,


¶ Rent fecke. Ando (t is of a Rent charge to allrefpects,


© Et touts auters manners dactions reals. Hexeupon tome haue gatb-
sea.that a man ſhall haue a wꝛit of Right ofa rent feck,oz of a rent charge,albett thep be agaínft
common tight, Wut that which hath bene ſayd by Littleton of an Affife of Mortdauncefler,
a Writ of Aycl,Cofinage, andother Actions rcalls, is tobe vnderſtod after Hcifin bad bp
fome of the Anceftozs of the Demandant, {oz withont an actual feíGn,oz a fetfin in Deed, nons


of theleare maintainable,


Se.


160 À


Bralt.lt.2.fo.67.Brit.cap. 8g.
& c.7 6. Fler.ls. 5.0.7,8. oe.
F.N.'3.221.


(w) 6.E.3.34.. 7.E.3.45.
Regifl.zió. F. NB 221.2. 5.
‘Brit.ca.76.


(a) Bralt.lis2 fo 67.
Britsca, 89. ca.76.Flet l.5.
ca,7,8, F.N.B, aat.


1 5. E. a. Hors de fon fee 25.
3.8.3.35. 4.£.3. Droit 31,
F.N.'B.6. 14. E.4-
Diuerfitie des Conrts 117,
331.E.3.Imdgm. 352,


Lib.2.


19.2.3. 3. 44.€.3.20.5.
20.H.7.1.4. it.[1,7. 40.4.
F.X.8. 102.6.

6.H.6. Diffs(ing. 4.6.2.
AG 43. 8.8.1. ibid. 416.
W.2.cap.6. 12.H.7.Kelway
30,


(p ) R2 Feſton 15. 40.
E.3.33- 31. E. 3. Refeour 17.
32.H.6.2.6. 6. E . 4. 11.5.
y. E.4 20. LEM. —
6.47. F.R,B .102.€.
2084 ai 16 44E.6."Diffres
Br.24.39.E. 3.35.39. H.6.7
Lib. 4- fo. Vy Bevills Cafe,
8.H. 4.1.


7 E.4.24.


19, E 3.45.
Vide 159 ,"Rofeemi 14.


(4p. 2,


€ R Efcous.Refcuf-

fus ig here deſcribed

bp Littleton; Jt ts
an antient french $0029 com:
ming from Refcourrer, (id ef)
Recuperare ,.that is , to take
from, to reſcue oꝛ recouer. Re-
fcousig ataking away, and
fetting at libertie againt IaSo,
a diſtreſſe taken, 02 a perfon
arreſted bp the q920ccffe 52
courfe of La, And ail tg
one, as the point of the Diſſei⸗
fin torefcuc,tbe diftrette after
it tg taken,and before hand to
refit and withſtand the ta-
Bing of it (but pet (t {8 no 33e-
{cous bntíll ít bee diſtreyned.
And therefore pou may make
fire Dilletfing of a Went fer=
uice : Refcous of a diftreffe,res
fiflance to diftrepne, Keple⸗
utn, Incloſure, Counterpiea⸗
Ding of the title, and bouching
of a Kecoꝛd, and failing. 3f
the Tenant refcue the diféres,
and after ig dilletſed of the
Œenancie, vet tbe Alſiſe lieth
agaínft him, fo» the difleifin
done of the Went bp the Ree
fous,

@ Per fon vent arere.
DereLittleton dectdeth an an⸗
tient queftion in our %Weoks,
(p) viz. Ghat the rent mutt
be behind, o2 clfc tbe Œenaunt
imap make Keſcous: for (£ no
tent bebehind When the Di⸗
ftrefleis taken, how can the
Keſcous amount to a difleitin
of the rent ben none is due:
And ſo ttis, the Cenaunt
refifE the Lord to Ddiftrepne,
Soben there (a no rent behind,
this can be no diffeifin of the
rent £o? the caufe abouc fapde,
and this (ag tt appeareth bp
Littleton) holdeth ag Wellin
cafe of a rent fernice between
loibanb Œenant, ag incafe
of a Kentcharge, &c. And
fo 3| bcarb Sir Chrifto-
pher Wray Chiefe Jutticefay,
Spbcn there (s no rent behind, 1


tender the rent to the loro oben be (g to take thed
diftrepne, the Tenant map make refcons. Wether
ſtreyne the Cattell of the Tenant in the highwap


Of Rents
Seétion 237


€ J Tem ſont trois

caufeg De Diſ⸗
feifin De Gent Ser-
uíce, 5, Keſcous Ke⸗
plenin, a Enclofure :
Keſcous eft, quaunt
le Seignior cn la
terre tenus De lup
Diftrein f Srent arere
file Diftres 5 Iup foit
vefcous: ou (ile ſeig⸗
nioz bient fur là ter=
ve, ttboile Difftepnet,
&le TŒenant ou aut
home ne lup boile fuf-
fet,ar, Kepleuin eft,
quant le eignioz
ad Diftrepne , et Ke⸗
pleuin foit fait ó leg
diſtreſſe per Briek, ou
pet Plaine, Encloſuẽ
eft, files Terres ou
les Tenements font
iffínt enclofes, que te
Deignioz ne popt
benet Deins les tres
ou tenements pur
diſtreyñ. Ctlacaute
pur que tiels chofes
iffine faits font Díf-
feifins al Seignior,
eft pur ceo que per ti-
els cbofes le Seig-
tío? eff diſturbe de le
meane per que él Doit
auoire x benera fon
rent, 5, De le diſtreſſe.


Diffeifin of Rent Ser.


uice,that is to fay,Re-


{cous, Repleuin, and


Enclofure: Re fcousis |
when the Lord diftrai-
neth in the land hol- -
den of him, for his rét


behind, if the diftreffe


be refcued from him,
or the Lord come vp-

on the land, and will
diftreyne, and the Te- —


nant or another man
wil not fuffer him,&c.
Repleuin is, whenthe
Lord hath diftrained,
and Repleuinis made
of the diftreffe by writ
or by Plaint. En-
clofure is, if the lands
and tenements bee fo
enclofed, that the lord
may not come with-
inthe Lands and tene-
ments forto diftreyne.
And the caufe why
fuch things fo done be
Diffeifins made to the
Lord, is for this, that
by fuch things the
Lord is difturbed of
the meane by which
he ought to haue come
to his rent, s. of the
diftreffe.


Œbathe had adiudged (t : And that Which the (tenant tap doe
uap a ſtranger doc, if his beats be diftraincd, Flthe Cenaunt
iſtreſſe, tf notwithftanding the Tord will
ent of the Lozd be bebind, and the Lo dt
Within big fer, che Œenant map make Rez


frons,


Lib. Of Rents. Seël.237.


{cong, fos that tt (s Defended by Lak to diſtreine inthe high May. And by the fame reafon tf
the Loꝛd Will dtftrepne aucria carucæ, Sobere there is a fufficient dtftrefic to bectaken befides,
o2 ifthe 1020 diſtreyne anp thing that is not diſtreynable cpther bp. che Common Law, oꝛ by
anp Statute, the Cenant map make refcous.

Note, t5ttc is a Reicous tn Deed and a Reſcous in daw: of a Reſcous in Ded fomewhat
hath already beene fpoken. A 1Refcoug in Law is When aman hath taken adtftrelle , and
the cattle diſtreyned as he ts o2tuíng of them to the Pownd coc into the Houſe of the xD&oncr,
ít bee that tokc the diffreile Demaunathem of the :DXoncr, and hee veliuer them not, thigisa
Beicous in Law, and fo of the like,

Bnd eucrp woꝛd of Littleton is matertall, foz he fapth;


€ Ex laterretenus de luy And therefore if the 1020 diſtreine out
of bis fee in lands not holden of kim, the Cenant map make reſcous, vnieſſe tt bee in fome fpez


ciall Cafes. 7


As i£ the Loꝛd cometodittreine Cattle Which bec ſeeth then within his fee, and the Œc-
nant oz any other topzenent the Lozd to diſtreine, dꝛiue the Cattle ont of the fee of the Loz
into fome place ost of hisfee, pet may the dotofrefblp follow, and diſtreyne the Cattic, and


- the Œenant cannot make reſcous, albeit the place Whercin tbe diftrefle ts taken, is out of his


|


fee, for now in iudgement of Law the piffrefic(s taken within bis fee, and fo {hail the watt of
- of Keſcous ſuppoſe.
Beut if the Lord comming to diftrepne had no view of the Cattle Within his fe, though the
- Tenant dziucthem off purpofelp, o2tt the Cattle of themleines after the vie w qoc ont of the
- fee, otf the Cenant after tbe view remoue chem fo? any other caufc , then topzeuent the 1020
of his diſtreſſc, then cannot the Lozp diftrepne them out of hisfe, and t£ he doth, the Œcnant
may make refcoufe.

FE a man come to diftrepne fo? Damage Feafant, and fee the beaks (n his fople , and the
Owner chafethem out of purpofe befoze the diftyefie taken, the Owner of the foplc cannot
diſtreyne tiem,ano {€ he Doth the Owner of the Cattiemay refcuc them, £02 the beatts mutt be
Damage Feafant at tbc time of the diftrefle,andfo note a dinerfitie.

CThere is a diuerſity (a) betWeene a toatrant of Recoꝛd, and a Warrant, o2 an Authozitie
in Law, fortf a Capiasbe awarded te tbe Sherife to arrelt a man for Felony, albeit tbe par-
tp be tnnocent, pet cannot he make refcous. But tf a Sbherife, will bp anthozttp which the La
giveth him, arreft anp man foz Felony Whichis not quiltie, be map refcuc himſelte.


«| Replenin, (b) Is deriued of Replegiarc to redeliuer to the Ow⸗
nct bpon pledaes oz furette,
Cc) Bifo to counterplcab the Plaintife in an Aſſiſe bp Which hee is delayed, maketh him
that picadeth it a Diflcifor. Dtherwife tt te, (fhe had pleaded Nul tort, &c,


Œ Exclofer, Fs here alfo delcribed, and need no other erplicati-
on, fozthe Lozdcannot (4) bzcake open the gates, o? breake done the Incloſures to take
a diſtreſe, and therefore the Law accounts it a diſſetſin. Wut all thefe are intended bp Litile⸗
ton tobe diſſeiſons after an actuall fcifon had, and when the Kent is behind, otherwife none
of thefeare diſſeiſons at all,

Wut Wierefore ſhould a Reſcous of the diftrefle bp the party bimfelfe, oy a Repleuine
which ts a redeltuerp of the diftreile bp the Sherife bp tbecourfeot Law tothe partie beanp
diſſeiſin of tie Bent Herutce? Littleton doth here pels the trucreafon, becaufe that by the
Keſcue, and bp the fuíng ofthe Repleupn , tbe Lozdis difturbe ofthe meanc by the Mich he
ought to bausand come to bis Bent, viz. ofthe diſtreſſe.

And fo itis ofan Incloſer, forhe that diſturbes a manof themeane diſſeiſeth him o£ the
thing tt fcfc, (c) As the turning of the whole (Ereamc that runnes toa Millis a DilTcífin of
the Mill tt fcite.

So itis tf a man be difturbed to enterand manurehis Land , (f£) thts is a difleifin of the
Rand it ſelte:Foꝛ Qui adimit medium dirimit fine Bnd qui obftruit aditum deftruit comodum.
(g) Bnd therefore Where it isfatd that a man fballnot bec puntihed £o; fuing of Wꝛits in the
Bings Court, be tt of right o2 Swzong, (t ts regularlp true , but ít faplctb tn this fpectall cafe
of tbe to zit of 1Replcup for the canfe afezefatd, (h) But Denier ig no diſſeiũn ofa Kent Sere
nice without refcous 02 refiftance.


Sf Seit.


161


3.E. 3 Refcds.12:


44.€ 3:20.6.R .3.Reféoms 11
4,H.7 4.21.H,7.40.34.H.
6.18.16.€. 4.10.lib.9 fal. 22
in cafe de aueyrte,


16.8.4, 10.2. E, 3, axcvric
182. li. 9 . vbt fupra.


(a) 14. Hog. 29.288, Iuſtic⸗ ds


Peace.9.


(b) Brittonfel. 168. Fleta lib,
4«cap. t. JMirrer.cap. 2.6.1 5,
(€) 24.A4ff 3.29.40. 52.
Fleta lth 4.eap. le
"Britton (0l. 108.


(d) 10.E. 3.9.49. E. 3. 14.
7.E.3.3.11.He7.28.8..4/f.
18.10. E. 4.2.


rae lib. 4.fol. 161.208,
Britton fol.'108.
Fleta lib. 4.cap. 1.


f


(€) 9.4 ff 19. -Mirr.2a.3.S.
15. Brirr.fol. 108.114.998.
141.

(t) 26..4T 17.3.E.4.3.per
Littl. 40.E. 3.14 6.

(g) F.N.B 41.g.22,E.3.15
43. ff. 40. 43. E. 3.20. faux
iude. 10. 8. E. ss L5.per Moyle.
2-R. 3.19.

(b) 5.5.5.7 5. 8. H.6.12.


Lib.2.


Britton vbi (upra,
Flora lib, 4.60 1s


39. ^f 4.40. A[f. 3.13 E.1.
Affi? 404. 3. fj. 8.8.H.6. 11
H.E, y. 4fie78-


=


49.8. 3.18.29. Aff «.
36. £7 1o E.53. 19.35. H.
6.33. 33. H.6.7.6.


(©) Fleta i.v cap. 42.
49. E. 3.14. 49..4f.5,
39. f. 4p.


(3) Vide Sef. 45 v.


(4p.12.


Ont 4. caufes de
VS differfin de Rent


Charge. And pou map
adde a fifth, viz. Keuſtance to
Diftrepne, Counterpicading
ano Wouching a Record dnb
fapler thercof, ag hath benc
fato before,

¶ Denier. Deni⸗
all is a diſſeiun of a Kent
Charge, afwell ag of a Rent
fecke, alb tthe map diſtreyne
fo? the Rent Charge, aſwell


Of Rents.


Sect. 238.


T font 2, caus
E B fes De diſſeiſin
de rent charge, fcílí-
cet, Keſcous, Keple⸗
ulin , Œnclofure, ¢
Denier, cat Denier
eft $n Differin De
Bent charge , come
eft auantbit De rent
Seck.


Seél.238.239.24.0. .


diffeifin of a Rent
Charge. /éz. Refcous,
Repleuin, Inclofer, &
Deniall. For Denyall |
isa diffeifin ofa Rent
Charge, as is faid be-
fore of a Rent Secke.


as fora Rent SHerutce. Nota, Chat when Wakes fap that a detapner of a Ment Charges, —


Secke ig a Diſſeiſin, ít muff be intended bpon a demand made.


FE there bec twotopnttenants , andthe grantee ofa Kent Charge diltreyne foz the Bent,
and one of them make Kelcous, thep are both dieilors, foz a diftretle forthe rent (ga Demand —
in Law and then tie J2 on-papment ts a denpall and a dilleifin, but he that made the Keſcous
18 onip the 3D(fict (02 with Force,


€ De reafon where⸗
T Incloſure is a

Diflerfin of a Rent
Secke, ts becaufe the Gans
tee cannot come bpon tbelano
to Demand it.


€ Forals. (*)Fore-

ftallamentum ,
Ganificth Obtrufionem vix
vel impedimentum tranfitus,
&c.


Œ Oue force & ar-
mes. Vi & armis.
Forte, vis in (1) the Coms
mon Law is moft commonly
taken tn (Il part,andtaken fo?
bniaiwfyll biolence, for Maxi-
me paci fint contraria vis &
iniuria. Bnd therefore Brit-
ton fatd Dell, fpeabing tn the
perfon of the ing, Nous vo-
lous gue touts gents pluis v=
feant iudoement que force
Arma. Armes (n the Com-
mon Law fignifieth anp thing
that à man ſtriketh oz burteth


Seétion 239.


€ ET Deur font

caules De dif=
fetlinde Bent Seck,
ceftafcauoir , Denier
& enclofure,


Section 24.0.


€ ET il femble
que il y ad bn
autet caufe De diſſei⸗
fin De touts lestrois
feruices auantbítg,
cettafcauoír, fi P feíg-
nioz foit en alant a
là tette tenus delup
put diſtreyner pur le
Rent atece, a le Te⸗
nant ceo opant, lup
encounter, a tupfo2-
ftalà la voy ouefque
force & atmeg , ou
lu» manace en tiel
fogme que il ne ofaft
benet


Nd there be twe
caufes of diffeifin
ofa Rent Secke,that is
to fay, denyall and in-


clofure.


ND it feemeth

that there is ano-
ther caufe of diffeifin
of all the three ferui-
ces aforefaid , that is,
if the Lord is go-
ing to the Land hol-
den of him for to di-
ftreine for the Rent
behind , and the Te-
nanthearing this, en-
countreth with him
foreftalleth him the
way with force and
armes , ot menaceth
him in {uch forme,that


Lib.2.


benera fa terre pur
Diftreiner, D fon rent
arere pur Doubt de
most, ou mutilation
De {es members, ceo
ef On Diffeifin, put
ceo quele Seignior
e(t diſturbe De le
meane per queil Doit
pener a fon rent, Et
iſſint eft (( p tiel fo2=
ftaliment ou manace,
celuy que ab bn rent
charge ou rent fece
eft fozftalle, ou ne o⸗
fatt benec a la terre a
Demaunder le rent
arere ac.


quz faciunt Brufüram,&c, Arma moluta plagam faciunt,
ligna vero & lapides Brufuras orbes, & ictus,
morum appellatione non folum fcuta & gladij & galea contine


as tbe Poet ſaith:


Of Rents.


hee dare not come to
the land to diftreine
for his rent be-
hinde, for doubt of
death, or bodily hurt,
thisis a diffeifin, for
that that the Lord is
difturbed of the
meane whereby hee
ought to come to his
rent. And fo itis ifby
fuch foreftalling or
menacing, hee that
hath rent charge, or
rent fecke is foreftal-
led, or dare not come
to the land to aske the
rent behinde, &c.


Se#.24.0.


Sotthall ; (k) Om nes illos di-


162


(k) BraBen lib. 4. fel. Y6 4s


cimus armatos qui habent pals Flora libus


cum quo nocere poffunt. Te-
lorum autem appellatione
omnia in quibus finguli ho-
mines nocere poffünt accipi-
untur. Sed fiquis venerit
fine armis & ipía concerta-
tione ligna fumpferir, fuftes
& lapides; talis dicetur. visar-
mata, fed fi quis vencrit cam
armis, armistamen ad dejici-
endum non vius fuerit, & de-
iecerit, vis armata dicitur effe
facta, (ufficit enim terror ar-
morum vt videatur armis
deieciffe. And Armorum
quedam funt tuitionis ( &
quod quis ob tutelam corporis
fui vel fai juris fecerit, jufte fe-
diffe videtur) quedam pacis
& Inftitiz, quadam pertur-
bationis, pacis & iniuriæ;
quzdam vfurpationis rei alie-
nz. Bgaine, Armorum quæ-

am funt moluta, & quzdam


ficut gladius,bifacuta & huiufmodi;


&c. (Eoconclubt this, ft is truly fato, that Ar-


ntur; fed & fuítes & lapides,


lamque faces & faxa volant, furor arma miniſtrat.


Sed vim vi repellerelicet, modo fiat modetamine incul
fed ad propulfandam iujuriam.


pata tutelæ non ad fumendam vindictam,


€ Psr doubt de mort & mutilation de fes members. For it mut not be


Vagus & vanus timor, fed talis quz cadere poffit in virum conftantem, & nonin hominem va-


num & meticulofum, talis enim debeteffe metus quiin fe continet mortis
craciatum. Littleton here fatth it muſt be fos feare of Death,
nemo tencrurexponere fe infortunijs & periculis. Bud therefo
menace isa difeifin, not onlp (faith Littleton) of a Rent
and Kent ſecke. Chefe be ali the diffetfins of a rent that our Æuthoz fpcakeg of,
aiter (1) Soberea diffeifin (ball be bp Sap of admittance


of the owner of the Kent


periculum & corporis


* oy mutilation of members Et
2e a kozeſtallment with fac a
feruice, but alfo of a Rent charge


Se here⸗
Bnd


' Littleton doth adde the binding reafon in cafe of Fozeſtalment, becaule the Lord is difturbed


of the means bp Which he ought to cometo his rent, w

befoze, aſwell in cafe of the Rent charge and ik ent fcc
€. cc. DE the (&c.) in theend oft

plicd therein, fufficient bath bene fpoken befoze,


hereof therebath bene ſpoken fufictent
ke, ag of the Rent feruice,


big Section, and what ig im⸗


#20% hath Littleton fpoken of remedies foz the recouerp of the arretageg of rents, ut


fince Litrletons timea right profitable ffatut
teconerp of arrerages of rents in certaine
Law, and gineth further remedp ts fome c
remebp, which Statute hath beme well and beneficiallp erpeanded,
things arcto be obſerued. Sirk , when Littleton $29te, the Weires,


t * inthe 3 z.peare of H.8. hath bene made fog the
cafes obere there lap no remedp at the Common
afes where at the Common Law there was fome


and bercupon eight
Executors 92 Adminiſtra⸗


tors of a man feifed of a Rent feruice, Rent charge, Rent fecke, oz Fee farme tn fee fimple o2
fe tatle had no remedp for the arrerages incurred tnthe life of tye owner of fucb rente : 25ut


Ho a double remedy is giuen to the Œrecutoss 02
viz. either te diftretne, oz to have an action of debt.


Adminiſtratozs for payment of oebts,¢c,


2. Chat the preambic of the ſtatute concerning Executoꝛs 02 Adminiſtratoꝛs of Tenant foz
lifets to be intended of Tenant pur auter vie fo long ag ceftuy que vie ifuettj, Sboarealfo bols


pen bp the fai boubic remedp : but after the c(Eatc £02 life Determined,
minthratozs might bane bad an action of debt bp Ste Law,
2


bis Erecutozs o? Ad⸗
but thep could not jaue
diſtrexned


a.


Virgill 1. v/£neid;


Bractor lib. 2.16
Bratronfo.19. er 88.
Fleta (55.3. cap.7.


(* ) See of this inthe
Chapter of "Difcents
49.E.3.14« 49. Aff 5.
29..Af.42. Ge.


(1) Vide $e8.58g.


(* ) 31. H.8. cap, 15.


Lib . 4. fo 49. «0.'a.. Ognelle
(«fe 40.E.3. Execute 98
45. E.3.0id.71.. 9.H.6.43.
14.H.8 10. 19.H.6.43.
34. H.6,10. 32. E. 3. Det.p.
9.H.7-17. 19.E,3. Imhidie
vim 22,


Lib.2.


(m) 23. Eig. Diu. 375.


26.2.3.64.13.4.4.fe.ul-
times. Ognals cafe.vhi fupra.
& lib. fo. 39.6.
Lillingrens sale,


(0) Lib.y,fe118.
Edysdges cafe.


© 40.E.3.3.4. 11. H. 4.855.
14.€.4.4. 20.1.7, 1.46
28.H.8.Dier 24.

(p) 34.E.1. Anonrie 333.
FLN.B.123. 10. H. 6.11.
11.H. 6.8. Mich.32.H.8.
Tra 29, Leakes cafe.
Ognels safe vbi fupra.
3-E.3.Debt 157.

(4) W.1. v9.36.
F.N.2.82.122.


(r)36. 8.3.44. 16.H.6.11.
9 33.H.6.35.FN.B.121.


(€) Hil vg. Eli Rit. 457.
énter Sharpe & Pole.

Vid. Ognalls cafe vbi fupra.
(0 19. 6.5. Inri dition 22.


Cap.


Of Rents. Sect. 240.


diltreyned, which now they map boe bp force of this ſtatute, fos in that point it abbet (m) an
other remedy, then the Common aw gaue.

3. It a man make a Reale fo; life o2 iiues, 02 a gift tntaplereferning arent, this (ga Rent
feruice within this fatute.

4. The oiftrelle is the moze plaine and certaine remedy, then the action of debt,foz the action
of debt muftbe brought agaínft them that tace thepzoffits when the rent became bebinde 02"
againtt their Executoꝛs oz Adminiſtratoꝛs; but the diftrefle map be taken bpon the land, be it
either in tbe Œcnants owne hands o? tn the hands of any other that clapmes bp oz from him,
( that ts by interpzetation vnder bim) bp purchafe, atft oz difcent, and theſe woꝛds, Clayming M
only by and from him, are to be bnderfton clapming onip from o2 vnder him bp purchafe, gift «
02 Difcent, and not paramount 02 aboue Him, as the Loꝛd bp cfcbeate clapmeth not bnder the +
tenant by purchafe, qift,oz difcent, but bp reafon of bis fciantorp which ts a title paramount,

$. there be 302b and Cenant, and the rent is bebinde, and the 3.075 grant awap hig
Seigniory and dpeth, tbe Erecutezs {hall haue no remedp foz thefe atrerages, bccaufe the
granto2 bimfelfe had no remedy fo? them ben he dped in refpect of bis grant, andthe ffatute
is ( in like manner as the eftatos might o? ought to auc done ) Et fic de fimilibus, fo; the
ac giueth no remedy ben the Œcftatoz himſelte hath difpenced With the arrerageg oa had no
remedy when he Dyed.

6. Itthe Œenant make a Leafe Foz life the remainder fo? itfe, the remainder in fe, the ez
nant fo? life papes not the rent due to the 1020, the Lozd dpeth,the Cenant foz life dyeth, the
Exccutozs cannot diftrepne bpon him in rematnder,becaufe be clapmes not by oz from the Ge=
nant fozitfe. And ſo tt to of a reucrfion for the caufc afozefatd, Wut ffa man grant a Rent
charge to A. fos the lífc of D. and letteth the lands to C. foy itfe, the remainder to D. (n fes,tbe -
tent te behinde by diners peares, B.dpeth,and after C.dpeth, A.map diftrepne Din remainder
fo? all the arrerages,bp the latter branch of the Statute of 32.H,8. and this Ddiuerfitte rifeth
bpon the feucrall pennings of the former bzanche and of thig later, which pou may reade tn the
flatute it feifc, and fo erpounded and adiudged (o ín Edridges cafe, and the latter claufe giueth
the Ic(Ter eftate the greater remedp.

7. Foꝛ the Drrevages of a Nomine poenz, and fo? relíefe, o2 for apbe, Pur faire fits chi-
ualer, 02 Pur file mane: thts ftatute * giueth noremedp, Foꝛ, for the arrerageg ef the Nomi-
ne pænx,the Grantee himſelte map haus an action of debt, and confequentip bis Crecutozg og
Admintſtratoꝛs, and pet the Nomine penc ag an incident to the rent {ball diſcend to the heire⸗
Fosrelicfe the Lozd cannot have an action of debt but diftrepne, but his Erecutozs bp (p) the
Common Law hall have an action of Debt, fox ítís no rent but a cafuall impꝛouement of
feruiceg for the fain Aides, tf the 100 doth leup them, tbe fonne andthe baugbterrefpeafullp
fhall haue an action of debt againft the Œrecutezs ey Admintfratozs of the Loꝛd, and {€
they baue nothing, then againt the hetre, but this te bp the ftatute (q) o£ W.r. Note that ail
manner of arrerages of rents ifuing out of a freehold o? inberitance Whether thep be tn moc
ncp 02 cozne, cattell, fowle, pepper, Compn, victuall, fpurres, gloves, o? any other pzoffít to be
deltuered o2 peelded, € Whether thep be annuall 01 euery 2-3.03 4. peares, ec.oꝛ the like are with⸗
tn this ftatutc,but woꝛke Dapes,o2 any coppozall ferutce o2 the like are not Within this ſtatute.

8, A feme fole is fcí(e of a rent in fee, tc. which is behinde and onpato fhe taketh bufband,
the rent (g bchinbe againe, the offe opeth, the bufpano bp the Common Law fhould not bauc
the arrerages growne due befeze the mariage, but fo; the arrerages become buc during the
conerturethe hufband might (r) hauc an action of bebt bp the Common Law, but now thie
ftatute * bp a particular claufe giueth the hufband the arrerages duc befoze mariage, anb
the fato double remedy Foz the fame, and that he map diltrepne for the arrerages growne due
during the couerture, fo tt giueth htm that which be could not hane befoge, and further remedp
fo? that, which the Common Law gaue him, and ſo it hath benc (( ) adtudged.

be UB ifhop of (t) Norwich had the firft fruits of all tbe Œlergie within tbe Dioceſſe at eucz
tp auopoance, the Church became vopde,¢ another 39arfon became Incumbent, Who papb the
25 ifhop parccil of hig Firſt fruites accozbíng to the taratíon of the Church, and fog the reft hee
hada pap giuen onto him to pap it, the Biſhop dped,the refione Was not papb, Soberenpon

his Erecutozs brought an action of debt, and ít (e adiudged that no action doth ipe, bez
caufe ít ig a meerc ſpirituall thing and no lap contrac, and therefore the Court
bad no iuriſdiction to hold plea of tt. 3| haue bene the longer tn she
erpofition of tbe fato Statute, —— it is a generall
cafe, and doth concerne molt part of the
Subiects e €nglanb,
*


*


Finis libri fecundi.
THE


^


H


THIRDBOOKE
of the firſt part of theln-


ftitutes of the Lawes of
ENGLAND.


Of Parceners.


Seil.241


Cuar.l.

i Arceners
eu font en
22i Deux ma=

ners, ceftafcanoir,
Parceners (olongs E
courte Del Common


le», a Parceners ſo⸗
lonque cuſtom̃. Par⸗
ceners folonque le
courte Del cómon lep
font,lou hie ou feme
feifie De certaine ter-
tes ou tenements en
fee finipf ouen taile,
nadiflue forſq; files
et Deuie, et les tene=
ments difcendont a
leg iffues.et les files
entront en les terres
ou tenements iffine


Arceners are of
NIGH two forts (to
E-- wit ) Parce-
ners according to the
courfe of the Com-
mon Law, and Parce-
ners according to the
cuftome.Parceners af-
ter the courfe of the
Common Law are
where a man or wo-
man feifed of certaine
lands or tenements in
‘fee fimple or in taile,
hath no iflue but
daughters & dieth, &
the tenements difcend
to the iffues,and the
daughters enter into
the lands ortenements


$t;


€ Ur Duthoz has
Bing treated in
his two fozmcr
bakes, firtt of


effates of lands and tence
ments, and in big fecond
bake of Genures whereby
the fame bauc beens holden:
$305» tn his third boke voti
teach ba dtuers things con-
cerning both of them, ac fr
the qualities of their eſtates.
2.3 n what cafes the entrp of
dim that right hath, map bee
taken a$oap. 3. The reme⸗
dies, andin bat cafes the
fame map be pacucnted, 03 a=
wopbed. 4.12090 a man map
be barred of big right foz
tuer, anb in what cafes the
fame map be pzenented 02 as
gopoed, Foꝛ the ũrſt he hae
níng fpoken of folc eſtates
Dentdeth the quality ot eſtates
into Indeuided, € Conditto⸗
nall, Indeuided, into capar⸗
cenary, (opntenancp and tes
nancy in common. Coparce⸗
natp into parcenerg by the

Common


163 |


Capa.


Common Law , anb 493tces
ners by the Cuftome, and he
beginneth his third bok With
Parceners claiming bp dit
cent, Which comming bp the
at of Law, and right of
blond, ts the nobicft and $002»
tbíeff meanes whereby lands
bot Fall from one to another,
Condvitionall,tato condttiong
expreile 02 in deed, and Condi⸗
tions in Law, Conditions
in Deed, into Gages, Which he
diuideth into Vadia mortua,
anb Vadia viua. Vadia mor-
tua, fo called becaufe either
monep 02 land map bee loft:
and Viua, becaufe neither mo⸗
nic noz land can be loft, but
both pacferued. Chen {peas
Keth be of Diſcents, whereby
the entric of him that right
hath map bc taken away.
And nert to that, of the re=
medie how to preucnt the
fame, viz bp continual ciaim,
«Eben he teachcth, how aman
having a deftafible o? an im-
perfect cffate, may perfect and
effabiifh the fame bp thre
meanes, viz. WBy Keleaſe, By
Conſirmatton, and Attourne⸗
ment, where that is requtfite,


Of Parceners.


Difcendus a eur, dõ⸗
ques els font appels
qdarceners,2 quaunt
a files els font foꝛſ;
bn beire alour ance-
fto?, Ct els font ap-
pel Parceners, p cco
que per le beiefe que €
appel Bꝛieke De Parti-
cipatione facienda, la
lep eur boet covert
à partitíó GE fait ent
eur, Et ſi font dur
files as queurles f=
res Difcendont, Don-
que els font appels
Deux Parceners. Ct
fi font trois files.00-
que els font appels
trois Parceners, €t
fi quater fileg.quatet
Parceners, a iffint
oufter,


Setl.24


fo difcended tothem,
then they are called
Parceners,and bee but
one heireto their An- «
ceftour. And they
are called Parceners,
becaufe by the Writ
which is called Brewe .
de participatione facien-
da, the Law will con-
ftraine them , that
partition fhall bee
made among them:
and if there bee two
daughters to whome
the land difcendeth,
then they bee called
two Parceners, and if
there be three daugh-
ters, they bee called
3 parceners, and foure
daughters, 4 parce-
ners,and fo forth.


Hauing fpchen of a Difcent, being an Act in Law Which taketh away an entrte, he doth then
Cpeake of a difcontinuance,the act of the partt:, whereby tbe entrie of them that right haue ffjal be
taken away, And next onto that be tcacheth, in What cale the fame map bcauopocobp 18 emitz
ter, After he had treated of difcents and Difcontinuances, Which take aSvay entries, but
barre not Actions. Lally, be frttcth forth the learning of toarrantics, ( acutigua.gnd cana

D ot ]garntna 3 allure Sobercbp both Œntrie, Acdion,and i ight map be Barred,
€ theremedies how thep map be pzeuented befoze they fail, € in What cafes thep map be auop=
bed after thep be fallen. And thus haue pou an accotint of the thirtere feuerall Chapters of
bis third boke. Andnow his method being vnderfton, iet ds heare What our Bathoz wil fay
bnto bs concerning Parceners.


€ Et quant a files els font forfque vn heire a lour (a) anceffer. his is
Falle pztnted, foz the originalltg, Et quanque files els font, els font parceners , et font forfque
vn heire a lour auncefter.

€ Parceners. (b) lus difcendit quafi vni heredi propter iuris vnita-


tem, cut funt plures filiæ,&c. & vbi omnes fimul & in folidum haredes funt, plurescohære-
des funt quafi vnum corpus, propter vnitatem iuris quod habent. tOhereupon tt followeth,that


Er


(a) Bralf.li.2.f2. 64.7 1,67.
€ 76,tc. & Liss .fo.443.
"Brit. fo. 58.112 128.183.
184.185.189.193.
Flet.ls.§.¢4.9.i.6.c4.47.

€ Lann.li. ca. 5. & li 13 11
(b)ZraB.li.a.fo. 66.76.
Tlet.vh.fap."Brit yb. up. ci


Statute de Hibernta albeit where there be tio Parceners, (c) they haue motties in the lands delcended to them,pet

COJU SAT thep both but one beire, and one of them is not the moitie of an beire, but both of themate
uf vnus hares.

; And tt is to be obferued, that there (8 a diuerfitie betweene a difcent, Which (e am ac of the

(d) Flet.li. s.ed.g. Law, anda purcbafc, which is an act o£ the partte.(e ) fro? it a man be feifen of lands tn fee,

Flai.li.6.en, 47 and hath luc to daughters, anb one of the daughters is attepnted of Eclony,the father dicth,


both daughters being aline, the onc moitie ſhall difcend to the one Daughter, and the other mois
tie fbatl efcbcat, '

Wut t£ a man make a Teafc fo? life, thercmainder te the right heires of. A. beeing dead, ha
bath (Tuc two daughters, wherdot the one is attainted of felonte, in thie cafefome hath fato
that the rematnder is not geod fo? a moitie, but bopd Foz the whole, Cos tpat both the vaughterg,
ſhould bane bene (ag Littleton faith) but one hetre, 2

man


A


Lib.


Of Parceners. Seit.24r.


A man makes a gift in tatle,veferning two ſhillings rent to himlclf during bis lifc,and tf he
dic his betre Within aac, then referuing a rent of twentie Hillings to bis heires Foz euer; he di⸗
eth having (fluc tivo dangbters, the onc of fullage, the other within aae, inthis cafe the Do-
ne [ball bolo bp Fealtie oneip, tnfomuch ag che one Daughter ag weil as the other is big here,
‘and both of thera (ag Littleton fatth ) make but one bare, creo bis beiroig not of full age, nci-
ther is his heire in that cafe of full age. Wut ifthe releruatton had bene, And if he die, his

boire neither being wirhin age, noz of Cullage,¢c. un this cafe the releruatton had benc god ;
‘ano if it Doth not beaín tn bis next heire, tt fpati neuer begin as this caſe is, fog that the paccc-
dencie is not perfouned. (c) Wut pet (C one of them be of age, and the other within age,the thal


- bauc ber age and other pꝛiuiledges and aduantages that an ÿeire within age (ball hauc, and


ben tycp are vemandants,fo2 the nonage of the one , the 39aroll fball demurre againk ther
both. f) Sunt autem plures participes quafi vnum corpus in co quod vnum ius habent, & oportet
quod corpus fit integrum, & quod in nulla parie fit dcfectus. ino when the right heire doth


. Claime bp purchafe, he muft be (fap thep ) a cemplcat right heire in tudgement of Law, Bnd


evefoze if lands be gtuen to a mart and to the heires females of bis bodic, and he hath iſſue a


- fonneanb a daughter, and dict, the Daughter Hall aue tbe land by difcent, but t£ a remainder


|
|


be limttted to the heires females of the bodie of 1.5. anb be hath iſiue a fonne anda daughter,


- bis daughrer (ball neuer take it bp purchale, fo» that the (s not heire Female of the body of L.S.


becaufe he hath a ſonne.

FE aman giue lands to another,and to the heires males of his bodie,bpon condition, that tf he
Die Without heire female of bis bodie, that then the 3Done? MHhalre-enter, this condition ts btter-
ip bopd, foz he cannot haue an beire female, fo long ag he hath an beire male.

Bnd esthep be but one heire, and pet fcuerall perfons, fo kane thep one entire freehold inthe
land, ag longag tt rematneg vndiuided in refpect of anp ſtrangers Præcipe. (2) But betwen
themfciucs to many purpoles thep hauc in indgement of Law feuerall freehoids,fo2 the onc of
them map infeoffe another of them of her part,and make liuerte. (h) Andthis Coparcenarte


is not feuerco 0? dintded bp Law, by the death of any of them, for t£ one die, her part thal diſcend


to ber (ffe, and one Præcipe Mhail lie againſt them, £o? thep ball neuer fopne ag hetres to ſeueral
Aunceſtoꝛs in anp Action Aunceſtrell but when oneright dilcends from one Aunceftour :
and then propter vitatem Juris, though thep beinfeucrall degrees fromthe common Aunce⸗
fto;, pet fball they ioyne. Wut the tues of feucrall Loparceners, becaufe feucrall rights otf
cend,fhaii neuer iopne as heires to thew moth.rs, and pet jeu thep haucrecowered,a wꝛit of
Partition lieth betweene them.

Foꝛ erate pie, (1) Ita man hath iffuc two daughters,and fg diſſeiſed, and the daughters banc
iſſũe and die, the Flues hall topne tn a Præcipe,becaufe one right diſcends from te Aunceltoz,
andit maketh no difference whether the common Aunceftoz being out of poſſeſſion, died Dcfoze
the daugbters,oz after.foz that in both cafes thep mult make themfelues heirs tothe Gꝛandta⸗
ther Which Was lat leiled, and Sohen the FAucs (k) fau: recouered top are C oparceners,and
one Præcipe ſhalllie aga inſt them, And likcwile if the Blues of two Ceparceners Which are
tn by fenerall défcents, be diſteiſed, thep ſhall ioyne in Aſtiſe. Wutinthe fame cafe, t£ the two
Danghters had bene actually feifed, and had beene dilletfed, after their » eccafes the Iſſues fhati
not ispue, becaufe feuerall rights diſcended te them from feucrall Aunceſtoꝛs: and yet When
thep hane feucralip recogcred,thep aro Coparceners, and one Precipe lieth again them, and a
reicafe made bp one of them to tbe other ig god, And ſo notca diverfitie inter difcenfum in ca»
pita, & in ftirpes.

And the Statute of Gloucefter cap.6. made Anno 6.Edw.r. fpcaketh, Si home muige,&c.
Fea man dteth: foas that Statuteertendeth not but Where one dieth, and hath diners heires,
Sokercof one is fonnc oe daughter, brother o2 filter, nephew o2 nece, andthe others bee in a
further dearer, all tbetr heires from hencefozth fball haue their recoucricbp Swatt of MHoꝛtdaun⸗
£cílo?, And this fæmeth to me to be the Common LaSw,foz Bracton who Wait befoze thts fas
tute.faith, (1) Un cafu cum fit affifa mortis anteceffor coniungenda cum confangu nitate, non erit
poftea recurrendum ad pracipe de Confanguinitate,fed ad affifam mortis, quia perfona quz pro-
pinquior cft, & facit Affifam,& trahit ad (e perfonam & gradum remotiorem vt vbi potius pro-
cedat affifa quam precipe quia id quod eft magisremctum, non trahit ad fe quod eft magis iun-
Gum, fed é contrario in omni cafu. Bnd here With agrecth the moff of our (m) Woks: ano two
Coparceners (ball auc a Watt of A yel, an» by thetr connt fuppofe the common Aunceltoz tobe
gtandfather tothe one, and great grandfather to the other.

J haue heene the longer herein, £o? that this Fuberitance of Coparceners istherarett kind of
Inheritance that ig in the Law.

Furthermore itis to be obferned, That herein alfo incafe of Coparceners, (n) fometimes
the difcent és in Sarpes, (viz.) To Stockes 02 Roots, andfometimes in Capita, Eo ieads:

As if a man hath Blue two daughters and dieth, this difcentts in Capita, (viz ) that euerte
one fhall inberit althe, ag Littleton berefaith, Wut it a man bath Iſſue two oangbterg , p
he


(e ) Tempi Er. Age 128.
8.€.2.Iudgment 240. 30.E.3
7: 44.E. 3. Age 47.26,aff 65.
13-E. 3.7 fe. 51. 28. ff.a2.
29. 4:25.57.

34 H.6.4.. Aff Y.

(t) Fleta lib. 5.ca 9.ct Lib.6.
Cap.47-


(g) 16.E.4,
(h) 37. H.&.8. 19. H.6, Ax.


17.E.3,46.


Vid: Sef. 313-


(i) 7-E. 3.30.34.
48.6.3.13 4. 2 4.E.3.13.
FN /B.221. 35.H.6.3

27. E.3.89. 35H. 6 (BE
(k ) 37-H.6 8. 9.€,4.13.6
42. E. 3. 16. 17.


(1) Brabtcn lib. 4. 25 406.
Brittonfol. ig. 183.6
178.204. Flers (sb, 5.64p.1.
€t 2. 9. in fine.

(m) 19. E. 5. Tit.Toindre $n
vien 31, 7. E.3.30.et 34.
27.E.3 89. 48.E.3.14.
24.E. 3.13. F.N.B.aar.

R egifler. ns

Vide 3 1. E.1. Ioindre in Actiã
34. - 13. E. 3.1bsdem 29,
Tempi E.2.3b.35-

30. 8. 1.504.56. 25.H.6.23.
Cn) Braëton bb. 2.6 6.
Brittencap.71.
Fletallb. 5 .eap.9set G cap, 47.


Bits Veal


ER (Cau. Of Parceners. | SeH.2 4090


(o) $9. £.3.9Qupmr h.t 4i
F.N. coger ttm


© Braf.lt.2. fo. 6.01. rc.
Britcagie — Fler.li.5.ca.g.


(p) Reti? Orig.7 6.316.
Renfl.Jud.8o. B t vb.fup.
Fler.ubs fup. ‘Braë.ubi fup.
dr Li.5.fo. 443.5.


(a) 13.E s. ri, Duo Imp.
170. Y7 E.3,38.Flet.l5 e 9
Mir.c#.2.§.17.

(0) 44.5.3.819. Partie. 6.

& fit. Anovrieys. 2. H.6.


( (Y 3.8.2. tit. Dower 133
(0) is. E 2. Nuper ebrt 12.
16 E.2.shid.i3.. 5. Marie
Die! 153.


(1^ 17-8.3.73.
(w)13.E.3 Quare Tropedis
179

Fleta sb $. 27.9.

(x) Mub.34 et 35, Eliz.
enter (omitemde Huntingdon
gt Seignyer Mennpioye «


the eldelt daughter hath (ftue thre Daughters, anb the poungel,one daughter, al tbefefoure (bal —
inherit, but the daughter of the pongelt fhall haucas much as the thre daught re of the elocft, |
Ratjone ftirpium, and not Ratione capitum, fo? in tudgement of Law eucrie daughter hath a i
fenerall Stocke o1 18 ot, E

Milo it a man bath lue two daughters, and the Ideſt hath {Tue diuers fonnes anb Dínerg —
daughters, anb tbe peungeft hath iſſue diucrs Daughters, the eſdeſt fonne of the eldeſt daugh⸗
ter Chall onelp inherit, foz chis difcent (s not in Capita,but all tho Daughters of tbe pongcft hal
inherit, and the elocft fenncis Coparcener With the vaughters of the pongeft,and fal hauc one
moitte, (viz.) bis mothers part: fo that men difcending of daughters may be Hoparcenors,
as Well ag Women, and fhalltopntlp impleae and beimpleaded, ag tg atozefapd,

Co) BPftherebe tivo Coparceners, and the onebztug a Rationabili parte , 03a Nuper obijt
agatn& the other, the Defendant clatme bp purchafe, and diſclatme in the bloud, the 39latntífe
all havea M ortdauncetter againft her ag a ftranger fo2 the Mole, i


€ Parcener s font en deux manners. Pere Littleton Doth Diuide Par⸗
ceners, anb herewith doe agree the anttent bokes of Tao," és

€ Et ils ſont appels Parceners,cc. Parceners, Participes, Et dicun-
tur Participes, quafi partis capaces, fiue partem capientes, quia res inter cas eft communis ratione
plurium perfonarum. This Cenancte fm the antient bakes of Haw (s called Adæquatio, and
fometime Fam ilia hirfcifcunda,an Inheritance tobe diutded, andmanp times Parceners are
Calicd Coparceners, ; fi : i

Œ Brcue de Participatione facienda. This tS falfe pzinted, and
fbeuib be, De Particione facienda, a 192ít whereby the Coparcencrs are compelicd to make
partition, Item eftalia Actio mixta , quæ dicitur ACtio Familiz hircifcundz , & locum habet
inter eos qui commune: habent hzreditatem,&c. Etlocum habet vt videtur, inter Cohzredes, |
vbi agiturde proparte fororum, vel inter alios vbi res inter partes & Cohæredes diuidi debeat,
ficut funt plures forores, qua fun: quafi vnus heres, vel inter plures fratres, qui funt quafi vnus M
hares ratione rei quz diuifibilis eft inter plures mafiulos, & c.


Œ Des terres & tenements. 3t is to bec confidered of tohat Inhe⸗
títances daughters fhall be Coparceners, and how andin What manner partition thai be made
bet weene them. wherein tt is to be obferued, Chat of Inheritauces ſome be entire, and fome —
be ſeuerall: againe, of entire, fomebe Díut(ibloanb fome be tmotuifible, Bnd here ttappearethby —
Littleton, Chat Parceners take their appellation, becauſ thep are compelled to make partition
by wꝛit of Particione facienda ; Where note, That Littleton alioweth Sell to ino out tbe true
derivation of Swords, as often hath bene and fhail be obferned, :

Fea Villeine diſcend to two Coparceners, this (e an entire 3inberítance, and albeit the
Willetne bamfelfe cannot be diuided, pet the profit of him map bedturved, one Ceparcencr map
hauethe feruice one dip, one Weeke, dc. andthe other anether Dap 02 wækc, ac. and foz the
fame reafon a Woman fhall be cndoWedofa Villeine, ag before it appeareth tn the Chapter
ot Dower, Likewife an Aduowſon ts an entire Fnberitance, (a) and pet in eftec the fame
map be Dintded bet weene Coparceners, for thep map diuide it to pꝛeſent byturnes.

A Rent charge ig entire,and againt common right, (r) petmap it be diufdedbetweene Los
parceners, and bp Ba in Law tbe Cenant of the land ts ſubiect to ſeuerall diſtceſſes, and parti=
tion map be made befoze feifin of therent.

Œntire Fnberitances not dintAbic,we Gude diners tn our bookeg , anb fome Fnberitances
a are diuiſible, and pet hail not be parted 02 Diutded betweene Coparceners, as hereafter

all appeare. : j

(1) Fa man haue reafonable Œfteners, ag houſebote, Heybote, sc. appendant to his frees
hold, they are fo entire as thep fball not be diuided bet&oeene Coparceners. (1) So tfa Coꝛo⸗
dic incertaine be granted toa man and his hetres, and he hath Fine diners daughters, this
NE 0100ít fball not be diutded betweene them, but of a Coꝛodie cerrtaine, Purtition map

ee mabe.

(v ) Homage and Fealtie cannot be dtuided between Coparceners.(w) Ho a Piſcharie tre
certaine, 02a Common fauns nombre cannet be diuided between Coparceners fo: that Would
bea charge tothe Tenant of the Soile. (x) Che Loro Mountjoy feifed of the Wannoz
of Canfordin fee, bib b» Ded indented and inrolied, bargaine and feli the fameto Browne in
Fe, in Which Indenture this claufe Was contained, Prouided alwayes, and the fayd Browne
did couenant and granttoand with the fayd Lord Mountjoy,his heirs,an affignes,that the Lord
Mountioy, his heiresand A ffignes might dig for Ore in the lands (which were great wafts) par-
«cll of the ſa vd Mannor, and to dig turfe alfo for the making of Allome. Bnd in this cafe
thaee popntg Wererefoined by all the Judges. Firſt, that thie did amount to a grant of am
Intereſt and Anberitance to the Lord Mountjoy, te digge,#, S»cconolp, Chat — J—


^
+


Lib.3. Of Parceners. Se#.241,


ding this grant. Browne hig hetres and aflignes might digge alfo, and like to thecafe of Com⸗
mon Sauns nomber. Ehirdip, that the 3020 Mountioy might aflignebis Whole fntereft te one,
tio,07 moze, but then LE there be tivo og moze, thep conld make no diuifion of it, but woꝛke tos
gether Sith one Locke, nepther could the Lez Mountioy, &c. afligne big interell is anp part
of the waſt to one 02 mozc, foz that mtabt woꝛke a pretadice and a furcharge to the Œenant of
the lano, and therefoze (£ fuch an tncortatme 3inberítance difcendeth to tivo Coparceners, it
cannot be deuided betweene them.
-. Sbut then it map be demanded, What fball become of tbefe Inheritances. The anſwere ig,
- that it appcatctb in our Bokes that regularlp (y) tbc elbeft Mall havo the reafonable Œfto-
tiers, Common, Difcharp, Cozody incertaine, ac. andthe veft fhall bauc a contribution, that
tg, an allowance of the batue in fome other of the Inheritance, anb foof thelike, Wut what tf
the common Aunceſter left no other Inheritance to gine anything in allowance, What contri:
- bution 02 recompence (ball the ponger Coparceners fauc. It isanfwered, that if the Elto⸗
- trs 92 Pilchary o2 Common be incertaine, then hall one Coparcener haue the Eftoucrs,
- Difcharp, o2 Common, c. foz a time, and the other For the like time: ag the one foz onc peere
- and the other for another, oz moze,o2 leſſer tine, hereby no pzeiubice can grow tothe :D ner
- ef tbcfopic. Oꝛ in cafe of the Pifcharp, the onc map haue one ſiſh, and the othcr thefecond, d.
- 9r one map banc the firl dꝛaught and the fecond the fecond dzaught.#. And tf (t be ofa Parke,
- one map haue the Gift Beaſt, andthe fecond, the fecond, ec. Andi of a Mill, one to haue the
; Mill for a time, and the other the like time, og the one, one soll Bifh, and the other, the fecond,
Ec. Andthis appeareth tobectbe anctent Law, fozitis faid, ( z ) Sunt aliæ ves hæreditariæ
qua veniunt in partitionem qua cum diuidi non poffünt conceduntur vni, ita quod alia cohæ-
redesalibi de communi hæreditate habeant ad valorem ficut funt viuaria Pifcariæ, parci, vel fal-
- tem quod partem habeant pro dcfe&u ficut fecundum pifcem tertium vel quartum, cl fecundum
tractum, tertium vel quartum. Item in parcis fecundam, tertiam aut quartam. |

But now let bs turne our cpc to Inhexitances of Honour and Dignity, And of this there
is an ancient Woke Cafe ( * ) in23.H.3.tit.partition 18. in thefe Words, Mote, tf the Carles
dome of Chefter difcend to Coperceners ít (ball beedentded betweene them al well as other

Lands, and the eldeft Hail not have this Seigniozp and Earledome entire to her felfe, Quod

- nota, adindge pertotam Curiam. Wy this it appeareth that the Œarledome (that ts, tbe pols
feftions of the Gariedome) hall bee deuided, and that where there bee moze Daughters ther

. one, che eldeſt (bali not hane the Dignity and Power of the Earle, that (e to be a Counteſſe.

- TObat then Mall become of that Dignity. The anfwere (e, (a) that in that cafethe King Whe
is the Soueratgne of Honour and Dignity, map Foz the tncertatntp conferre the Dignity
— of the Daughters he pleaſe. Ans this hath beene the vſage (ince the Eonqueſt ag
ít (s ſaid.

But fan Earle thathath his Dignity to him and bis hetres dieth, hauing (fruc one Daugh⸗
ter,the Dignity (bali difcend to the Daughter, for there is no tncertainty,but onlp one Daugh⸗
ter, the Dignity (ball difcend bnto her and her Poſterity ag Well as any other Anberitance,
and this appeareth by manp 392e8bente, sn bp alate Judgement giuen tn Sampfon Leonards
Cafe, Who married With Margaret the onlp After and etre of Gregorie Fines Lord Dacre of the

' Sonth, and tn the cafe of William Lord Ros.

Wut there is a difference betweene a Dignity 02 name of Nobility and an D Fice of Honout
Foꝛ it aman hold a Wannos of the King to be high Confable of England, and dpe hauing (f-
fac two Daughters, the eldeſt daughter taketh bufband, he hall execute the :D fice folp , and
befoze marriage ít (ball be exerciſed bp fome fufficient Deputy, anb all tbíg Was rcfoluep bp all
the Judges of England, tn thecafe of (b)tbe Duke of Buckingham. Wut tbc dignity of the
Crowne of England tg Without all queftion defcendibieto the eldeſt daughter alone and te hep
voſterity, anb fobath it beene declared bp Act of 39arlíament, (*) X01 Regnum non eft di-
uifibile. And fo was the Difcent of Troy.


Praterea fceptrum Ilione quod gefferat olim,
Maxima natarum Priami


(b) FEa Caltle that te vſed for the neceſſary defence of the Realme difcendetotswo op more
Coparceners, this Calle might bee diuided bp Chambers and Romes as other houſes bee,
but pet fo? that (t ig Pro bono publico & pro defenfione Regni , tt fhall not be diuided, for ag
onefapth,Propterius gladij diuidi non poteft. Bnd another faith, (*) Pur le droit delefpeeque ne
foeffre diuifion en auenture que la force del realme nedefaille pax taunt. But Cafties of has
bitation for pziuate tfc; that are not fox the nece(Taty defence of the 1Realine eught to bee par=
ted betweene Coparceners aſwell ag other Doufes, and Wiues may thereof becenBower, ag
bath beenefatd in the Chapter of Dower,

Be there be two Coparceners of certaine Lands With QURE and thep mate partition


165


Vide €. Maria Dier 15 3.


(y) 2. E.2 dewar 123.15.E.
2.qmar.Inep.170. Fletavbs
Supra. Vyae Mirrer. ea. 2. S. 17


(z) "Bran lib. 2.76. Britton
esp. 71.7 2.F lita lib, 5.cap.g.


(9) 23. H. 3 tir, partition 18,


(a) 3. H.3 fi prefription;


(b) 1x1. Elie Dien 285. the
"Duke of Buckinghams (Cafe.


(9) a5. H.8.cap.22.
Virgil s inci,


(b) Braon lb. s. fol.y6;
Flctá lib. s .cap.9.


(*) Britton 186187.


Vide $98.58.


Lib.


(C) 32. £. 3. garrantia70.
(d) Ittn.Pickering.
V. E. 3. Ret. 34,


Caps. Of Parceners. Sefl.242.243. |


of the Land, the Warranty fball remapne ; becaufe tbep are compellabic , to make partition, —
(c) Wut ot herwile it Was of Jopntenants at the Common Law , ag fall bee faid hereafter |
in bis proper place, (d ) Thomas de Eberfton fetfed of the Mannor of Eberfton, Within the
Foꝛreũ of Pickering, had kept timeout of mind, a towdWwardfoz keeping of tbc tomds parcell —
of that Wannoz, and had the bake of all the Crees feiled in thefatd Woods by any ofthe froz-
refters of that fforreft ag belonging to hts Mannoꝛ( which he conto not haue wit hout a Pze⸗
fcription. ) Thomas of Eberfton tnfeoffed two of the faib Mannoꝛ, betSweene Mhom partition
Swag made, fo ag one of them had the oxone haife in feueraltp; and the other the other haife, Ro-
bert Wyerne afterwards had the one halfe, and Thomas Thurnife the other, andthep inthe.
pre of Pickering clapmed to heepe a Howard Within tbe fatb towds , and the barke afozes
fatd, and the truth hereof and the bfage being fpectatlp found by tbe fozreflors,Werderozs, and
Kegardors, Willou ghbie, Hungerford anb Hanburie, Fluftices 3itínerantg Within that Jro1-
reft gaue iudgement as followeth, Ideo confideratum eft quod przdi& Robertus & Thomas
habeant Woodwardum & Corticem in bofco prædiéto de quercubns prædiétis fibi & hæredibus


—


fuis imperpetuum. Saluo femper iure, &c.


Seti.


€ AU? fi home feifie De te-
| nements en fee fimple,ou
en fee taile , Deup fauns t(Tue De
fon cozps engender , a les tene-
ments Difcendont a fes foers,
els font Parceners, come eft a=
uantdit, Cf en mefnele maner,
lou tl nad pas ſoers mes les te-
nements difcenddt a fes aunts,
els font Parceners, ac, Des fi
home nad fozfque bn file, eine
poit c(tte Dit Patcener, mes el
e(t appelle file a heive, ac,


24.2 . |
Lfo if aman feifed of Tene-
ments in Fee fimple or in Fee-

tayle, dieth without iffue of his

bodie begotten, and the Tene- |
ments difcendto his Sifters , they
are Parceners as is aforefaid. And
inthe fame manner, where he hath ”
no Sifters but the Lands difcend to
his Aunty they are Parceners, &c. |

But if aman hath but one Daugh-

ter,fhe fhall notbe called Parcener,

but fhee is called Daughter and

Heire,&c.


J


€ () fein. Chis mult be intended of an eftate taíle made
to the father and to the heires of his boop , for otherwife if the fate Taple were
made to a manand to the beires of bis body, hic Gfters cannot inbertt, And not on=

Ip Daughters Hall be Coparceners, but Hitters, Aunts. great Aunts, ac.
€ File & heire, &c. Here by (&c.) ig implyed Siſter and heire,


Aunt and heire, great Bunt and heire, and fo vpward.


€ 'y tbíg Section, and
Ritec &c.) inthe end

of ít. Jtis to be vn⸗
derſtood that there are two
kind of partitions betweene
Coparceners, the one ín ded
orꝛ expꝛeſſe, and the other tn
La o2 Fmplicite. DE pars
titions in deed 09 expꝛeſſe,
fome bee boluntarp whereot
Littleton enumerates foure
Manners, and onecompulfa-
tp, that is bp Wait of Parti⸗
tion.


Sed. 243.


€ ET eftafcauoir,


que partition

enter parceners poit
eftre fait en Diners
maners.Un eft. quat
els agrecont De faire
partition,t font pats
tition de les Tene⸗
ments, ficome (i foí-
ent Deux parceners
a


ND itistobee ©

vnderftood, that —
partition may be made M
in diuers manners.One
is when they agree to
make partition,anddo —
make partition of the
tenements.As if there
bee two Parceners to
deuide between them


L .


Lib.3.
a Deuider enter eur
les (enements eu
Deur parts , chefcun
part per (op en ſeue⸗
taltie,æ 9 egal baluc.
€t ti font 3, Parce⸗
ners à deuider leg
tenements en trots
parts per foy en ſe⸗
ueraltte, aC,


Of Parceners.


the tenements intwo
parts , each part by it
{elfe in feueraltie , and
of equall value. And
if there bee three
Parceners, to deuide
the tenements in three
patts by it felfeia fe-
ueraltie, &c.


Seil.244.

The Art partition (n deed
bet weene Œoparcencrs , tg
that Swbich Littleton here
fpeaketh of, viz. Quant els
agreont & font partition de
les tenements, &c. chefcun
part per foy en feueralty & de
egall value, &c. 3€ Copatz
coners makepartitions at fi
age, and bnmarríco, and of
fane memorie of Lands ín
jfccfimple, it is qoo «firme
for ener, albett the balues bee
bnequall, but i£ ít be of lands


entayled, 02 if amp of the Parceners bct of non fane memorie,


ít fall bind the parties


themfelucs butnot their Flues bnicile it be equall. Dz (€ any be Coucrt, it (ball bind the huſ⸗
band, but not tbe Sie 02 her heires Dz t£ anp be within age tt hall not. bind the Inkant ag
he fecond partition fonosoctt) in the next Scétion. And


fall befatd moze fully hereafter,
herethe ( &c.) implpeth further,


' parts andfo forth, It further tmpipeth,


that it there be foure Parceners,chen fourc parts, FE fiuc fine
thatall this muft be ín fencraltp ; $obercof and with


&obat limitations this ta tobe vnderſtood (t hath beene declared befoze,


(C V M auter parti-
V tion ett, a efiter
per“ agreement enter

- eux, certeine De lour
amies,de faire partitis
Des terres ou tenemts
en lc forme auantdit,
Œtenticls cates apres
ticl partition, Le cigne
file papmerment cflie-
tà bn des partes tint
Dimides , que el boit a=
uer pur fa part, aDotn-
ques la fecond file por⸗
cheine apzes lup auter
att,a Donquest tierce
oer auter part, Don-
ques le 4, auter part,
ac, (t iſſint foit que ſoi⸗
ent plufozs foers, tc.
ne foit auterment a-
gteeenter cur, Caci
poit eftre agree enter
eur, que bts aucta ticis
tenem̃ts a ou auttiels
tenemts,æc, fatis aſcũ
tel primer election, ac.


Seclion 24.4.


Nother Partition
there is, wz. to
choofe byagreement be-
tweene themfelues cer-
taine of their Friendsto
make partition of the
Lands or Tenements in
forme aforefaid, And in
thefe Cafes after füch
partition , the eldeft
Daughter fhall choofe
firft one of the parts fo
deuided which fhe will
haue for her part, and
thenthe fecond Daugh-
ter nextafter heranother
part , and then the third
Sifter another part, then
the fourth another part,
&c. if fo bee that there
be more Sifters, &c. vn-
leffe it bee otherwife a-
greed betweene them.
For it may beagreed be-
tweene théthat one fhall


haue füch Tenements ,
Tenements,&c.withoutany primer election.
Œt 2


€ [ee le 4.


auter part,


orc here tye Cc.)
tmplpeth the fifth After,
anb alter ber the Grt,and
fo toit.


Œ Cor il poet effe
agree anter eux que
vi adera tiels tene-
ments, ey vn auter
tiels tenements, cc.

Here bp this ( &c.) fa
tmpiped divers rules of
Law prouing the con-
Cluffon of Littleton in
thts Section. viz. modus
& conuentio vincunt le-
gem. Paco aliquid lici-
tum eft, quod finepa&o
non admittitur. Quilibet
poteft renunciare juri pro
fe introdu& Hut with
this limitation that thefe
Rules extend not to ang
thing. that is agatnft the
Common Weaith , oz
common tight, Foꝛ con»
uentio priuatorum non
poteft publico iuri dero-
gare.


and another fuch


Seil;


166


Vide SeW. 2t,


Lib.s.


© 7a. li 32%.
Flets,lib. 5.ca.ge
Britten,es.73:


CE) 45.E.5. finer 41.
99.E.3.quar.imp. sou ^
18.€.2 144.1769 ^ ^ ^
$. H. 5.19. 38. H.6.9.
Del. 8tud. 16.117.
Vid. Bra®on. 338.249.

% 5.3.7.8. 34.H.6.40.
Y1. H.4.54. £0. E. 5. quar.
Imp. 63: 34.E.3.
Pbid.198. 15.E.3. Dar.
Prefentmend 11.


Uy. E.3.20. 31, 21,€,3.21.


FINE. 32.


Capa.


CEA pars. It

ig called in old bobs

* Æifnetia Which ts
deriued of the french word
Eifnc 62 eldeft,as much to fap
as the part of the eldeſt, foz
Bra&on fatth, Quod Eifnetia
femper eft praeferenda. propter
priuilegium ztatis , fed cfto
qued filia primogenita relicto
nepote vel nepte in vita patris
vel matris decefferit , prafe-
renda erit foror antenata tali
nepoti vel nepti quantum ad
Eifnetiam quia mortem pa-
rentum expectant. Bnd herex
Sith agresth Fleta alfo, Quod
nota, whereby it appeareth
that Ænitia pars ts perfonall
to the eideft, and that tbíg
Prerogative 02 pꝛiutledge df=


Of Parceners.


Setl. 245.


T la part que
EE leígne foer ad
eft appelle en Latin
Enitia pars. Mes fi
leg parceners à-
greeont, que leigne
foer ferta partition
Delestenements en
Ic ſorm̃ auantDit,s ſi
ceo el fait, Donque il
eft Dit q̃ leigne foer
eet pluis  Dat-
reine puc fa part, a
apzeg chefcun pe les
forts, tc.


Seël.245.246:


ND the part

which the eldeft
fifter hath is called in
Latyn Evitia gars. But
if the parceners agiee |
that the eldeft fifter
fhall make partition |
of the tenements in
manner aforefaid, and
if fhe doethis, then it
is faid that the eldeft
fifter fhall choofe laft
for her part, and after
euery one of her fi-
fters,&c.


en le maner but petit pile, iffint


fcendeth not to her fflue, butthe next elbeft Gtter Chall aue tt, (f) Bnd here is a dtuerfity to be
obferned betweene this cafe of a partition tn deede bp theac of the parties, (for there the
pꝛiuiledge of election of the clocff daughter (ball not diicenb to her tne ) Bnd Where theiaw
Doth giue the elvct anp pꝛiutledge Without her ad, therethat pitutlebge fball diſcend. As {€
there be diuers Coparceners of an Aduowfon * æthep cannot agree to pzefent, the Law doth
glue the firtt prefentment to the eideft, and this pztufledge fhall difcend to her (uc, ncp bee
Allignee hail aue tt, and fo ſhall her husband that ($ Œcnant bp the Curtcfic hane tt alfo,

€ Donques il eft dit leigne foer eflier pluis darreine,oc. By this and the
&c.inctheend 8€ this Section ts implped the rule of Law is Cuiuseftdiuifio, alterius
cft cle&io. Bnd the reafon of the Lao ig foz anopbing of parttalitp,

Ipfe etinim Leges cupiunt ut Imrevegaatur.


thich might apparantip follow ifthe elde& might both diuide anb chofe, Mow Folloxoctl) the


third partition in Desde,
Sell. 24.6.


autet partition ou al- Nother partition or allot-

€ Vr eit ficome foient A ment is, T if there be foure
quater parcencrs & apres le parceners and after partition of
partition De les terres fait, the lands be made, euery part of
chefcun part Del terre foit per fop the land by it felfe is written in a
folement efcript en bn petit e= little fcrowle, and is couered all
fcrouct, a foit couett tont en cete, in waxe in manner ofalitrle ball,
fo as none may fee the fcrowle,
and then the 4.balls of waxe are
putina hat to bee kept in the
hands of an indifferent man, and
then the eldeft daughter fhall firft
Dongs


que nul poít eter lefcrouct, &
donque ſoient les 4. piles de cere
Mis en bn bónet a garder, en leg
Maines Dun indifferent home, &


a


Lib.3. Of Parceners.


Dongs leigne file pzimermét met-
tra famaine en le bonnet, quel
prendra bu pile De cere ouefqi
lefcrouct deins m le pile pur (a
part, Dongs le fecond foct met-


Se0.247. 167 P
put her hand into the Hat and take : :
aballof waxe with the —— — 4 Ai e
within thefame ball for her part fe^ wkd ba: ck Í À
Andthen the fecond fifter {hall («daz CA ee Cou
put her hand inrothe hat andtakg ea ses ———


tra (à maine enlc bonnet & pzen-
Dea bn auter, le tierce ſoer le 3.
pile,æle 4. ſoer le 4. pile, ac. & en
ceo cas cou'ent chefcun De eur
lup tener a (a chance æallotment,


an other, the 3. fifter the 3. ball,
and the 4.fifter the 4.ball. And
in this cafe euery one of them
ought to ftand totheir chance and
allotment.


€. A Lines Dithis partition by Lots ancient Authors * weite


that in that cafe Coparceners Fortunam faciunt iudicem : Bnd Littleton here tears


meth it chance, for in the end of tbíg Se&tion be faith,
ought to hold her felfc to her chauce, € of this kinde of diuifion


ture, where ít is fato, Dedi vobis poffefsionem quam diuidetis


be moze balls accozding to the number of the parceners.


€ | em, bn autec

partition il p ab,
ficome font quater
qDarceners, a tis ne
polleat agreer a pat-
tition deſtre fait en-
fet eup, Donque lun
poit auerb£e De par-
titione facienda en⸗
uersies aute trois:
ou deux deur poient
auerbte De partitio-
ne facienda enuers
les auters Deux, ou
trois De eur potent
&uct btc De partitio-
ne faciendaenuers Ie
quart, a Iout electi-
on,


tion doth lye. Wut if onc oz both makea Leafe foz life,
tweene them, becaufe Non infimul & pio indiuifo tenent
ther, and the wꝛit of partition mutt be againſt the Œenant of the
parcener diſſetſe another during this difleitin a tiozt e£ partition both not


Sell. 247.


Lfo there is ano-

ther partition,
As if there bee foure
parceners, and they
will not agree to a
partition to bee made
betweene them, then
the one may haue a
Writ of Partitione fa-
cienda againft the o-
ther three, or two of
them may hauea Writ
of Partitione facienda
againft the other two,
orthree of them ma
haue a Writ of Part;-
tione facienda againft
the fourth at their ele-
“ion.


fo: that Non tenent infimul & pro indiuifo.


Wut therebe other Partitions ind


that in this cafe eucrp of them


pou ſhall reade in bolp Serips


forte.
he &c. in tbe end of this Section implyeth that (£ there be moze coparceners


there mutt


€ Hit: followweth the


fourth Dartition

th Dede. Vitrleton
hauing fpoken of teluntarp
Partitions, 02 Partitions bp
co:fent, {20% he ſpeakes of
a9 artittowby the compuifas
vie meancs Of dato where
no Partition can bee had bp
coment. Now of What ins
heritance partition map be
made bp the tozit o£ Partitio-
ne facienda map partip aps
peare by that Which hath
bencfato, Mozeouer tt is ta
be obferued that the words
9f tye Wait De partitione fa-
cienda be * Quod cum exdem
A. & B. infimul & pro indi-
uifo teneant tres acras terre
cum pertinen',&c. Bnd note
thatthis word ( Tenct) in a
tto2ít Doth alwayes (mplp a
Œenant of afrehold. ino
therefoze (9) í£one Coparce-
ner maketh a Leaſe fo
Pcarcs, pet a Sorít of Parti⸗


a Szit of Partition boti) not ipe be-
» thep doe wn the freehold toge-


shold. (h) FE one Co-


ipe betweene them


cede then bere hath bene mentioned. (i) Foꝛ a $9art(-


tion made bet eme tio Coparceners that the one fbati banc and occupíc the Tanto from Eafter


vntill the Gr(t of Augutt only in feucraitp bp himteite
occuptethe land fromthe firtof Ausult ontílltbe Jfeaft


heires, this (qa god partition, Bifoftwe — haue two Mannoꝛs by dilcent,


and that the other {ball hans and
of Eafter peartip to them and cheir


and


* Fletabb. s,c2.9.
Bras, lib. 2.75.

‘Britton ca.72.

Vid Numbers a. 26.

Verfe 54.8 5. & ca.33:

verfe $4. Of diufion by Letts.


© 3.E.3.47.485


(8) 21 E.3.55.

F.'N. 2.63. dé
38.H.6.2. Y1.H.4.1.
4. H.7. 19.5;


Cb) 4,H.7.9. 11. Af-23-


(i) Temp;.E x, Partition ax,
F.AN./8.62. 4,


Lib.5.


\


,


(k) 36.H.6.9.


(D) 37-H-6.8.43.E. 311.


(m) 17-E. 3.14.15.


(n) 1a. E. 3.Iudgm. 162.
7.4[f. 10. 7.E.3.49.10.a].17
13«.4[[.5. V7. 10. E. 3-40.43*
28..4/35.21.4//.18.
zo.E. 3. Aff. 63. 3 E. 3.48 b.
y9.H.6.45.7.H.6.4. 5. Ed. 4.


1o,

© Bra. li.4. fo. 216.5.
(0) 3. E. 3. 48. 21.2. ti.
Nnper ob.21. 4.H.7.10.
30-€.1. Nup.eb.18,
F.N.B.9.b.

V "Drit.fo.v12.4.

(p) Li.6fe.12. 13.
Adorrices cafe accerde.


Bal fo 66. rc. "Brit. t. ere.
"Brit.ce. 72. Flet.li. 5.04. 9.


Ld


Ockamcap. Suid fit [ber iudi-
iari,

46. 8.5.45.9.30:3. 8.2/:35*
40· E. 5 2, Rogifl, F2. BA6.


Capa.


" Of Parceners. Set. 248:


a make partition, & bat the onc (ail hauetheone Mannoz fox onc peare , anb the other

MM — foz this adig fo alternis vicibus to them and their heires, this tg a god

Partition. Che fame Las ts if tbe partition bec made in forme afozefapd, for two 02 moze
"peares and each Coparcener banc an eftate of Inheritance and no Chattell, aibett either of
them alternis vicibus haue the occupation but for a certaine terme of peares,

DF Wartitions tn Las, fome ve bp act (n Loo without iudgement, and fome be bp tudge⸗
fnentyam not tn a woꝛit de Particione facienda. Bnd of thefetn ozder.

(k) Je therebe 1010, three Coparceners Mefnes,and Cenant, and one Coparcener purs
chafethe Genancie, this tg not onely a partition of tbe Wefnaitie, being extinct Foz a third part,
but a diuifion of the Seigniorie Paramount, foz now he mutt make feucrall Auowꝛies.

(1) léone Coparcencr make a freoffement in fee of her part, thig ig a fencrance of the
Coparcenaric, anu fenerall weits of Præcipe ſhall lie againt the other Coparcence anv the


coffee,
T m) 3£t$oo Coparcencrs be, and each of them taketh huſband anb haue Flue, the Swiues
dic, the Coparcenarie ts divided, and here is a partition in Raw.
(n) Bf two Coparcencrs be, and onc dilleile the other, and she Difletfæ bzingeth an AE
Gife,and recoucr, tthath * bat —— — be var ne ud
dthis ſeemeth (fay f erie antient,and thereupon boucl) Bra&on, * Si res mmu-
— — — diuidendo iudiciun;. And (0) fo (fap tbep) t£ tbe one Co⸗
parcener recoucr agaínft another (a Nuper obijt, oza Rationabili parte, the iubgement thal be,
That the Demandant all recouct and bold in ſeueraltie. 1But Britton fg to the contrarie, fog
bc faith,* Et fi afcun des Parceners foit enget ou difturbe dea feifin per fes auters Parcencrs,vn,
ou plufors, al diffeifee viendra affife per feucrall pleint fur fes Parceners & recoucra, mes nemy a
teneren feueraltie, mes en common folonque ceo que auant le fif, &c. (p) Bud this ſeemeth
realonable, for he muſt haue his iudgement according to bis Plaine, and that wags of a moitie,
andnot of anp thing in foucraitte,and the Sberife cannot haue any Warrant to makeany pAr=


tition in fcucraitie o2 bp Deets and Wounds,


Dte the fir tudgment
in a wꝛit of Partition.
Sobercof Liliieron here
{peaketh , ig, uod partitio
fiat inter partes prædiétas de
tenementis prædictis, cum per-
tinentijs,after Mhich Judge⸗
ment, bp thig &c. viz. Tene-
ments, &c. is implied, Chat a
tait (ball be awarded to the
Sbherife, Quod aflumptis te-
cum 12.liberis & legalibus ho-
minibus de Viceneto tuo , per
quos rei veritas melius fciri po-
terit in propria perfona tua
accedas ad tenementa prædi-
€ta cum pertiñ, & ibidem per
córum facrament in præfentia
partium predictarum per te
premuniend’ fi intereffe volu-
erint;przdicta tenementa cum
perti per facrament bonorum
& legalium hominum prædi-
&orum habito refpectu +dge-
rum valorem earundem in dü-
as partes equales partiri & dis
uidi,& vnam partem partium
illarum, & c.
Tie lak Kc.inthis Section
(8 euident.


€ ludgement, Iudi-


Seélion 248.


€ E & quát iudge⸗
ment Gra Done

fur tiel brief, le iudg⸗
ment fecta tiel à par-
tition ferra fait enter
les parties, a que le
UWicount en fon p20-
pct perfon alera ales
terres a tenements,
eC, & que il pet E Cerc-
ment De rij, lopalt
homes De fon Bapli⸗
toicke,ac, ferra pat-
tition enter les pats
ties, et que lun part
Demefines les Ter⸗
res & Œenements
foient Aflignes al
plaintif.oualun Des
plaintifs, et bn autet
part abn auter Par⸗
cener, ac, nient fca-
fant


AN when iudge-


ment fhal be giué
vpon this Writ, the
iudgment fhal bethus,
That partition fhall be
made between the par-
ties,& that the Sherife
in his proper perfon
fhall go tothe lads and
tenements, &c. & that
hee by the otah of 12
lawful men of his Bai-
liwicke, &c.fhall make
partition betweene the
parties, & that the one
part ofthe fame Lands
& tenements fhall bee
affigned to the plor to
one of the plaintifs, &
another part to another
parcener, &c. not
making mention inthe


a


H d
2


H


Lib.3. Of Parceners.  Seëf.248.


fant mention en le Iudgement , ofthe el- ciumeft quafi iuris di&um, fo
tudgement Deleígne deft {ifter,more than of M —
ſoer pluis qd puiſũ. the youngeft.


accipitur, and cannot bee con⸗
tradicted: And thereupon Antiquitie called that excellent Boke in the Exchequer, Dometday,
Dies ludicij, Sicut enim diſtricti & terribilis examinis illa nouiffima fententia nulla tergiuerfati-
onis arte valet eludi, &c. fic fententia eiufdem libri inficiari non poteft, vel impune declinari ob
hoc nos eundem librum iudiciarium nominamus, &c. quod ab eo funt, & prædiéto iudicio non
licet vlla ratione difcedere. 1By Littleton (t appeatctb, Chat the fozmes of Judgements,pleas,
and other legall proceedings, doc conduce much to the right vnderſtanding of the Law, and of
the reafon thereof, ag here Littleton rígbtlp collecteth, bpon the forme of the tudgement that the
Sherike all deliuerto them fuch parts as he thinkes god, and that tbe eldeſt Coparcener {bal
haue no ciection when partition ig made bp the Hherife, Anditis tobe obferued, that there
be two Judgements ina wꝛit of Dartition: DE the former Littleton fpeaketh in this place,
And Wien partition ts made bp the oath of twelue men, and afliqnement andallotment fhere⸗
of, andforcturnedby the Sherike, then the latter tudgment tg, Idco confideratum eft, quod par-


"titio predicta firma & ftabilis imperpetuü teneatur,and this (s the principall iubaement,(q) And
- of the other befozethis be ginen, no ait of Erroz dot Lie.


€ Sbireue is a $0020 compoundedofttoo Saron words, viz.


- Shire, and Reue. Shire, Satrapia, 92 Comitatus; commeth of the Saxon Uerbe Shiram,i. Par-


tiri,foz that the Swboïe Realme is parted and diuided into Shires: And Reue fg Prxfectus , 02
praepofitus ; fo as Shireue ig the Reuc of the Shire, Praefectus Satrapiæ, Prouincie,oz Comita-
tus. Bnd be ig called Præfectus, becaufe he is tbe chiefe D fFicer to the tring Within the Shire;
fo? the $0073 of bis Patent be, Commiffimus vobis cuftodiam Comitatus noftri de,&c. And
be hath à thzeefold cuftodie, triplicem cuftodiam, viz. Firſt, Vitx Iuftitiz, for no futt begins,
and no Procelle ts ferued but by the Sberife. Aifohe (8 to returne indifferent Juries Co the
tríall of mens liues, liberties lands gods,xxc. Secondly, Vitz legis, hee te after long fuit
and chargeable, to make execution, which ts che ltfe and fruit of the XLa£o, Chirdip, Vitæ Rei-
publice, He tg Principalis Conferuator pacis within the Œountie, which ts the life of the Com⸗
monweaith, Vita Reipublicæ pax. ‘

He is called before Sect 234. Vifcount, in Latpne, Vicecomes, i. Vice Comitis,that tg, tn ſtead
of the Earle of that Countie, who in antienc time had thereqtment of the Countte vnder the
Hing, for tt is ſayd in the Mirror, * Chat it appeareth bp the ozotnance of antient Kings
before the Conqueft, Chat the Caries of the Counties hav the caftodte o? gard of the Coun⸗
ties, and when the Earles left their cuftobies o2 gards , then Swag tbecuftobte of Counties
committed to Viſcounts, Whotherefore (agit hath beenefapd) are called Vicecomites, and Oc-
kam cap. Quid centur,&c. Porro Vicecomes dicitur,quod vicem Comitis fuppleat

Marculphus ſaith, Chis office tg, Iudiciaria dignitas. Lampridius, Chat it is Officium digni-
tatis. Fortefcue fatth, Quod Vicecomes eft nobilis officiarius. Bndfee there, and obferue Geil
his honourable and ſolemne election anb creation at this dap, Wut to confirme all that hath bin
faro touching this point, and to conclude the fame, among the Lawes of Edward the Confeïñoz
FZ findit thus recozded, Verum quod modo vocatur Comitatus olimapud Britones temporibus
Romanorum in Regno ifto Britannix vocabatur confulatus, & qui modo vocantur Vicecomites
tunc temporis Vice confules vocabantur ; ille vero dicebatur viceconful qui confule abfente ipfius
vices füpplebat in iure & in foro. Herein many things are woꝛthie of obfernation : Hirt , fo?
the antiquitie of Countics. Secondip, Chat Which Wee called Comitatum, the Romanes
moze Latinelp called Confulatum. Thirdly, t0bom the Saxons afterwards calicd ( as hath
benc fapd ) Shireue 02 Earle, the Romans called Conful. jrourtblp, Chat the Sbherife wag
Deputy of the conful o: earle therfore the 13 omang called him V iceconful, ag We at this day cal


‘Din Vicecomes, Fiftlp, Chat the Sbherife inthe Romans time,and before, Was a Minifter


tothe kings Courts ot Law + Jultice,t had then a Court of hig own, which was the Couns
tp Court,then called Curia Confulatus,ag appeareth by thefe words , Ipfius vices fupplebat in
iure & in foro. Higtiy, Chat this Realme Was diuided tnto Shires and Counties, and
thofe Shires into Cities, Burroughs, and Townes, bythe Bꝛittains. Sothat King Æl-
freds bíuífion of Shires and Counties, Was but a renogatíon 02 moze eract delcription of the
fame, Laftip, the confequence that Will follow bpon thefe things being fo antient, (as inthe
time of, and before the Homans ) the fudious Reader will cap collet, And afterwards,
fol. 135. amonaft the Lawes of the fame hing tt appeareth , That thole Whom the Sarons
fometimes called (and now Se call) Aldermen, 02 Eorles the 1Romang called Senatores , Et fi-
militer olim apud Britones temporibus Romanorum in regno ifto Britannia vocabantur fenatores
qui pofteatemporibus Saxoni vocabantur Aldermani,non propter ætatem,fed propter fapientiam
& dignitatemcum quidam adolefcentes effent iurifperiti tamen & fuper hoc experti.


€ De


168


(q) Zib.r 1.fol.40.

Hill. 39 Eliz. Rot. 327.in
Banke le Roy iter An\Conuter
de War, et le Setgnior "Berkiey.


Vide the fecond part of the In-
fisinves W.1.cap.10.
€) Mirror cap.1. S. 3.


Ockam cap. Quid (entur. dre.


Fortefcue cap. 24.
12. R. 2.cpa.


Lambert fel. 139.12,


|


Cafar pelichro  Hunrirgdin
polider inter leget, Malmuciio
Hooker lib. 2,


Lib.3.


Flea. lthyr.04p 67.


Braken lib. 3. trad 2.049.335.
v3.3. Idem lib s. fo 131.5.


"Bralt.li. 5. 156.b. Brit fo. $6.
Flet.ls,2.€6,63,


Glam h. 1.62.9.


1e. H.4.4-


© Mir.¢4.5.6.2. Ui. Drac.
fr.40 9. Flet.li.2.c2.63.5 6.


Bris. fe A8 qb. aco Bra. l.a.
figi ere Fletlli. 9.2.2.


Capa.


€ De ſon Baylimicke. It appeatet


Of Parceners.
b before.that the Œnaneft mutt


$et.2491


bi De vicineto, of the place where the lands boc lic, anb not generally deBaliua tua. Ip this
{tappeareth, That the Sherite is Balivus,an’ his Countte called Baliua, anb therefoze (t is
go» to be feenc, what Balivus originally fianifien, and Sobercot it (8 deriued. . 1
Baylife (g a french $0020, and fignifics an £D ffícer concerning the adminiſtration of Juſtice
ofa certaine Pꝛouince, and becaufe a Spherife bath an officecencerning tc abmínt(bration of


Juſtice Within his Countie 02
ctample, when be cannot find the D


ABaplisorcke, therefore be calleth his Countie, Baliua faa, fog
cfenvant, gc. be returneth, Non eftinuentus in Baliua meae


J auc heard great queftion mave, Ghat thetrue expofition of this 12070 Balivus ig, In the


Statntcof Magna Charta cap. 28.
nataliquemad legem manifeftam nee ad


ad hoc indu&is. And ſome hanelapd, Chat


the letter of that Statute ig, Nullus Balivus de cætero po-
iuramentum fimplici loquela fua fine teftibus fidelibus
Balivus tn this ffatute figuificth anp Judge, fox
the Law muff be waged and made befozethe Judge, Andthis Statute (fay tbep) extends to M


the Courts ofcommon Pleas, Tings Wench, &. Foꝛ they mult dzing with them Fideles
teftes & c. and fo hath been the plage to this dap.
abut F auc perufed a berie antient and learned reading bpon this Statute,and the Keader


taketh it, Chat atthe Common
anp Court of Becozd, mut bring
ranted by Glanuile, Sho wꝛote in the raigne of
That in the Courts which Were not of Record,
the Court Waron, €c.t


fauc made big Law :


forremedte Whereok this Ba 5»


La before this Statute, he that Swould make bis daw in
Sith bim Fidcles Teftes. Andthis opinion hevein ts Ware
Henrie the feconb. Wut the Reader holdeth,
ag the Countie Court, the Hundzed
here the Def. Without any Faithfull Witnelles, might befoze this Stat,
as made, and therefoze (fatth he) the ſta⸗


ourt


tute extendeth to the Judges offuch Courts ag are not of Record. Fn 10. H. 4. tt ig Holden,


f£ bat (£a Lod that hath a ffranchife ina Let,


beth not enquireof things enquirable, anb pus


ní(b them,the Spberife (ball enquire in hts Œurne, Et file Vicount ne fare en fon Torne, le Bay-


lic le Roy enquirer quant
le Roy tg bnderftæb lufti
extend to enerte Juſtice,


$7020 Baylifc.


il vient, ou


auterment ferra inquife per Iufticeen Eire. obere Baylie


ccleRoy. Badin the Mirror * (t is holden, Chat the Statute doth


Minter of the ting, Steward, ec. and all compach)enoco Onder this


Thechiefe Waagtttrates (n bincrg anttent Corporations ave called 1Bapliés,ng in Ipſwich


Parmouth, Colchefter,


itfe oz Geucrnoz. But of this thus much (bati fuffice,


(CU Co fon
Sud ee.


Note, the partition
made and deliuered bp
the Sbherifeand Ju⸗
rozg, ought to bee re=
turned intothe Court
onder the Seale of the
Sherike, and tbe feals
of the twelve Jurozs,
fo; the 500209 of the
Judiciall weit of
Partition, Which doth
command tbe Sherife
to make partition,are,
Affumptis tecum I2.
&c.(foag there mult
betwelue) & partitio-
nem inde, &c. fcire fa-
cias lufliciarijs , &c.
fub figillo tuo,& figil-
liseoruma per quorum
facramentum partitio-
nem illam feceris, &c.


Seël. 249.


€ ET la partition

quel Uicount ad
iffint fait, il ferra notice
as Juſtices fouth fon
Seale, eles Seales D
chefcun De les 12. a,
Ct (ftint en C cafe poics
veier que leigne foer na⸗
uera my la pꝛimer elec=
tion, mes le Gisount
lup aflignera fa part
que el aucta, ac, Ct
poit eftt quele q3icount
Doit aſſigner pꝛimerm̃t
$n part a le plug puiſũ,
ac, & Darreinement al
eigne, tc,


ac. And Baylifein French, is Dioccetes Nomarcha, in Œnglifh,a Wats |


AM of the partition
which the Sherife
hath fo made, hee fhali
giue notice to the Jufti-
ces vnder his Seale, and
the feales of euerie of
the 12.&c. And fo inthis
cafe you may fee,that the
eldeft fifter fhall not haue


the firfteleétion, butthe .


Sherife fhall affigne to
her her part which fhee
fhal haue, &c. And it may
be that the Sherife will
affigne firft one part to
the youngeft, &c.and laft
to the eldeft, &c.


And this to tbe reafon Soberfose in this cafe the partition which thep make bpon carh,oughtts
be returned bnider their Seales: anb thereatou of that is Cog the maze ftrengtbening of the pars
títíots


beum.


-


Lib.


Of Parceners.


$e8.250.251. & 252.


109


titton bp tbe 12. and that the Sherife (bonib not returne what partition he Would, Mow LU.ti.fel, io. mn Mercalfes


i S, this (&c.) viz.12.& c. Doth imply, shat the pztncipall iudgemert bpon the partitt-
As feud Et e diua eft per Curiam qued partitio firma & ftabilis imperpetuum


tencatur, the latter tive ( &c.) ate enident,


€ ET nota d para


]


tition per a=


greement parenter


parceners, poit e(tre
fait per la lep enter
cup, auribien per pa⸗
tol fang faít, come
pet fait,


deuided bp Paroll without Ded, (f) Wuta
Swithout Deed, albeit ít beof Lands andt
Statutes of 31-H.8,cap.ro. and 32.H.8 c


Setlion 250.


Nd note that par-

tition by agree-
ment betweene Parce-
ners may bee made
by Law  betweene
them, afwell by paroll
without Deed, as by
Deed.


€ Ere it appeareth
Hos (r) not onip

Lande anb other
things that map pale bp Li⸗
ueríe without Ded, but
things alfo that doe ite tr
gtant, ag Rents,Commongs,
Aduowſons and tbelike thac
cannot paffe bp grant with⸗
out Dad, Whether tbep be ín
one Œountie o» im feucrall
Counties map be parted and


partition betweene Joyntenants ig not god
hat thep beecompellable to make partition by the
ap.32 becaufe thep mutt purfuc that Aa bp tozit, dc


pastitione faciendo a partttion between topntenants Without wꝛit remapng at the Common
Law Whichcould not be Bone bp Paroll. And foit is and fez the fame reafon of Tenants in
Tommon. Wut if two Œcnants th Common be, thep make partition bp 33aroll, ¢ execute the
fame in feneralty bp Liuerie this (s god, and fatfictent in Law. And therefore Where Wakes
fap, that Joyntenants made partition Without Ded,tt mutt beinten’ed of Tenants in come


MON, and executed bp Liuerie.


Nota, betweene Jopntenants there ts a twofold priuitie, viz in eltate and (n poſſeſſton, be-
tweene Cenants in Common, there is pꝛiuitie only in pollefton,and not in effate , but 39ar-
ceners bauca threefold paiuitie, viz. in eftate, in perfon,and tn pofleffion,


Seclion 251. & 252.


€i fi deux
meafes Difcen-
Dont à Deux Parce⸗
ners , & lun meafe
bault per an 2o. g,
lautet fozfque 10. 9,
per an , en ceft cas
partition poit eftre
fait enter eur en tiel
forme, ceftafcauoir,
que bn parcener aue-
valun meafe, a que
lautet parcener auc-
ta lauter meafe,a ce-
Inp que auer le meafe,
que eft de balue De 20
8. t les heires, papes
tent bn annual rent


Lfoiftwo Mefes
difcend to two
Parceners,and the one
Meafe is worth twen-
ty fhillings per annum,
and the other but ten
fhillings per annam. In
this cafe partition may
bee made betweene
them in this manner,
to wit, the one Parce-
ner to' haue the one
Meafe, andthe other
Parcener the other
Meafe. And fhe which
hath the Meafe worth
20.fhillings per annum,
and her heires fhal pay


Yn


€ pz parol. Nota,
Here (t) a Rent map
be granted fo? oweltie
of partition Swithout Ded,
cuen ag a Bent in cafe of a
Leaſe for peares, fozlifo, ora
gikt in tatle map bee reſerued
Without Ded, andfomapa
Bent be alligned toa woman
out of the Land whereot thee
is Dowable, ac. without
Ded, but albeit an exchange
fo? Lands in the fame Œoun-
tie may be Without Ded, pct
(u)a Bent granted fot egait⸗
tie o£ tbe fam; exchange canta
not be Without D eed, end the
caufe of che difference tg ap=
patant, for Coparcences aro
in bp bífcent, and compellable
to make partition,
Le Rent, ore.
(w) be fame Law te of
Common of Efouers , oz


a Corie, o2 a creme
e


Ce


(r) 3.£.4.5. To. 9. E.4.38.
11.H.43: 9.H.4. Partition
13. 421. E. 3. 38.


(f) Vide Se31.290. 3. H. 4. I.
19, H.6.25.a8. H.6.2.
3.6.4.9. 10, 47. E.3.22.
47.-4[[8. 19.H.6.1.
17.€. 3.46, 30..4f/ 8.

Lib. 4.fal.73. E1:6.fol. 12.13.
2.H.7.5. Dter 18.150.358.
31. B.8. Dyer 46. 2,Elsx.
Djs 179. 38. H.8. Dyer 39;
1..Mar, Dyer 98.


(t) 8. E.3. 6. 21. fpi.
21.E.3.38. 11. H.43.61.
4g-E.3.21. 2. H. 6. 14.
21,H:5.11. 1 Mar. Dyergr.


| Lib.3.


(x) 1.Maric Dier 91.


(2) 29-Affi2 3. 29.E.3.9.6.
T1.Com.3 4.


(3)15.H.7.14.. 29. M az ·
29.E,3 9.5.


(b) 39-4. 23. 29-E. 3.9.
9.


17. EF. 3.10.


(e ).38.E.3.26.6.


(e) r. Marie "Dyer 91.
$.E.5. V6. exd ether the
Boske:r aAben / id.


Capa |


of Pafture, «t. ez a way
granted bpon the partition bp
the one dLopercener to the oz
ther. Au hich anb theltke
albett tbep lpc in grant, vet
bpon the partition map thep
be granted withont bed.

€ Muant hors de
mefme le meafe , cre.
(x) dro2 tf tt bee granted out
of other Lands then difcended
tothe Coparceners then there
mu bea Ded. (z) Wattle
the Rent be granted generalz
1p (out of no land tn certaine)
foz oweltie of partition , pro
refiduo terre , tt {hall bee tn=
tended out of the purpartic of
her that granteth ít.

(a) FE there bec thee Co⸗
parceners and thep make pars
tition, and one of them grant
twentte thillings per annum
out of ber part to her two (i-
fers, and their beires,foz E⸗
galttte of partition, the Gran
tees are not topntenants of
this Rent, but the Rent ts in
nature of Coparcenary , and
after the death of the one
Grantee, the moítp cf the rent


' {hall bífcenb to ber iflue in


courfe of Coparcenary , anb
not furutueto the other, forthat
tie Rent doth come in recom=
pence of the Land, € therefore
fhall enfuc the nature thereof,
and ik the grant had bene


Of Parceners.


De v. g, iffuant hows
De mefme le meafea
lauter parcener , & a
fes beires a touts
jours , put ceo que
chefcun de eur aũoit
otweltyen balue,


Sect.

€ ET tiel pattíci-
on fait per pa-

rol eft affets bone, &
mefme le Parcener
fauera Ic rent a {cs
beires, purront Di-
ftreiner De common
Droit , purie rent en
le Dit meafe De le va⸗
lue De 20,9, file tent
Des, 9, foit aderere
en afcun temps en
quecunque mains q
meſme le meaſe De-
uienD2a, coment que
ne fuit vnques afcun
efcripture De ceo fait
enter eur à tiel tent,


Setl.252.253:


a yeerely rent of fiue w
fhillings, iffuingoutof ..
thefame Meafe tothe —
other Parcener and to
her heires for euer,be-
caufe each of them.
fhould haue equalitic |
in value.
2.1
As fuch partition
made by paroll
is good enough, and
that Parcener who fhal —
haue the rent and his
heires may diftreine —
of common right for.
the Rent in the faid —
meafe, worth twentie
fhillings, ifthe rent of -
s. fhillings be behind
atany time, in whofe |
hands foeuer the fame
meafe fhall come, al-
though there neuer.
were any writing of
this made betweene
them for fuch a rent.


made tothem two of a Bent of twenty hillings, viz. to the one ten ſhillings, and tothe other
es ſhillings, pet (all tbep haucthe Rent in courfc of Coparcenarp, and topne in action £oz the


atue. :

(b) HE one Coparcener be married, and fo? oweltie of partition the bufband and Wife grant —
a Rent to tbe other two out of the part of the Fem Coucrt, this partition being equall, {ball M
chargethe part ofthe Fem Couert £o? ener.


(c) Ittwo Coparcencrs bp Deed indented alien,


both their parts to ancther infer, ren= |


pring fo them two and their beires a Went out of the Land, they are not topntenants of this
Rent,but they thal hane the Rent in courfe of Coparcenary,becanfe thetr right in the Land ont
of which the Rent is referned, was tn Coparcenary.


© Purront distreiner decommon droit, &c. €


. "A


bat íg, (o in this cafe.


the 1,:5 Doth gíue a diftrefle, ick the Grantee ſhould be Without remedic , for the Sobíct vpon
the partition the hath given a valuable recompencein Land, Which difcended, ac. And ſo in the
cafe of Dower aboue mentioned


Cp d Tene-


ments ec. ete
(&c.) tmplpeth a Cantion,
viz. that thep becfuch Lands


Sed.


253.


CE 2 meti E manet
eft, Dc touts ma⸗
necs De tetves a tene=


ments


I" the fame manner
it is of all manner
of Landsand Tene-


es


Lib.
ments, ac, loutielrent
eftreferue a bn, oua
diũs Parceners ſur
tiel partition ac, Wes
tielrent neft pas rent
feruice, nies et rent
- charge de comon Droit
ewe a reſerue pur egal⸗
tie de particion.


€ p € nota quenul'es font aps
pelies parceners p ie com= :
mon Icp, mes femateg, ou ies
heires oc females que beignont
a terres xtenements per Difcent,
Car G foecs vurchale terres ou
tenements.deccotls font appel-
les iopntenants, & Hemp parce=


ners.


CITE deux Par⸗

cencrs De tert en
fee ſimple, font par=
tition enter cup, #18
part de bn fault
pluts dle part 5 lau-
ter, els fueront al
temps De la pattíti-
on De pleine age 8,
Derr ang, dong là
partition touts dits
Demurreca, a ne ſer⸗
ta bnaues defeat,
Mes fí leg tene-
mente(Dont els font
partition) fopent a
eurenfee tatle, + le
part que lun ad eff


Of Parceners.


ments, &c. where
{uch rent is referued
to one or to diuers
parceners vpon fuch
partition, &c.but fuch
rentis not Rent fer-
uice but arent charge
ofcommon right had


and referued for egal-
tye of partition.


Sell. 254.


ments of


bis needes no explanation.


Seil. 255.
LE two parce-


ners of land in
fee fimple make par-
tition between them-
felues, and the part of
the one valueth more
then the part of the
other, if they wereat
the time of the parti-
tion of full age,s. of
214yeares, then the
partition fhall alway
remaine and bee neuer
defeated. But if the
tenements ( whereof
they make partition )
be tothem in fee taile,
and the part of the one


Bs 2


Sei.254..255


anb tenements out of hich
a Kent fez egaltye of partic
tion map be granted, where⸗
of fufficient bath bene fato
before,

Referue al «n.
Were referuation ts taker
foza grant, andif i be dled
bpon t;epartítíon, doth a»
mount in tits cafe to a
grant, Mhichis Wozthyp the
obfersation,


AN note that none are called

parceners by the Common
law, but females or the heires of
females which come to lands
or tenements by difcent: for if
fitters purchafe lands or tene-


this they are called


ioyntenants and not parceners;


€ oes le parti.


tion touts dits


demurrera, cc. Here⸗
bp ít appeareth that the
inequality of the balue fbatf
noi impeach a partition made
oflands in fe fimple bes
tweene dLopcrcenerg of full
age, no moze then it (ball doe
tis cafe of an exchange, :
¶ als font concludes
darant lour vies. This
inequall partition Dot) fo
concludes the parcenets them⸗
felnes, ag (be that bath che
vnequall part (ball not az
wopde tt During ber Iffe. .


€ Concludes. his
50020 is deriued of Con an
Claudo, and ín thts fence
fignifietly toclofe o fhat tp
bct mouth that thee cannot
fpcake to the contrary.

Husband $ wife tenant


170


9-H.é.5.andethar akg
bookes abens-fatd,


Lib.3.


LAG p.i


Seo after the Chapter of Garr.


(g )31-E.3-34-35. 2. Ea.
Baflardie 19: 11. Maz ·
3e. Af-7. 17.E.3.59.


(*) 43. Mas. 8.2.4.4.
9.Ë.3.38.15.E.4.20.F.N.B
62. 29.-4[f.33.9. H.6. 5.
43: If. 14.


(E)Fida.E. a (nd invite 17;


partition.


Capa.


fn fpccíall taple of certaine
lands in fe bane {lue a
Daughter, the Wife dpeth, the
bufband bp a fecend wife
hath (luc another daughter
both the daughters enter
( Mbcrethe eldelt is only ins
heritable ) and make partítíz
on,the eldeft daughter is con=
cluded during her life to (mz
peach the partition, op to fap
that the poungelt is not
hetre, and pet (be toa ſtran⸗
get to tbe tatle, but ín refpec
of piíuítp in thetr perfona
the partition (ball conclude,
for a partition between meere
frangers in that cafe is
baide, but the {lue of the el=
deft (ball auoide this partítí-
on ag iſſue in tatle.

(g) LS. fcifco of Lands ín
fee hath {lue two danghters,
Rofe. and Anne, baftarog
eigne, and Mulier puifne and
bíct). Rofe and Anne boe
enter and make partition.
Anne and her befreg are con⸗
cided £02 euer ·


CE Ls y lour barons.
Here (t appearcth

that the wife matt be
partieto the partition, and fo
are the boks* to be intended
that fpcake of this mat-
ter,


¶ E: defeatera de
Note the


partition {hall not be defeated
fo; the furplufage onip to
make the partition equali,but
bere it appeareth that ít hall
be auopoed fo; the whole,
But of this moze (hall be fato
hereafter in thts chapter,
Seétione 264. (h) @nd
though the partition be tutes
quall, ect fs not the partition
bopde, but bopdable, for (f
after the beceafe of the bufe
band, the Sife entreth into
the vnequall part, and a=
gretb thereunto, thie (bail
bínbe, and therefore Littleton


Of Parceners.


melicug en annual
balue, que eft la part
de lauter, coment q
els font concludes
Durant lour bies a
Defeater la partitis,
bncoac ft le parcener
q̃ ad le meinder part
en balue ad iſſue &
Deuy, liſſue poit diſa⸗
greer a [a partition,
& enter et occupier
€ cómon lautet part
que fuit alotte à fa
Aunt, a iffint lautet
poit enter toccupier
en common lautet
part alotte a fa foer,
fc, ficome nul patti-
tion bit efte fait,


Section 256
C Cem fí deur


parceners de te⸗
nemets € fee preigne
barons, et els et lour
barons font partiti-
on enter eur, (i la
part lun eft meinder
en anual balue à la
part iauter, Durant
les bies lour barons
la partition eftopera
en fa farce, ABes co-
ment que il eftopeta
Durant les bies leg
barons, vncore à-
pres la mot le ba-
ton, ccluy feme q ad
lemeinder part poit
enter en le part fa


foer


isbetter in yearly vas '


lue then the part of
theother, albeit they


beeconcluded during —
theirliues to defeate


the partition, yet if
the parcener which
hath the leffer part in |
value hath iffue and.
die, the iffue may dif-
agree tothe partition,


and enterand occupie —
in common the other ~


part. which was alot-


ted tohis Aunt, and ſo


|
|


the other may enter
and occupiein cómon M


the other part allotted
to her fifter,&c. as if |
no partition had beene
made.


ALS if two parce:


ners of lands in


fee take husbands,and


they and their huf-
bands make partition

etweene them,if the
part of the one bee
leffe in value then the
part of the other du-
ring theliues of their
husbands the partition
fhall ftand in its force.
But albeit it fhal ftand


during the liues of M


their husbands, yet af-
ter the death of the.
husband, that woman
which hath the leffer
part may enter inte


T0 .. 9 DP à


Lib.3.
focr come eft auant-


Dit, et Defcatera 1a
partition,


(LA ACs GE parti-
. M tio fait peti-
terles barons fuit
tiel , que chefcun
part al temps Dal-
lotment fait, fuit De
egall annuall balue,
Donque il ne poit a-
pacs eftre Defeat en


OF Parceners.


her fifters part as is a-
forefaid, and fhall de-
feate the partition.


Sed. 257.


BV: if the partition ¶


made betweene
the husbands were
thus, that each part at
thetime of the allot-
ment made was of e-
quall yearely value,
then it cannot after-
wards bee defeated in
fuch cafes.


Seit.257.258.


bleththe woꝛd ( Defeatera )
which proneth ft t0 bee bop=
Dable,


Erenter les ba-


rons. This ts
miſtaken, koz the oziginall (s
Parenter eux, that ts, betwen
the barons and Fems, and
not, as tt ts here betweene the
Barons, therefore this erroz
would be hereafter refozinen.


Œ 41 temps del al.
lotment. Hereby it ap-
peareth, that tf the parts at
thettine afthe partition be of


tielx cates, equal peareiy balue, neither
the wiues noz theit heires Hall encr auoyde the fame, and the reafon hereof ts, £02 that the bu
bands and Sines Were compellable by Law to make partition, and that Which thep are coms
. Pellableto boc in this cafe by Law, they map doc bp agreement Without pzocelle of Law. ze

the annuall value of the land be equall at the ime of the partition and after become tncquall


by any matter fnbfcquent, as by ſurrounding, il! bufbandate oz {uch like, pet the partition tce
matnes god,


Iu dicis officium efl vt ves ita tempora rerum,
Quarere, quefito tempore tutus eris,


Wut if the partition be made by fozce of the Rings Writ, and (nbaement theresf given, it
fball binds the frem-coucrtg fo? cuer, albeit the parts be not of equall annuall balue becauſe
itis made by the Dberife by the oath of twelue men by Puthorttp of Law. And tbe tudge⸗
ment tg that partition {hall remaíne firme and ftablefoz encr as hath bene fatd, (2) Wut a
partition ín tbc Chancerp Where one Lopercencr is of Enllage andfucth Liuery, and one ©
ther ts Svithin age and hath an vnequall part allotted to her,this thai not bine her at full age,

£03 ina tait directed to the Efcheatoz to make partition there ig a Salvo nue, And there te
no tudgement vpon fuch a partition. But (f fuc) a partition béequall ft Hall binde, fo that
8 part of theland holders In Capite be allotted to euerp of the Coparceners, foto that end
there is an erprefic Prouifo tu the toztt. (b) Bnd this partition map bee aucpded either bp
que fac’ in the Chancerp, oz bp à Wꝛit De partitione facienda at the Common Law at her
Il age.


Sect.258.


¶ Cem Fdeur parce= A Lio iftwo Coparce- ¶ AS before ts


ners font, et le pu-
tine efteant deing lage
De2 1, ang, et partition
eft fait enter eur, iffint
que la purpartie que eft
allot al puifne € ð mein⸗
dee balue d la purpat-
tie lauter, en cett cafcle


ners be, and the yon-
geft beeing within the
age of twenty one yeres,
partition is made be-
tweene them, foas the
part which is allotted to
the youngeft, is of leffe
value than the part of the

Wa 3


the cafe of the
Fem-Couert, (c)-fo
ttisinthe cafe of the
Enfant, for tf the pars
tition be equall at the
time of te allotment,
it fhall binde him foz
euet, becanfe he tg co»
pellable by La to
make partition,and be
fhali not banc bis age
in à Partitione facien-
ds,


171


9. H.6. €. And other the beokas
aboueſaid.


(a) F-X. B.356. 359.266
261.262.263. 9-H.G.6.
21. E. 3. 31.


(b) Vide 21. E. 3. 31-


(€) 43. 14. 9. H.6. 5.6.
g.E. 1.13. 8 E.3. x4, 1o: B.
4.5: 1AM 16.31.H.6.35-


Lib.


*F)ÉdI 409,403.


Bris fo 65,64. & 101.


Filet, li, 3.02.14.


Cap.

da,and thongh the par=
titionbe dnequal, and
the Enfant hath tbc
lefler part, pet ts not
the partition bopd,but
voidable by bis entrp,
fez 1€ btc take the
whole profits of the
bnequal part;atter his
ful agethe partition is
miade gwd fez euet,
no therfore Littler.
heregiucth him a cas
ucat, Chat (n tbatcafe
be take not the hole
profits of big bnequal
part, netther (ball an
bnequail partition in
the Chancerie bindan
nfant ag appeareth
befoze. Wut a partiti=
on made by tic Kings
tait de Partitione fa-
cienda by the Sherife
bp the oath of twelve
men, and iudgenent
therenpon given, fhail
bind the Œnfant,
though big part bee
tnequall, Caufa qua
fupra.


Of Parceners.


le puifne Durant? t£p$
De fon nonage, et AULP
quaunt ci bicnt a pleine
age, 5, De 21, ang, poit
entecen la purpattie a
fa (oer allot ædefeatera
la partition, Wes bien
fop gard tiel Parcener
quant el bient a fa plein
age, que el he preigne a
fon ble Demefne touts
les profits Des terres
ou tenements que alup
fuct allots, Car Don-
ques cl foy agreea a le
partition a tie age, cn
quel cafe la partition e=
fiopera et Demurra en
fa force: Mes peraucn-
tut les pfits 5 la moi-
tícel pott prender, re⸗
linquitant leg profits ó
lauter moitie a fa (ocv,


Set. 259.


Sed.259.


other ; in this cafe the |
youngeft during the time —
of her nonage, and allo
when fhee commeth tom
full age, s. of 2 1. yeares,
may enter into the parc
allotted to her fifter, and —
fhall defeat the partition:
but let fuch parcener take M
heed when thee comes ro —
her full age, that {hee ta-
kethnotto herowne vie
all the profits of the lans
or tenements which were
allotted vnto her, tor
then fhee agrees to the
partition at fuch age, in
which cafe the partition
{hall ftand and remaine in
it’s force : but peraduen-
turc fhe may take the pro-
fits of the moitie, leauing
the profits of the other
moitie to her fitter.


€ que Law hath p20-


wided for thefaftpot

a mans oꝛ Womans
eſtate, that* befoic their age
of twentie onc peares thep
cannot bind tbeniclu s by
any Ded, not alicn anp lan,
(003,02 chattels,

Age de 21. ans.
“Before this age a man 07
Woman (8 called an Enfant,

€ Far. Factum,

Ane'icc, a De , andfignifis
eth inthe Common Law, an
Inſtrument conGfting on
thie things, viz. tüaiting,
Healing , anb Deliuerie,
compzebending a bargatne o2
gontrad betQene partie and
partie, mano Woman, It is
calicd of the Cintitang , Lice
rarum obligato.


€ Feoffement. Df
fold word fuificient bath vin


€ ET eft aſcauoir

que quant ilé
Dit,que males ou fe-
maies font De pleine
age, ceo ferta enten⸗
Due à age De 2 1,408,
car fi deurnt tiel age,
afcun fait ou fcoffe-
ment, grant, releate,
confirmation, Dbit-
gation, ou aut fcríp-
ture fort fait per af
cun Dc eur, ac, ou fí
afcun deins tiel age,
foit 2Baplife ou recei=
uec a afcun home.ac.
tout feruc put nient,
& poit efte auopbr,


Aue


AN itistobeevn- -
derftood , that
whenitis (ayd , That
males or females bee ©
of fullage, this fhall
be intended of theage
of 21. yeares, for ifbe-
forefuch age,any deed
or feoffement, graunt, —
releafe, confirmation,
Obligation , or other
writing bee made by
any of them, &c. or if
any within füch age
be Baylife or Recei-
uerto any man,éc, all
ferue for nothing, and
may be auoyded. Al-


Lib.3. Of Parceners. Sett.259.


Auxpy home Deuaunt fo a man before the tap? beforsin the fr Chap-
le dit age, ne fra mp faydage (hall not bee i aber Cau.
ture en bu Cnquelt, fworne in an  En- egisti te Common ins


RC, queft,&c. a conueyancc of à thing that
, lies ingrant,and not in Line

te, which cannot paffe Without Ded, as Aduowſons, Herutces, Benes, Commons, Keuer⸗
" E — ſuch ithe. Ot this alfo {ufficient like wiſe bath beene (apo in the firll Chapter of the
: ce, -


© Releafe, Confirmation, dc. DEthete thallbe (poen hereafter in


their proper places and Chapters.


€ Obligation is a woꝛd of his otone nature of a large extent,but
- tig commonly taken in the Common Law, for a Wondcontainshg a penaltie With conditiow
- fozpapment of money, o2 to doc o2 fuffcr fome act 02 thing, &c. and a Will (s moft commonip tas
Ben £o? a Gngle Bond without condition. 5


+ © Ov anter feripiure foit fait per afcum de eux cc. Pere by this (&c.)
(ds tmpited fome exceptions out of this gencralitie, (d ) as an Intant may bino bimfelfeto pap
"fo? bis neceflarte meat, dꝛinke, apparel, neceſſarie phyſicke and fuch other neceſſaries, and like⸗
Wile for bis god teaching o2 tnftrucion, wherebp he may profit himfelfe afterwards: but {€
be bino himfcife in an Odligation o; other toziting, With a penaltie fo2 the papment of anp of
" thefe chat Dbligation (ball not bind him. (c) Aifo other things of neceſſitie {hall bind them,
as a prefentationto a Wenefice, for other wife the Laps (ball incurre again him, Alſo tf an
infant bean Executor pon payment of anp debt duc tothe Ceftatoz , hee map make an ace
quittance , but in that caic a releaſe without payment ts bopd, andgenerallp whatſoeuer an
Fnfant is bound to doe by Law, the fame (ball bind him, albeit he Voth (t Withour iuitof Law,
Put of this common learning this ttle taft fpali [nffíce,


€ Baylife ow Receiuer al afcun home, dre. By this xc many things
are implied, ag that bp Waypitfeis vnderſtod afernant that hath admintftration and charge of
lands, gods, and Chattels, to make the bcf benefit forthe owiucr, again@™ whom an Acton
of Account dothlic fo: the profits which he hat» railed 02 made, ez might bp hte induftric o2
tare hauc reafonably raifed o2 nade, his vcafenable charges and expences Dedudeo (f ) Wat
ene vnder the age of twentie onc pearcs (hall not be charged in any ſuch account,becanfe bp in⸗
tendDment of daw, before his full age he hath not fill and abilttte to vatfeoz makeanp {ach
impꝛouement and pzofit.

Bn account agatnft a Receiner, is When onc receiueth money tothe ble of another, torender
an account, but bpon bis account be (ball be allowed hts expences and caraes.( 9 ) And there⸗
foze a man cannot charge a Waplifeas a Recetucr becaufe then the Waylite ſhould lofe his ex⸗
genceg and charges.

In an account againſt a Receiuer, the Plaintife mull declare by Whole hands the Defens
dant received the moncy, Which he (ball not doe tn the cafe ofa Waylife, Ch) Wut in fome
tafe inan Action of Account againft one ag à e-epror denariorum, hee {ball aue allowance of
his expences and charges, andalfo ſhall account for the pzofit he recetued, o2 might reafonabip
recetue,and this Was pꝛouided bp Law in fauour of Merchants, and fo? admancement of trade

anb traffíque,

As (£ two jopnt Werch ints occupte their ſtocke gods, and merchandtzes tn common to their

. Common profit, one of chemnaming himſelfe a Merchant , Hall have an account againt the
‘other naming hima Merchant, and hall charge him ag Receptor denariorum ipfius B. ex qua-
cunque caufa & contractu ad communem vtilitatem ipforum A. & B. prouenien’ ficut per leggi
mercatoriam rationabiliter monftrare poterit. ?

(i) 3i£tbere be two Joyntenants o? Cenants in Commonof lands, andthe one make the
other bis Wailtfe of his mottie, he hall baue an Acton of Account againk bim as Waplite:
And fo ate the Bokes to be intended, that fgeake of an Action of Account tnthat cafe,

So as there be but to1e Binds of 102its of Account, viz. again oncas Oardeine,whereok
Littleton hath fpoken before tn the Chapter of Secage. The ſecond againft one as Wayplife:
And the third, ag Receiuer, as here tt appeareth, (k) Foz aman all not bee chargedin an
Account as Surveyor, Controller, Bppzrentice, Rene, o2 Heyward. And to maintatne an
Aion of Account, there mut be cither a prtuitie in deed by the confent of thepartic, for (1)
again a Dilletfor 02 other wꝛong doer no account doth lie, 62a paiuitie fm Lai ex-prouifione
lcgis, made bp the Law, agagaina Gardein, ac, Sobereot fuffictent bath ben ſpoken in the

Chapter of £»ocage,
€ X:


*
r


172


L8.3.fl.63.in L pcolra Cal:
ledge (C.


(À) 18.E.4.2. 11.H.6.31.
Lib.9.fol.87.Pmchens. (ae.


(e) 8.E.4.4. 9.H.6.5
17-€.3.9.  19.4ff:25.!
2. Marta, Dier.104.10$.


Fleta Lib.*.cap. 64. dr cap.6
Bieler a n
Flers Lib. 2.cap.64.

AVE. 3.39. 46.E. 3. coim
40. 2.R.2.1bidema 45.
E-R.a.bid.3.€.3.10.

(t 13. E. 3. Enfant 9.1m,E.3.
Accomne 131. 21.E,3. 8.

16. H.4.14. 2.H.4.13,. .*


epift. 1355.


(g) 43-E.3.31. 46.£. 3.5.5.
4. H.6.27.


(h) 39.E.1. Account 127,
47.E.3 22. 10.07.16.
"Brall.li.5. fo.334.Brit.f.62.
Fle.li.1.c.64.& 541.5. E. 3. 1.


! Lib. Inirat.17, 1813.


(i) 45.6. 3.10. 3.E.5.27.
39:E.3.27.47.E. 3.33,
-X.B.u8.


(K ) 13. E. 3. Account 76.
41.E. 3 ibidem 34.
8.E.3.46. 8.E.4.6.h.
F.N.B.119.4.

(ys, Mar. 8. Account $9.
FN, B 117. Pl. (om,s43
2.H, 4.12. 33.8,6.2. 4.81,
7.6.5.


LI
Lib.3.
(52) Bra%on lib.s .'fe.340.b.

n) 13.2.3. Lg 5o.
i MINT 2, Maria
Deer 194.16 5.
(p ) Vid. deum (ap . de He
mate et Cap. de Fealtie Se,
85.91. "BraB lib.a. fo.124.
Britton fe.7 3,74. en fel.ig.
Fleta lib.x.cap.a7.
(4) 11.H6.40. 1.H.7.35.
15.£.4,2.

(T) 46.E.3.10. 9. 4.346
15-E,4.2, 31.3.3.


Cap.


Of Parceners.


. Setl.260, |


€ Ne ferra iure en vn Enquefl, de. Bythis(&c.)igs implied amags |
ime in La, (m ) Quod minor iurare non poteft. Foꝛ example, (n) Bn 3ntant cannot €
hig La of Non fummons : (o) Bnd therefore the default fball not griene him, fo? feing
meancto excufe the default (g taken away bp Law, the defanit tt felfe [pati not preiudice
Wut pet this rule hath an exception, Chat (p) an Intant When hee ts of the age of !
geareg, [ball take the Dath of Dilegeance to the ing : and this Sas, as FOR faith, Secu
dum leges Sancti Edwardi. 1Bnt indeed fuch was the La inthe time of ding Archur, (CE
An Fnfant cannot spon bis oath make his law inan Action of Debt, (r) Bad the bufband)
and wife of full age fo; the debt ofthe Wife, befoze the couerture (ball make thetr Lam, 4


A terre en
fee fimple
eff allot a la file
puifse. It ts firſt


' to be obferued bpon


thts whole cafe, That
the fee imple Land ig
allotted to the vongeft
Daughter, and the land
entatled to the eldeſt.
This partition Prima
facie (g god, and here=
in the partition diffe-
reth from the efchange
Sobercín the cfcbangc
the eftates muff be
€quall.

Wut vct this partt-
tton by matter fubfe-
quent may become bot=
Dable, (ag Littleton
bere puttcth the cafe)
the eldeſt Coparcener
bath by the partition,
and the matter fubfe=
quent barred her felfe
of ber right (n the kee⸗
fimpic iands, ínfo-
much as when the
roungeſt Gfter alieneth
the fe ſimple Lands
and dicth,andher Iſ⸗
fuc entreth into baie
the lands entatled, pet
hall not the eldeff ens
ter into balfe of the
lands tn jre Ample
bpon the Alienee, foz
bp the alíenatíon , the
veiuitie of the fate {5
deftroped,


@ Le puifne


file alien la terre


vn fee fimple, dc.
Œbe fame Law (t ig,
kthe poungett daugh⸗


Seclion 260.


€ rem ff terres ou
lents fopent
Donesa bn home en le
taile, quel ad tant Des
terres en fec fimple, et
ad iſſue Deux files, et
Deute, € fes Deux files
font partition ent eur,
iffint quela terre en fee
fimple eft allot a le file
puifne en allotoance dg
terres & tenements
tailes allottes a te file
eigne, fapges tiel pars
tition fait, la puifne
file alienaft fa terre en
fee ſimple abn auter en
fee, a ad iſſue fits ou file
& Deute, liflue poit bien
entrer en leg Tene—
méts tailes a eux tener
a occupier en purpattie
ouefque fon Aunt, Ct
cco e(t pur Deux cauſes:
bi eft,purceo quelifue
ne poit auct afcun re⸗
medte dela terre alienp
faimere, purceo que la
terre fuit a lup en fee
fimple,# put tant que il
eftbn De les beíreg en
taile, a nab mp afcun
recompence De ceo que
a lup affiert be leg Te⸗
nementg tailles, tl eft
reaſon


^
JF


Y. if Lands or Tes
nements be giuento
amanintaile, who hath
as much land in fee fim-

ple, and hath iffue two

daughters and die, & his
two daughters make par^
tition betweene them,
fo as.the Land in Fee-
fimple isallotted to the
younger daughter, in
allowance for the lands
and Tenements in Taile
allotted to the elder
daughter, if after ſuch
Partition made, the yon-
ger daughter alieneth her
land in fee fimple,to ano-
ther in fee, & hath iffuea
fon or a daughter & dies,
theiffue may wel enter in-
to the lads in taile & hold
and occupie them in pur-
partie with her zunt. And.
this is for two caufes:one
is, forthat the iffue can
haue no remedie for the
land foldby the mother,
becaufe the land was to
her in fee fimple,and in as
much asthe is one of the
heirs in taile, & hath no

recópence ofthat which

belongeth to her of the

lands in taile, it isreafon


Lib.3.

teafon que el eit fa
purparty oles teñts
taíles, a noſmement
quant tiel partition
nefaitalcun Difcon-
tinuance.

a Mes le contra⸗
rp eft tenus M.10.H.
6.3, que le heire ne
poit enter [ur f Par⸗
cencr que ad la terre
taile, mes ef mis à
Formdon. *


Of Parceners. -


that fhee hath her por-
tion ofthe Lands tay-
led, and namely when
fuch partition dothnot
not make any difcon-
tinuance.

q But the contrary
is holden M.10.H.6.
s.that the heire may
not enter vpon the
parcener who hath the
intailed land,but is put
toa Fermedon. *


Sect. 261.


ter had made a gift (n tapic,
fo» the Renerfion expectant
bpon an eftate taple is of no
account tn La, foz that tt
map bee cat off bp the tenant
ín taple; Otherwilſe (t ig of
an eftate £o? life oz peares. It
in thts cafe the poungett
Daugbter alien part of the
Landin Fe ſimple, and dieth
fo ag a full recompence fo? the
land entapled difcends not to
her (fue, thee map Swatuc the
taking of anp p2ofits thetes
of anb enter into the Land
entapled foi the ‘lue in
taple {hall neuer bee barred
Swithout a full recompence,
though there bee a Warrantte


in Ded, o: in Law diftended, Fe on the other Ade the eldeſt Coparcencr alten the land
entapled and dpeth, bec Iſſue Hall bauca Formdon atone £o; the sobole Landentapled, fozfo
long as the partition continuctl in foxce the is onlp enbcritable to the whole Landentapled,


€ Et nad my afcunrecompence. Chis ig intended, ag itappeareth


of a full recompence,


€, Tie! partition ne fait afcun difcontinuance. And the veafon thereof
is £o; that (t pafleth not bp Liuery of feifin, but the partition is tn truth leſſe then a grant, Co?
that ít maketh no degree but cach C oparcener ts in by difcent from the common Mnceftoz.

© Mes le contrary eff tenus , Ge. THis is no part of Littleton,
and is contrarp to La ag appeareth bp Littleton himfelfe, and befives the cafe intended is


not truly bouchon, fo, (t (c notin 10,H.6.butin 2o.H.c.anb pet there itis but the opinion of


Newton,Obiter,bp the Wap, Vide F. tit.pzrt.1.


V $3 autet caute €,

put ceo q̃ il ſerra
rett la folip del eigne
ſoer que el boit fuffer
ou agree a tiel parti-
tion, ouel puifloit a-
uet fi cl botle, lamoi-
tie De la terre en fee
fimple, afonmottte
Des tenants en le
taíle, pur fap put
party, e (int. eftre
fure fans Dammage,


Sechon 261.


Nother reafonis

for that, it {hall be
accounted the folly of
the eldeft fifter that
fhee would fuffer or a-
gree to fucha partiti-
on,where fhe might if
fhee would haue had
the moity of the Land
in Fee Simple, and a
meity of Lands entai-
led for her part,&fo to
be fure without loffe.


€ JN amer. caufe,

oc. This is
another reafon to pzouctbat
bp the partition the eldeft
3Daugbter hath concluder her
felfe ag ig atozefatb,


€ Sor moitie des ter-
resenletayle. fFortta
Wꝛit of Partition
had beene brought, che cldefk
ſhould nothaue bincôpelledto
take the whole cftate in taple,
foz the pretudice that might
after enfuc, but might baue
challenged the one maítp of
the Lande in Œayle, and an=
other moity of the Lands tn


Fe ſimple, and this (be might doe ex prouifione legis. Wut when thee Will not fubmít her to
the policie and proutfion of the Law , but betake berfeife to her once policie and pꝛouiſion,
there the Lew will not apde her, ag here by Littleton ít mantfeftiy appeareth, Bnd fo (t is in
the other cafe, (*) As (£ aman be feifed of thace Mannoꝛs of equall value tu fee € taketh wife,
and chargcth one of the Wannors With a Rent Charge, and dyeth, the map by the pzonifion


173


See mere of this in the Chapter
of difcontinuante. SeBiene. *


20. H.6. 14.


(*) 26.E.3.dower 13 3.
17.€.2.rir. dower 166.7


of the Law take a third part of all the Manners anb bolo them difcharged, but if Thee Willace 157.627.


cept the entire Wannoz charged, tt (g Holden that fhe (bali hold ít charged. 2
tr


Lib.;.


Dier.1.M mw. gt.


(915. £.4.3.«. per Littleton.
Lib.4.fel.121.132
Baflardi (af.


(n) 13.E.4.3+ 42: 22


Caps.


Of Parceners.


Seil.162.


n of Lands intayled bet weene Parceners, tf it bo equall at tbc time of tbe par⸗
de. ——— iſſues tn tapic foz euer, albeit the one doe alien ber part. :
But here it map be demanded, tbatfeíng Littleton fapth, that ít (bail bee taken to bee
the follp of the eidelt Parcener, ac. bat tf fo be the eldeſt DID not know of the eltate tayle eps
ther ín refpect of the antiquitie thereof, oz fox want of hauiug of the eutdence, 03 fez any other
caufe, what follp can be imputed to her?


Æbeanfiver ts, That tt {9 prefumed tn Law, that euerp one is Conufant of ber


right and


o%ne Kann ; and on che other fine tt ſhould be arrete great foliy in her to be igno⸗
* of —* osone titie. And theretoze the reaſon o£ Littleton both firmelp hold,


€ Œfore ít appeareth
B that Soben the patut=

tie of the eftate is
deſtroyed by the feoffment of
one Coparcener, that bpon
eutdíon of a moítp by force e£
an entaple agaínft the other
thee (ball not enter bpon the
aliene, Wut in this cafe that
Littleton. bere putteth when
the priuitp of the fate re-
mapneth, andthe part of tbe
onc is euicten, ( *) fhee fhall
enter and hold tn Coparcena-
tie Swith her other dLoparces
ner, and fo tt tg in the cafe of
an efchange, By reafon of
the (&c.) in the end of this
Hecion there map two ques
ſttons bee tuftlp Demande,
Sohat i£ the whole eftate in
part of the purpartie of one
Parcener becuited bp atitie
paramontz Swhether is the
Swhole partition auopded, foz
that Littleton bere puttetl)
the cafe that the $obole pur:
partie of the one is defeated’

(bc fecond queftion tg
Sohether tf but part of the
fate of one Loparcener bee e=
uicted, as an eftate intapie,oz
fo; life leautng a reuerfion ín
tbe Coparcener, Whether that
Hall auoyde the partition tn
the whole’

Eo the irk itis anfwered,
that if the Swbole eftate in part
of the purpartp bee euicted,
that fbali auoto the partition
tn the whole, be tt of a Man-
no, that (s entire, 02 of acres
ofground, o2 the itke that be
feuerall,(n) fo; the partition
tn that cafe implpeth foz tbíg
this purpofe both a warranty
and a condition in Law, and
either of them is entire, and
giueth an entrp in this cafe
(nto tbe Swbole, And fo hath


Sedion 262.


€ A dr» fi bome
A foit fetfie en
fee Dun carue De ter=
re períutt title, a Dif-
ferfift bn enfat deins
age Dun auter catue,
&aD tflue Deur files,
æ moꝛuſt feifi Daumt-
bideur carucs , lenf,
adong efteant Dcíng
age, & les files en-
tront & font partiti-
on, iffint q lun carue
eft allotte al put-
partpiun, come pet
cafe al puilue en al=
lotoàce Dauter carue
que eft allotte a le
purpartie De lauter,
ft puis lenf, enter en
le carue Dont (1 fuit
diſſeiſiſt fur P poſſeſſi⸗
on la Parcener que
ad mefme le carue,
DONG m̃ le Parcener
poit entrer en lauter
carue que fafoer ad,
& tener en Parcena⸗
ty ouefqs lup: Des
file puifne aliena m̃
la carue a bn auter
en fee (imple Deuant
lentrie lenf, & puis
lenf, enter fur le pof-
leſſion lalienee, Don-


que


Lfoif a manbee

feifed in fee of a
carue of Land by iuft
title, and hee diffeife
an Infant within age,
ofan other Carue,and
hatliiffue two Daugh-
ters, and dieth feifed
of both Carues, the
Infant being thé with-
inage, and the daugh-
ters enter and make
partition, fo as the one
Carue is alloted for
the part ofthe one, (as
per cafe to the youn-
geft in allowance of
the other carue which
is allotted to the pur-
partie of the other, if
afterward the Infant
enter into the Carue
whereof hee was dif
feifed vpon the pof-
feffion ofthe Parcener
which hath the fame
Carue, thenthe fame
Parcener may enterin-
to the other Carue
which her Sifter hath,
and holdin Parcenarie
with her. But if the
yongeftalien the fame
Carue to another in
fee beforethe entry of


Lib.5.

que el ne poit en-
ter enlauter Carue,
put ceo que per
fon alienation el ad
lup tout oufterment
diſmiſſe Dauer afcun
pt De les tenements
coe Parcener. Mes
fi le puifne Deuant
lentrie lenfant fait
De ceo bn leas pur
terme Dang, ou put
terme Dc bie, ouen
fee taple , fauant
la reuerſion a lup,
& puts —— en⸗
tev, la parauẽnture
auterment eff , pur
ceo que el ne fop
ceo que fuit en Iup,
diſmiſſe De tout mes
ad referue a lup le
euerlion & le fee,
Re,


Of Parceners.


the Infant, and after


the Infant enter vpon


the poffeffion of the
Alienee, then fhe can-
not enter into the o-
ther Carue, becaufe
by her alienation fhee
hath altogether dif-
miffed her felf to haue
any partof the Tene-
ments as Parcener. But
ifthe youngeft before
thc entrie ofthe Infant
make a Leafe of this
for terme of yeares,or
fortearme of life,or in
Fee Tayle fauing the
reuerfionto her, and
after the Infant enter
there peraduentute o-
therwife it is, becaufe
fhe hath not difmiffed
herfelfe of all which
was in her, but hath
referued to herthe re-
ucrfion,& the fee;&c.


Sed.262.


tt been latelp reſolued (o) both


the partition,

Tothelecond; tf anp eftate
of freehold be enlisted from the
Coparcener in all 02 part of
ber purpartie, it hall be auoy⸗
Ded tn the Whole, As (£ A. be
feifed in Fee of one acre of land
in pofleflion, and of the res
Gerfion of another expectant
bpon an eftate fo2 life and bee
Difleife the Leſſee £02 life bo
makes contínuall clapme, A.
dyeth fetfed of both Beres,
and hath Iſſue two 3Daugb-
ters, partition is made, ſo as
the one Bere ts alloted tothe
one, and the other Acre tothe
other, tbe Leſtees enter, the
Partition is auopbed foa the
whole, and fo 1ikeSvife hath
Cp) ít bene latelp refoluen,
(q) Pet thereis a diuerfitte
betweene the arrantic, and
the condition which tht Law
createth bpon the partition
Shere one Coparcener taketly


benefit of the condition in


Law the defeatcth the partitis
on ín the whole.

ut Soben fhe boucheth bp
fozce of the warranty in Law
foz part.the partition fball not
be defeated in the whole, but
thee {hall recouer recompence
fez that part, And therein


alfo thers is another dinerfitie bet weene a recouerte in value bp force of the warrantie bpon the
efchange and bpon the partition : fo? bpon the efchange be fball recoucr a full recompence fo? ail
that be lofeth, U5 ut opon the partition (Dc fhall reconer but the moitie 02 halte of that which ts
loft, to the end that the loſſe map be equail, : ;


Many other diverGtics there bebctoene efchanges and partitions , for there are moꝛe and.


greater pzíuftieg in cafe of partition tm perfons, bloud, and eftates, than there ts in cfchanges,
all whtch Were tw tedious to rehearſe in thts place, feeing fo much as hath beencfatd, bercin ts
{ufficient £02 the erpianation of the cafes of partition Sbtch Littleton hath put.


€ Donqnes el ne poet enter en lauter carae, cre. By thts íg alfo ap=
prꝛoued that Swbich hath bene oftenfatd before, that When the Whole prtuttic bet weene Copars
ceners ig deftroped, there ceafeth anÿ recompenteto bee expected epther Spon. thecondttion {ri
Law 02 Warrantte in Law by force of the partition,


. € Per fon alienationil ad Iny tout onsterment difmiffe daner afcun part de


les tenements come parcener. 39eveupon tt followeth, that tf one ware


tener maketh a feoffement in See, anb after her (coffee is impleaded and boucheth the feoffoz,
(1) the may haus appe of ber Coparcener to deraigne a warrantie Paramount , but ncucrto
recouer pro rata agaínft her by force of the Warrantte in Law pon the partition, for Little-
ton here ſayth, that bp her aliénatton thee hath diſmiſſed berfeife to bauc anp part of the Land
as Parcener. And without queftion as Parcener thee muft recouer pro rata, pon the war⸗
rantic ín Law agaínft the other arcener, 344


And prt in fome ca fc the coffee of one dr oparcener ſhall baue ayde of the other Parceners


to Deraigne the warranty paramount, and therefore (a) if there bee two Coparceners and


they make partition, and the one of them enfeoffeg her fonme anb heire apparant anb Dpctb the.


fonric {5 impleaded, albeit he be in bp the fcoffment of En mother, pet ſhall be pray in ayde ce
E th


174


Co) Baffardi cafe, 1 (t
- inthe cafe of exchange andof L5 fiin "d


(p) Baftards cafe, obs Apre.
( q) Vide 5. Elʒ.tit.
Voucher, 249.


18.6. 3.tit edd ty i
ty H.6.26.


(t) 41-E.3-245
11,H.4.22.23«
14. E, 3.414134,


(a) 43.2. 3.23. Pl. (em:
4.6.3.15. $.€.3.7.
35.E.3.17. Gv.


Lib


(b) 33 E.r.rir. Aid 178.
id. 163.


y En ibid. 163


(* 2M. € xd.


(b)24.E.3.39.31-F.3.Frief Coparcenarp,(b) for the
319» 9. E.4.13. 19. N, 6.36,
1.N.6.26.. 3.H.6.4/f.1.


37.M. 6,8. 31. E. 3. 14.


hi


Capi. à


Of Parceners.


Sel.263.264.


er Coparcener to haue the Warranty Paramount ; andthereafon (b) of the gi
wen I foz that the warranty betweene tbe motberanb tbe fonne i¢ by laxo ad
and therefeze the Law giucth the fonne albeit he be tn bp feoffment to pzap in aide of the other
parcener, to deraigne the Warranty Paramount, wherein ts to be ebftrueb the great equity ot


the Common Law in this cafe:


Ipfe etenim leges cnpiunt vt inve regantur.


*) Wat (fa man befcífeo of lands (n fe and hath (Tne two daughters anb make a gikt in
s à one of them and dic feifed of the renerfion in fee which dilcends to both fiers, and the
Done oz her (fluc ts impleabeo, the ball not pray i apbc of the other Coparcener either to rex
coner Pro rata, oz to Deraigne the Warranty Paramount, to? that the other fifter, is a ftran-
ger to the fate tatle Shercof the eldeſt was fole Cenant, and newer partition Sas 02 could be


thereof made,


€ Mes file puiſue denant lentrie legfant fait de ceo vn leaf &c. ou en fee


a


tatle fauant le reuerfion a luy, &c.
fatd) nedeth noerplanation. Dnip this ts
tant tn taíle to cut oft. the reuerſion, pet tf


( bpori that tobich hath beene


e obferucd ,that albeit (t is tn the power of tc-
infant enter befoze tt be cut off, the Law bath


(ucl) confideration of thts reuerfon, that e that loſeth it hail enter into her Gfterg part, and
bold with her tn Coparcenarp fog that the pztuitp bersweene them Wag not Dheilp deftropen.


Seét.


€ | Cem fi foiét trois ou quater

parceners,ac.q font partiti-
on enter cur. file part Dun parce-
ner foit Defeat p tíel loyal entrie,
el poit enter ct occupier laut ter-
tes ouem touts les auters par=
ceners et eur compel de faire no-
uel partition de lauters terres,
enter eut,ac,


2.63. $


Ale ifthere be three or foure .


Coparceners, &c. which
make partition betweene them, it
the part ofthe one parcener bee
defeated by fuch lawfull entrie,
fhe may enter and occupie the o.
ther lands with all the other par-
ceners,and compellthem to make
new partition betweene them of
the other lands,&c.


C | Neer cnx crc. This (&c.) implyeth that fo it is betweene the


ſuruiuing 39arcenerg and the hetres of the other, ez betwemne the beires of


all being dead,


Parceners


Sed. 264.


€ I; baron foy


tient eius coe
tenant per le curte-


fie. This is no


feucrance ofthe fkate in


other Œoparcener and
the Œenant bp the Cur⸗
tefie (ball be (opntip ims
pleaded, for he doth con-
tinue the fate of Copars
cenarp as the other
Warcener div,

Œ Vers le tenant


€[&emn (í font deur
parceners, et lun
pzent baron, et le baron
et fa fe ont iffue enter
eug,et la feme Deup, ct la
baron fop tient epng en
le moity com tenant per
le curtefie, en ceo cas le
patcener q ſurueſquiſt,
et letenant per le curte=
fie bien potent faire pat-


Al? if there bee
tWo parceners and
the one taketh husband
and the husband and
wife haue iffüe be-
tweene them and his
wife dieth, and the huf-
band keepes, himfelfe
inastenant by the cur-
tefie, In this cafe the
parcener which fürui-


tition


 Liba.


tition enter eug,ac. Ct (i
letenant per le curtelie
ne boit agreer al pattiti-
on Defire fait, Donques
le patcenet. que ſurueſ⸗
qui(t poit auer eñuers le
Cenant per le curtelte,
bgeife De partitione faci-
enda,&c. et lup côpeller
De faite partition, Ades
file tenant per le curte-
fieboile auer partition
enter cur Deftre fait, etic


parcener que furuefquitt


ne boit cco auer, Denque
le tenant per le, curtefie
nauera aſcũ remedy put
auer partition, ac. Car
fl ne poít auer breife
De Partitione facienda,
put ceo queil nett par⸗
tener , cat ticl breife
gift pur parceners
tantfolement, Ct illint
pores feret que bíe
De Partitione facienda
gift enuers tenant per


‘le curtelie, ef bncoze


il meſme ne poit auet
tiel breife,


OF Paroenand


ueth, and the terant by
the curtefie may well
make partitió between
them,&c. And ifthe
tenant by the curtefie
willnot agree to make
Partition then the par-
cener which furuiueth
may haue againft the
tenant by the curtefie a
Writ De partitione faci-
enda cj c.& compel him
to make partition.But if
thetenant by the curte-
fie would haue partiti-
on to be made between
them and the parcener
which furuiueth will
not hauethis, then the


tenant by the curtefie €


cánothaue any remedy
to haue partitionj&c.
For hee cannot haue a
writ of Partitione faciz-
da,becaufe he is no par-
cener.Forfuch a Writ
lyeth for parceners on-
ly.Andfo you may fee
that a writ of Partitione


fac’ lyeth againft tenant


by the curtefie,and yet he himfelfe cannot haue the


like Writ.


Se#.264..


per leCurtefie brief
de partitione facien-
ds,cc. Pere bp
the &c. ts implyed that
albeit that the Œenant
by the Lurtefis be an e-
ranger in blob pet the
(c) Wꝛit De partitione
fac. clearly ipeth againtt
the tenant by tbe Cur-
telle, becaufe beg contís
nuctb tbe eftateof Co⸗
parcenarp,

3t two ŒCoparcencre
be, and one doth alten in
fee they are Genants in
common, and fenetall
Writs of Precipe mutt
be brought agatntt then,
and pet the 39ar£ener
hall bane a toztt of pars
titton again the Altec
nee at tbe Cõmon Raw,
Which is a farte ffron-
ger cafe then the cafe
pat of Œenant bp the

urtele,


@ Tiel briefe
Sift pur Parceners
tant olement Here⸗
by ít appeareth that net⸗
therthe Œenant bp the
Cortehe, noz ¢ much
lee ) the ienæ of à
Œoparconer thall hage
& Wꝛit of Partitione fac’
at the Common Law,
fo? Littleton faith bere,
that fuc a wꝛit Ipeth
8nip fo? Parceners,
* bütítmap be brought
bp à Parcener agaínft
firangers ag ft appea=


reth before, But a Nuper obijt anda Rationabile parte Boe Tpe only betweene two Copar-


tener on both fides.


FE thre Coparceners be and the eldeft v
hing onc part by difcent, and the other by purchafe (b
Common Law againk the other middie fier, Et
ſtronger cafe, ik there be three Coparceners and the


oth parchafethe part of the pounactt, the eldeft has

ali banc a 103ít of Partition at tbc
fic de fimilibus And fo (t tg in a farte
eibeff taketh bufband, amp the hufband pur-


Chafethe part of the poungeft the hufband for big part. is a ranger and no Parcener, and


pet he and his wite ſhall haue a wꝛit of partition againtt the middie
Law, becaufe be is faifeb of one part in the right sfhis wile who (c a

Pur auer Partition crc.
that be ftrangers (n blo, whether t
Since Littleton wrote ; bp the &
bauc a wait of Partition againt the other,


tatutes (d


fier at the Common


39arcener,

Hereby this (&c) is included all others
hep come to their eſtates by Wurchafe oz bp atin awe,
) one Flopntenant o; Tenant in common map
and therefore at this vay the Alien of one Parce⸗


ner tap have a wꝛit of Partition agaínft che ether Parcener, becaule thep are Cenants in


Common : and the like hab beene attempted tn former Waritam
thefe


later Statutes.


ents (~) but prenatied not bntill


Ce) She Cenant bp the Carteüe hal bane wut of Partition vpon the Statnte of
r3


32.H.8,


(¢)3-€.3.47. 9.€,5.13.
16.E.3. 414119. sy. €.3.
thid.144.


38,E.7, 5.


(5) 3.E.47. 48.


Die 1. Maia 98.


F


RN. Es.
Regifr.


d) 31.H.8.cap.1. 32 H,B.
OH Vid, SeB.ag0.


(*) Rose. Parl. 1.R.a 89,82,


(e) Brooke sit. Partition A.


Za.


Lib.3.


(E) ichs, e 8. Eliz,
‘Bendloes inter PYvetten et
Corks. s
"Dur 3, Maia 138.4. et
9. Kli(.341-


See before aM the Austiend
Authours of the Law coneer-
ming Gaualkiml vis fupra.


Lambert verbo Terra ex feript f


(£g) 5-E.4.8.6. s1.E.4.56.b
"Ple. Com.129,b.in Buckleis
Cafe. Vi. Sc, 8. vndas finem,


(Lh) Berechefrire.
AHndord.


(i) Lonb.vabe Welfimen.
SilueHter Giraldo.


| Ap.1. mti


33.H.8.63.32.. for albeit he is neither Joy
ileth againt the Parcener anb Eenant bp the
ag another Œenant £0? liée,

(f) Itt there be thꝛee Copar


ceners an


Of Parceners.


ntenant nor Cenantin Common koꝛ that a bræcipe
Courtefie ag hath beene layd, pet hee tg tn equall


| Seit.265:


pa ftranger purcbafe the part of onc of them,he and


one other ofthe Coparcencrs (ball not topne in a wo rit of partition, netther bp the Common


La, 02 bp force of the fatutc,
of them by the Law doth orm
Realme make partition thereof,

4010 in this cafe the ene of
tien at the Common Law, and the other Parcener


without ot


the Dlaintifes,viz.


and therefoze they (ball not topre in one tozit.


Cuap.2.


ome. YYoel fai Licl.


(2) Ghat he in his Declara⸗
tion muft make mention of
the Cuftome, ag to fap, Chat
theland is of the Cuftome of
Gauelkind, but hee fball not
prefcribe tn it. And ſo ts tt of
Burgh Englith, and thefetwo
barie in that point from other
Cuſtomes, forthe Law, when
thep are generallp alledged,
taketh Knowledge of thele


£500,

Jn(h) Domefday tt ts thug
fapd, Duo fratres tenucrunt in
paragio quifque habuit aulam
fuam, & potuerint ire quo ve-
Jucrint.

¶ 4uxy tiel cuflome
ell ex auters lieux Angle-


terre. DE this (utti-
cient hath bene fato bekoze.

: North Gales.
tales, Wallia, It commeth
(i)ofthe Saxon 50078 Wealh
Sbich Agnifiet) Peregrinus,oz
exter’ fog the Sar0s fo called
them, becaufe im troth the
Swere ftrangerg to thers, being
the rematne of the old and ans
tient Wrtttons, a Sotfe and
Swarlike atten inhabiting
inthe weft part of England,
hele men have kept chetr
propcr Language fo abouc th


ten, Saifons, (that is) Haro
Hoꝛth wales, was alfo in Ireland,
Swere of the nature of Gauclkind : but where by thetr


ant Wittens)


Parceners by Cuftome.


CES arceners p

Mage le cultome

font lou bóc
feifte en fee fimple,ou
en fee tatle De terres
outenements d font
Detenure appel Ga⸗
uelkind deins E Cott-
tie de kent, a ad (Tue
Diuers fits & Deute,
tielx terres ou tene=
ments DifcenDerôt à
touts les fits per le
cuftome, æouelment
enheriterdt & ferront
ptition enter eux pet
le cuftome. ficome fez
males ferront, & bte
De Partitione facien-
da gift en ceocas, fi
come enter females,
mes il couient en là
Declaration De faire
mention dle cuftom,
Aurrtiel cuftome cft
enautecg lieux Den⸗
gletert, Ct auri tiel
cuſtome eft en North
Gales, at.


fos the words of the Preamble of the ftatute be ( And none
ay know their feuerall parts, c amd cannot by the lawes of this
her of their mutuall affents, &c.)

the Parcener map have a wꝛit of 39artt-
being a purcbafer may fauc ft bp the fat,


Sek. 265. -


msArceners by
BS 1 BH the; Cuftome
(A where a
man eifed in Fee fim-
ple, or in Fee tayle of
Lands or Tenements
which are of the Te-
nure called Gauelkind
within the Countie of
Kent,and hath iffue di-
uers fonnes and die,
fuch Lands or Tene-
ments fhall difcend to
all the fons by the Cu-
ftome,and fhal equally
inherit and make parti-
tionby the cuftome,as
females fhall doe,and a
writ of Partition lieth
inthis cafe as between
females, but itbehoo-
ueth in the Declarati-
on to make mention
of the Cuftome. Alfo
fuch Cuftome is in
other places of Eng-
land, and alfo fuch cu-
ftome is in North-
Wales, &c.


efe thoufand peares paff , and thep to this dap call bs Engliſh⸗
ng. Bnd tbe like cuffome as our Author becre fatth was in
fo; thetethe Lands alfo (which is one marke of the anti=


Brehon Haw the 15a-
ſtards


Lib.3. Of Parceners by Cuftome. Se#.266,267. 176


fta tbe inberiten with their legitimate fons, ag tothe Baſtards that cuſtome Was aboliſhed.
Bnd agraing With Littleton ta this popnt,fean old Sptatute,* Aliter vfitatum eft in Wallia,
quamin Anglia,quo ad fucceffionem hæreditatis, co quod hereditas partibilis eft inter heredes
mafculos, à tempore cuius non extitit memoria partibilisextitit, Dominus Rex non vult quod
confuetudoilla abrogetur, fed quod hzreditares remaneant partibiles inter confimiles hæredes
ficut fieri confucuit,& fiat partitio illius ficut fieri confuenit


© Parceners per le Cuſtome, &c. mel {apd Littleton, By tbe Cus
ome, fez fonnes are Parceners im refped of the caftome of the Fee o2 Inheritance, and not in
tefpect of theirperfons, as daughters and fiflerg, ac, be, ( h) Et{unt participes quafi partem ca-
pientes,&c. ratione ipfius rei qua partibilis cft, & non ratione perfenarum,quæ non funt quafi
vnus hares, & vnum corpus, fed diuerfi heredes, vbi tenementum partibile cft inter plures cohz-
redes petentes qui difcendunr de codem ftipite & femper folent diuidi ab antiquo.


[Gem il p ad aut
partic quel eft Dau-
ter nature et Dautet
forme que afcuns Des
‘partitions auauutdits
font, Sicome home fei-
fie De certaine Terres €
fee (imple, ad iſſue deux
files et leigne eſt mary,
et le piere Done parcel
de ſes terres a le baron
oue fa file en frankma-
tíage, et moꝛuſt feilie à
leremnant,le quel rem:
nant eft De pluis grein⸗
Der balue peran, q font
les Terres Doncs en
Frankmariage.


Set. 266.


Lfo thereis another

partition which is
of another nature,and of
other forme, then any of
the partitions aforefaid
be. Asif aman feifed of
certaine Lands in Fee-
fimple, hath iffue two
daughters, and the el-
deft is married, and the
father giueth part of his
Lands to the husband
with his daughter in
Frankmarriage, and dieth
feifed of the remnant,
the which remnant is ofa
greater yerely value than
the lands giuen in Franke-
marriage.


Ona par-
J D cel L fes


terres 4 le Baron


one [à file en frank-
marriage.

Here ít appeareth,
Chat a gift in frank=
marriage may be made
after marriage, ag
hath beenefapd in the
Chapter of fe tapie.

€ Le quel ré-
nant eff de pluis


greinder value per


an, crc. Admit
that thelands given in
Frankmarriage are
of greater balue than
thelands difcended in
Fe finple, Shall tbe
other fiffcr have anp
remedfe againft the
Dones > itis plaine
be fhall not , becaufe


it (8 lawtull fo? a man to diſpoſe of bia one lands, at big Sotilano plcafnre,


cre cel cafe le ]


baron ne le fée
auera viens pur lour
purpartie De le Dit
remnant, finon que


Nthis cafe neither
the husband nor wife
fhall haue any thing, sera riens pur lour pur.
fortheir purpartie of partie,ére. (i) Gp big
the fayd Remnant, vn-


Sell. 267.


€ EN cel cafe le Ba-


ron ne le Femea-


gift in Jrrankmarríage {ball
Prima facic be {ntended a fuf-


fig toile mitter lout
Eres Dones cn frank⸗
Mariage en Hotch-
pot ouefque le rem⸗


leffe they wil put their
lands giuen in Franke.
marriage, in Hetchpor,
with the remant of the


ficient aduancement,and ther=
fo;e the remnant (ball diſcend
tothe other &oparccacr, onlp
Sith this preuifion in Law,
Tacite anwersd, that f£ the do⸗

nos


Vid.$e8.213.
* Star Wallie,an.12.€.1,


(bh) 2raR. li. 5.f:.428.
Brit.ea.71.
Bier. lib. s.eap.o.


6) 8.H.3. bre 380.
34.E. 1 .wper Obiit 1 5.ad-
sudge — 4. E.3.45.
10. A4 (f p.14.

"Vid. 10, 8.3.38. «t 39.42
Br ht. Lip. a.fel 97.

Lib. 5.fol.428. "Bestienga.7
Fleta Lib, 6.cap. 47.


Lib.3.


(k) Glanusll Lib.7.cep.5.
Brafon Lib. 2. fol. 60.
Fleta Li5.2.cap.5.
Magna ( artacap. 18. 3.
F.N.B.222. 30.E.3.35-


31. E. 3.Refp.6o. 31.4 ff.1 4.
Y 7. E.2. Detinew 17.E.3.19.


1. E. 3. Detinew $6,

31. H.8.tit. Rationab.parte.
Benerum.6.

* Lamb. f.119.68.

(1) Regift.142.

3 4E. x. Detmew 60.

1 E.4.6. 7.E.4. 21.
41.8.3. 38.


(m) 3-E.3.Dettinew. 156.
40.€.3.18 .


Cap. ⁊.


nees will put the Land into
Hotchpot,then the ſhall out of
the remant make bp ber part
equal, but the Dones muft
doe the Grft at, and tn the
meane time the Swbole fee fim=
pleland diſcends to the other.
And this is Marranted heere
bp Litfleton, viz. Chat the
Dones (ball haue nothing
foz the purpartíc of the rem⸗
nant, vnlelle (bep Will put
their lands giuen in Franke⸗
marriage, in Horchpot,fo ag
the Donees mull doe tbefir(t
act and moze erpzeflelp after in
this Chapter, Where he dire=
dlp faith, Chat the other St-
fer {hall enter into the rem⸗
nant,é themto occupte to her
owne ble, vnleſſe the hufband
and wife Mill put the Lands
ginenin Frankemarriage,in=
to Hotchpor. And herewith
agreeth Fleta,Loho faith, Cum
dicat tenens excipiendo, qucd
non tenetur petenti rcfponde-
re quia A. participem haber,
&c. replicari poterita petente
quod predict A. tenet quan-
dam partem in maritagium
de communi hzredit, nec vult
illud in partem ponere. Bnd
bereare thae things (that J
map {peake once foz all) tobe
obferucd, Firſt, G bat in this


nant De Ia terre ouct-
q; (atocr, Ct Kiflint
ils ne voilent fapze,
Dongs le puifne poet
tener æoccupier m̃ 1e
remnanc, Æ pꝛendra
a lup les profits tãt⸗
ſolement. Et il ſem⸗
ble que ceſt parol
(Hotchpoteft en En⸗
gliſh, A Pudding, car
en tiel Pudding neſt
communement miſe
bn cbofe tantfoleme,
mes bn cbofe oucfqs
auts chofes enfem-
ble, Ct pur ceo il co=
uient en tiel cale De
mitter les Terres
dones en frankmar⸗
riag, ouefque les aus
ters terres en Hotch-
pot, file Baron a fa
feme boilent auer alt
pt en les auts ttg,


OfParceners by Cuftome, —Sef#.267.


land with her, fifter.
And if they wil not
doe fo, thenthe youn-
geft may hold and oc-
cupie the fame rem- |
nant, and take the pro- |
fits onely to her felfe.
And it feemeth that
this word (Herchpot)
is in Englifh, A Pud-
ding, forinthis Pud-
ding is not commonly
put one thing alone,
but one thing with
other things together.
And therefore it be-
hooueth in this cafe
to put the lands gis
uen in Frankemarri-
age with the other
Lands in Hotchpot, if
the husbandand wife
will haue any part in
the other Lands.


+


fpectail cafe where there be two daughters, one of them onclp Mall in herit the lands (t fee fima
ple. £ycconbip, Chat tn this cafe there iteth no t2it of Partition, becanfe non tencatinfimul
& proindiuifo. Thirdly, 3E the Parcener to Whom the land in fee Ample diſcended, Wwill not


put the lands in Hotchpot, then ma


in Coparcenarie With her.


E


y the Dones enter (nto the fee Umpie lands,and hold thens


And it ſeemeth bp our olo Bokes, (k) Chat by the antícnt Law there wag a kind of res


femblance hereof concerning gods, Siautem poft debitadedu&a & poft deduétionem expenfa~
rum quz neceffariæ erunt, id totum quod hunc faperfuerit diuidatur in tres partes, quarum vna
pars relinquatur pueris fi pueros habuerit defunctus. Secunda, Vxori (i fuperftes fuerit, & de ter-
tia parte habeattettator liberam difponendi facultatem : fi autem liberos non habeat, tunc medi-
etas defunéto,& alia medietas vxori: fi autem fine vxore decefferit liberis exiftentibus,tunc medi-
etas defun&o,& alia medietas liberistribuatur : (iautem fine vxore & liberis,tunc id totü defun-
cto remanebit. And bp the Law before the Conquelt it * wag thus pꝛouided, Siue quis incuria,
fiue morte repentine fuer inteftat mortuus, dominus tamen aullam rerum fuarum partem (prz-
ter cam que iure debetur) herioti nomine fibi aflumito, verum cas iudicio fuo vxori liberis 8c
cognatione proximis iufté pro fuo cuique iure diftribuito.

Wut ttappcarcth bp tbe Regifter, (1) and manp of out Bokes, That there muſt be a cuz
tome alledged infome C ountíc, ac. to tnable the wife oz children to tbe Wait De rationabile
parte bonorum, and fo hath (t beene rcfolueb in Parliament, (m) Wut tach children ag bee
reafonabip aduanced bp the father (n his life time Sith anp part of bis gods, (hall Daue ma
further part of hig goods, for the woꝛds of the wꝛit be, Necinvita patris promotifuerunt. — ^

Note, the cuftome of London is, & bat téche father aduance anp of bis children With anp
part of his gods, that fhali barrethem to demand any further part, vnleſſe the Father vnder bie
hand, o? in bis la(t wili doe erpzeiie and declare, Chat tt Was butin part of aduancement, and
then that child fo partipaduancen, fhall put big part (i Horchpot, with the Œrecutozs and tote
doW, and havea full third part of the Whole, accounting that which Wag formerlp giuen onto
bim ag part thereof, And this tethat tn effet, which the Cintiiangcall Collatio — |

Et


‘.


Lib.s. Of Parceners by Cuftome. — $68.268.


¶ Et il femble que ceſt Parol (hotchpot) eff en Engli[b, a Pudding, &.


Littleton both here and in other places fearcheth foz the Ggnification of woꝛds, in all Arts a
thing mol neceſſary, £0) ig noratis terminis ignoratur & ars vide fog Etymologies, Scét.95.119.


33501 $4-164.20 40234. &c.


€ Autſpot 02 Hot/pot, is an olo Saxon woꝛd, and fignificth fo
much ag Littleton here fpeakes. Bund the French ble Horchpor £0 acommixtion of diners
things together. It Agnificth here metapbogicallp in partem pofitio. Jn Engiiſh we ve to fap
Hodgepodge, in Latine Farragoog Mifcellancum. *
The reũdue of this Secton needeth no explication.


Set.


CET ct terme Gotchpot)
nett korſq; on terme fimi-
litudinaric, & cft a tant abíte,


- €eta(cauoítt, demitterlesterts


_ en frankmarriage aleg auters
. terres en fee Ginple entemble , a
. teocítatiel entent De conuſter le


balue de touts les terres, S. Dc


. les terres danes en Frankmar⸗
riage, & De le remnant que ne


_ fucront Dones a dong; partition


ſerra fait en le foꝛme que enſuiſt.
Sicome mittomus que home
foit feifie De 30. acres De terre
en fee (imple chefcun acre De baz
]ue De 12. 8. peran, à que ilad
iſſue deux files, ælun ett covert
D baron, Fle pier Dona 10. acres
De les 30. acres alebaron , oue
fa file en ffrankmarriage, a mo-
2ut feifie Def remnant donques
lautet focr entra en le remnant,
s.ẽ les 2 c.3Creg,x eur occupier,


- à fon bfe Demefne finon que le


baton et (a feme botle mitter les


‘To. atres Dones en Frankinar-


tíage , oue les 20. acres en
Hotchpot, ceftafcauotr, enfem-
ble , a Donque quant Ic value De
chefcun acte eft conus cefta(ca-
tioít, quechefcun acre vault per
an, &cft aflefle, ou enter eur
agree, que cheſcun acre hault p
an 12.0, Donques le partition

ferra


268.


Nd this tearme (Hotchpot) is

butatearme fimilitudinary, &
is as much to fay,as to put the lands
in Frankmarriage , and the other
Lands in Fee fimple together , and
this is for chis intent, to know the
value of all the Lands féz. of the
Lands giuen in Frankmarriage,and
of the remnant which were not gi-
uen,and then partition fhal be made
in forme following. As put the cafe
that a man be feifed of 3o. Acres
of Land in Fee fimple, euery Acre
of the value of 12. pence by the
ycare, and that hec hath iffue two
Daughters, and the one is Couert
baron, and the Father giues 10. A-


cres of the 30. Acres to the Huf-


band with his Daughter in Frank-
marriage, and dyeth feifed of the
remnant, thenthe other fifter fhall
enter into the remnant , viz. into
the 20. Acres, and fhail occupie
them to her owne vfe , vnleffethe
husbaad and his wife will put the
1o. Acresgiuenin Frankmarriage,


with the 20. Acres in Hotchpot,


thatisto fay, together and then
when the value of euery Acre is
knowne, to wit, what euery Acre
valueth by the yeare,and is affeffed
oragreed betweenethem, that eue-
ry Acreis worth by the yeare 12.
pence. Thenthe partition (hall be
Yy


77^


V ide Britt.eap.7 2. 4.E. . 4.
6.E.3.30. 10 E.3.38.
24.E.3,17, FN.5.262.
‘Regifi.320. Flera lib.6.ca.47-
Mich 10.E,1, coram Rage
Hereford, in the faux.


Lib.3.


(ap.2.


ferta fait enticlfogme, ceftafca-
uoit le baron a fa feme aucront
ouffre les 10. acres Doneg a eux
en Frankmarriage 5. acres cn
feueraltie De les 20. acres a lau⸗
ter focr aucrale remnant, 8, 15.
acres De Ps 20-acres pur fa pur=
partie, (lint que accomptant les
ro.üttcS que le baron a fa feme
punt per le Done en Frankmar⸗
riage, etles auters 5. acres De
leg 20. acres, le baron et fa feme
ont autant en annual balue, que
lauter foer ad,


Of Parceners by Cuftome. Fect. 269.


made in this manner, w%. the
Husband and Wife fhall hauebe-
fides the 10.acres giuen to them in
Frankmarriage 5. Acres in feueral-
tie of the 20. Acres, and the other —
fifter fhall haue the remnant, joiz.
15. Acres of the 20. Acres for her
purpartie, fo as accounting the 10. —
Acres which the Baron and Fem |
haue by the giftin Frankmarriage,
andthe others. Acres of the 20.
Acres, the husband and wife haue :
as much in yearly value asthe other
fifter.


Brak. lib. 2 fel. lio. v.

fil. 418. "Britt.e p.72.

Fleta lib.6.cap.47-
E.3.49. 10. E 3. 37.

mao rar. 10..4f.14.

4.E.3.49:

(0) a⸗ · Maz.


€ Nd herewith in expreſſe tearmes agreeth Bra on, Britton,and Fleta an all tbe bokg —
A aboucfato and many others. And tt ts Sorthy the obfernation(n that after this putz
ting into Potchpot, and partition made,the Lands giucn in Frankmartiage,arebe> —
come ag tbe other Lands Which difcended from the common, di nccfto2,an b of tbcfe Lands if he |
be impleaded (0) the (bati haue atde of the other 49 arcener ag f£ the fame Lands fao difcended, M
So the Coparcener that hath a Rent granted to her fo? owelty of partition, as (g atozefatn,
hath the ent, as {€ it had difcended to her from the common Anceltoz, '


Section 269.


T iffint touts foits fur
ok tiel partition , les terres
bones en Srankmarriage Dc-
murgent a ies Donces a alout
beires folongs le foꝛme de le Do-
ne, Car fi lauter Parceũ attoit
tiens De cro que eft Done eti
Frankmarriage, De ceo enſue⸗
toit inconuiens,æ chofe encoun-
ter tcafon, que la ley ne boit fuf-
fer, €t la caule pur que les tet-
res Dones en Frankmarriage
feront mis en Hotchpot cff ceo,
quant home Done terres ou tene⸗
ments en Frankmarriage oue
fa file, ouoneautercofin, il eſt
entendus perlalep que tiel Do-
ne fait per ticl qarol ( Frank-
Marriage) eft bn auancement, a
putatancement de fa file, ou de
fon auter cofin, a no(mement

: quant


Nd fo alwayes vpon fuch par-

uon the Lands giuen in Frank-
marriage remayne to the Donces
and to their heires according to
the forme of the gift, for ifthe o-
ther Parcener fhould haue any of
that which is giuen in Frankmar-
riage : of this would enfue an in-
conuenience, and a thing againft
reafon, which the Law will not
füffer. And the reafon why the
Lands giuen in Frankmarriage fhal —
bee put in Hotchpot, is this when
a man giueth Lands or Tenements —
in Frankmarriage with his Daugh-
ter, or with his other Confin, itis
intended by the Law that fuch
gift made by this word(Frankmar-
riage) is an aduancement , and for
aduancement of his Daughter, or
of his Coufin, and namely, when


Lib.3.Of Parceners by Cuftome. Sef.270,271.


quant Ie Donoz et fes heyres na-
ueront afcui tent ne fecuice De
eux, ſinon que foit fealtp.tanque
le quart Degree foit palle. ac. Ct
put tiel cauſe la lep eft que el a=
uera tiens De les auters terres
ou tenemets difcendus, a lautet
parcencr,tc, finon que el. boile

 míttcr ics terts Dones € frank-
Mariage en Potchpot, come ett
Dit, Ct ſi e ne voille mittet les

terres Dones en frankinariage
en Hotchpot, Donque el nauera
tiens Del remnant pur ceo que
ferra entendu pet Ta Tcp que el eft
fufficientmentauance, a que a-
uancemẽt el (op agree a lup tient
content,


the donor and his heires fhall
haue no rent nor feruice of them
but fealty vntillthe fourth degree
be paft. And for this caufe the
Law is that fhe fhall haue nothing
of the other lands or tenements
difcended to the othet parcener,
&c.vnleffe (hee will put the lands
giuen in frankmariage in Hotchpot
asisfaid. And if fhe will not put
the lands giuen in frankmariage in
Hotchpot, then fhe thall haue no-
thing of the remnant, becaufe it
fhall be intended by the Law, that
fhe is fufficiently aduanced, to
which aduancement fhee agreeth
and holdes her felfe content.


€|)* cea enfucroit enconnenience & chofe encounter reason que la ley ne


veet f ffer-


Quod eft inco ueniensaut contra rationem non permiffum eft in lege. Hereby ít appearetb,
ag tt hath beene often noted, (0) that an argument ab inconuenienti aut ab eo quod eft contra
rationem, tg fereible (t La. (p.) Nihil enim quod eft inconueniens cft licitum.


€ Tanque le 4. degree fiit pasos 3yetebp(&c. ) ig implyed poto the


Degrees (hall be accounted, whereof fufficienc hath beene faid befoze,


€ MIE lep eft
perenter ies

beires de les Donees
enfrankmatiage, ct
les auters parceners
&c, fi les Donees en
frankmariag Deuiôt
deuãt lour auncefter,
pu deuant tiel parti=
tion, ac.quant à mit-
ter en Hotchpot,zec,


CET nota que
Ldones en fank-
matiage fueront per


Sect. 270.


He fame Law is

between the heirs
ofthe donees in frank-
mariage, andthe other
parceners, &c. if the
donees in frankmari-
age die before their
anceftor or before
fuch partition, &c. as
to put in Hotchpot,
&c.


Sed. 271.


Nd note that gifts

in frankmariage

were by the Cómon
Yer


€ y thefe thie (&c.)
in this Section te
tinplted that {€ etther
the Denes Die befoze the
Anceſtoꝛ, o2 ſuruiue the Ans
ceftoz and Die before ſuch a
partition, oz (£ the Denes
and alithe Perceners die be⸗
fore fuch partition vpon the
putting into Hotchpot, their
{Tues thall bauc thefame bee
neat to put the lands into
Hotchpot, foz that beneht ts
heritable, and Difcendisie to
the iſſues.


€ Coni», e. By
this(&c.) is to be vn⸗
derſteod that before the Sta⸗
tate is Sas afer (imple, m
nee


178


Regula.

(") Vid. $eR. 138.139.331,
440.478 488.722.

(P) 49-^f/27.


$e8, 20.


Lib.3.


(aus B. 411, 31-€.3.Gard
116.


(ap.2.
fince the ſtatute a feetatle, So
as it is true, that (9) the
gifts doc continue (ag our
Author here faith) but mot
the eftates. Foꝛ the eftate ts
changed ag atlargeappearcth
inthe Chapter of effateg tn
tatle. And albeit our Author
bere fatth that fuch gikts bane
bene alwayes fince bled ande


=


nant le Sotatute
nocti fecond,


ac,


tout temps puis ad
efte ble et continue,


Of Parceners by Cuftome. 568.272.273.


la common lep De-


Law before the Sta-
de


et and haue beene al-


continued,&c.


ontinued, vet now tbep be almoſt growne ont of ble, anb ferue i


now principallp for Weote cafes and quefttong in Lak that therupon were Sont to rife.


€ He lands
[ giuen in

frankmac

riage, € the lands
in Fee ſimple muft
moœue from one
and the fame Bn=
cefter, for tie lands
gínen (n franks
mariage are in res
pect of the aduace=
ment accounted in
La ag hath bene
fatd, ag if the fame
had difcended from
the fame Anceftoz
Who died fetfed of
the fee Gmpic lands,
and there tg no rea⸗
fon to barre the
Done of her fuil
part of the fee fin-
ple lands that dis
{cenved from anos
ther Anceftos from
whom (be had no
fuch abuancement.
¶ Nemy per

fe donor, cc.
ere (&c.) impli⸗
eth no moze but that
Donoz that made


Sect. 272.


C[Cem, tiel mitter en

Hotchpot.ac. eff lou
leg auters terres ou tc-
nements que fuet Dones
en frankmariage Dilcen-
Dont De les Donors en
frankmariage tantfole-
moent.car files terres Di-
fcenderont ales files per
le pier le donor, ou perle
merele Dono2, ou per le
fret E Dono2, ou auter an-
ceftor, et nemy perle do⸗
n02,#c, la auterment eft,
cat en tíel cas el a quel
tielDone en frankmari⸗
age eft fait aueta fa part
ficonte nul tiel Done en
frankmariage bit effc
fait.put ceo q el ne fuit a-
uanc per cup, ac eins per
bn auter.#c.


tute of Weftm.fecond —


wayes fince vfed and


|


‘AE fuch putting in |


Hotchpot, &c. is


wherethe other lands or”


tenements which were


notgiuen in fräkmariage -


difcend from the donors
in frankmariage only, for
if the lands fhall difcend


tothe daughters by the |


father ofthe donor,or by
the mother of the do-
nor, orby the brother of
the donor or other ance-
fter,and not by the donor
&c.there itis otherwife,


for infuch cafe, fhee to |


whom fuch gift in frank-
mariage is made fhal haue
herpartasif no gift in
frankm: had beene made
becaufe that fhe was not
aduanced by them, &c.
but by another, &c.


the gitt of Frankmariage, the other two ( &c.) in this Section neede no explanation.


CD» tbíg Se-

ction € the
( &c. Herein fome
hate gathered that
the baluc of the
lands (ball be acs
counted as thep
were at the time
of the aif in


Sect. 273.


¶ JTem. li home ſeiſie

De 30 acres De terre
chefcun acre de ouel an-
nuàlbalue efant iſſue
deux files cóe eft auant-
Dit, et Dona 15. acres De


ceo


Lio ifa man bee feifed
of 30. acres of land
euery acre of equall annu-
all value, and haue iffue
two daughters as afore-
faid, and giueth 15.acres


Lib3. Of Parcenersby Cuftome. Seff.243.. 179


ceo à le baron oue fa file
en frankmariage, a mo⸗
tutt ſeilie De les auters
15. actes en ceſt cafelau-
tet ſoer auera les 15. a⸗
cres iſſint diſcẽdus alup
fole,ct le baron et fa fer
nemitteront en tiel cag
les 15.acees a eur dones
en frankmariage en
. Hotchpot, put ceo q les
tenemts nones € frank=
Mariage font be auxy
grand et De bone annual
bälue, come les auters
terres Di(cenbug,ac. Cat
files terres Doneg en
- frankmariage font de.
tant egal annual value,
quele remnant font, ou
De pluis balue, en baine
et à nul entent tielr te-
nemẽts Dones en frank=
mariage ferra mis en
Hotchpot ac.pur ceo que
elie poit riens auer De
les auters terres diſcen⸗
DUS, zc. car fi el aũoit aſ⸗
tun parcel De les teue-
ments difcendus, Don-
ques el auera pluis de
annual balue que fa foer
fc, que Ia lep ne boit,æc,
€t ficome eft parle € leg
cales auantdits De deur
files ou De Deur parce-
ners, en m le manere eft
en femblabt cas lou font
pluſoꝛs foers ou pluſoꝛs
parceners, folongs ceo
GE cate a E matter eft,ac,


hereof to the husband
with his daughter in frank-
mariage, and dies feifed of
theother 15,acres. Inthis
cafe the other fifter fhall
haue the r5. acres fo di-
fcendedto her alone, and
the husband and wife fhall
not inthiscafe püt the 15.
acres giuen to them in
frankmariage into Hotch-
pot,becaufe the tenements
giuen in frankmariage are
of as great and good yeare-
ly valueas the other lands
difcended, &c. for if the
lands giuenin frankmariage
bee of equall or of more
yearely value then the
remnant, in vaine and to no
purpofe fhall fuch tene-
ments giuen in frankmari-
age bee put in Hotchpot,
&c. for that fhee cannot
haue any of the other lands
difcended, &c. for if fhee
fhould haue any parcell of
the lands difcended, then
the fhall haue more in year-
ly value then her fifter, &c.
which the Law will not,
&c. Andasitis fpokenin
the cafes aforefaid of two
daughters or of two parce-
ners ; in the fame manner
it is in like cafe where
there are more fifters or
more parceners according
as the cafe and matter is,
&c.


Pd 3


Frãkmariage, but
it is cleere that the
value ſhall bee ac⸗
counted as it was
atthe time of the
partition, koꝛ tf the
Donoz npurcbafe
moze land after the
gift, o2 t€ tbe land
gimen in Sfranks
mariage be bp the
ac of od decay⸗
ed in balue, o2 tf
the remnant of the
lands infer fimpie
be tmpzeucd after
the gift, 02 à con-
ucrfo the Law
fball adiudge of
the value as ít
Was at the time
9f the partition
( bnlede tt bce bp
the proper at 02
default of the par=
ties) as hath bene
fato befoze tn
the foamcr Chap⸗
ter. And fome
haue colleteb vps
on this Section
that the rewerfion
ín fe of the lands
giuen in Frank⸗
martage ail onip
diſcend to the Do⸗
ne, fo? otherwiſe
the other iter fhal
haue moze benefit,
then the Donæ
which ſhould bee
agaínft the rcafor
9f our Authoꝛ.


€ 14 vaine
Cr a nul ent,
de. For itis
a maxime in Law
Lex non præcipit
in vtilia, quia inu-
tilis labor ftul-
tus.


Sed


eenla,
— 194.598. Lib.s.fo.
$.


Lib.3. (ap.2. Of Parceners by Cuftome. Seël274,775276 |


31 Aff la. x4.


13. E. 3.111. Taile 26.
6.E,3.30.b. 4. E. 3. 40. 50,


"Brat i.a. fe. 77,


Sect. 274.


Nd itis to be vnderſtood, that


FT eft afcauoire, que Terres
ou tenemétg Dones en frank⸗
mariage ne Cerra mife en Horch-
pot,fozique ou Œerres Difcende
en fec (imple, car De tette diſcen⸗
bus en fee taile Partition ferra
fait, ficome nul tiel Done en frãk⸗
marriage bit efte fait,


Lands or Tenements giuen in


Frankmarriage fhall not bee put in M
Hotchpet but where Lands difcend —


in Fee fimple,for of Lands difcen-
ded in Fee taile partition fhall bee
made, as if no fuch gift in Franke-
marriage had been made.


€ D20f Lands intatled, the Done in Frankmarriage fhall have ag much part ag the
Foie: Coparcener, becaufe oucr and befides tbe Land atucn in franhmarriage;the J

fuc in Taile clatmeth per formam doni, and both sf the 39arcenerg mulkequalip inherit
bp fozce of the gift, & voluntas Donatotis,&c. obferuciur.


Sed. 275.


© T Lem nuls Terres ferra

mile en Hotchpot oucautg

finon terres que fueront
Done en frankmartage tanttolc-
ment: Car fi aſcun feme adal-
cung auters terres on tenemétg
per afcun auter Done en le taple,
elne bnques mittera tiel Terre
iſſint Done en Hotchpot, mes el
aucrafa purpartíe Dele remnat
bifcenbug,ac,5 a tant que lautet
Parcener auera à ri E remnant,


JA Do no Lands fhall bee put in
Aotchpot with other Lands;but #
Lands giuen in Frankmarriage one-


ly : for if awoman haue any other
Lands or Tenements by any other
giftintaile, fhe fhall neuer put fuch
Lands fo giuen in Hotchpot, but fhe
{hall haue her purpartie of the rem-
nant difcended,&c. (videlicet) as
much as the other Parcener
fhall haue of the fame rem-
nant.


€ FE Dz t€ the Anceſtoꝛ infcoffeth onc of his daughters of partof bis Land, oz purchafe


lands to bím and her
02 generall, fhe not


D their heres, o2 giueth to her part of hts lands in Taile fpecíal
ftanbíng this ail have a full part ín the remnant of tbe iands


in fe fimple, for th: benefit of puttina,#c. into Horchpot, ig onelp appzopzíateb toa gitt in
Frankmarrtage, (quia maritagium cadit in partem )Swbich hall be (ag te afozefapd accounted


as parccl of bis aduancement.


Setl. 176.


¶ T pem on auter Partition
post efte fait inter parcens,

que bariaft De les Partiti⸗
fions auantdits, Sicome y fot
trois PBarceners, tle puiffi boct
auct partition, a leg aufs Deur
ne boillont , mes voilent tener
en parcenaric ceo que a eur affí-
ett


Lfo another partition may be
made betweene Parceners,
which varieth from the Par-
titions aforefayd. Asif there bee
three Parceners and the youngeft
will haue partition, and the other
two will not, but will hold in par-
cenarie that which to them belon-


4


Lib.3.
ect fang partc.en ce cafe (ibn pt
foit alot en ſeũalty al puifne [oct
ſolonq; ceo que el Doit aucr,Don-
ques les auters potent tener le
temnant en parcenarie, a occu-
pier ett common fans partition (t
els boílent;a tiel partition eft aſ⸗
fetsbone, Ct (apes leigneou
lemulnes Parcener boile fayre
partition inter cup, ð ceo que tis
teignont tis teignont, ils potent
ceo bien faire quant acug pleift,
Mes lou partition ferra fait per
force De Briefe De Partitione faci-
enda,laauterment eft cat 1a co-
uient que chefcun Parcener a=


- uera (a part en feucraltie,xc,


¶ Pluis fett dit Des parceñs
en le Chapter De Joyntenants,
gautrenleChapter De Cenats
in Common,


Of Parceners by Cuftoine.


geth, without partition: in this
cafe if one part be allotted in feue-
raltie to the youngeft fifter, accor-
ding to that which fhee ought to
haue,then the others may hold the
remnant in parcenarie, and occupie
in Common without Partition , if
they will, and fuch partition is
good enough. And if afterwards
the eldeft or middle parcener will
make partition betweene them of
that which they hold, they may
well do this when they pleaíe. But
where partition fhall bee made by
force of a Writof Partiuone facien-
da, there itis otherwife,for there it
behoueth that euerie parcener haue
her part in feueraltie,&c.

More fhall bee faid of parceners
inthe Chapter of Ioyntenants,and
alfo inthe Chapter of Tenants in
Common.


€ Ercit tg tobe obferued, That this partition (& god bp confent, fo? Confenfus rollie
H errorem, but ik t be by the Kings wꝛit, then euerie Parcener mult hauc his part. And
bere pou may fer that modus & conuentio vincunt le gem. :

€ E» feueraltie c eve by this(&c.)is implied anothce kind of
feueraitie than our Duthoz hath menttoned,and that is, That the one Parcener (ball hane thé
lano in feuctaltíc from the featt of Calter, vntill tbe gule ot Auguit, ( that ts, the fitt of Au⸗
guft) and the other tn feacraltic from thence bnttiithe feafkof Eaſter, oꝛ the like, & fic alternis
vicibus to them and their hetres imperpecuum, whereok fuficient hath bene fpoken before.


Chbap. 3.


Of Ioyntenants.


5277


Se#.277.


€ Oynteũts font, |


ficome home fet=
fie De certain Certs
ou Tenements , ac,
œenfeoffe deux trois
quater, ou pluſoꝛs, à
auer a teñ à cup pur
term De lour bles, ou
a terme Dauter bie, p
fozce De quel feottimt
ou leaſe ils font fei-


Oyntenants are, as if
a man bee feifed of
certaine Lands or Te-
nements, &c. andin-
feoffeth two, three,
foure,or more,to hauc
and to hold to them
forterm of their liues,
or for terme of ano-
thers life , by force of
which feoffement or


€ qe 4 © agreth not
Sith the :Dzfginal,

fo; tt thould bec,

Ioynt font ficée hoe feifiede
certaine terres ou. tenements;
&c. & ent enfeoffe deux ou
trois, ou quater, ou pluforsa
auer & tenera eux & a lour
heires ou leſſa a eux pur terme
de leur vies,ou pur terme dau-
ter vie, per force de quel feoffe-
ment,ou leafe,&c. Che erroz
may eafilp bee percetucd bp
that Which te in print, viz.
By force of which feoffement
9? leafe, «c, ergo there =
æ


So.)


24 1.3.11, Partis.19,


Regula.


BraR.li. 4 fo.262.
Brit.ca.35.@ fo 113,
Fles.lib.3.ca.4. 10.

d ls. 6.0ap.47,


Lib.3.


f. F4gu9. 11,H.4.16.


Flos.lb. d. sa.45.
Bratt. bb. s. fel. 535. .


4e. £.3.3. 17 AT 14.
14.44. (5. 8.4 f p.30.
10.€,3.47.10..4f 33.
2 2.H.8. 818 Diffeifb.77.
38.4f.21. 37. A4f- 30.
Y3. E. 4.9. 9. E.4.7.b.
38.2.7. 31.H.7.35.
39 Af «9. 21,H.8. 35.
35 H.6.61. 21. EK.4.46.


i$ E. 4.15. F-N.8.179.v.


(à) ge. £1.35.


Capa.


Ofloyntenants. $e&l.178.


bc feoffiment andieate fpokes eg tiels ſont Joyn⸗ leafe they are feifed,
ia alfo Fopntenants tenants, thefe are Ioyntenants,
by other conucpances than Littler. here mentioneth ag bp fine, Recouerte, Wargaine, and
xe. lRcleafe, Confirmation, ec. Ho there be divers ot her limitations than Litticton becre
fpcaketh of: Bs if a Rent charge of ten pounds be granted to A - and B. tobaucano to bolo to
them tio, viz.te A. vntill be be married, andto B bntill bebe aduance to a Wenefice,thep bag
Fopntenants inthe meane time, notwithftanding the ſeuerall limitations :anb it A die before
marriage, the rent fall furntue , bat t£ A. bab married, the vent (bout haue ceaied fog a moitie,
& fic à conuerfo on the ether Aide,


Littleton hauing ſpoken of one Mind of Tenants pro indiuifo, viz. of Parceners, commeth !


now to another, viz. Joyntenants, andfirk of Jovntenants of Freehold. It an Alien and


8 fubiet purcbafclanbg (n fee, they are topntneantg, & the ſuruiuoꝛſhip bail hold place,Et nul- -


lum tempus occurrit Regi, spon an office found.


 Joyntenants, So called becaule thelands 02 tenements, tc,are
connepedto them topntlp, coniunctim fcoff iti, &c. 02, qui coniunctim tenen, and are diſtingui⸗
Shed (rom fole os fcucrall Tenants, from Parceners,and (rom Œenants in Common, ac. and
antícntlp thep were called Participes, & non hærcdes. Bnd thefe Siopntenants mul topntip
implead and (opntlp be impleaded bp others, which propertie is common betweene them and
Coparceners, but Joyntenants haue a fele qualitte of fnrutuozhip, Which Coparceners haue
not. Littleton haning now fpoken of Parceners and of 3lopntenantg of right, doth nercfpeals


of Fopntenants bp Wzong.


tg to bee obferucd,
Chat fome Diſſeiſours,

be Tenants of the land
and fome be no Œenants of
the lands, and of both thefe
Kinds Littleton here ſpeaketh.


€. cc. In the firt
&c. nothing is implied bnt
foure o; fine, ox moze, but tn
the latter( &c.many things be
tobe vnderſtod, ag of TD ((Tets
fois that be no Tenants, ſome
are Œoabiutois, ‘whereof
Littleson here fpeaketh, fome
Councelloꝛs, Commanders,
$c, When the diflcifin is not
to bcc bone to anp of their
bles. Bifo ff A. diſſeiſe one
fo the tfe of B. who knoweth
not of it, and B. affent to it, in
this cafetilithe agrosment A.
Sas Tenant of the land, and
after agreement D. (a Œenant
et the land, but both of them
be Diſſeiſors: oz omnis cæ-


titrabitioretrotrahitur et man-


€


Seélion 278.


«rem ff deur ou

trots, ac, Diffeifont

bo aut Dafcun tet-
res ou Œenements a
jour ble Demefne :
Donques les Diſſei⸗
fours font Joynte⸗
nants, Wes fils diſ⸗
ſeiſõt bnauter al bfc
Dutt De eux, Donques
ils ne font Joynte⸗
nants, mes celupa
que fele diſſteiſin eft
fait eft Cole tenant, x
Es auters nont tieng
ett le tenancie, mes
font appels coadiu-
tors aleDifleilin,æc,


Ifo iftwo orthree

&c. diffeife ano-
ther ofany lands or te-
nements totheir owne
vfe,then the diffeifors
are loyntenants, But
if they diffeife ano-
ther to the vfe of
one of them, then
they are not Joyne-
Tenants, but he to
whofe vfe the Diffei-
fin is made, is fole Te-
nant, and the others
haue nothing in the
Tenancie, but arecal-
led Coadiutors to the
Diffeifin,8c.


datocquiraratur. Bnd (t (g Worthie ofthe obferuation , and implved alfo (n the latter (&c.)
that feing Coadiutoꝛs, Councellozs, Commanvers, ac, atc all Toffteífo;, that albert the Dit⸗
feifoz Which is & enant dieth,pet tbe Alliſe lieth againtt the Coadiutoꝛ, Courcelles, Commanz
der, 9c, and Tenant of tbe land, though be be no diffeifor,


(a) Che Demandant anb o
and the wait did not abate, fos


land, for that he was buts «Leabíutoz.


A man biTeifeth Tenant for life to the vfe
agretb to the bifleiGin, ít (a fa, Chat be in
made bp the Stanger, the reueruon Was bí


thers (n a Præcipe Did bíffeife the Cenant to the ble of the others,
the Demandant Was a Difletfoz,


bnt gained notenancie in the


of him in tbe reuerGon,1nd after he in the reuerſion
therenerfion (s a 3D((Teifop in fee, forbpthe diffeifin
neiep, Sobich (fap they) cannot bes reuefted bp the


agreement


>


Lib.3.


Of loyntenants.


Sei.279.280.


agreement of him tn the Reneriion, fez that (t mabeth bím a Mozong door, € therefore no relation


offan e(fate bp wꝛong can belpe bim.
Ceadiuter. Coadiutor e


coadiuuando. Anglice, à fellow helper,


& nota dq dif-
CE feifin eft pro⸗
permet lou bn home
entra cafcum terres
ou tenements lou fon
entre nett pas con-
geable, toufta celup
que ad franktene=
ment, ac,


Sect. 2779.


Nd note that dif.

feifin is properly
where a man entreth
into any Lands or Te-
nements where his en-
tty is not congeable,
& oufteth him which
hath the Freehold,
&c.


ft quiauxiliatur alteri; and is deriued a


€ Dis delcription of a
difeifinandthe(&c.)

in this place ts bri»

derfted onlp of fuch ands
and @enements whereinto
an entrp map beemabe, and
not of Rents, Commons, EC.
whereof fufticient hath bene
fatd befoze in the Chapter of
Bents, anb foin effect ittle⸗
ton delcribed it before the Œ=
dition of bis Bak. And note
here that euerp entry ig no


dilleilin, vnleſle there bee an oufter alfo o£. the Freehold, And therefoze Littleton doth not fet
done an entríc onip but an oufter alfo, ac an entrp and aclapmer, o? taking of profits, ac.
Now ag there be 3lopntenantg bp diffeifn, fo are there 3iopntenantg bp Abatement, In⸗


trufion,and Vſurpation, ail Mbich are included (n the latter, dc,


€ ET eft afcauote

que là nature
De iopntenancie cft d
celuy que furuefquift
auera folement len⸗
tier tenancic folonqs
tiel eftate que tl ad, ſi
lc topnture foit con«
tíuue,ac, Sicome (i
trois Joyntenants
font en Fee fimple, &
lun ad tue & Deute,
bncoze ceux que fut-
uefquont aüont leg
tenements entier, a
liffue nauera riens,
€t (ile 2 .íopntenant
ab iſſue # Deute, vn⸗
coze le tierce que ſur⸗
nefquitt auera les te-
nemẽts entier, a eur
auera a lupa a fes


Set. 280.


Nd it is to be vn-

X derftood, that the
nature of ioyntenancie
is, that hee which fur-


uiueth fhall haue only:


the entire tenancie ac-
cordine to fuch eftate
as he hath, if the ioyn-
ture be continued, &c.
As if three ioynte-
nants beein FeeSim-
ple, and the one hath
iffue, and dyeth, yet
they which furuiue
fhall haue the whole
tenements, and the if-
fue fhall haue nothing.
Andif the e&s ioyn-
tenants hath iffue and
dye , yet the third
which furuiueth fhall
haue the whole tene-

$5


CS!“ joyntwre foit


continue, c.


Bere by this (&c.) manp
points of Learning are to bee
sbferued, ag that (t is proper
to fopntenants onlp to bans
Lands bp Suruiuoz, for no
Surutuoz of other Cenante
pro indiuifo fhall baue the
Sohole bp Suruiour, bat ons
lp fopntenants , and this is
Called {n Law Iusaccrefcendi.
Omnes feoffati funt fimul ha-
bendi & tenendi nec totum
nec partem feparatam nec pér
fc fed vt quilibet eorum totum
habeat cnm glijs in communi,
& cum vnus moriatur non dif-
cendit aliqua pars hæredi mos
rientis nec feperata necin có-
muni ante mortem omnium
fed parsilla communis per ius
accrefcendi accrefcit fuperftiti-
bus de perfona ad perfonam
vfque ad vltimum füperftitem.
Wut although Suraituorſhip
bee proper to Foyntenants,
pet tt is mot proper quarto
modo (that is) omni, foli &
fcmper, fos these map

Joyn⸗


181


3..4.2. 34. AL 11.12.
26.4 17.41. 4f. 10.24.€.
3:317 LL. Cem. 8). "Parfón de
Hony Lane. 7.40.10.

11. 44.2 8.

I2. E. 3.088 Af 88.45 7 3.
9. ff. 19.39 [f 1. 18.8.3,
9°37 4°


BralFon lib. 4. ful.263. b.
‘Brivion cap. 3 5. Flera lib. 5.
64.4 (7 64,190,439, 6 3 ftl, 5.6


b) 39. Af. p.17.

30.4.8. tst.deusfe B.

* 3-Elie.190.4 9. E. 3.16.
3. Eb. Dyer 175. 23. Eli
De eei] Di Hex
10H. 4.2.8 3. 14. H.4. 34
39.H.6.43. 31. Mao.

33. M. 8.icynt. Br. 62.
39°H.8. condition Br. 190.
(e) 38.4.8. "Dyer 62.
37.H.8.fal.6.


(d) Pafeh. 45.Elig, inthe
Kings Beach betweene King
Hobbes.


Ce) ai. R. s judgment. 265.


Capa.


Fopntenants , though there
be not equall benefit of Sur-
uiuo? on beth fines. Bs (fa
man letteti Lands to A. anb
B. During the life of A. if B.
dyeth A. fall haue all bp the
Suruiuoꝛ, but tf A. dyeth B.
ail bane nothing,

@wo 0; more map havea
(ruft oz an Æuthozitie coms
mitted to them (opntlp, and
pet ít fheil not furuine, Wut
berein are diners ptuerfitica
tobe obferucd: Sivit, there is
a Dtucrftie betweene a naked
Truſt ozan Authoꝛitie, and
a (raft o2 Authoꝛitie (opaco
toan eftate o2 tntcreff, Sec
conilp, there tg a diuerſitie
betweenc Authorities created


Of Ioyntenants.


heires atouts tours
es auterment ett
de Parceners. Car (i
troisparceners font,
& Deuant afcun par-
tition fait lun ab, tf-
fue a Denice, ceoque a
lup affiert Difcendza
à (c5 cobeires iſſint q
(lg auctont ceo pet
Difcent, & nemy per
furutuoz, come iopn-
tenants aucront,éc,


Sed.281, 1


ments to himandto-
his heires for euer,but
otherwifeitis of Par.
ceners, for if three
Parcenersbee,and be-
fore any partitiô made
the one hath iflue and
dyeth, that whichto
him belongeth íhall
difcend to his iffue,
and if füch Parcener
die without iffue, that
which belongeth to
her fhal difcend to her


bp the partie fo; puatecans coheires fo as they fhall haue this by difcent &
ſes, anb Duthoztte created


tby furui
b» Role vice ot que: 2° by füuruiuour,as Ioyntenants fhall haue,&c. |


fice, As for crampic, (b) tf a man denife that bis two Erecutors hall fell bis Land, tf onc of
them dpethe Surutuoz Hal not fell it, but if hehad deutfed his Lands to hig Executoꝛs tobe
folbe there, the Surutuoz fball fell (t which dincrGtte ts tmplped bp our Buthoz, £02 hee fay.h,
that he, that ſuruiueth thai! bane tbe entire Œenancie,

It à man make a letter of Atturney to two, to doe anp act, tf one of them dpe, tbc Surnt-
$02 fhalinot Doctt ; bur t£a Venire facias be awarded te foure Coꝛoners to impannell and rex
tutnca Jury, and one of them dpe, pet the other hall crecuie and returne the fame.

FE a ér batter of feofFement (7 ) be made, anda Letter of Atturney to foure 92 thre topntip
and ſeuer ally to deltuer fetfin,two.of them cannot make ituerp, bccanfe ít is neither by them
foure 01 three topntip, noz any of them fencrailp: but if the Sbherife opor a Capias Directed to
Him make a toarrant to foure o? tb: topntip 02 feucrally to arrelt the Defendant, t$0 of thew
map arret him, becaufe it ts for the crecutton of Juſtice (4 ) which (& pro bono publico, and
therefore hall be moze fauourablp erpounded, then Shen (t is onlp £02 pꝛtuate, and fo hath (t


bene adiudged, Iura publica ex o: iato promifcue decidi non debent. A
€ Erdewe. fotethere is anaturall Death and a ciuéll Death,


and Littletons Cafe tg to be intended of both, and thercfoze (c) if tio Tenants be, and onc of
shem entreth into Religion, the Surniuoz (hall hane the Whole.


Sed.


CRT come le furuiuo2 tient

lieu enter iointenants, en
mefine Ie manere él tient lieu en=
ter eux queur ont íopnt eftate
ou poſſeſſion oue auter Dc chattel
teal ou perfonal, Sicome (i leas
Detertes ou tfits foit fait a plu-
ſors put terme Des ang, celuy d
ſurueſquiſt de les leffeeg auera
les tenements a lup entier, Du-
rant E tevine, per force De meſme


leleas, Ct fon chiual ou i au-


tec


281.


ND as the furuiuour holds

place betweene ioyntenants,
in the fame manner it holdeth
place betweene them which
haue ioynt Eftate or Poffeffion
with another of a Chattell , re-
all or perfonall. As if a Leafe
of Lands or Tenements bee made
to many for tearme of yeares,
hee which furuiues of the Leffees,
fhall haue the Tenements to him
only during theterme by force of


|
|


Lib. Of loyntenants — — 560.282.283.


182


ter chattel perfonall font Done thefameleafe. Andifa Horfe, or -


aplufozs, celuy que furuefquiff any other chattell perfonall be gi-


auera le chiual folement,


ritance 0: Jrreebolb.


@ Chantel, 02 Cate


uen to many, hee which furuiueth


fhall haue the Horfe only.


€ Œrebpitis maniécft that Surutnoz holdeth place, regularly afiwell betweene Flopn-
His of Gods and 4 hattels in polleffton oz in right, ag Jopntenarts of Inhe⸗


lI, tobereof commeth the word (eb in Lato


(£) Catalla andigag Littleton here teacheth twofold, via. reall and perfonall, and putteth ex⸗


Bibles of both,


CERN mele le
p he eft Dc


Debts & Duties ae,
car fi bn obligation


foit fait a pluſoꝛs


pur bn Debt , celup
à furuefquitt aucra
tout le Det ou Dutie,
Et iſſint ef Dauters
Couenants x Cons


Setlion 282.


N the fame manner

it is of debts and
duties , &c. for if an
Obligation be madeto
many for one debt hee
which furuiueth fhall
haue the whole debt
or dutic. And fois it
of other Couenants
and Contraéts, &c.


€ Dw bee fpeaketh
N« Debts, Duttes,

Conenants, Cons
trade, tC.


€ Des & Duties,
oc. Pere bp force of


thig ( &c.) an exception t¢ to
bee made of two topnt Mer⸗
chants, forthe toareg, Dera
chandises; Debts, 07 Dus
ties that thep haue ag fopnt=
merchants 02 39 artenerg hal
not furutue, but (ball gos to
the Œrecutors of him that de⸗


’ C[Cematcais ioin⸗


tracts 3 gc. ceafeth, anb this tg per legem
Mercatoriam which (as hath bene fato ) ts part of the Lawes of this calme fo? the aduance⸗
tent and continuance of Commerce and rade Which ($ pro bono publico, foz the vule ts,
f& lat lus accrefcendi inter Mercatores pro beneficio commercij locum non habct.


Andto the latter ( xc.) in this Section the like exception muſt be made,


Sechion 283.
ALS there may bee


fome ioyntenants
which may haue a
ioint eftate,& be ioynt-
tenants for terme of
their lines, & yet haue
feuerall inheritances.
Asif lands be giuen to
two men and to the
heires of their two bo-
dyes begotten, In this tance in taple.
cafethe donees haue a ¶ Sisome homer
ioint cftatefortermeof & fem poient auer,
theirtwo liues,and yet cc. Perea Diuct-
they haue feuerall in- S#etstmpiyed , Soben the


: : : eftate of ttance is
heritances,for if one of po ose sinite
332 as


€ [5 ont 1oynt e-
flate pur terme


de leur deux vies ,


oc. Srote, albeit
thep haue fcucrall 3inber(-
tances intaple, anda parz
ticular effatc fo» their
itunes, pet the 3Inberítance
Doth not execute, andfe
bzeake the Jopntenancte,
but they are topntenants
fo? life, and tenants im
Common of the Inheri⸗


tenants potent
eftre que poient auer
toint effate, et eftre
iointendts pur terme
De lou bies, et vncore
tis ont ſeuerall enbe-
titances, S»ícóc ter=
tes foient Dones a
deux homes et a les
beires De lour deur
Cops engendres, ett
teft cafe les Donees
ont toint eftates pur
terme De tour Deux
bies.et bncoze tls oũt


(CE) Regi T.Oricir t 39.444,
"Brad.lib.a. 39.H.6.35.
Stanford. Pr.45.


F.N.B.115.E. 38.8, 37.


Vide SeB 198.


Vide Weficetes cafe.
Lib. 2, fel 68.61.


Lib.3.


Vids. £4.» b.


(f) 39. H. 6.3.5.


(9 Weftubs enfe, vbi fnpya,


Alden. 7. M és


Co

ug inthis cale it is, there
are no fcucrall eftates to
drowne onc (m anorher,
But when tbe ſtates are
deutded ín feuxrall conz
uepances their particular
eftates ate diſtinct and de⸗
uided, and confequentlp
the onc dꝛownes the other:
Bs ifa Leaſe be made to
tivo men foz terme of their
liucs, and after the Aeffoz
granteth the reverfion to
them two, and tothe heires
of their two bodyes the
topnture ts ſeuered, and
they are @enants in com⸗
mon in polſeſſion. Bnd it (a
further tmplted that in this
cafe of Littleton there ts
no Diuifion betiwene the
eftate £o lines, and the fe=
uerall inberitanceg, fos in
this caf: thep cannot cons
uey awap the trberttances
after thetr deceafe, foz tt is
Dewided only infuppoltion
and confidevation of Lai,
anbto fome purpofes the
inheritance is fatd to be
executed, ag fhall bec fato
hereafter.

It a man make a Leafe
£02 ( f )life, and after gran⸗
teth the reucrfion to the

enant fo; life, and to a
flrangcer and to thet
heires, thep are not topns
tenants et the reuerfion,
bat tbc teuerfon is bp ad
of Law crecutcd foi the
onc moitie inthe Œcnant
fo? life, and for the other
moitp be holdeth ít ſtill fog
life tbe reuerfion of that
moitie to the arant,

And fo itis, tf a man
maketh a leafe (2) to two
fo? their itues, and after
granteth the reuerfion to
one ofthem in fee,the topn=
turcisfencred, and the re=
herfton is executed for the
onemoítp, and fo» the oz
ther moítp there {8 Œe-
nant fo: life the reuerfion
tothe Grantee.

FE Leſſee fog itfe gran-
teth his eftate te him in the
renerfion and to a ftrans
Get, the fopnture ig feuc-

ted, and thereucrfion erc=
cuted for the one moitie
by the ad of Law,


Of Joyntenants.


feuecal! inheritances,
car (í iun Des Donees
ad iſſue et Deuy,lauter
que furuefquift auera
tout p le furuiuoz put
terme De fa bie, et fi
celup que furucfquift
augp ad iflue, et Deup,
Donques E (fuc Del bn
auera lun moitie, et
liffue Del auter auera
lauter moitied la tet-
te,et ils tiendzont la
terre enter cur € cont=
mon, et ne font pas
tointenats, mes font
tenants en common,
Ct la caute pur d tielx
Donecs en tielcas ont
toint eftate put terme
De lourbies, ef B ceo
que al commencement
les kres fueröt Bones
a eux deux les queur
faro!r (as pluis Dire


¢ font ioint eſtate a


eutPur terme de lour
Meg, Car (i home boit
letter fre abn auter p
fait ou lãns fait.nient
feafant mention Gi e⸗
ftate tl aucroít , et De
ceo fait liuerie De feí-
(ít, en ceo cafe le leſſee
ad eftate pur terme De
fa bie, et iſſint entant
que les terres fueront
Dones a eur, tls ont
toint eftate pur terme
De lour bícg:ala caufe
pur q ils aueront fe-
ueral enberitances eft
ceo, entant queils ne
poict att p nul poffibi-


uty


Sel.283.


the Donees hath iffue
and die , the other
which furuiueth {hall
haue the whole by the
furuiuor for terme of
his life, andif he which
furuiueth hath alfo if-
fue, and die, then the
iffue of the one fhall
haue the one moity,and
the iffue of the other,
fhall haue the other
moity of the land, and
they fhall hold the land
betweenethemin Có-
mon, and they are not
ioyntenants but are te-
nants in common. And
the caufe why fuch
Donees in füch cafe
hauea ioynt eftate for
terme of their liues, is,
for that at the begin-
ning the lands were gi-
uento them two,which
words without more
faying make a ioynt e-
ftatetothem for terme
of theirliues. For if a
man will let land to a-
nother by deed or
without deed, not ma-
king mention, what e-
ftate hee fhall hauc, and
of this make liuery of
feifin, in this cafe the
leffee hath an eftate for
terme of his life,and fo
inas much as the lands
wcre giuen to them,
they hauea ioynt eftate
forterme oftheir liues,
& the reafon why they
fhall haue feuerall inhe-


Lib.3.


lity bn boire enter cur


ingender, ficome höe


et fem potent auer ac.
donq; la lep boct que
lout etate ct lous en-
heritance (oít tiel coe
reaton boct.(olonq; là
fozmect cffect Des pa-
rolx Del Done,ct ceo eff
ales beítes d lun ens
gendra De fon cozps
p afcun de (ca femmes,
& ales heires d lautet
engendra 8 fon corps
p att De fes femes,æc,
Iſſint il couient p ne-
ceflitie De reaſon que
ts aueront ſeueralx
enberitances, €t en
tiel cas (i liffue Dun
Des donees apzes là
mont des Donees De-
uic, iffint d él nad at-
cun íffuc en bie De fou
C02DS engedze, Donas
le Donoz ou fon hepre


poit enter en la moitie -


come en fon reucrfion,
fe, coment d laut des
Donees ad iffue en bie,
gc, Ct ia caufe eft, que
entant q les enheri=
taces font feueral, ac,
^de reuerfion de eur en
ep eft ſeueral ac. et le
furuiuoz Del ifue Del
auter ne tiendza pag
lieu dauer lentiert,


üor of the iffuc ofthe other fhall hold no


to haue the whole.


tendment of the premiles ; And the reafon of this is,


Of Toyntenants.


ritances is this; inaf-
much as they cànot by
any poffibility haue an
heire between them in-
gendred, asa man and
woman may haue,&c.
the Law will that their
eftatand inheritance be
fuch as is reafonable,
according to the forme
and effect of the words
of the gift,and this is to
the heires which the
one fhall beget of his
body by any of his
wiucs,and tothe heires
which the other {hall
beget of his body by
any of his wiues,&c.So
as it behoueth by ne-
ceffity of reafon that
they haue feueral inhe-
ritances. And inthis
cafe if the iffüe of one
of the donees after the
death of the donees dy,
fo that he hath no iffue
aliue of his body be-
gotten, thenthe donor
or his heire may enter
into the moity as in his
reuerfion,&c. although
the other donee. hath
iffue aliue, &c. and the
reafon is, forafmuch as
the inheritancesbee ſe⸗
ueral, &c. the reuerfion
of them in Law is feue-
rall,&c. and the furui-
place


for that it is a maxime in


Seil.283.


Fea man maketh a Leafe
fo? life and grantetb the
reuerlion to two in fee, the
lee granteth his citate
to one of them, thep are
hot topntenantg of the res
uerGon, £o? there is an exce
cutton of the cftate for the
one moitp, and an citate
fo life, the rcnerüon to tbe
other of the other moitp,

Bere Litticton hath well
refolued a doubt, for of
ancienttime ít hath bene
fafo Ch Ghat wien lands
haue bene giuen to two
Women, anb to the beircg
9€ their two bodpes begots
ten ( Sobíc cafe our Ans
thor putteth in the next
Section) that the bufband
bauing iſſue hould be Te⸗
nant bp the Curtelie i=
wing the other filer, fox
that ag forme helt the tnfez
titance Was executed, and
that the fitters were Gee
nants in Common in pof-
feffion, anb confequentip
the bufbano tobe Genant
by the Curteñe, Which be
could not be (£ tbe women
had a topnt eftare £02 terme
of thet liues: and ltke-
wile it Sas fato (i)tyat the
tfiueof tbe one fpouib rez
couer the moity in a Form-
done liuing tis other fitter,
But, Verba funt hec, and
Littleton grounding hime
felfe bpon god Buthogitp,
in Law hath clered thig
Doubt,


Œ Nient feafant
mention quel eflate il


aueroit. Here Little-
ton addeth matertallp (not
making mention of what
€ffate ) fox (k) t€ in the
pꝛeiniſſes lands be letter,
9 Arent granted, the ge=
nerall intendment ts, that
an eftate for life paffetb,
but (£ the Habendum limit
the fame fo? veares o2 at
Will, the Habeadum doth
qualifie the general in-
Law, That


suctp mans atant (Mall be taken by conftrution of ato moft fozcíb'e againt himfelfe, Onz-
»narorem inrerpretanda eft, which is fo to be vnderſteod that


liber c
fo


f


rtiffime conera de
) reby done, for (t (s another
jniuriam : Bro therefore it Cenant tog ite


maxime in La% Quod lees conftru&io non facit
— a leafegeneratg, this (bail
33


bee taken bp
conſtruction


o


183


(h) 17,€.3.51-78,
18.6.3.39. 50.E.34
Stathows.rit done.
so. E, 3. Feoffments
€ fast?.97-


(4) 44.8. 30 baile 15.
8.4733. 34. E. 3.49.
7. H.4.16.

Corbets ( fe, lib. Y. fo. 8.
84.6.

4.Marie Dier 145.


See before in the ehapter of.
Ten.by the curtefie SeFione.


(k) Pl. Com.in Térogkmvor-
Sont cafe,


Razute.


ES


Lib.


(1) 8.E.5. 437.tir Feoffem,


€ Fair: 7 3.36. H.8.rir.


Toynt. Br,§ 3. Dyer fe. 561.
'PlCom.1éo.


BraFor.


MriFlei 1. Metaphif.


Virg. Georg.


Byer 14. 309.


Cap. 3. Of Ioyntenants. vecl.adze


conftruction o£ Hat, an eftate fos his oton life that made the Leafe,for it (t hould be a leaſe Foz
the life of the ULefice, tt hould bea Dzong to him tr the remerfion. And ſo it is if Tenant (n tatle
make a Leaſe generally, the Law Shall contríue this to bec fuch a Leafe ag hee may lasofullp
make, andthat ig £02 terme of hts owne life ; fos tf it (bonito be £07 the itfe of the Letter, tt Mould
bea Difcontinuance,and confequentip the Hate wbich fhould paſſe bp contruction of 135» fhoule
Sworke a Wrong. f ;

Et ifint entant que les terres fueront dones a eux ils onnt ioynt eflate pur


lour vies. This ts plaine, but woth thiserception, Unleſſe the
Habendum doth otherwile iimit the lame. And therefore (£a Leaſe be mape(1) totwo, Ha-
bendum to the one fo? life,the remafnber to the other Foz like this doth alter the general intend;
ment of the premifics, and fo hath (t bene oftentimes refolucd, And fo tt is if a Leaſe be made
to tio, habendum the one mottte tothe one, andthe other moitie tothe other, the habendum
doth make them Genants (n Common, an fo one part of the Deed doth erplatne the otber,and
no repugnancte ber&oeene them, Et femper expreffum facit ceffare racitum.


€ Per nul po/ibilirie. ere it ts to be obferucb, Chat where the
zant (9 impoſſibie totake eect accozding to the Letter, there the Law (ball makefuchacon=
ſtruction ag the gift bp poflibilitie map take effec, which is worthie of obferuation. Benigne
facienda funt interpretationes cartarum proptcr fimplicitatem Laicorum , vt res magis valeat
quam pereat.


€ ft il conient per necefitiedereafon. Tye reaſon of tbe XLatoíg
the life of the thas, fo: though a man can tell the Haw, pet {€ be know not the reafon rhereof,
be fhali ſcoue forget his fuperfictall knewicdge : but When he finveth the right reafon of thelaw,
and fobatngeth tt to bis naturall reafon, that he compzehendeth (t as his one, this ill not
onely feruc him foz the bnderftanding of that particular cafe, but of many other. Foꝛ Cognis
tio legis eft copulata & complicata: And this knowledge will long remaíne with him, all
Sohich (s platnelp implied bp the woꝛds, and( <<.) ef our Author tn this Section, ;


© Et en tiel cafe fi liſſue dun des Donees apres la mort des Donees deuie iffint
que il nad afcuniffue en vie de fon corps engendres,donques le Donor on fon beire


poet enter en lemortie. This ig miftaken tn the unpeinting, and ba
rieth from the ozigtnall, which tg,Si lun Donec ou liffue dun des Donees apres la mort des Do*
necs deuic, iffint que il nad afcun iflue, &c. Foʒ it is eufdent , that (£ the one Donæ himſelte
dieth Without iſſue, the Jnberitance doth reuert oꝛ a moitie, and after the deceafe of the ofher
Done, the Donoꝛ may enter into that moitie, and Sobetber the Iſſue of the onc Done dieth
Without Flue at any timecither in the life of the other Done, og after his deceale, ition
matertall, £e; vobenfocuer no iflue tg rematning of the one Done, fo as the ffatetatle ig fpei
the Donoꝛ may after the deceale of the ſuruiuing Done, enter tuto that moitie, j

@ Et la caufe eff, que entant que les inheritances &c. Littleton in this
Chapter hath oftcnfapb, Et la caufe eft, which ts woꝛthie of obſeruation,foꝛ then Wwe are trulx
fapd to know any thing, when we know the true cauſe thereof: Tunc ynumquodque fcire di-
cimur cum primam caufam fcire putamus:Scire autem proprie eft rem ratione & per caufam cog»
nofcere.


Felix quipotuit verum cognofi ere cau[as. ‘
Anodtherefore all Students of Law are toapplie thetr princtpall tndeauour to attaine there⸗


Onto, all Which tg implted bp the words and feuerall &c. inthis Sectton. :
Pere the caufc of the centric of tbe Donoꝛ into a moitie tn this cafe (o, Chat in as much ag


the 3inbevitance is feucrali,the reverfion ig fenerall, Therefore pon the fenerall deternunatts -


Gn of the eſtate (m tatle,the Donoꝛ map enter, and the La terineth a reuerſion to bee expectant
byen the particular eftate, becaufc the Donoꝛ oꝛ Leiſoꝛ 02 their hepres after ewerte determinaz
tionofany particular eftatc, doth expect o2 looke foꝛ to cníop the Lands o2 Tenements againe,


© Le renerfion deeux enley eff fenerall, cc. Hereby, and by this
(&c.) is implícb, Chat bpon onc ioynt o2 entire gikt of 3Leafe thercis one topnt o2 entire rener=
fon, and bpon fcuerall gifts oz Leafes rhere be feuctall reuerfieng, And this ts to be buderftad
of thereuerfion in the Donoz ophis beires. But albeit the gifts o2 Leaſes be feucrail, pet tf the


tenants ofthe rcuerüon, And ſo it is of a Remainder: and therefore (f a gift

men anb the heires of their two bodies begotten, the remainder to them two a reg,

they ave Joyntenants foz life, Cewants in Common of the tatetatle,and Fopntenants of
@


Donors 02 Leſſoꝛs avant the reuerfion to two 02 moze perfong anb their y ie are Jon |


b


Lib.3. Of Ioyntenants. 56e8.284,285.


fee imple in rematnder, fox thep are Joynt purchalers of tbe Fee fimple, anb theremainder ín
pag jad created cftate,but the raier Gon remaining is the Donoz, 02 bts heives, 13 a part
of bigs antient Fee imple.


Setl. 284.


Ndasitis faydof ¶ [f aman gincth xanos
Ai the fame to two men and one


& ficome eft
€ E De males,


Woman, and the beircg


en meſme le manner
eftlouterre eft Done


manner it is where
land is giuen to two


of their thee bodies begotten,
3n this cafe thep baue ſeue⸗
tall Jnberttances , £o albeit


adeurfemales, € a females ; and to the ítmapbefayo , that tbe $902
les bteg ð lour deux heiresoftheirtwo bo- apes: oss dad
coꝛps engendꝛes.  diesengendred. ther, pet fir(t fpe cannot mar-


rie them bothin prælenti, and the Law Will nouer intend a poflibilitis bpon a poſſibilitie, ag
fir to marriethe onc, and then to matric the other, Secondly, the forme of the gift (e, Go the
heires of their thre: bodies, which is not poflibie,and therefozcthep fait banc fencrail Inheri⸗
tances. And fo tt is, tf a gift be madeto one man and to tio Women, mutatis mutandis. In
the fame manner, it a gift in taile be made to a man and big mother, (m) oz toa man and big
fifter, 02 to him and his Punt, 2, in this and like cafes, albett the giftis made to man and a


Sooman,pet thep baue feucrail inheritances, becauſe thep cannot warrte together, and are with⸗
in the rule and reafon of our Author.


Cem Gésrees loy⸗

ent Dones a Deux,

€alesheirsd lun
De eur, ceoctt bone
Joynture, & lun ad
fcanktenemét,a lau⸗
ter ad fee (imple : Ct
tí celup que ad le fee
Deuie, celup que ad le
franktenement aue-
ra lentiertie per le
futuiuoz pur terme ð
fabie, En meſme le
manner eff, lou cene-
ments font Dones a
Deut eles heires Del
€02p8 Dun De eur en⸗
genóg, lun ad frank-
tenemét, a lauter ad
fee taile, ee,


Sed. 285.


At’ if lands be gi- |
uento two and to
the heires of one of
them, this is a good
Ioynture, and the one
hath a Freehold, and
the othera fee fimple :
And if he which hath
the fee dieth,he which:
hath the freehold fhal
haue the entiertie by
furuiuour for terme of
his life. In the fame
manner it is, where te-
nements bee giuen to
the heires of the body


of oneofthem engen- d


dred, the one hatha
freehold, & the other
a fee taile,&c.


qr Y this Section, and

the (&c.) in the end

OF tt, thep are Join⸗
tenants foz life, amb the Fee⸗
Gmple o? eftatetatle ig in one
Of them, and becanfe it ts bp
enc and the lame connepance,
thep arc Jointenants, and the
Se Ample is wot executed to
all purpofes, ag hath been fato
befoze,

FE a finc bec lented to twe,
(n) and tothe heires of onc of
them, bp force Sobereof hee is
feifed, bc that hath. fee dicth,
and after the Jopntenant for
life dteth, and ati eltranger a=
bates , in this cafe the hetre
map either fuppofc the fee fim
pie executed and bane an affífe
of Mortdauncefter, the words
of hich ft be, Si R. pater
fuit feifitus die quo obijt in
ominicg. fuo vt de feodo,
which campot bec fao of him
that bat but arematnder ex⸗
gcdant bpon an eftate fo» itfe,
but in refpect that be (e feifeb
of a fee imple, anb ofa jopnt


eltate in pofleffion, tbt Words in the wꝛit betrac, Chat he wae fetfed in Dominico fuo vt de fe-
odo. Mkewife the heire may auo a Wzit of Might, Mbich alfo tn fomefost proues the fee ſim⸗
ble executed, oz the heire map haus à Scirc facias toerecutethe fine, by which the beíre —


44 6.3.18. Tallt.1z.


(m) 18.5;3.39. 7 H. 4.16


Cn)41.E.5.9. 16. 11,44.4.64
31 .E.3.6cire Facias 19.

39. 4,8.Mord,B «5,

4: E3.35.

F.Y.B.196.¢ 219.
4-E.3.Itinere Derby,
24,E,3.70.


Lib.3.


F.N.B.204. E. 297-
cd 13.H.7.23.
10 €.3:34. 17. R20
Charge 15: s.H:5,8.
Vide 6.4. 289.


(o) 9.H.6-§2-


(p)8-E.3.8, Execution
Srathon,


(a) 14. H.3.35. 7l. Com.
263-b. in Deme Male: (afe


Capa.


chat the fee Was not executed, oz hee may matntaine à #2
keth the like fuppoñtion,
anb tothe betreg of one of them,


beene ſayd.


€ ( » Laimer
riens per


dicent de [on com-
paignion, orc. BYP


bich (&c.) (g tmc
plicd, Chat foit te tf
one Joyntenant ac
knowledge a Kecog⸗
nifance op a Statute,
o2 fuffrett) a iudgment
in an action of Debt,
ec. amb dieth before ex⸗
ecution had, tt (bail
not bee executed afters
Swards. Wuttferecu=
tion befued in the life
of the Conufoz,tt hat
bind the furuiuos, and
ít ig further (mplíeb,
Chat both tn the cafe
of the Charge and of
the Kecogniſance, ſta⸗
tute, and tudgement,
f£ be that chargeth, ac.
ſuruiue, tt (& god foz
euer.

And fo it tg (o) t£
aman bee pofleffed of
certain lands fo? term
of peares in the right
of big wike, and gran⸗
teth a Kent charge,
and dteth, the wife
fball auopo the charge,
but tthe huſband had
furuined,the charge is
god During the terme.

fa Villeine purs
chafe landg , and bind
himfelfe in a Recognts
fauce, tf the Lord en⸗
ter before execution,
the i020 fball auopa
the fame, ag tt hath
been ſayd.

Wut otherswife tt (e
ifhe bad made a Leaſe
fox peares, for the reas
fon that Littleton here
peldeth in tbíg Se-

lon.

FE two Joynte⸗
nants bee of a terme,
(q) and the one of
RARES Boek


Of Toyntenants.


ít o£ 3ntrufion where the heire mas
And pet when land ts giuen to tive


anb fball terme tt a a Remainder.


Seti. 286.


€ T Cem (i deur join-

tenaunts font fei-

fies deftate en Fee
fimple,æ lun graunt bn
rent charge per (on fait
à bn auter hors Dc ceo,
que alup affiert, en cett
tate Durant la bie fe
Grantoz,le rent charge
eft effectuall: Mes à-
pres fon Dece fle E avant
Dele cent charge € void,
quant a charger la tre,
cat celup que ad la terre
perle furuiuoz tiendra
tout la terre Difcharge,
Et la cauſe eſt, put ceo
que celuy que furuef-
quift clapma a ad la fre
per le fucuíuo2, a nemy
ad,ne poet De ceo clay-
mer rien per Difcent De
fon compaignion, ac,
Mes auterment e(t De
Parceners, car fi ſoient
Deux Parceners Des
tenements en fee (impr,
et Deuant afcun patti-
tion fait. lun charge ceo
que a lup affiert per fon
Fait , Dunrent charge,
æc,ct puis mozutt fang
iffue, per que ceo que a
lup affiert diſcẽd a laus
ter Parcener, en cett
cafelauter 39 arcenet tí-
endrala Terre charge,
ac, put ceo que él bient
acelmoitie per Difcent
come beire,Œc,


be (t tbe remainder cannot grant away bts fes fimple,


Set. 286.


ag hath


Ale if two Ioyntc-
nants be feifed of an
eftate in Fee ſimple, and
the one graunts a Rent-
charge by his Deed toa-
nother out of that which
belongeth to him : in
this cafe during the life
of the Grantor,the Rent
charge is cffectuall, but
after his deceafe the
grant of the Rent charge
is voyd,as to charge the
land, for hee which hath
the land by furuiuor,fhal
hold the whole land dif-
charged. And the caufe
is, for that he which fur-
uiueth claimeth and hath
the land by the furuiuor,
and hath not nor can
claime any thing by dif-
cent from his companion,
&c. Butotherwife it is
of Parceners,for if there
betwo Parcenersof Te-
nements in Fee fimple,&
before any partitió made
the: one chargeth that
which to her belongeth
by hir Deed, witha Rent
charge, &c.& after dieth
withoutiffue, by which —
that which belongeth to

her difcends to the other

parcener , inthis cafethe

other parcener fhall hold .
the land charged &c.be-. .
caufe fhe cametothis mo-
ity by difcét,as heir, &c.


Liba. Of loyntenants.


t£ be gap to him ten pound before Michaelmaffe, that then be ſhall baue his terme , tbe Gran⸗
to? Dpeth befozethe Dap, 1. 5. papes the fummeto bis Erecutozs at the day, yet hee fball not
Bauethe tearme, but the Surutuoz (ball hold place, for tt was but in nature of a communicatt=
on, but t£ he had madea Leaſe fog pearcg to beginne at Michaelmaffe, ít ſhould aue bound the

uruiuoz.
Fan Shere Littleton patteth the cafe ofa Rent charac, It is fo likewiſe implyed that tf one
Fopntenant qvanteth a Common of Paſture, oz of Curbarp, 02 of Eftoucrs, o2 à Coꝛodie 02
fucb like ont of bis part,o2 a Wap oucr the Land, this fhall not bind tbc Suruiuour: fo it is
amartine in Law, that Lus accrefcendi praefertur oneribus, and there is another maríme ; that
Alienatio rei præfertur iuri accrefcendi.

FE one Fopntenat in Fee ſimple be indebted tothe King, and dpeth, (r) after bis deceale
nO extent {ball bc made bpon the Land inthe bande of the Suratuour.

PE arccouerp be had agatnft one Fopntenant Who dycth before ceccatíom, the Suruinout
hail not anopo this recoucry,becaule that the ríabt of the moitie ig bound by it,

FE one Jopntenant in fee,take a Leaſe fo? pearcs of an eftranger bp Deed indented and
dyeth, the Surutuour (hall not be bound by the Conclufion, becanfe be claymes aboucit, and
not driver it,


Et la cauſe efl pur ceo qne celuy que furuefquiff clayme & adla terre per ſur-


ainor, ec. Here againe Littleton fbetoetl) the veaton: and the caufe
Swherefoze the Saruiour hall not hold the Land charged, is, for that hee clapmeth the Land
from tic ſirſt Feoſtoꝛ, and notbp his companion, Which ts Littletons meaning when be fapth,
Cthat be claymcth bp Surutuor) Foꝛ (f£) thefurutuing freoffee map pleade a fcoffinent to him⸗
fcite without any mention of his topnt feoffe. And this ts the reafon, Chat if two Fopnte-
wants becín fe , andthe one maketh a Leafe foz xeares, referuing a Bent and vpeth, the
ſuruiuing Jreotfe (t) fhail haue the Reuerſion by Surutuour, but bec fball not baue the Rent
becaufe he claymeth tn from the firft frcoffoz, which is Paramount the Went. Fe therebe two
Popntcnants in fe, and the onc Jopntenant grantetha Rent charge out of bis part, and
after reieifeth to his topnt companion and dyeth/ bc ſhall hold the Hand charged, fo; that he is
eut ef the reafon and caufe {ct downe bp Littleton becauſe he clapmeth not bp Suruivoz (n ag
much as the releafe pzeuented the fame. And of this opinion was Littleton himfelfe (a) before
the Edition of his Woke. Wot all men agree that if A. B. and C. be Joyntenants in tee, and A.
chargeth his part, and then releafeth to Band bis hetres and dpeth.that the ( w ) charge (e god
fo; eucr,becaufe in that cafe B. cannot be in fromthe firtt Feoftoꝛ/becauſe be h ith atopny come
Panton at the time of the Rcicafe made, and fcucrall Waits of Præcipe mutt be bought agatnft
them. And albeit the Keleaſe of onc Flopntenant to therefiduc of the Flopntenants makes no
Degree tn fuppofition of Law, popther is there any fcuerall cftate betxoeene them, but tbe eftate
of tin that rcleafeth tg as tt Socke extinguiſhed and downed (n their eftate and poffeflion, foas
one Præcipe lyeth again& them, pet thall thep hold the Land charged as is afoꝛeſatd. As (f tez
nant fo; life grant a Rent charge, and after furrendzeth bis cftateto the Leſſoꝛ, albeit tbe eſtate
Charge be dꝛowned, andthe Lefloz is notin bp him, pet he ſhall hold tt charged,

€ Mes auterment ef} de Parceners, Car fi font deux Parceners cc. This
is to be intended afSweli of Parceners by cufteme as of Parceners by the Common Law, and
bere is tmpiped the rcafon ofthe dinerftie,foz that the Suruiuoz doth clapmeaboue the charge,
and thebeire bp diſcent onder the charge,


Sechon 287.


Lfo if there bee
two Joyntenants


€ jean fi fot deux


€ Pz r fon teflament,
topntenants des


ec. Epther in


Se.287,


terres en fie (imple
Deins bn burgh , lou
les terres + tenemts
font Deuifables per
teftament,  filun De
les dits deur iopnte-
nants Deuife ceo que
aiup affiert per fon


of Landin Fee fimple
within a Borough,
where Lands and Te-
nements are deuifable
by Teftament,& ifthe
one of the faid two
Ioyntenants deuifeth
that which to him be-


Baa


‘writing 92 nuncupatiue ac
cording tothe cuftome,


Œ Et la canfe eff pur
ceo que nul. deusfe , poet


prender effect mes apres
le mort le denifar & per
fà mort tout la terre
maintenant dewient per
laleya fon compagnion,

e


185 .—


45.E, 3-13:
Vide So 289.


(1) 40-4136. 50 Aff: s.
F/N.B.149.4. PL (vm.321.


(46) 14.E.4.1.6. 18.2.3.
breife 830. 8.8. 2.entrit77.
18. E. 3.28. 38. £.3.26.
$.H.6.25. Vide 46.€.3.77.
3. H.6.39.

(0) Dyer Mich. 2. 3. Elit.
187. Lsb. Y . fol.9 6-

Vide lib, 6. fol.78,79.


(9) 33- H.6. 5.4.

9. Eliz Dyer 263.

(wr) 37. H.8 tit. alienatiom
"Br.31. 10.£.4.3.b.
40.E. 3.41.5. 33. H. 6.4.
22.H.6.42.h. per Pole.
35-E.3.releaft 43.
21.6.3. anowrse 195,
14. H. 8.2.


Lib.


Tl. Com. in Fnlmerftem cafe.


1,H.5. exteuter: 108,


(x) Fleta lth. 2,049.50.
Braflon hh.2. fe'.60.
Britton fol.178.


Lamb, fal. 119.68.


Capa


cc. Here both their
clapmes comm at one ins
ftant, anb although an In⸗
flant, ER vnum indiuifibile
tempore quod non eft tempus
nec pars temporis,ad quod ta-
men partes temporis conne-
&untur, anb that , Inftans eft
finis vnius temporis, & Prin-
cipium alterius-y et ín confides
ration of Law there is a pꝛio⸗
ritie of time tn aninftant, ag
here the Surutuoz ts prefer=
red before tive deuife, £02 Lit-
tleton fapth, that the cauſe is
that no Deutfc can take effect
tillaftcr the Death of the Dea
wifoz,and by his death all the
land prefentlp commet) bp
the Law to bis companion,
Wherebp ít appcarcth, that
Littleton by thefe words, Poft
mortem & per mortem ,
though they tumpe at one ins
fant, pet alloweth priozitie of
time in the tnftant which hee
diftinguitheth sp cer and poft.
Bnd thercafon of this pꝛioꝛi⸗
tie is, tht the Suruiuour
claymeth bp the firtt feoffoz
(as bath bin fat») and theres
fore in iudgement of Law his
Title tg Paramount, the ti=
tle of the Deutle, and confe-
quentlp the deuife boid, and
the ruleof Law tg, that, lus
accrefcendi praefertur vltima
voluntati.


Of Joyntenants.


teftament, ac, amo⸗
tuft, ceo Deuife eft
poide, Ct la caufe et
pur cea que nul Qe-
uife poít prender ct-
fect, mes apaeg la
mot ledeuifoz, a pet
famozt tout laterre
maintenant Deuicnt
per la lep a fon com-
pation, que furuct=
quí(t per le furuiuo?,
le quel ti ne claime,ne
ad vieng en la terre
pec mp le Deuifo2,
mes en fou Droit De-
mette p Ic ſuruiuor,
folonque le coutfe De
lep 4c, a pur cel caute
tiel Deuite eft voide.
Mes auterment eft
De Parceners feilics
Des tenements Deut=
fables en tiel cafe de
deuiſe, 3€, Caufa qua
fupra.


TW ;


Setl.2 87.


longeth by his Tefta-
ment, &c. and dyeth,
this deuife is voide.
And the caufe is for


" ae


|


1


—


|


thatno deuifecantale ^


effect till after the
death of the deuifor :
and by his deathal the
Land prefently com-
meth by the Law to
his companion, which
furuiueth by the Sur-
uiuor , the which hee
doth not clayme , not
hath any thing in the
land by the dcuifor,
burin his owne right
by the furuiuor accor-
ding to the courfe of
Law, &c. and for this
caufe fuch deuife is
void. But otherwife it
is of Parceners feifed
of Tenements deuifa-
ble inlike cafe of de-
uife, &c. Canfa qua fu-
pra.


Two Fens Jopntenants ofa Leaſe for peares, eneof them taketh hulband, and d{eth,


pet the terme (ball furutue, fo? thongh all Chattels reais are qiuen tothe yufvand, {€ he ſuruius
pet the Surniuoz betwenethe Joyntenants is tbe cider title, and after the marriage the feme
continuco fole poſſeſſed, foz tf tbc hufband dyeth, the fcmc fba:l hauett,and not che Executors of
the hufband, but otherwife it is of perfonail gods.

£a man beleifed of a houle, and potletTep of diucrs helrclomes , that bp cuftome hane gene
with the houfefrom beireto hetre, ans by bis will deutfeth away the hetrelomes,this dentleis
boib, foz ag Littleton bere faith, the will taketh effect after his death, and bp bis death, the
heirelomeg bp anctent cuftome are vefted in the bette, andthe Law preferreth the Cuftome bez
forethe Dentle, And fott {s ik the Lozd ought to hane a Herriot When his Grenant dpeth,and
the Cenant deutfeth away all his gods, pet the 3,020 hail haue big Weriot for the reafon ac
koreſaid. And it hath beene anctentlp fato, that the Hertot [ball biepatd before thc Woztnarte,
(x) Imprimis autem debet quilibet qui teftanerit, dominum fuum de meliore re quam habuerit
recognofcere, & poftea Ecclefiam dealia meliore, &c. Sohercin the 3.020 is preferred, for that the
tenureigof hin, Chis dutieto the Loin is berp ancient , forin the Lawes before the Cons
quett it ig fair, Siue quisin curia,fiue morte repentina fuerit inteftat’ mortuus, Dominus tamen
zullam rerum fuarum partem (prater eam quz iure debetur herioti nominc) fibi affumito.

FJuthe Saron tongue tt ig called Hereseat , ag much tofap (ag 3| take ít) as the ide
befte,foz Here tg 3,020, and cat ts befte, Wut let bs returne to Littleton.


Gl, Wes anterment eft de parceners feifes des tenements denifableentiel —
cafe, del denife, &c. Cauta qua fupra.
Che rcafon tg eutdent, for that thereis no Surutuoz betweene Coparceners but the part of
the ene ig diſcendible, and confequentlp map be denifed, d
Sect.


wee


Lib.


¶ ITẽ il ẽ comae-
— [ment dit q̃ cbefc
tointenat eft ſei⸗
fie dela tert q il tient
ioyntment per mp et
per tout,ct ceo eft au=
tant adire,q il eft ſei⸗
fiep chefcun parcel,
et p tout.ac, et ceo eft
boier, caren chefcun
parcel, et per chefcun
parcel, et per touts
les terres et tenc-
ments il eft ioint-
ment feifíe oueſq; fon
companion,


another purchafe lands totheut two and their betres, 3| map enter into a moptie,


Of Ioyntenants


Selion 288.


Alo it iscommon-

ly faid, that euery
ioyntenant is feifed of
the land which ‘hee
holdeth ioyntly Per
my e per tewt, and this
is as much to fay as he
isfeifed by euery par-
cel and by the whole,
&c.and this is true,for
in euery parcell, and
by euery parcell, and
by all the lands and te-
nements heis ioyntly
feifed with his com-
pagnion.


Se8.188.289.


qt» et commune-


met dit, &Ac. That
18, Ft ts the common opinion,
anb Communisopinio tg of
god authopitp in Lame, A
communi obferuantia nor eit
recedendum, which appeareth
here by Littleton.


€ Per my coger
tout. Et fic totum tenet
& nihil tenet,s. totum con-
iun&im, & nihil per fe fepera
tim, Bnd albeit thep are fo
fetfed ( as for crainple Where
there be two fopntenants in
fe ) pet to diuers purpoſes
cach of them bath but a right
toa moity, as to enfeofte,
gine, o? demife, où to Fozfeite
O2 loſe bp default in a Praci-
pe. Bf my villeine (y) aad


Bnd Wiere ali the topatenants topne in a feoffiment, euerp of them in tadgement of Haw do


giuebut bis part, It an Alien and a ſubiect purcbafe lands topnely, the Ling vpon office
found ſhall haue but a moitie. Bnd Littleton afterwards in this chapter fatth that one topn=
tenant hath one mottic in daw, and the other the other moitte, Bad therefore 1€ two topnte-
nants be (z) and both they make a fcoffment in fee bpon condition, and that for bzeacb thereof
one of them (ball enter (nto the Sole, pet he ſhall enter but into moitie becaufe no moze in
iudgement of Law pafled from him ; and fo tt ts, of a Gift (n tatle 92 a Leaſe for life ec.

Petcuerp topntenant map Warrant the whole, (a) becaufca man map Warrant moze then
paffeth from him

FE two (opntenatits make a fcoffment in fe (b) and one of the fcoffozs die, the feoffe
cannot plead a feoſfment from the furuiuour of the whole, becaufe each of them gaue but bis
part, but otherwile itis on tbe part of the Feoftess, ag hath beene ain befoze,

Bnd Shere two ioyntenants be, tbe one of them (c) map make tbe other his Wailife of big
moitie, and Daue an Acton of accountagatnft hin nd one tepntenant (d) map let big part
fo? peares 02 at Will to his Companion, :

Ff two topntenants bc of certatnelands ,anb tbeoneoftbem bp Deede indented (e) bar=
gaineth and felleth tbe lands, and the ather topntcnant dyeth, and then the Deede is inrolled,
there (ball patte nothing but the moitie Sbich the bargaincr had at the time of tbe bargaíne,


Sed. 289.


€ [Tem (i deur join- Lfo if two Ioynte-


€ pE ‘force de


tenants font fcí- nants bee feifed of meſm le dit
fies De certain tet« certain lands in fee Jefe, c.
teg en Fee ſimple,a lun fimple, and the,one let- Bp this («c) (s


tmplicd, Ghat Where
ont Duthoz {peaketh
of Jopntesants ſeiſed
in kee, that fo it (s (€
twobee ſeiſed fo) itfe,
anb onc makes ieafe
to begin paefensig , oz

In


tech tht fo hembelon-
geth to a ftranger for
terme of fortie yeares,
and dieth before the


Baaz


leffa ceo que a lup affí-
ert abn eftranger pur
terme De 40, ans, & De-
ute Deuantle term coma


186


Vid, Sell. 697, ]


Usd. BraBon lib. $ fo 430.
‘Bretton, cap, 35.

Fleta, lio. 3. cap. 4.

49.E.5 40. 18.5.2. bre 83 1.
35.H.6.39.

Vid tbe fecond part of the Ia. "
Aistutes vponthe 6. chapter ef.
the Staiute De bigamis,
Flota,/sb.1.capsas. — |
49.4: 79. 48.E. 3.16»


(y) Vid.6.E.3.4. |
7. E439. ia Eli( Dier.183


(2) 'PlL Com. in Brow-
nings cafe, fo,


(a) Vid. thefecond pa 8o tha
Inftit utes upon the 6. chapter
of the Statute of Rigamis.
cb) 14.E.4. s. and the o; her
bookes aboueſaia.


(c) a1. E.3.60.
(4) 11. H.3.69. 33.


(e) 6.E.6 tit, Faits in-
rell.9. Br.


Cf )Vid $e8.386, 6
660.7, 568.3,


KO


Lib. | (ap. .


(& ) r1. H. 4.90. 14.H.8.6.
17-E. 4.6.4.9, H6, 52.

a1. H.7. 39. 14. H.7,4.
18.E.3. Executions 6.
11.61. Dy.285.P.Com,160.4
Temps Et. Aff 422.20. H.6
4: 7H 7.13: 10 1.7.24.


6.2. 3.38,39. 52.
Past 17. Ed. 3.37.6.
22,€.3.9. 30. E, 1.16.

31. H.4.54. 15.€.3.Dar,
pref mtraent.Y. 10 E.4.94.
3.H.7. 1,6. 2.8.5. Sar. imp,
102. g.El.Dy.259.

36. H,8. "Br. Prefene,

25. H.8.fo. 11. 5. H.7.8.

6, £,4:10.6. DoF, & Stud.
Y16. 34: H.6.40. 20. E. 3.
uar. imp.63. F /N. 8. 34.F.


(1) BraR. li. 4 fo. 239.24 8.
347. Brit.fe. 333. 45. Edw. 3.
Fines 41.18.E.2. Quar. imp.
176. 38. N.6. 9. 19. E. 3.56.
$9. 5. H. g 19, F.N,2.54.V


in futuro, and dieth,
this Leafe (ball binde
thefurutuog,as it bath
bene adiubged, (2)
Bnd tf one Jopnte⸗
mant grant vefturam
teriz , 02 herbagium
terra, Foz peares, anb
Dieth, this (ball binde
the furuine: , for fuch
a Lellæ hath right in
the land. So ít íg tf
two 3opntenantg be
of a Water, andthe
onegranteth the fenes
tall Pifcharie,

€ Lan leſſa.
Che one letteth. Xf
two Fopntenants bs
of an Aduowſon, and
Ch) the one paefenterh
tothe Church,and big
Œlerke (g admitted e
inftituted, thigin rez
ſpect of the priutrp fal
not put the other out
of poffeffíon, but tf
that Joyntenant that
pꝛeſenteth dteth, it (hal
ferue fo a title tra
Quare impeditbzought
by the Huruinoz, But
pet (£ one Joyntenant
02 Tenant in Cõmon
prefent, oz tf thep pre
fent fcuerallp, the Oz⸗
dinarie may either abs
mit ox refufe to adintt
fuch a391cfenteo, vn⸗
icile thep topne in pres
fentation,and after the
fire moneths bee map
tn that cafe prefent by
Raps,

But (€ two 01 more
Woparceners bee, (i)
and thep cannot agre
to prefent , the cldeft
Dal prcfent and tf ber
fifter doth difturbe ber,
fhe (ball hanea Qua-
rc impedir agatné ber,
and fo fhall tbe Iſſue
and tbe À Migneæ of the
eldeſt, and pet he tg te=


Of Joyntenants.


mence, ou Deíng E tme,
en ceft cafe apres fon
beccate le Leflee poet
enter et occupier la mo⸗
ítícalup Leſſe Durant
leterme,tc,coment que
le Leſſee nauoit bngs
poſſeſſion De ceo en la
bie le XLetTo? , per force
De mefme le leate;ac.Ct
le Diuerfitie perenter le
cafe De grant De Rent⸗
charge auantdit, et cett
cafe eft cco, car en grat
De Rent charge p jopn-
tenaunt, ac, 1c8 Tene⸗
méts Demurgent touts
foits come tls fueront
adeuant , fans ceo que
afcun ad afcun D2opt
Dauer afcun parcell De
leg tenements fozfque
eur mefmes,ct les Te⸗
nements font en tiel
plyte,come ils fueront
Deuant le charge, ac,
Mes ou Leale cft fapt
pet bn doputenant a
bn auter pec terme Des
ang , ac, maintenaunt
per korce de le Leaſe le
leffee ad Dzoit en meſme
la terre, ceſtaſcauoir
Detout ceo que a fon
leffour affiert, ct dauer
ceo per force De meſme
le Leaſe Durant fon
terme, Ct ceo eft la Di-
uerlitie.


Sed.289.


term beginneth, or with-
inthe terme, inthis cafe
after his deceafe the Lef
fee may enter and occupy
the moitie let ynto him
during the terme,&c, al-
though the leffee had ne-
uer the poffeffion therof
inthe lifeofthe Leffor,
by force of the fame
leafe,&c. And thediuer-
fity between the cafe ofa
grant cf a Rent charge a-
forefayd, and this cafe, is
this, for inthe grant of a
Rent charge by a Ioyn-
tenant, &c.the tenements
remaine alwayes as they
were before,without this
that any hath any rightro
haue any parcel ofthete-
nements butthey them-
{elues, and the Tene.
ments are in the fame
plight as they were be-
fore the charge,&c. But
wherea leafe is made by
a Ioyntenant to another
forterme of yeares, &c.
prefently by force ofthe
Leafe, the Leffee hath
right in the fame Land,
(videlicet ) of all that
which to the Leffour be-
longeth, and to haue
this by force of the
fame Leafe, during his
terme. And this is the
diuerfitie.


ant in Common With tbepoungelt. And in the fame manner the tenant bp the Cartefie of
the eldeſt tball ppefent ; but (£ there be-foure Coparceners and theeldeR and the fecond prez
fent,and the other to prefent fopntlp or fenerallp,the $D2binary map refafe them all,foz the els
deft Did not prefent alone but Eyes and onc ether of ber Giers, But now let be returne to Lit.


tleton.


$e


°


|


ms


Lib.5.


€ [€ iopntenats

(fils otlent )

potent fait par-
tition enter eux et là
partition eft affets
bon, mes De ceo faire
tis ne ferront com-
pels perlalep, Des
fils boplent fait pat-
tition De lour proper
bolunt & agreement,
le partition eſtoie⸗
ra cn fa force,


Of Toyntenants.


Sell. 290.


Lfo ioyntenants

(ifthey willymay
make partition be-
tweene them, and the
partition is good e-
nough, but they fhall
not bee compelledto
doe this by the Law,
butifthey will make
partition oftheir own
will and agreement,
the partition fhal ftand
in force.


Seél.29 0.291.


€ poer faire parti-

tion. But this
partition muff be (k bp Deed
as hath bene fato befoze,
Put iopntenants foz peares
map (l)make partition with⸗
out Ded,


Ils ne ferra com-


pell. This is true re⸗
guiatlp, but bp the cuftome of
fome Cittes and Woroughs
one topntenant 02 tenant in
Common map compel! big
companton bp tzit of parti⸗
tion grounded bpon the cus
tome to make partition.25ut
fince Littleton wꝛote toynte⸗


nants anb Tenants in common generally are compellable to make partition by wꝛit framed
bpon tbc Statutes (m) of 31,& 32.H.8, ag befote hath bene fatd, Bnd albeit thep be now
compcilablc to make partition, pet feing thep are compellable bp Sait, tbep mutt purfue the
Statutes and cannot make partition bp Parol, for that rematnes at the Common Law, And
bp Littletons Authority herein tt feemeth te methat i£ one topntenant o2 tenant in Common
diſſelſe another, and the Difleife bring his Write foa the mottie, that inthis cafe, though the
Hlaintife prapeth it, pet no iudgement {all be giuen to bolo in ſeueralty, foz then atthe Com-
mon Law there might haue bene bp compulGon of Law a partition betweene topntenants
and tenants in Common, and bp rule of Law the Piaintife mul have tudgement according to


bis pleint o2 demaund.


It two Fopntenants be (n) of land with warranty, and thep make partition bp Svziting
the warranty ig diftroped, but tf tbep make partition bp Wait of partition bpen the Stacute,
the toarrantic remaines becaufe thep are compellable thereunto,


€ [Gem ff on toynt

ettate (oit fait De
fre ale baron a a fa
fci 4 a bn tierce pets
fon, en ceo cas le bà-
ron et fa fem nont en
en ic» en Tout Droit
for {gs le moítp;sc, et
le tierce perfon aucca
tant come le baron ct
fafeme ont, 3, lauter
moitp,ac. Ct la caufe
eff, put ceo que Ie baz
von ct fa feme ne font


toꝛſque on perfor en


Sect, 291.


Ae? if a ioynt e-
ftate be made of
land to husband and
wife, and to a third
perfon,in this cafethe
husbád & wife haue in
law in their right but
the moitie, and the
third perfon fhall haue
afmuch as the huf-
band and wife,viz.the
other moity,&c. And
the caufe is, for that
the husband and wife
are but one perfon in
Baa 3


i E baron & fa
feme nent en ley
en lour droit forfque le


meity , crc. William
Ode anb Ioan big wife
Co) purchafed lands to them
6500 anb their beireg, after
William Ocle was attainten
ef bígb treafon for tbe mute
ther of the Kings father E.2.
and Wag exccuteb, loan bis
Swife ſurutued hie, E.3.grane
ted the lands to Stephen de
Bitterly and bts hetres. Iohn
Hawkins the heire of the fain
Ioan ís a Petition to the
Hing vifclofeth this whole
matter, and bpona Scise facias
again the Watente hath
fadgement te recener the

lands,


187


(k) Vi.Se#. 259-328.
(1) 18. El. Dyer 350.


F.N.B.62.6.


(m) 31.4.8.ca.1. 32.7.8.
64.33, Vi.ScB.264, 247.2590
Mich.16.d> 17. El.1 340.

Inter Harris & Eden adsudge.


acc.

18. El. Dyer 3 50.6. VS. before
inthe Chapter of Partitions
mary beokes cided eoncerning
this matter.

3.E.3.48. F.N.B.9.b,

7 «4[f:10. 7, E. 3.29.
10.-4/f.17. 10.€.3.40.47.
12.4 f.15.17. 12. E. 3.
tudgement 163. 20.Ë.3.
A. 62. 28.435.
23..4ff10.7.H,.6.4.
19.H,6:45.3.E.4.10.


Vid. Se. 247. Britt.fo,x14,


Lib.6 fo.13.dr 13.
Morrices ( afe.
(n) 29.€.3.1it.Garr.


(0) Mich.3 3. E 3. Coram
Rege Salop.5n The/awe.


~~


à re e RN RE Ds.


Lib.3.


Vi.S48. 665.


Cp) EraB.li. c. fo. 416.
29.H. 3.Difient.52.
Lib,4.fe 68.Tokars cafe.
Pl, Corn. 483. NC cboli cafe.


{q) 4-Mar.Dyer 145.
3. Mar. Dyer 1223.
29. H.8.Dye 32.


(1240-.4f.p.7*


(£) Pl.Cem. 483 Nichols cafe


ur Mr.


t)11. E. 3. Cui in vita 9. ^
Ou 36.Ë.3.1bi4.20.
gs Aff. Pls.

31. H.6.tit. £nt Congeable 54
19.H.6. 4$. F.2N78.193.k;


Cap


lands, foz tbe reafon here
grelbeb bp our Buthoz.

But (£ ancftatebe made to
a man anb a Soman andtheir
hetres before marriage, anb
after tbep marry,the huſband
and $vífe haue mopties be-
tiene them, Which ts {ms
plicdin thefe Swords of ont
Buthoz, Baron & fa feme,


€ Forfque vn perfon
en Ley. Bra&.fatth(p)
vir & vxor funt quafi vnica p-
fona,qnia care vna & fanguis
ynus. It bati) bin fato,tbat tf
a reucrfon bæ granted to a
man and a woman and their
beires, and befoze attoznment
they entermarrte, and then
attojnement {5 made, Chat
the bufband and wite (ball
bauc nomotties, inthis cafe
no moze thanif a Charter of
Feoffement be made to aman
anda woman, With a Letter
of Atturnep to make Linerp,
thep entermatric,and then Lt
acrie {8 made fecundum for-
mam chartæ, in which cafe tt
is fatd,that thep bauc no moi⸗
tics. Wut certain ít ts that t€
a fcoffmert were made before
the ftat of 27. H. 8. of bfcs to
thevſe of a man(q)¢a Moma,
€ their hetres, and thep enter
marrie,and then the Statute
ig made, (€ the bufband, alten
it tg go fo; a moitie, for the
HDtatute executes the polſſeſſi⸗


Of Joyntenants.


ley, ct font en ſem⸗
blable cafe, fíceme e-
(tate foit fait à deux
iopntenants, ou lun
ad per force De iopn-
tutlun moitie cn Icy,
ælauter lauter moí-
tie,ac, Cn mefme Ic
manet eft lou eftate
eft fait ale baron ct à
fa feme, et as auters
Deux Homes, en tiel
cas E baron et fa fem̃
nont form la tierce
patt, et les auters
deux Homes les au-
ters Deux partg,ac,
Caufa qua fupra.


€ [uis ferra Dit

Del matter tou-
chant topntenancie,
enlechapter De Te⸗
nants en comimon,et
tenant per Ciegit et
tenant per ftatute


Merchant,


Sed.291¢


law and are in like cafe
as if an e{tate bee made
to two. ioyntenants,
where the onehath by
force of the ioynture
the one moytiein law,
and the other the o-
thermoitie,&c.Inthe
fame manner it is
where an eftate is
made to the husband
and wife, and totwo
other men, in this cafe
thehusband and wife
haue but the third
part,and the other two
men the other two
parts, &c. Caufa qua ſu-


pra .


Ore fhall bee faid
M of the matter
touching ioyntenancy
inthe chapter of Te-
nants in Common and
tenant by Elegit, and
tenant by Statute
Merchant.


on according to fuch qualitic, manner, forme, anb condition, ag tbep had in the bfe,foas though
tt deft during thecouerture, pet the Het of Parliament erecutes fenerall moittes tn them,feing
thep had feuerail moities tn the bfe,

FE an cftate be made to a Uilleine and bis wife (r) being free, and to their heires, albeit they
hauc feucrall capacities, viz. the Utileine te purchafe for the benefit of the 3028 and the Mife fog
her owne, pet tf the Lozd of the Ailleine enter, and che Wife furuiueth her bufbatib, Me Mal in=
top the Whole land, becaufe there be no moitics bet weene them.

A man makes a Leafe to A. anb to a Baron and Feme, viz. to A. fog life, to the bufhaud
tn taie, and to tbc Feme fos peares, in this cale itis fapd, Chat each of them bath a third part,
in refpect of the fencraltie of thetr eſtates.

Fifa Feoffement be mabetoa man anda Woman and thetr heires With warrantio,([) and
they cntermarrie and after ave impleaded and boach and recouer tn baluc,tnotties fhal not be bec
tweenethem, for though thep Swere fole Shen the toarrantíe Wag made , notwithfanding
at the time When they reconered and had execution, thep Were bufband and Wife, te which time
thep cannot take bp moitieg.

Albeit Baron and Feme (ag Littleton here fatth) be one perfon in Law , fo ag neither of
then can afue any eftate oz intereſt tothe other, pet (£a Charter of -frcotfement be madeto the
Swtfc, the hufband as Atturnep to the Feoffoꝛ may make lfuerte to the Wife, anoo a Feme co⸗
wert that bath power rofell land by Mill, may fell the fame to Her bufband, becaufe they are but
Inſtruments for others, and the ftate palleth from the Feoffee 02 Deuiſee.


hufband before the Statute of 32.H.8.cap.i. had alfened the whole land to a ranger in fi


:


£a huſband, wife, anda third perfon purchafe landg te them and their beíreg, (1) and wo


and died, the wile and tbe other Jopnrenant Were Joyntenants of the right, and (t the * ;
a


Lib. Of Ieyntenants. Se£.291.


had dicd,the other Fopntenant ſhould haus had the Whole rígbt by ſuruſuor, for that tbep might
haue ioyned ina wait of Bight, and che difcontinuance (boulb not haue barred the encrie of the
furutuoz, for that he ciatmed not onder the micontínuance, but bp title paramount abouc the
fame, bp the firf fcotfement, Which tg worthie of obſeruation. But tf the hulband tad mace

- afectfement in foe bur of the moitíc; andhe and big wifehad died, their moitie ſhould not hane
faruiued to the other.

And £o; the better vader landing of this diuerfitiediuers things are wozthy of obferuation,

Fir, Chat avig' t of ation Sa right o£ entríe map fandin 3lopnture, for at the Common
law the alienation of the bufband Was a difcontinuance to the wite of the one moitie,anda dif-
feifin of the other, foas after the death of the hulband, the Wife hath a right of Adion to the one
mottie, and the other 3lopnterant a right of entrictnte the other, but thep are Jlopntenants of
theright, becaufe they map fopnc trn a ait of Right.

Secondly, That aright of Action o? a bare right of entrie cannot (tano tn jopnture With a
Frehold oꝛ Inheritance in poſſeſſion, ano therefore ít the huſband make a feotkement of che
moitie, this Was a diſcont inuance of that moitíc, * and the other Joyntenant remained tn pots
feflion of the Freehold and Inheritance of the other moitie, which fo the time Wags a feucrance
of the Yopnture, and fo are alltl)e bokcs Which fesmed to baric amongſt themfciues, clerelp
reconciled.

Fé two Fopntenants be of arent, and the one of them diſſeiſe the Tenant of the Land, (u)
this is a foucrance of the Jopnture foza time, for the moitic of the vont is ſuſpended bp bnitie
of poſſeſſion, and therefore cannot ftand in Joynture with the other moitie in poſſeſſton. And
this toto be obferucd, Chat there ſhall neuer be any furuiuoz, vnleſſe the thing be in iopnture
at the inffant of che death of him that fir dteth : for therule ig, Nihil de re accrefcit ei qui nihil
inre quando ius accrefceret habet.

Milo (£a man deuiſeth lands to two, to hane andto bolo tothe one fozltfc,and the other foz
peares, thep areuo Fopntenants, fozaftate of Freehold cannot Land in Joynture with a
terme for peares : anda reuerſion vpon a freehold cannot (Fano tn (opnture With a freehold anb
Inheritance in pofledion,as ſhall be fapo in the next Chapter. Metthercana Delfin tn the
rightof a politiquecapacttie, (fano tn 3iopnture With Hctin tna naturall capacitíe, ag {ball
befapd bercafter,

FE two Femes be ioyntly feifed, and they take 25arong, and the Barons iopne in an alt-
cnation and die, the $viueg are Jopntenants of tbe right, anb map topne in a Writ of Wight,
and pet thep map haue fenerall wo2its of Cui in vita atthetr election, but When thep haue reco⸗
uered in tbofe fenerall rozits, thep thalibe Jopntenants againe. Wut tf the Barons had alts
ene feucrallp, thig had bene a feucrance of the Jopnture foꝛ a time, for the reafon aboueſaid.

( FE two Fopntenants, the onc fo? life, and the other in fee, lofc by defaut, the one fhall haue

a wꝛit of Bight, and the other a Quod ei deforccar, and pet when thep haucleucratly recoue⸗
red, they hall be Flopntenants againe. So (t is {€ two Joyntenants be difleifed, and an Aſ⸗
Gifeig brought, and the one is ſummoned and feucrep, and the other recoucr the moitic,and ate
ter another Aſtiſe ig brought,and he that recouerctl) is ſumunoned and ſeuered, and the other rez
Couer, albeit they {eucrailp resouer, pet thep dre Joyntenants againe.

And in all cafes Shere the Jopntenants purtuc onc topnt remedte,and the one ts ſummoned
andfeucred, and ths other recouer, bz that is ſummoned and ſeuered (all enter with him: but
Where their remedies befeucrall, there the one Mall not enter Sith the other, till both bane re-
couerco, an» the fame Law is of Coparcenerc. It lands (w ) be demiled fo life, therematn=
ber to the right heireg, of I.S. and of I.N. 1.S. hath Iſſue and dicth, and after [. N. bath Iſſue
and Dieth, the Iſlues are not Jopntenants, becaufe the one moítíe belted at onc time, anb the
other moitie veſted at another time, And pet in fomecales there map be Joyntenants, and
pet the eſtate may belt im them at feuctall times.

FE aman (x) make a Feoftement (n feetothe vle of bimfelée and of ſuch Wifeas hee Mhould
afterwards marrie, foꝛ terme of thetr lines,and after he taketh wile, they are Jlopntenaunts,
and vet thep come to their eftates at feuerall times,

And fo it is if J bíffctfe one to the bfc of two, andthe one agræs at onc time, and theother at
another, pet tbep are Joyntenants.


In this Section arethzes (&c-) the firlk anv fecond are at large ecplatned befoze, the laſt ce


intended where moze parties tabe than thee,


Chap. 4.


188


Us. Se. 302.


prj the Statute of 32. H.8.0.
itis mo difvoutinuance at thts
day.


(u) Pl.Com.419 rm. Bratoü-
bi tages cafe.


*


46. E. 3,121, 19. H. 6. 45.
37.H.8.8. 3.€.4.19,


Vid. Lit cap. Remitter the laft
cafe.

)0.H.6.10 31.H 6.tit.£n-
trecongesbe 4G. E. 3.21. b.
3-E.4.10. 37 H.6.8.

(w) 24. E. 3. 29. 18. E. 3. 28.
38.E.3.


(x) 1g. El. Dyer Brents cafe.


Lib.;.


Filet. 3.04.4:


Cap.4.


Of Tenantsin Common.  Seé. 292,


—*
—*


Cuar.4. OfTenantsin Common. Seéf.292.


~~ Enants en Common

7i fontceup, que ont
terres ou tenemts
en Fee imple, fee
taile, ou put terme De bie, tc, les
queux ont tiely terres ou Tene⸗
ments per fcuecalltitleg,a nemy
per iopnt title, et nul De eux ſca⸗
voit de ceo fon feucrall, mes us
Dofent pet la Ley occupier tiels
terres ou tenements en comm,
& pro indiuifo aprender les p20-
fits en commo, Et put cco que
ils auiendiont a tícly terres ou
tenements per feuerall titles ct
nemy per vn ioynt title, etlout
occupation ct poſſeſſion ferra p
lalcp perenter eur en common,
ils font appels Œcnaunts en
common, Sicomebn home en⸗
fcoffa Deur Joyntenants ca fee,
et unde cuz alten cco que à luy
affiert abn auter en fee; ore Ie a=
lience ct lauter Joyntenant font
Cenantsen Common, put cca
que tls font eins enticls Tene⸗
ments per feucrall títics,carla-
lienee bient eins en la moitie per
la feoffement Dun Des Joynte⸗
nants, etlauter Joyntenant ad
lautet moitie, per force De E pri-
met jreotfanent fait a lup, et a
fon compaignion, ac, Ct iflint


ils ſont eins per fcuctall titles,


ceftafcauoir, pet feueral 4reo(tc-
fentg,3c,


!Enants in Common are
they which haue Lands
or Tenements in Fee-


terme oflife, &c. and they haue
fuch Landsor Tenementsby feue-
rall Titles, and not by a joynt ti-
tle, and none of them know of
this his feucrall, but they ought
by the Law to occupie thefe
Lands or Tenements in common,
and preindinifo, to take the pro-
fits in Common. And becaufe
they come to fuch Lands or Tene-
ments by feuerall titles,and not by
one ioynt title, and their occupati-
onand poffcffion fhall be by Law
betweene them in Common, they
are called Tenants in Common.
As if a man enfeoffe two Ioyne-
tenants in Fec,and the one of them
alien that which to him belon-
gcth, to another in Fee, now the
Alienee and the other Ioyntenant
are Tenants in Common, becaufe
they aie in in fuch teneméts by fe-
uerall titles, forthe Alienee com-
meth tothe moitie by the Feoffe-


ment of one of the Ioyntenaunts, -
and the other Ioyntenaunt hath .


the other moitie by force of the
firft feoffement made to him and to
his Companion, &c. Andfothey
are in by feuerall Titles, that
is to fay, by feuerall Feoffe-
ments, &c.


& L. Irtleton hauing fpokcn of Parceners Which are onelp by Difcent.and of Topntenantg


Sohich are onclp bp purchafe, and by topne ttle. fpcaketh now of Tenants tn Coms —


mon Whith may be bp three meanes, viz. by Purcyale, by Difcent, o2 bp Pꝛeſcripti⸗


on, a8 hereafter in chis Chapter (ball appcare,


€ o»


fimple, Fee taile, orfor M


hi


Lib.3. Of Tenantsin Common.  Seé.293.294.
GE 08 pur terme de vie, dre. Here (&c-) impipeth pur terme dau-


ter vie, 92 fos tearme of pearcg, o2 for amp other fred Inheritance in tbe Lanv.

Bund hore it appeareth, that tbe c(fentíall Difference betweene Flopntenantg and Cenants (n
Common,ts that Joyntenants have che Lands bp on fopnt Citie,and in one Kight, and Ce⸗
. gantg ín common bpfeuerall Cities, oꝛ by one Citleand bpflenerall Rights, which te the veas
fon that Jopntenants bauc one topnt freehold, and Cenant in Common bauc feucrall Free⸗
holds, only thts p2opertie is common totbem both, viz. that their occupation is indeuided, and
nepther of them knoweth bts part tn feuerall,

The Erample that Littleton puttctlj in this Section (g perfpicnous , and needeth no erplis
tation.


Sed. 293.


CET cft afcauoir, que quant
il eff Dit en atcun Lieu, a
home cf fci(ie € fee fauns pluis
Dire , il ferra entendue en fee
fimple , car il ne ferza entendue
per tiel paroil (ens fee) que home
eft(eificenfeetaple, finon que
foit mis a ceotiel addition, fee
taple, ac,


ND it is to bee vnderftood,
that when it is faid in any
Booke , that a manis feifed in fee,
without more faying , it fhall bee
intended in fee fimple , for it fball
not bee intended by this word (in
fee)that a man is feifed in fee tayle
vnlefie there be added to it thisad-
dition fee tayle,&c.


€ His ts euident anb fecundum excellentiam, ít fhali bee taken £02 the higheſt and belt
| fee, anb that ts fee Gmple. ;


€ Addition in fee tayle, de. Vere is ünplpeb a maxime in
Law, viz. that Additio probat minoritatem , ag (tíg bulgarlp fato , the pounger fonne giucth


tbt dtFerence,


Sect,


€T Tem fi 5. iopntenäts font,
& n de eux alien ceo que à
lup affiert a bn auter bone en
fee, en ceft cas lalienee eft tenant
en common oucfque les auters
Deut topntenants , mes bucozc
les auters 2. topntenants font
Ceiffes 58 Deux parts iopntment
que remapne, & De ceux Deur
parts lefuruiuoz enter cup Deux
tient lieu, ac.


€


294.


"ALE if three Toyntenants bee;
and one of them alien that
which to him belongeth to ano-
ther manin tees Inthis cafe the a-
lienee is Tenant in common with
the othertwo Ioyntenants,but yet
the othertwo Ioyntenants are fei-
fed ofthe two parts which remain
ioyntly, and of thefe two parts the
Suruiuor betweene them two hol-
deth place, &c.


Dis needeth no explication, onlp the C&c.) intheend o£ this Section tmplpeth that
the fame La is where there be mozc Flopntenants then thre,


Bbb


$ed,


189.


Vide Se 256.


Vide deaant; $68 99°


L1b.3.


V ide $:H. 300.


(a) $48.28;.


(b)7.H.7.9.5.16.H.7.15.5.
3. H.7.11. 10. E. 4.16.5,
$.H 3.15. 18.F.37.

49. E. 3. a s. b.

Vide Se@.109


(c) 4.H.7,45« 18. R. 3. 27. b-


mon, ac.


Seclion 295.


€ [Er (i fotent deux Joynte⸗

nants en fec,æ lun Dona ceo
que a Iup affiert à bn auter en le
taple,z lauter Done ceo que a luy
affiert a bn auter en le taple, les
Donees font tenants en com:


(cap.4. Of Tenants in Common. 568.295.296;


x


nion, &c.


€ He C&c.) in the end of this Section implyeth, that fo tt is Shen a Leafe for life, os
JT: pur auter vie (g made, fo? ín that cafealfo tbe Leſtees arc Œenants in common,


€ eV terres
à; ot do-


nes 4 2.bo-


mes , e.
DE thts tufft-
cient hath ben
fpoken tn the
Chapter (a) of
Fopntenants,

¶ oes


fi terres font


dones 4 2.


Abbes, rc.
In this cafe of
the two Ab=
bots ín refpect
of their feucrall
capacities, al-
beitthe Words
be topnt,pet the
Raw (b) voth
adindge them
to be feneralip
feifed,

he ( &c.)
ín tbc eno of
this Section
impipeth, that
fo tt is of any
(c) bebp Po⸗
litique o2 Œoz-
pezate bee tbep
regular,asbead
perfons inlaw
(Sobereof our
Buthour bere
fptahcth ) oz
SDeculer: ag i£


Sect. 296.


€ Es fi terres font

Mines a2. homes,
€ ales beires De lour Deux
cozps engendres, leg Do-
nceg ount ioint eftate pur
terme De jour vies, a fi
chefcun De cur ad iſſue a
deuy lour ((fucs tienDzont
en common, ac, Mes (i
terres font Doneg, a deur
Abbes, ficome al Abbe de
ndeftmintter, + al Abbe De
S3. Albon . a auct a tenct
aeux & alour fuccctfo218,€
ceft cas ils ont mainte-
nant al commencement
eftate en common, a nemy
iopnt eftate, Ct la caufe
c(t, pur ceo d chefcun Ab⸗
be, ouauter Soueraigne,
De meafon De Religion, de⸗
uant quetl fuit fait Abbe,
ou Soueraigne, ac, il fuit
fozfqs come most perfon
enlep, et quant il eft fait
Abbe, il eft come bn home
perfon able en lep tant⸗
folemt a purchafer et auct
terres ou tenements, ou


auters


BY ifläds be giuéto two
men, andto theheires
oftheir two bodies begot-
ten,the Donees hàue a ioint
Eftate for tearme of their
liues, and if each of them
hath iffue and die , their if-
fues fhall hold in Common,
&c. But if lands be giuen to
two Abbots, as tothe Ab-
bot of Weitminffer , and to
the Abbot of Saint A/bons,
to haue and to hold to them
and to their Succeffors. In
thiscafe they haue prefent-
ly at the beginning aneftate
in Common,and neta ioynt
eftate. And the reafon is for
that euery Abbot or other
Soueraigne of a houfe of re-
ligion, before that hee was
made Abbot or Soueraigne,
&c.was butas a dead perfon
in law, and whenhe is made
Abbot,he is as a má perfon-
able in Law only to pur-
chafe and haue lands or te-
nements or other things to
che vie of his Houfe, and


A Lfo if there beetwo Ioynte⸗
nants in fee,andthe one giucth |
thatto him belongeth to another «
intayle, and the other giueth that M
to him belongs to another in tayle,
the Donees are Tenants in com-


Lib.3.
auters choles al ble De fa
meafon, et nemp a fon
proper ble, come auter ſe⸗
culer bone poit, ct put ceo
al commencement De lour
purcbatc ilg font tenants
en common, et (i lun De
eur deuie, Labbe que fur-
uefquift nauera mp tout
per le Surutuour, mes le
fuccefloz De Labbe que
moꝛuſt tiendza le moitie
en common oue Labbe qs
furuefquitt, ac,


not to his owne proper vfe,
as another fecular man may,
and therefore at the begin-
ning of their purchafe they
are tenants in common, and
if one ofthem die, the Ab-
bot which furuiueth fhall
not haue the wholeby furui-
uor,butthe Succeffor ofthe
Abbot which is dead , (hall
hold the moitie in common
with the Abbot that furui-
ueth, &c.


OF Tenantsin Common. — 68.297.


lanbg be ginert
to two Bis
fbops, to haus
and to hold to
them tio and
their Succel=
fours; Diveit
the Biſhoppes
ere neuer as
np Bead pers
fons in Law,
but aliwapes
of capacitie to
take, perfeing
thep take this
Purchaie in
thetr politique
Capacttie, ag
Withops, thep
are pꝛeſently


190


Æenants in Common, becaufcthcp are fetfedin ſeuerall rights , fos the one Biſhop is ſeiſed
in the right of bis Withopzicke of the one moítíc, andthe other (s ſeiſed tntheright of Lis Bi⸗
fhopzickc of the other moitie, and Fo by feuerall Citles and in fenerail Capacitics, whereas
Joyntenants ought to haue tt in one and che fame right and Capacitie, and by one and the
fametopnt Title, Che ithe Law is (£ Lande be giuen to two Parſons andthetr Succeſſors
op toany other fuchlike Ecclellaſticall bodies Politique o? 3Incozpozate ag hath benc fab;

£a Cozodic be granted to two men and thetr hetres, inthis cafe becaufe the Coꝛodie is
incertatne and cannot be feucred; (t (ball amount to afeuerall grant to each of them one Coꝛo⸗
dic, for the perfong befeucrall, and the Cozodie is perfonall,


Sei. 297.


Cem (t terres ſoi⸗ Lfo if lands bee ¶ Nd fo tt (a it lands F. I. 2.49. I. 16, E. 3. Tin.
Tint ‘bones adm giuen to an Ab- À Esp demain 7. —
Abbe ,æabn S»etu- botandaSecularman, say man, te haue andto 15.458


lat home, 3 auct a
teí a cup, g. al Abbe,
&afesfuccefoz8 , &
al Secular home à
lup æ a fes heires,
bonques ils ount c-
flatc en cómon, Cau-
faqua fupra.


to haue and to hold
to them, viz. to the
Abbot and his Suc-
ceffors, and to the Se-
cular man, to him and
to his heires, They
haue an eftate in com-
mon, Caufa qua fupra,


hold totbem, that is to fap, to
the Parfon and his Succel=
fois, anb to the Lap man and
bis betreg , thep are prefentip
Tenants in Kommen foz the
caufeg abouefaid, So of a
ihoe , Ec. Et fic de fimili-
us.


FE Lands bee giuen to the
Hing and toa Subict. Co
baue and to hold to them and
totheir heres , pet thep are


Pl. Com, in eig. Barkleys


cafe fal


Tenants in Common, anb not Flopntenants , for tbe king (s not fcífeb in his náturail
Capacitic, butin bis Ropall and Politique Capacttte , in iure Coroner, Soljícb cannot (fano
in Fopnture With the fcíGn of the fubtec (n his naturall Capacitic. So likewile it there bee
tio Fopntenants, and the Crowne difcendts onc ofthem the 3lepnture is ſeuered, anv thep
are become Genantg ín common, Wut if Lands bee giuen to A. de B. Biſhop of N. andtoa
Secular man to banc and to holdto them two, and to their heires. In this cafe thep ats
Fopntenants, oz each of them take tbe lands tn their natural Capacttic, i
It᷑ lands be gtuento Lohn Biſhop of Norwich and big Succefloss, and to lohn Overall
Docoꝛ of Diuinitie and kis heires being oneand the fame perfon, he is Tenant fri Common
(d) with bimfeife. Wut our Authoꝛs rules doe nôt bolo in Chattels , Reals op Perfonate ;
for if a Leaſe fos peares be made, 03a tard grantedtoan Abbot anda Secular man, e? toa
Withop and Secular man, oz (f gods be grantcd to them, thep are 3opntcnantg, becaufc tbep
take not in their 39olítíque Capacitie,
Bbb 2 Sed.


(d) 13. 4.8.14.
—— 9.6.30
45.E.3.35.


Lib3. (Cap.4. Of Tenants in Comon. Seé.298.299.300


11,44. 71.16.


45. E.3.12. 44.4 f.11.


ax. E,4. 32.5.


21.Ë.4:22 6.


§.E.3.23. 67.


Tempi E 1.Faffments 115.


34. £-1.quar .simped. 179.
10. Eli( .Dier. 28.


23. E.3. 6. Feoffments 116.


6.E.3.56. 39. 7.3.38.
9.E.3.16. 17.6.3. 3e
18.8.3.43. 43 E. 3-36,
33 Af. 33. H6. 5.2.


€ Nd the teafon is,

becaufe thep aue

feuerall Freeholds

and an occupation Pro indi-
uifo,

Pere is to be obferned that
the Habendum Doth fener the
premiffes that Prima facie
feemed tobe topnt, for an exz
pꝛeſſe effatc controles an im⸗
pipen cftate, ag hath beone

b.


€ A?» the like Law ig,

ít the feoffinent bee

made ofa third pare
ora fourth part,zc. And ff
there be an Aduowion apz
pendant, they are alfo Ges
nants tn common of the Ad⸗
nowion. And albeit itis fato
that fuch a fcoffment of a
moitp o2 third part, tc. is not
god Without Suziting, foz
that (ag tbcp fap)a man cane
not create an bnecttain eftate
in land by Parol, pet ts the
La clere that fuch a feoff-
ment ig geod bp Parol with⸗
out Writing, aud fuch an bu=
certaine cftate (ball paffc bp
Liuerp, ano fo (t appeareth in
our bokes.


Sed. 298.


Tem i terres

foíent Dones a

Deux à auct, et
tener.s.lun moity a
lun ct a ſes beíteg, et
lautet moíty a lautet
et a fes beires, tlg
font tenants en com⸗
mon.


Section 299.


Cj Tem home fei-
fie De certain ter=
res enfeofta bn auter
De le moitie De mefme
la terre fans afcun
parlance De aflign-
ment ou limitation
De mefme le moitie
€ feuccaltp al temps
Del fcoffment, Dongs
le feoffee a le feoffoz
tiendront lour parts
De la terre en com:
mor,


iB


ALP mes be gi-


|


|
i


uen to two to.


haueand to hold,s.the
one moitie to the one
and to his heires, and
the other moitie to
the other, and to his
heires , they are te-
nants in common.


Lfo if a man fei-

fed of certaine
lands infeoffe another
of the moitie of the
fame land without any
{peech of affignement
or limitation of the
fame moitie in feueral-
tie at the time of the
feoftment, then the
Feoffee andthe Feof-
for fhall hold their
parts of the land in
common.


It a Qicebíd finde that aman hath Duas partes manerij,&c. in tres partes diuifas , ) tbíg
fljall not be intended to be in Common, but if the verdict be in tres partes dinidendas, then it fe
meth that thep are Tenants in conunon bp the tntendment of the Werdic.

Aut (fa man be fcífzo of a Wannoz Sobercunto an Aduowſon ts appendant, and maketh
a feoffiment of three acres parceil of the Mannoꝛ together With the Aduowſon to two. Qro
bane and to hold the one moitie together with tbe moity of the Aduowlon to the one and big
beíreg, and the other moity together with the other moitie of the Aduowſon to the ether and
bis heires this cannot be geod without Deed, for the Jreoffoz cannot annex tbe Aduokofon te
tbefe three acreg and diſanex it from the ref of the Wannoz without Der.


€ ET eft afcauoir, queen metim

lemanec come eft auantbit
De tenants en common, De terres
outeñts enfee (imple, ou en fee
tatle, en metre le maner poit ye:


d


Setlien 300.


Nd itis to bee vnderftood
that in the fame maner as is
aforefaid of tenants in common
of lands or tenements in fec fim-
ple, or infee taile, in the fame


Lib.3.:


at,


€.| Cem fi bor leſ⸗
fa terres a deux
. Homes pur terme de
lour bies , & lun
granta tout fon c-
{tate De ceo que a Iup
affiert a bu auter,
Dongs lautet tenant
' atermeDebie, et ce-
lupa dle graunt eft
fait font tenants. en
common, Durant le
temps que ambideur
les leſſees font € bie,
€ Et memoranda,
queen touts auters
tiels cafes, coment
que ne font icp ex⸗
preſſement moucs ou
fpecifies, f font en
femblabf reafon, font
ett femblable ie»,


of tbe Common Law, Chat Wherefoener there is the like reafon


Of Tenants in Common.


Dc tenants à terme De bie, Sicom
beug topntenants font en fee, elit.
leffa a vn home ceo que à lup af-
fiert put terme De bic, et lautet
topntenant Icffaceo que a lup af-
fitta bn auter pur terme De pie,
ac. ies Deup leffees font te-
nants en common put lout bies,


faid two leffees are tenants in có-
monfor their liues,&c. |
Vid. Scét.zo5. where this ig fufficientlp explaneb befozc.


Sed. 301.


Lío if a man let

landsto two men
for terme of their
liues, & the one grants
all his eftate of that
which . belongeth to
him to another, then
the other tenant for
terme of life, and hee
to whom the grant is
made are tenants in
common during the
time that both the lef-
feesbe aliue.
^p And memorans.
dum, that in all other
fuch like cafes al-
though it beenot here
exprefly moued or
fpecifiedifthey bee in
like reafon, they are in
the like law,


€ Nd fo (t (& i£ lands

be ictten to tio fo

terme of their liues,
Et corum alterius diuti vie
uent!, anbone of them grans
teth big part to a ftranger
Soberebp the topnture ts fez
uered, and dpeth, here (hall
bt no furutnour, but the Lets
To? (ball enter into the moity,
and the furutuour {ball haue
0 aduantage of thele woꝛes
Et eorum alterius diutius vi-
uenti foz two cauſes. Firſt
fo? that the topnture is feue-
red. Decondip, foz that thefe
500708 are no moze then the
Common Law Would bauc
tmpiped without them, and
Expreffio corum quz racité
infunt nihil operatur. Here⸗
by ít appeareth that ín cafe of
Leafes fozitfe tt ig moze be=
nefictall £o? tbe Leſſoꝛ to haue
the topnture fevered then ta
haue it continue.


€ Si foiert en fem-
blable reaſon fam en fem
blable ley. ere Little-


ton citeth ene of the maximes


t > there ig the ithe aw. Vbi
cadem ratio, ibi idem jus, 02 Vbi eadem ratio, ibi idem juseffe de


Bnd therefore Ratio potett allegari deficiente lege. But it muſt b
apparens. Bnd here tt appeareth that Argumentum fimili tg g
galis eft cafuum diuerforum inter fe collatoru

bit inalteto, difsimilium diísimilis eft ratio.


Bobb 3


bet, fog Ratio eft anima legis.
€ Ratio vera & legalis & non
Od (ft Law, Sed fimilitédo te-


m fimilis ratio, quod in vno fimilium valet, vale-


See.


Seti201.

manner may it be of tenants for
terme of life. Asiftwo ioynte-
nants bee in fee, andthe one let-
tthrowne man that which to
him belongeth for terme of life,
and the other ioyntenant letteth
that which to him belongeth to
another for terme of life,&c.the


30.49.18.


Vid $8.1.


i 9 p "A"


Lib.z. (ap.4. Of Tenantsin Common.


Vi.33.H.6.4..


a)V.S¢.3 46.37 5.419.440.
462.563.464. 482.483.648.
730.729, vi. $ed. 170.


Vi Se. 8. 7. H.s.


7 Rs. »


€ QU deux Toyrrenants
95 fee cre.


This needeth no explana
tion,
€ Et far ceo cafe vn
question poet farder dc.
Were Littleton maketh a
quettion,and theweth the reas
fons on both Goes , and con=
cludes with a Quare. When
Littleton maketh a queftion,
and fheiweth tbe reafon on
both fides , the latter is euer
bts owne, (a) andthe better.
Wut Cime hath made thig
queftion without queftion, fez
now all agree, Chat the join⸗
ture tefenercd foz the time,
according te the latter opint-
on here fet boton tn Littleton,
Sohofe reafons are vnanſwe⸗
table: fo; manp times the
change of the freehold makes
an aiteration o1 change of the
reucrüon. As if Tenant ín
KEatle,o2? the bufband ſeiſed
ín the right of big wile, o te-
nant foz life make a leafe fox
lifeof the Leïæ, ineuerte of
thefe cafeg the Leſſour doth
gaine a new renerfion bp
wrong, as ſhall be fapd moze
at large in the Chapter of
Difcontinuance,and tf che el=
bct brother grant the reuerſi⸗
on (expectant bpon a Free⸗
hold ) fo; life, (t hall caufe poſ⸗
feffio fratris, ag bath benc
fapd.
€ Per meſme le rea-
[on le reuerſion que eff de-
pendant fur mefme le
frankienement eft fener
de le loynture cc.
3f two 3lopntenaunts in
fee be, anb thep both topne in
a Leaſe to an Abbot and a
fécular man foz terme of their
liues , here the veucrfion that
is dependant bpon fenerail
freeholds ts feuered. And fo
it (8 iftheptotne in a Leaſe to
two fecullar men, to haus and
tobolo the one moitie to the


Setl. 301.


€ Ibm fi Deut

jopntüts ẽ fee

font, et lun lef=
fa ceo que à lup affi-
erta bn aut pur tme
De fa bie, 1c «irenant
a terme De bie Durant
fa bie, etlaut Joyn⸗
tenaunt que nc leila
paffe, font Cenants
€common,€t fur ceo
cafe bn queftion putt
turbet ficome en tiel
cafe, mittomus quel
le(To2 ad iſſue et duie,
biuant lauter Joyn⸗
tenant fon companís
on,ct otuantt tenant
a terme De vie le que-
ftion poet eftre tiel :
S»í le reverfion de la
moitie que le leſſor a-
uoit diſcẽdra al élue
le leffoz, ou que lant
jopntenant auera cel
reuerſion per Ie ſur⸗
uiuor. Aſcuns ont dit
en cett cafe, que lant
jopntenant auera cel
reuerſion perle furui-
uo2.et lour reafon eft
tiel, 5, que quant les
jopntenants fueront
topntment feífíeg en
fee fimple,æc, coment
que lun de eur fift e=
ftate De ceoquealup
affiert pur terme de
fa bie,et comt que él
ad fever le franktene-
ment De ceo que à lup

affiert


Setl.302.


Alo if there bee

two Ioyntenaunts
in Fee,and the one let-
teth that to him be-
longeth to another for
terme of hislife, the
Tenant for term of life
during his life,and the
other Iointenat which
did not let, are tenants
in Common, And vp-
on this cafe a queftion
may arife, as in fuch
cafe admit that thelef-
for hath iffue and die,
liuing the other Ioyn-
tenant his companion,
and liuing the Tenant
for life, the queftion
may be this, Whether
the reuerfion of the
moity which theleffor
hath fhall difcend to
the iffue of the Leffor,
or that the other joyn-
tenant fhall haue this
reuerfion by the furui-
uor.Somre haue faid in
this cafe,thatthe other
jointenat fhal haue this
reuerfton by the furui-.
uor:and their reafon is
this, s. That when the
Iointenats were ioint-
ly feifed in fee fimple,
&c. although that the
one of thé makeane-
ftate of thatto him be-
longeth forterm ofhis
life, and although that
hee hath feuered the


Lib.3.


affiert pec P Icafe, vn⸗
cozeu nan (euevE fee
fimple, mes Ie fee
tünple demurt a eug
fopntment cóc il fupt
adeuant, Ct íffint
femble à cur,queiau-
ter Joyntenant que
furuefquitt, auera le
teuct(ion pert Sur⸗
uiuout,æc, Ct auters
ont Dit le contrarie, a
ceo eftiour ccafon, $,
que quaunt lun Des
Forntenaunts leſſa
ceo que à lup affiert
à bn auter pur terme
de fa bie, pet tiel
Leaſe le Franktene-
mt eft feuer à Le fopu-
ture. Et per meſme
le reaſon le Reuerſt⸗
on que eſt dependant
fur mefmele Frank⸗
tenement,eft ſeuer De
le Jornture, Auxy
file Leſſour bit re⸗
ferue a lup bn annu-
all t3ent fur le Leas,
le Leſſor folement a-
ueroit le f3ent,xc, le
ql eff bn proofe dlc
reuerſiõ eft folement
en luy, et quelauter
nad viens en cel re⸗
uerfion, ac, Auxy (i
le Tenant aterin de
bte fuit impleade,zc.
& fi default apres
Default, Donques 1c
Leſſoꝛ ſerroit De ceo
ſolment receine a de⸗
fender fon Doit, &


Of Tenantsin Common.


frechold of this which
to him belongs by the
leafe, yet hee hath not
feuer’dthe fee fimple,
but the fee fimple re-
mains to them ioyntly
as it was before. And
fo it feemeth to them;
thatthe other Toynte-
naunt which füruiueth
fhal haue the reuerfion
by thefuruiuor , &c.
And others haue faid
the contrarie, & this is
their reafon, s. that
whenone ofthe Ioyn-


tenants leafeth that to b


him belongeth,toano-
ther for terme of his
life, by fuch Leafethe
frechold is feuered fró
thejoynture. And by
the fame reafonthe re-
uerfion which is depé-
ding vpon the fame
freehold is feuer'd fro
the joynture. Alfo if
the leffor had referued
to him an annuall Rent
vpon the leafe,the lef-
for onely (hould haue
had the Rent, &c. the
which isa proofe,that
the reuerfion is onely
inhim, and that the
other hath nothing in
the reuerfion,&c. Al-
fo ifthe Tenaunt for
terme of life were im-
pleaded, & maketh de-
fault after default, the
leffor fhall be only re-
cciu'd for this,to deféd


one Fos life, t the other moitp te
the other fo? life,fez both thefe
cafes ave Warranted by the
authoꝛitie of Littleton.

FE two Fopntenants be of
a XLeafc foz twentie one peres ;
and the onc of them letteth bie
part fo? certaine peares, part
of Be terme, the Joynture is
fenered, and furuiuoz bol:
deth not place, Foz à ternie £02
afmall number of peares is
as high an intereſt, as foy ma-
thie moze peareg,anb fo Was it
reſolued Hil.18.El.Reginz, in
Communi Banco, * Sbich 3i
my felfe heard,

It to Coparceners be (n
fe, andthe one make a Leate
fo» itfe, this tg no feucrance of
tye Coparcenaric, fox wots
withſtanding the 1e20 Malt
make one auowꝛte pon them


But tf two Joyntenaunts
be, and one maketh) a Leafe,
this (s a feucrance of the jopns
ture, as Littleton bere taketh
it, and feuerall auo wꝛies (bal
be made bpon them,


€ taxy f le Lef-


for vſt referue vn apaual
rent le Lejfor folement a-


sera le rent, cc. But
f£ two Joyntenants make a
Lealſe foz itfe,referuing a vent
to one of them , the rent halt
enure to them both, becaufe
the tcuerfion remains tn toin=
ture, vnleſſe the referuatton be
bp Deed indented,and then he
onclp to whom ít is referuco
fall haue tt. Put 1€ thep
make a Leafc bp Deed inden=
ted,referning v; fauing the tcc
uerfion to onc of them, that is
boyd, becaufe thep had theres
uerfion befoze, but the rent is
neSolp created.

Andfo (tto (€ fuch a Leflee
fo? life fhould furrender to
onc ef tbew, it fhall ensure to
them both, fozthat tbep baue
a (oput reucron, But tf the
Leſſee grant bigeftate te onc
of them, no part of (t fbalen-
ure to bte Companton , be-
caufe £o? the moitie belonging
to bis Companton,tt tg tn cflc

ín


Sect. zo20


192


i Hil.18,£lis.


4.4: 27, H.8. 16.8.
:25« 14,€4d. 5. Er. 382:


$E. 4, 4o


Lib.5.


38.H.6.34.0.— s. R3. tif,
Extmquifhment 3.


(£) Wr. 2.08p.3. 20.E.1.
Statute de Defenfione Imris.
We sep 16


C ap.4.
in bin to Whom the grant ts
made, the reucrfion to the
other in fee.

Pe two Fopntenants make
a Leafe fo; lite, the remainder
to his Companion ín fe, this
íg a gob remainder of his mos
itie to bis Companton.


€ Donques le feoffor
ferra de ceo folemeut re-
ceine, c.

¶ Receive, Receit,
Receptio, (g in manp cafes
Where a perfen partic to a
tozit, oz an cflranger there-
unto, to whom à reucrfion 02
remainder appertatneth, fall
in default of anothet perfon be
recetucd to Defend his oz her
Frehold oꝛ Sinbcritance, tbc
ia faít, Admitratur, &c.
And this admiſſion oz recetpt
is giuen by fundzie ftatutes,
(f) Cand thisis that Sbich
the &íuillang call, Adiniffio
tertiæ perfone pro intereffe. )
Et in cafibus predictis dua
concurrunt Aétiones : Vna in-
tet petentem & tenentem , &
alia inter tenentem ius fuum
eftendentem & petentem.


Œ Pur ceo que vn
Franktenement ne poet
per nature de loynture,
efle annexe a Un rener-


fiez. Andthisis the
princtpall reafon, and of this
faffictent bath bene fapd in
the chapter of Jlopntenants,
Sc&.291.


€ oc. Chis &c.
in the end ofthis Section, im⸗
tlíctb anp other heire lineal
02 colaterall,


-. Of Tenants in Common.


fon Compaignion en
ceftcafeen nul man⸗
nerferroit recciue, le
quel proue Ic reuerſi⸗
on Decl moitie Deftre
tantfolement en te
Leſſoꝝ : Ex fic percon-
fequens, file Leſſour
moguft binant le Leſ⸗
fcc pur terme De bic,
E reucrfion difcendra
al boire De Leſſour, &
nemp deuiendra à
lauter Joyntenaunt
per le ſutuiuor, Idco
quære. Mes en ceft
cafe fi celup Joynte⸗
nant que ad? frank=
tenement ad (Tuc ct
deuie otuant ie leſſor
& lcffce, Donques d
femble, que memo
líftuc atia ceft moitie
en Demefne , et cn fee
per Difcent, pur ceo
quebn franketene-
ment ne poet pct na⸗
tute Dc Jornture
eltre annerea vn re⸗
uerfion, tc, ct il eft
certaine, que celup
quc leffa fuit feiffe De
le moitie en fon De-
mete come De fee, et
nul auera a(cun ioin⸗
ture en fon Frankte⸗
nement, Ergo ceo Dif-
cendza a fon tue, ac,
Sedquære.


$ctl.302.


his right,and his Com-
panion in this cafe in
no manner fhall be re-
ceiued,the which pros
ueth the reuerfion of
the moitie to be onely M
inthe Leflor : & {fo by «
confequent ifthe Lei-
four dieth, liuing the
Leffee for terme of
life, the reuerfion fhall
difcend to the hcire o
the Leffour , and fball
not come to the other
Ioyntenant by the fur-
uiuor, Ideo quere. But
in this cafe if that join-
tenant which hath the
Freehold hath iffue, &
dies living the Leffor
and the Leffec, then it
feemeth that the fame
Iffue fhall haue this
moitie in Demefne, &
infeeby difcent, for
that a Freehold cannot.
by nature of Ioyn-
ture bee annexed to

a Reuerfion, &c. And
itis certaine, That he
which leafed was fei-
fed of the moitie in
his Demefne as of.
Fee , and none fhall |
haue any Ioynture in
his Freehold, there-
fore this fhall difcend
to his Iffue, &c. Sed
quere.


Section.


Lib.3. Of Tenants in Common. Seil.303.304:


Es (t iſlint foit
€M à là lep en cett
cas ett tiel,que (tlelef-
fo» Deuie biuant le lel-
fee, & biuant lautet
topntenant, que ad ic
franktenement De lau-
ter moitie, quele reuer=
(iot Difcendza al (fue
del leſſor, Donque eft le
topnture, a title queat:
cuts De eux poit auer per
le futuiuoz, a le Droit De
le iopntute anient, &
tout oufterinent defeat
atouts tours, Cn meſ⸗

- uc le manet ctt, fi celup
ioyntenant que ad le
franktenement Deuie,
biuant.le leffo? a lelet-
fce fi lalep (oit tiel que
fon franktenemẽt a. fec
Gul aden Ie moítp, diſ⸗
cendra à fon (ue, don⸗
ques le toynture ferta
Defeat atouts tours,


time ef bis death the Joynture Se g fenered,


Sed. 303.


Vtif it be fo that the

Law in this cafe bee
fuch, that if the Leffor
dye lining the Leffee and
liuing the other ioynte-
nant which hath the free-
hold of theother moitie,
that the Reuerfion fhall
difcend to the Iffue of
the Leffor , then is the
loynture and title which
any ofthenimay haue by
the Suruiuour , and the
right of the Ioynture ta-
ken away, and altogether
defeated for euer. Inthe
fame manner itis if that
ioyntenant which hath
the freehold dye liuine
theLefforand theLeffee,


if the Law bee fo as his.


frechold and fee which
he hath in the moity fhall
difcend to his Iffue, then
the Ioynture fhall be de-
feated for euer.


€ [yon est
le foynture
e title, ecc. & le
droit de le soynture
auient, ec.

And the reafon of
this is, koꝛ t€ the loyn⸗
tute be feucre at the
time of the death of
him that firtt deceaſed
the benefit of Surui⸗
Gour is vtterly des
ftroped for euer, ag
bath bene fato (*) as
kore in tbe Chapter of
3i opntenantg. But ín
the cafe afosefain, it
tenant Co? life dyeth in
the life of both the
topntenants thep are
topntenants againe ag
thep were before.

FE two Jopnte⸗
wants becinfes, anv
the one letteth hig part
to another fo; the life of
the Leſſor € the Lelloz
bieth,fome fap that his
part thal furutue to his
compantom for bp big
Death the Leaſe Wag
Determined, And ez
thers hold the contras
tp and thetr reafor tg,
fürff, fon that at the


fo; folong ag belined the Leaf continued, And


fecondlp, that notwithfanding the act of any one of the Jopntenants there mutt be equall bes


. nefit of Suruiuour as to the


had bene no benefit of Surutaoz to the Letlo Svithont quettion.


€. | Cem 6 5. iopn
tenants font , 4
lun releffa » fon fait


A Ndif three Ioyn-
one releafe byhisdeed


Set. 304.


tenants be,and the


that in this cafe tbig


Freehold. But here (f the other Joyntenant had frt Dped there


€ Vis imis thefe


two things are to
be obferucb, Firſt,
cleafe


abn i fes cõpanions
tout le Dioit que il a=
uoiten le terre, Don-
ques ad celuy a que
le teleas eff fait le
tierẽ part Deleg ter-


to one of his compa-
nions all- the right
which hee hath in the
land, then hath hee to
whom the releafe is
made thethird part of
«cc


doth entire bp Way of mitter
leftate, and not (*) bp Wap of
Crtingutlhment, fo2 then the
IBeleafe (bono enure te bte
Companion alto, andbe (e in
the Perbp him that maketh
the Keleaſe. (a) But tf hee
had releafeb to the other two,
then had (t wzought no Degree

bas


193


(*) Vid. ScB 191,


(*) ».EliQ.Dier 263.
19.H.6.1y. .
(a) 4o. E. 3.41. 13.2.3. 155,
Garr.

35.2. 3 76'eaf243.22,H.6.4
14.€.3. Briefe 28,19. H. 6.1
33. H.6.5. 28. H. 6.3. 35. H,
Alienation 31, 8. H.A.g.
10. E.4. 3.


Lib.3.


(b) s-£iiq Deer 263.
ty. H.6, 17. y


(Ce) 1e. Ek . Bendioes
giEhs.Dier 363.


— * the (hap-


10,.2.4.3.6. 31,H.6,8.b.


(4p-4-
but (n fuppofitíon of iam,
foi many purpofeg they to
whom the Keleaſe ig made
(as hath benc faib) fbalibæ
fuppofed (nfrom the firft feof=
fozas thep {ball deratgne the
firft $oarrantíc foz the Whole.
(b) The fecond thing to bee
obferucd ts that hee to whom
the Keleaſe is made bath a fee
Ample without thefe Swozdeg
(heires) as hath bene tons
cheb tn the firft Chapter of
the fict Boke, foz that hes to
Sohom the 1Rcleafe ts,1¢ fetfeo
per my, & per tout, of thefes
anb Inheritance ag hath bin


Of Tenants in Common.


res per force De le Dit
releas a il x⁊ fon com=
paníon, teignet les
auters deux parts en
ioynture. Ct quant
al tierce part , que il
ad per force De rez
leas, tltient cel tierce
part ouc lup m & fon
companion en com⸗
mon,


Sed...505.


the Lands by force of
the faid releafe,and he
and his com panion
fhall hold the other
two partsin Ioynture,
And as to the third
part which he hath by
force of the releafe he
holdeth that third pare
with himfelfe and his
companion in com-
mon.


fatb inthe Chapter of 3lopntenantg, And note the ike Law (o bet weene Coparcencrs: and
farther if there be two Coparcencers, ans the one bat) diffuse twenste daughters anb dperh,che
other may releafe to anp one of the Daughters her whole part,albeit fhe to whom the Release ig,
hath not an equall part, but fo? che p2tuttie andthe tndentded eſtate the Releaſe (s gwd.

Wut tf tio Flopntenants be of twentte Acres, and the one maketh a feoffment of bis part
in etghteene Acree, the other cannot reicafe his entire part, but only tn tive Acres, for thatthe
Jopnture to ſeuered Foz the refioue,


€ TM is cut-
bent vpon
that which
hath ben fato befoze.
(c) Bnd tt ts to be
vnderſtood that a Re⸗
leaſe map cnure foure
manner of aies ſirſt
bp Swap of mitter le.
ftateag here it appea-
reth, Secondip, bp
Say of mitter la droit.
Æbirolp , by Way
of Œrtinguifhment.
Fourthly, bp Wap of
creation of inlarge-
ment of an €ftate,
ag hereafter in this
chapter fball appearc.
And tt is to bee ob-
ferucd that bpon a rez
leafe that creatcs 02
tniargeth an eftate, 02
enures bp Swap of
mitter leftate, a Rent
map beereferucd, but
not vpõ a releafe that
tnureth bp Swap of
mitter le droit, ©
Swbich enures bp wap
of Q'rtíngut(bment.
be ( &c.) in the
end of this Section
tmpipeth a Diuerfitie


Setl. 305.
CET eft afcauoír, q


atcun foits bu te-

leas prendra effect, a
bzera pur mitter leftate
De celup que fift le re⸗
leas, a celup aque le re⸗
leas en fait. ficome en le
cag auantdit a⁊ auxy (i-
come ioynt eſtate foit
fait a le baron a fa fe⸗
me, talatierce perfon
ela tierce perlon cele(Ta
tout fon dzoit quetlad
&lebaron, adonque ad
le baton la moitie que
te tierce auoit, ala feme
Deceonad tiens, Ct (f
entiel cafe le tierce re=
leffa ala feme nient
nofmant le baron en le
releas, Donqueg ad la
feme 1e moitie que Ie
tierce auoit ac, ale bard
nad riens De ceo forſq;
en


ANS is to bee obfer-

ued, that fometimes
a deed of releafe (hal take
eſſect, and enure to putthe
eftate of him which
makes the releafe to him
to whom the Releafe is
made,as in the cafe afore-
faid, and alfo,as ifa ioynt
eftate bee made to the
husband and wife,and to
a third perfon, and the
third perfon releafe all
his right which hee hath
tothe husband, then hath
the Husband the moitie
which the third had, and.
the wife hath nothing of
this. Andif in fuch cafe
the third Releafe to
the Wife nor naming
the Husband in the Re-
leafe, thenhath the wife
the moitie which the


|


Lib.3.
endzoit fa feme, pur
ceo que ets tiel cafe le
releate beera De faire
eftate à celup à que
le releaſe eft fait, De
tout ceo que affierta
celuy que fait le re⸗
leafe.#c,


Of Tenants in Common.


third had,&c.And the
husband hath nothing
ofthisbutin right of
his wife, becaufethat
inthis cafe the releafe
fhall enure to make an
eftate to whom the re-
leafe is made of all


that which belongeth to him which maketh


thercleafe,&c.


€ ES ẽ aſcun cas

bn releas vre⸗
ra de mitter tout le
droit ql q̃ fait le re⸗
leas ad. aceluy a d le
releafe eft fait, Si-
come home feilie De
certain teneméts ett
Diffeifie per Deux Dif-
ſeiſors, file diſſecſee
p fon fait releſſa tout
fon D20ít,ac,a vn Des
diſſeiſors, donque ce=
lup a que Ie releas eft
fait aucra & tiendra
touts les tenements
alupfolement, et ott-
ftera fon companion
de chefcun occupati-
on de ceo, Ct le caufe
eff pur cco d les Deur
Diffeifors fuerõt eins
encounter la lep, et
quát bn De eur Dappe
lereleas De celup que
ad Droit Dentre,zc,
cef Droit en tiel cas
belteraen celup a que
lereleag eft fait ct eft
entiel plyte,ficome il
que audit Dzoit auott
enter.et lup enfeotta,


Seilion 306.


Ndin fome cafe a

releafe fhall enure
to put all the right
which he who maketh
the releafe hath, to
him to whom the re-
leafeis made. Asif a
man {eifed of certaine
tenements is diffeifed
by two diffeifors ifthe
diffrifee by his deed
releafe all his right,
&c.to one of the dif-
feifors, then hee to
whom the releafe is
made fhall haue and
hold all the tenements
to him alone, and (hall
ouft his companion of
cuery occupation of
this. Andthe reafon is,
for that the two diffei-
fors were in againft
the law,and when one
of them happeth the
releafe of him which
hath right of entrie,
&c. this right in fuch
cafe (hall veftin him to
whom the releafe is
made, and he isin like
plite, as hee which


Coc 2


$e8.306.


between a releafe Mbich enures
bpWay of mitter leftate(Sobere
of Littleton here fpeaketh) &
à iReleafe that enures bp Swap
of Extinguifbment ; foz of à
Releafe enuring bp Way of
Extinguifhment made to the
bufband the wife (ball take
benefit, o; to the Sue, the
bufband fball take beneñt, as
hereafter (ball moze at large
be fatd,


€ * Gre Littleton pura

fueth the fcconb part

of his diutfion,viz.

Sohere a releafe fhall enure by
ap of Miiter ledroit.


¶ Diffeifie per deux
differfors crc. Che like
law ts, beretbere bee two
topnt Abatoꝛs o2 Iutrudoꝛs
ich come in meerelp bp
Szong. But ik tivo men doe
vſurve bp a Sozongfull pez
fentation to a Church, and
their Clarke ts admitted, in=
ftituted and inducted, and the
rightkull Patron releafetl) to
one of then, thig fball enure
totbem both, £o? that the bz
farpers come not in meerely
by wong, but their Ciarke
tg (n bp admiffion and inſti⸗
tutton which are tudictall
acts, (f) Bnd therefore an
bfurpatton (all wozke a Re⸗
mitter to one that bath a (912
mer right.

Œ Dongues celuy 4
que le releafe est fait aue-
ra cy teignera touts les


tenements cc. Here bp
operation of Law pzefentip
tpox the belíuerp of the res
lcafe the whole freehold and
inheritance ts befted (n him
to Soho the releafe is made,
and ail the ffate, that the other
Dilſſeiſor had Soboflp deue⸗
fted; fo; right and Song
cannot confift together, but
the Weongfull effate glueth
place to the rightfnll. Ans
thereafon hereof is £o? that
as hath bene faid the diſ⸗
feifoz to whom tbe relcafe

ag


194


(f) Fite NB. 39. in
LT R.2:quare Dop.144;


Lib.3.


(e) Brit. fol. 116.36, Aff. p!.
39. 39.Ë.3.29. 21. H. 6. 41
23.H 6.33. 7.€.4:25. 9.
E.4.6. 11.H.7.12. 20.H.
7.5. at. H.g8.. 12.8.4,
nt. Difcontint. 9.H.6.37.
21.H.6.52.


( E) 30.H.3.4ff.432.

1. Mi 3. 9. Aff. 8.

31. Af. 28. 274/68. 31.
29. Af:54. 4349-176
40. E. 3.24, 5o. E.3. 21.

3. R.2, entrie cong: 38.

15. E.3.tit. 44.9. 13-4 ff.20


was made Was feifen Per my
& per tout, &obcreunto Wher
theright commeth ít excludeth
the Dzong (e )foz right which
ig lawfuil, and wrong that
ig contrarp to Lawe cannot
fan together.


€ Ex tiel plite fi-
come il que auoit droit,
auoit enter ey luy enfeoffe


ac, Ct là caufe eft,
put ceo que il G auoit
adeuant effate per
toat.8, p Difleifin, ac,
adoze pet le releas
bn eftate daeoitu⸗
tel,


(4p -4. Of Tenants in Common: Seéf. 307.308.


|


hath theright had en- |


tred & enfeofted him,
&c. And the reafonis,


for thathe which be-.


fore had an eftate by


wrong, s. by diffeifin, «
&c. hathnowby the


releafe arightful eftate —


ec. This (&c.) doth implp that this ts true fecundum quid, but


not fimpliciter, Fo ag to the holding out of tbc iopnt Difletfoz (t amounts toag much ag (f hee


had entred and enfcoffed him to whom the releaſe is made, but it doth not ameuntto an entrie


and fcoffment Simpliciter to all purpoſes, ag (bail be fatobersafter in big proper place in the


chapter of relcafes.


€ Ere Littleton ſpea⸗
H keth of the third

kinde of releates,
And the veafon of this Diuer-
fitie ( tmpiped in the (&c,)
inthe end of this Section )
betweene the Diffcifozs and
their feoffes comming in bp
titicand purchafe are tnten=
dedin Lawto bane a tare
rantie( Sbich (c much eſtee⸗
med in Law ) and therefore
left the toarranty ſhould be as
uoyded, the Keleaſe ſhall en-
ure to both the Feoffess in fa⸗
uour sf 35urcbafozg, amb fe
therightand benefit of euery
one faucb, (f) And in anct-
ent time {€ the Diffetfoz had
made a Feoffment in fee, o2 a
gtft in tate, oza Icafc oz life,
and the Sfeoffe, Monee, o2
Leſſee had continued in feifin
qutetlp a peareand a Day, the
entric of the Difleife had net
beenclaspfull pon him, and
the rcafon ag fo the benefit
and fafegard of the warran⸗
tie ( Which Wag intended bp
Haw ) (ouo haue bene bc-
ftropco by the entric. 25ut
bereof alfo moze fhall bez fatd
in big proper place tn the
chapter of Releaſes.


CE


{2 metimele mance eft, file |
Difleifoz Fatt bn leafe a bn


Sell. 307.


€ ET € afcun cag
vn releas b2c-
ta per boy Dertin-
guifbment, et en ttel
cafe tiel releas ayde⸗
va la iointenat a que
le releas ne fuit fait,
aucpbien come Iup à
q̃ le releafe fuit fait,
Sicome bn home
foit Diffeifie, et le Dif-
fcio? fatt fcoffment
a Deut homes en fee,
ft le Diffeífee veletfa
per fon fait a br de
les feoffees , Dongs
cel releaſe b2et a am-
bideux les feoffees,
pur ceo q les feoffees
ont eftate per la lep,
$, per feoffment, et
nemp per tort fait a
nullup.ac,


Sef. 308.


Nd in fome cafe
a releafe (ball in-
ure by way of extin-
guifhment, and in fuch


cafe {uch releafe fhall -


aide the ioyntenant to
whom the releafe was
not made afwell as
himto whom the re-
leafe was made. Asi

amanbe diffeifed and
the diffeifor makes a
fcoffmentto two men
in fee, if the diffeifee
releafe by his deed to
one of the feoffees,
this releafe fhall enure


to both the feoffees, «
for that the feoffees


haue an eftate by the


law, s. by feoffment, M
and not by wrong


done toany,&c.


N the fame manner it is if the
diffeifor maketh a leafe to a


hoe pur tertii de (a bie, le remain⸗ man for terme of his life the re-


det


Lib.3. Of Tenants inCommon. — 58.309.310.


Deroufera bn auter en fec, ( le
diſſeiſee releſſa a le tenant à terme
De bie tout fon D20ít, ac.cel releaſe
bpꝛera auxybien acelup en Ie vez
mainder, come ale tenant a terme
Dc bíe, Et la caufe eft,pur ceo que
letenanta terme De bie bient a
fon ettate per courſe De lep, a put
ceo celveleafe vꝛeta, et prent ef-
fect per bop dextinguiſhment De
Droit decelup que teieffaac. Ct
pet cel releate le tenant aterme De
bie nad pluis ample ne greinder
eftate, queil auoit Deuant Ie re-
leafe fait alup, et le Doit celup
que celeffa eft tout oufterment ex⸗
tinct, Ct entant que ceft releaſe
ne poit enlarge leſtate De le tc-
» nant atermede bie, il ett reafon
que cel releate vꝛera a celuy en le
remainder.at.

@ Piuis ſerra Dit De Kez
es en le Chapiter De tielea-
es,


mainder ouer to another in fee if
the difleifee releafe tothe tenant
for terme of life all his right,&c.
this releafe fhall inure atwell to
him in the remainder, as to the
tenant for terme of life. Andthe
reafon is for that the tenant for
life commeth to his eftate by
courfe of law, and therefore this
releafe fhall enure and take effect
by way of extinguifhment of the
right of him which releafeth,&c.
And by thisrelcafe the tenant for
life hath no ampler nor greater e-
{tate then hee had before the re-
leafe made him, and the right of
him which releafeth is altoge-
ther extinct. Ánd in afmuchas this
releafe cannot enlarge the eftate
ofthe tenant for life, it is reafon
that this releafe (hall enure to him
inthe remainder,&c.

More fhall be faid of Releafes
in the chapter of Releafes.


€( X ff releafe vrera anxibien 4 celuy en le remainder come aletenat aterm


de vie dre Of this and the reſt of this Section, foy auopding
of repetition,moze fball befaid in big proper place in the chapter of KReleaſes.


Œ Tout fon droit cc. Were by this (&c.)is tmplyped,title, Demand
and other 200208 Which may tranfterre the right, ec. Hilo bere (8 tmplped of in 07 to the land.


Sect.


€ | Cem fi ſoyent deur Parce⸗
ters, et lun alien ceo que a
lup affiert abs auter, Dongs
lautet perfor et lalience font Te⸗
Hants en Common,


309.

AL o if two Parceners be, and
the one alieneth that to her

belongeth,to another,then the o-

ther Parcener and the Alienee

are Tenants in Common.


Chis (a entdent,and needeth no erplication,


Setlion 310.


Cp Con nota que Tenaunts en Lío note that Tenaunts in
Cominon popent eftre pet títE Common may bee by title

De Pꝛeſcription, ſicome lun et fes of Prefcription, asif the oneand
aunceſtors, ouceux que eftate il his Anceftors, orthey whofe e-
Gee 3 ap


195


Lib.5.


v1. E. 3. Trani. 213. 13-€.3-
Breife 674. 8.H.6.16.5.
Lib.Intrat 23.


4. £18.


Cap-4-


pzcttcg,ac,
€


Of Tenants in Common.


ad ẽ bn moity ont tenus en Com-
monmefme ie moitie, ue lauter
tenant que ap lautet moitie et oue
fes auncefors ou ouc ceux quce-
ftate il ad Pro indiuifo, De temps
Dont memogie ne cut, ac, Ct di⸗
ucrgautecg manners potent faire
et caufer homes De(tt Cenaunts
en Common, quene font tcp ex⸗


Setl.3n.


ftate he hath in one moitie haue
holdé in cómonthe fame moitie
with the other tenit which hath
the other moitie,& with his An-
ceftors,or with thofe whofe ftare
he hath vndiuided,time out of
mind of man. And diuers other
manners may make and caufe
mento be Tenants in Common,


which are not here expreft, &c,


4f this, befides Littleton, there ig good anthoattte in Law, as there tg foa al bis other
Cafes throughout bis 3 bokeg,but 3iopntenantg cannot be by pzelcription , bccaufe


there ts furuiuoz bet weene them, but not betweene Œenants in Common,
Che two ( &c.) inthis Section are evident,


€]? thig Scétion
Swe lcatne two

things : Firſt,
(& fat inreall Actions,
and in Actions alfo
that atc mirt ith the
perfonaltie, Tenants
ín Common fhal feucr
tu Action, becaufetbep
hauefeueral fræbolds,
€clatin in by feucral tí-
tes, and therefore ag
thep ſhall be feucralip
bp others tinpicaded,fo
hall hep ſeuerally im⸗
plead others in all real
and mírt Patong, bn-
lefle tt bein cafe of nee
ceflitie fox a thing en⸗
ttre, ag hereafter in
this Chapter fbali ap-
peare, Bnd Littleton
here putteth tbe cafe of
the Atife which te
míxt Sith the perfo-
naltie, and therefore
he needed not to put
any cafe of anp Precipe
quod reddat,foz (f {tbe
fo in cafe of Alife A
fortiori , tn zits of
bígber nature, bich
is neceflarilp ímplíco
in the (&c.) Now of
fuite that found inthe
realtic,and of perfonal
adions Littleton ſpea⸗


Sechion zu.


€ T Lem en atcun cag

Cenants en com-

mon Dopent auct
De lout poſſeſſion ſeue⸗
ralx Actions.et en alctt
casils topndront en bn
Action, Car (t font Deux
Qenants en common,
et ils font diffeifies, tis
dopent auet Deux Aſſi⸗
fes,et nemp bn Aſſiſe,
cat cbefcun De cug coui-
entaucr bn Aile De fon
moitie,zc, Ct la caufe
e(t.put ceo que tenants
en common fucront fei-
fies ac, per feuctaiz ti-
tles, Mes auterment
eft be Jovntenants,car
ft fopent bint Jopnte=
nants,et tis font diſſei⸗
ſies,ils aueront ẽ touts
lout nofmes fozque bn
Alife, pur ceo que tig
nont fozfque bu iopnt
title,


Lfo in fome cafe

tenants in Common
ought to haue of their
poffeffion feueral A&iós
and in fome cafes they
fhall ioyne in one A@i-
on. For if two Tenants
in Common be,and they
be diffeifed, they muft
hauetwo Affifes,and not
one Affife, for each of


them ought to haue one ~


Affife of his moitie, &c.
& rhereafon is, for that
the Tenants in common
were feifed, &c. by fe-
uerall Titles. But other-
wife it is of Iointenants,
for iftwentie Ioynte-
nants be, and they bee
diffeifed,they fhall haue
inal their names but one
Affife , becaufe they
haue notbut one ioynt
title.


beth bercafter inthis Chapter. The feconb thing hereto be leatmeb, te the diuerutis betweene
Senants in Common, and Jopntenants, which both of ít telfe,and bpon chat which bath baw


fapb, (g appatant,


se.


xo,


Lib.3.


Of Tenantsin Common. Seël.312,313:


Sect, 312.


€ iic (i fopent trois Joyn⸗

tenants, bnreleafe abn De

fes companiôs tout le Droit
quetlad,tc, et puis les auters
Deux (ont Diffeifies De lentiertie,
ac, en cet cafe les Deux auters
aucront Ceucraly Affifes, ac, en
ceft forme, 5, ils aucrent en lour
ambideur nofmes, bu Alife de
les deux parts , ac, ptit ceo que
les deux pts tis teignont iopnt-
ment al temps Dele Diffeifin, Ct
quant ate tierce part,celuy a que
le releaſe fuit fait , content auer
De ceo bn A Mile en [on nofine De-
metre, pur ceo que il (quaunt à
mefmeletierce part) eit De ceo
Cenant en Common, ac, pur
ced que il vient a cel tierce part
per force Del Weleafe, et nemp
tantſolement per fozce peliopn-
ture,


‘Ale if three Ioyntenants bee,
and one releafe to one of his
fellowes all the right which hee
hath, &c. and after the other two
be diffeifed of the whole,&c. In
this cafe thetwo others fhall haue
feuerall Afñfes, &c. inthis man-
ner, s. They fhall haue in both
their names an Affife of the two
parts,&c. becaufe the two parts
they held ioyntly at the time of
the diffeifin. Andas to the third
part, heto whom the releafe was
made ought to haue of that an Af-
fife in his owne name, for that
hee (as to the fame third: part)
is thereof Tenant in Com-
mon, &c. becaufe hee commeth
to this third part by force of
the Releafe,and not oncly by force
of the Ioynture.


€ Big ts put for an example (Sobich cuer Doth tiluftrate the Rule) and (s euíbent of 4
T és: and the ( &c. ) in this Section needeth no further explication.


Sed.


€ | Ec quant à fuet beg Ac⸗
tions que touchant Preal=

tie, p font diuerfitics perẽ⸗

tet parceners que font eins per
diuers Di(tents,a Cenaunts en
common, Car ft home (eí(íe De
certaine terre en fee ad tue Deux
files et mozutt, et les files en=
tront, ac, ct chefcun De cur ad iſ⸗
fue bn fits , et Deuteront faung
partition faít enter cur, per que
lun moity diſcendiſt a le fits Dun
Parcence, a lauter moitie Difce-
diſt al fits Dauter parcener,et tls
entront


313.


Líoto the fuing of A&ions

which touch the realty,there

be diuerfities betweene par-
ceners which are inby diuers dif-
cents, and Tenants in Common:
For ifaman feifed of certain land
in fee, hath iffue two Daughters
and dieth, and the Daughters
enter, &c. and each of them
hath iffue a Sonne, and die with-
out partition made between them,
by which the one moitie difcends
to the Sonne of theone Parcener,
and the other moitie difcend to the


196


Lib.3.


Vi SeB.241


(ap.4.
entront et occuptont en common
et font diffeifics, en ceft cafetls
auctót en lour Deux nofines bn
Aile et nemp Deux Aſliles. Ce
la caufe eft, que coment que tig
beignont eins per Diners Dif-
cents, ac, vncoꝛe ils font Par⸗
ceners et bꝛiefe De Partitione fa-
cienda, giftentereur, Ct ils ne
font parceners epant regard ou
reſpect tantfolement ale feifin et
poſſeſſion delour meres, meg
tis font Parceners pluis cíant
reſpect a leftate que diſcendiſt De
iout apel alour meres,car ils ne
popent eftre Parceners fi lour
meres nefueront Parceners a=
deuant, ac. Ct iffint a tiel refpeet
et confideration, 8, quaunt a le
pꝛimer Difcent que fuit a lour
meres tls ont bn title en parce-
narie, le quel fait eux parcencrs,
Ct auxy ts ne font fozfque come
vn heire a lour common Aunce⸗
02,5, alout apel De que la. terre
Difcendift a lour meres, Ct pur
ceux caufes Deuant partition en-
tec eur, ac, tlaucront bn Aflife
coment que us beignont eins p
ſeueralx Difcents,


Of Tenants in Common.


Seti. 314.


Sonne of the other Parcencr , and


they enter and occupie in common |


and be diffeifed , in this cafe they.
fhall haue in their two names one
Affife, and nottwo Affifes. And
the caufe is, for that albeit they
come in by diners difcents,&c.yet
theyareParceners, and a Writ of
Partitionlieth between them. And
they arc not Parceners, hauing re-


gard or refpeétonely to the Seifin «


and poffeffion oftheirmothers,but
they are parceners rather, hauing
ref{pect to the eftate which difcend
from their Graundfather to their
mothers, for they cannot be Par-
ceners if their mothers were not


Parceners before, &c. And fo in.


this refpe&tand confideration, s.as
to the firft difcent which was to
their mothers, they haue a Titlein
Parcenarie,the which makes them
Parceners. Andalfo they are but
as one heire totheir common An-
ceftor,s.to their Grandfather,from
whomthe land difcended to their
mothers. And for thefe caufes, be.
fore partition betweene them,&c.
they fhall hauean Affife, although
they come in by feueral difcents.


€ Bis, bpon that Which hath bene fapdin* the Chapter of Parceners, te enfdent:
Sohere pou map readercellent pointe of learning , and diuerfities concerning this
matter, all which are here either expaclle 07 implied, ag the ſtudious and Diligent


Reader Will obferue,
Sed. 314.
€ Ez Neel enfe quant Tem ( font A Lio if there bee
ale Rent & liner Deur tenants two Tenauats in
de Pepper, ils anerount en Common Common, of certain |
deux Afvifes & quaunt a. Decertaine Gp ette ett Lands in Fee, and


lefperuer ou le Chinal fee, et tig Doneront
cel terre abn home
enletaile, ou leſſerõt
à On home pur terme


forfquevun Afife.

Wut for the better bnber-
ſtanding bereof tt is to be
knowne, Chat i£ two Te⸗


they giue this Land
to à man in Taile,
or let it to one for
terme of life, ren-
be


Lib.3.


De bic, rendant à cur
annuelinent bn cer-
taine rent, a bn ltuer De
Pepper, thu efperuer,
ou bn chiuall, ils font
~feifies De cet ſeruice, a
puis tout le rent ett a=
Derere, 3 ils diſtreigne⸗
tont pur ceo tletenant
a eux fait ve(cous, Cn
ceft cas quant ale rent
æliuer De Pepper ils a-
uccont deur ATites , a
quant a lefperuer, oule
chiual forfas bu Aſſiſe.
Ctlacaule pur que tis
aueront Deux Affifes,
quant à le rent a liner
De Pepper, eſt ceo, en⸗
tant queils fueront te-
nants en common en
feuerall titles, a quant
tls feront bn Done en le
tapleou leas pur terme
Debie, fauant aeur le
reuerſion, trendant a
eur certaine rent, ac,
tiel referuation eft inct=
Dent alour reuerfion, t
purceo que lour reuerſi⸗
on e(t en common, per
feuerall titles, ficome
lour poſſeſſion fuit De-
nant, le rent, a auters
choles que potent eftre
ſeueres et fueront a cur
referucs fur E Done, ou
faricicag , queux font
incidents pet la lep a
lout teuer(ion , tiels
choles iſſint referues
fucront De la nature Del
veuerfion, Œt entant
quer reuerſion eſt a eux


Of Tenants in Common.


dring to them yearely a
certaine rent,and a pound
of Pepper, and a Hawke
or a Horfe, and they bee
feifed of this feruice,and
afterwards the whole
Rent ts behind, and they
diftraine for this, and the
tenant maketh Refcous.
In this cafe as to the rent
and pound of Pepper
they fhall haue two Affi-
fes , and as tothe Hawke
or the Horfe but one Af-
fife, And the reafon why
thenthey fhall haue two
Affifes as to the rentand
pound of Pepper is this,
infomuch as they were
Tenants in Common in
feuerall titles, and when
they made a gift intayle
orleafe for life, fauing
to them the Reuerfion,
and rendring to them a
certaine rent, &c. fuch
referuation is incident to
their reuerfion, and for
that their reuerfion is in
common and by feuerall
titles as their poffeffion
was before the rent and
otherthings which may
be feuered, and were re-
ferued vnto them vpon
the gift or vpon the leafe
which are incidents by
the Law totheir reuerfi-
on , fuch things fo refer-
ued were of the nature of
the reuerfion. And inas
much as the reuerfion is
to them in common b
feuerall titles, it beho-


Dv


Se 314.s


Hants in Common
bee, andthep grant à
tent of 20, thillings
per annum, ont of
thetriand, the Gran⸗
te hall bane two
tents of 20, Hillings
fo) that cuerp mange
grant {bal bee taken
moſt ſtrongly again
himſelle, and therefore
thep be feucral grants
ín Law,

Wut tf they two
makea giftintaple, a
leafe for life, &c. refers
uíng twentp fhillings
tent to them and thetr
beireg thep hail haue
but one 2o. thillings,
for they (ball haus no
moze then themfelneg
reſerued: and the Doz
nee 0? Leſſes fball pap
but 20, fbillíngs acz
Cozding to their oon
€xpzefie reſeruation:
And albeit the refered
natíon of rents feuez
table bee in ioymt
Words , pct in refped
of the feuerali Reuer⸗
fions the Law makes
therecf a fencrance.
i205» for the rent, ag
namely 20, thillings
01a pound of 3Sepper
tap bec feucred, the
one Tenant in Coms
mon map have an Af-
fife foz the moptie of
20. fhillings, andthe
moptie of a pound of
Pepper, de medietate
vnius libr’ piperis, but
he cannot bane an Al⸗
fife of ten thillings, op
de dimidio libra pi-
peris. But for the
Dake 02 Boite, als
beít tbep be Cenante
in Common, they Hall
topne tn an Alliſe foz
ot het wiſe thep ſhould
bee Without remebie,
fos one of them cannot
make bis plaint in
Alife of the moytie of
ahaiwke, 0? of a hoꝛſe
fo? the Law will ne-


y uer ſuſter anp manto


Demand anp thing a-
gaint the oder of e


197
Ti, (om. Hill & Grange; cof.
17%, Vide $68. 219.


Vide vé. Af. PL. 16.63]
loyndre en eS. 37.


Lib. 3.


Regula.
Vide Se. 129.


(1) Libs. fel; a1.
Ris.


Rae


(23:23:19, a


38.E.5.35.
Regula.


(m) $.H.5.8. 13.2 2. qna.
té inp. 170. 33. H.6.11.
&.E. 4. T0. 15, €. 3. darr. pre-
I1Nent 10.
n) 6.H.4.6.7.
CE 30.6. Afife 39
18. E.3.56.


18.7.3.56:


89. 8.5.51. 43-E.3.24
46.E.3.23. 5. H.4.3.
14.H.4. 31.3. H.6. «7.
12.H.6.21. 22.4.6.14,
18.£.4.30. 2.R 3.16.
20.H.7.27. 21.H.7.23."
37.H. 6.3 5. 21. E. 4.13.


Cap. 4.
ture oꝛ reafon , as bes
fore, ít appeareth bp
Littleton Sc&ion.129
Lex enim fpeétat na-
turz ordinem. Alife
the Law Swill neuer
enforce a man to Des
mand that which he
Cannot recoucr, anda
man cannot recouer
(1) the moptie of a
Bawke, Hoꝛſe oz of
any other entiretbing.
Lex neminem cogit ad
vana, feu inutilia. Wat
tn that cafe thep (bail
topne in Aflife, and
the reafon tg , Ne Cu-
ria Domini Regis de-
ficeretin iuflitia exhi-
benda,0z lex non debet
deficere coquerentibus
in iuftitia. exhibenda.
And (€ they ſhould
not topne, thep ſhould
baue damnum & iniu-
riam, and pet fhouid
have no remedte (*) bp
Law, which ſhould be
fnconuentent, But the
ka Will,that in eue⸗
tp cafe Shere a man
(9 wronged and en-
Dammaged , that hee
Hall bauc remebie. A-
liquid conceditur ne
iniuria remaneret im-


Of Tenants in Common.


en common per feucrall
titles, il couient que le
vent, et le liuer De 39e p-


per, queur poient eftre


feuers, ſoyent a eux en
common,et per ſeuerall
tities, et Deceo tls aue-
tont deux Ailes, ct
chefcun De eux en fon
Aile ferra (on pleint
De le moitie Dele rent.et
de le moitie Delliner De
Pepper, mes De lelper=
uer, ou De chiualque ne
popent eftre feucrs, tis
auctont foztque bn Aſ⸗
fife, cat home ne poit
faire bn pleínt en Alife
Dele moitie Dun eſper⸗
uer, nedelemoiticdun
chiual, ac, En meſme le
maner eft Dauter rents
& dauter feruices que
Œenants en Common
punt en groffe pit Di-
uers titles, ac.


pun't: quod alias non concederetur.


(m) Bnd Tenants (n Coin


2o ouotofon ts enttre,


is entire,


Se..3 156


ueth thatthe rent and the
pound of Pepper which.
may beefeuered , bee to
them in common and by
feuerall titles. And: of
this they fhall haue two
Affifes,and cach of them
in hisAffife thal make his.
plaint of the moytie of
the rent,and ofthemoy-
tie of the pound of Pep-
per. But ofthe Hawke or
of the Horfe which can-
notbe feuered, they fhall
haue but one Affile, fora
man cannot make a plaint
inan Affife of the moy-
tic of a Hawke, norof
the moytie of a Horfe,
&c. Inthe fame manner
it is of other Rents
and of other Seruices
which Tenants in Com-
mon haue in groffe by di-
uerstitles, &c.


mon fhall fopnc in a quareimpedir,becanfe the prefentation tothe


(n) Allo Cenants in Common of a Seign
Bautlhinent of ward for the badie, becanteit
FEtwo Tenants in Common be of the wardthi


fozp Hail (opne tn a Wꝛit of Bight of tard and
9 of the bodie, anb one doth rantth the


War’, and the one Tenant in «Common releafcg to tbe Ranthher,this ali goc fn benefit of che.


other Cenant in € ommon, and he thal! recouer the $0)
barreto him, And fott (g(£ two Tenants in Comm
à Quare impedir, and the one doth releafe , pet the ot


piefentment,


Œ wo Cenants in Co
futt, the other (bati recon
Ft is ſaid that Tenants ta Cõ mon ſhalli
Œ CHoîitie de chinal dre.


02 fcruíce,


€ Per diners titles, c.
One topnt title ag hath benc faid,


€


Cons perfonells
sointment en touts [our


nofmes, Ge. Wy this


Seclicn 215.


Veront tels a- ¶ I Tem, quant al

actiõs perfona!g
tenants en common
auctont tielg actióg haue fuch actions per-


ole, anb tbíz 18 eleafe {ball not beeanp
on bcof an Aduowſon, and they bring
jer (ball fuc forth , and recouer the Whole


mmon (ball topnein a detinue of Charters » anb (f the one be Non⸗
er.
opie in a Warrantia Charte,bat fener in Woucker,


Here ig implyed o2 any other entire rent
That is byteuerall titles, and not by


Lfo as to Aai-
ons perfonals Te-
nants in common may


pet


Lib.3.
pfonals topntment


en touts lour nof-
mes, ficome De trel-


pas, ou De offence


que touche lour tene⸗
ments en common,
(come de bauter lour
meafons, ne enfrein-
Der Dc lout clofes De
patture, degaſter, &
de fouler des Herbes,
De couper lour bois,
De pitcher en lour pif-
charie,& huiufinodi.
Et ca cct cag tenats
en common auccont
on action iopntment
& tecoucront topnt=
ment iout Damages,
pur ceo que lactton
eft enle perſonaltie,


Of Tenants in Common.


fonals ioyntly in all
their namesas of tref-
pale, or of offences
which concerne their


Tenements in Com-


mon, as for breaking
their Houfes,breaking
their Clofes, feeding,
wafting, and defow-
line their graffe , cut-
ting their Woods, for
fifhing intheir Pifcha-
rie , and fuchlike. In


this cafe Tenants in


Common fhall haue
one Aáion ioyntly,
and fhal recouer ioint-


ly their damages , be-


caufe the Aton is in
the perfonaltie, and
not inthe realtie, &c.


Se&.316.


it appeareth that Tenants tn
Common (ball haue perfonal
Actions toyntly. And (tte
to bee obferuep, that where
Dammages arc to bee recoue-
ted fo; a jong Bone to Te⸗
nants tn Common, 02 Par⸗
ceners in a perfonall Acton,
and one of them dic,the Sur⸗
tituoz of them fhalihaue the
Aion, for albeit the proper=
tie oz eftate bec fenerall be»
tweene them, vct (ag tt ap=
pearcth bore bp Littleton) the
perſonall action ts topnt.


Et huiu{modi.
Heredy (g tmpiveda diuerſity


betWenca chattle tn poffe(ft-


on, anb a perfonall Chole tn
Action belonging onto them,
As i£ two Tenants in Com⸗
mon be of land, ano one doth
a treſpaſſe therein,of this act=
on thep ate Jlointenants,and
the Suruiuoꝛ thal hold place,
So ít ts t€ two Tenants
in Common be of a € anno,
ana thep make a Waplike
therof,and one of them dieth,
tbe Surutuoz (ball have the


g.nentp CE realty, tc, | Action of Account, for the
Acton giuen bnto them for the arterages bpon the Account wag topnt, So it is tf two
Æcnants in Common foo their land & one doth eat tbe fame With his cattle, though they bauc
the Come in Common, pet the Action ginen to them for trcfpatte in the fame is topnt,and (hall
furuiue, Foꝛ the trefpafle and dammage done to them Sas (eynt , ail which here is tmplpen
bp Littleton, Swbofayth, that tuep Hall haue an Action topntip, and the fame Law ts of Cos
parceners.

Wut if wo Cenants in Common be of gods, ag of an hoꝛſe, 020€ anp other gods perfos
nail, there (f one ope, his Crecutozs fpallbe Cenant in Common With the Suruiuca.


Œ Et nemy en le realtie , dre. If tooo Tenants in Common bee
of an Aduowſon, and a (ranger vſurpe, fo as the right (9 turned te anaction, and they bring a
3O2ít OF Quare impedit which concernes the realtie, the fire moncths paſſe, and the one dyeth,
the weit ſhall notabate, but the Suruiuoꝛ fall recouer, otherwiſe there ſhould be no remtc-
Die to redzeſſe this wꝛong. And loitis of Coparceners, and this ts one exceptlon out of our
Authors rule, :

(*) Wut i£ thee Coparceners recouer land € Dammages in an Alſiſe of Mordancefter,aibett
the iudgcment be topnt, that tbep ſhall recouer the land and batrumageg , pet the Dammages bez
ing acceflozp, though tbep be perfonall, boc in tudgement of Mato depend bpon the Frehoiv,
being thepzincipall Which tefeneratl. And though the Words of the tudgement be topnt, pet
fball it be taken fox viftributine. And therefore tf two of them Bye, the entire dammages doe


_ met furuiue, but the third hall baue ececutton accozding to her portion, and this is another ex⸗


ception ont ofour Authors rule, Wut if allthꝛee hadined Execution by fozce of an Elegit,and


two of them had dyed, the third thould banc had the whole bp Suratnoz > ttl the hole bamz
mages be paid


FE the Punt and Niece toyne in an Action oftbaffe , for watke bonc (n the life ofthe ether


fier , the Punt ball recouer the Dammages only, becanfe the ſame belongs not bpLaÿ to the
Piece. And fome bold the dammages in that cafcto be tbe principal,


Sechon 316.
€i «un fi deux tenants en L{o if two Tenants in Com-
common font bn leafe De mon make a leafe of their Tc-
lout Ddd 3


Vide $e8.319.320.321.


22.H.6.12. .

38.E.3.7. 1 3. E. 3a cec nu⸗
126. 45.£.3. 13.14.

37. H.6.33.58.


38.£.35.17.E. 5.11. 5.H. s.
Quare Imp.71.14.H.4. 12.
9-H. 6.30. 33.H.4.14.37.H,
6.9.6. 19.ElizyDyer 179.
F.N.8.35.9.€. 3.36. 37e
PL. Com. Seignicr,

Barkley: cafe.


(*) 14. E.3. Exeeutiong y.
45. £.3.3.6.


AG E. 3. 3. b. 48.E.3.14e
11. H. 4.16.0. 35. H. 5.23. b.
11 E, 2 af. 115.


Lib. — (Cap.4. Of Tenants in Common. Sed. 317.318.319


Vid.9.E-3.36.37.
PI. Com, Seigntor
"Barkl3: ( afe.


8 Vid $68. 2 52.390.247.264


(0)19..4 p-1. 30. Ap. 8.
2.


47 E. 3. 2


lour tenemẽts a bn auter pᷣ term̃
des ans,xendant à eux certaine
rent annualment Durant E terim
file tent foít abetero sc, les te-
nants en cómon auctót vn acti⸗
on De Debt enuers Ieleffec et ne-
my Divers actions, pur ceo que
lactíon eft en la perfonalty,


nementsto another for terme of
yeares,rendring to them a certaiue


Rentyearely duringthe terme if |
the rent bee behinde, &c. the te-


nants in common fhall haue an
action of debt againft the leffee, &
not diuers actions, for that the a&ti-
on is inthe perfonalty.


Chis bpon that Which hath bene fato (9 euident.


Seél.


€ M£: en auovory put Ie Dit

rent ig coutent feuer,
Carceo e(t en le realtie, comele
aſſiſe eft (upra.


Sis


BY" an auowry for the faid -


rent they ought to feuer for
this is inthe realty, asthe affife is
aboue.


Chis being an additton to Littleton albeit it be confonant to Law pet "3 omit (t.


Sed.


& | Cem, tenants en common
popent bien faite partition
enter eur fils tollent, co-

ment Gils ne ferront compelles
be faire partition per la ley, mes
fils font enter eur partition per
lour agreement et content, tiel
partition e(t affects bone, come eft
adiudge en Ie liver Daffifeg, -


318.


Lfo tenants in common may
À well make partition between
them if they will, but they fhall
not bee compelled to make partiti-
onby the law, but if they make
partition betweene themfelues by
their agreement and confent, füch
partition is good enough, as is ad-
iudged in the booke of Affifes.


Ok this fuffictent hath beene fatd * in the chapter of arceners and Popntenants.


¶ [ale liner Dafiifes. Chis booke is of great Authority in Lato,
and ts fo called becaufe tt paincipallp contepneth the proceeding pon t0zite of Aie of Noucl
diffeifin hich tn thofe dayes was Feftinum & frequens remedium.


See. 319.


@ | Tem ficome p font tenants
en common De terres et te-
nements,ac, come eft auantDit:
Cn mefme le maner » font de
chattels veals et perfonals: Si-
come leafe foit fait De certaine
terres à Deux Homes pur terme
De 20, ans, ct quant tls font de
cea


AL’ as there bee tenants in


common of lands and tene-
ments, &c.as aforefaid.Inthe fame
manner there be of chattells reals
and perfonals. As ifa leafe bee
made of certaine lands to two
men for terme of 20. yeares,and
when they be of this poffeffed, the


Lib.3. Of Tenants in Common. Se8.310.321.


ceo poſſeſſes lun de les leſſees
grantceo q aluy afftert Durant
le terme à vn auter, Dongs mefme
celuya que? grant eft fait,et lau-
ter tienD2ont et occupicront en


one of theleffees grant that which
to him belongeth to another du-
ring the terme, then heeto whom
thegrant is made, and the other
fhall hold and occupie in com-


common,


mon.


CG Rant ceo que a luy afiert. The famelato tt is ifthe one Leſſee


in thts cafe make a 3Leafe of part of tbe terme, the fcconb Leſſee and the ether are Te⸗


Rants in common ac hath beoe fato tn the chapter of Hopntenants. Œbe(&c.)in
this Section implyeth other hereditaments whereof menmap bee Tenants in common,
Whereof {ufficient hath bene fato befoze.


| «| Ten, deux ont
iopntint le gard
De corps a De tcc dun
enfant Deins age, et
lun De eux granta a
vn auter ceo à a lup
affiert De fi le garde,
Donque le grantec et
lautet que ne granta
pas, aueront et tien⸗
dront ceo en com:
Mon, EC,


Setlion 310.


Lfo if two haue

ioyntly the ward-
fhip ofthe body & lad
of an infant within
age, & the one ofthem
grant to another that
which to himfelfe be-
longeth of the fame
ward , then the gran-
tec, and the other
which did not grant
fhall haue & hold this
in common,&c.


CH TS tt appeareth,


that there may be
Œenants in Com⸗
mon ag Sell of chattells reali
entire, ag Wardſhip of the bas
by,ac.ag of chattels 39erfonal,
ag a Dawke ora Worle. HE
two Œenants in common be
ofa Seignioꝛp, anda Ward
fall, thep are @cnants (n
common of the wardſhip afs
Swell of the bodp ag land, And
fo ít (9, i£. the land it ſelte
efchsat to them, thep hall be
chants in common thereof,
ano fo (t (g of Parceners.
En commen, cc.


Here ( &c.) implyeth anp os
therentire chattell,


Sethion 321.


€E $3 metme le maner eft De
4. chateur perfonals : Siz
come Deux ont iopntment per
Done ou per achate on chiual ou
boefe, tc, et lun grant ceo que à
lup affiert De mefme lechiual ou
boefe abn auter:ongs le grã⸗
tee, ælauter que ne granta pag,
aueront ct polideront ticls cas
teur perfonals en cómon, Ct en
tiels cafes, ou diuers perfons
ont chateur reals ou perfonels
encommon et p Divers titles, f
lunde eux moꝛuſt, les auters q
ſurueſquont nauera ceo p le ſur⸗

uiuoz


N the fame manner it is of chat-

tells perfonals. As iftwo haue

ioyntly by gift or by buying a
horfe or an exe,&c. and the one
grantthat to him belongs of the
fame horfe or oxe to another, the
grantee and the other which did
notgrant, fhall haue and poffeffe
fuch chattells perfonalls in com-
mon. And in fuch cafes where di.
uers perfons haue chattells real or
perfonall in Common, and by di-
uers titles, ifthe one of them dieth
the others which furuine (hall not
haue this as Suruiuor, but the exc-


2 DD 3


199


Vs. Se. 318,


16, E. 3. tit. B.


Víd.deuent.S63. 515.


4$


21. £.4,11. 33.43. £.3. 34.
4 5E. 3.13. 22. H.6. 50.58.


10, H.7.16, F.N.'B. 117.4.


Cap-4. OfTenantsin Common.  Seë.322,323.


uiuos, meg les executors celup
que moauft tiendzdt et occupiet
ceo ouefqs eur que furuefquont,
ficome lour teftatoz tiff ou de⸗
uoít en fa bie,æc, pur ceo ( Tout
titles a Droits en ceo fueront ſe⸗


uerals, tc,


rall, &c,


cutors Of him which dieth fhall
hold and occupie this with them
which furuiue,as their teftator did
or ought to haue done in his lite
time, &c. becaufe that their ti.
tles and rights in this were feue-


Chis ig entdent enough, and hereof fufficient hath bene faíb * before,


€ pr terme de aus,
oc. for one


peare,halfea peare, ac,


¶ Lus occupy tout e
mist lauter hors depo[fe[-


fon. Cheſe are


Words matcriallp added, foz
albcít one Œenant tn Com⸗
mon take the Swhole profits,
the other haue no remedie by
La again him, for the taz
king of the whole profits ig
no etectment. Wut tf he dziue
ost ofthe land anp of the cat=
tell of the other Œenaunt in
Common,oz not fuffer him to
enter 02 eccupíctbe land, this
tg an eiectment o2 expulſion,
whereupon he map banc an
Eiedione firma, fo? the one
moftfe, and recouer damages
foztheentrie, but not for che
meane profits.


¶ Eiectione firme


dela moitie, crc. ere


bpthigand the other ( &c.)
ín thefe two Sections, ateto
be bnderfteod diners dtuerf=
ties betweens Actions which
concerne right and intereft,
(ag of Eieétione firmz,Eic&t-
ment de gard, quareciecit in-
fra terminum of a Chattell
real bpon an expulſion 02 etec⸗
ment) and Acttons concer-
ning the bare taking of the
profits rifing of the Land, oz
doing of Treſpaſſe bpon the
Land, as here by the eram=
ples boc appeare, fo: the right
ig feuerall, and the taking of
the profits in Common. The
fecond Dinerfitte íg betweene


Section 322.


a [c ente cafe a=
uátà, ficde deux
ont eftat en common
pur terme Dans, ac,
lun occupter tout, ct
mift lauter hors De
poſſeſſion et occupa-
tion, ac, Donques ce-
lup que eft mife hors
De occupation aucta
enucrs lautet. brieke
De Eicctione firme, de
la moitie,¢c,


Lfo inthe cafe a-

forefayd, as if
two haue an eftate in
Common for terme
of yeares, &c.the one
occupy all,and put the
other out of poffeffion
and occupation, hee
which is put out of
occupation, fhall haue
haue againft the other
a writ of Etectione fir-
ze of the moitie, &c.


Sec. 323.


¢ E fmi manti
eft, lou Deux
tcígnont le gard Des
tercea ou tenements
Durant le nonage dit
enfant, fi lun outa
lautet de fon poſſeſſi⸗
on, ti que eft oufte a=
uera baicfe De Ciect=
ment De gard De 1e
Moitic,zc,purceo que
ceurcholes font cha⸗
teux realy, & popent
eftre appostíons et
feuers,4c, Mes nul
Action De Crelpas,
ceffafcauoir, Quare
claufum fuum fregit,
& herbam fuam, &c.
con-


| N the fame manner
itis, where two hold
the wardfhip of Lands
or Tenements during
the nonage of an En-
fant,ifthe one ouftthe
other of his poffeffion,
he whichis oufted fhal
haue a Writ of Eiecé-
ment de gardofthemo-
itie, &c. becaufe that
thefethings are Chat-
tels reals, and may bee
apportioned and feue- ——
red,&c. butno Action
of Trefpaffe(videlicet)
Quare clauſum [aum
fregit, & berbam fuam
cre. conculcauit, & con-


Lib.;.
conculcaüit- & con-
fumpfit, &c. & huiuf-
modi actiones, &c.lun
ne poet auct enuers
lauter pur ceo q chel-
cun De cur poet en-
tet et occupièren có-
mon. ac, PCT myet p
tout les Terres 3
tenements queur tls
teignot en common,
Mes (i deux font
poſſeſſes de chattels
perſonalx en comm
pet Diners titles, ff-
tone oun Chiual ou
Boef,ou Wache, tc, (t
lun pent cco tout à
lup bozs à poffeffion
Dauter, lauter nad
nul aut remedie mes
De prender ceoDe lup
que ad fait Iupt tot,
pur occu pier en com⸗
qmon,ac.quant il poet
bcicr (on temps, ac,
€n metti Ie manner
eft De chattels reair,
que ne poyent eftre
feuers , ficome en le
tafe auantbít, que
Deux fot poffeffe dun
gardd corps Dun en⸗
fant deins age, filun
prent lenfant how:
De poſſeſſion Dauter,
lauter nad afcun re-
medie per afcun acti
on per la ley, mes de
prend lenfant hors
Dele poſſeſſion Daut
quaunt tl beít fon
temps.


colambaris fai totaliter amifit


Of Tenantsin Common.


Jempfit , Gc. & huiuſ
mods actiones, &c. the
one cannot haue a-
gainft the other, for
that each ofthem may
enter & occupie in có-
mon, &c. per my & per
tout the Lands and Tc-
nements which they
hold in Common,
But iftwo be poffeffed
of Chattells | perfo-
nalls in Common by
diuers titles, as ofa
Horfe, an Oxe, ora
Cowe, &c. if the
one take the whole
to himfelfe ont of the
poffeffion of the o-
ther, the other hath
no other remedie but
to take this from him
who hath done to him
the wrong to occupie
in common,&c. when
he can fec histime,&c.
Inthe fame manner it
is of Chattels realls,
which cannot be feue-
red ,as in the cafe a-
forefayd , where two
bee poffeffed of the
wardíhip of the bodie
ofan Enfant within
age, if the one taketh
the Enfant out of the
poſſeſſiõ of the other,
the other hathno re-
medie by anaction by
the Law, but totake
the enfant out of the
poffeffion of the other
whenhe fees his time.


: $02 the Whole Hight is voftrope


Chattells realis shat are aps
pozttonable 02 feucrable, ag
Leafes for peares, Warship


of landg, intereſt of teneinetg:


bp Elcgit, Statute merchant,
Stapie, ac, of lands and tec
nements and Chattells reais
entire; og Soarbibíp of the bos
Die, a Ailleine foz peares, ac⸗
fo? (fone Cenant fn common
take away the ward o2 the
Uilletue, ec, the other hath na
remedie bp Actien, but be map
tabe them agatne. Brother
biu.tütíc is bet weene Chats
tells rcalg and Chattels pers
fonalls, fo fone Genant in
Common take all the Chate
tells perfonalg, tbc otber hath
Ro remedie bp Acton, but hee
map take them againe, and
herein the like law ts concera
ning Chattells reais entire,
and Chattels perfonall foz
this purpofe, Wut of Chats
tels entire, ag of a thip, hozfe,
Ozpanp other entire Chattell,
rcall 02 perfonail, no furnino;
fball bec betWweene them that
held them in Common: And
Œenants in Common thal
not topne tn an Eiectione fir-
mz1t02 in a Writ of Eic&'ment
de gard, 02 a Quare eiecit infra
terminam, &c. for that thefe
Æaiong concerne the tight
lands which are ſeuerall.

Fftwo Cenants in Come
mon be of a Mannoꝛ, to the
bich waike and rap doth
belong, a ftrap doth bappen,
thep are Œenaunts tn Come
mon of the fame; tf the ong
doth take th: fray, the other
Hath no remedie by action, but
totabe bimagaine, Buttf bp
pacfcription the one (s to haue.
the firſt beaft happening ag a
ſtray, andthe ether the ſecond,
therean action lieth if the one
take that which pertaines to
the other.

Ittwo Tenants in Com⸗
mon be of a Done boufe, and
the one deftrop the old Doue⸗
Sobereby tie flight is Wholly
loft, the other Tenant in cotz
mon ſhall bane an Action of
CTreſpaſſe, Quare vi & armis
columbare le pf fregit & du-
€cntas colambas pretij 40. s,
interfecit per quod volatum

D, awd thersfors Dee cannat i
basta


Sei.323.


200


10.H1.4.Trefpas xy.
AI. H.4. 3.


21, E,4.11.12.


13.E. 3. Briefe $4.


47.8.3.33. 8.


Li


Lib3. * (ap: Of Tenants in Common.


4 E. 3. Trefptr 233.
(c) 1. H. 5.1. 2. H.5.3.


(3) 13 E-3.Trefpas 312.
19. R.2./8 7.917. 11.E.3.
Trefpas a12.Ur.18,H.6.5.
(€) 13.H.7.36.


(£) F.9(2.137- «165.


15 · E. 3. ff, Account 23.
8. E24 Account 115.
m 127.


E.3.9. 22. E. 5. 66.
27. 39.8. 27.83. F. Nar..
B.1i8.i. 10. H.7.16.
2.E.4.25.


W'.3.4.25:


10.E.4.3.b. 22.H.6. 43.
31. E. 3.47. 17.E. 3.47.
18.6.4.27.28. 3.6.4. |


3-E.3.


Seël.324.


barre pleat Œenancie in Common, And fo tr ts tf t&o Tenauuts in Common bee of a
QDarke, and one deftropetl ail tbe Dere,an Action of Œrcipalle lieth.


(c) 3t


two Tenants in Commonbe ef land, and of Were llones, pro metis & bundis,and


onetake then bp andcarrie them away, the other (bal bauc an Acton of Treſpaſſe Quare
—* armis againft him,tn ithe manner as be Mall haue fo? veftruction of Doucs.
(4) 3€ to Tenants in Common be of a Folding, and the one of them difturbe the other.


to erect Hurdles, be Hall baue an Acion of Crefpatie


quare vi & armis, £03 this biflurbance,


(c) Fe twe fcucrall owners of boules haue a riuer in common betWeene them, if one of tbe
cozrupt tbe river, che other (bail have an Arion bpon bis cafe,

CE) Jeewo Tenants in Common, oz FJotntenants be of am boufeoz mtil,and it fal in decay,
and the one (g Wwilmg torepaire the fame,® the other Silnot,be that ts willing ſhal haue weit M
de reparatione facienda, and the wait fatth, Ad reparationem & fuftentationem eiufdem domus |
tencantur, $oljercby tt appeareth,that owners are in that cafe bound probono publicoto mains
taine boules and mills which are foz habitation and tfe of men,

FE one 3iopntenant 02 Cenant in Common of Land maketh big Companion his Daylife |
of bis part, be hall baue an Aion of Account again bim, as hath bene fapb, Wut although


30, 47-2.3-22,5. 38. OD Tenant in Common of Joyntenant without being made Waplike take the Whole profits,


no Acton of Account lieth againt him, for in an Aion of Account he mult charge bim et=
ther ag a Guardtan, Daylife, o2 Keceluer, as hath ben fapd befoze, which be cannot do in this


cafe, valeſte his companton conftitute him bts Bailite.
affirme that an Action of Account lieth by one Œenantin Common,


And therefore all thoſe Bokes Which
o2 Floyntenant, againſt


another, mutt be intended wren the one maketh the other his Wartltfe, fag other wile, never bis


Wapiike to render an Account, is a god plea.


FE there be two Tenants in Common of aad, Turbarte, Piſcharie, ogthelike, anb one
of them Doth watt agaínft the Will of his companton, his companion (bail bauc an Action of


tWafk, and he that div the waſt belore tudgement


svath election either to take his part in certain⸗


tícby the Sherife and the oath of men, tc, 02 that bt grant, Chat fromtbencefozth be fbal not
Doe Saft but according to his portion, dc. and if he make choice of a certaine place,then the place


Swafted Hall beafligned to him. (g)


ut this extends not to Coparcencrs , becanfe thep


Sere compellable to make partition by the Connon Law: and this, as itisfapd, Doth extend |
ag Soci to Cenants in Common and Flopntenants fog life,as to an eftatc of Inheritante. But
1€ onc Tenant in common, o? Flopntenant of a Doue boufe.veftrop the Whole flight of Doues, .


no Acton of Walk doth lie in that cafe bpon tbcfato Statute, *
FE lands be giuen to two, and to the beires of one of them, an


as forme doe hold, :
D the tenant fo? life doth $oaff,


be that hath the 3 mberítance (hail have no action of 19 aft bp the ſtatute of Glouccfter,but bpon
the ftatute of W.2. he (ball baue an Action of waſt. And tt te to be knowne, that one Tenant
in common may tnfeofte his companton,but not releafe,becaufe the freehold 1g feucrall. Flointes
nants may relcafe, but not infeoffe,becaufe the freehold is topnt, but coparceners map both en⸗
feoffc and releafe, becaufe their {ein tofome intents (8 topnt,and to fotut feuerail,


Set. 324.


€ [Tem quant bn home boile
mter bu feoffemt fait a lup
ou vn done en le taile, ou vn
leaſe pur time De bie daſcun tres
ou tenem̃ts la il dirra p force de
quel feoffernt. Done ou leas il fuit
feifie,ac, meg lou bu boíle plead
vn leas ou grat fait a luy ð chat-
tel real ou perfonal,là il Ditra pet
force be quel tl fuit potlet{e, tc,
¶ Dluis ferra Dit De tenants
en common en le chapter De Ke⸗
leaſes et tenant pet Elegit.


Lfo when a man will fhew a.

Feoffement made to him, or a
gift intaile,or a leafe for life of any.
lands or Tenements,there hee fhall
fay By force of which Feoffement,
gift,or leafe, he was feifed,&c. but
where one wil plead aleafe or grant
made to him of a Chattell reall or
perfonall,then he thal fay;By force,
of which he was poffeffedj&c. — ..

More fhall be faid of Tenants in.

Common, inthe Chapters of Re-
leafesand Tenant by £/eeit.


& JL fit ſeiſiex&c. Scificigà woad of art, andin pleading is onelp
applied t oa Srechold at leaſt; ag Poflcílc Foz Ditincion fabe is to a Chatteil seal pet


Lib.


Of Tenantsin Common.


. plead a feoffement & fee, be conclndeth, Virtute cuius predict’ B. fuic &ifitus,&c.bnt
a — leaſe foz peares, he pleadeth, Virtute cuius prædictus B. intrauit, & fuit inde poffcffi.
and fo it ig ot Chattcils perfonallg,
"am this holdeth not onely in cafe of Landg oz Cenemente which lie in liuerie, but alfo of
Rents, Aduowſons, Commons, dc, and other things chat ile in grant, Subercof a man hath


an eftate fo2 life o2 inberitance,


Alſo When aman pleads a leafe fo» itfe,oz anp higher eftate which palleth bp Liuerie, hee is
not to picad any entric, for be is in adualifeiün bp the linerte tt felfe, D theriwife tt is ota Leaſe
foz peares, becaufctbere beta not atuallp polfefTeo dntiiian entríe,

%


Cuar.s. Of Eftates vpon Condition. Seéf.325.


À tcrtg ou
tenentents fur con-
Dition fout De Deux
manets , {cilicet ou
üg ont eftate fut con-
Dition en fait, ou fur
condition en lep,
ec, Sur condition
en fait eft , ficome
bu home per fait
endent enfeoffa ÿn
auter en Fee fimple,
referuant a luy & à

fes beites annual-
ment certaine rent
payable a bn feaft,ou
à Divers keaſts per
an,fur condition que
file vent Coít aderere,
atc, que bien lift al
keoffor a à {es heives
en meſmes ies tec-
res ou tencinents De
entrer, ac. ou ſi terre
foit alien abn home
en fee rendant a luy

- €eetaínevent,ac, a fil
bappa d le vent foit

aderere per bn (c-
maigne apres afcun
tour De payment De


*


ments vpon condition
are of two forts, viz.
cither they hauee ftate
vpon Condition in
Deed, or vpon Con-
dition in Law, &c.
vpon Condition in
Deed is, as ifaman by

eed indented , en-
feoffes another in fee
fimple, referuing to
him and his heires
yearely a certaine rent
payable at one feaft or
diuers Feafts per an-
num,on condition that
ifthe rent bee behind,
&c. that it fhall bee
lawful for the Feoffor
and his heires into the
fame Lands or Tene-
ments to enter, &c.
And if it happen the
rentto be behind bya
weeke after any day
of payment of ir, or
by amoneth after any
day of payment of it,
or by halfe a yeare,
&c. that then it fhall


belawfulto the Feof-
' €ee


TAS Vr condi-
E^ 2) tion. Lit-
SO aN tleton baz
Co EJ ning befoze
{poken of @ftates abfolute,
no beginnetth to intreate of
fates bpon condition, And
a Condition annexed to the
tealtío whereof Littleton
bere fpeakcti) tn the legal vn⸗
derftanding eft modus an E⸗
qualítíc annexed bp him that
bath Eltate interelt, os right
tothe fame , whereby an Œ-
ftate, ec. map epther be defeas
teD, 02 inlarged, 0 created
bpon an incertaine cucnt,
Conditio dicitur cum quid in
cafum incertum qui poteft
tendere ad effe aut non effe
confertur,
Œ Sur condition en


fait, qua eft facti, that
is, bpon a conbition expzeſſed
by thepartie inlegall termes
of Law,

Œ 04 far condition
en ley, &c. quæ eft iuris,
that ig,tacité created bp Law
Without anp words bien by
the partie, Bgaine Littleton
{ubdeutdeth Conditions ín
ded (though not ti expaette
Words) into conditions pzez
cedent ( of which it is fatb,
Conditio adimpleri debet pri-
ufquam fequatur cffe&us)
and conditions fubfequent.
gaine, of conditions in deed
Some be affirmative, and fome
in thenegattue ; and fome in
the affirmatine, Which implp
anegative:fome make the E⸗
fate, $obereunto they are ans
Wered, tofbable b» entríe oz
clapine , and fome make the

effate


Seël,325:


201


Glanuill sb. 10 cap.8.
"Brailonlib.2.cap. 5.€ 7. o c.
lb. a. fol. 333 "Brittoncap. s6-
dr fal.89.99. 14,1305 225.
206.207.2 49.

Fleta lib. 3.64.9. hb 5 ci,
Mirror cap. 3. S. 15 dy 17.


Lib. :


Mirror sap. 2.S.1 5. dy 17.


(b) 40..4f 11. 20. H.6.50.
31. 6,H.7.7. 19. H.6.76.
20. H,6.32- 22. H.6.46.

FI, (Com. Kidwelys cafe fel.70.
& Hill & Granges cafe fsl.7 3°


Lib. 4.fol.92.73.
"Berenghe: cafe.


49-4 ff. s. xs. Eliz; Dyer 339


(c) Terdlees Trefpeffe 4. 5
Lar,


Pb. M


Cap e ^
Eſtate void ipfo facto, With⸗
ont entrie 92 clapme.

Bifo of conditions in Bed,
fome bee annexed to the rent
referned out of the Land,and


fome to collaterali acts, dC.


. fome bec nale, fome inthe
contundine,fome in the diun⸗
dine, ag fball entoentlp ap=
peare inthis Chapter, where
theeramples of thefe dtuifiog
fhall bee erplapncd in their
proper place.

@, Exley, dc. DE
conditions in Law moze thail
be faio hereafter (a this chaps
ter,

€ Sur condition en


fait, efl ficome vn home
per fait indem , ce.


Here Littleton putteth one


Of Eftates


«to , ou per vn mois
apaeg afcun tour De
payment De ced, ou
per vn Demy, ac. que
abonques bien iít-
voit a le feoffor a a
les heirs Dentver,ac,
Cn ceux cafes fi le


rent ne {ott pate à tiel


temps ou Deuant tiel
temps limit a ſpeci⸗
fie Deins les conbiti-
on compaífeg en len⸗
Denture, dõques poit
T feoffoz ou fes heiks
entrer cti tielx terres


trample of fire fcuerat kinds QU tenements, d cuc


of conditiens. Gat ig, ffirfft,
of a finale condition fri Ded.
Secondly, of a Condition
fubfequent to the E€ftate,
Chirdlp,a condition annered
tothe rent, &c. Fourthly, a
Condition that defeateth the
Gate, jríftlp , A condition
that defeateth not the Œltate
befoze an entríc, And laſtiy,
a condition in the affirmatine,
Sohich implyeth, a negatine,
(ag behind ogbnpatd tmplpeth


enfon primer eftate
auer & tener, & De
ceo oufte le keoſtee
tout net, Ct eft ap-
pelle eftate fur con-
Dition put ceo que le
ftate le feoffee eft De-
feafible (i E condition
ne foit perfozine, ac.


Sect.325.


for and his heires to


enter, &c. In thefe ca:


fes if the rent bee not
paid at fuch time or


before füuch time limi- |


ted and fpecified with
in the Condition có-
prifed in the Inden-
ture , then may the
Feoffor or his heires
enter into fuch Lands
or Tenements, and
them in his former
eftate to haue and
hold , and the Feof-
fce quite to oufte
thereof. And it is
called an. eftate vpon
Condition , becaufe
that the ftate of the
Feoffee is
ble , if the Condi-
tion bee not
med, &c.


a ncgatíne ) viz, not paid, All Dhich doeappeare bp the expzc(Te Words of Littleton.
QD Renda luy certaine rent, dre. Here, by this (Scc. ig implyed for


life, in taple, 02 in fee,


Œ Eten ceff cafe fi le rent ne foit pay a tiel temps, &c. donques poet le feof-


perfor-.


Sor on fes beires enter, dre. Bythis Section, and bp the (&c.) there=
incontapned, firethings are to be bnoerfton, :

Fir, Where cur Authoz fapth, Si le rent foit arere, that though the rent bee behind and
not paid, (b) pet ifthe Feoſtoꝛ doth not demand thefame, tc, he fhall neuer reenter ,becanfe the
land ts the pzinctpall acbtoz, foa the rent iſſueth out of the land, and in an Ql tfcfoz the rent
the lan fhall be putin bíc&o, and if the land be euicted bp atitle paramont, tbe rent (c auopded
and after fuch eutd(on the perfon of the Feotlee ſhall not be charged therewith , for the perfor
of the Feoftee was onip charged with the rent in reſpect ofthe grant ont ot the Land.

SHecondlp, Che demand muft be made bpon the Land, becanfe the Land te the debtoz, and
that ts the place of demand appointed bp Law,

Fe the King maketh a Leafe for peares rendzing a Rent papableat his receipt at Weftmin-
fter, aud after the ing granteth the Reucrfion to another anb big betres ; tbe Ozante ſhall
Demand the Rent bpon the Land. and not at the Rings Weceipt at Weltminfter, for ag the
Law Without erprelle Words Doth appointthe Leſſee inthe tings Cale co pap ftat the tings
Receipt, fo in cafe of afubiee, the Law appoints the Demand to be on the Land.

Fe there be ahoufe pon thefame he malt demand the Rentat the houſe. And hee cannot
Demand tt at the backe Daze of the honfe but at tbe foze doze, becanfetho Demand mut ener be
madeatthe moft notozoug place. Anditis not matertall bether anp perfon be there 02 no,

Albeit the Feofkee be in the Wall o2 other part of the Woufcipet the Feoffor me: not (c) bnt
come tothe foze one, £o? tatis theplace appointed bp Law, albett the doore be open, ca)


defeafi- :


ax à:


Lib.5. vpon Condition. SeH.325.


(d) HE the keoſtment were made of a t0 cob. only, the dDeman® mull be nade at the aateof the
110000, oz at fonte high Way leading through the Wod 02 other molt notosions place, And ít
one place be as notoztous as another, the Jreoffoz hath clecion to demand tt, at which bec Spill,
and albert the Feoffee be in ſome other part of the tto readie to pap the Rent,petthat thai not
auaple him. Et fic de fimilibus. *

Ehirdlp, And if the Feoffor demand (t on the ground at a place which (s not molt notozious,
as atthe backe Doze ofa houſe Ec. anb (n pleading the Feoſfoꝛ alleadge a Demand of the Rent
gencrallp at the houfe, the Feoſffee may traucrfe the Demand, and bpen tbc enfoence tt Hall be
found fo) bim, Fo that it was a Loin Demand,

Fourthly, It the Went beereferncdto bee patd at anp place from the Land , pet itis (n
Law a Rent, andthe frcoffo; mult demand tt atthe place appointed by the parties obleruing
that Which hath bene fato before concerning the mol notoꝛious place.

Fiftip, And all this (9 to be vnderſtood Wien the Feoffe is abfent , for tf the Jrcoffe coma
meth to the freoffoz at anp place bpon anp part of the ground at the dap of papment, and offer
bis Rent, albett they be not atthe moft notezious place , nozat the laf tnftant the ffeoffoz (c
boundtorecetuett , ozclícbe hall not takeanp aduantage of anp Demand of the Rent foz
that Dap,

Sitrtip, therfore the place of demand being now known, tt is further to be HnoSon what time
the La 5ati) appointed foz the fame. Chis vartip appeareth bp that which bath bene Taft
faío. Foꝛ albett thelaft time of demand of the rent is {uch aconuenienttime befoze the funne
fetting of the la(t bap of payment as the monep map be numbꝛed and recetued; not withſtanding,
(€ thetender be made to himthat (s to recetue (t opon any part of thelan’ at any time of the
laf dap of payment, and he refuleth, the condition {9 faucd £oz that time, Foi by the expzefle res
ſeruation the money tg to be paid on the dap indefinitely, and conuentent time befoze the lat
inftant, is the vttermoſt time appointed bp Law to theintent that then both parties fhould
meet together, th: onc to Demand andreceiuc and the other to pap it, fo as the one fhonid not
pꝛeuent the other, But it the parties meet vpon any part of the land whatſoeuer onctbe fame
Day, the render fbal faue the Condition fozeucr foz that time.

Andté thereferuatton of the rent be (ag here Lictleron putteth the cafe ) at certatne teaſts
{ith condition that (£ (t happen tbc rent to bc behinde by the fpace of a weeke after anp bap of
papment,é€c. Jn thts cafe the freoffoz necdeth not demand ít on the feaſt dap, but the btterz
moſt time £02 the demand is a conuentent time ( as hath bene faío ) before the laft dap of the
— valelle bekore that the Feoffes meet the Fcoffoz bpon the land and tender the vent ag is
afozefatd.

FE arent be qranted payable at a certaine dap. and if it be behinde and demanded that the
®rantes hail diftretne for ít; Bn this cafethe Grantee need not demand it at the dap, but if
he demand ft at any time after he (ball diſtreyne fo; it, for the Grantee hath election tn this cafe
to demand it when be Will to inablehim to diftrcine,


€ Eteuxen fon primer estate auer de. Regularly tt (8 true that he
that entreth Foz a condition broken (bail be fcifed in bis Grit eftate, o2 of that cffate Sbich he
had at the time of the eftate made opon condition,but pet this fapleth in many cafes.

Firk in Relpec of Polſſibility. As (£a man feífeo of lands tn the right of his Wife, mac
keth a Feoſtment in fe bp Deed indented, bpon condition that the Jreoffeo ſhould demife tbe
land to the #coffoz £02 bis life,ec. the hulband dpeth the Conditton ts broken, in this cafe the
heire of the hufband ſhall enter fo2 tbc Condition broken, but it is impoſſible for him to hauc
the effate that the -freoffo; had at the time of the Condition made, Foꝛ therein he bad but an
eftate in the right of bis wife, Which bp the couerture Was Didolucd. Bnd thercfore When the
Boire hath entred £02 the Condition bzoken and defeared the Feoffment, bis eftate doth vaniſh
and prefentip tbc eftate is belted in the wife.

2, In refpet of Sreceflitp. It Cefty que vie after the Statute of R.3,and befoze the Stas
tute of 27.H.8, had made a jreoftment {n Fe pon condition, and after had entred fez tbe con=
dition bzoken, Fu this cafe he had but an ble when the Feof_ment Was made, bu: now hes
fhall be feifed of the whole fate of theland. So that ag (n tbc fozmcrcafe, the Buceftoz hav
fomeSwbat at the making of the Condition, and the hetre fbatl baue nothing when He hath en:
tred fe; the Condition broken, fo in this cafe the Feoffoꝛ had no eftate on intereſt in the land
atthe time of the Condition made, but a bare ble, pet after big entrie for the Condition bzoken
be all be ſeiſed of the whole fate in the land, and that alfo for necellitie,foz bp the Feotkment
infeof Céy que vie, the Whole eſtate and right Was deueſted out of the Feoſtees. Bndthere-
pd neceflitic the feoffoz muff gaine the Whole eate bp bis entrte for the Condition

20ken,
Tenant in fpeciall taile hath (fue, and his wife dicth ; Cenantintatlemaketha Fesftment
in fee bpon Condttton, the iſſue dieth, the — ig broken, the ffeoffez re-enters, fhe em
te z "ut


202


(4) 1 5-Eliz.. Dyer 329.


- » j


Lib. 4, Borou;Bes Caja fol.72.
*PL(om.70,


Lib. s.fol. 114. Wades (afr.


"TL (Cem. Hill eà Grangereafé
167.172. 20.H.6.30.31.
6. H. J. 3.


Mich.40. 41. El. sater
Stanly dr Read,
Lib.7. fo. 28 Ad ai dei cafe.


$.H.7.7 4.


a. H.6.2. Lib.8 fo.4 3,44.
hit tinghars: cafe.


g. Hg...


Lib.;.


15.12.


1.H.7.7.


1. H.6,4.


43-40-47. 1 32.4.4.
aH. 5.7.5. 39. ff 15.
11. H. $.35. 16. 4(f.47-


Vid. SeB.3 32.
19.E.1it. barre 180.
19. R .2.done rent 10.
"Pletm.534.


(b) 30. E« 3 tis. Couenant 3.


C5 |


Of Eftates


haue bat an eftate for life; ag Tenant intatle apres poffibility of élue ertint bp the re-entrp,
an pet he had an eftate taile at thetime of the Jrcoftment, anb that aïfo fox neceflity. |
3. An feme cafes the Feoftor bp his re-entry fbail be tn big former eftate, but not in refpect


of fume coilaterallqualities. Asif Cenant by Homage anceſtrell maketha Areoftment in tz


Dentreth vpon the Condition broken; it (ball neuer be holden by Homage
pa uini d nd fo Pe * a Coppthold eſcheate be, and the Lord make a Feoſfment in
fee bpon condition, and entretl) £02 the Condition broken, Bnd the reafon in both tbefe caſes
(g, for that the cuftomc oz pacicriprion foz the time is interrupted, ;

iozb and Tenant bp tealty and rent, the 1.020 isin fcifin of his rent, the Lozd granteth his
Seignory to another and to his hetres bpon condition, the Cenant attezneth and papeth big
rent to the Grantee, the Condition ts broken, the Lozd diftrepnech for his rent, and Refcous
ig made be fball be tn bis founer eltate, and pet the fozmer feiGin {hall not enable him to haue an
Alliſe Without a ne feifin.

3t a in tatle make a Feoffment in fee pon condition,and bpetb,the ue (n tatle Soit he
im age doth enter fo) the Condition bzoken, be (ball be ſirſt in as Cenant in fee fimple ag heire
to hig father, and confequentlp and inftantip be fball beremítteo. But it the heire be of fuit
age, be Mail net bc remitte» becaufe he might haue had big Formdon again the -freoffee, and
the entrie for the Condition ts his owne act, but moze ſhall be fard hereof in bis proper place


Seél. 326,327.


tn the chapter of Remitrer.


JE a man makea Feofkment tn fee of Blacke acre and white acre byon condition,¢c and
£02 breach thercof that he fbail enter into Blacke acre, this ts god.

FE Tenant forlife make a Feoſfment tnfesbpon condition and entreth foz the Condition
broken, be fall be Tenant fo? life agatne, but fubted to a fostciture, for the Hate is reduced, but


the forfeitureis not purged,


Section 326.


Cr N meſme le manner eff [N the fime manner it is if lands


ft terres font Dones en le


be giucnintaile, or let for terme


taile, ou leſſes a terme De bie ou oflifeor of yeares vpon condi-


Des ans, (ut condition.+c,


tion,&c.


€ Sur condition, & c. This implpetb the feuctall kindes of con:
bitions in Deed before fpecifico,


CRT la terre tener


tanque ils foyent


fatisfies ow paies de le


rent aderere, cc. By
this it is tmplped that t£ fuch
a fcoffment be made veferuing
(b) (fos example) 8.markeg
rent at the feat of Catter,
Sith fuch a Condition as is
afozefaid the jreoffo? at the
featt bap demands therent,the
SFeofke payeth onto bim 6.
markes parcell o£ the rent,the
SFeoffor entreth (nto the
lands, and taketh the profits
towards fatiffacion, Atter⸗
wards the fcofte doth ten-
ber the two markes refidue of
herent to the Feofforꝛ bpon
the land who refulcthit, It


Sei. 327.


(X A38 lou fcoft-
Meret fait de
certaine terres reſer⸗
uant certain rent, tec,
fut tiel condition,que
fi le rent foit aderere,
q bien lirroit al feof-
for, a les heires Den-
trer, et la terre tenet
tana: ils fotent ſatiſ⸗
fies ou papes De le
tent aderere, ac, Cn
ceft cafe file vent (oft
aderet, a le feoffoz ou
fes beíteg enter, le


fcoffce


Vt where a. feoff-

ment is made of
certaine lands refer-
uing a certaine rent,
&c.vpon fuch conditi-
onthat ifthe rent bee
behinde that it (hall be
lawfull for the feoffor
and his heires to enter,
and to hold the land
vntill hee bee fatisfied
or payed the rent be-
hinde,&c. Inthis cafe
if the rent be behinde,
and tbe feoffor or his


\
Y.


*


| Lib. ʒ.


feoffce neſt pas ex⸗
cludede ceo tout net,


mes ſe feofor auera


etiend2a la terce et
prendza ent les pro⸗
fits tangs ii (oit ſatiſ⸗
fie de lc tent aderere,
€ Quant il cit Catiffie,


- Doug poit lc feoffee


te-enter en metine la
terk, ceo tener come
il tenoit adeuãt. Car


en tiel cas te fcoffoz


aucta là tre korſq; en
maner cóc pur vx di⸗
ftres tangs il oit fa-


- tilfie Dole cent ac.cõ⸗
ment qilprendee les


Profits en te meane
temps à fon ble de=


 mefne,xc.


vpon Condition.


heires enter, the feof-.
fee is not alrogether
excluded from this,
but the feoffor fhall
haue & hold the land,
and thereof take the
proffits, vntill hee bee
faufhed of the rent
behinde, and when he
is fatifned, then may
the feoffee re-enter in-
tothe fame land, and
holdit as hee held it
before. For in this cafe
the feoffor (hall haue
the land but in manner
asfora diftreffe vnrill
bebe fatiffied of the
rent, &c. though hee
takethe profits in the
meane time to his own
vie; ec,


proffits in nature of a Diſtreſſe And therefore (£a man ma
- feruation of arent and fuchacondition tf center £02 the Cond


faife printed, and
fame page of the icafe.


But heretn at(oa diuerſity wo
fon poares referuing a rent Sith
tesenter and take the pzoffíts onttl:
ag parcell of tie ſatiſta cion, and during the time that he fo taketh the
haue an action of nebt for the rent, fo: th


the condition be that he
Without faving thereof)


C | Cem Diners pa-

toit (enféauters)
P font, queux p ver-
tué de eur meſmes
font eftates fur con-
dition bu eft le paral
Sub conditione : Di
come A. enfcoffa B.


continue, and therefore
the true cafe was of a cafe


fhalltake tbe proffits batilthe
02t0 the itke effect, there the p
fatiffation but to hatten the Lee te pay it, and ag Littleto:
fied be thatitake the pzoffits in the mcane time to hig owne bfe


the boke (c)


Sed. 328.


At 0 diuers words

(amongft others)
there bee which by
vertue of themfelues
make eftates vpon
condition, one is the
word (Sub condic’ )as if
A. infeoffe B. of cer-

Eee 3


Seil .318.


bath bene adiudgeth thar ihe
Feoſte bpon the refufall map
enterintothe land, foz when
the Feotko is fatilied etther
by perceptid o£ the profits oz
bp papment oztender and rez
fuíall, o2 partly bp the one
and partly by the other, the
Fcoltee may re-enter inte the
land. And thts is within the
520208 of ! ittleton,viz. (Vane
tili he be fatiffied.) And albez
it the Feoffoz had acceptea
part of big rent, pet hee map
enter £o2 the condition biohen
anb reteine tbe land atíll be


bc fatifien of the Wie dt
— is Dozthy of obferuas
tion,


€ Eten tel cafe le
feoffer auera la terre
forfqueen manner come
vn diftreffe tanque 4 foit
fatiffie de la rent. & 6.


By this it appearech that the
Feotko: bp his tczentty, q te
neth no cftate of freehold but
an interelt by the agreement
of the parties to take the


keth a Leafe for life with a re=


ttion broken andtake the profs
fits of the land Quouique, & c be tall not haue an action of debt


_ fræbolo ofthe Leſſee voti)


for tho rent Arere for that the
that feemeth to the contrary ts


foz peares ag ít appearith after wards in the


athy the obferuation íg tinplped,viz. It a man make a Leafe
a Condition that tf the rent be behinde, that the Leffoz (bai
tbe: cof he befstifffeo, there the p;offitg (ball be accennted


profits bec fall mot


efattifacion Sobereof he taketh the profits, But if
Freoffoz be ſatifũed op paid of the rent,
2eftitg (all be accounted no part of the
here faith,


that vntil be be ſatit


nert two Speci

ons Littleton Doth
put foure ex imples of Weds
that make conditions ín
Deed, and firff Sub cendiiio..
nc. Chis tg the moft erprefle
and proper condition. in Deed,
and therefore our Buthoz
beginneth with (t.


C Tale reddis e.
hig


« His inthis andtie


203


(¢) 30.2.3 fes,


30. E. 3.9. Vid ferablable.
27.H.8.4. 43.E.3.2t.
31..4f.Pl.26.

Vid leRatuee de Merton.ca 6.
andobferue the e werds, Quod
inde peretperepefint duplicem
valorem are.

Etca.7. without this word
(Inde. )


Sub conditicne.
(€) Marre Dser 138.
27.H.8.15. 13. H.4 entr.
Oong . 57.29 Aff:7.
33- Aff ua. 40. AR 43,
"Bratfen vbi fupra.
Fleta lib.4.ca.9.
Britton cap. 38. & vlifopra,


Lib.3.


Vid. Se. 525.


"Treuifo, Vid.Sell. 33e.
Deer 38. H.8.fel.13.

ay. H. 8. fel. 14.15.
13, H4. Entre (Cent. 57.
Saignio Crermvells cafe.
Lis fo.71.73 at large.
35. H.B.tit. Condition. Br,
Lib.8.89.Frances cafe.


(> s7-H.8.15. dre
Tra qued.

Fleta acer.

Bratton vhi fupra.

Britton vbi fupra.


6. E. -Entrie Cong.65. 8.€


2. Aff.330.adindged.
Quod fi C en'ingas
"Pafth.35.El( Rot.254.


inter Geyer et. Hares in (orm,


Banse o


Caps.


Œbis (&c.) implicth
any other rent oz fum
in grofle, 6; any cola-
terall condition what⸗
focuer,either to be pex⸗
tormeð by the Feofkes,
(wbercof our Bue
thon here putteth bis
cafe) 92 bp the Jrcofz
foz, andextendcth to
all kinds of Œonbitis
ong in Deve, before
fpecified,


Of Eftates


De certaine terre,haben-
dum & tenendum cidem
B. &hærcdibus fuis, fub
conditione,quod idem B.
& hæredes fui foluant feu
folui faciant praefat A.&
haredibus fuis annuatim
talem redditum,&c. En
ceft cale ſans afcun plut
Dire le Feofkee ad citate
fur condition,


Seil.329,330.


taine land, To hauc & to
hold to the faid B.and his
heires, vpon condition
thatthe fayd B. and his
heires do pay or caufe to
be paid to the aforefayd
A.and his heires yearely :
fucharent, &c. In this
cafe without any more -
faying the feoffee hathan
eftate vpon Condition. .


ae


€ Pr femper qa’
B.folwat cc.

Dur Duthes putteth bis
cafe where a Prouifo commeth
alone, And ſo it is (£ a man
bp Indenture lettctl) Lands
fox peres, Pꝛouided alates,
and (t is couenanted and a=
greed betweene the fapd Par⸗
ties, Ghat the Lee Mould
not alien, and tt Wag adiud=
geb that this ag a condition
by fo2ce of the Prouifo, and a
couenant bp force of the other
Swords.

hts Word Prouifo fbalbe
alfo taken as a limitation oz
qualtfication, ag hereafter in
his proper place fall be ſayd.
Bnd fomctítuc it thal amonnt
toa Œouenant, Ail which bo
appeare bp the anthozities ín
the margent.*

Fozthe (&c.) inthis Des
dion erplanation to made tn
the Section ncct before.

Ou fuerant tiels,


Ita quod. Œbigis the third condition in Deed, tohercof our Authoz


maketh mention,


$etl.319.


€ Au» fi les
A parola fuerõt
tielx, Prouifofemper,
quod pradi&' B. fol-
uat, feu folui faciat
prafato A. talem red-
ditum,&c. ou fuerôt
tielg, Ita quod præ-
di& B. foluat feu fol-
ui faciat præfato A.
talem redditum , &c.
En ceug cafes fauns
pluíg Dire, le freoffee
nad eftate forfque
fut condition, iffint
que (il ne perfozmatt
le condition, t feoffor
ct {es heires popent
entrer. ec.


Sei. 330.


C (Vo fi contingat € eer aufs pa-
€


This to the fourth conditi-
on in Deed (ct downe bp our


Authoʒ.
Denter, ec.
hereby it is cuíbent, Chat


cols font en bn
fait queug caus


fant tes tenements


ette. Conditionals.
Sicbe fur tiel fcof-
ment


Lfo if the words

were fuch , Pro-
uidedalwayes that the
aforefayd B.do pay or
caufe to be paydto the
aforefayd A. fuch a
rent,&c. Or thefe,So
that the fayd B.do pay
or caufe to be payd to
the fayd A.fuch arent,
&c. In thefe cafes
without more faying
the Feoffee hath but
an eftate vpon condi-
tion: Soas ifhe doth
not performe the con-
dition, the Feoffor
and his heires may en-
ter,&c.


Lfo there bee
other words in a
Deede which
caufe the Tenements
to be conditionall: As
if vponfüch feofment


Lib.3.


ment bn Bent eft re=
feruc al Feoſfor, ac,
et puis ſoit mítte en
le Fait cf parol,
Quod fi contingar red-
ditum przdict aretro
fore in parte vel in to-
to, quod tunc bene li-
cebit à le feoffor et a
fes heyres dentrer,
ac, ceocft bn fait fur


‘condition,
fore. Modus ig at thts bap properlp taken for a modéficatton, limitation,


the Wich alfo the Lam bath
in the end of this Chapter,


F will referue t


vpon Condition.


arent bee referucd to
the feoffor, 8c. and af
terward this word is
put intothedeed;That
if it happen the afore-
fayd rentto be behind
in part or in all, that


then it fhall be Iawfull


forthe Feofforand his
heires to enter, &c.
This is a Deed vpon
condition.


Hall perceine excellent matter of learning touching thts point,


Cau, Che caufe 02 confGocration of the (ant,
gift cf lands, anda gift of an annuttie 02 fuch like
pro vna acra terre, in tts cafe ehts $5025 Pro ſhewet
mounterl toa condition, oz if the acre of land bc cut


écafe, £02 ceſſante caufa ceffat effectus.


And fo tf an annuitie be granted pro decimis, &c.
tithes tbc Annuitie ceaſeth. And foit is ik an Annu
teerefufe to giuecouncell, the Annuitic ceafeth,


conciliur, this makes the Gzant condttionall,


Wut tE A. proconcilio impenfo, &c. makea feoffc
| vna aga terre, &c.. albett he denteth Councell, o2 that


Seël.330.


forie $9020 of themfelues vo
makea Condition, and fome
other, (Swbercof our Authout
Here anb inthe ncct S edíon *
putteth an erample)do not ef
themfelucs makea Condition
without a conciufon and
claufe of 18 e-entríc : And mas
nic times (Si)makes a Con:
ditton, andfometimes a lite
tation, ag hereafter thallbe
fapDin this Chapter,

Ineffe potcft donationi mo-
du conditio, fiue caufa. * Sci-
to quód (vt) modus eft (fi)
conditio (quia) caufa.

Conditio is cxplatned be-
02 qualification, fo;


appopnted apt Wo2dg, and becanfe. Littleton ſpeaketh of this alfa
big matter to his pzoper placc > Where the Reader


anb herein there is a dinerſitis betWweene a
Foꝛ crample, 3i£a man grant ah annuitie
h the caufe of the Gzant, and therefoze a=
Ged bp an elder title , the annuttte thal


(E tbe Grantes be vntuſtly diſturbed ofthe
{tte be granted pro concilio,and the ®2an=
So it an Ænnaitie be granted quod præftaret


ment oz a leaſe fo? life, of an acre, oz pro
the acre be enídcb, pet A. (ball not re-ens


ter, fos in this cafe there ought to be legall words of condition o2 qualification, fo2 the caufe oz
confideration Mail not auopd the {tate of the feoffæ ; and the reafon of this dinerfitiefs , foz
. that the (fate of tis land tg erected, and theannuttie executoꝛie.


Bnd pct fometime ín cale of lanog 02 tenements
oman gtue lands to a man and his heires, caufa
02 the man refufe to marrie her, the tha
her heires. Ce) Wut of the other de, (fa man giue land to
matrimonij przlocuti, though he mairie her,
againe, £o? it ſtands not Sith the modeſtie of
Councell, as theman map and ought:
(£0; thereafon afozefaid) althenay (t b


ther marrie the man,


map auetrc the caufe,


* And the rather £o;


though the feofferncnt be made Without Ded,


3fa man maketh a feofFement fn fee, ad facie ndum,
Gun, 01 ad propufitum, that the Feoffee (hall boc o
take the fate (n the land conditional, fo
on, tfo Was (t refolued, Hil.r8.Eliz.in
cafe of the ting the fayd o2 the tke words doe create
Sill of a common perfon, whitch cafe F mpfelfe heard
: Wutfor theauopding of a Leaſe for peares,
Ip required as incafe of Freehold and Buberttance,
Of a mannoꝛ fos peares, in Which there is a claufe
dwen pon the capitall MeTuage of the fapd Mano


Com. Banco,


thele words amounttoa Condition,


And fo tt (e (£ ſuch a clauſe be in fuch a Leafe,
vel concedere ftatum, & fab poena forisfa Qura:.t
ble, € fo Was it adtudged in the Court of Com


in the cafe of a common
a Condition, and fo tt is in the cafe of a

and obferüucb,

{uch pzcctfe words of condition arenot fy ſtrick⸗
CF) Fort€a man by Deed make a iLcafe
( And the

2,bpon patrie of fozfetture e£ the fatoterm 9.


(Caufa) fpall mahe a Condition, Be {€ à
matrimonij prælocuti, tn this cafetE (hee ei
Uhaue the land againe to her and to
aWomanandto her heires , caufa
01 the Woman refufe, he (ball not fane the Lands
Women inthis kind, to afhc abuícc of learned
that in the cafe of the Soman Me
enot contained in the Ded) yea


02 faciendo, 02 ea intentione, oꝛ ad cff--
4 not doe ſuch an at , none of thefe words
din tubgement of Law they are no


words of conditi⸗
gerfon,but inthe


fayp Lee au continuallp


Quod non licebit, to the Leffe, Dare, vendere,
Dis amounts to make the leafe foa peres oefeafi-
mon 91eag (c ) in Queene Elizabeths time,and


the reafon of the Court wag, hat a Leafe fo? peares $oag but a € ontrad;Sobich map begin by
woꝛd, and bp word map be bt(foluco,


: Sethion


204.
* Vi Se. 131.


3.H.6. o. . Shi
Flet Is.4.04.9, Bral. lib. 4.
£9.21 3.6,


* 4. Mar. Dyer 138.4,
"Bre&.vb fupra,


Pre. 3484.14.


9-E.4.20. 32.2.3. 4nay, 3e.
14.E.4.4, 15. E 4.2.b.

8.H.6.2;. 5E. ait. An. 44,
41.E.3.19. 32.€,1, nome
T6241. 21.£, 4 49.12.€.4,
28. 35.H. 6.2. 10.8.3. 44,
5.Ea, 2. E.4. 20.15. EL 4,3.


Fler.ls.s
40.41
(©) §-£.2 Cain vita 34. tif.
Condit mr Br. 5.4.4.1.


£4.34. 34.4 f: 1.
3


Éra-E-rare Feoffments &
Fairs 114, “NB. 205.2.
Vid. Sed.365,

4d factend, ea intentsons &c.
Dyer 148. 7.H.4.21.
314,8 fit. Condstion 19,85,
PlCim.142,

38.H.6.33, 36.37.

Delt. £r Stud. à ca. 4.
27.H.8 18. a.

32. E. 3. rene. 291.


(£)».&.« Diag.
28.H.8. Dior 29.8.
Sub FenaferüfaBura.


Quod non licehiz,
3.6.6.Dií.5 56.4. Mar. 138
(c) Fill. 40. Else. Ret 1610,
inter Browne dr Ayer.

Vid. Tl. Com. 142. r. Bo


fans enfe.


Lib.


Caps. Of Eftates Sed..331.
| Sed. 331.
€ MES ileft Dinerfity perett> TO Vttherc isadiuerfitie between


ter ceft parol (fi contin-
gat,&c.)etles parals procheine
auantdits, Car ceux parolp, Si
contingar,&c. ) tit valent riens à
tiel condition, finon que il ad
ceux parol fublequents, que bit
lift al feoffoz ct a fes heirs Den-
trerv,ac, Mes enleg cales auat=
pite, il ae befoigne per la Ley, de
mitter tiel claufe, (fcilicec) que le
Feoffor ct es herzes poicnt eus
tuer, aC, put cco que fis popent
faite ceo perforce Des pato;g a-
uantbítg, put ceo d tls impꝛeig⸗


condition, fcilicct, que le Feoffoz
et ſes heires popent entrer , ac.
UWncore tl ek communemt ble
entoutstiels cafes auauntdits
ðᷣ mitter les clauſes en les faits,
fcilicet, file tent ſoit aderere ac,
que bien lirroit ale Feoffor et a
fes heires Dentre, ac, Ct ceo ct
bien fait, a celintent, pur Decla-
ver et expꝛeſſer ales laps gents,
que nc font appzifes en 13 Ley,
Delemanner et le condition De ie
feoffement, tc, Sicome home
ſeilie De tecto le(fa mefine la tet-
re a vn auter per faitindent pur
terme des ans rendant a luy cer⸗
tain rent, tl eſt hfe De mitter en Ie
fait, que (ile rent foit arere al
tour De payment, ou per on ſe⸗
maiqne, ou per on mois, ac, que
adonque bien lirroit al Leffor a
Diftrepfi.æc, bncof le leffoz poit
deſtreiñ à cémon Droit p le rent
tere, ac, content que tiels pa-
rols ne vnque fucront mifes en
le fait,ac,


this word 5i contingat de. and


the words next aforefaid, &c. for |


thefe words, Sicontingat, ec. is
naught worth to fucha Condition,
vnleffe it hath thefe words follow-
ing, That it fhall be lawtull for the
Feoffor and his heires to enter, &c.


but in the cafes aforefayd, itis not;


neceffarie by the law to put fuch
claufe, fcilicet, that the Feoffor and
his heires may enter, &c. becaufe
they may doe this by force of the
words aforefaid,for that they con-


oon mmo Pe ete’ +


taine in themfelues a condition, |
nont a cup mefines en Ley bn /ziicet, Thatthe Feoffor and his |
heires may enter, &c.yet it iscom- -


monly vfed inall fuch cafes afore-
fayd, to put the claufes in the
Deeds, féilicer, if the Rent bee be-


hind, &c. that it fhallbe lawfullto «


the Feoffor and his heiresto enter,
&c. And this is well done, for this
intent, to declare and expreffe to
the Common people who are
not learned in the Law, of the
manner and condition of the
Feoffement, &c. As if a man


feifed of Land, letteth the fame —


Land to another by Deede in-


dented for terme of yeares, |


rendering to him a certaine


Rent, it is vfed to bee put into
the Deed, That ifthe Rent bee
behind at the day of payment,”
or by the fpace of a weeke ora


moneth, &c. that then it fhall bee


lawfull to the Leffor to diftreyne,
&c. yet the Leffor may diftreyne


of common right forthe Rent be-.


hind,&c. though fuch words were
not put into the Deed, &c.
€ Il⸗


Lib.3.


vpon Condition. |


Sell 332⸗


205


c[ ne befoigne per la ley de mitter tiel clanfé, oc. Que dubitationis -


caufi tollenda inferuntur, Communem legem nonlzdunt, Et expreflio corum quæta-


cite infünt, nihil operatur.


¶ Per vo moys, re. Bere albeit tbe claufe of diſtteſſe bee
added, that ifthe Kent be behind by the fpace of a Weeks 02 a Moneth that the Lefloz map
Diftreine,pet he may diftreine Withinthe toake o? Moneth, becaufe a Diſtreſſe ts incident of
Common right coeucry Rent Seruice. And the $9070 bee in the affirmative, and therefore
cannot reftraine that Which ts incident of Common right.
The other ( &c.) in this Section bpen that Soljich hath beene ſaid are eutdent,


Sect.


€ [& em, (i feoffinent foit fait
fur tiel condition, que file
feoffor papa al feoffce a certaine
tour, at, 4o. E. Dargent, que a=
Donque le feofFo2 port reenter, zc,
enceo cas Ic feoffee ef appell te-
nant en mo2gage, que eff autant
abíte en francois come mogt=
gage, a en Latin, mortuum va-
dium. Et tifemble que là caute,
pur que il eff appelle moztgage,
e(t, pur ceo que il eftopt en awe⸗
touft file feoffo2 boyt payer, al
iout limitte tiel fumme ou non :
& (flne papa pas, Donque le tette
que il mitter en gage (ut conditi-
on De payment De lemoney. eft
ale delup atouts tours, æiflint
mot à lup fur condition, ac, a fil
papale money, Dongs eft le gage
mot quant ale Cenant, tc,


332.


Temjfa feoflment be madevpon

fuch cédition,that if the Feoffor
pay to the Feoffee at a certain day,
&c. 40. pounds of money, that
then the Feoffor may reenter,&c.
In this cafe the Feoffee is called
Tenant in morgage, which is as


much to fay in French, as mort- :


gage, and in Latine mortunm va-
dium. And it fcemeth that the


-caufe why it is called mortgage,


is,for that is doubtful whether the
Feoffor will pay at the day limited
fuch fumme or not, and ifhe doth
not pay , then the Land which is
put in pledge vpon condition for
the payment of the money is ta-
ken from him for euer,and fo dead
to him vpon condition, &c. And if
hee doth pay the money, thenthe
pledge is dead as to the Tenant,
&c.


€ Mere is Deviued (c) of ttoo French 90208, viz. Mort, that
fg, mortuum, and Gage that is vadium, 91 pignus. And ít is called ín Latine mor-
tuum vadium, 02 morgagium. Nom ítíg called here Mortgage , 6% mortuum va-


dium, both fox the reafon bero expꝛeſſed bp Littleton , ag alfo te diftinguith it from that which
is called viuum vadium. Viuumautem dicitur vadium, quia nunquam moritur ex aliqua parte
quod ex fuis prouentibus acquiratar. As it aman bogrow a hundzed pounds of another, and
taketh an eftate of Lande onto him, vntill hee bath recetueo tbefatofumme of the (Tues and
the profits of the Land, fo as (n this cafe nepther monep nos Land dpeth , oz is loft , whereot
Littlcton hath fpoken ( d ) befoze tu this & bapter.) and therefosett is called, Viuum vadium.


F ff Se.


(ec) Glanuil.tib. xo cap. 69,
© lio. 1 3007.26.27


(4) Wide Soff, 527.


Lib.3.


25. H.B. 15.5.


Esp. 8. fol.gt. Frenceses(z.


(4p.5.


Seét.


Tem ficome hie poit faire
eT feoffment en kee en Mort⸗
gage, iſſint home poit kaire done
cn taile en Mortgage, vn leas
pur terme de bie, ou pur terme
Des ang en Mortgage, atoutg
tiels tenants font appels te-
nants en Moꝛtgage, folonque
ies eftates, que ils ont en là tet-


Of Eftates


560.333.334.


3


At’ as a man may make a
feoffment in fee in Morgage,
fo a raan may make a gift in Tayle
in Morgage,and a Leafe for terme
of life, or for tearme of yeares in
Morgage. Andall fuchtenants are
called tenants in morgage accor-
ding to the Eftates which they
haue in the Land, &c.


re, eC,


Chis Sccion spon that which hath benc fato needeth no further explication,


Ve le feoffor pa-


CCE 7
tera a ttel iour,
crc. Albeit Condt=


tions bee not fauourcd, pet
they are net alwayes taken
littecallp, but inthis cafethe
Law cnabletb the hetre that
ag not named to perforzme
the Condition for foure cau=
f


es.

Fir, Wecauſe there {9 a
Dap limited , fo ag the heire
commeth within the time liz
mited bpthe Œondition , foz
otherwife hecould not doe it,
as fhall bee fato hereafter in
this Chapter. j

Sy»econolp , jro that the
Condition defcends bnte the
detre, and therefore the Law
that qtueth him an tntcrett in
the Condition, gtueth him an
abtittic to performe (t.

Thirdlp, ro? that the Fef⸗
fe doth receite no Dammage
or pretudicetherevp (alithefe
teafong are erpreflp to be col-
tected out of the Words of
Littleton.) Bnd thefe things
being obferned.

Fourthly, Che intent and
true meaning of the Conditi⸗
on fball bee performed, And
Sphere tt is here fatb, that the
etre map tẽder al iour affeffe,
&c. herein is tmplped , that


Sell. 334.


€| an ft feoff-
ment foít fait en
moztaage fur condi⸗
tion que le feoffot
papera tiel fumme à
tieliour, ac. come eft
enter cur per lout
fait endent accozDe
a limit,coment que le
feoffoz moꝛuſt Deuát
le tour De payment,
æc, vncoꝛe ſi le heire
feoffoz papa meſme
le fumme De money a
mefine le tour à le
feoffee, ou tendera
lup les Deniers, et le
feoffee ceo tefufa De
receiuer,Donque pott
iheire entrer en E ter-
re, et oncoze le cons
Ditton eft , que fle
feoffour papera tiel
fumme a tiel iout,#c.
níentfea(ant menti-
on en le condition


daſcun


Lſo ifafeoffment
bee made in mor-
age vpon conditio

Se ra Feoffor thal
pay fuch a fumme at
fuch a day , &c. as is
betweene them by
their Deed indented,
agreed, and limited,
although the Feoffor
dyeth before the day
of payment, &c. yet
if the heire of the
Feoffor pay the fame
fumme of money at
the fame day to the
Feoffee , or tender to


Í


him the money, and |


the Feoffee refufe to
receiue it. Then may
the heire enter into
the Land , and yetthe
condition is,that ifthe
Feoffor fhall pay fuch
a fumme at fuch a day,
&c.not making men-


Li


S


! Lib.


- datcun papment de⸗
. ftt fait per fou beíte,
mes pur ceo que le
heive ad intereſſe de
droit en E condition,
t, et lentent fuit
o2tque queles Deni-
evs ſerront paics al
iour aſſeſſe, ac, et le
fcotfce nad pluis dã⸗
mage, (i il foit pap
pct lheire, que (it fuit
pap per le pic , at,
Ct pur cett caufe, (tie
beite papa les Deni-
ers, ou tendera les
Deniers à le four at-
felle, tc, et lauter ceo
refufa, ti poit entrer,
eC. Mes (ibn efirage
de fa tefte Demefne,
que nad afcun inter-
eite, ac, Voile tender
les auantdits Deni-
ers al feoffee aletour
aſſeſſe, le feoffee nett
pas tenus De ceo re=
ceiuer.


vpon Condition.


tionin the Condition
of any payment to bee
made by his heire,but
for that the heire hath
intereft of Right in
the Condition, &c.
and the intent was but
that the money fhould
bee payed at the day
afiefled, &c. and the
Feoffze hath no more
loffe if it bee paid by
the heire,thé if itwere
paid by the Father,
&c, therefore if the
heire pay the money
or tender the money
at the day limited, &c.
and the other refufe it,
he may enter, &c. But
ifa ftranger of his own
head, who hath not
any intereft , &c. will
tender the aforefaid
money to the Feofte
at the day appointed,
the Feoffee is not
bound to receiue it.


Seël.334.


the Executors o? Admint=
ſtrators of the Moꝛgagoꝛ, o2
tn default of them the sD25t-
natie may alfotender as (ball
be fato (£) hereafter tn this
Chapter, Wut What i£ the
Condition had beene, té the
Moꝛgagoꝛ 03 his heires vid
pap, tc, ano hee dyed before
the dap without heire, fo ag
the Condition became impoſ⸗
fibic, here it ig to be obferucd,
that Wherethe Condition be-
commeth tinpolitble to be per⸗
formed bp theat of od, ag
by death, &c. the fate of the
SFeofke fbatl not bee auoyded,
ag fal bec fato. hereafter tre
this Chapter. And tbercEone
the Law here inableth the
beire (of Swbom no mention
Was made inthe Condition)
to perfonne the Condition
leatt the Inheritance ſhould
be loft, wherein diners Divers
fities arc worthy of obferua=
tion.

Sirk, betweene a Condt-
tion annered to a fate in
Lands 02 Œenements bpon a
feoffinent, gift in taple, ec,
anda Condition of an Obli⸗
gation, lRecogntsance oziuch
like. (g) Foꝛ tfa Condition
annered to Lands be poſſible
at the making of the Condi=
tion,and become tmpofltble by
the act of dod, pet the ftate of
the Sfeoffer, ec. fhall not be
auoyded. As tf a man maz


Ketha feoffment fn Are vpon Condition , thatthe seoffos ball Within one peare goe tothe
Citie of Paris about the affaires of the fcoffæ, and pacfentip after the Feoftoꝛ dpcth, fo as
it is impoſſible bp the act of Sodthatthe Condit ion fhould bec performed, pet the Eftate of
the 4fcoffec is become abfolute, fo? though the Condition befubfequent tothe fate, pet there is
a precedencic before there-entric , viz. the performance of the Condition. And ifthe Land
ſhould by couftruction of Law be taken from the Feoftee, this thould Wworke a damage to
the Feoffee, for that the Condition ta not perfozmed which Mas madefoz bis benefit. And
ttappeareth bp Littleton, that it muft wot bee to the dammage of the Jreoftee, And fo itis
f£ the Feoſffoꝛ ſhall appcare in {uch a Court the next Cearme, and before the dap the fFeoffoz
Dpeth, the Eftate of the coffee is abfolute. (Ch) Wut (£ a man beboundbyp Recognizance
02 Bond With Tondition that he fall appeare the next Œcarme infucha Court , and befoze
the day the Lonufoz o» Obligoꝛ dpeth, the Recognizance o2 :D blígatton ts faucb, and the rea=
fon of the diuerfiticis becaufe the ſtate of the Land ts executed and feticd (n the freoffæ , and

nnot bee redecincd bacse againe but bp matter (tibfequent, viz. the performance o£ the Con⸗
dition. Wut the Bond oz Recegnisance ts a thing in action, an executozte, Sobercof no ad=
uantage can be taken bntill there be a Default inthe Dbligoz, and therefore (m all cafes Swbere
aŒonoition of a Bond, Recogniszance, ac. ig poſſible at thetime of the making of the Condi⸗
tion,and befozethe fame can be performed, the Condition becomes tnpotltble by the act of ed,
020€ the Law, 02 of the Dblige, c. there the Obligation, «c. is faucb. Wot tf the Condi⸗
tion of a Wond, xc. be finpo(tiblc at the tine of the making of the Conditton, the Dbligation,
tc. is ſingle. Bud fo tt ts (n cafe of a feofinent (n fec With a Condition {ublequent,that is tm=
Pollibie, the Late of the Feoer is abfolute, but tf the Sus precedent bee impollible, no

2


Hate


208


(£) Vids 548.337.


(g) 'Pl.Com. 456. Wroshes
Cafe. 14.H.0.3. 15. H qui
14. E, 4.3. 38. H.6. 2. 3.


(h) 15,H.7.18.. 31-H.6.
barre 6o. 18.E.4.17-
9.Eh(.26 2. Dier lib. 5.22;
Langhiers ca/2. 38. H6. 24


Fleta lib.4-cap.9. & Bron
dr Britton vhs fupra,


Lib.3.


14.H4.8.28. 10, M 5.35.
4-H.5. 4.8. £,4.1.
28.H.8.35. [15.5.f5.2 3.


39.£. 3 5. 17.
Obligas 18. 5. Elsx: Dier'222


7 Plcorn. Fillers safe 273.


35. H. 6.0i8 barre 162.
37-H.6.barre 60. 3E. 5.9.
9-Elsiz Dier 263.
18.H.8,30.


(1) 4. H74.

30.H.8. Dier 41.

Yt. H.4. ç7.smprorcélion.
10/H.7. 38.


(k ) Vid. Brakon, Britton
Fietavbs fupra,


"Brallon lib. 3.fo.100.
3.H. 4.9. 8. E.4. 12.6.

2, E, 4.3.87 3. 4.H.5.4. b.
10.4,7.13. 14. H.8.28.
43. E.5. 6.25.


3.4.4.9.


Pl Com. Brownings cafe 133


7-H 6.43.5. 31. H. c. 33.
21.4 5.11. 21. H.7 · 30.
30. E.4. 8.

Pl. (Cem, in Brownings
safe 133.0. 27.4.8.


Vid. $8.33 s.


Vid SeB 401.

Hill.38.Elig 5n exe» Regis
Inter Watkins & fiic k,
"Pro terris sn (Com. Dew,
45 E. 3-12. Releafé 28.
y2.E 1.65. Anmity $1.

33: H.6.18.


"u


36. H.4. it. barre. 16b.
33. E. 1.992, nn ty $1
3 E. 3d qomemt 254.


Cap.s. Of Eftates Seél..3343


ſtate 0» intereſt (ball growe thereupon. And to illuſtrate chefs by examples pou [ball bite
derftand, It a man beboundin an £Dbltgation,sc With condition that if the Dbltgozr doe
got from the Church ef St.Peter in Weftmin. to the Church of Sr. Peter ig Rome Within thre
boures that then the sD bligatíon all be votive, Che Condition te bopdeand (mpofifble and
the :D bligation ſtandeth gad.

And fo it is if a fcoffment be made bpon condition that the -Feofke ſhall got as ta afozefaíb,
the ftate of tie feoffæis abfolnteanb the condition impoſſible and bopbe.

* Jaman make a Lealſe fog life opon condition that (£ the Letter got to Rome ag tg afoze-
faíb that then he ſhall bauc a fee, she condition precedent ts tmpoffibic anb bopbt, anb therefoze
no fos Ginple can gro to the Leſſee.

Ffaman make a feoffment in fee vpon condition that the Seoffes fball re-infeofte him bes
fore fuch a bap, and before the day the Feoſtor diffetfethe jitoffe and bolo him out bp force
Dntill the bap be paft, the fate of the Feoffes is abfolute, for the SFeoffor ts the caule whereot
the condition cannot be performed, andtherefoze (hall neuer take aduantage fox non perfos=
mancethereof, (i) And ſo it is tf A. be bound to B. that 1.5. thal marrp loanG. befoze fucb
a Dap, and before the Dap B.marrp With lane, he Hall never take abuantage of the bond, foz
Le he himfel 3 ts the meane, that the condition could not be perfozmed, Bnd this ig regulars

P trüc tsall caſes.

Wut tt is commonly holden (k) that (f the condition of a Bond, Fe. be againft law, that the
bond tt felfe (g voyde.

Wut herein the Law diſt inguiſheth betSweene a condition againft Law forthe doing of ang
ad that tg Malum in fe, and acondition agatnft Law ( that concerneth not anp thing that (g
malum in fe ) but therefoze is againit La, becanfe it is either repugnant to the ftate oz as
gaint fome Wartime oz rule in Raw, And therekore the common opinion is to bec bnderfton
of Conditions againft Law fes the doing ef fome act that tg malum in (c, and pet thercin alfo
the Law oiftinquifbeth. Bo (f a man be bound vpon condirton that he ſhall kíll L.S the bond is
voide.

ut (fa man make a feoffment vpon condition that the Feoſfe fall Kill L.S. the ffate ig
abfolute, and the conbítton vopde.

Fla man make a fcoffinent in fe? bponcenbítion that be (ball not alten, thig conditton is
repugnant anb againft Law, and the ftate of the Feoltee is abfolute ( whercof moze hall be
fato in hts pzoper piace.) Wut if the Feoffex be bound ina bond, that the rcoffec o2 his heireg
fall not alien this is god, foz he map notsoitbftanbing alten if bc will fogtcit btc bond that he
himfelfe hath mare,

So it ts i£ a man make a feoffment tn fee byon condition that the Feoftee fbali not take the
profits of the land this condition és repugnant and againſt Law, and the ftate (s abfolute,

ut a bon with a condition that the Feoffee fall not take the profits is goo. 3f a mon
be bound, with a condition to enfcoffe his wife, the condition (a boide and againft Law, bes
caufe it ts againſt a maxime {in Laws, anb pet the bond is qed, but {€ be be bound to pay dis
tet c money chat is gwd. Et fic de fimilibus $obereof there bee plenttfull Buthozitics in our
bokes,

€ Tender les deniers aliour a[feffe, cc. rote hereby is implied that
albett a conuentent timc befoze fanne fet be the laſt time given to tbe Feoffo: to tender, pet tfhe
tender tt to the perfon of the morgage at anp ttme of the bap of papment, and he refufcth ít,
the condition ts faucb fo2 that time,


¶ Upoct enter, &c. And fo map bis heire after his death,

€ Mes fi eitranger de [a tefle demefne que nad aſcun intere(fe, dre. voile
tender les ananaits deniers al feoffee al iour affe(fe, le feoffee neff pas tenus deceo
receiuer. Notabp this period and tbe (&c.) ít is implped that if the


mozgager die, his heire Within age of 14. pearcs ( theland being holden in Socage) thenert
of Kinne to Sohom the land cannot difcend being his gardein in Socage map tender in the
name of the heire, becaufz he hath an intereft ag gardiine tn Hocage. Aũo if the heire be Withe
in age of 2 1, yeares, and the land is holden bp Knights ferutce, the Lozd of Whom the land is
Golden map make the tender fos his interelt Swbich be Mali haue When the condition (s per=
fozmed, for thefe (m refped of their intereft are not accounted eftrangers.
ut tf the hetre be an Ideot, of what age focuer, anp man map make the tender for Hirt ín
par bis abfolutc difabtlttp, and the Law in thts cafeis grounded bpon charity, and fo in
tke cafes.
Le Feoffee nef? pastenus de ceoreceiner. Bnd note that Littleton


faith, that he is not bound to receiue ft ata frangerg hand, Wut (Fang Granger (n the —
0


Lib.3. vpon Condition. Sedl.235:


of oꝛgagoꝛ or bis beire ( Without his confent os patuit ) tender the money and tbe mos
Bien Ea ite ít, this is a geb ſatiitacion, and the Worgages o; bis beíreagrecing thereun=
to map re-center into the land, O mnis ratihabitio retro trahitür & mandato cquiparatur, But


the Moꝛgagoꝛ sz his heire map diſagtee thereunto tf be Lill.


CET memozan-
EX que en tiel
cas lou tiel tender De
le monep eft fait, zc,
tle feoffee à recetuer
ceo refula, per que le
feoffoz ou fes beires
entront,zc,dDonque le
feoffce nad afcun tes
medy Dauer E money
per le cómon lep, pur
ceo que tl ferta vette
fa follie que tl refufa
le money quant bn
lopal tendze De ceo
fuit fait a luy.


Seffion 335.


Nd be it remem-

bred that in fuch
cafe, where fuch ten-
der of the money is
made, &c. and the
feoffee refufe to re-
ceiueit, by which the
feoffor or his heires
enter, &c. then the
feoffee hath no reme-
dy by the cómon law
to haue this money,
becaufe it fhall beeac-
counted his owne fol-
ly that hee refufed the
money, whena lawful
tender of it was made
vnto him.


("T^ Ender de le mo-
ney eft fait, de.


Pere (9 implped at the due
time and place according to
the conditten.


€ Entront,c.viz.
into the lands o? tenements.

€ Dorque le feoffee
nad aſcun remedie dauer
le money per le common


ley,c«. Bnd tbe veas

fon is bccaufe the monep te

collaterali to the land, and the

2. hath noremedp theres
01€.

It an Dbligatton of an
bundzed pound be made With
condition foz the payment of
fifty pound ata dap,and at the
bap tbe xDbiígo) tender the
money, anb the Dbligce rc-
fufetb the fame ; pee in ation


of debt byon the Dbligation,
1€ the Defendant pleade the tender and vefafatl, he mutt alfo pleade that be ig pet readp to pay
the moncp and tender the fame tn Court · But (£ tbe Plaintike $011 not then receiuett but take
iſſue spon the tender, and thefame be foundagatnt btm, be hath loft che money fo? euer.

It a man be bound in 200. quarters of toheate fez delivery of a 100.quarters, tf tbe Obli⸗
G02 tender at the Dap the 10°.quarters,éc, he (ballot pleade Vncore prit, becaufe albeit tt be
the parceil of the condition, petthep be Bona peritura,anditis acharge fo, the Dbditgoz to
heepe them, And the reaſon Wherefore inthe cafeof the Obligation the fome mentioned in
the condition is not loft bp tbc tender and refufatl, is not onlp fozthatitig a dutie and parcell
of the obligation, and therefoze is not loft bp the tendev and refufatl, but alfo fez that the Db-
ligee hath remedy by Law forthe fame, And in this cafe, Liberaca pecunia non liberat offe-
rentem.

But ifaman makea ſingle bond, o knowledge a Htatute oz Recognizance € afterwards
made a defeafance foz the papment of a leſſer fumme at a day it the :Dbligos oy Conufoz tender
the leſſer ſumme at theday, and the Dbligee o3 dLonufee refuleth tt, he fall neuer have any re-
medp bp Lai torccoucrtt, becaufe (t íg no parcel of the fumme congained in the Dbigation,
Statute, 02 1Recognisance, being contapnen in the defeafance made at the time oz after che
Mbligation, Statute, or Becognizance, And in this cafe tn pleading of the tender and refa=
fai. the party thall not be d2tuen to pleade, that he is pet rcabp to pay the fame og to tender it
in Court: 3) cítber hath the :D bligee o2 Conufecany remedp bp Las to recoucr the fumme
contained in the Defcalance, (o) And foítís ifaman makean :Dbligation of 100.pounb
Sith condition for the deltuerp of Coꝛne oz timber.Æc. 02 for the performance of an arbitre-
ment, ez thedoing of anpad,tc. Chis (& coliaterall to tbc Dbligatton, that tg to fay, (s not
porcell of ít; and therefoze a tender and refufall (g a perpetuall barre.

Wat if a man be bound to make a keoffment tn fee to the Dbitgee, and be make a Leaſe and a
releafe to him anb bis beires, albett this be a collaterali condition, pet is tt well perfoztuen, be⸗
canfe this amounts in La to afcoffment.


€ Money, moneta, Legalis moneta Anglia. Latofull money of Eng⸗
and epther of Gold oz Siluer, te of two foztg,viz. tbc Engliſh money copneo bp tbe kings
FEE 3 authortep


207


8.E. 2. dit. 4ff.389.
31. M. 32.


22. H.6. 39. 21.8.4.25,
22,E.3.5.
Lib.9.fo.79. H.Paytes: cafe,


8, E. 2t. Af. 389.


g- H. 4.18. 5. Mar "Dier.150
21. 5.4.25. 21.E.3.5.

33. H.6.2.b. 17. Aff pl.a.
10. E. 4. 1.b. 9. H.6.16.
36-H.6.36. 15,€.4.1.

16. H.3.13. 18.E.3.53.
7.6.4.4. b. 19. H.9. 12.
37.H.8.1. s.

22. H.6 3 9. tit. Abatemét 11.
4g. E.3.3. 19. H. 6. 11.

(0) Hentry Petees cafe

ubs fupra.


31, 4/f: 3$. 11.H.4.33.
1. H.6.8. 1. E.A. 17. E. 4.3.
Pl. (em. Fegaffes café, ſo. 6,


Lib. g fo. 114.31 5.
Wade cafe, hib. 9 fo.78,


Lib. ^: (aps.


Ariforle Lib.s.cap.8.
(*) 9. B. s. Gtat. 2. C 49.7.


Y2.E.3,( endi. 8. 13.84. 3.
tid ig. 52.45.


a


Livy fo.96,97.Gordales cafe.


Lig fe 314,119 Wfades enfe,


Of Eftates 9c. 336.


authority, 0j foraine copne bp Proclamation mabe currant withinthe Realme. Coinc, cuna
dicitura MES of copning of money. 3n French Coine fignificth a cogner becanfe (m ancient
time moncp Sag fquarc with comers, ag ít (s in fome Countries at this day, Somefay that
Coine dicitura xem id eft , communis, quod fitomnibusrebus communis. Moneta dicitur
à monendo, not only becaufc be that hath it, ts to be warned prouidentip to bfc it, but alfo bes
caufe Nota illa de authore & valore admonet. Pecunia dicitur a Pecu, beaſts, Omnes enim ve-
terum diuitiæ in animalibus confiftebant, and (t appeareth that in Homers time, there as no
monep but exchange of cattell, ec.


Nummus des 7$ rue quia lege fit non natura. Vide


* the Statute of 9-H.s ef the noble,haife


noble, and farthingoË gold, Which ts the fourth part ofa noble, and thatis 20,pence.


T fil faile
€ E de paier les


deniers ec.

jf a man make a
feoffment of Lands ,
@o haue and to hold
to him and his beires,
bpon condition, Chat
í£ the ffeofte pay
to the Sfeoffour at
fuc) a Dap twentie
pounds, that then the
Feoffee (ball baue the
lands to him and bis
heires;tf the condition
bab not proceeded fur=
ther, (t bad beene votd,
foi that the Feoſtee
had a fee imple by the
fir (I words, and there=
fo;e the Swords ſubſe⸗
quent are matertallp
abbded,( And t€ he Fatle
to pay the moncp, ac. )


Le fécond
Feoffee voile ten-
der le fumme des
deniers crc.


Albeit the fecond
ffeoffe bee not named
inthe Condition , pet
fbail be tender the
ſumme, becaufehe is
gituictn eſtate, an in
tudgement of aw
hath an eſtate and in⸗
tereſt in theconditton,
(ag Littleton beerc
faith ) for the faluatt-
on of bis Œenancie,
Vi.Se&.334.And note
be that bath tnterctt in
the conbítío on the one
fibt, 0; inthe land on
the other,may tender.

And it is to bee ob=


Section 336.


Cem fi feoffment
foit fait fur tiel
condition, Que fi
le Feoffee papa al feof=
foz a tiel tour inter eux
limit cr. E, adonques le
Feoffee aucca la Terre
alupetafes beíteg, et
(il faile De paper les De-
niers a le tour affeffe,
que adonque bien lift a
le fecffoz ou a fes
hepres dentrer, ac, et
puis Deuant le tour
atfcife, le ffeoffee ben=
Da laterte a bn auter,
et De cco fait fcoffment
aluy, en ceft cafe (CT fe-
cond 4rcoffec Voile ters-
der le ſumme Deles Dc-
niers a le iour aſſeſſe a
le Feoffoz, et te Fcoffoz
ceorefula, ac, Donque
le feconD 4reoffee ad
eftate en la terre clere-
ment fans condition,
Ctla cauſe eſt, pur ceo
quele fecond Feoffee a-
uoit intereft en le condt=
tion purfaluation à fon
Tenancie. Ct en ceft


€


cafe il femble que ft le -


primer Feoffee apres
tiel bender dela Terre,
botle tender le "—

e


Lfoif a Feoffement

be made onthis con-
dition, T hat if the Feof-
fee pay tothe Feoffor at
fucha day between them
limitted, twenty pounds,
thenthe feoftee fhal haue
the Land to him and to
his heires, and if he faile
to pay the moncy at the
day appointed, that then
it fhallbee lawfull for the
Feoffor or his Heyres
to enter, &c. and af-
terwards before the day
appointed the Feoffce fel
the Land to another, and
of this maketh a Feoffe-
ment to him, inthis cafe
if the fecond Feoffee wil
tender the fum of money
at the day appointed , to
the Feoffor,and the feof-
for refufeth the fame,&c.
thenthe fecond Feoffee
hath an eftate in the land
cleerely without condi-
tion. And the reafon is,
for that the fecond Feot-
fee hath an intereft in che
códition for the fafegard
of his tenancy :and in this
cafe it feemes,that if the
firft feoffee after fuch fale
of the land, wil tender the


UC


bib 308


le four alfetfe, ac. a le
feoffor ,cco terra affets
bone purfaluation De-
. fiateDelcfecond Feof-
fee, put ceo que Ie pri⸗
tfi Feoffee fuit priuie à
- Je condition, a iffint Ic
tender be afcun de cur
Bur c(t allets boít,ac,


bagges, Without ſhewing o2 telling the fame,
monep im parfeg o» bagges. Which ts the oftia


vpon Condition.
money at the day appoin-
ted, &c.to the feoffor,this
fhall be good enough for
the fafegard of the eftate
of the fecond feoffee, be-
caufe the firft feoffee was
priuie to the condition,
and fo the tender of either
of them two is good e-


nough,&c.


part of the party that is torecetue ít, to put ttout and tell tt,


€ 4 primer Feofee. Here tt appeareth,that the ficft Feoffee map


hotwithfanding his feoffment, pap the monep to the fcoftoz,
to the Condition, and bp bis tender map fauc the fate of big


Heought to doc,


Ci Cem fi Feotke=
ment foit fait
fut condition,

Que À le Feoffog

papa certaine famme

‘Dargent al coffee,
adongs bien lirroit

à feoffoz et a fes

Heirs dentrer: en cett

cafe (i le feoffoꝛ deuie

Deuant le payment

‘fait, et ibeire Voile
fender al feoffce les

Deniers, tiel tender ẽ

boyd, purceo que le

temps Deing quel ceo

Doit efit fait eft pate,

cat quaunt le conbí-

tion eft, que file feof-
fot paya ies Deniers
al feoffec, ac. ceo eft

‘tant abíre, que fi le

feoffoz Durant fa bie


pa les Deniers al:


fee, ac, ct quant
Ufeoffo, mozuft,dor-


Seit. 337,


AL ifa feoffment

bee made vpon
condition, That if thc
Feoffor pay a certaine
fumme of money to
the Feoffee,then it thal
be lawfull to the feof.
for and his heyres to
enter: in this cafe if
the feoftor die before
the payment made,
and the heire will ten-
derto the feoffee the
money, fuch tender is
void, becaufe the time
within which this
oughtto bee done, is
pat. For when the
condition is, That if
the Feoffor pay the
money to the Feoffee,
&c. this isas much to
fay, as if the Feoffor
during his life pay the
money to the Feoffee,
&c. & whenthe feof-


$08.53.


ferned alfo, Chat the
foes map tender anp
thonep that {9 currant

“Within the Realme,
albeit tt bee fogreine
coine, foag tt bee cur⸗
rant bp Bet of Parli⸗
ament,o2 by tbe kings
proclamation, as hath
bene fato,


© Tender le
J^mme». The


SF coffee map tender the
monep in purfes 02


fo? he Doth that which he ongbt;viz to being the
manner to carrp monep in, and then tt ts the


becanfe he (s partie anv paite
dfeotta Which in all gov dealing


€ Dis vdinerftie ig

plaine and eufdent,

Æagreeth With our
(4) Bokgs,and pet fomwbat
thal be obferued bereapon:foz
bere it appeareth, Chat feing
no time fg lfmitteo, the Law
Doth appotnt the time, a thas
is, during the life of the feofs
for, wherein diuers diuerſi⸗
tics are worthy the obferuas
tion:


Fir, Betweene this cafe
that Littleton here puttctl) of
the condition of a feoffiment
{tt Fee, fos the payment of mos
hep Wherenotime ts limite,
andthe condition of a Bond
fo: the papment of a fumme
9f money Where no time (g 1í-
titted:fo2 ín fucl a conditton
of a Bond the money ts to
be papd prefentiy, that tg, tn
connentent time, ( b )29nb pee
tn cafe ofa condition ofa bond
there ig a dfuerfitte bet weene
a condition of an obligation,
Which concernes the doing of
a tranfitoxte at Without 1f-
mitatton of anp time,ag pap-
ment of mene, delinerp of
Charters, og the ithe, foz
there the condition (a to be
performed paefentlp, that ts,
in conuentent time, @ bers
by the condition of the Dbit-
gation the ad that is to bse

bone


208


(à) 14-H.7. $i. 0508.7.


cen ov e
AT Ds I tonde tlm


— { tre ;


4M €.3.9.33.H.6.43.d
48.6. 4.E 4.30. 9.8.4.23;
15-E.4.30. 21. E. 4. 38 6.
9.H.7.17.5. 10.H.7.1$.
14. H.8.21.. d 29.6.

(b) Lib.6-fo. 30. 3 x. Bothist
café, 33.£.6. 47,48,


2.


Lib.3.


(*) Boothies cafe,vbifupra.


Boothies cafe,li.6.fo.31-
L1b.2.fo.7 9.b Seignier (rem-
selscafe. 44. E. 3.9.
ar.E.4.41. 2.€.4:3,4.
19.H.6.67.73.75-

4.8. 4.4.b. 16. H.8. 9.6,


6.


E


14.E. 3. Det. 138. Li. 2. fo. 0o.
Seignior Cromvells cafe.


(*) Vid.Dyer y 4. El. 311.


8.


(aps.


Done to tbe Dbilige is of bis
one nature locali, foz there
the Dbligoz ( no time being
limited) bath time during bis
life, to perkoꝛme it, ag to make
a Seoffment, ac. if tbe Ob⸗
ligee Doth not balten the fame
by rcqueft. In cafe Where the
condition of the Dbligation
$8 locall, there (e alfo a Diners
fitic, when the concurrence
of the Dbiigozand the Db-
lige ig requifite, ( ag tn the
fapd cafe of the Jrcoffment )
and $oben the Dbitqoz map
perfozme it in the abfence of
the Obliqe, ag to knowledge
fatiifacion in the Court of
Kings Wench, * although the
knowledge of fatiffacion ts
locall, pet becaule hee may doe
tt intheabfence of the Obli⸗
gee, be muft doe ít in conueníz
ent time, and hath not time
During bte lite.

Another diuerlity (a, volere
the condition concerneth a
tranfitozp oz locall at, andis
tebe perfozmed tothe Feoſfee
02 oblige, and Where itis to
be performed toa Granger: ag
tf A.be bound to B. to pap ten
pounds to C. A. tender to C.
and bee refufeth,the Iond is
forfeited, as in this Ses
ttíon fball bee fatd moze at
large,

Another Dínerfitie is be»
tweene a condition of an Ob⸗
ligation, anda condition bp:
ona 3jreoffmcat, Where the
Bd that is locall tg to be Done
toa flranger, and Where to the


Of Eftates


ques le temps De le
téder ett paſſe. Wes
auterment eft lou ou
tour De payment eft
limít,ct le feoffo? Dc-
ule Deuaunt le tour,
donque poet le Heire
tender les deniers
come eft auauntdit,
put ceo que le temps
de le tender nc fupt
paffc per le mozt Del
feoffoz, Auxy il ſem⸗
ble queé tiel cafe lou
le fcoffo? deuy duant
le tout De payment, ff
les Crecutors De le
fcoffo? tendront ies
deniers al feoffce al
four De payment, cel
tender eft aſſets bon,
Ct (ile feoffee ceo re⸗
fule les beíreg De
feoffoz potent entrer,
ac. Ct le caufe eft,
pur ceo que les Exe⸗
cutozs vepacfentont
I perfon our Tefta-
to2.at,


S00.337,


for dyeth, then the
time of the render is.
paft. But otherwife it
is whereaday of pay⸗
ment is limited, and
the Feoffor die before -
the day, then may so


hcire tender the mo-
ney as is aforefaid, form
that the time of the 1
tender was not paft by
the death of the Feof-
for. Alfo it feemeth,
That in fuch cafe
whercthe Fcoffor dy-
eth before the day of
payment, if the Exe-
cutors of the Feoffor
tender the money to
the Feoffeeat the day
of payment, thisten-
der is good enough,
and if he ———
fufe it, the heyres of
the Feoffor may enter,
&c. And the reafon
is,for that the Execu-
tors reprefent the per-
fon of their Teftator,
&c. . +100


Dblige or Feoffor himleife, Bs if one makea Ceoffment (n fee, oponconvitíon that the Feofs
fee hall infeoffe a ftranger, and no time ltmitted, the Feoffee hall not Baue time ouring bis life
to make the feokment, foz then be fhould take the profits in the meane time to bis oSone tfr,
SHhich the Eftranger ought to baue, andtherefore 5: ought to make the feoffment ag fone as
contententip he map, and fo tt is of tbe condition of an Dbitgation. Wut tf thecondition be,
That the Feoſtee (ball re-tnfeoffe the feofko2,there the coffee hath time during bis life, fog.
the pꝛtuitie of the condition betweene them, bnleffe he be haſtened bp requeft, ag fall bec ſaid

+


hereafter.


Another diverfitie ts, When the Dbitroz or Feoffee te to enfeoffca ftranger, ag hath bin fay,”
and Soben a ſtranger ts to infeofie the Feeffee 02 oblige : As (E A. tnfeoffe B. of Blacke Der:
vpon condition that (£ C. infeoffe B. of ito bíte Bere, A-fhall re-enter, C. hath time During big


life, ££ B. doth not baften it by requeft, and fo of an :Dbligation.
Wut in fome cafes albcít the conditionbe collateral, andistobe performed to the Dbiige,


^


*


AND no time limited, pet tn reſpect of the nature of the thing, tbe Dbitqoz thall not haue time dye
ting his itfeto perforne tt. As t£tbe condition of an Dbitgationbe, to grantan annuitie 0»
peerelp vent co tbe Obliger during bis life, payable pearelp at tbefeaff of Batter, this annuítp -
02 ycarelp rent mut be granted before Calter, o? eife tbe D blige ſhall mot banc (tat. that feafb-
during big life, & ficde fimilibus, and fo Wag itrefolned bp the Judges (*) of tbe Common
Pleas tu the Argument of Andrews cafe, Which F my felfe heard, 9
Laltip, when the Dbitgoz, Jreoffoz, oz Feoffee is to boc a fole act ox labour, ag to qoc to


honte,


(NV


Lib. vpon Condition. Seël.338.


Rome, Aerufalem, dc. In {uch and theltke cakes; the Dbligoz, Feotffoꝛ, ot Feoſtee hath time
‘during his life and cannot bee haftencd by requelt, And fo tt is tf a ranger ta the D bliga=
tion o2 Jfcoffiment Wwere to doc ſuch anac , he hath time to doc (tat amp time During bis life,


€ Siles executors del feoffor tendromt, dc. HO a8 noto it appeareth
thatepther the heive of the Scoffor, or bis Executoꝛs map (Shen a day is limited) pap the
— monep , and fo alfo map the Adminiſtratoz of the -freoffoz doe, if the Feoſtoz dpe intcftate,
( f) 0 this map the Dzdinarte doe tf chere beneprher Erecutoz no» Pominitratoz, as hath
eee ſaid.
«Cf Exile feoffee refufe, les heires del feoffor poient enter, &c. Notaa teti-
- Btr by the Exccutozs o» Pominiftratozs, and « refufall doth gine the heire ofthe ffeoffoz a títlc
- ofentric. Andbherebp this ( &c.) tga diuerfittetmplped; When a tender and tefufall (all giue
- athfrd perfon titic of eritrie.
It a man bebound to A-inan Dbligation with Condition toinfcoffe B. (Who is a mere
ſtranger) before a day, the Dbligoz doth offer to enfeoffe 8. and be refufcth , the Dbligation
- ts foatcít, fox the Dbligoz hath taken vpon him to enteoffe him, and big refafall cannot fatiifie
- the Condition, becaufe no feoffment is made, butt the fcoffiment had bene by the Condition
- £0 be made to the xD bligæ, oz to any other for hts benefit o? bebofe, atender and refufali Mall
faue the Bond, becaufc be himfelfe bpon the matter is the cauſe wherefoꝛe the Condition could
- not be performed, and therefore yall not gtue himfelfecaufe of action, But it A. be bound to
B. with Londittonthat C. fail enteoffe D. In this cafe (£ C. tender, and D. refafe; the Ob⸗
ligation is faued, foz the Obligoꝛ btmfelfe bndertakcth to doc no at, but that a ranger {bail
- inicoffe a ranger. Bnd it ts holden in Weokes, (h) that inthis cafe tt Malibetntended, that
- the keolfment ſhould be made £02 the benefit of the Obligee. Some to reconcile the Bokes
ſesme to make a difference betweene an crpzette refufall of the ranger, and a reabíneffe of the
Odbligoꝛ atthe nap and placeto make perfogmance, and the abfence of the ſtranger: butthat
can masc no difference. J tabe itrather to bec theerroz of the Repoꝛter; and the iRceco2og
- themfclues are necefarp to be fene, fo? the Law herein ts, ag tt hath beene before Declared.
«FE 3 enfcoffe one tn fee opon condition to infeoffe 1.S. and bis heires,the Feffe tenders the
- feotfiment to 1.5. and he refuleth it, the Feoffoꝛ may reentcr , for bp the cepzeffe intent of the
- Condition, the Felker Hhouid not haue and retaine any benefit o2 cftate tn the land, butas it
were an inftrument to convey oucr the land.
But in that cafe (£ the Condition Were to make a gift in tapleto!.S. and berefufcth tt,and
a tender and refufallig made, there the Sfeoffoz (ball not reenter, for that (t wag intended
that the F effee (boul haue an eftate inthe Land, Bnd fo tt is (£ a fcoffinent bec made bpon
Convdition that the Feoffe (ball grant a Rent Chargetoa ſtranger, tf the Seolkee tender the
“grant and de refufeth,the ffeoffoz ſhall not renter,becaufe the feoffe Was to ret aine the land,
Sobich points are woꝛthy of dus obleruation,
Bere in the cafe of Littleton, Shen the Œxecutors make the tender, and the Seofke refufcth,
albeít the heire bea third perfon,petis he no ſtranger, but bee and the Crecutozs alfo are printes
in Law.


C Le perfon del testator, cc. Œbisis to bee vnderſtood concer⸗

ning gods and chattels eptber tn poſſeſſion oz tn action ; andthe Executoꝛ doth moꝛs acually

tepzcfent the perfonof the Teſtator, then the heire doth the perſon of tbe Anceſtoꝛ. Foꝛ (fa

tan bindeth himſelke, his Œrecutozs ave bound though thep bee not named , but fo it ig not of

x * : — the Adminiſtratoꝛs andthe Ozdinary allo are impiped,as before
eme fato.


Se. 338.
€ E: € nota que eu ANR that in ¶


Bis is to be vnder⸗
flob, that bee that


touts cafes de all cafes of condi-
condition De paym̃t
$ certaine fumme en
grote, touchant ter-
tes ou tenements, (i
lopall tender foit bn


ougbtto tender the


tion for payment of monep is of this difcharged


acertaine fumme in

groffe touching lands

or tenements , 1f law-

full tender be once re-
Ogg


fo, euet to make anp other
tender, butif (t were a Dutíe
befoze,though the Feoſfor en
ter by force of tie Condition,
pet the debt oy butíc remay⸗
netb. Bs (€ A. bowremetha

hundzed


209:


Lib.s. fl. 96.97. ©
Gosd.les Cafe.


(f) Vide SeB.3 34°


33. H.6.16. vg. 36.H.6.8.
2,8. 4.2.3. 15-E,4.5 6.
23,E.4.3. 32. E 2.barre 264
7.E 3.29. 9. M. 17.17.

10, H.7.14.8. 35. H« 8.
Dyer 56.lib. 5. fol.23.
Lambes cafe.


(h) 3. E.4.14.2.€. 4»
vit fupra.


19.H.6.3 4.


a. E, 4.Enfrit conge 25,


Vide Se. fequeu.


Lib.5.


y


18. E. fl. 18. Lib. y. fol.96.
Goodiler Cafe.

19.H.6,54. 30.Ë.3. Ac-
ones Pl.7œ


Caps.


bunbzeb pound of P. and af-
tct mozgageth land to B bpon
Conrition fo, papment there
of, qf A. tender tie monep
to B. anb bec refafeth it , A.
may entcrinto the Land, and
the land (9 freed Foz cucr of the


Of Eftates


Condition, but pet thedebt pres,
remayneth, and may bee reco⸗

acted by Action of Debt. Wut if A. Without anp lone, debt, 92 dutie preceding infeoffe B.
ofland bpon Condition foz the payment of a bunbzco pounds to B. in nature of a gratuitie oz
gift. In that cafe tf he tender the handzed poundto him accozding to the Condition and hee re⸗
kuleth it, B. hath no remedie thercfoze, and fo (g our Author in this and bis other cafes of like


nature tobe bnderftoa.


€ Do tiel


fome a tiel


jour, crc. Pere
is implyeb that this
papment ought to bee
reall and not in ſhew
Opappearance, Foꝛ 1€
itbecagred betweene
the feoffoz and the
Executozs of the fFef-
fe , that the ffeoffoz
fhall pap to the Exe⸗
cutors but part of the
monep, and that pet
in appearance the
whole fumme ſhall bec
paío, and that the reti-
bue (bal bee repatd,
and accozdingip at the
bap and place, the
Swhole fumme is paid,
and after the refduets
repatd, this ts no pers
foymance of the Con⸗
Dition, forthe Rate thal
not bee deueſted out of
the beire Which is a
third perfon, without
a true and effectual
payment , and not bp
a fhado%02 colour of
payment, and the as
greement pꝛecedent
doth guide the pay⸗
mentfubfequent.
And bp this Hecs
tion alfo ft appeareth,


thatthe Grecutozg do *


toi repzefent the
perfor of tbe Œefta=
toz,then the heive doth
to tbe Bunceftoz , foz
though the @recutoz
be not wan, petthe


Section 339.


jem fi le feoffee en
moztgage, Deuant le
tour De payment que
fertoít fait a lup face
fes executors et Deuie,
et fon heire enter en Ie
terre come tl Deuoit, ac,
tifeinble en ceft cas que
le feoffor Doit paper le
money al tour aſſeſſe as
erecutozs, ct nemyal
heirele feoffee, purceo
que le monep al com-
mencemêt trenchatt al
feoffce-en maner come
bn Dutie, et ferra en-
tendue que leftate fuit
fait per caufe De le
prompter De le moncp
per le feoffee, oupur
caufe Dauter Dutie. Ct
put € le paym̃t ne terra
fait al beire, come il
femble, Mes les pa-
tole Del ccabítion pop-
ent eftre tiels, que le
parment ferra fait al
beire, come (ile conDi-
tion fuit, que file feof=
for para al feoffee, ou à
feg heires, tiel fumme
a tiel tour, ac, la apes

a


foits refute , celuy à
duiſſoit tender le mo⸗
ncy eft 5 ceo affouth,
& pleimmt diſcharge
pet touts temps a=


À
she 325:


to tender the money
is of this quite and


euer afterwards.


voies ifthe Feoffee in
morgage before the
day of payment which
fhould bee made to him,
makes his Executors and


fully difcharged E


v


fufed, he which ought _


|


|


]
4
^


die,and his heireentreth |


into the land ashe ought,
&c. It feemeth in this
cafe that the Feoffour
oughtto pay the money,
at the day appointed to
the Executors,and notto
the heire of the Feoffce,
becaufe the moncy at the
beginning trenched to
the Feoffee in manner as
a dutie and fhall be enten-
ded that the eftate was
made by reafon of the
lending ofthe money by
the Feoffee , or for fome
other dutie,and therefore
the payment íball notbe
made to the heire, asit
Ícemeth, but the wordes
of the Condition may be
fuch,as the payment fhall
be made to the heire. As
if the Condition were,
thatif the Feoffor pay to
the Feoffee or to his
heires fuch a fumme at


Li b 3

la moat le feoffce,
fimozuft Deuant
Efour limit? pap-
ment Doit eftre
fait al cit al iour
aſſeſſe at.


vpon Condition.


fuch a day,&c.there af-
ter the death of the
feoffee, ifhee dieth be-
fore the day limitted
the payment ought to
be made tothe heire at
the day appointed,&c.


Setl.3 4.0:
Law appoints him to receiue
the moncp, but fo bett) not the
Lat appoint tbe heire to re
€ctue the monep bnicile be bee
named, :
¶ Doit effre fait al
beire al iour affeffe , Gre.
Bnd here tt alfo appeareth that
tEthe condition bpon the 99o2-


gage be to paptothe Moꝛgagee
4? bis beíres the moncp,&c. and befoze the dag of papment the MWorgage dicth, the Scoffoz
Cannot pap the monep tothe Executoꝛs of tbe Wozgage ; Foꝛ Littleton faith that in this cafe
- the papment ought to be made to tbe fette, Ecin hoc cafu defignario vnius pérfonæ eft exclu-
fio altcrius, & expreffum facit ceffare tacitum, And tbe 3:35» thail neuer fee out a perfor,
when the parties themfeines hauc appointed one. Wut if the condition be to pay the moncy to
the Feoffee bis beires o2 Executozs, then the Feoſfoꝛ Hath election to pay tt either (m) to the
eire oz Crecutors.

It a man make a feoffment in fec opos condition that the frcoffe (hall pay to the eoftoz
bis bríres oꝛ aſſignes 20.pound at ſuch a bap, and befoze the Dap the Feoſfoꝛ makehis Erecu=
£029 and Dpcth,the Feoffee map pap the fame either to the hetre o2 to the Œrecutozs.foz they are
big afliqnes tn Law to this intent. But {Fa man make a feoffment in Fe bpon condition,that
f£ the Feoſtoꝛ pap to the feoffee bis heires oz aſſignes 20.pound before fuch a fcaft, and befoze
the featt the Feoffee maketh bis Exccutoꝛs and dyeth, the Feoſffoꝛ onght to pap the monep to
the cire, andnotto the Exccutoꝛs, foz tbe Executoꝛs tn this cafe are no alligness in Law,and
the rcafon of this diuerſity is this, for that inthe firft cafe the Law muft of neceflitp finde
ent Ailignes, becauſe there cannot be anp Aſſignes tn Ded, £02 the Jrcoffo? hath but a bare
condition and no eftate (n tbe Land Which be can aſſigne ouer Wut in the other cafe the
Feolfee bath an cltate in the land Which be map affígne ouct, and Sphere there map be ALG
fiqnees in Deed, the Law ſhall neuer fee out o? appoint anp Dllignes in Law, And albeit
the feoffce made no a(ftaninent of the eftate, pet the erecutozs cannot be Afliqnees, becaufe
Alignes Mere onlp intended by the condition to be aſſignees ofthe eftate, and fo was (t refol=
med * Mich.a3.& 24. Eliz bp the two chtefe Juſtices tn the Court of toards betweene Ran-
dallanb Browne which 3| obferacd,

Wut {€ the condition be to pap toe monep to the Feoffee His heires og affíaneg, and the
Feoffee makea feoffment over, it is in the election of tbe Feoffoz to pap the moncp £o tbe frit
Hecker o2 tothe feconb fcoffce, and foit thefirlt Feoffee dyeth the -Fcoffor map either pay the
monep to the hetre of the firft Feoffecez to the fecond Feoffee, for the La Swill not enforce
the Seoffoz to take knowledge of tbe fecond fcoffment, noz of the baliditp thereof, whither the
fame be effectuall 0; not but at his pleafure, and the Firſt Feolfee and big beíreg are erpzcilp
named inthe Condition,


Setf. 340.


«| Cem tut tiel cafe

de fcoffment. en
Mortgage, queftié ad
efte Demaunde en quel
lieu le feoffour eft tcs
nus Dc tender les De-
niers at feoffee al tour
affeffe, ac, Ct atcung
ont Dit que fur la terre
iflint tenus en 9po2-
gage, put ceo que E cõ⸗
Dition eft Dependant
furle tre, Ct ont dit,q


A HP vpon fuch cafe
of feoffment in
Morgage, a queftion
hath beene demanded
in what place the feoffor
is bound to tender the
money tothe feoffee at
the day appointed,&c.
And fome haue faid,vp-
onthe land fo holden in
Morgage, becaufe the
condition is depending
vpon the land. And they
ogg?


QL | Zev fur tiel cafe
| de feoffment en
morgace queflion ad
efle demande, cc.


Were an in other places
that 3| map fap once fos
all, wbere Littleton ma=
keth a doubt, and fetteth
done fcucrall optnt=
ong ano the rcafong hee
ener fetteth done * the
better opinion and bis
one laff, and fo he doth
here. (n) ffoz at this dap
this Doubt is fettied, ba-
bing bene oftentimes
vígiueb, that feíug the

money


210


Vid.lib. 5 fo.96-Goedslas safe
Dier 3. Eli( 181.
44-E. 3.1.6.


(m) 12.2.3. Condition
8.&.10.


27.H,8,2.

3.87. 4D b er Mar. 140. 4.
(*) Mic.23.d> 24. Eli(.im
(Curia Wardorum, Inter
Randal ¢ Browne.

Vid, 2. Eliz. Dier 181.
Pl. Com, Chapman: eafs
185.288.

Vid.Govdales cafe. lib. s. fo.
96.97.

17. Af pl. 2.

Geodakes cafe vbi fupra.


(&) Wid Se#.170.302.37 5.
(n) 8.2.4.4. 14,

11H. 4.62. 17. MNp. a-
17, E.3. 3.

21.4.7. Key! way 74.

16. Elx. Dter 327.

Lib. a. f.7 3-99 Boronghis eafe,
a1, E. 4.6.


C»


Lib.5.


8.2.4.2. 15. R. 3. Der. 178.


(b) 1 Ee.


Caps.


monep ig a fumme tn
grofle and collatcrall to
the title of the land, that
the feoffor muſt tender
themonep to the perfon
of the Sreofkee accozding
to the latter opinion, and
it is not fufficient for
himto tender (t bpon the
land: otherwife ít ts of a
rent that tflueth out of
theland, But (Ftbe cons
dition of a Bond, or
froffinent be to Deituer
tíventp quarters of
wheate o2 twenty load of
Œunberoz fuch like, the
Dblige: oy Ffeoffer is
not bound to carrp the
fame about, and fecke the
Fcotke, but the Obligoꝛ
02 #Fcoffoz before the Dap
matt voc to the 4Feoffes,
and know wbere he Will
appoint to receiue tt,and
there ít muſt bee deliues
red. And fo uote a diz
uerfitie betweene moncp,
and things ponderous,
02 of great Weight.
FE the condition of a
Wond oz feof—ment be to
make a feoffinent, there
ít tg fufficient (b) foz
him to tender (t bpon the
lind, becaufe the ftate
eis pafle bp Liue⸗
rie,


Œ Deos leroialm
Denzleterre. 402 if
bebeout of the Kealme
of England, bee ts not
bound to feeke bin 02 to
goc out of the 1Rcalme
bntobim. And fo» that
the feofæ is the caufe
that the Sfeoffoz cannot
tender the monep, the
ffeoffoz fhail enter into
theland, ag ifhe had du⸗
lp tendered ít accozding
to the condition,


€ vn efpectall


corporall fernice al


feoffce. Chis isa
bínerütp betwene a
ent ifuina out of iand,
and a Coꝛpoꝛall fernice
iſſuing out of land, fos ít


Of Eftates


file feoffoz foit fut le
terre la preſt a pater la
mony al feoffee a le
tour affefte, a Le feoffce
adong ne foit pag la,
abono; le fcoffoz eft
affouth, & excuſe De
paymẽt de E mony, pur
ceo que nul Default eft
enlup, Aes il femble
aafcung quela lep eft
contrary,& que Default
eft en lup, Car il eft te-
nus à querer le feoffee
(il (ott adong en afcun
auter lieu Deins le
otalme à Cngletett,
Come fi home foít ob-
lige en bn obligation
de 20.11, fur condition
endozce fur meſm̃ lob-
lígat,que (il papa à ce-
lup à que lobligation
eft fait a tiel tour ro.
li, adonque lobligati-
on De 20. It, perdra fa
force , & ferra te-
nus pur nul, en ceft
cas il coutent a celup
que fift obligation De
querer celup a que lob=
ligation eft fait, fil foit
being Cngleterre,t al
tour affeffe Detender à
luples Dits 10.11, au-
terment il fozfeitera
la ſumme De 2o.lí com⸗
prifedeins E obligati=
otc, Ct iſſint ti fem-
bleenlauter cas ac. Et
coment q̃ aſcuns ont
dit, que le condition eſt
Dependant fur là terre,
bncoze ceo ne paoue q


Sect. 340. |


 Jiaue faid that if the |


feoffor be vpon the land
there ready to pay the”
money to the feoftee at.
the day fet, &the feof-
fee bee not then there,
theo the feoffor is quit "
and excufed of the pay-
ment of the money, for —
that no default is in him, .
Butit feemeth to fome —
that the law is contrary, «
and that default is in
him, forheis bound to
feekethe feoffee if hee
beethen in any other
place withinthe Realm
of England. Asifaman
bebound inan obligati-
onof 20. pound vpoñ
condition endorced vp-
on the fame obligati-
on, that if hee pay
to him to whom the
obligation is made at
fuch a day ro.pound,
then the obligation of
20. pound fhall lofe
his force and bee hol-
denfornothing. Inthis
cafe it behooueth him
thatmade the obligati-
ontofcek himto whom
the obligation is made if
he be in England,and at
the day fetto tender vn-
to him the faidro.poiid
otherwife hee fhall for-
feit the fumme of 20,
pound comprifed with-
in the obligation, &c.
And fo it feemeth in the
other cafe,&c. And al-
beit that fome haue


Lib.3.


ie feafans De le condi⸗
tion Deftre perfozme,
coutent eſtre fait ſur la
tert, ac.nient plus que
fi le condition fuit que
le feoffoz ferra a tiel
tour, tc, bn efpecíal
cozpozall feruice al
fcoffce;ntent noſmant
lelieu ou tiel cozpozal
feruice ferra fait, € tiel
cas le feoſffoꝛ Doit faire
tiel cozpozal feruice al
tour limitte al feoffee,
en quecund lieu Den-
gieterre que ie feoffee
eft, fl voile aucr aduã⸗
tage,ù le condition.ac,
Flint il ſembł en lau⸗
ter cag, Ct il femble a
eur que il ferroit pluis
paopetiient Dit quele-
fate De la terre eft De-
pendant, furla condi⸗
tion,que adire, que le
condition eft Dcpen-
bant fur la terre.ac,
Sed quære,&c.


, vpon Condition.


faid that the condition
is depending vpon the
land,yet this proues not
that the making of the
condition to be perfor-
med,ought to bee made
vpon the land, &c. no
morethen if the condi-
tion were thatthe feof-
for at fuch a day thal do
Íome efpeciall corporal
feruice to the feoffee
not naming the place
where fuch corporall
feruice fhallbe done. In
this cafe the feoffor
ousht to doe fuch cor-
porall feruice at the day
limitted to the feoffee in
what place foeuer of
England that the feoffee
be, if hee will haue ad-
uantage of the conditi-
on,&c. fo it feemeth in
the othercafe. And it
feemes to them that it
fhall bee more proper-
ly faid, that the eftate
of the land is depen-


ding vpon the condition, then to fay that the
condition is depending vpon the land,&c. Sed


quare ec.


$e8.340.


fuftícet) ( ag bath bene
fatd ) that the rent beo
tendered bpon the land,
out of which tt illueth.
Wut Womage oz anp os


“ther fpccíall Cozpogail


feruice muff Bc bone to
the perfon of the 31020)
and the @enant ought
bp the lawe ef conuent=
encic to feke him to
whom the fevníce te to
bec bone in anp place
Within England
FEaman be bound to
pap twenty pound at
any tine during bis life
ata place certaine, the
Dbligoz cannot tender
the monep at the place
Swhen hee will, for ther
the Dblige Mould be
bound to perpetuall atz
tendance , and tbercfoze
the Dbligoz in refpet of
the incertatntp of the
time mufk give the oblige
notice that on ſuch a vap
at the place limitted , hes
Will pap tbe ntonep , and
then the obligee muft at:
tend there to vecetue tt:
fo ít the obtígo? then and
there tenber the moncy,
be hall faue the penaitie
of the Pond for ever,
Che fame law ít (g (€
aman make a feoffinent
in fee thon condition, i£
the #eotfor at anp time
during bis life pap to
the Feoffee twenty potio
at fuc) a place certaine
that then, ec. Bn this
cafe the 4feoffor muff


give notice to the Feoffee When he Will gay ft, for without fuch notice ag ts afozefatd the tena
Der Will not be fufficient, Wut in both thele cafes tf at any time the Dbligoz 02 Feoffoʒ mccte
tbc Obligee o2 Feoffee at the place he map tender the money.

FE A beboun to E. With condition, that C. thal enfcoffe D. on facha day. C mutt gine
notice to D. thereof, and requeff him to be on the land at the Bay to reccíne the Ceoffment and (m
that cafe he is boundto ſeeke D. andto gine bim notice,


€ Detender. 02 Tendre tg awoꝛd common both to the Englifh
and French, in Latyn Offerre, and inthat fence, and With that Latpn Goo tt ig alwapes
bied tw the Common Haw. Vide ſect.5 14. the tender of the halle Darke. And before Sea.


3353345337.


GES


Seftion


211°


31.E, 3.10. 20,H.6.35-
27.€.3.34. 21.4] 13.
g.E.4.4. 21.E.4.17. 20.6.
Auowrse 113. 45.£3.9.
46.E.3, Barre 116.


Mich.12. & 33. E lig in
"Banke le Roy whch 1 my felfe
heard and obformed. vg. Eli.
"Dyer 3 5 4- Lib 8. fel. g 2» in


Franses safe,


18, Eliz, "Dyer 354.


2.2.4. dr 4.


Cap.5.


€ dé
€ [iu sv:


twene a fumme in
gtofie,and a rent iſſu⸗
ing out of the land, as
bath been touched be-


fone, .

Crrecrcilpe-
et eflier, S. de re-
linquifher [on en-
sry es de aner un


AfGfe.

there (t. appeareth,
Æbatif the condition
be broken foz non paps
mentofthe rent, pet
t£ the Feoftor bzingeth
an Bile for the «ent
Due at that time,be (bal
neuer enter foi the
condition broken, be-
caufe be affirmeth the
went to bane a conttz
naance , and therebp
Swapueth the conbíti-
on, And ſo it (e if the
rent had bad a claufe
of Difirelle annexed
nto tt, ik the eoffoz
had diftrepned foo the
tent, foz non papment
Sobercof the condition
ag bꝛoken, he fbouib
neucr center fog the
condition broken, but
he map recetue that
tent an» acquite tbe
fame, and pet enter fos
the condition bzoken.
Dut the accept a rent
bueat a bap after, hee
fbail not enter fo? the


Of Eftates


Setl. 341.


Es fi feoffment
€ M; fee foít fait re⸗
feruant al feoffoz bn a-
nuall vent.et pur fault
De papment $n re-enz
trie ac. en ceft cafe il ne
befoigne le tenant a tẽ⸗
Der le rent,quaunt il eft
arcte, foz(que fur le fre
put ceo que ceo eft
Bent i([uant hors de
la «erre, queek Bent
fecke, Car file Feoffor
foit fetfie bn foits 5 ceft
rent, et puis il bient fur
la terre, ac, et le rent
lup foit Dente, il poet
auer Affife De Nouel
Diffeifin, Car coment
que il poet ent£ pcaufe
De le condition enfreint,
fC, bncoze tl poct cflicr,
5, De relinquifbcr fon
entrie ou De auet bn Aſ⸗
fife;ac, Ct (Tint eft di⸗
uerfitie quant al tender
De le Rent que eft iſſu⸗
ant ors dela Cerre,et
del tender dauter ſumm̃
en gtoffe que ne palfe
ifuant bors Dafcun
Œerre,


Seël.341. 342. à


Vt if a feoffement in -

fec bee made, refer-
uing to the feoffor a yere-
lyrent, and for default of
paymenta re-entrie, &c.
in this cafe the Tenaunt
needeth not to tender the
rent when it is behind,
but vpon the land, be-
caufe this is a Rent iflu-
ing out of the Land,
which is a Rent Secke,
For if the Feoffor bee
feifed once of this Rent
and after hee commeth
vponthe Land, &c. and
the rentis denied him,he
may hauean Affife of Ne-
nel Diffeifin : foralbeithe
may enter by reafon of
the Condition broken,
&c. yet hee may choofe
either to relinquifh his
entrie, orto haue an Af
fife,&c. And fo there isa
diuerfitie as to the tender
ofa Rent which is iffuing
out of the land, and of
the Tender of another
Summe in Groffe,which
is not iffuing out of any
Land.


condition bgoken, becauft be therebp affirmeth tbeleafe to hance a continuance.


€ ET pur ceo il ferra bone et
fure chofe pur celup que

boct faire tiel feoffement en
Mortgage, de mitter bn efpecial
lieu lou les deniers Grôt payes,
et Ie pluíg efpeciall que eft mis,
le


Setlion 342.


A Nd therefore it wil bea good
and fure thing for him that wil
make füchfeoffement in morgage,
to appoint an efpecial place where
the money fhall be payd , and the
more fpeciall that it bec put, the


4


Lib.  vpon Condition. Se8 343: 212
le melioꝛ eft purie feoffoz, Siz betteritisforthe Feoffor. Asif A.


come A. tafcotfe 25, aauera luy
eta les heires furtiel condition,
Que tA, papaa 28, en le Feaſt
De Saint Michael Larchangell
procheine abeneren Eſgliſe ca⸗
thedrall de wWaules en Londres
deins quater heures procheine
Deuant le heure d noone ð meſm̃
lefcatt a le Rood loft Dele $3000
Dele North 0002€ Deins meſme
le C (alite, ou al tombe ð S», Er-


kenwald,ou al buis de tiel Chap⸗


pelloua tiel piller, Deins mefine
Lefglife que adonque bien lift
al auantdit A, ct a (28 heyres
Dentrer,æc, en ticl cafe tl ne be-
foigne De querer le feoftee en au-

ter lieu, ne Deftre en auter
lieu, fozfque en le lieu com:
prife en lendenture, ne Deftre 1a
pluís longe temps, à le temps
fpecifie en metiri lendenture,pur
tender ou paper le money a le
FF coffee, at,


infeoffe B.to haue to him and to
his heires , vpon fuch condition,
That if A. paytoB, on the Feaft
of Saint Michael the Arch- Angel
next comming, in the Cathedral
Church of Saint Pa/s in London,
within foure houres next before
the houre of Noone of the fame
feaft, at the Rood loft of the Rood
of the North doore, within the
fame Church, orat the Tombe of
Saint Erkenwald, or at the doore of
fuch a Chappell, or at fucha pillar
within the fame Church,that then
it fhall be lawfull to the aforefayd
A.and his heires toenter , &c. In
this cafe he needeth notto feek the
Feoffee in an other place, nor to
bee in any other place, but in the
place comprifed in the Indenture,
nor to bee there longer than the
time fpecified in the fame Inden-
ture, to tender or pay the mony to
the feoffce,&c.


€ Œrcis good councell and aduice given, to fet Downe in Connepances enerie thing
ín certaintie and particularitie, foz Certaintie (8 the mother of Quietneſſe and Res
pofe, and Incertaintie the caufe of bartance and contenttong : anb foy obtaining of
the one, and auspding of the other, the belt meane is in all affurances, to take councell of ſear⸗


ned and Well experienced men, and notte truft onelp Without aduice to a Pꝛeſident. os as

the tule is concerning the fate of a mans bobíe, Nullum medicamentum eft idem omnibns, fg
in the (fate and afurance of a mang Landg, Nullum exemplum eft idem omnibus.

€ A Tombe de Saint Erkenwald, cc. (bis Erkenwald toas à

X vounger fonne of Anna dking of the Cat Sarong, and was firft Abbot of Cherfep in Sure

rey, which be had founded, and after Withop of London, a holy and devout man, and lieth

burted inthe South Fic, about the Nutrein Saint Pauls Church, where the Combe pet res


maineth that Lit. fpeaketl of in this place, beeflourt(beb about the peare of our 3020 , 680.
Che refldue of this Scction,and the ( &c.) areentoent,


«CT Cem en tiel cafe
loulelieu De pay⸗
ment ettlimitte, le

Feoffee nek oblige de

receiuer le papiment en

nul autet lieu korſque
en mefme ie lieu (Gint


Se8.343.
Ale in fuch cafe


where the place of
payment is limitted , the
Feoffee is not bound to
receiue the payment in
any other place but inthe
fame place fo limitted.


€ H Œerbp it aps


neg.

Bnd therefore (£ the
Dbligæ recetneth tt
at anp other place, {8
{8 fuffictent,though he
be nét bound to receíne
itat any other place,
Bur


if


Lib.3.


H5. 4. b. 9. H.7. 16.
dH 72-21 19.€.4.1.5,
47-E.3.34. 226E.4.24, 37.
H.6.26.L5.9.f0.78.Peytoes
cafe.


33. H.4.35.


“ Peytses cafe vhi fupra.


4H 7-4. Dy. 3 5. H.8.56.
27. H.8.1.


Lib. 5.fa. 17. Pinnels cafe.


26. H.6.tit. Barre 37:


30.83.23.


11. odiis Barre 545.


Cap-5- À


And fo it is tf the
money he to be paid on
{uch a Fealſt, pet if the
money be tenbico and
receiued at amp time
before the dap, tt is
fufficient,


€ Ereupon are many
Hoinerities woꝛthie
of obſeruation.

Firſt, there ig a Diucrfitie,
ben the condition ts for
payment of monep,and when
fo1tbc deliuerte of a Hoꝛſe, a
18 0bc,a Wing, o2 the like: fox
where tt is for payment of
money, there ifthe Feolfee oz
Dbliqeacceptan Worle, ac.
in fatiffaction, this {3 gwd;
butt£ the condition Swere foz
the deltuerie of a hozfe,o2 robe,
there albett the oblige 02 fcofz
fee accept monep o2 anp other
thing fo? the Dojfe, «c. it is
no performance of the condi⸗
tion. Chelike Law ig, ifthe


( condition bee to acknowledge


a iecognifance of Éiwentic
pounds,ec, tf the :Dbligeæ o2
feoffes accept twenty pounds
ín fatiffactton of the condition,
itis not fufficient tn Law , *
‘but not withſtan ding fuch ac-
ceptance, the condition (8 bꝛo⸗
Ben, And ſo it is of all other
colaterall conditions, though
the O blige oz feoftee himfcife
accept tt,


limit, Mes vncoꝛe fr il
tefccíutt ie payment en
auter lieu, ceo eft aſſets
bonc, et auxy fort pur le
feoffor, ficome le receit
ptt efteen metme le lieu
iffint limit.ac,


Of Eftates


Sect. 344.


¶ ITem en tiel
cafe De feoffmẽt


en mortgage, fi
£ fcoffo? papa al fcof-
fee on chiual, ou ha⸗
nap dargent, ou bt
annuel D02, ou auter
tíel chofe en plein fa-
tiffaction Del money,
& lauter ceo receiutt,
C€ allcts bot a auxy
fort ficome il bit re=
cetue la fumme Del
moncp,coment qnc le
chiual, oulaut chofe
ne fuit de bintifme
part Del balue De [um
Dele money, pur ceo
que lauter aucit cco
accept en pleine fa-
tiffaction,


| Seth. 344)
But yetif hee do receiue |
the payment in another -
place,thisisgocd enough
and as ftrong forthe feof- _
for as if the receipt had
been inthe fame place fo «
limitted,&c.


Lfo in the cafe


of Feoffementin —


Morgage, if the


Feoffor payeth to the.


Feoffee a Horfe ora
Cup of Siluer, or a


Ring of Gold, or any .


fuch other thing in full
fatisfaétion of the mo-
ney,and the other re-


ceiueth it, this is good.


enough, and as ftron

as if hee had receiue

the fumme of money,
though the horfe or
the other thing were
not ofthetwétith part
ofthe value ofthe fum
ofmony, becaufe that
theother hath accep-
ted it in ful fatisfaction


Secondly, tn cafe When the condition ts for payment of money, therets a diuerfitie When


themonep is to be papd tothe partie, and hen to an eftranger : for $oben itis to bec papd to
ancftranger, theretf the ftranger accept a hozfe 92 any colaterall thing in fatiffacion of the mos
nep, itig no performance ef the Condition, becaufe the Condition in that cafe (s ſtricly to bee
performed. Wut tf the condition be, That a ftranger (ball pap to tbe Obligee 02 Feoffee a ſum
of money, there the Dhitge oz Feoffee may receine a hoꝛſe, ec, in fatiffaction,

Thirdly, where the condition ts for papment of twentic pounds, the D bligoz o2 Fecffoz can=
not at the time appointed pap a leſſer fumme infatiffacion of tbe whole, becauſe it is apparant
that a Teffer fumine of money cannot be a fatíf(adton of a greater. Wut if the Dbitge o2 Feof⸗
fee doc at the Dap tecctue part, ano thercof make an acquittancebnder big Seale in full fatífz
faction of the whole, it (5 fuffictent, by reafon the Ded amounteth to an acquíttance of the
Whole. Bethe Dbligoz o2 Lelſoz pap a leer fumme either before the bay, oz at another place
um iS limitted by the Condition,andthe :Dbitge o2 Feoffee recetucth (t, thig (ea god fattfz
adton.

Fourthly, Mot oncly things tn poſſeſſion man be giuen fn fatíffadion , (&pbereo£ Littleton —
putteth his cafe, but alfo if tbe Dblige 02 Feoffee accept a S tatnte o2 a Wond in ſatiſtaction
of the money it ig à god fatiffatton.

FE the D bligoz 02 Feoffoꝛ bebound by condition to pap an hundzed Markes at a certaine

Dap,


Lib.3.


vpon Condition.


$e8.345.


Day,and at the day the parties doc account together , and fog that the reoffe os Obligee did
nee twentie poundto the :D bligoz o2 SFeofkes, that fumme fg allowed, and the rcübue of tbe
hand2ed Warkcs patd, this (ga goo fatiffadion , and pet thetwentis pound pag a Chole tix


action, and no payment Was made tbercof, bat bp Wap of retapner ez


€ E» pleine futisfaction. Nota, In fatitfacion ,


faction is all onc.


[£o fi home enfcot-
fa bn auter (ur con⸗
Dition , que ti et fes
heites cenDzont abu e⸗
ftrange home a à (es
beires on annuel vent
De 20. 9, te, ct (f tlou
fes beires faplont de
papment De ceo, queas
Donques bien lirroit al
feoffoz et a fes breites
De entter ceo eft bon có:
Ditton, et bncoge en cett
cas,coment que tiel an=
nuall payment eft ap-
pelle en lendenture bn
annuall rent, ceo neſt
pas properment rent,
Car fil ferroit rent , il
couient eftre Bent ſer⸗
uice, ot cent charge, ou
tent ſecke, et il neft aſ⸗
cun de eux. Car ſi le⸗
ſtrange fuit ſeiſie ð ceo,
et puis il fuit a luy de⸗
nie, il nauera vnque Aſ⸗
fife De ceo , pur ceo que
il ncft pas i(fuant hos
Dafcun tenements , et
iffint leftrange nad at-
cun remedie fi ticl an-
nual cent (oit aderere en
ceft cag , mes que le
feoffor ou fes beires
poient enter,zc. Ct vn⸗
core fi le feoffor ou fes


Sel. 345.


Lſo ifa man infeofte

an other vpon Con-
dition , that hee and his
heires fhall render to a
ftranger and to his heires
a yearely rent of 20. fhil-
lings, &c. and if hee or
his heires fayle of pay-
ment thereof, chat then it
fhall bee lawfuil to the
Feoftor and his heires to
enter,this isa good Con-
dition, and yet in this
cafe, albeit fuch annuall
payment be called inthe
Indentnre a yearely rent,
this. is not properly a
rent. Forif it fhould be
arent, it muft bee Rent
Seruice, Rent Charge,or
a Rent Secke,and it is not
any of thefe. For if the
ftranger were feifed of
this and after it were de-
nied him, hee fhall neuer
hauean Affife of this, be-
caufe that it is not iffuing
out of any Tenements,
and fo the ftranger hath
not any remedie if fuch
yearely rent be behind in
this cafe , but that the
Feoffor or his heires may
enter,&c. And yet ifthe
Feoffor or his heires en-
ter for default of pay-

Bhs


diſchar


charge
and in full fatit-


€ R Endront 4


vn effrage


home vn annuel


rent, cc.

This referuation
{9 meerely void (a )foz
the reafons bereatter
in thie Section alleade
ged bp Littleton, and
alfo fo? that no Œftate
moueth from the ſtrã⸗
Ger, and that he is not
Partic roilje Ded.

Gnd albett 1t beea
bopde releruatton,and
can bens rent,and the
wozds of the Condt=
tion bethat tf the fcof-
fee o1 his beires fatle
of payment of tt(that
tg,0f che annual rent)
that then, tC. petit ap=
peareth thatthe Cons
Dition (S god, anb an⸗
nuali Bent fball bec
taken foz an annuali
fumme of moncp tn
groiſe, ant not tn the
proper fignification
thereof, viz.tobce a
Rent íffuíng ont of
Land, Which is to be
obferued, that words
tn a Condition fhall
bee taken out of their


213


37-H.6.26. 46.£.3. 33.
344H,6.17.. 12,H,8.1.6.


(a) Lil. 8. fol.70.910


proper fence, Vt res ©


magis valeat quam pc-
reat, and fo in like ca⸗
fes (tis holden (b) in
our Bokes.

Wut tf A. bee ſeiſed
of certaine lands, and
A. awd D. toyne in a
jfeoffment in foe ves
ferning a rent to them
both and their heires,
and the ffeoffæ grant
that (t (ball be lat full
foy them and their
beíteg to ———


(b) 6..2.entr. corg, 55.
recipere.
8.40.34. rmuertere,


Lib.;.


(e) W.B. 3.4391.
$6. M.8.2. 13.E.2.feoffments
dr faits 103, 31.40. p.31.


‘


(4) Vide S9.3316


fe) s. E- 3.35.35


Caps.


the rent, this ig a gos
grant of arent to them
beth , becaufe hee is
partie to the Ded,
anb the clanfe of di⸗
ſtreſſe t$ a grant of the
tent to A. anb B. ag ít
appearcth befoze ín
the Chapter of rents,
Wut tf B. had beenca
firangcr tothe Ded,
then B. had taken no⸗
thing. Bnd bpon this
píucrGtic are all the
Bokes (c) With pri-
ma facie feeme to baty,


reconctled,


€ Car fil fer-
rarent , il conient
eitre rent fernice,
rent charge on rent
fecke, c 1lneft nul
deeux. Œbis ts


a god Logicall argus
ment à diuifione, &
argumentum à diuifi-
one eft forti(fimum in
lege. Littleton vſeth
thts argument elle
Sbere Where feo moze
of this matter.


Of Eftates


beíteg entront put De-
fault 6 papment,adon-
que tiel vent cft ale a
touts tours, Ct iffint
tiel vent neft foafgs bn
peine alfeffe a le tenant
et {es heires, que fils ne
boílent payer ceo folon-
que la forme 51 Inden⸗
ture, Us perdDzont lour
terre per lentrie Del
feoffoz ou fes beires
pur Default ó payment,
Ct en cett cag il Cembie
que le feoffee et fes
beiteg Doient querer le
eftranger ct beires fils
font deins Cngletette,
put ceo que nul lieu eft
limit lou le payment
ferra fait , & pur ceo
que tiel rent neft pas
ifluant bois daſcun
terre, ac,


Setl.34.6.


ment : then füch rent is
taken away for cuer. And
fo fuch a rent is butasa
paine fet vpon the tenant
and his heires ,. that if
they will not pay thisac-
cording to the forme of
the Indenture , they fhall
lofe their land by the en-
trie of the Feoffor or his
heires for default of pay-


ment. And inthis cafe it”


feemeth that the Feoffee
and his heires ought to
feeke the ftranger and his
hcires if they bee within
England, becaufe there is
no place limited where
the payment fhall bee
made , and forthat fuch
rentis not iffuing out of
any land, &c.


¶ Pur default de payment. Srote here fecíng it is but a ſumme in
gtofic, there need no Demand of the rent, foz Littleton here fapth, that the Feoffes ought to feke
the perfon of the ranger to pay him thefumme of mong, becaufe tt (g a ſumme in grofic,and


not iſſuing out of the Land,


€ AE feoffor do-
nor, CC. ou 4
lour heires. Hereby it


map feme that (£ a man make
a ffeoffment, Gift, o2 Leafe,
that (omitting bimfelfe) bec
map referue a Rent to big
betres, Wut Littleton (g not
fo tobec bnderfton, his meas
ning t¢,that epther tbe reote
fo», ec. map referue the Rent
to himſelke onlp , 02 to hime
felfe and bis heires. And pet
itis hoiven (c ) in our bokes
that aman may makea jrcof-
mens in for reſeruing a iRent
of forty Chillings to the Feof⸗
foa £02 fearme of hig iffe, and


Setlion 346.


CET hic nora Deng
Ets Un eff,
quenultent (qs p20-
periment eft dit rent)
poit eftre referue fur
afcun feofment, Do-
ne, ou leas, forfque
tantfolement al feof-
for,ou al donoꝛ, ou
al lefloz, ou a four
beires, æen nul ma-
nec il poit eftre ve-
fecue a a(cun eftrang


perfon


Nd here notetwo
things , one is,
That no rent (which is
properly faid a Rent)
may be referued vpon
any feoffment, gift, or
leafe , but only tothe
Feoffor, ortothe Do-
nor, ortothe Leffor,
orto their heires, and
in no manner it may
bee referued to any
ftrange perfon. Bucif ^


-Lib.s.


perfor, Wes ( Deux
fointenants font bn
leas per fait en Dent,
referuant a bn De eux
bu certaine annuall
rent, cco eft aflets
bon aluya que Erent
eft referue, pur ceo q
il eft pꝛiuie ale leafe
& nemp eſtrange ale
leas, ac,


two Ioyntenants make
a Leafe by Deed in-
dented referuing to
one of them a certaine
yearely Rent, this is
goodenough tohimto life, and botd to bis here.
whom the Rent is re-
ferued, forthatheeis mants font vn leafé per
priuie tothe Leafe, & fait indent, crc.

not a ftranger to the
Leafe, &c.


vpon Condition.


Setl.347.


after his beceale a ponnb of
Compne to bis bríreg , that
this is god,

It a man make a feoffex
ment in £e referuing a Rent
to him 02 bis heires tt is god
( £5 to him oz tearme of big


Mes fi 2. iointe-


bis cafe being bp Ded
fndented ,


is euident , andit


bath beene touched befoze but


it that two Jopntenants Without a Ded tndented make a Leaſe fo; life referuing a Rent to
one of them, it (ball enure to them both in refpect of the iopnt reuerſion. And fo tt is of à furrens
der to one of them, it hail enuteto them both,

FE two Fopntenants, the one foi life, and the other tn fee, tope tn a Leafe for life, 02a gift
tn taple referuing a Rent, the Bent hall enurcto them both , toꝛ if che particular effate deter
mine,thep fball be topntenants againe in pofleflion, But (£ tenant fos life &bc in the reucrfion
topne in a Leafe foz life ozagiftin taple bp Deed referdinga Went, this (ball cnureto the
@enant £o? life onlp, during his life, and after to him in tbe reucrfion, kozeuery one grant tat
Sobich be may lawfully grant, anb t£ atthe Common Law thep had made a Feoffinent (n fe
generally, the Feoſtee Hhould haue holden of the Cenant fo life during bis life, and after of
him tn reuerſton, and fo tt was holden ( 2) inthe Rings Wench,


€ L£ fecond cbofe eft
que nul entre, ou
reentre (que eft tout vn)
poit eftrereferue , ne Do-
. neaafcun perfon forts
tantfolement al feoffoz,
ou al Donoz, ou alleffoz,
ou a lour heires, a tiel
reentre ne poit eſtre
grant,a bn auter perſon.
Car ſi home leſſa terre a
bn auter pur terme de
bie per Jndenture, ten-
bant al lefloz & a fes
beires certaine rent, a
pur default De payment
bn reentry, ac, apres
leleffoz per bn fait gran-
talereuerfion De laterre
a bn auter en fee et le
tenant at terme De bie
atturna, ac. ( le vent a=


Section 347.


He fecond thing is,

that noentrie nor re-
entrie (which is all onc)
may bee referuedor giuen
to any perfon but only to
the Feoffor orto the Do-
nor, ortothe Leffor, or
to theirheires. And fuch
reentrie cannot bee giuen
to any other perfon. For if
aman letteth land to ano-
ther for tearme of life by
Indenture rendring to the
Leffor and to his heires a
certaine rent , and for de-
fault of payment, a reen-
trie, &c. If afterward the
Leffor by a Deed granteth
the reuerfion of the Land
to another in fee , and the
Tenant for terme of life,
attorne, &c. if therentbee

Hhh 2


€ Ve nul

nirie>
de. Here Lir-
tleton veciteth one
of the maximes of
the Common 13%,
€ the rcafon bercof
{5,602 auoyding of
maintenance, fups
bzeflion of right,
and firríng bp of
fuites ? and theres
foze nothing tn as
ction, entrie, o2 rez
entrie can be grans
ted ouer ; foy fo
bnbcr colour theres
of,pzetended titles
might bee granted
to great me, where⸗
by right might be
trodden done, €
the weaks oppzef=
fed, wbtch the Com
mon La® fojbíbe
beth, — men te
grant before tbep
be ín poſſeſſion.


€ Par de-
fault


214.


(©) Lib. g. fol. 111^
WMallories cafe,


g, E. 4.4.4 37, H 8.16
Vide Se, 58.


Vide $48. cf.


(g) ich. 3


6.0 yr Ep.


Lib.3.


Regifier 346. "Pl. Com.a7.
24. E.3.Formoden 68.
F.N.B.sor. Ls ie fo.36.
Marie Portingtows safe.


‘Brooke tit. Condition in Abb,
11.1.9. Loppinicn de Bromley
10°E-5§2. 10. 4 pl.24.
"Pl. Com.136. 11.N.7.17.
13.7 3. Dew le.


TI. Com.313.31 4.4. Seele-
Flienes cafe.


85, E. 4.14.6.


Hm EMITE


(ap.5.


fault de dpt n re-


entrie,Grc. Hereuporn Gr


tg to bee collected diuers
dtuerfities , firk betwene
a condition that requireth a
resentrie, and a limitation
that [pfo facto Determínctb
the cfkate Without any entríc,
Df this firſt fort me ttranger
ag Littleton fatth, {ball take
anp aduantage, as bath bene
faid. But of limitations it is
other wiſe. Bs t£ a man make
a Leafe Quoufque that is ons
till I.S. come from Rome, the
Lefoz arant the reuctfion o-
uerto a ftranger, 1.S.comes
from Rome, the dbrante {ball
take abuantage of ít and en=
ter, becaufe the eftate bp the
expzeſſe limitation wag deter⸗

So it is if a man make a
Leafeto a Woman Quamdiu
cafta vixerit, o2 1f aman make
a cale fo; life to a a widow,
Sitam diu in pura viduitate
viueret. So tt is if a man
make a Leaſe foz a 1°0,pears
f£ the Leſſee liue fo long, the
Lefloz grants oucr the reuer=
fon,the Leſſee dies the Gran-
fes map enter, Caufa qua

' fupra,

2, Another ptueritíc is bes
tweene a condition annered
toa freehold, and a condition
annered toa Leaſe Foz peares.


Of Eftates


pres Coit aderere, le
antee De le reuerſl⸗
on poit Diftreiner pur
le rent, put ceo que le
rent c(t incident a le
reuerfion, megil ne
poit entrer en la fre,
æoufte le tenant, f=
come E leſſor puiffoit,
ou fes bepres, fi le re⸗
uecfion oft efte contt=
nuceneug,ac, Cten
cef cafe lentrie eft
tolle a touts temps,
Carle grantee de le
reuerfion ne pott en⸗
trer, Caufa qua fupra.
Œt le leffor, ne ſes
heyres ne poyent en-
ter, Car fi le leſſor
puifloit ent, Dongs
tl couient que il fer-
roit enfon primer e=
ftate, tc. ceo ne poit
e(tte, pur ceo que il
adalien De lup le re=
uetfíon.


Setl. 14.
after behinde , the
grantee of a rcuerfion
may diftreine for the
rent, becaufe that che
rentis incident to the
reuerfion,but hee may
not enter into the
land and ouft the te-
nant, as the leffor
might haue done or
his heires,ifthe reuer-
fion had beene conti-
nued in them,&c. And
inthis cafe the entrie
is takenaway for euer,
Forthe grantee of the
reuerfion cannot en-
ter. Cas/[a qua (upra.
And tebe Ro
heires cänot enter, for
ifthe leffor might en-
ter,thenhee ought to
be in his former eftate,
&c. And this may not
bee, becaufe hee hath
aliened from him the
reuerfion.


For tfa man make a giftintailcoz a Leafe fox life vpon condition, that (£ the Done


0? Leſſee goeth not to Rome befoze fuch a dap, the Leafe fball ceafe o3 be botde, the dzanteæ of
the reucrfion (ball neuer take aduantage of thiscondition, becaufe the eftate cannot ceafe bez
fore an entrie, but tf the Leaſe had beenc but £o pearcs, thercthe Orantes fhould baue taken
aduantage of the like condition, becaufe the Leaſe £o; peares Ipfo facto bp the breach of the
condition Without anp entrie ag bopde, fo; a Leaſe for peares map begin Without cercmony,
and fo map end without ceremonp: but aneftate of Freehold cannot begin noz end ‘without
ceremonie. And ef a boide thing an eftranger map tabe bencfit, but not of a bopdable effate
by ontrie. f


€ 41 feoffor, onal donor, &Ac. on a lour heires, cc. Dere is to be obſer⸗


Hed a diuerſity betweene a referuatíon of a rent anda re-entrp, fer (ag (t hath benc fato )a rent
cannot bereferucd to the beire of the Feoſtoꝛ, but the heire map take avuantageof a condition,
Which the eoffo could neuer doe. As (£ J infcoffe another of an acre of ground bpon condi⸗
tion that t£ mine hetre pap te the Feoffee, c, z0.fhillings, that he and big beireg thal recenter,
this condition ig god, and (f after mp beceafe mp heire pay the 20.fhillings, be (ball resentes
Foz be (a patute in bled, and entop the land ag heire to me,


€ Forfque tantfolement al feoffor,circ. ow 4 lour beires. Dur Authog
fpeaketh here of naturall perfong fes an example, for (£a Withop, Archdeacon, Parfon, Pꝛe⸗
bend, 0? ang other body politique oz Corporate, Ecclefialttcall or Cempozali make a ieate,ge,
bpon condition, his fuccelloz may enter £o? the Conditton broken, foz they are patuíc in right,
And fo if a man bane a Leafe for peares, and demiſe oz grant the fame byen conbitíon,gc.
and bie, bis Executoꝛs oy Mominiftrators fball enter fox the condition bzobens, Fox thep are pis
Mle insight, and reppelene the perfon of the dead, Cy) 3t
y


feife and bis heircs (bail not onip take benefit of tt; but alfo


Lib:3. vpon Condition. Sed.14 7:


(y) FE Cefty que vſe had made a teafe fez veares,€c. Hyon Condition tbe Peofkes thonid
not enter fo the Condition broken, fox thep are ppinte in eſtate, but, not pzíu(e (n blo, !

Brother btuerütic is in cafe of a Leafe fog peares, where the condition ig that the Leafe (atl
ceale 0; be boide ag ts afozcfaid, anb where the condition is, that the ALeffoz fhall te-enter; fog
there the Drante ag Littleton fait, ball neuer take benefit of the sonbítion .

Bnd ít is to be obfrrucb that Where the eftate o? Reafets Ipfofa&o bofoe bp the conditton
Os limitation, no acceptance of the rent after can make (tto have acontinuance; Deberwite (£
ts of an efkate o2 Leafe boidable bp entrie,

Bnother biuerütíe (d vetSveme conditions (n Ded Whereot fafficient hath bene fab befoze,
and conditions in law, Asif a man makea iLeafe fos itfe, therets a condition in Law anz
heed onto it, that it the Leſſee doth make a greater eftate,¢c, that then the Leſſor map enter,
MDE thigand the likeconditions in Law Dhich doe gine an entrieto the Lefoz, the Leſſor him⸗
bis Allignee andthe 2075 bp Œf-
cheate every one for the condition in Law broken fn their Wne time, Bnother diuerfitie
there ts berweene the tudgement of the Common Law Sobereof Littleton toote;anb the Lac
attbís bap by force o£ the ftatutc(*) of 3 2.H.8,cap.34. (a) fox bp tbe Common La no
Grantee 02 AMiqnee of the renerfien couid (ag hath beencfaid) take abuantage of a recentrie
by force of anp Condition. fo at the Common Raw, if a man bad made a ALeafe fo? life res
feruing a rent,¢c.and tf therent be bebinde a Re-entrie, and the Leſſoz arant the reuerfon
ouer, the Grantee (boulb take no benefit of the condition fez the canfe befoze rcbearfe», But
noto by the fato Statute of 32.H.8. the Grantee map take aduantage thereof, and vpon des
mand of the ront and nonepapment be may re-enter. By Which ad tt is prontded, that aſwell
eucty perfon which ſhall haue anp grant of the King of anp reverfion,ec. of any lands, ec.
ich pertained to Monalteries, ac.as alfo all other perfons being Grantees o2 Diliqnecs,ec.
to 01 bp any other perfon o? perfons, and their Hetres, Executozs, Succeſſoꝛs and Aiſignees
fall hauclike aduantage againſt the Leftecs,æc. by entrie for non-papment of the tent, 02 fog
doing of toaffe o? other fozfeiture,#c. asthefatd Leſtoꝛs op Grantors tbemfelneg ought o2
might baue had. Upon this Ac divers refolutions and tudgements haue beene ginen which
are neceſſary to be knowne.

1. That the laid Statute is gencrall,viz. (^) that the Grantee of the reuerſion of euerp
common perfon afivell ag ef the King all take aduantage of conditions,

1, Chat the Statute doth exteno to Grants made bp the Succeflozs of the ing albeit
the king be onlp named in the act,

3. Chat Where the Statute ſpeaketh of Letlecs that the fame doth not extend to gifts
ín tatie.

4. That where tbe Statute fpeakes of Grantees and BAignes of the teuerfion, (d) that
an Allignee of part of the ftate of the reucrGon map take abuantage of the Condition, Bs if
Lelſee foz life bz, ec. and the reuerfion tg granted forlife,¢c. So t£ ieflee for Peates,€c.be, and
the reucrüon is granted fog peares, the Grantee fo? peares Thali take benefit of the Condition
inrefpc of this 30010 ( Executers ) tn the Act.

$. Œbit a Grantee of part of the reuerGon, (hall not (c take abuantage of the Condition,
ag it the Leaſe bc of thzce acres referning arent bpen condition,and the renerfion (g granted of
two acres, the rent (ball be appozt{one by the act of the parties, but the condition (s deltroped,
to; that it is entire and againft common right.

6 Chat in the Kings cafe the condition in that cafe is not deſtroyed bnt remaines ſtill tn
the King.

7 "8p ad (n La a condition map bee apportioned (m the cafe of a common perfomn,
as (£ a Lealſe fo peares be mabe of two acres,one of the nature of Burrough €ngli(b.tbe other
at tbe Cominon Law,and tbe .e(Toz bauíng ine two fonnes, Bieth , each of theus (ball enter
fox the condition broken, and Itke wife a conbít(on (ball be appoztioned bp the ad and wrong of
the Lellee, as hath benc ſayd in the Chapter of Rents.

8, Sf a Leafe for iife bee made, referuing arent pon conbition, €c, the Leffor lenteg
& fine of the reuerüon, he ts Grantee 02 Allignee of the renerGon, but without atturnement be
fhali not take aduantage of the Œoubition, fo; the makers ef tbe makers of the Statute (tte
tended to auc all neceflarie incidents obſerued, other wile (t might be mifchienous to the elle,

9. There is a diuerGtte betweenea Condition that is compuifarte, anb a a Power of 1Ke-
uecatíon that (s boluntarie ; foz aman that hath a power of tenocation, map by hic owne ag
extingutth bis power of Keuocation in part,ag bp leuping of a fine of part, andypet the poWer
fbali remaine fo2 the refidue,becaufe tt (8 in natare of a limitation, anb not of a Condition,and

fo (t ag reſolued (b ) inthe Garle of Sptzewfburtes cafe iw the Court of Wards, Pafch.39.Eliz.

anb Mich.4.0.& 41.Eliz.
Io, It the 3ieffo; bargaine anb fell tbercuerfion bp Ded indented and (nrolleb, the
Wargatnes is not (n the Per bp the Wargatnoz, Sara i bt íg au Aſligus Mithin tbe EU
3 8


215


(y) 27.81,


Pl. Cor, Browning? (4/2.13 6.


(") 32. H.8. cap. 34. ia l⸗
preamble
(a) a6. H.G.tiz eníre feng. 4g


(b) Pl. Com. Hill & Gren-
£5¢4/, 175.176.
M,10.$r 1 I.Eüg.1 £a.
Dier. Ibid,


14.E 5. Dier 309.
Te

(d) FL. Com. Kidyellyes
faf? 69. )

Usd. Dier Mich.14.¢> 1 5:
Elig.309.

Vid.7.E.3.$ 4. Similead-
iud; ed in (ermuni Lance in the
Lord Dyers time, P. 17.Ehz.
Midh.1 4.& 15 Ent.
Din 309 .adindge Winters
cafe.

(e) Lib.s. fe,54

Knights cafa.

Prynters cafe vbi fupra.
Knights safe vbi Supra.


Lib, 4.fe.120. Duswpers cafe,


Refolued im Dukes cafe Pafo,
3o. Elf is (Commnuni "Banoo,
"Malleriei café lib. 5 .


fo. 11a. b.


( b) 14. Elie Dye 39


Lib.3.


Lib 5 fo. 113. Mallaries cafe.
Lib y fel.o3,Cranees 04/6.


And fe was (e. vofeluad. im
Wynter: cafe. Mish. 14.615
Eliz. sn (Commen. Banco and
oftentimes fines, V. Dye 3098


19. 8.3. Rofério 14.


(£)21.N.7.18. 19. Af 20,
89. E. 3.Gerd 113.114.
88.49 pl.18. Lib 7. fol 7.
The B arl of Bedferds cafe.


(4p.5- Of Eftates Sed. 348.


fbo if the Lelloz grant tbe renerfion in fee tothe ble of A- anb bis heires, A. (5 a fafficimt Be
figna within the Statute, becaufcbe comes in by the ad and itmitation of che partic, albeit be
is tn the Poft,and che words of the Statute be, To or By, and tbep bee Miligners to him, als
though thep benot bp hint: but fuch as come in meetelp bp ad in Raww,ag the 102b of the Wiis
letne, the Lord bp Eicheat, the Luzd that entretb oz clatmetb foz Woztmatne, o) tbe ithe, Mall
not takebenetit ofthis Statute.

11 PE the Leflorin tbe cafebcfoze bargaine end fel the reuerfiou bp Ded indented and ins
Folicd, 0? (€ the defloz make a fcoffement tn fee, and the Leflesre-enter, the Ozauntes os Feottet
fhallnet take any abuantage of any Condition, Without making notice co tbe Leſſee.

12 Dibett the whole words of the Statute be,foz non-payment of the Rent, of for b
of Saft 02 other forfeiture, pet the Gꝛantees o2 Aſſignees ſhall not take benefit of euerie foꝛtei⸗
ture, bp foace ot a condition, but onely of uch conditions as either are (nctoent to thereucrfon,
as Kent, o? £02 rhe benefit of the fate, as £o? not doing of waſt, for keeping the boufes inves
parations,foz making of Fences, (couring of Ditches, fo: pacleruing of Wods, 02 fuch itke,
and not fo the payment of any fummetn zofte, deltuerie of Coꝛne, too, o3 the like, fo ag
other toꝛteiture fball be taken £02 otber fozfeitures like to tbofc examples which were there pug,
vidclicet ) of payment of Rent, and not doing of thal, which are forthe bencht of the Kee


nerfon,


L Seiguiour per
€ AS. p Efcheat,
de


Note here it appeareth,
Æbat the Herd by Eſcheat
Wail diftrepne foz ihe Bent,
end pct tbe. Kent was refer-
med to the Leffo: and dts
betres, but both Alſignees tn
Dedand Aſſitgnees in Law
fhall baue therent, becaufe the
Rent being referueb of Inhe⸗
gitance to bin and bis hetres,
is incíoent to the rewerfion,
and gocth With the ſame. But
t€the Kent ere referucd to
Him and hig Altgnes, anb the
Leloz affiqueo oner the re⸗
werGon,and ptetb, the Allignee
Gali not bauc the Bent alter
bis deceafe, becaufe the Rent
Betcrinined bp his death, for
that it Wag not referued to
him, bis hetres, and Aſſignes.

€ Mes il we poet
enter en la terre per force
del Condition, cc.

Berebpitappeareth, Chat
at tbe Common Haw neither
Allignes tndeed,noz 21 ignes
fn Law could bane taken the
bencfit of ether entrie 02 res
entrie, by fozce ef a condition.


€ Pur ceo que il neff
pale heire al Leffor, &c.


Setlion 348.


€ «em f fort
&»eignío et tes
nant, a E tenant
fait bn tíel leafe put
terme De bie,renDant
aLeflos et ales bteg
tielannual rét, a put
Default De papment
bn re-entrie,tc, ſi a⸗
pꝛes E Leſſor moruſt
ſans heire durant la
vie le Tenaunt a
terme de vie, per que
le reuerſion deuient
al Seignioz per boy
Delcheate, et puis le
rent dele Tenaunt a
terme De bie foit ade=
tete b Seignior poet
Diftrepner F Cenant
put le Gent arere:
Mes il ne poet enter
en là terre per force
Del condition, xc, put
ceo que (1 nett. paffe
heive al Lelloz.æc,


Lfo if Lord and

Tenant be, and
the Tenant make a
Leafe for terme of
life , rendring to the
Leffor and his Heyres
fuch an annuall Rent,
and for default of pay-
ment, are-entrie, &c.
if after the Leffor di-
eth without heire du.
ring the life of the Te-
nant for life, whereby
the Reuerfion com-
meth to the Lord by
way of Efcheat, and
after the rent of the te-
nant for life is behind,
the Lord may diftreyn
the Tenant for the rent
behind, but he may not
enter into the Land by
force of the condition
&c. becaufe that he
is not heire to the Lef=
for,&c.


Che Hardein in Chinalete or (a Secage thal in the right of the hetretake benct of a Cone |
Dition bp entrie 0? resentrie,bp the Common Raw, and fo tt ig hers implied.


$ed,


Lib.3.


vpon Condition:


| Se8.349.


Section 349.


CT Cem terre ſoit graunt a
bn home pur terme De deur
ans fur tielconDition, que

fil papctoit al grantoz deing les

Dits Deur ang 4o, Markes a=

Donques il aucroit la tetre à lup

età fes bepzes,æc, en cett cafe ft

le Grantee enter per force De le

Grant fans afcun liuerie De fei-

fin fait alup perle Grantoz, et

puis il papa al Grauntoz ies

40, Markes Deins les Deut

ans, vncore tL nap riens en la

terre fozfque pur terme De Deux
ans, pur ceo que nul liuerie De

Seiſin a lup fuit fait al com-

mencement, Car fil aueroit

Franktenement et fee en cett

cafe, put ceo que il ad petfozme

le condition, donque tl aueroit

Franktenement per force Del

prime graunt, low nul liuerie De

Seifin De ceo fuit fait, que fer:

toit inconuenient, ac, Des ft

le Grantoꝛ vſt fait liuerie De feí-
fin al Grantee per force De la

Grant, Donque aucroit le Gran⸗

tecle Franktenement et E fee fur

mefine le condition,


AL if land bee graunted to a

man for terme of two yeares;
vpon füch condition, That if hee
fhall pay to the Grauntor within
the fayd two yeares fortie Marks,
then he fhallhaue the Landto him
and to his Heyres, &c. Inthis cafe
if the Grantee enter by force of
the Grant, without any Liuerie of
Seifin made vnto him by the


Grauntor, and after he payeth the


Grauntor the fortie Markes with-
inthe two yeares, yet he hath no-
thing in the land but forterme of
two yeares, becaufe no liuerie of
Seifin was made vnto him at the
beginning : for if he fhould haue
a frecholdand fee inthis cafe, be-
caufe he hath performed the con-
dition, then he fhould hauea free-
hold by force of the firft Grant,
where no liuerie of Seifin was
made ofthis, which would be in-
conuenient, &c. but ifthe Graun-
tor had made Liuerie of Seifin
to the Grantee, by force of the
Graunt then (hould the Grauntee
haue the Freeholdand the Fee vp-
onthe fame condition.


€ His fire things arctobo obferueb: Firſt, Littleton here putteth an erample of a cons
dition precedent. Secondly, Chat fucha Condition Which createth an cftate map
be made by D aroll Mithont Ded. Chirdip, That Linerieof Setin in chis cafe mutt


be made befoze the Lefle enter, (as Littleton here fatth at the beginning) foy after big entrie
Ituerie made to bin that is in poſſeſſton is boyd, ag bath beonefapo, Fourthip, Chat tf no U⸗
nerte of Seilin be made, that no Se (imple doth pa(Te, althongh the money be paid, Fitthly,
Chat it is inconuenient, that the fra Gmple (ould pale tn thts cafe Sotthont liwerie of feífim.
Sirxtly, That Argumentum ab inconuenienti {g fopctbiec in Lato, ag often hath ben and hall
btobferucb, Se moje of this kind of condition inthe Section nett followina.


T |
© Era fes heires, dre. Dere (&c.) implictb an ettate in taile, of a


Leaſe lozlite.
Sect.


V, 504.6.


216


Lib.3.


3 1. E. 1 fit. Peoffments dr
Faits 319.


Cap-5-


Re il ad


fee fimple
conditionall , ec.
Gheitke is of an E⸗
flate in taie 02 fo?
life. Many are of ET
nion againſt Littleton
ín this cafe, and their
reafonis, becaufe the
fe ſimple is to com-
mence opor a condtti=
0n paccedent,ano ther=
foze cannot paite vntill
the conditton be per=
formed: Bnd that here
Littleton ofa. Condi⸗
tion precedent doth
(before the perfoz=
mance thercof ) make
tt fubfequent : and £02
profe of their opinion
they auouch manpfuce
ceflions sf authozttics
that no Fee fimple
fhould paffc before the
condition perfozincd,
3 I. E.1.tit. Feoffinents
& Faits (19. A letteth
a Mannoꝛ to P. for
term of twenty pctce,
andthe Deed would,
That after the terine
of twentie peares that
B. and his hetrs ould
hold the fapo SiDannor
for cucr bp tweluc
pounds rent, A. fa
Beth a wife and dicth
befoge theterm be paft,
the Wife of A. bc-
mands Dower. And
there Wavland chtcfe
Juſtice faith , Chat
the Fee and the frank=
tenement doth rcpofe
in the perfon of the
Lefloz ontill the terme
be paft,f02 befoze that,
the condition is not
performed, fo2 if the
ALciloz had altered the
land before the end of
the terine,8-fhould not
recoucr bp a ait of
Aife, and bp the
Death of the Leſſor the
chiefe 10 fhouip
hauehad the wardſhip


Of Eftates


Setl. 350.


€ lod terre fopt
grant a bn home
pur tme de 5, aug,
ß condition, que fil pay
al Grantoz Dcíng ies
Deur primer ang 40,
Aparkes, que adonque
il eucroit fce , ou autet-
ment fortque pur terme
De les b, ang, et liuerte
de Seifin eft fait a lup
pur force dele graunt,
oze tad fee fimple con-
Ditionall, ac, Ct (i en
cco cafe le Geauntee ne
pata my ai Grantoz les
40, Markes deins ies
primers Deux ans.Don-
ques immediate apres
mefmes ies Deux ans
pattes, le fee et ie frank-
tenement eft, et ferra
adiudge en le Grantor,
pur ceo que le Grantoz
ne poct apres les Dits
deux ang maintenant
enter fur le Grauntee,
pur ceo que le Grantee
ad bncoze titE per trois
ang Dauer et occuptet
la terre per force De m le
grant, Et iſſint pur ceo
que le condition àl part
le Grantee eft enfreint.
etle Grauntoz ne poct
entrer la Lep mittera le
fee et le franktenement
enle Grauntor. Car fi
Grantee en cé cafe fait
watt, Donques apres le
enkreinder De le conDi-
tion, at, et apees les
Deux


Setl.350.


JA D if Land be gran-
ted to a man for term
of fiue yeares,vpon con-
dition, That if he pay to
the Grauntor within the
two firft yeares fortie
Markes,that then he fhall
haue fee, or otherwife
but for terme of the fiue
yeares, and liuerie of Sei-
fin is made to him by
force of the Grant, now
he hatha fee fimple con-
ditionall, &c. And if in
this cafe the Grauntee
doe not pay tothe Gran-
tor the fortie Markes —
within the firft 2 yeares,
then immediately after
the fayd two yeares pat,

the fee & the freehold is
and fhall bee adiudged in:
the Grauntor, bécaufe
char the Grauntor cannot
after the fayd two yeares
prefently enter vpon the
Grauntee, for that the
Grauntec hath yet title
by three yeares to haue
and occupie the land, by

force of the fame Grant.

And fo becaufe that the
condition of the part of
the Grauntee is broken,

and the Grauntor cannot

enter , the Law. will put

the fec and the Freehold

inthe Grauntor : for if

the Grauntee inthis cafe

makes Waft, then after

the breach of the condi-

tion,&c.andafter the two


\


Lib3. vpon Condition. Seël.350.


deux ang, le grantoz yeares, the Grauntor ekthe heire o£ the Lelſoz, and
aucra fon bzicfe De {hall haue his Writ of ne bague —


watt, €t ceo eſt bone Waſte. And this isa couv not haue fer, all Sobícl
peoofe abouque qué good proofe then, "ris ur. voucher 265.
je reuerſion eſt en luy, thatthereuerfionisin 1ietteth Lands to P for eight
i : pear: g, ano if the Leſſor pap
BC, him, &c. not a hundꝛed Markes tothe
Lette at the env of the tearme; that then he {ball bane fee: by the non-payment of the money.
& be fee enafranktenement accructh to hin, and before, the Leſſee cannot bee impleaded iaa
Preecipe, nepther thalt he bouche.
 (x)7.E.3.10. 1, letteth certaine lands to N. for the tearme of ten poares , rendzing a hun⸗
Bred [billing by the pearetohimand his heires, and aranted by poco; tatit be held thelands
ouer to him and bis hetres, that he ſhouſd render bp the pearctwentp pounds,the Leitoz during
the tearme brought an Adion of debt for the rent, And there Herle Chicke Juſtice of the Com⸗
» mon Pleas aineth te rate, that During the tearme the Leſſee had but fo? pearcs , andtherefoze
tbc Action of Debt maintenable.

(y) 44 E.s.titattamt.22. and 43-A(T. p.41. D. and A. (nfcoffe the two 33laíntífeg in the
Alife, thep let thoſe ands to 5. foz tearmc of nine peares bpon Condition, that tf the Platn⸗
tifein the Adliſe pap a hundzed ſhulings to S. during the tearme that S. fball baut it but foz

. wine peares, and if thep pap tt not that S.thalthaue fee, S.continueth big effatc bp one peare,

and after granteth bts cftate to one H. which H. continucth his eltate by two vearcg , and

granted tbercfibucof the trarme to R. anb Within the tearme of nine pearcs the Wlaintifes tn

the Alſiſe pay the hundzed ſhillings toS. R. continucth bis poffefTion atter tbetearme, and in⸗

: Écoffcth D &obícb tnfeoffetb the 1920 Furniuall, agatnft Sohom and ethers without any clayire

Opentriemade by the Piaintifos, after the nine peares ended, heebzought bis Alliſe, and atz
ter adionrnmentrecouered.

(z) 16.E.3.39. & 40. R. doth let certains lands to T. for tearme of twelue peares , and
tn furetic of bis tearme be maketh a Charter of the fee vpon Conditton, that tf bee bce diftur-
bed Within the tearme, that he canftet hold the lands vntill the endof the tearme, that then
be fati holo thelands tobim and bts heires fo? euer, and feifin Was deltuered Lion the one
Charter and the other. R. Within the tearme plowed and fowed the land, amb toke the profits
againtt the will of 1. andl. vpon this dffturbance had fec and recouere in Aſſiſe.

6.R.a.tit. Quid iuris clamat.zo FE a Leafe be made for a teatime bpon Condition, tf the Leſ⸗
fee pay a certaine fumme Within the tearme, that then he hall haue fce, ik hee pap the money bee
Shall banc the fee, but it bcfoze the day of papment the Leſſoꝛ Icuicth a finc to another tie Leſ⸗
fee ought to attorne by proteftation, and if he pay the money, the Conulee fball auc tt, and the
Connfee hail haue the rent referucd tntill the day of payment, anb tf Land be letten fo? tearme
of peareg bpon Condition, that ifthe Lellee be oufted within thetearme by the Leffo?, that hee
fball baut fee, (£ bee beoufted, be ſhall bauc fee bo the Condition, and not withſtanding bec
— x fauc any Aiife, buthee mult bap poſſelſton after the ouſter, and of this he (ball haue
an Aifife.

Bnd generally the Bokes (*) arecited that malic a diuerſitie betweene a Condition pꝛe⸗
tedent, and a Condition fubfequent.

Andialtly, tbe» cite Dier, (a) 10-Eliz.231. anb in Say and Fallers cafe; Pl-Com 372. the
epintong of Dyer and Browne. '

Notð ithſtanding all thts there arethofethat befeno the opinion of Littleton , both bp reaz

- fon and authozitie. By reafon fo2 th by the rule of Law a liuery of feilin mull paflea prefent
Frehold tofome perfon, and cannot gue a Freehold in faturo, ag tt muft doe tn this cafe, (f af⸗
terliuery of feifin made the Freehold and Inheritance fhouls not paffc prefentip, but expec
vntiu tbe Condition be performed, and therefore tf a Leafs for pearcg bee made to biginneat
Michaelmas, the remapnder ouer toanother in fee, if the Lefloz make liucrp of feifin before
Michaelmas the ituerp (s botd, becaufe tf tt hhould woke at all (t muft take effet pzeſently
and cannot erpect. ;

Secondip, they fap that When the Leller makes itucry tothe Leller,ttcannot (and with any
teafonthat againt bis ownelinerp offeifin a Freehold Hould remapne in the RelToz, feing
there is aperion able to take (t. ut it a man by Hed makea Leaſe for peares the remayn⸗
der to the right Heires of 1.5. andthe Leffoz make livery tothe Leſſee fecundum formam char-
te this livery is void, becaufe during the life of 1. S. his right hetre cannot take ( fo? ncmo eft
lizres viuentis) and inthat cafethe freehold (ball not remapne inthe Leſſor, and erped the
Death of 1. S. During the tearme, fox albcit 1. S. die During the tearme, pet the remapnder ts bold
betanfe aliner p of feifin cannot exped,

Fit Aue


217


12.E.a.tit. weucher 265


=. — Rad


(x) 7-E 3 10. TL Com. |
Sayer cafe 272.


(y) 44.€. 3-tít aM aint. 22.
4347 p.41.


Pa tl a LEUR, "2 Pll


(x) 19.€.3 39.40. 10.44.
1g tt. A 161.
PL (om. Brownings cafe 135,


6. Reꝛ· tit. quid jura clamat 30,


: y
(*) 15.H.2 1.2. 4
14 H.8.18.29. 3. H.6.6.b, |
(a) Dyer 10. Eitz. 381.
Pl (em.272.


Tenants for yeares,


Vide Litt. inthe Chapter sf
{


; Lib. Cap.s. Of Eftates Seil.350.


(9) Hill & Granges
Pl.('em.171.


(c)10.E.3.

Seignser Staffords cafe,
[ib.8. fol.7 4.

TA Curt. Neche!s cafe 487.


Seignier Gtafferdieafe vli fup a


Pl.Corin Nicholsesfe 387.


(3) 16.8.5. 54.


,


(9) 5 E. 3 tit. garr.50.


|
And thepfay further chat fœing all the docs afexíaib prooue that fuc a Conditionis —
geo, anb that the liuerp made to the Lellee (a cffetuall, byconfequence the Freehold and In⸗
beritance muft palic pzcfentlp, oz not at ell. aM
inb ít is not rare, fap they, in our Wookes that Words fall bec tranfp.feo and marſhalled
fo ag thefeoffment oz arant may take effec. (b ) Bs (£a man in themoneth of Februaric,make M
a Leafe £o pearcs referuing a pearelp rentpayable atthe Feaſts of Saint Michael the Arch⸗ hi
angell, and the Annunciation of our Lady During the tearme, tbe Law (inthis afe ofretcr= y
uation) fhall make tranfpofition of the Feaſts, viz. at tbe Feaſts of the Annunciation, and of —
&aínt Michacl, the Archangell, thatthe rent map bepato pearelp During tbetearme, And ſo
ít is (c) {nca of agrant of an Annaitie, And further thoy take a diuerfitie in big cafe bes
twWeene a Leufe forlife, anda Leaſe fez peares. Foꝛ in cafe of a Leale Foz life WithfuchaCon= «
dition to hauc fee, they agree that the Fee impie paſſeth not before the performance ofthe Con
Ditton, for that the iinerp may preſentiy worke bpsn the Freehold: but otheriwife ttisinthe «
cafe ef a Leaſe for peares, Alſothep takea diuerſitie betweene Inheritances that Ipc in grant —
and Inheritances that licin Linerp. Foꝛ they agrethatif a man grant an Aduowion (op M
gcates bpon condition, that i£ the zante pay tiventie fhillings, ac, Within thetcarme , that
then be ſhall bcnc fee, the Gzantee (ball net auc fee vntill the Condition be performed, Et fic de M
fimilibus. Bnt otherwife it (g Whereliuery of LiGmis requifite, and therefore if che Ring —
mabefucha Leaſe fo peares, bpon ſucha condition, thctæ imple fball not palle paefentipbes —
caufe tn that cafe no liuerp tg made, »

Chey alfo make feucrall anfweres tothe Authorities before cited. Foꝛ as to tbe cafe in —
2 t E.1- thep fap that epther the cafe ig mifreporte ; oz elle the Law teagatnl the tudgement. — —
Foꝛ the Cafe ig but this, that a man makea Leaſe of a Mannoꝛ to B tozrwentp pearesjand —
that after the twenty peares B. fhall bolo the Mannoz tohim and bis Deuce bp tivelue pound ——
rent and (ag it muft bec intended) maketh ltuery offeifin, in this cafettis ciere (faptbep) — |
that B. hath a fe imple Maintenant, fog there is no Condition pꝛecedent tu the cafe,

Bs for the cafe fn 1 2.E.2.the cafe (ag itis put inthe Bake) ts that lohn de Marre made à —
Charter to (ohn de Burford of Fee (imple , and the fame dap it Mas couenanted betweene
them that !ohn de Burford ſhouid hold the fame tenements £o cígbt peares, € tf he Did not pap
a bunbzeb Markes at tbe end of the tearme thatthe Land Honidrenmapneta lohnde Burford,
andhisheires. In whichcale, fap they, there ig direc repugnancte, fo2 artt the Charter of the
Fee ſimpie Was abfolute, and after the fame Dap it Was coucnanted betwWeene them, ac. this
Coucnant being madeatter the Charter, could nepther alter the abfolute Charter, noz porn
a Condition precedent qiue him a See imple that had a See Ainple befoze.

To all the other Wakes, viz 7-F.3. 10.E.3.10 Aff.44-E.:.43 Aff ando.R.2. thep fap that
being rightip vnderſtood they are gad X35», fo tn fome of tbofe Bokes, ag namely in 10.E.3.

10. Aff. &c.ttappeareth thatthere was a Charter made in furetie of tbe tearme, which fay thep
muſt be intended thug, viz. A man maketh a Leale for peares.the icHee enters and the Leflog
makes a Charter to the Leſſee, ano thereby doth arant onto him, that tf be pay nto the Leſſor
a Dun Markes during the tearme, that then he (ball jauc and hold the Lands to htm and
tobis heires, . À

1t this cafe, fap thep, there need no liuery of fci , but Dothenure ag an exccutozíc grant
by tncreafine of the fate, and in that cafe, without queftion, the Fee fimple paileth notbefoze —
the Condition performed,

And therefore Littleton warily puttctb his cafe ofan eſtate made all at one time bp one Cons
ueyance, and a linerp madethercupon,

302 Littleton himfelfe tn the Section befoze fapth, That in that cafe Without a liuerp nothing
paíicth of the Freehold and Inheritance.

And this diner fitte (fap they ) is proucd by Bokes, and thereupon they cítt(d) ro E.3.54: M
ina wꝛit of Mower,the Cenant vouched to Warrantic,tye bouche ae to partpleadedthatthe M
huſband Was never feifed of any eftate Whercof fhe might bee endowed, as totherehouethe —
tenant pleaded that he leſſed to rhe bufbanb in gage bpon Condition , that tf the Leſſor pato
ten Markes at a certaine day, that he ſhould re⸗eñnter, andif hee fapleo of papment, that the
Land thonid remapne to che bufband and his heires, hich muft beintendedte bedonebp one
entire Act, and pleavcd that bc paid the money at the dap Which is allowed to bee a god plea, —~
Ergo, the Seefimple pa (eo by the Liuery, otherSife the plea had amounted that the bulband
Was neuer feted, tc, Alndfay they that itcannot be intended, that the Judges Mouldbeeof —
onc optnton in Trinitie Œearme, and of another optnton in Mich:elmafl: Cearme ín tbe. fame
i and therefore (thep old) their feucrall opintons, ave in refpect of the fate piuerütie of the
cafes. ho

(c) 3 2.E.a.tit. garr. 20.20 Œenant bp the curtcfie made a Leaſe fos peares, d (n furctic of the
tearme, tc. made a Charter in Fee fimple, and made Liverp according to the Charter (notew
fpecíall mention made of Liuerp inthis cafe) and (Tue being taken inan Biile, Whether the


Lib. vpon Condition. Seél.350.


Tenant by the courte fe demiled ín fee, pon thefpeciall matter found, it was adindged that a

Se (imple vaſſed, and that the heire might enter Foy a forfeiture , Sobich fav thep in cafe ofa
Liuery ig an expꝛeſſe tndgement in the pointagresing With tbe opinion of Littleton.

(f ) 43-E.3.35-tnan Baton of wake again one in Lands which hee held foz teafmc of
peares, Belknap pleaded thus £o? the Defendant, that the Defendant Swag feífco in fe, and
infeolfed the 33 laintife, &c. and after the Plaintife demifedthe Hand backe againe tothe De-
fendant fo2 peares pon condition, that if the Defendant patd certaine money, ac. that then
the Defendant might retaine the land to him and to bis heires,and tf not, the Plaintife might
enter, tc, and pleaded that thetcarme endured, andthat the dap of payment Was not come,
anb Demanded iudgement, ik the PDiaintife map mapntaine an Aion of wate, inaſmuch ag
the Defendant had now a Fee finpic, awd ſhewed forth the Jnventure of Leale Sith the cona
bítion, (Which agreeth With Littletons cafe ) all being bone at onetime, anb by one Deed, and
a Lincry intended, anb Sith Litrlerons opinion alfo, It to true, fap thep, that Cauendifh acz
countell with rhe Plaintite offered to demurre, but neucr proceeded, (x) Vide 20. AMT pl.20.

Other Authoꝛities thep cite, but thele (a F take (t) arc the pzíncipall, and therefoze £o? aa
Hopding of tedioufnefle, hauing 3| feare beenc to long vpon this point, the others 7 omit,
Duly thts thep adde that Littleton had feene and confivercd of the faid Bokes, and haue fet
done his opinion Where Huerp of feifin is made bpon a Conuepance made at onc time, as
hath beenc (ato, that he hath Fee imple condittonall,

Bentgne lector vtere tuo iudicio, nihil enim impedio. Conditio beneficialis qua ftatum con-
ftruit benigne fecundum verborum intentionem eft interpratanda,odiofa autem quz ftatum de-
ftruit ftrice fecundum verborum proprietatem eft accipienda.

2) Lcafets made toa man and a Woman fo? thetr tues bpon condition, that Which of thens
two (bail ſirſt marrie, that onc fpall haue fee, they entermarric, neptbcr of them Pall haue fee,
fo; the incertaintie.

Note tf thecendition be to increaſe an eftate, ( that is to fap, ) to aue fee bpon payment o€
money to the Lefoz 02 his heires ata certainedap, before the dap the Lelloz is attainted of
treafon 02 felony, and alfo befoze the Day ts exccutcd, now ts the condition become tmpoflibie
bp theac anb offence of the Lefoz,and pet the Leilæ Mall not haue fe becaufe a precedent con
bison to encreaſe an cftate muft be perfozmed, and (f (t become tmpoffibie,no cftate fhall rife,


Œ Pur ceo quele grantor ne poet enter, rc. Regularly when any man
will take abuantagc of a condition, (£ he may enter be mutt enter, and when becannot enter
be mnt make a clapme, and thereafon (s foꝛ that a freechold and inheritance {ball not ceafe
Without cntrp oz clapme, and alfo the fcoffoz oy Wrantoz map watue the condition at big

lcafure.
: Ag ifa man arant an Aduowſon toa manand to his hetres bpon condition, that if the
Grantoz, tc. pap zo.pounb on fucha day,€c. the ftate of the Grantes (ball ceafe oz bec btterip
void. Che Grantoz paycth the monp pet the Mate is not reucked inthe Grantoz before a clap,
uno tbat clayme mutt bemadcatthe Church, (4) Andfo tt is of a reuerfion o2 remainder of a
Bent o2 Common oz the itke, there mult be a clapme before the ftate be reueſted in tbe Gran=
to bp force of the condition, and that clapme mutt be made bpon the land.

A fortiori in cafe ofa ffeoffment which paffeth by Linerp of feí(in there mutt be a re-entry bp
fozce of the condition befoze the ftate be voide.

FE a man bargaineth and felieth land by Ded indented and inrolled Sith a Prouifo that if
the Ibargaíner pap, te, that then the ftate (ball ceafe and be botde, he papeth the money, the fate
is not reueffcb in the 2Bargatner before a re-entry, and fo it tg (£ a bargatue and fale be made
of a Reuerſion Remainder Pouowfen, Rent, Common, ec. Bnd fo tt (s (Flanbg be denffe to a
man and his heires vpon condition, that tf the Deuiſee pap not 20,pound at fuc a bay, that
bts eftate fbailceafe and be bopde ; the moncp ig not paid, the tate Mall not bee belted (n the
beire befoze an entric. Bnd fo (t is of the Reuerfion oz 1K emaínber,an Aduowſon, iB ent; Com⸗
mon, 02 the like,

Wut the fato rule hath diners erceptions. Sir, in this pzefent cafe of Littleton, fo that be
tan make ro entríc, hee (ball not be Dztuento make amp clapme to the renerfion, fo; feíng bp
conftruction of Law the freehold and inheritance pañleth Maintenant out of the Lefoz, bp the
lise conftrucion, the freehold and inheritance by the default of the Lees Mhaibe reucfted in the
Lelez Without entrie oz clapme,

2, FE 3 grant a Kent charge in fee out of mp land open condition, there tthe condition be
broken, the rent ſhall be extinct in mp land, becaule 3 ( that am in polleftton of the land ) neede
make no clapme bpon the land, and therefore the Law (ball adiudge the rent bopbe Without
any clapme.

3. 3 a man make a feoftment onto me in fe vpon condition that 3 hall pay onto him 20,
poundat a dap, gc, before the day J lette duro him a land foz peareg referning a rent, and

tt z after


218


(t) 453. Z.3. 35


(g) 29,47. Pl.20.


Lib.8.fe.9o, Frances cafes


‘Pl. Com, Browning &
Beffons cafe,1 33.6.


Vid. Liteleten cap. Villein,
(d) PL. Com. Brovensnge
64/251 33.5.


Sian:
—— Yin e Chg 0
Lib.2.fo.so. Sir Hugh po) im Ia


Chelineleys cafe. b —*—


i
P


tw


Vid.lib.x fol. 174.
‘Digs cafe.
20.E,4:18.19.


Pl Com. Brownings
«afe, 133.6. 30.Æ£.4.19;


a9. E. 4.19» 36, H 745,


Lib.5.


Lip. 1. 174. Digges cafe.


Pl. (erm in Euler foo:
safe.107.b.


g.E.4.29. 14. E. 4.6,
45 E3


3, E. 3.4]. 39 5


je. 23-27.


j. Marie 134. Duy
14. Els? Die. 3 v1.5,
3. H. 4.4. 44.E. 3. 9-
Lih. 3.f9. 79. 80.8 1.im
ei grav (remsiveils cafa,


(aps. Of Eftates Seël.351.352.


after fatie of payment the Feolkee fall retaine the land to him anb to bis beires, and the rent
is Determined and extinct for that the Feottoꝛ could not enter, noz ne&d not clapme tpon the
land fo? that be himfelfe was in pofictiton, and the condition being collat@ai is not fufpene
Ded by the Leale, other wile (t 1s of rent referued.

4 fa man bp his Ded ín consideration of fatberly loue,€c.coucnant to ftand fcifco to the
ble of bimfeife fo life, and after his deceale to the fc of big eldett fonne in taie, the rematn=
ber to bts fecond fonne in tatle, the remainder to big third fonnc (n fee With a Prouifo of reuoz
cation,&c. the father Doth make a renceation according to the Prouilo,the whole eftate t& mains
tenant reuetted in bim without cntrie ozclapme foz the caule afozefatd

€ Le grantee ad uncore title pur 3.ans. Bp this it appeareth that
albeit the Lefe had Pro tempore a fee Ample, pet after that teo (imple ts deueſted out of him,
and befted ín the Leffoz he thall bolo the lands Éoz tyre peares by the expꝛelle limitation of the
parties.

It a man make a Leafe fo; 40. peares, the Leſſce afterwards taketh a Leaſe fo? 20,peares
bpon condition that if he Doth fuch an act, that then the Leafe fo? 20. peares {ball be boide,and
after the Leſſee breake the condition ,bp tozce whereot the fecond Leafe is botde, notwithſtan⸗
Ding the Leafe for 40.peares is furrendzed, foz the condition Was annexed to the Leafe foz 20,
peareg,but the farrender Wag abfolute. Ho tt (g i£ a man make a Leaſe for go. peares,and the
Lcfloz grant the reuerfiontothe Leflee bpon condition, and after the condition is broken, the
tearme Was abfolutelp furrendered. And the diuerlitie ts when the Lefloz grants the reuerf=
on tothe Leflee vpon condition and when the Leſſee grants 07 furrenders bis effate to tbe Leſ⸗
fo2, fox a condition annexed toa furrender map reueſt the particular eftate, becauie the furrens
der is condittonall, Wut ben the Leſlor grants therener(ion to the Leſſee bpon condition,
there the condition is annered tothe reucrfion and the furrender abfolute,

20 gardeine in Chinalrp toke a feoffment of the infant within agethat was in bis tard,
and the infant bzougbt an QV (ife, andthe Gardein fball be adtudged a Difleifor which pio-
ueth that rhe feoffment as agant the infant was boite, and pet by acceptance thercof the
intereft of tbe Gardein Was furrendzed-

28 man maketh a Leafe fo? terme of lifebp Deede, referning the fir fenen peares a Kole,
and if the Lefice will hold, the land after the feucn peares,to pay a rent ín money. the Leſſee
Sotll not hold ouer,but furrender his tearme, In this cafe tn iudgement of Law he had buta
tearme for fouen peares. And fo it is {£a man make a Leafe for life, and (£ the Leffec Within
one pcatc pap not 20,thillings, that be fhall bane but a tearme fo? two peares it he pap not the
money the eftate foz life (9 determined, and he Mail bane the land but fog tio peares,


y Ceveſt bone proofe adonques que le renerfion eff in luy, &c. Pere (8


| fmplped that no matt can haue an action of wWatte, nelle the reuerfion be tn him, and bp the


( Bathozity of our Authoꝛ the reafon of a cafe, and well applyed {9 a ged pzofe in ia»,


Section 351.


CM: en tiels cates De F2 Vt in füch cafes of feoftment
fcotfment fur condition, ^^ vpon condition, where the
lou le feoffoz poit lopalment en- feoffor may lawfully enter for the
ter pur le condition enfreint,tc, condition broken, &c. there the
lale feoffor nadie franktenemét feoffor hath not the freehold be-
Deuant fou entric,ac, fore his entrie,&c.


This bpon that Which hath beene fatd is eutdent and needeth no further erplanation,
Set. 352.


Eye ^ feoffee € Tem fi feoffment At if a feoffment
donera, &c. foit fait fur tiel be madevpon fuch
Here is notime mitteo, conDition.que Ffeoffee condition that the feof


ope Late bard time ve, Doncra le terre al rx. fee fhall giue the land to
02,


Lib.3.


fo», ala feme Del
feoffor, a auer a tener
aeur, aa les hepres
De lout Deux corps en-
gend2es,+ pur Default
De tick cffue, Le rematn=
Der al Droit hepzes le
_feoffor, En ceo cas ſi
[baron deuy.biuant la
feme, Deuant afcun e⸗
ftate en Ie taile fait a
Qup,ic, Donques Doit
le feoffee per la ley
faire eftate a la feme cy
pꝛes le condition, et
aULY cp pres lentent
De le condition que il
- pott faire ceſtaſcauoir.
De letter la terre al for
purterme De bie fans
impeachment de toatt,
E cemainder apres fon
deceaſe a les heyres De
co2ps fa baron De Iup
engenD2es, & pur Dc-
fault De tiel iffue, Le ve-
mainder as Doit
beiteg le baron. Ct là
caufe pur que le leaſe
ferra en ce(t cas a la
feme fole fans im⸗
peachinent de toatt, c(t
pur ceo q le condition
eft, q̃ leſtate terra fait
al baron # à fa feme en
taile, Ct ſi ttel eftate
ft efte fait en le bie Le
baton, Donques apres
le nost Ie baron el bf
«toc eftate ent en Ie
taile : quel eftate eft
fans impeachment de
wat; Ct tint il eft
teafon,que cp pres que


vpon Condition.


the feoffor, and to the
wife of the feoffor, to
haue & to hold to them
and to the heires of
their two bodyes en-
gendred, and for default
of fuch iffue the remain-
der to the right heires
of thefeoffor. In this
cafe if the husband dy-
eth liuing the wife be-
fore any eftate in taile
made vnto them, &c.
then ought the feoffee
by thelaw to makean e-
ftate to the wifeas neere
the condition, and alfo
as neere to the entent of
the condition as he ma
makeit, Thatisto fay,
to let the land to the
wife for terme of life
without impeachment
of wafte the remainder
after his deceafe to the
heires of the body of
her husband on her be-
gotten, and for default
of fuch iffue the remain-
der to the right heires
of the husband. And the
caufe why the leafe hall


‘bee in this cafe to the


wife alone without im-
peachment of wafte is
for that the condition
is,that the eftate fhall be
made to the husband &
and to his wife in taile.
And if fuch eftate had
been made inthe life of
the husband, thenafter
the death of the huf-
band fhe fhould haue


3tt 3


Sell.352.1


ting bis life, bnieffe bebe
haſtened bp tbe requett


Littleton fatth fn tbe next
Section, mi


€ Site baron de-


uicre. But in
this cafe 4£ the Feoſte
dyeth before anp Jreeff-
ment made then is the
condition bzoken,becaufe
he made not the cítatcg,
€c. Within the time pre⸗
ſcribed bp the Law. But
tf the feofiment be made
bpon conbition that the
Soffer before the fea of
St. Michael the Archan⸗
gell next following gine
the land to the feoffoz
and to his Wife (m tatie
vt fupra, and befoze the
dap the Jrcofte dyeth, the
ftate of the beire of the


y dfeoffeo thal! be abfolute;


becaufe a certaine time
1g limítteb by the mutual
agreement of the parties;
Within Which time the
condition becommeth im⸗
pofltbic bp the act of od
as hath beene ſaid before,
and therefore ít (9. mecef=
farp Soben a day is límí-
ted, to abe to the conditts
0n, that the freoffe op his
beires doc performe the
condition, but when 110
time is limitted, then the
jfeoffe at his periti mak
perfozme the condition
during bis life (although
there be no requett made)
oz elle the freoffos 01 his
beíteg may recenter.


€ Fait 4 eux,
oc. Pere the (&c.)
tmplyetb according tothe


condition with the res
matnbder oner,


€ 4 ffr &
a lafeme, dc. Pere
ít appearcth that albett
the Feme bee a ftranger,


219


+


15. H.7.13. 33. H. 6.26.27;
9: Eliz. Dier.262.
Pl.(wm.456. —

Lib. 2. fo. 79 S eignttr
Crompellts cae,


37. E.3.D wer 155.
Seignier (: a) 64/65
à fupra.


pet the jfeoffee ig not 76 /#


bound to make ít Within
congeníent time, becanfe
the ffcoffo, Whots pilup
tothe condition is to take

Gorntig


Caps.

toyntly with bcr. And fo
ít te t£ the condition be to
enfeotte the Feoftoꝛ and
an eftranger, the ffeoffce
bathtime during big life
vnleſſe he be haſtened bp
requeſt. Otherwile it ts
(as bath beene fatd )
Swhere the condition isto
enfcoffe a ftranger 02
Grangers onely.

FE amanmake a feof=
ment in fee, bpon conoíttz
on that the ffeoffæ (bal
make a gift in taie to the


Of Eftates


home poit faire eftate
alentent De condition,
ac, Gilferroit fait,ec,
coment que el ne poit
auet eftate en taile ſi⸗
come el putfloit auct. fi
le Done en le taile bft
eſtre fait a fa baron et
à lup en le bie fa ba-
ton,


Sedl.352.


had an eftate in taile

which eftate is without
impeachment of wafte,
And foit isreafon, that.
as ncere as a man can
make the eftate to the“
intent of the condition, +
&c. that it fhould bee”
made, &c. albeit ſhe can-
not haue eftate in taile,
as fhe might haue had if


€oftoz, the rematnder tó e :
5 need fæ,therethe thegiftintailehad been made to her husband and
Feoffee hath time during |


to her in the life of her husband,&c.
bis life,ag is afozefapd,


becanfethe feoffor wbois partic and priute tothe condition, istotake tht firft cftate. Wut if
the Condition Were to make a gift in talleto a ranger , the rematnder to the Feoffoꝛ in fe,
there the Feoffee ought te doc ít inconnentent time, fos that the Granger (e not patuic to the cens
dition, and he ought to haue the profits pꝛeſently, as befoꝛe hath beencfayd,


€ De faire eflate al feme cy pres le condition, & auxy cy pres lentent del


Condition que il poet faire, &c.

A. infcoffe B. bpon condition that B. fhall make an eftate ín frankmartiage to C. with one
{uch as te the daughter of the Sfeolto2; inthis cafe he cannot make an eſtate in Frankmarri⸗
age, becaufe the eftate mut moucfrom the Feoffee, anb the daughter is netof big blono, but
vet he muſt make an eftate to them Foz thetr lines, £0? this (s as nare the Condition as yee can,
And fo tt is (f tbe Conditton be, to make to A. (Which ig a meere Lay man) an eftate in frank=
almotgne,pet muft be make an cftate to him for bis life , forthe reafon beere yecloco bp Lit-
tieron.

A diuerfitie is to be vnderſtood betweene conditions that are to create am cftate , andconditic
ong that are to deftrop an eftate: for here ttappeareth, Chat a condition that ts to create an
eftate, tg to be perfozmedby contruction of Law, as neere the condition as map be, and accoꝛ⸗
Bing to the entent and meaning ofthecondition, aibeit the letter and Swozds of the condition
cannot be performed : but otherwife it is ef a condition that deſtroyeth an cftate, for that ig to
be taken ſtrictly, onleffe tt be in certaine fpecíall cales: and of this fomeWhat bath bene ſayd
befoze tn this Chapter.

Agif aman mozgage bis land to W. bpon Condition, that t€ the Wozgagos ano T. S. pap
twentie ſhillings at fuch a dap to tbe Mozgage,that then he fail re-enter, the Morgagoz di⸗
eth befoze the day, 1-S.papes the money to tbc Dorgagee.this toa god perfogmance of thecon=
dition, and pet the letter of thecondition is not perfoamed, Wut i£ the Mozgagoz had bene
altue at the dap, and be Mould not pap the money, but refufedto pay the fame, anb I. S. alone
had tendzed the money, the Morgagee might baue refuſed tt. Wutif aman make a lealetotwe
for peares, With a prouifo, Fé the Leflees déc During the terme, tbe Leflos (ball re-enter, one
Leflee alien big part and dic, the Leſſee cannot re-enter, bnt the Aflignee ſhall entop the terme fo
long ag the Surutuoz lineth, andthe rcafon ts, becaufe tbe Leaſe bp tbe prouifo (g , Not to
ceaſe till both be dead, Wut inthe foꝛmer cafe, albeit the Moꝛgagoꝛ be dead, pet the ad of Sov
Bali not Dífablc I S. to pap the moncp, for thereby tbe Moꝛgages recciuce no pretndice: And fo
it (s tn thatcale,t£ 1.5. had died befoze the day, tye Moꝛgagoꝛ might have papd tt,

And here ig to be obferuco a dtuerfitie when the Feoffes diet, for then (ag hath bene fap)
the condition ts bzoken, and $oben the Feoffoz dicth, foz then the fate ig to bee made ag neere
tbe intent of tbe Condition ag map be,


€ 41 feme pur terme de fa vie fans impeachment de wast.
ere tt appearcth, Chat this eftate for ife onght to be Without impeachment of tal, anb
pet tf the wife doth accept of an cftate fox life; Without this clanfe, without imprachment of
Wa, (t ($ ged, becaufe the fate for Itfe ts the fubftance of the Grant, and thepzinticdge to bag
Sithout impeachment of Svat fg colaterall, and oncip fo; the benefit of the wile, and the omífe
fion of it ontly Foz the bencfit of the heire.
Allo it the Wite take huſhand betoze requelt made, and thes they make requcft;ano tbe fate
ig


Koitnior (revowelscefe vb. fup.


3e.H.8.151.Coudis.Br.1 50.
V.3 3.H.8.Hit.Loint.Br.63.


Lib.a fe .79.To n. Seirnior
e cafe. 3, H. 4. 5.


3.4.4.5. Deiguier Crormels
«fe ob. fupra,


w€-*" PRET “oh MN, #7 NOTE. VUA!


P


}
Lib. vpon Condition:
tg made to the hufband and wife, during the life of the Wife this is a god performance of tho
Condition, albeit the eftatebe made to the halband and wife: Where Littleton fatty tt is to bee
red A the wife, but tt is all one in fubflance,feeing that the limitation ig during the life of
D.
© Sanns impeachment de Waft , Abfqueimpetione vati, (that tg)
- SRithout anp challenge ozimpeachment of toatk, anb by Force hercof the Leſſee may cut done
the Cres and conucrt them to his owne ble, Dtherwite it is ifthe Words were, Sauns im-
peachment per afcun Action de Watt, fo? then the difcharge crtends but to the Acton, and not
tothe Gras themfciucs, andinthat cate the Leſtoꝛ halt bauc them,
And it isto be obſerued, That after the deceafe of the huſband the Hate te not to bee made to
the wife and the heires of ber bodie by her late hufband ingendzed, ond foto haucan cftate of


Sed 3532


220.


See in my Reports lib. v1.
Jo 83. Lib. 9. fe.. li.2.2 3,


Inheritance as tbe ould baue had bp furutuoz;, ifthceftate bad bene made accozding to the —


condition, but enclp an eſtate foz Ife Without impeachment of waft, ac. £o? that by the anthezt=
- ticof Littleton fg not fo neerethe intent e£ thecondition , as thecafe that Littleton putteth,
Wut J Will fcarch no further into thts caſe,but leaue tt to theicarned and tudictong Reader,
Œ Be apres [on deceafe a les heires del corp; le Baron de luy engend es.
-. SMoce here, admit chat there Were two 3l C ues in tatie; the remainder ſhallpꝛeſently beft only
— fn tbc elocft, and pet tthe dieth Without Flue, tt (ball per formam don: bel tn che poungelt, ag
À hath beenc fapo in the Chapter of Clkate tatle: and foit t tacite ppoued ÿcere , (oz otherwiſe
- theconbition( tf there were two ilues) could not be pertoꝛmed.


¶ [Get ea cett cate
.. fle baron ct la
feme ont iffte, et De-
uiont Deuant le Done
en le Taile faíta eux
- &c, Donques le Fcof-
- fec Doit faire eftate al
Iſſue ct a les heires
de corps fon pere et
fon mere engendzes,
et put Default de tícl
Iſſue te remainder
à leg Droit heires Ic
- Baron, tc, Et meſm̃
la Ley eft en auters
tafes femblables, Ct
fi ticl feoffee ne voet
faire tiel eftate, ac,
quaunt tl c(t. vcafo-
hablement — tequife
pet eur quc Deuopent
auer eftate per force
De le condition, ac,
Donque poet le Feof⸗
fo» ou ſes heyzes
- enter,


S6. 353.


Lfo inthis cafe if

the husband and
wife haue Iffue, & die
before the gift in taile
made to them, &c. thé
the feoffee ought to
make an eftate to the
Itfue,and to the heires
of the bodie of his fa-
ther and his mother
begotten, and for de-
fault of fuch Iffue,&c.
the remainder to the
right heires of the
husband,&c. Andthe
fame Law is in other
like cafes : andif fuch
a Feoffee will not take
fücheftate,&c, when
he is reafonably re-
quiredby them which
ought to haue the ftate
by force of the Con-
dition, &c. then may
the Feoffor or his
heires enter.


€ V ant il eft reafo-
pablement | ve-
quife per eux queux de-
soient aner effate per
force de le Condition,
Note herett appearcth, That
the Feoſftee bath tine during
big life to make tbe eftate, ona
leſſe bc be vcafonablp required
by them that are to take the
eftate, This ts to bee tntene
ded of partics o2 printes, and
not of meere firangerg, fog
there (ag bath becne fapd)
the ftate muſt be made in cons
Hentent time,

Ani concerning the requelk
{tts tobe known, that when
the requeft ts made, the partiz
01 prtup mult requeft the feofs
fee at a time certatite,to be bp=
on the land, and toinake the
ſtate accozding to the conditt=
on, for ſeeing notte certaine
is preferibed for the making
of the ſt ate and tt ig incertain
when the requeft (ball bee
made, fuch requcl and noz
tice muft be made ag hath bin
fayo befor: in this chap.3 DE
this Section, with tbe ( &c.)
there needeth not, vpon that
which hath beenfatd,any fara
ther explication,


Sed,


Lib.3.


Vide. s.


(ap.s.


€ le ff. €


Le r€-in-


feoffera  plufors
homes. By the
te-feoffiment it (9 im
plicd tó be made to the
Feoſtors, for a fcoffes
ment duer to ſtran⸗
gers cannot be fapo a
1K e-feofement, and tf
the feoffement ſhould
bemabc ouerto ftran-
gews onely, then ag
hath beene often fasd,
ít muft bee made ín
conuentent tite,

vA Heire


celuy que furuef-
quiſt, a auer & te-
ner a luy cy a les


Of Eftates


Se. 354.


Cem fi feoffmét
fott fait fur condi⸗
tion, que le feoffee
re-infeofter plugs hoes
a aueret tener a eux et
a lour beites a touts
tours.et touts ceux que
Deuoient auer e(tat mo-
tont Deuant atcua eftat
fait a eux,donque Doit E
feoffec faire eftate al bre
celup que furuefquift De
eur.a auer a teneca lup
et ales beires celup que
ſurueſquiſt.


Fect. 354.355.
AE ifa Feoffement]


bee made vpon con-
dition, Thatif the feof-
fee fhal re-enfeoffe many
men, to haueand to hold «
to them and to their heirs
for euer, & al they which
ought to haue eftate, die
before any eftate made to
them, then ought the
feoffee to make eftate to
the heire of him which
furuiues of them, to haue
& to hold to him and to
the heires of him which
furuiueth;


heires celuy que ſurucſquiſt. Hereupon queftions haue beene made,
Sobercto1e the Habendum fs not to the heires of the heire, and foz what rcafon it is bp Little
ton ifmitted to the betres of the ſuruiuor. And the cauſe is, foꝛ that tf it Were made to the heirs
of thebcire, then fous perfons by poſſibilitie ſhould be (aberitablete tbc land, which fboulb
not haue inherited {£the ſtate had beene madeto tbe Suruinozand hig heires,andconfequentip —
thecondition bzoken,

Foz crample, JE the Suruiuoꝛ toke to Wife Alice Fairefield, fn this cafe ££ the limitation
Svert tothe fonne and bis betres, then it tbe fonne fhould die without heires of his Father, the
blond of the Faircfields (being the bloudof bis mother) (bonto tnberit, But (€ the limitation
be to the right heres of the father, then fbeulo not the bloud of the Faircficlds bp any pollibili=
tic (nbertt, fos then itis ag muchas tf the ftate had beene made to the furuiuos and bis heires
And therefore theſe Words, ( Et à les heires celuy que furuefquift ) which manp haue thought
furperfluoug, are verie matertall. Mote Well this kind of Free ſimple, for (t (s Wozthiethe obs
feruatton : but faffíctent hath beenc fapdto open the meaning of Littleton, ano therefoze J
wil diue no Deeper (nto this point, but leaue (tto the further conGderation of thelearued Reader,


€ ju bauíng fpos


ken of defaults of
perfogimance , 02 ers
Prefle breaches of conditions,
fpeakctl) now in what cafes
the feoffe in tndgement of
Law doth fodtfable bimfeife
to performe the Œ onditton:
And of diſabilities fome bee
bp act of the partie, and fome
bp act in Law,
€ o» 4 doner en
taile a Un auter, dc.


Here is (mplícó an etfate foz
life 92 £02 pcareg,tc,


Setlion 355.


¶ T Cem fi keoffm̃t

foit fait fur con-

Dition, Denfeof=
fer bn auter, ou ð Do-
ner en taile a bn aut,
at, {i le feoffee duant
P pfozmance Del con-
Dition enfeoffa bn c-
ftranger , ou fait bn
leate put tme De bie,
donques poet F feof-


fot


Lfo ifa Feoffe-

ment be made vp-
oncondition, To en-.
feoffe another, or to,
make a gift in taile to
another, &c. if them
Feoffee before the
performance of the”
Condition , enfeoffe-
a ftranger, or makeæ
Leafe for life, then


Lib.3. vpon Condition. $e8.356.357:


fos & (eg Heites en- may the Fcoffor and | @ Enftoffe v» E-
ter, xc, pur ceo que il hisheirsenter,&c.be- ranger sou fait vn Leaf


caufe he hath difabled pur terme de vie. (his
: is a otfabilítíe by tbe act ofthe
PE f himfelfe to P — partic, for herein the Feoſfee
Dition, entant que tl meena P muc bath Dubie inte make
ad fait eftate a vn as he hath made ane- the Feoffement oz other ettate
accozding to the Condition.

auter, tc, {tate to another, &c. And 32 once foy ail,
the Feollee is diſabled When he cannot conucp the Land ener accopding to tbe Condition in the
fame plight, qualitic and fredome as the Land Das conneped to him, fo» fo the Law requireth
tbe fame, ag (hall mantfettlp appsare hereafter, And bere where onr Authour ſpeaketh of a


ap luy mene difable
De performer le Con-


22K :


13. B.7. a3.6. 32, £. 3. barrt
264. 2i. Mab 38. Apl.q.


keoſtment, he includeth an eſtate taile ag wellas the fee imple,


Section 356.


€ E N melmele manner c(t, (

le feoffee Deuant Ie condi⸗
tion performe leſſa mefine ates
tc abn eftranger, pur terme Des
ans, enceftcafele feoffo2 et fes
beires poyent enter, ac, put ceo
que le feoffee ad lup Difable de
' faire eftate De les tenements ac-
cozdant a ceo que eftoit en leg
tenements, quant eftate ent fuit
faítalup. Car fil boíle faire e-
 flate De leg tenements accoz«
dant à le condition, ac, Donques
poít le leffee pur terme Dans en-
ter x ou(te meſme celup a quele-
ftate e(t fait , ac. et occupier ceo
Durant fon terme,


€ IN the fame manner it is if the
Feoffeebefore the Condition
performed, letteth the fame land
toa ftranger fortearme of yeares,
in this cafe the Feoffor and his
heires may enter, &c. becaufe the
Feoffee hath difabled him to make
an eftate of the tenements accor-
ding to that which was inthe te-
nements when the ftate thereof
was made vnto him. For if hee
will make an eftate of the tene-
ments according to the Conditi-
on, &c. then may the Leffee for
yeares enter and oufte him to
whom the eftate is made, &c. and
occupie this during his tearme,


cs’ le feoffee deuant le condition performe le(fa meme la terre a un effran-
ger pur terme des ans, &c. eve the &c. implyeth a Leaſe to take

effect in futnro afiveil agin prxfenti, alfo a Leafe fo? one peare o2 halfe a peare, &c.
Tbe reafon of this tseuidentlp fet Downe before, And agatne of difabtlities fomebe bp Da
in prefenti,fobhereof Littlctontath put ting cramples,andfome in futuro, Sphersef now he will


fgeabe (n the next Section.


Sed. 357.


CET plufors
ES Dit, que {


AX D many haue
faid that if fuch


€ Irſt bere (g an example
of a bifabtittp both by
adin Hato, and in fu-


tiel feoffement foit feoffment be madeto
fait a bn home fole a fingle man vpon the
ſur m̃ le condition,æ {ame Condition, and
beuaut d él ad pet» before hee hath per-

BE


ture, fozbp marrtage the Sotfe
ig entitied bp aw to Dower,
after the death of ber bufban®,

Sccondip, Fe appeareth,


(a) 13.H.7.33.4.


that albett the wike bp the 34.5.:.4eer.127.M 17. E.
marriage (g bnt íntítieb to — 135. a8 ARP La.
baut


14 H.4.7. 6. lib 2. fel. 59.6.


Lib.3.


Tulins Winningtons aft.


312,455.


(*) Trin. v8. Eliq.io Com-
muni D ento in Sir Thomas
Witt eafc,


Caps.


hane dower, Ethe eltate which
the is to haue in futuro, viz. af=
ter the deceafe of her bufband,
petitigapzefent caufe of ene
trie, Bs a Leafe fop peares to
begin ata bay to come ts a pre
fent difabtittie and caufe of re⸗
entrie, fez that tbe Land (s not
in that fresdome anb plight, as
ít $vag conneped to the Feot⸗
fe,and after the fate made 95
ner accozbínq to the Condition
theland fhall bo charged there=
With,


En vn anuter


plight. Plightig an old
Englifh Word, and here figni=
fieth not only the eftate,but the
habit and qualitie of the land,
and extendeth to rent charges,
and to a poflthilitie of ower.
Vide Sett, 289. where Plight
is taken fox an eftate 02 tutes
teft of and is tbe land it felfe,
anb ertendeth not to a Bent
Charge out of the Land.

A vn home fole.
Foꝛ 1€ the Feoffee were marz
ried at the time of the feoffes
ment, then the Dower can bee
no Difabtlitie,becaufethe Land
fhall remaine in fuch Plight


Of Eftates


forme mefinela con-
Dition tl prent feme,
Donques ie feofoz
et ies heires main-
tenant potententer,
put ceo que fil fefoit
eftate accozdant ale
condition, et puis
mo2utt, Donques là
feme ferra endowe,
et poit recouer fa
Dower per bziefe Dc
Dower, at, et iſſint
per Le pzifel Del feme
les tenements font
mis € bn auter plíte
que ne fueront al
temps Del feoffment
fut condition , put
ceo que adonques
nul tiel feme fuit
Dowable, ne ferroit
Dowe per là dep,
FC,


as it was at the time of the feofment made date him.
¶ Donques le feoffor & fes heires maintenant poicnt enter. Pere tt


Sect. z50.


formed . the. fanie
Condition hec taketh
wife , then the Feof-
for and his Heires
maintenant may enter,


becaufe, if hee hath -


madean eftate accor-


ding to the Condition «
& after dieth, thenthe —


wife fhall be endow-
ed , and may recouer
her Dower by a Writ
of Dower , &c. and
fo by the taking of a
wife , the Tenements
bee put in another


plight then they were -


at the time of the
feoffment vpon Con-
dition, for that then
no füch Wife was
dowable, nor fhould
bee endowed by the
Law, &c.


appcarctb, that feztma that for this títle o» poſſibilitie the Feoſfoꝛ map pzefentip enter , that ale


bcít the wife happen to die befoze the huſband, fo ag this title oz poſſibilit ie toke no effect, pet.


the Jrcoffo may re-enter, for the Feoffee betng difabled at any tine though tbe fame continue
not, pet the Feoffoꝛ may re-enter, foz (n that cafe, be that is once diſabled ĩs ener Difabled. And
herein a diuerftie (s to be obferueb bctivenea Difabilitie foz a tine on the part 9€ the Jreoffee,
and a Difabilitie foza time of the part of the Feoffoꝛ. Foꝛ i£ a man maketh a fcoffment tn fee
bpon condition that the Feoffee befoze fuch a day fbali rezenfeotfc te ffcoffor, the Feofkee taz
keth wife, and the wike dpeth befoze the day, pet map the Feoffor re-enter.

Ho it is tf the Jreoffee before the dap cntreth into Religion, andts profelled , aub before the
dap (e Beratgned, pet the Feoſfoꝛ map resenter.

Soit ts t tbe frcoffee befopethe day make a feoffment infer, andbefore the dap takebacke
an cftateto him and bis hetres, pet the Feoſfoꝛ map re-enter.

Albeit in thefe cafes a certaine nap be limited, pet the Feoſfes being once diſabled is ence dif=
abled, And fo tt is oben no time is limited bp the parties, butthe time is appointed bp tbc
Law,

But (£ a man make a feoffment in fee opon Condition, that i£the feoffoz o; his heres pap a
certaine fumme of money befoze fuch a day, the Feoſfoꝛ commit Creafon, ts attainted and eres
cuted, now (e there a dtfabllitte on the part of the ffcoffez, for be hath no betre , butif the heire
be reftoze befozethe dap he may perfozme the Conditton, agit Was rcfoluep (* Trin 18. E-
liz. in Communi Banco ftt Sfr Thomas Wiars cafe, Which 3] heardand obferued. Otherwife
itis if ſuch a diſabilitie had growne on the part ofthe Feoffee, andthe reafon af the diuerũtie
is, for that ag Littleton fatth, maintenant bp the diſabilitie of the Feoſtee, the Condition ig
broker, anb the Feoffoꝛ may enter, but fo (t is not bp tbe diſabilitie of the feoffoz,02 bis heires,
fox it they perfoyme the Condition within tbe time tt te fulfictent, for chat thep map at anp time
performe the Convition before the dap, And fo tt is (£ the feoffog enter (nto Keligion, and E


Lib.3.


vpon Condition.


Sei.358.


is deraigned, he map performe the Condition Copebe caufe aforefate; Et fic de fimili-
eg (&c.) in this Section are fnfficientip erplapned,


«Lf» mefme ie
Coil eft, file
feoffee charge la ter⸗
re per fon fait dun
vent charge Deuant
le performance Del
condition, ou foit ob-
lige en ba eftatute De
le Staple,ou tatute
Merchant , en tielx
cafes le feoffoz et fes
beires poyent entrer
gc, Caufa qua fupra.
Car quecunque que
venuſt ales tenemts
per le feoffinent de Ie
feoffce , eux coutent
eftreltables , et eftre
mis en erecution per
force De leffatute
Merchant, ou de
flatutc del Staple,
Quzre. Mes quát le
fcoffo? ou fcs heives,
put fs caufeg auant-
Dits , aucront enter,
come tls Deuopent,
come tl fembie, ac,
Donques touts tiels
chofes que Deuant
tiel entrie puiffent
troubler ou encum⸗
bec legtenements is
fínt Dones fur condi⸗
tíon,ac.quant a meſ⸗
mes £s tenentsfont
oufterment defeats,


The Lord Clifford vid hold his Barony and the
by Grand Dertantiein capite,


Sell. 358.


€ IN the fame man-

ner it is if the

Feoffee charge
the land by his Deed
witha rent charge be-
fore the performance
ofthe Condition , or
be bound in a Statute
Staple or Statute Mer-
chant, in thefe cafes
the Feoffor and his
heires may enter , &c.
Caufa qua fupra. For
whofoeuer commeth
to the Lands by the
feoffment ofthe Feof-
fee, they ought to bee
lyable, and put inexe-
cution by force of the
Statute Merchant, or
of the Statute Staple.
Quare. But whentlie
Feoffor or his heires
for the caufes afore-
faid,fhall haue entred,
as it feemes, they
ought, &c. then all
fuch things which bc-
fore fuch entrie might
trouble or incumber
the Land fo giuen
vpon Condition, &c.
as to the fame Land,
are altogether defca-
ted.


€ P Oyent entrer, &c.
Bnd bere it ig tobe
bnorrffob , that the

grant of the rent charge (sa

pꝛeſent difabiitp of the Feol⸗
fee , and therefore albeit the

Grantee doth bring a tozitof

Annuitie, and difcharge the

Land of ít, ab initio, pet the

caufe of entrie being once gta

uen by the ad of the ffcoftæ,
the Feoſtoꝛ map re-entcr,

Bnd fo tt is tf the grantof the

rent charge Swere made for

life, and the Gꝛantes died, be⸗
fozeany dap of payment , pet
the Feoſftor map re-enter.
he like Law is of anp
tudgement giuen again tbe

Feoltee Whercin debt e? dams

mages are recouered,

On foit oblige in
un Statate de la Staple,


orc. FE the Feoffee
be diſſeiſed, and after bindeth
Yinfelfe ina Statute Stac
ple,oz Merchant, 02 ina Ree
cognizance, 02 take wite, this
isno bifabtlítée in bin, fog
that during the difeifin, the
Land is not charged there=
With, nepther ts thelandin
the bands of the dffletfoz 1ía-
bie therenuto, And in that
cafe it the wite die oa the Coz
nufee releafe the Statute og
Becognisance, and after che
difleifæ doth enter,there is na
difabtlitie at all, becaufe the
Hand Was neuer charged
therewith, anb tberetope in
that cafe the Feoftee map ens
ter anb perfozine the Condi⸗
tion in the fame plight anb
freedome ag (t was conuepeb
bnto him.

Bnd it (9 to be obferued, that
Littl. patteth thefe cafog as
examples , fo? thereare fome
other difabilities implyed,
that ate not here erpzefien,


Sher tfwicke of Weftmerland of tye ing
and the king gaue him Licence that he might (nfeoffe thereof


divers Chaplyns in fee, fo that thep thauid gtue MN to the Loꝛd Clifford and the heires
2


males


222


13.H1.7.23.6. 44. E 3.9.5.
26.E.3.73, 20. H. 6. 34. Iu-
——— —


Lib,2.fol.59.60;
Iulius PP ynuingtens cafe.


18, 4f. Plo!timo.195.3.39
Lib.2. fol.80.6. Sir (rom.
wels cafe,


Lib.3. Caps Of E ftates Se.259.360.
males of his body the remainder oucr ec. the Loꝛd Clifford according tothe Hicenceinfeoffen —
the yada idee thep mabe the reconnepance the Lord Clifford dped, and ít was ads -
tudged that the betre might enter fon the condition bzoken. Foꝛ inthis cafe the Feoffees Swere
bound bp Lav to hane made the gift in tapie to the 1,020 Clifford himfelfe, albeit be nener made
anp requett, for otbersotfe thep purfucb not the Licence, and if thep fbouib make the fate to

bt (fínc of the Lozd Clifford, then might the ting fete the Warony,€c. for defauit of a Ate
cence, and that in vefauit of the Feottes, And then tbc famc fboulb not be in the fame plight
and freedome ag (t Swag at the time of the feoffment made vpon condition which tg worthy of


obferuation, À
It a man grant an Aduowfon bpon condition that the Grantee thall regrant the fame to
she Grantoz intatle, An thiscafe tf the Church become bopbe before the regrant 07 befoze ang
tequeft made by the 4 rantog, he may take aduantage of the condition, becaule the Douswion
ig notin the fame plight ag it vas at the time of the grant vpon condition: Bnd fo was it re"
(*) Pal. ta Elis. b 1-Dim folnep, (*) Pafch.14.Eliz. in comuni banco, betweene Andrews and Blunt, fvbich J heard


and obferuen, and Which mp Lozd Dier hath omitted out of his repezt of that cafe,and there=


fore the Grantee in that cafe at his perill muft regrant ít before the Church


become bopde, oz


cliche ts btfabicb, otherswile be hath time during his life tl he be not battened by requeft.


44.3.91


CE7 en le fait eff nal
condition , &c.
eitherin Dedozin Law,


Œ Et lefeoffment ef


en tiel force ficome wu

tiel fait vſt effe fait.
18.E.3.19.56. 17.47.20. Bnd thereafon hereof 19, foz
8.H.5.8. 27.H.6, thatthe cftate pafleth bp the
Liuerp offeiin, Bnd (n this
cafe the Feoſfoꝛ bpon the de⸗
Itucrp of feifin muſt erpzeffe
the fate to him and his hetres
oz to the heires of big bo⸗
dy, £C.

It an agresment be made
betweene tie, that the onc
fball enfeofte the other vpon
condition in furetp of the
payment o£ certaine mencp,
and after the Liuerp is made
tobim and bis beires genes
valip, the ftate ts Holden by
fome tobe opon condition tn
afmncl) ag the intent of the
parties Was not changed at
anp time, but continucdat the
time of the Linerp.


3 4 ML.


13. E. 3,ti9.Efeppell 177.
19.E. J. ihid 1840


Tt ? feoffmen
—— —


Fecl. 359.


¶ ITem , fi bn home
kait vn kait de
feoffment a bn auter,
æ en le fait ef nul
conDdition,æc,æ quant
le feoffoz a lup bople
faire liuerie De feifin
er force De meſme le
ait, tl fait aluple li⸗
uerie De ſeiſin fur cers
taine condition, en
ceft cas rien De les
tenements paffa per
lefaít, pur ceo que le
condition nett cont-
paite Deins le fait, a
le feoffment e( en
tiel force come nul
tiel fait vſt efte fait,


Sect. 360.


Cl Cem fi feoſtmẽt
foit fait fur tiel
condition,


It the Feoſtee faffcr a Becoucry by defanit bpon a fayneo title, before execution fucb the
At cof? may recenter fos this diſability. Et fic de fimilibus,


Lfo ifa man make

a deed of feoff-
ment to another and in
the deed there is no
condition, &c.& when
the feoffor will make
liuery of feifin vnto
him by force of the
fame deed, hee makes
liuery of feifin vnto
him vpon certain con-
dition, in this cafe no-
thing of the teneméts
paffeth by the deed for
that the condition is
not comprifed within
the deed, & the feoff-
ment is in like force as.
ifno fuch deed had
beene made.


PFE a man make a Charter of fcoffment in fee, and the feofFor veliner fetfin foz life, the
SFeofke fhall holo it but for life, bnt (€ the Liuery be expzeflp foz life, and alfo accezbíng to
the 3D «b the Whole fee (imple fhall vale becaufe it hath a reference tothe Deed.


€ AP if a feoff- |


ment be made


Lib.3.


condition, le feoffce
ne alienerala terre a
nulluy, ceft conditi-
on eſt bode, purceo
que quant bome eft
enfeoffe Dc terres
ou tenements (1 ad
power de cur aliener
a aſcun perfor per la
ley, Car fi tiel con-
Dition ferroit bone
Donque la condition
luy oufteroit de tout
le potoer que la lep
lu» Dona, le quel fet-
toitenconter reafon,
& pur ceo tiel conditt=
on eft bode,


vpon Condition.


vpon this condition
that the feoffee fhall
not alien the land to
any, this condition is
voide,becaufe whena
man is infeoffed of
lands or tenements he
hath power to alien
them to any perfonby
the law. for if fuch a
condition fhould bee
good, thenthe códiti-
on fhould oufte him of
all the power which
the law giues him,
which fhould bee a-
gainft reafon, &there-
fore fuch a condition
is voide.


Se 561;


the like ila (s ofa bentfe in
fee bpon condition that the
Deutlæ Hall not alten ,tbe
condition is batoc, and fo tt is
of a grant, releafe, confirma
tion oz any other conuepance
whereby a fe fimple doth
paie, Foꝛ it (s abfurb and
repugnant to reafon that hee,
that hath no poñibilitp ta
hauethe land revert to bít,
fbonib reftrainc bis Fofter in
fee fimple of all big power to
alten. Bnd foit is tf a man
be poffeffed of a Leaſe fos
peares, o? of a hogle,oz of anp
other chatteil reall op perfoz
nail, and gine oz fell big
whole tnterct , o2 pzopertie
therein byon condition that
the Done 02 Mende ſhall not
alien tbe fame , the fame is
batde, becaufc his whole ins
tereft anb pzopertie is out of
him, fo as he hath no pollibie
lttp of a Renerter,and it (ga-
gaint Crave and Œraffique,
anb bargaining and contrac


ting betweene man and man: anb ft is Within the reafon of our Duthoz that ít ſhould outter
him of all power given to him. iniquum eft ingenuis hominibus non effe liberam rerum fua-


rum alienationem, and Rerum fuarum quilibet cft moderator, & arbitor. And againe, Reou-
lariter non valet pactum de re mea non alienanda. Wut thefe are to be buderfteod of conditions
annexe to the avant o3 fale it {elfe in refpect of the repugnancie and not to any ocher collaterali
thing,as bercafter (ball appearc, where our Authoꝛ putteth bis cals of a feofment of land,
thatis put but foz an example : £o? tf a man be feifenof a Scigniory o2 a Rent, o2 an Adz
nowfon 07 Common o? any other inheritance that ipeth in grant, and by his ede granteth
the fame to aman and to his heyzes bpon condition that be ball not alten, this condition ts
boide, But fome bauc fato that a man map grant a Rent charge newly created out of landg
toa man and to bis heyzes bpon condition that be (ball not alten that, that (e god, becaufe the
tent ts of bis oxone creation, but this (s againſt the reafon and opinton of our Buthoz, and
agaínft the height and purity of a fee (imple,

A man befoze the Statute of Quia Emptores terrarum might hate made a feoffment in fer,
and added further, Chat (€ be o his heires did alten Without Licence that be ſhould pay a fine,
that this had bene god. Bnd fottislatd,that then the Loꝛd might hane reftratned the aliena⸗
tton of bis Cenant bp condition, becaufe tbe Loꝛd had a poflibilitie of reuerter, and fo tt tg
tn the Kings cafe at this dap becanfe be map relerue atenure to bimfelfe,

FE A. be feifed of Wiacke acretn fee, anb E. infeoffeth btm of white acre bpon condition
that A. (ball not alten Blacke acre, the condition (s go, fo? the condition is annexed to other
land, and outterh not the ffeoffæ of his power to alien the land Sobereof the feoffment {5 made,
and fo no repugnancy to the Rate paſſed by the Ceoffmtut, and fe (t te of gifts oz fales ef
Chattelig realls 02 perfonalls,


Sed. 361.


€ Es fil condt- Ve if the conditi- ¶ 4 feotfiment in te bec
M tion fott tiel, 42 on be ſuch thatthe T'uste, to cannon
quele feoffce ne alie⸗ feffee fhallnotaliento not infeoffe 1.5. e; amp of


neta a bn tiel, nof-
Mant fon nofme, ou


fucha one, naming his
name, or to any of his


HEE 3


bis beires oy Tues, zc, this ts
QHD, Foz be Doth not reftraine
the feoffee of all big power z
the veaton here peeloed bp our

Bathoa


223


21. H.6.34.4. 8.H.7.10:b.
33 4ff.11.24. Dot &
Stud. 39.114. 13. H.7. 23.


vArqumeniwm ex abfi di.
Vid.$48.7 22.


14.44. 1 3: H:3.23.


21,H.5.8. Lib. $.
56. Kmightt cafe,


Pl. ('em.73.9. B. Fog. 10 b,
21,B,4.47..


Lib3.


1o. H.g. 11.Dé8. dr
Stud.124, 13. N.5.35.


Braker, lib. 1 .fo.1 3.4.


3449.11.24. Lib.6.40.41.


Mildmayes cafe.
21. H. 6. 33. 13.H.7.23.
21, H.7.11.


"UMS HI 320. «cc.


21.H.6.33. 13. H.5.23.24.
27. H.8.17.19. 31.4.8.
Dier 45.


(*) Dier,3 3. H.8.f0.48.49


Vid.Lib.6.40.41.
Sir Anth. Mildmayerenft,


Capss.


Authoꝛ is woꝛthy of obfetz
uation, Bnd in this cafe tf
the Feoffee enfcofte I.N. of
entent and purpofe that be
fall enfeoffe 1.5. fome hold
that this is a breach of the
condition,foz Quando al quid
prohibetur fieri, directo prohi-
betur & per obliquum.

FE a feoffment bee made
tpon condition that the Feof⸗
fee (ball not alten in Mozt⸗


Of Eftates


a afcun à fes heyzes,
pu bt iſſues 5 bn tiel,
at, ou huiufmodi leg
qux conbítíóg ne tol-
lent tout la power
Dalienation Del feof=
kee ac. Dong tiel con-
Ditton eft bone,


Se.3 622


heires, or of the iſſues


of fuch a one, &c. or
the like, which condi-
tions doe not take a-
way all power of alie-
nation from the feof-
fee,&c. then fuch con-
dition is good.


maine, this is gwd, becanfe fach alienation (s prohibited bp Haw, anbregularlg Sbatfoeuer
is prohibited bp rhe La, map be probibiten bp condition, bee it Malum prohibitum,
oz malum infe. In anctent deedsof feoffment in fee there was moff commonip aclanfe, Quod
licitum fit donatorio rem datam dare vel vendere cui voluerit exceptis viris religiofis & ludæis.


UN bere the bou-


bie neqatíue in les

Wall conftrucion
fhall not binder the negatítie,
viz. Sub conditione qued ipfi
nec hæredes fui non alienaret.
And therefoze the Gramma⸗
tícall conffrudion is not al-
Shapes in tadgement of Law
to be followed,


¶ Forfque pur lour
vies demefne,erc. And


pet ik a man make a gift in
taile bpon condition that bec
fbail not make a Leafe fox his
oSene life, albeit the flate bc
lasofull pet the condition is
god ; becaufe the reuerfion ig
inthe Dons. Ag t£ a man
make a Leaſe fo; life 02 pears
bpon condition, that thep
fhall not grant oner thetr ec
ftate oz lettheland to others,
this ig god, and vet the
gtant o2 ilcafe fhould bee
lafall, (*) Jfaman makea
agtftintatle bpon condition
that bc fball not make a Leaſe
foz thice lies 02 21, peareg
according tothe Statute of
32.H,8.thecondition (g gwd,


Section 362.


Cem, fi tene-

méts fotent do⸗

nes en E tail fur
tiel condition, que le
tenant enc taile ne
fes hepzes ne alienc-
tont en fee, ne en le
tatle, ne pur terme
dauter bie,foriqs pur
lour bies Demefne ,
fc, tiel condition eft
bone, Ct la caufe ett,
pur ceo que quant il
fitt ticl alienation &
Difcontinuance De le
tatle,tl fait le contra-
vie a lentent le Do-
noz,pur que leftatute
De W.2. cap.1. fuit
fait, per quel eftatute
lcs eftates en le taile
font o2deines,


AL if lands bec

' ^ giuen in taile vp-
oncondition, that the
tenant in taile nor his
heires fhall not alien
in fee, nor in taile nor
for terme of anothers
lifebut only for their
owne liues, &c. fuch
condition is good.
And the reafon is for
that when bee maketh
fuch alienation and
difcontinuance of the
entaile, hee doth con-
trary to the intent of
the donor, for which
the ftatute of W.2.
cap.1. was made, by
which ftatute the e-
ftates in taile are or-
dained.


fox the Statute doth giue him power to make fuch Leafes Which map be reftrained by cond{-
tion, and bp big one agresment, foz this power is not incident to the eftate, but giuen te


Dim collaterallp by the Pa according to that rule of LaW, Quilibet potcft renunciare iuri pro
fe introdu&o.


Œ nant i! fist tiel alienation c difcontinnance del flate taille. And
theretereiE a gift in tatie be made bpon condition, That the Done, ec. fall not alien, this
conditionts geod to fome tntents,and voyd to fome : for as to ail thofe alienations which a=
mount toanp dtfcontinuance of the ftatctatle, (ag Littleton here fpeaketh) oz is againft the
Statute ot Weftminfter 2. the condition is god Without queftion. Bat as toa common rez
couerie the condition (a vopd, becanfe this (s no difcontinuance, but a barre , and this common

reconerp


Lib. vpon Condition: Se8.363.


reconerie is wot reſtrained bp the fain Statute of W. 2. Bndtherefore fuch a condition ig rez
pugnant to the eſtate tatle, oz ft is to be obferued, that to this eſtato taile there bee diners incís
dents. Fir, Cobe difpunithed of walk, Hecondip, Chat the Wife of the Done in Taile
ſhall be endowed. Thirdly, That the bufband of a eme Done after Iſſue ſhall be & enaunt
bpthe Curtcüe, Fourthlp, Ghat Conant in tatle may fuffer a common recoucrie: and there=
' fos if a man make a gift in Catie, bpon condition to reftraine bin o£ anp of thele incidents,
thecondition (s repugnant and voyd in Law, And tt ts to beobferned," that a collateral war⸗
rantic 02 a lineall with affets in vefped of the recompence, {8 not reftraincd by the Statute of
Donis conditionalibus, no moze ts the common recoucric in refped of the {intended recompence,
And Littleton to the intent to exclude the common IW ecouerte, faith, Ticl alienation & difconti-
nuance, fopning them together. "

. Sif à man before the Statute of Donis conditionalibus, had made a gift toa man and to the
heires of bis bodie, bpon condition, Chat after Iſſue hee fonto not haue power to ſell, tbíg
condition (boulo bane been repugnant and boyd, Pari rationc; afterthe Statute a man makes a
gift in taíle; the Law racire gtues him power to fuffcr a commonrecenerte , therefore toadde a
Condition, Chat be [ball haue no power tofuffer a common reconerie, is repugnant and bopb,

It a man make a feoffement to a Baron anb eme in fee, opor condttion, Chat thep [ball
not alien, to fome intent this is gad, and to fome tntent it is bopd : for to reftraine analtenatis
on by feoffement,oz altenation by Ded, (t (8 god, becaufe fuch an Alienation te toztíoug and
bopdable ;but to reftraine their Alienation bp Fine is repugnant and bopp,becaufe tt (g law⸗
fuil anb vnauoydable.

It is ſayd, Chat if a man infeoffc an Enfant (m fe, pon condition, Chat he hall not
- alten, this is aco to reſtraine Alienations during his minozitie,but not afterbis full age.

It is likewile ſayd, Chat a man by Licence may qtue Land to a Withop and bis Succef=
fozs, optoan Abbot anb bis Succeſſoꝛs, and ad a Condttion to it, Chat they thal not Without
the confent of their Chapitcr 92 Œouent, alien,becaule (t Wag intended a Woztnaine; that ts,
that it (boul foz cuer continue in that Sea o boufe, £02 that thep bad (ten auter droit, fog reli⸗


gtous and god dies.


€ Lefatute de W.2. cap.1.39ctcbp it appeareth , Chat tobatfoe-


wer is prohibited by the intent of anp Aa o£ 39arl(ament,map be pꝛohibited bp combítion , ag


bath benfapd.


€ C3t il eff prouc

perles parols
compaitcg en mefine
Leftatute, que la bo-
lüt bel Dono entiels
caſes fercoit obferue,
et quaunt le @enant
en le Taile fait tiel
Difcontinuance,tl fait
Ie contrarie a ceo, ac,
€t aurp en eftates
ent tatle daſcun Te⸗
nements, quant E ve-
uerlion De fee (imple,
ou remainder en Fee
fimple eft en auters
perfons, quaunt tiel
Difcontinuanc € fait,
Donques le fee Gimp


Seélion 363. .
Fo it is prooued by


the words compri-
fed in the fame ftatute,
That the will of the
Donor in füch cafes
fhall be obferued, and
when the Tenaunt in
Taile maketh fuch dif-
continuance, hee doth
contrarieto that, &c.
And alfo in eftates in
Taile of any Tene-
ments, whenthe Re-
uerfion ofthe Fee fim-
ple, or the remainder
of the Fee fimple is in
other perfons, when
fuch difcontinuance is
made, théthe fee fim-


(C (ant le reuerſi
en ou rem’ en fee


est em amters perfons.
ut the cafe thac a Man
make a gift tm Œailc to A.
the remainder to him and to
bie hetres, bpon condition
that he (ball not alien, ag to
the (tate tatlethe condition ig
god, fo» fuch aitenation is
gzobibiten,ag hath bene fafb,
bp the fapo Statute, But as
tothe Fe imple , fome fap it
ig repugnant and bopd, fog
thereafon that Littleton hath
pelded:and therefore fome
arcofopinion, Chat this (d
aged Condition, and (fail
defeat the Alienation fog the
eftate taile onelp, and leaus
the Fee fimple (n the Alien,
for that the Condition did in
aw egtend onelp to the
Gate tails, anb not to the rez
mainder.

€ Encounter lepro.


fit


224


23,£.3.19.19-E1.3 43.Dier.


(") 13,H.7.24.b.


10.H,7.11. 13:H.7.23
Lib, aibi im Sir Cini baie
Mildemayes cafe vbi siya.


Door & Student 1240


10. B.7. 11. Doll. & Stud.
134. 13. H .3 23.


11-H.7.6. 13.B.7.33.24.
Dyer 2. 3 Thil, & Ma,
127.4.


Lib.3.


(9) 446.8. 3.4


St Hy ane


Cap
fit de fes Iſſues. Hexeby
ít appear. th, hat toreftrain
— he —
agatnf the profit et bis iſſues.
ig gwd, fo; thatagreth Sith
the Will of the Donoz,andthe
tatent o£ the &tatutc*.
uta gift (n Taile may be
mabe tpon cenbition , Ghat
Genant in Tatle,¢c. may alt=
en fo) the profit of his iſſues,
and that hath beens holden to
be good, and not reftrained bp


Of Eftates


en le remainder eft
Difrontinue. Ct put
ceo que E Tenant en
taile ne fert tiel chofe
encounter le profit De
fes iſſues a bon Droit
tiel condition eft boñ
come eff auauntdit,
ac,


Setl.364...
pleinthe remainder is
difcontinued. And be-
caufe Tenant in Tayle
fhall doe no füch thing
againft the profit ofhis
iflues and good right, —
fuch Condition is.
good, asis aforefayd, -
&c. |


the faib Stat.and ſeemeth to agree with tbercafon of Littleton, beeaufe in that cafe, Voluntas
Donatoris obferuetur, &c. and (t muft be £02 the profit of the (flues.


€ Lienont,

D Et
any ft touts les If-
fues font merts,


oc. Note Lit-
tleton purpoſely mabe
arcellofthe Conditi=
eníntbe Copulatiue,
that the @enant tn
Gaile (onto alien,ec,
Sor t€ a gift in Œaile
be mabt to aman and
tothe beirs of bis bos
Dis, andifhe die With=
eut bcíres of his body,
that then the Donoz
and bis Heires all
tenter, this fa a
bopd Condition, foz
Shen the iſſues fatie,
the eftate determineth
by the erpreffe limita⸗
tott,and confeqnentip
the adding of the cons
bition to Defeat that
Swhich is determined
bp the limitation of the
sitate, is bopd, and in
that cafe the Wite of
the Done {ball be en⸗
vowed, ⁊c. And tberc-
fo36 Littleton tomake
the Condition gad,
added am alfenation,
bich amownted to a
Spzong,and he reftrat=
ned not the Alienatton
onelp , (fon then pres
fentip bpon the Bite:
nation the Donoz,¢c,
might re-enter and be-
feat the etate Taile)


Settion 364.


€ [Tem home poit
doner Œerres en
taile , fur tiel con-
Dition, Que fi le tenant
en le aile ou fes bteg
alienont en fee, ou en
taíle.ou put terme Dau-
tet bíc, ac, et auxy que
ff touts tiſſues veig⸗
nants Del Cenant ene
taile foient mogts fans
iffue, que adonques bit
líttoit al Dono? ct a fes
beires De enter, ac, Ct
pet tiel boy le D20ít De
le tatle poet eftre ſalue
apres Difcontinuanc al
iffue en le taile, (i afcun
p foit, iffint que per boy
Dentre bel 320002,0U De
fes hetres le tailene Gt
mp Defeat per tícl cons
Dition: Quere hoc. €t
bncoac (t ic Cenant en
E tatle en ceo cafe,ou fes
beires font afcun Dif-
continuance, celup en le
reuerfion ou fes beires,
ap2es ceo que le taile eft
Determine , pur Default
De ((fuc ac, poptnt enter
en


Lfo a manmay siue

lands in Taile vpon

fuch condition,that
ifthe Tenant in Taile or
his heires alien in fee or
intaile, or for terme of
another mans life, &c.
and alfo that if al the If
{ues comming of the
Tenant in Taile, bee dead
without Iffue, that then
it fhall be lawfull for the
Donor and for his heires
to enter, &c. And by
this way the right of the
taile may bee faued after
difcontinuance, to the
iffue in taile, if there bee
any : foasby way of en- -
trie of the Donor or of
his heires, thetaile thal
not bee defeated by fuch
conditió: Quere boc. And
yetif the tenant intaile in
this Cafe, or his Heires,
make any difcontinu-
ance, he in the reuerfi-
on, or his Heyres , after
that the Taile is deters
mined for default of If
fue, &c. may enter into


Lib.5.


en Ie tetto per force
De meſme le conDiti-
on, ane ferront mp
cobert Defuer baicfe
De formdon en le re⸗
uerter.


vpon Condition.


the Land by force of
the ſame Condition,
and hall not bee com-
pelled to fue a Writ
of Formedon in the
reuerter.


Se.365.


but added, and die Without tſ⸗
facto the end that the right of
the eftate in taple might bec
pzeſerued, and net dcfeated bp
the Condition, bet might bee
recouered againe bp the iffuc
tw taplc (tt a Formedon.

Bnd Littleton expꝛeſſely
fait) , that the Dono anb


bis beiteg after the bifcontinnance, anb after that the eftate tapie ts vetermincd,map recenter;
which ts theintention anb true meaning of Littleton in thts place, Bnd where ft ig fatd in
this Section (Quzre hoc.) tbig (s added bp fomctbat vnderſtod not this cafe, andis not in


the ozigtnall.


Hote, that in a Condition confiltíng of din


ers parts inthecontundiue, ag herein tbecafe


9f Littleton both parts mutt be performed, accozding to the old rule, ( a) Si plurcs conditiones
afcripta fuerunt donationi coniunctim omnibus eft parendum & ad veritatem copulatiue requi-
. gitur quod vtraque pars (it vera. But otberípifc(t is when the Condition (e tn the bíflunctae,


fog tho fame Duthoz in that cafefaptb; Si diuifim cuilibet , vel alteri corum
B^ Ec in d; fiun&ius fufficitalteram partem effe veram. What then (f£ the


fatiseft obtempe.
Condition oz


3Limítatton be both tn tbe Contuncine and Diſiunciue: ag (£a man makea Lcaſe to the Bu
band ant wile fo the teatme of one and twentie pares, ifthe Hulband and wife or anp Chin
betweene them fo long hall line, and then the tio ife dicth without tue; (Dat the Leate determine,
ez continne during the ife of the ufbandy And the anfiwere ig, that it (ball continue, fo: the


DiGinneine referret to the Whole, anb difiopneth notonip shelatter part ag to the


bib, but


aifoto the "baron anb fem, fo ag tbe fence ig, if the Waron, Fem, op anp Chtive ali fo


line,
(b) Bnd fo it is (£ an bfc be limited tocertainc perfons , bntitl A. thall come from bepond


Hea, andattaine onto bis fullage, oz die, f£ he Doc come from bepond Sea,


fuil age,the bfe botb ccafe,


€ IS bome ne
poit pleder en
afcun action, que e-
ftate fuit fait en fee,
ou en fec taile,ou pur
terme De bie, fur con=
Dition, (il nc boucha
bn recozd de ceo, ou
monſtra bn efcript
fouth (cale, pyouant
meme la condition.
Car il eff bn cõmon
erubition, que home
per plee ne Defeatera
. Afcuneftate ófcank-
tenement per force
Dafcun tiel condition
finon que il monftra
lepioofe De conditi⸗
on en efcript, ac, ſi⸗


Section 365.


Lfoa man cannot

plead in any acti-
on, that an eftate was
made in fee, or in fee
tayle, or for tearme of
life vpon Condition,
if hee doth not vouch
a Record of this, or
fhew a writing vnder
Seale , proouing the
fame Condition. For
it is a common lear-
ning, thata man b
plea fhall not defeat a-
ny eftate of freehold
by force of any fuch
Condition, vnleffe he
fheweth the proofe of
the Condition in wri-
ting, &c. vnleffeit bee

Lil


90? attafne to hie


€ E NN 4fcun action.

Bee the ation reali,

perfonall, ez mirt, i€
a Conditton be pleaded to Bre
feat a kreehold (t ts regularly
truc, that a Wad muft be
ſhewed korth (a) in~Court.
Bnd the reafon Why the dev
fball bee themed forth to the
Court (3 ; for that to eucrp
3Dab there be tWothinge rec
quite, the one that tt be ſuf⸗
fictent in aw, and this ig
calledthe 3egall 49art , and
therefore the iudgement of
that belongeth tethe Judges
of the Law: the other cons


Y cernes matter of frac, as fea=


ling anb dDelinerp , and this
belongs to tbe Juroꝛs. Ano
becaufceuerp Deed ought to
appzouc it {elfe,and be pꝛoued
by others to ; ft mu ape
proue it ſelte bpon tie ſhew⸗
ing of ét forth (s Court in
tiwomanners, —
Fir, as tothe compofitt.
9n of the Wong, that fae


! 228


(a) Braten 'ib.2. ſol. 19.
vide Pl, Com,76. in Wim-
belhes cafe. & fa'.1 29. in Fule
marfions ezfe.


"Bratou vis supra.


So it was ad'urged in Commis.
ti "Barco pafch, 30. Ei !z inter
Baldwyn & (Cache comraonly
salied |ruperises safe,


(b) Hift. 35-Eliz entrefpaffa
pet le Sciguisy Madantuers
GeorgeVaux fg aéiudged im the
Kings Bench,


39.2. 3.33. 4.2.4.3 ça.
9.E.3.25.5.26.a 6, 91.7. B. b,
11.8.7. 124. 7.H.6.5.
14.H. 8.32.0. 38. ff p. X.
(a) Lib, 10.f6/.93. Defer
Layfi:lds cafe.
7-E.3+57-3§-E.3.4 16

41,E, 3.10.a¢¢,


Lib...


45.6.3: 31-6.


Lib ç.fel.52.93. dre,
Pugescafe,


6.8 «cp.


(b) Vide y 3.H.8. in Patents
Br. 12.1.7. 13. 9.


(c) 3.& 4. E. 6.eap.4- &
13-6 iQ eap.


(d) Dyer.1 .£li(.167.


(e) Li. 8. fel.8. 1m he Thine
as cafe. Vide Tages cafe vb
fps.


33.8.3. gard. 162. 3o. E. 1.
darrein prefznit 3.185. H.6.


tif. Ponilrans des fasts 118


(D 30.H.7. s.


g.E.3.37. '1.H.4, 83.

35. H..6.t it monjirani des
faits 11.6.7. H. 6.1 7. H. $.5.
3. H. 6.31. 33. H.6,1.

V4. H,.8.8.


Caps.


(uffictent in Lao , anb that
the Court fball adiudge.

. Secondiy, of anctent time
1f the Ded appeared to bee
raſed oz interitned in places
materiall, the Judges ad⸗
tudged opon their view, the
Derd to be voyd. Wut oflat-
ter time, the Judges haue
ieftthat tothe Jurozs to try
Wbether the rafing 02 tnter=
lintng were before the deliue⸗
tie,

And there io a difference
betweene a rent, anda re=
entrie,foz bpon a gift in taile,
oz lcafc foz life, arent map bee
referucd without Ded, but a
Condition Sith a rccentric,
cannot bec rcfcrueo in thofe
cafes Without ded,


€ Efcript de fourth
feale. Which Littleton
intenbeth to bea Ded onder
Seale,
Bnd Weil fatd Littleton ,
A Deed vnder Seale, fez
though the Ded bec inrolled,
pet bee cannet piead the in⸗


rolment thereof , though it bcc of record. And though ít
(b) pet mutt he ſhew forth tbe Ded tt felfe vnder Seale
exemplification, And fo ben Littleton $020te,19 Cont
ters 39 :tentg Were auapleable to be fhe wed forth in Cou
ſelues onder Seale. $02 both the Conflac anb infpeximu
tolment ofthe Charters, 07 Lett


Of Eftates


nou que ceo foit en
afcuns efpeciall ca⸗
fcg,ac. 9pes De chat-
tels reals ficome De
leas fait a terme
Dang, ou De grants
be gatos fait pet
gardeins in chiual-
tie, € huiulmedt, ac,
home poit pleder que
ticls leafes ou grátg
fueront faits (ut có-
Dition.ac, fans mon⸗
fite afcun elcript De
le condition, Flint
en mefine le maner
home poit faire de
dones & grants Dc
chattels perfonalg a
De contracts perfo-
nals, ac,


Sedl.365.
in fome fpeciall cafes,
&c. But of Chattels
reals, as ofa Leaíe for
yeares, orof grants of


Wards made by Gar-


deins in Chiualrie and


fuch like, &c. aman -


may plead that fuch


Leafes or grants were ©


madevpon Conditon,
&c. without fhewi


any writing of the -
Condition. So inthe


fame manner a man
may doe of gifts and
Grants of Chattels
Perfonals , and of
Contracts perfonals,
&c.


be crewpltfied bnber the great Seale,
ag Littleton here fatth , andnot the
at 0? infpeximus, of the Kings Leta
tt, but the Letters 39atentg thems
— sare but apscaeo bea of the ine
Atents : an s appearetl bp the refo
feacrail (c) 49arlíamentg, one holden tn the third and fourth peare ot : —
and the other in the thirteenth peare of Mueene Elizabech.
exemplificatton o? Conttat onder the great Seaie of the
made fince the fourth bay of Jrebiuaríe,
be pleaded and ſhewed forth in Court; aſwell agatnt the Bin
Patenters themſelues ( &obereof there swag fome doubt ( d ) co
E.6.) and by all and cuetp other perfon and perfons clapmtn
Statutes are generall and beneficial, andefpect
onip to Lands, Œcnements, and Wereditaments,
ought to be fauourably conftrucd foz abuancemcnt of
GL be difference betweene a Conftar, Infpeximus


dking Edward the firt,


Wut noto by tbofe Statutes the
inrelment of any Letters Patents
Anno 27.H.8. 07 after to be made, fall befutficient ta
q. as anp other perfon by the
nccíueo bponthe fatd Statute ot
gbpfromez onder them. which
ap the Act of 13. Eliz. foz that extends not
but to cacrp other thing Sohatfoeucr, and
the remedie and right of the fubtect.
> and a Vidimus pou map reade (c) at large


ín Pages Œafe. Wut none ofthemby Law ought tobe had, bat onlp of the (nrolment of recozd,


anb not of a 3D cob 01 anp other Writing that (s not of Reco⸗
bielle tt be Dulp and lawfully acknoMlenged.


QL si non que ſoit en aſcun efpeciall cafés, Cre.
that tf a Garden ta Chlualrie in the right of the hetre entreth fo;
bled the (tate bpon Condition Without thewing of any Weed,
by the Law. And fo tt is(Hofa &enant bp Statute Merchan


Eleeit.


Ltkewife Œenant in Dower fall pleada
And thercafon of thefeandthe ithe Cafes,


thep.come notin by btmtbat entrcd fox the Condition bzoken,


the theming ofthe Ded, butt
daw will allo them to picad the Condition without (b


bep come to the Land bp aut


íg for that the Lawn


d, and no Ded, Fc, can beínrolleb, -


Hereby (8 implped
a Condition bzoken, he ſhall
becaufe his intereft is crested
to; Staple, oz Cenant bp


Condition , #c. Without thewing of the Dep,
oth create thefe eſtates, a
fo ag thep might prouide
bogitie of Law , and therefore the
ewing of (f,


CD Bu


Lib. vpon Condition. ^ $e8366.


C£) But the Loꝛd by efcheat albett bia cftate bs created by Law hall not plead & Condition
to defeate a frechold Without hewing of (t, because the Desde doth belong bnto bim.

28 Senant by the curteſie (all not (g) pleade a conditten made bp his Sife, and a re-entrp
£o; the condition bzohen without theming the Ded, fog albeit his eftate be createobp Law,
pe Lal E^ pꝛeſumeth that he had the pofleliion of the Deedes anb Cuidences belonging to

ife.
Ch) But Leflees for peares and all others that clatme bp anp Conuepatice fromthe partie
oz luſtiſie as feruant by Commandement, &c. muft fbexoe the Derde. é

(i) R. brought an Eicétionc firme agaínft E.foz Etecting him out of the Mannoz of D.
Sobích he held for terme of peares of the demife of C. E.the Defendant pleaded that B.gane the
faid Wannoz to P. and Katheriac big wife tn taple who had {fue E. the Defendant, and after
the Dones ínfeoffeb C. of the Mannoꝛ bpon condition that hee fhonid vemife the Aannoz
fez peares to R. the Wlaintife, tbc rematnoer tothe hufbandandto the Wwife,ec. C. DID demife
theland to R. tbe Piaintife £o; peares but kept the reuerfon to himfeife, Swherefoze Katherine
after the deceale ot her bufipano entred opon the Plaintike, ec. Coz the condition broker, and
Died, after Whofe deceafe the land difcended to E. the iſſue tn tafle.gc now defendant, iudge⸗
ment fl action, exception was taken againt this plea becaufc E, the Def. maintained his en-
trie bp force of a condition broken, and fhewed koꝛth no Deed, 8 the plea as ruled to be god,
Becaufe the thing was exccuted, and therefore hee necd not ſhew forth the Deed, Nota the
Defendantbeing (fuc in tatie was remitted to tbe efkate taile.

In a Pracipe quod reddat againt S. Soho pleaded that R. wag feifed, and tnfcofied him ín
Mozgage vpon condition of payment of certaine monep at a Dap, and faid that R. paid the

at the Dap, and entred tudgement of the toztt: exception was taken to this plea fos
that be he wed forth no Ded of the conbítton, anb it was ruled that he need not (beso forth
the De for twocaufes. 1.Chat he oaght not to thew anp TDesb to tbe. Demandant becaufe
the Demandant is a ſtranger. 2. It might be When R. pato the monep, and thecondition per⸗
formed, that the Ded Dag rebatied to R. and thereupon the plea Wags adindged god, and the
Wott abated.

It land be mozgaged bpon condition, anb the Wozgagee letteth the lands fox peares,refer=
ainga rent, the condition is performed the Moꝛgagee re-enters, in an action of debt brought
E the rent the Lefles ball pieade the condition and the resentrie Without ſhewing fozth anp

&bt.

Gn an Bite the Cenant pleades a feoffment of the Anceſter of the 9latntife nte him, ge;
the Platntife faith that the fcoffment vas bpon condition, ec. anb that the condition was bzo=
Kers,and pleads a re-entrie, and that the Cenant entred and toke away the Chel in Which
the Deed was and pet Detaineth the fate, the Diaintife fall not in this cafe be enforced to
thew the Ded,

FE a Woman gtuelands toa man ano his heires bp Deede o2 Loithout generally, the map tn
pleading auetre the fame to be Caufa matrimonij prxlocuti,aibett he hath nothing in Sziting
to proue the fame, the reafon whereot foe Sect. 330.


©, Mes des chattels realls ficome leafe fait avolunt a terme des ans crc.
Œbis ig spparant.


See. 366:


€ [gem coment que
—.. * hoe en atcun acti-
on ne poit pleder n
condition que tou-
cha €concerna frank
tenement fauns mons
fiver efcript De ceo,
come eft auantDit, vn⸗
coze home poit eftre
aide fur tiel condition
pet berbíct De xii.hões


Lfo albeit a man

cannot in any acti-
on plead a condition
which toucheth & con-
cernes afreehold with-
out fhewing writing of
this as is aforefaid, yeta
man may be aided vpon
fucha condition by the
verdi& of 12. men ta-
kenat large in an affife


AH


Erdit or ver-

dif de 12.

homes. VerediQum
quafi dictum veritatis, ag
Iudicium eft quafi iuris
dictum. Etficitad quz-
ftiónem juris, nori refpon-
dent jaratof, fed judices :
fic ad queftionem fa@i
non refpondent judices
fed juratores.ffoz Aurois
are t trie the fac, and
the Indges ought to
iubge accozding to the
Law that rifeth pon the
fad,


226
(£) 35. H.6.vbi fipras


(8) 3 5. H.6. vh fupra.


(h) 14.H.8.8. Lco. 45.


(1) 44 E. 3.22.


See after this chapter.
SeBie 366.


nr. Ë.3.nit, Mons, dis
faits.175. 45. E. 3.8.


4 s E38. Finch;


16. H.4 9.5. 43.8.3,
Vid.10.E.3.41.
Simile in Dower.


12.2.1. Feoffments &
fasts, 1142 N,B,x05.6.
13. R. a. Monfirans des fait:
165. 4.E.4 35.2 c.

11. H.7.22.9. 6.H.7.?,
9.E.4,25 26. 14.H.3.22.5.


Lib.8.fo.155.
Lib. 9.fo.13.
Lib. 114i, 10.


164.165. 3.6. 3. (Carott. 384.


Caps.
fat, foz Ex facto Ius o-


ritur.


Prife alarge.
‘Chere be two kindes of
ferbíds;viz. one genes
tall, and another at large
0; elpeciail, Bs tn an
Actiſe of Nouel diffcifin
bzougbtbp A.agaínff B.
the 39laumtife makes his
platnt, Quod B. diffeifiuit
cu de zo. acris terra cum
pertinentijs , the Œenant
pieades, Quod ipfe nul-
lam iniuriam feu diffeifi-
nam przíato A. inde fe-
cit,&c. the recegnitors
of the Alliſe doe finde
Quod prxdi&. A. iniufte
& fine iudicio diffeifiuit
predi. B, de prædiét.20.
acris terra cum pertinent.
&c. Chis ts a gencrall
berdic, Che ltke law it
is t€ they finde tt nega-
tíuclp. And Littleton
here putteth a cafe of a
Werdict at iarge oz a ſpe⸗
tíall Verdict, and tt (g
therefoze called à fpecíall
Gierbít oz a Verdict at
large, becaufe they finde
the fpecíall matter at
Jarge,and Ieaue tbe iudge⸗
ment of aw thereupon
tothe Court, of Which
kinde of Uerdia tt is
fatd, (1) Omnis conclufio
boni & veri iudicij fequi-
turex bonis & veris pre-
miffis & dictis Iurato-
rum.

Bnd though Littleton
here putieth bis cafe of a
Werdic at large bpon a
generall iſſue ( Sbich in
the cafe hee puts it was


neceflarp for the Œenant.


to pleade ) pet when {fs
fucís topned tpon fome
fpecíall potnt, the Jury,
ag fbatl be fato Yercafter
ín this Sccion map
finde the fpectall matter,
it itbedoubtfail in La,
for as much doubt map
artfe bpon one point bps
on the fpeciall {lue ag
bpon the generall (fuc,
And ag a fpectal verdict
tap be found in Cimon


Of Eftates


prife alarge en Aſſiſe
de Nouel diffeifin, ou
en afcun auter action,
lou ies duftíccg voi⸗
lent prender le berdict
De rij, Jurors alarge,
Sicom̃e mittomus à
home fetfiede cettaíne
terre en fee,leffa metr
la terre à bn auter put
terme De bic fans fait,
fut condition 8 render
ai lefioz $n certeine
rent, a pur Default De
paiment bn re-entrie,
&C, per force De quel le
leſſee eft fetfie come de
franktenemét.et puis
Event eft aderere.p que
le leffoz enter en la fre,
et puis le leffee actatü
pr Affiie de Nouel dif-
{cifin, De 1a terre en-
uers le leftoz2, le quel
plede Gil titt nul tozt,
nenul diſſeiſin, et fut
cco,laftife foit pzife, en
cett cate les 13ecogní-
toz3 Del affite popent
Dive et render a les
Guttices lour verdict
alarge fut tout le mat-
tet, come abite que le
Defendant fuit ſeiſie De
la terre en fon demeſũ
come De fee,et iſſint fei-
fie mefine la terre leffe
al plaintife pur terme
be fa vie rendãt al lef-
four ttel annuel rent
patable a tiel £caft;ac,
fur tiel condition, que
file rent fuit aderere a
afcun tíel feaft a que


Doit


Sect. 306.


of Nosel diffeifim, or in
any other action where
the Juftices will take
the verdict of 12. Jurors
at large. As put the cafe,
a man feifed of certaine “
land in fee letreth the
fame land toanother for
terme of life without
deed vponcondition to
render to the leffor a
certaine rent, and for
default of. payment, a
re-entrie, &c. by force
whereof the leffee is
feifed as of freehold,
and after the rent is be- —
hinde, by which the
leffor entreth into the
land, and after the leffee
arraigne an Affife of
Nouel Diffeifin, of the
land againft the leffor,
Who pleads that he did
no wrong nor diffeifin,
and vpon this, the Affife
istaken ; inthis cafe the
Recognitors of the Af-
fife may fay and render
to the Iufticestheir ver-
dict at large vpon the
whole matter,as to fay
that the defendant was
feifed of the land inhis
demefne as of fee, and
fo feifed, lette the fame
landto the plaintife for
terme of his life ren. -
dring to the leffor fuch
à yearely rent payable
at fucha feaft,&c. vpon
fuch condition that if
the rent were behindeat


any fuch feaft ar which


Lai


doit eftre pap, dongzs
bien litroit al leffoz
dentrer, ac. per forced
quel leafe le plaintife
fuit Cette en fon De-
mefne come De feams-
tenement, et que puis
ap2es le veut fuit ade-
rere a tiel Ccaft,ac, pet
quelc leffoz entra en
le terre furie poſſeſſion
ie leſſee et pzieroit le
Difcretion De les Ju⸗
ftices, fi ceo (oft bn diſ⸗
feifin fait al plainttfe
pu nemp, donque p cco
que appiert a les Ju⸗
ftices, que ceo fuit nul
diſſeilin fait al plaíu-
tife entant que lentrie
De le leſſour fuit con-
geable fur lup ; leg
Juſtices Dopeut Donec
iudgement q le plain-
tife ne prendra riens
per fon beiefe dalſſiſe.
«t (fint en tiel cag le
leffor ferva aide, et vn⸗
core nul eferipture
buques fuit fait Del
condition, Car cibien
quc les Jurors potent
auer conufance De le
leafe,aurybicn tl poiêt
fuer conuſance De le
condition que fuit De-
Clave & rehearſe fur le
[ leas,


- Gfloppelis which bind the interet of the Land
landby Deed indented, andthe ithe, being fpecíatlp found b
iudge accoꝛding to tbefpecíall matter, Foz
bponbpanaptconclufion, andthe Zu


meere right.


vpon Condition.


it ought to bee paid,
then it fhould bee law-
full for the leffor to en-
ter,&c. by force of
which leafe the plain-
tife was feifed in his de-
mefne as of freehold,
andthat afterwards the
rent was behinde at
fuch a feat, &c. by
which the leffor entred
into the land vpon the
poffeffion of the leffee,
and prayedthe difcreti-
on of the Iuftices ifthis
b.e a diffeifin done to
the plaintife or not.
Then for that it appea-
rethtothe Iuftices that
this was no diffeifin to
the plaintife, infomuch
astheentrie of the lef-
for was congeable on
him ; the Iuftices ought
to giue iudgement that
the plaintife fhall not
take any thing by his
writ of Affife.And fo in
fuch cafe the leffoz fhall
bee aided, and yet no
writing was euer made
ofthe condition. For
afwell as the Iurors may
haue conufance of the
leafe, they alfo as well
may haue conufance of
the condition which
was declared & rehear-
fed vpon the leafe:


rie íg firozne ad veritatem
werstatem facti; tiep purfue Swell their oath,
Law, (b) So map the Furte find a twarrantic bei
becaufe (t bindeth the right, vnleſſe ít be ina 102í
i


Setl.366 j


Pleas, fo map ít alfo be
found ín Peas of the
Crowne , of criminal
caufes that concerne life
9? member,

A verdict finding mat-
ter incertainip op ambi-
guoufly ts tnfuffictent
and no isdgement fall
be giuen thercupon, ag {€
an Œxecutoz plead Plein.
ment adminiftee , and
tine ts topned thereupon,
and the Jury (noc, thae
the Defendant haue
gods Within his hands
to bee adminiftred, but
finde not to bat va⸗
lue, this is tncertaine
and therefore infuffic
cient,

A Merdict that finde
part of the ilue, and fin=
Ding nothing Éoz the rcfi-
due, this is infufficient
fo? the whole, becaufc
thep haue not tried the
Whole tine wherewith
thep are charged. As ££
an trfezmation of intru⸗
fion bee brought againtt
one fo; intruding into a
mefuage, and 100. acreg
of land, bpon the gene⸗
tall iſſue the Jurx finde
againſt the Dekendant
fo; the lind, but fatth
nothing for the boufe,
this (a infaffictent £o; the
whole and fa Wwas ít
twiee adindged. (m) 1B ut
t€ the FJurp gtue a were
bít of the Whole if
fue, and of moze,éc, that
Sobich ig moze ts lurpiu⸗
fage,and (ball not (a )ftap
fudmement, £oz Vile per
inutile non vitiatur, but
neceflarte incidents re=
quired bp law the Jurx
map finde,

FE the matter and fab=
ftance of the (lue be
found, it is (ufficient ag
Littleton bínfelfe fapeth
hereafter,


as the taking of a Leafe of a mans owne
P the Furie, the Court ought to
albeit Eftoppels reguiarlp mutt beeplcabco and relied
dicendas: , pet When thep
and the Court ought to adiubge according to
ng gluen in enidence, though (t be noc pleaded,
i Wight, ben tbe Mile te topneb pon tbe
3


()After


229


1
ji


40.E.3.15. 20 E. 3,«mend-
meni. 57. 18.£.5.49. 30
Ceffaust. 30,E.3.23.
78.4.39.


174E. 3.47. 18. F.5.58.
22,E, 3.1. 18.E.3.56.
1 s. E. 3. Indeemanz.58..
2, H.5. 3. 7. M. 6. 5.

7.E.4«34. 28. H. 6.10,


(m) Hill.35.Eliz ina wrig
of Errer be: weene Brace and
the Queene mike Exchequer
chamber. Mich.18 dr a9.
€li(. inter Gomerfall £r Go-
mer fal! im acconnt in the Kings
bench.


(a) 32.E, 3. Ceffauit. 25.


Vid $48. 484.48 5.


"Vid. Sel $8. 15.E.3.garr.a6
15,E.3.4[f: 322. 17.€.3.6.
18.42. 35.4.8. f
(b)1.H. 4.6.5. 27. H.8.22.6
Pl. (97.515.

Lib.a.fo.5 3. Rawlins cafe.

Qr Yid. T ledols cafe.

Hill. 31.Elis; berweene Sus-
Bo» and Dicens inthe (omsmen
place, thecafe of the Leafe
for cares by Deed indented.
34.8.3. Dre. 29.


LI
Lib.5.
(c) 7. R1. (orne. 108.
Plo. (Cory Frersans (Cafe 211.
114 H. 4d. 20 4 ff. 13.
16.A9-16. 22..Af:3;.
g.H.7. a3.


Pafih. 24. H.8, ef the Report
of Inft.ce Spilman sn tha Kings
Bansh,


11. H, 4.07. 35.1.6. Examen
17. 39. H.8. 37. Dir.
35. H.8.55« 4.61 S. Elie 218
14.H.7.1. a0. H.7.3-
(d) Pafch. 6. E.6. 5n the
Common Place.
(€) 11-4 4.16.17.

«Mar Iurors ‘Br.8.
V ide Dier vpi fopra.


Tafch.6. E.6, vli ferra.


() 34.E. 375.


ar, E. 3 18.


W.2.44p. 30. s H.4- t.
8.E.4.19. 9 H.7:13-
33.H.8 tit Verdi. Br-8 5.
11. Elig; Dier 283.284-
3E. 3, Itinere North 284.286
43-Aff-31- 36 H.8.5-
44. E.3.44. F.tit.Cor 0247
4. "Aff. 17. 5
i. Tl. Com. 93°
2. H.7. 3- Vide Li5.9.12-13-
Dewmans (af. And fee there
many etber Authorities.
31. Aff. Plat. 10.H.4:9-
m) See more before 1n thu
Chapter SeH.365-


10.47 p.9- 11 af 28.
17.4.20. 31* Aff-2\

33 A2. 3p, £28.44 F3
32. 19. H.4. 9. 7: H-5:5-

9 E.4 16. 18. E. 4-132.

15. E:4.16.17- 11,H.7.23:


Lib, 10. ft. Anf de Sewers.


Caps.


OF Eftates Sell. 366,


(c) Wfter the verdict recorded, the 3 aríc cannot varie from (t, but beforeit bee recozded thep
may varte from the irl offer of theit verdict, and that verdict Sobich (g recoꝛded (ball ſtandealſs
they may varie from a pꝛiuie berdic.

An iducfound by berbtd fall alwayes be intended true brttil ít berenerfed bp attaint, anb
thereupon bpon the attaint no Superfedeas tg grantable by La,

3 £ the 3 rte after their eutpence given dnto them at the Barre, doe at their one charges
eat 02 Dzinke etther before oz after they be agra’ on their berdict, itis Ginabic, but tt (ball not
auopo the berbtd ; but before thep be agreed on their berbíc, thep eat 03 dꝛinke at the charge of
the Dlaintife, if the verdict be given Foz him, (t [ball auopd the berdia; but {Fit be gtuen for the
Defendant, ít hall not anopd tt, Et fic € conuerfo. (d) Wut t£ after thep bee agreed on thetr
verdict they cat 02 ounbeat the charge of him fos whom they doe pafle, ít fball not auoyd the
berdic,

(e) 3f the Plaintite after entdence given, and the Jurte departed from the Barre, oz anp
fox hint, Doe beltuer anp Letter from the Plaintife to any of tbe Furte concerning the matter
in J) .uc, 02 anp Œuidence oz any efcro% touching the matter tn iftue, Which was not given in
Gutvence, ít fball auopd the derdict, tf it be Found foz the Pla intite, but not i£ (6 bec Found foz
the Defendant, & fic e conuerfo. Wut tf the Jurie carrie a&oap any Waiting bnfealen , which
Sas gíucn in cutdence in open Court, this Mail not auoyd their verdict albeit thep ſhould not
baue carried it Sith them.

Wy the Law of England a Furie after there Œutvence gtuen bponthe Aus, ought to be
kept together fn fomeconucntent place, Without meat oz Diinke, fire egcandle, which fome
Bookes (f) call an impꝛiſonment, and without {peech with anp, bnlelte tt be the Wapitfe,and
With him onelp (£tbep be agreed. Alter they beagred thep map (m caufes betweene partieand
pattie gtuca verdict, and if the Court be riſen, giue a priute berdict befoze anp of the Judges of
the Court, and then they may eat and dzinke, and the nect mozning in open Court tbep map
either affirme oz alter thetr priute berdDict, and that Whichis given in Court hail fan’, 25ut
in criminal cafes of itfe 02 member the Jurte can gine no priate verdict, but tbep muft gine tt
openlp in Court. And hereby appearcth another Diuifion of verdicts, viz. a publique berdit
openip giuen in Court, and apziute verdict given out of the Court before anp of the Judges,
ag (8 afozefapd,

B Furie ſwoꝛne and charged (n cafe of life o2 member, cannot bediicharged bp the Court oz
any other,but thep ought to atuc a verdict, And the King cannot be on-fuit, £02 he is tn iudg⸗
ment of Law ener prefent in Court: but a common perfon map be Non⸗luit.


€ En Affe de Nonel diffeifin ou en afcun auter action, crc. Here it is
tobe obferucd, G at a fpecíall verdict, 02 at large, map be gluen ín any Action, and bpon ang
^j (tuc, be tbe Iſſue gencrall oz fpecíall, and albettchcre bee fome contrarie opíntons tn oor
Bokes, pet tbe Law is now fetleo tn this popnt. a

GL, Per que le Lefforenter Deve it appeareth that the condition t$
executed by re-entrie, and pet the LefTon after bis re-entrie fpall not bp the opinion of. Littleton,
plead the Condition Without (being the Ded, becaufe he Wag partie and pztuleto tbe cons
Ditton, fox the parties muft ſhew forth the Deed, vnleſſe (t be bp the ad and wzong of his aduer=
farie, as hath beene ſayd, (m) but an eftranger which ig not priuie to rho Condition, noy clata
wncth vnder the fame, as in the cafes abontfapo appearcth, fhall not after the Condition ts eres
cuted tn pleading, be tnfozced to (beso Fopth tbe Deed: and by thts bíuerütic allthe Woks ann
authorities in Law Which feme to be at vartance are reconciled. Se alfo for this matter the
Section nert following. à

¶ Les Recoguitors del Afsife potent direc. Here it appeareth that
the Jurors map find the Fact, albett the Ded be not ſhewed tn entbence, andthe rather foz that
the Condition bpon the Liuerie (as bath bene fapo ) is good, albeit there be no Ded at all.

€ Et prieront le difcretion des Infhices. Ghat íg tofap, Cher (haz
ting dDeclaredthe fpectail matter) pray the difcretion of the Jultices, Which ts as much to fap,
as Chat thep Woulddifcerne What the Law adindgeth thereupon, tohither foz the Demaun⸗
vant, 02 £02 the Œenant : fo ag bp the anthozitic of Littleton, Difcretio cft difcernere pet legem,
quid fit iuftum, that (Sto diſcerne by the right line of Lao, and not bp the cr@ked cod
of prinate opinion, which tbe Aulgar call Difcretion : S1à jure difcedas, Vaguseris, & erunt
omnia omnibus incerta ; and therefore Commillions that authoztle anp to proceed. Secundum
fanas difcretiones veftras fg ag much tà fay, as Sccundum lcoem & confaetudinem Angliz.

€ Car cibien come les Iurors poient amer conufance,crc Hereby tt appea⸗
reth, Chat thep that aue Connfance of anp thing, areto haue Conufance alfo of ali Fnet-
enim Dependant tbereupon , foz an incident ts aching neceflarilp Depending bpon
another,

3t


LA


Lib


vpon Condition.


Sett.367,368.


228


. gita Ded be made anddatedtn a foztefne Mingdome, of Lands ‘within England, pet i 1.F-3:17.50 Graecas,
Liuerte and Seiſin be made, fecundum formam cartx, the land ſhall palle,foz it patet) by the


Liuerie.


f$) meſme fe
Brune c(t De
Feoffement en free,
pu Done ets le Taile
fur Conditian, cos
ment que nul efcrip=
ture vnque fuit fapt
Deceo, Ct (iccme eft
Dit De verdict a large
en de, ac, Cn
mefine le manner eft
en beiefe Denti foun-
Due fur diſſeiſin, et en
touts euts actions,
pules Guftices voi⸗
lent prender le vᷣdict
a large p la ou tiel
berdict a large eft
fait, la manner Del
entrie entire e(t mig
enliflue,ac,


Sedl.36 7.


Nthe fame manner


it is ofa Feoffement :


in Fee, ora Gift in
Taile,vpon condition,
although no Writing
were cuer made of it.
And as itis fayd of a
Verdié at large in an
Affife, &c. In the fame
manner it is of a Writ
of Entrie founded
vponadiffeifin,& in all
other A&ions where
the Iuftices will take
the Verdi& at large,
there where fuch Ver-
di& at large is made,
the manner of the
whole entrie is put in
the Iſſue, &c.


€ Nd it isto be obs
ferucb, Ghat the
Court cannot res
fuf a fpeciatl berdict, if it bee
pertinent tothe matter put in
Iſlue. Sethe HSecion next
prcceding,
Œ Verdict alarge.
Jit ts called a Verdie at large
becaufe itfindeth the matter
at large, anb leaueg ítto the
tudgement of the Court: os tt
15 called a fpectall Verdict be⸗
caufe it Gindeth the fpeciall
matter,&, So as herebp tt
appeareth, Chat a Werrie
(ag bath bene fapd) is two
fold, viz. aQexdict at large,oz
a ſpeciall Verdict, (Mbich tg
all one) bercof Littleton
dere fpcaketh ; anda general
Gerdit that tg generallp
found accozding to the Flue,
ag ifthe Iſſue be not guiitte,
to find the partie quiltie o2
het quiltiegencrallp, & fic de
ceteris. Chere tg alfoa Wers
bid gtuen in open Const, aub
8 priate berbic giuen eut of
Court befozeanp ef the Jud⸗


gs of the Court, fo called becaufe it ought tobe Kept fecret and printe from cach of tbe parties,


befoze ít be affirined in Court,


Set. 368.
Lfo


in füch cafe


Lthough the
€ A 3urie fter


«C T Tem ca tiel cate
lou Lenqueſt poit
Dire tour berDict
8 large.fils voilent pnd
fur eur le Conufance De
lalep fur le matter, us
pofent dire lour berdict
generalment, come ett
mis en lour charge, cóc
enlecafeauantDdit , ils
poient bien Dire que le
JLeffoz ne differfa pas le
Lefiee, (ils botlent,éc,


where the Enqueft
may give their verdict
at large,if they will take
vpon them the know-
ledge of the Law vpon
the matter,they may giue
their verdi& generally as
is putin their charge,as in
the cafe aforefaid they
may well fay , That the
leffor did not diffeife the
Leffeejifthey will,&c; .'


will take bps
on them (ag Littleton
bere faith) the know⸗
lege ofthe Lai, map
ginca generall verdict
e$ itis Dangeroks fog
them fo to doe, foz (€
a miftake the
Law, fep runne into
the banger of an At⸗
tatnt, therefoze to find
the {peciall matter is
the fafeff wap Where
the cafe (s bonbtfull,


Sed.


See the Seen next Soltewing


See the aext prasceding $4 ian


Lib.3.


18. E. 4. Te- 13.4738.


10.49. 16.36. H. 6. Barres.


8..Af:38.4. 30 4f 260
39:3. 414 f$.


44-3. 8E 44:77.
31.8.3. 554. 97. 18.4.32.


4.842, Dyer 207
rene Byer 24€


Cap.


yr co €
€p que il


nad afin cfcrép-
ture de ceo.
Hereby (t allo ap
pearetb, Ghat ai-
beit tbt Condition
Was executed bp
te-cnttie , pet the
leo; cannot picad
tt without Mhew⸗
ing ef a Ded.
(nt of thi¢ mate
ter fofficíent hath
bent fapo before
in tbe two next
preceding Secti⸗


ons.
€ Quel ef
bone plea en


Barre. In a
«afe where there
bane benc ſome
Dartetie of opini⸗
ong (n ont Boks,
Littleron here cles
reth the Doubt, and
that tpon a god
greand, dro; be
Himfelfe repozteth
in eur Wakes,
Bhat itwas bol-
Denby ali tbe Ju⸗
Bices of ngs
land, hata leafe
fo? life, the rener=
fion to the Plaine
tife, Was a gwd
barre inan Æfife,
and alfo that a
Xeafe for peares,
the reucrfon to the
Plaintife, might
be pleaded (n am
Bile: and fo of
a Feoftenent in
Fe With $oatgan-
tte. Bud hereift tbe
diuerũtie of pleas
ding (e to be obfers
Ded,fos in the cafe
bere put bp Little-
ton 0f a Leafe fo;
life, the &enaunt
fhall plead it tn
Warre, Wut ina
cafeofa Leafe £0;

peares,


Of Eftates
Sed. 369.


em en mefme le
cafe GE cafe fuit ttel,


Aeflo2 auoit enter put De-
fault De payment, ac, que
le Leſſee bit enter fur Ie
letT02 et lup diſſeiſiſt, en
ceft cafe fi le Leſſoꝛ ar-
raigne bn af Tite enucrs E
ALeffee,le Leſſee lup puit
barre de laſſiſe. Cac il poit
pleader enuers Iup € bat,
coment le Leſſorz que eft
Plaintife itt bn leaſe al
Zaefendant pur terme De
fa bie, fauant le reuerſi⸗
on al 39laíinttífe, quel eft
bone plea en Warre, en=
tant que tl conu(t E reuer=
fon eftreal Blaintife, en
ceftcafele ylaintife nad
att matt De lup apb forſ⸗
que le condition fait fur
le Leas, et ceo il ne poct
plcabet pur ced que il nad
afcun efcripture De ceo,
Œtentant que tine poet
tefponder al barrel cera
barre, Ct (Tint en ceft cafe
popes beier que home eft
Diffeifie,et bncozc il naue⸗
ra Aſſiſe.Et vncoꝛe ft le
Leſſee ſoit wlaintife.et le
Leflor Defendant tl bar⸗
tera le Leſſee per berdict
Daffife,ec, Mes en cet
cafe lou le Leffee e(t 32c-
fendant, fi il ne boff plead
le Dit pleaen Barre, mes
plead nul tozt, nul differ
fitt, Dongs le leſſoꝛ recoũa
per Affife, Caufa qua füpr.


Setl.369.-


Lfo inthe fame cafe,
if the cafe were fuch,


que apres ceo, que le: That after that, that the


Leffor had entred for de-
fault of payment, é&c.that
the Leffee had entred vp-
on the Leffor, and him
diffeifed ; in this cafe if
the Leflor arraigne an A
fife againftthe Lefive,the
Leffee may barre him of
the Affife : for hee may
plead againft him in Bar,
how the Leffor who is
pf,made aleafeto the def,
for term of hislife, fauing
the Reuerfion to the Pr,
whichis agood pleain bar
infomuch as hee acknow-
ledges the reuerfionto be
tothe Pr. Inthis cafe the
plaintif hath no matter to |
ayd himfelfe,but the con-
ditió made vpon the leafe
& this he canot plead,be-
caufe he hath notany wri-
ting ofthis: and inafmuch
ashce cannot anfwere the
bar he thal be barred. And
fo inthis cafe you may fee
that a manis difleifed, &
yet he fhal not haue affife.
And yet ifthe lefleebe pr
and the leffor def. he thall
bar the leffee by verdit of
the Aſſiſe, &c. but inthis
cafe where the Leffee is
def.ifhe wil not plead the
faid pleain bar, but plead
nul tort,nul aif thé the lef-
for fhal recouer by affiife,


Caufa qua fupra.


| Lib.


vpon Condition.


Sed. 370!


orjot an eftateof Conant bp Statute 0; Elegit.the Defendant (pati not plead (n barre,
—— non, &c. but inftific bp force of the Leaſe, dc, and conclude, & iflint fans cane
AndiEthe Cenant of the Freehold be not named, be (ball plead, Nul tenant de franktenement
nofme en le breife : and ín thecate of the feokment With Warsantis , hes mutt relie bpon the
Sarran


C] Catt vpur ceo d
tielx conditions
. font plug commune⸗
. ment mis a efpeci=
fics en faits enden-
teg, afcü petit chofe
ferra icp Dit (a top
mon fits) De enden⸗
ture & De fait Poll
-concernants condi-
tions, Ct eff a(ca-
. uoít, que ft lenden⸗
ture foit bipartite.ou
tripartite ou quadri⸗
partite , touts les
. partes de lendenture
ne font que bn fait
enlep.æ chefcun part
De lendenture eft de
aury grande force et
effect, ficome touts
leg parts enfemble,


Setlion 370.


Nd for that ſuch

Conditions are
moft commonly put
and fpecified in Deeds
indented, fomewhat
fhall bee here faid (to
thee my fonne) of an
Indenture , and of a
Deed Poll concerning
Conditions. And it
is to bee vnderftood,
that if the Indenture
be bipartite, ortripar-
tite , or quadripartite,
all the parts of the In-
denture are but one
Deed in Law,and eue-
ry part of the Inden-
ture is ofas great force
and effe& as all the
parts together bee.


€ EX faits enden-
res. @hote are
called bp ſeuerall names, ag
Scriptü indentatum, carta ine
denta, Scriptura indentata, In-
dentura, Liter indentatæ. An
Indenture ts a Waiting cons
tatning a Conuepance, Wars
gaine, Contrat, Couenants
agreements bet$oeene two
OZmoze, and is indented (ti
thetop o2 fide anfwerabie to
another that like wiſe compres
benbetb tbe felfe fame matters.
and ís called an Jndenture,
fo; that it ($ fotndented, and
ts called in Gꝛeeke conzpagore
Fla Den begtnneth,Hæc
Indentura, &c. amb fn troth
the Parchment o? Paper is
not indented; this te no Fins
Denture, becaufe words can-
not make it indented. But if
the ded be actuallp indented,
and there ts ne words of In⸗
Denturcin the Desd,pet tt ig
an Indenture in Law, for ít
may bee ait Indenture with⸗
ent words, but not bp Wordg
without indenting,


¶ Ex faits indent. And here ít is to be vnderſtood that tt ought
to bec in Parchment oz in Paper. Foꝛ tf a wꝛiting bee made bpona peece of wod, 02 bpon a
perce of Linnen, o2 in tbe barke of a tree, 02 on atone, epthe like, €c. and the fame bec fealeb 07


deliuered


pet is ít ro De, fora Deed muſt bee Written eyther tn Parchment o2 Paper as


” befooc is isto, foz the Swziting bpon thefe (s leaſt fubies toalteratíon o cozrmption, ;
€ Silendentare foit bipartite, ou tripartite, ou quadripartite, dre. Bipar-
tite ts When there be two parts and two parties to the Deed, Cripartite when there are three
+ parts andthzee parties, and fo of Ruadstpartite, DQuinquepartite, te. ,
¶ E: de fait poll.A deed pollis that which tg plaine tottbout any
indenting.fo called, becauſe it (& cut euen 02 polled, cucrp Deed that is pleaded Mall be intense
Ded te bea Ded poll, bules ít be alleaged tobe indented,
€ Touts les parts del endenture ne font que vn en ley. Ifa Man by deed
indented make a gift in tayle, and the Done bpetb Without ilſus, that part of tbe Indenture
Sbich belonged to the Done doth wow belong tothe Donoz, foz both parte boc mabe but ons


Ded in Law.


Œ Et chefcun part del Indenture ef} de auxy grand force, crc. Œbisig
manifett of (t fel£c, and ts proucd by the Bokes afoefaid.
It is tobc obferucd, that (€ the Jreoffos, Donoz , 02 Xeffoz feale the part of the Fndeutare
belonging to the Feolfee, et. the Jndenture (9 god, albeit the Feoſfee neuer fealeth the Conn⸗
terpart belonging to the Feoſtor, c.


Mmm


Seffion


229


Pid, Self.217,


Lik.s.fl.30, Stilersafy,


14.€.3.Ley79,

4. B.2. Fine: 116.

4.€.3. Ley 68 2.8.3. Ded 4.
27. H.6.9. FN. F. 122 I.


38.H.6;23,25, :
9.H.6.35.3$.H,6.34.
9.E.3.18. g. €. 4.18.
Fl,Com,134,


Lib.. Caps. ÿ |


g. E.3.18. Vide the Bookes
aforerchearfed,


Vide 40.E. ; 2. 7. H.5y.14.
‘Deer 38.H.8.19. Lib, 2. fol.
4.& 5. Godard: caf,


yr Els. Dier3 42. 1.R.3-
14,H.6.29.Bab, 13, H. 4.12.
39.31.


Section


L fcafance de Andenture
CES en Deux maners, Un eft
De faire cup en le tietce per-
fon, Unauter eft de faite cus en
le primer perfor, XLe fcatance en
le tierce perſon ef come en tiel
forme,

Hac Indentura fa&a inter R. de
P. ex vna parte, & V.de D.ex alte-
ra parte, Teftatur, quod predi&us
R. de P. dedit & conceffit , & hac
præfenti carta indentata confirma-
uit præfato. V.de D. talem terram,
&c. Habendum & tenendum, &c.
fub conditione, &c. In cuius rei te-
ftimonium partes pradictz figilla
fua præfentibus alternatim appo-
fuerunt. Fel fic : incuius rei tefti-
monium vni parti huius Indenturæ
penes praefatum V .de D. remanen-
ti, przdi&' R. de P. figillum fuum
appofuit, alteri veró parti eiufdem
Indenturz penes R.de P. remanen-
tiidem V, de D. figillum fuum ap-
pofuit, Datum,&c.

‘Tiel Endenture eft appel en-
Denture fait en le tierce perfor,
pur ceo queles Uierbes, ac. font
en la tierce perfor, Ct tiel forme
dendentures eff De pluis fure
feafance, pur ceo que eft pluís
communement bfe, ac,


Of Eftates


Sec. 371.


371.


A“ the making of an Inden-
ture 15 in two manners, One

is to make them in the third
perfon. Another istomakethem «
in the firft perfon. The ma- |
king in the third perfon is as in «
this forme. Ie

This Indenture made betweene R,
P. of the one part,andV. of D. of RÀ
other part, witne[[eth that she [aid
R. of P. hath granted, and by this «
prefent Charter indented confirmed —
tothe aforeſaid V.of D. fuck Land
Gc. To haue and to hold, dc.
vpes Condition, cc. In witnefes —
whereof the parties aforefaid to thefe
prefents interchangeably baue
their Seales, Orthus. In witneffé
whereof tothe one part of this Inden-
ture, remayning with the aid V. of
D. the faid. R. of P. hath put his
Seale , and to the other part of the —
fame Indenture remayning with the
Said R. of P. the faid V. of D. hath
put his ſeale. Dated, &c.

Such an Indenture is called an


Indenture made in the third per- ⸗


fon, becaufe the Verbes, &c. are
in the third perfon. And this
forme of Indentures is the moft «
fure making, becaufe it is moft —
commonly vied,&c.


€ E T le feafance del Indenture eff en deux maners, cc. Bere is another
ofour Authors perfec diutGons, In this € the next. Section following. Littleton doth
illuſtrate his meaning bp {ctting Down formes and cramples Sobich Doefectuallp teach,

In tbefe two formes there are tobccobferned (among other) thee general parts of the «
fame,viz.the Pꝛemiſſes the Habendum,and the In cuius rei teftimonium. Wat hereof hath beene
fpoken at large, Sect 1.4. & 40. fog Littleton fpeaketh not bere of thedelinerp, but onip of cbe


Contert 02 500208 of the Ded,


€ Pur ceo que eft le pluis communement vfe. Here tt appeareth that


Which is mo commontp bfeb in Conuepances is thefureft Swap. A communiobferuantia non
eft recedendum,& minime mutanda fant qua certam habucrunt interpretationem, Magifter


rerum Vfus. It is pzontocb bp the Sptatute of 38-E.3-cap.4. that all penati Bonds (s the third


Lib.3. vpon Condition. |  Seë.372.373.


períon be bofb and bolben fo; none, wherein fome of our Bokes (d) ſeeme to differ, but they
being rígbtlp vnderſtood, there is no difference at all, oz the Statute isto breintenpco of
Wonds taken (n othcr Courts out ofthe Realme, and fo tt appcareth bp the acambic of that
Ba, Bud tt was principally intended of the Courts of Rome, and fo ttappeareth bp 3iuftíce
Hankford in 2.H.4. in Which Courts Wonds Were taken in-thetbire perfon, So as tach
Wonds made out of the Kealmeare boid, but ether Bonds tn the third perfon, arerefolned to
bt gab, ag Weil Indentures in the third perfon,bp the opinion f the Whole Court (n$:E.4.


Sec. 372.
€ € feafance De Indenture TH making of an Indenture


en le primer perfon eff cos
me en ciel fogme, Omaibus Chri-
fti fidelibus ad quos præfentes lite-
re indentatz peruenerint,A. de B.
- falutem in Domino fempiternam.
Sciatis me dediffe, conceffiffe, &
hac prefen’ carta mea indentata
confirmaffe C.de D. talem terram,
' &c. Vel fie : Sciant præfentes & fu-
turi, quod ego A. de B.dedi, con-
ceſſi, & hac præfenti carta mea in-
dentata confirmaui C. de D. ralem
terram, &c. Habendim & tenen-
dum, &c. fub conditione fequenti,
&c. In cuius rei teftinonium tam
ego prrd' A. de B. quam predic
C. de D. his Indenturis figilla no-
ftra alternatim appofüim'. Vel fis:
Incuius rei teftimonium ego pra-
fatus A. vni parti huius Indenture


figillum meum appofui, alceri vero. P


arti eiufdem Indenture predict’


C. de D. figillum fuum appofuit,


&c
€ Ere Littleton lets vosone thre fozmes of Deeds indented (m the fir perfon, Breuis
via per exempla, longa per precepta. Ft ts requifite for euerp Student to get 39


in the firft perfon is, asin
this forme. To all oe har.
whom shefe prefents indented [hall
come, A. of B. fends greeting in our
Lord God enerlafting: Know yee mee
to bane giuen, granted , and by this
my prefent Deed indented, coufirmed
10 C. Ds ſuch land, dre. Orthus:
Know all men prefent and to come
that I A. of B. baue ginen, gran-
ted, and by this my prefent Deed in-
dented , confirmed to C. of D. fuch
land, &c. To baue and to hold, dre.
upon Condition following, cre. In
witne(fe whereof, afwell I the faid
A. of B. as the aforefsid C. of D.
to thefé Indentures baue interchange-
ably put our Seales, Orthus: In
witneſſe whereof 1 the aforefaid A.
to the one part of this Indenture bane
ut my Seale, and to the other part
of the (ame Indenture , the (aid C. of
D. bath pnt his Seale, rc.


pee


dents and appzouco formes not only of eds accozding tothe sample of Littleton,


bntof fines, anb other Conuepances, anb Afurances , anb fpecíailp of god and perfest
Pleading, and of the right entries andfozmes of Judgements Which Will Band him in great
ſtead: both While he ftudic, and after When he Mall giue councell, It (s a fafe ching to fellow
Approned Pꝛeũidents, £92 Nihil fimul inuentum eft perfectum.


Setlion 373.


CET il ſemble que tiel enden-
ture que eff fait en le pꝛi⸗
Wer perfor ef augp bone " la

€»,


AN it feemeth that fuch In-

denture whichis made in the

firft perfon is as good in law as the
Mmm 2


230


(d) 49.8.2,1. 2.115.106.
8.6.4.5.


Vide $8,371,


Lib.5.


Caps.
ley, licome lenbenture fait en le
tierce perfon, quant ambideux
parties ont a ceo mite lour feals,
cat (í Elendenture fait en T tierce
perfon, ou en le primer perfon,
mention foit fait que le grantor
auoit mile folement fon teale, &
nemple grauntee, Donques eft
lendenture tantfolement le fait le
grauntoz, Aes lou mention eft
fait que le grantee ad mis fon
feale a lendenture,#c, Donques
eſt lendenture autpbien le fait le
grantee come le fait le grauntoz,
Iſſint ileft le fait Dambideur, &
auxy chefcun part de lendenture
eftlefatt Dambideux parties en
tiel cafe,


Of Eftates


Cr,


Indenture made in the third per- |
fon, when both parties hauc put
to this their feales, for if inthe In-
denture made inthe third perfon,
orin the firft perfon, mention be
made that the grantor only hath
put his feale, and not the grantee,
then is the Indenture only the
deed of the grantor. But where
mention is made that the grantee
hath put to his feale to the Inden- ”
ture,&c. then is the Indenture as
well the deed of the grantee as the
deed of the grantor. So isitthe
deed of them both, and alfo each
part of the Indenture is the deed
of both parties in this cafe,


€ Gre is to be obferued, that albeit the words in this Jndenture be only the Words of
H the eoffoz, pet if the Feofke put bis Scale to the one part of the Indenture, it (g

the Deed of them both, And in this fpeciall cafe to make it the Dedot the freoffe,
itappearetb bp Littleton, that mention muft be mace in the Deed, that hee hath put to big
Seale. for that he is no Wap made partieto make it, being made én the firſt perfon, but onip
by the claufe of putting bis Seale thereunto. Other Wile it is of a Deed indentedin the third
perfon ag befoze it appeareth, for there bc (g made partie to the Ded inthe beginning, And
Littletons rule ig true, that enetp part of an Indenture (g the Dede of both parties, fo? ag
ft hath beone faid both parts mabe but ons Deed in Law inthat cafe,


*


€ Se certaine con-
dition , crc.
Hereby this ( &c.)(g ims
plied, that the condition
in this cafe Doth extend
both to the eftate £02 itfe,
tto the remainder, but bp
fpectall limttatton (t map
cxtend fo euerp one of
them, and not to the oz
ther. Dud albetthe (n the
tematnder be no partie to
the Fndenture ( the par-
ties tbereunto onlp being
the Lefloz and the Gee
mant for life) pet when
tn the remainder en
treth and agreeth to aue
thelands bp fogce of the
BWrdenture, hee is bound
to ptrtoimc the conditt.
Ons Contained in the In⸗


Sed.374.


Cl Cem  eftate Loft

fait p Judenture
à bn home pur terme
De fa bie, leremainder
à bn auter en fee fur
certaine condition, ac,
€ file tenant à termed
bie auoit mis fon feale
al patt de lendenture,
a puíg mo2uft,s il que
eftenleremainder ent
enla terre, per force de
fon remainder, ac, en
ceft cas tl eft tenus De
performer touts les
conditiõs comptife en


lenden⸗


aoe if an cftate bee
made by Indenture
toone for terme of his
life, the remainder to
another in fee vpon a -
certaine condition,éc.
and if the tenant for
life haue put his feale to
the part of the Inden-
ture, and after dieth,and
he inthe remainder en-
treth into the land by
force of his remainder,
&c. Inthis cafe hee is
tied to performe all the
conditions comprifed


Lib.3.


lendenture, ficome le
tenant a terme De bie,
Denoit faire en (a bie,
$nco2e ceftuy en le re=
mainder ne bugs en=
feale afcun part delen-
Denture, Mes la caule
eft, que entant que il
enter ct agreea Dauer
leg terres perforce dl
endenture, ile tenus
De performer les con-
Ditions deins melme
lendenture fil botle a=
uer la tecre,ac,


vpon Condition.


in the Indenture, as the
tenant for life ought to
haue done in his life
time, and yet hee inthe
remainder neuer fealed
any part of the Inden-


ture. Butthe caufeis,for 3»


that inafmuch as hee en-
tred and agreed to haue
thelads, by force ofthe
Indenture hee is bound
to performe the condi-
tions within the fame
Indenture if hee will
haue the land,&c.


Sec.375.
denture. And bere is alfo
& diuerũtie to be bnber-
fed that anp eftranger
to the Indenture map
take by Swap of remains
Der, but be cannot tn this
cafe take any pzefent e-
ſtate in poſſeſſion. becanfe
beis an efüranger to the
ene.

PE A. bp Deed inden=
ted betweene him and B.
letteth lands to B.fo life,
the remainder to C. (n fee
teferuing a vent, Œenant
fo? life dieth, be in the res
mainder entreth into the
lands, be fhall bee bound
to pap the rent, for the
caufe and reafon befo2e
peelded bp Littleton, Bn
jnoenture gf Leafle is


ingroffed betweene A. of the one part, anb D. and R. of the other part, Sbich purporteth a


Demife for peares bp A.to D.andR, A-feaicth and deligercth tbe Indenture to D. and D. feaz
leth tbc Ceunterpancto A. Wut R. did not feale and deliver it. Bnd bp che fame tadenture ít
is mentioned, that D.anb R. Dfb grant to be bound to the Plaintifein 20.pouno (n cafe that
certaine conditions compzifed in the Jndenture Were not performed. Bnd fo: this 20.pound
A. brought an Action agatnft D. onip,and ſhewed forth the Indenture. Che Defendant picax
Ded, that it ($ pzeucb by the Indenture that the demtfe bp indenture as made to D. and R.
Sobich R. ig tn full life and not named inthe t02ít, Iudgement of the Wait. Che Wlatntife
replped that R. pfo never feale € deliner the Indenture, € fo his to2ztt was god againtt D. fole.
Bnd there the countell of the 39latntife tokea bíuerfitp betkoene a rent referucd Which is
parcel of tbe Leafe, and the land chargedtherewith, and a ſumme in grofle, ag were the 20.
pound is, foras tothe rentthep agreed that bp the agreement of R. to the Leaſe, he was bound
to pap tt, but fo the 20.pound that ig a ſumme in groffeano collaterali to the Leaſe, and not
annexed to the land, and groweth due onip bp the Dead, anb therefore R. faid thep as not
chargeable therewith foz that ho bab not fcaleb and deltueredthe Ded. Wut in afmuch as he
had agre to the 3L eafe Swbich Mas made by Fndenture he was chargeable by the Pndenture
£02 the fame ſumme in grofle, and fox that R. Wag not named in the wꝛit, it was adiudged that


the toztt did abate,


€ Aver la terre, Ac. Here is implyed an ancient marime of the


Lane, viz Qui featit commodum fencire debet. & onus, Ec tranfir terra cum encre.


Cl Cem fi feoffment toit fait p
fait Poll fur condition, &
pur ceo que Le condition neſt pas
perfo2rme, le feoffor entra & bap-
pala poſſeſſion de le fait Poll ſi
le feoffee post br action De cel
entrie enuers Ic feoffo2, il ad efte
queftíon file feoffoz poit pleder
lecondition per le Dit fait Poll
encountecle feoffee, Ct atcung
ont Dit que non, entant que il


Sechon 375.


femble


Lío if a feoffment bee made

by deed Poll vpon condition,
and for that the condition is not
performed, the feoffor entreth
and getteth the poffeffion of the
deed Poll, ifthe feoffee brings an
action for this entrie againft the
feoffor, it hath beenea queftion if
the feoffor may plead the conditi-
onby the faid deed Poll againft
theifeoffee. And fome hauc faid

M mm 3


231


$0.5. 3.32. 3.H.6,26.6.


38.2.3.8-4. 3.H.@26.6,
Vide 45H. 5, 11. 12+


Lib.;.


(3)V Se. rgo. 303.345.


84.8. 3.75. 45.2.3.
«Meuftran: dei faits.5 5.


(0) 40.49 34- lib. 5.7 5.5.
Wymark: aafa.
(€ ) 12. H.4.8. 43. E. 3.57.


Wymark: eafe, vbi fupra.
38. N.6.3. 41..4/.39-
13.H.4.8. 7. H.4.19.

21. N.4.73« 45. E. 3-11.
F.N.B.343-


Cap.5-


femble à eut quen fait 3201], &
le propertie De meſme le fait ap⸗
yettíent a cclup a que le fait eft
faít,a nemp a celup que fi te
fait, Et entant que tiel fait ne
attient al feoffoz, tl femble a eur
qucil ne poit pag ceo plebet, Ct
auters ont dit le contrarie,ct ont
monftre Diuers caufeg, Un eft,
file cafe fuit tiel, que en action
petenter cup, fi le feoffee pleder
meſme le fait et monftre eft al
Court, en cel cas entant que
ic fait eff en Court, le fcoffoz
poit montrer al court coment
en le fait font Diuers couDitt-
ong Deftre performes De Ie
part le feoffee, ac, et pur ceo
que ils ne fueront perfogmes, tl
euter.ac, et à ceo tl ferra relceiue,
perle reafon quant le feoffoz
ad le fait en poigne, et ceo mon-
fra a le court, il Certa bien ref=
ceiue De ceo pleder, ac. et nofinent
quant le fcoffo? eft priuie al fait,
cavcouient eſtre pꝛiuie al fait
quant (1 fift le fait,#c,


Of Eftates


568.375.


hee cannot, inafmuch as it feemes
vnto them that a deed Pollandthe
property of the fame deed belon-
gcth to him to whom the deed is
made, and notto him which ma-
keth the deed. And inafmuch as
fuch a deed dothnot appertaine to
the feoffor. It feemes vnto them
that he cannot plead it. And o-
thers haue faid the contrary, and
haue fhewed diners reafon, one is,
if the cafe were fuch that in ana-
ction betweene them if the feoffee
plead the fame deed and fhew it
to the Courtjin this cafe infomuch
as the deedis in Court,the feoffor
may fhew tothe Coutt how inthe
deed there are diuers conditions
to be performed of the part of the
feoftee,&c. and becaufe they were
not performed, he entred,&c. and
to this he fhall be receiued. By the
fame reafon when the feoffor hath
the deed in hand,and fhew this to
the court,he fhall well be receiued
to pleadit,&c. and namely when
the feoffor is priuy to the fait, for .
hemuft bee priuie to the deed
when he makes the deed, &c.


Ere the latter opinion ta clere Law at this bap, and ig Littletons one opíntz


CH on (a )as befoze bath beenc obferned,


€ Ont monfire diners cauſes.


Feelix qui potuit rerum cognofcere caufas,
Et ratio melior femper præualet.


¶ Entant que le fait eff en Court.crc. And herewith do agree boma-
np Authorities in Law. ( c) And it the Ded remaine tn one Court, it may be pleaded in a=
nother Court Without ſhewing fosth ; Qui lex non cogit adimpoffibilia.


¶ De part le feoffce, cc. Here alfo ig implyed tf the condition bee _
to be peefozmed on the part of the Feoffoꝛ op bp a ſtranger, and it (s tobe vnderſteod that When
a Deb is ſhewed forth to tbe Court the Ded fall rersaine in Conrt all that rearme (6 the
tuftody of the Cuftosbreuium, but at theend of the Œcarme ( tf the Deed be not dented thew
the Law adiudgeth the Ded in the cuftodp of the partic to whom tt belongetb, fox a tang ez
uidences areas (t $ocre the inewes of bis land, Wut (Ftle Dead be denied, then the Ded in
indgement of Law rematnethin court bntill the plea be determined, G bereübue of this Spex


dion needeth no explication.


Sedo


Lib. 3.


ary À deux
} cA homes font bn
trefpas à bn auter, le
quelreleate abn 6 eur
pet fon fait touts acti-
ons perfonalg,a nient
obftant tl fuif action
 Btrefpafic enuers lau⸗
ter, le Defendant bien
- poit monfiter que le
— trefpaffe fuit fait pet
- Iupet per bu auter fon
companion, et que le
Plaintife pec fon fait
. (tl monſtre auant tc-
— Lea a fon companion
touts actions perſo⸗
nals iudgemẽt (i acti-
one. Et vncoꝛe tiel
fait appertient a ſon
companion, ct nemy a
lup, mes pur ceo que il
poít auer aduantage p
- Iefaít boit monfirer
le fait al Court, tl poít
ceo bien pleder,at. Per
mefine le reafon poit
ie feoffoz en lautet cas
- quant il Doit auct ad⸗
uantage per le condi-
tion compris deins le
fait Poll.


€ Ay Ur ſi le keoffee
donaſt ou grã⸗

taſt le fait Poll al
02, tiel grant fer-
rabone, et Donques le
fait & le peopertic Del


Sed. 376.


Lfoiftwo men doe

a treſpaſſe to ano-
ther, who releafe to one
of them by his deed all
actions perfonalls, and
notwithftanding fueth
an action of trefpaffe
againft the other, the
defendat may well fhew
that the trefpaffe was
done by him and by an
other his fellow, and
thatthe Plaintife by his
deed(which he fheweth
forth) releafed to his
fellow all actions perfo-
nalls, and demand the
iudgement,&c. and yet
fuch deed belongeth to
his fellow and not to
him, but becaufe hee
may haue aduantage
by the deed if hee will
fhew the deed to the
Court, hee may well
plead this, &c. by the
fame reafon may the
feoffor in the other cafe
when he ought to haue
aduantage by the con-
dition comprifed with-
inthe deed Poll,


Sell. 377.


At& if the feoffee

granteth the deed
tothe feoffor,fuch grant
fhall bee good, and then
the deed and the pro-
pertie therof belongeth


EQ! sux homes
S font vn tref-


paſſe vn auter ec.
Bercbpthis Section tt
te to bee bnberffoop that
Svben diuers doc a trefz
patte, the ſame is Zopnt
0? Seuerall at the wil of
him to hom the Swzong
is Done, pet if be releafe
to one of them; all are diſ⸗
charged ,becaufebis oon
Ded hall bc taken mo
fronglp againt himfelfe,
but stheriwife i 1g tn cafe
of appcale of death,æc.
ag if tio men be fopntlp
andfeucrallp bounden in
an Dbligation, (f the
sD blige releafe to one of
them; both are difchare
ged, and feing the Œref=
paflers are parties and
pztuteg in Wong, the one
{ali not plead a 1Rcleafc
te the other without
ſhewing of it forth albeit
the Dede appertaine to
the other.

FE an action of debt
bpon an Dbligation be
brought againft an beire,
he may pleadein barre a
Reieale made by the
Obligee to the Œrecu-
tors. ut albeit the
Dead belong toanorher,
pet mult he Mew it forth,
fo? both of them are país
nie tothe Œcftatoz,


€ Per mefme le


reafon. Vbi eadem
Ratio, ibi idem Ius.


€[ Z property del


fait appertient


al feoffor Hereby it
appeareth that a man
map gine oj grant bis
Deed to another,and fuck
8 grant bp Paroll te aa
n


vpon Condition. 568.376.375. — 23


a7.E.3.83. 13. E. 4.5.

15. E.4. 26. 21.€.4.72.
32.E.4.7. 8.H.6.15.

30. H.6.41. 21.4.6.
vArbirrement, 41.

2.R:3.9.4. 14. H.8.10,

34.1.8. 165. Efl rante al fasi 2.
3 H.c. 18. 20.


13-E. 3.05, JM o Tren
dc; faits,43.


Li


Caps.
Bnd itis alfotmplied, Ghat
i£ aman hath an Dbligation,
though be cannot grant the
thing in Arion, pet hee may
gine 02 grant the Ded, viz-
the Parchment and ware to
another, who map cancell and
bfc the fame at his pleafure.
€ Serra plus toft en-
send que il vient al fait
per loyall meane, que per


tortious meane. Omnia
præfumuntur legitime facta,
donec probetur in contrarium.
Iniuria non præfumitur.


Quzre de du-


bijs. (here be three
Sind of bnbappíe men.

1 Qui fcit & non docet Hee
that hath knowledge and tta-
cheth net.

2 Quidocet & non viuit,
Hee that teacheth and liueth
not thereafter.

3 Quinefcit,& non inter-


rogat, He that knoweth not, and both not enquire to bnderftand, Cherefoze Littleton faith,


Quere de dubijs.


Of Eftates


fait appertient al
Feotkor, ac, Ct afit
le feoftoz ad le Fait
en poigne,ct eft plead
al Court, il fra plus
toft entendue que tl
bient al Fait per loy⸗
al meane, que per
tortious meane, Ct
iſſint a cup femble
que le Feoffoz poet
bien pleader tiel fait
polle que compaent
condition, tc, fil ad le
fait en poigne, Ideo
femper quare de du-
bijs , quia per rationes
peruenitur ad legiti.
mam rationem &c.


Infoclix cuins nulli fapientia prodeft,
Infelix qui re&a docet, cum viuitinique.
Infoelix qui pauca fapit fpernitque doceri.


4

Sed.378,
to the Feoffor, &c.
and when the Feoffor
hath the deed in hand,
andis pleaded to the
Court, it fhall be ra-
ther intended, That he
commeth to the Deed


by lawfull meanes, —


than by a wrongfull
mean : & fo it feemeth
vnto them, That the
feoffor may well plead
fuch deed poll which


4
|


|


—


+


comprifeth the condi- …


tion,&c. if he hath the
fame in hand.Jaeoféper
quere de dubijs, quiaper


rationes peruenitur adle- «


gitimam rationem dre,


¶ Quia per rationes peruenitur ad legitimam rationem. 4fo Ratio
é¢ Radius diuini Luminis, And bp reafoning anb debating of graue learned men che barkneg
of ignozance is expelled, and by the light of legall Reaſon the Right is difcerned, and thereupon
— giuen according to Law, Sbich (s ihe perfection of Reaſon. hig (g of Litrleton


ere called Legitima ratio, whereunto no man can attaine but bp long Audie, often conference, —


long ecperience,and Continuall obferuatton. .
Eertaine it is, Chat in matters of difficultte the moze ſeriouſly thep are debated and argued,
the moze trulp they are refolned, and therebp nei inuentions tuſtly auoyded. ;


Inter cuncta leges & perconétabere doctos,


« (5 Ondition en Ley,

@e: Littleton
haning fpoken of Conditions
ín Deed, no according to
his one dintfion commeth to
fpeake of Conditions in lago,


AD Que ne foit fpeci-
cifie en Efcript. A Con-
dition in Law { that which
the La intenveth o; iplis


eth without erpretie 5
the Ded, —


LJ


Section 378.


€ p States que
“homes ont fur
condition en Icy font
tiels eftates que ont
bu condition per la
lep a cug anner,comt
que ne foit fpecificen
efcript. Si come bie
grant per fon faít à
vn auter loffice de


Par⸗


~~


States which men -


haue vpon Condi-
tion in Law, are fuch
Eftates which haue a
Condition by the law
tothem annexed,albe-
it that it bee not fpeci-
fied in writing. As if
a man graunt by his
Deed to another the


Lib.
Parkerſhip de bu
park a aũ % occupier
mefme loffice pur
- terme defonbie, Ic-
. flateque il ad en lof-
fice e(t fur condition
en ler, ceftafcauotr,
aue le parker bicn a
lopaiment gardera
le park, a ferta ceo q
atiel office appettiéc
- à faire,ou auterment
bien lirroit a! graun⸗
toz za es heires De
lupoufte, a De grant.
€ à vn auter Gl voit,
- 8C, Œttiel condition
. que eff entendus per
- la icy e(tte anncre a
- afcun cbote, eft aury
fort ficome la condi⸗
tion fuifloit mis en
- etcript,


\


vpon Condition.


the office of Parker-
thip ofa Parke,to haue
and occupie the fame
office for terme of his
life, the eftate which
he hath in the office is
vpon Condition in
Law, to wit, thatthe
Parker fhall well and
lawfully keepe the
Parke, and fhall doe
that which to fuch of-
fice belongeth to doe,
or otherwife it (hal be
lawfulto thegrátor,&
his heiresto ouft him,
andto grant itto ano-
ther if hee will, &c.
And fuch Condition
as is intended by the
Law to be annexedto
any thing, is as ftrong
as if the Condition
were putin writing.


Setl.578.


@ Que le Parker
bien cy loyalment garde.
ra le Parke, ec. Parke,
this Gould be wꝛitten Parque
which is a French word, and
fignificth that which we duis
garlp call a Parke of che
french Werbe Parquersto {me
parke.to inclofe, It is called
tn Domefday Parcus. In law
it Ganificth a great qu intitte
of ground incloied, pꝛiutled⸗
ged fo; wild bealks of chafebp
pꝛeſcription, o bp the wings
grant,

he beats of Darque, og
Chal: properlp ertend to tbe
Wucke , the Doc, the Fore,
the MWatron, the Wor, but iw
a common and legall fence, to
all the beaſta of the Foꝛreſt.
AThere bee both Wealts and
Foules of the warren.
Weatts, as Dares, Co: tes,
anb Rocg c lcd in iRecondg
(4d) Caprech. Fowles of


two ſorts, viz. Terreftre: and b:


Aquatiles, Terreft es of tio
forts. Silueftres and Campe-
flres : Campeftres cg Wars
tridge, Muatle, Matic, ec,
Silucttres, ag Pheſant, to ods
Cocke, #c. Aquatiles,ag Mal⸗


Tat», Berne, tc. SobercoE F have fen this Recogd,(*) Rex conceffit Iohanni de Beucrly Armigero
fuo quod ipfe cuc quibufcunque canibus fuis ad quafcunque beftias, feras Regisin quibufcun-
quc/forc(tis, parcis fuisquotiefcunque voluerit venari poffit, & quofcunque Falcones poffit per-
mitrere volare ad quafcunque aues de Warrenain quibufcunque riparijs, &c.

Ft is vefolucb (c) bp the Juſtices and tbe Kings Counce, that Capreoli,idelt, Roeg, non
funt Beftiz de forefta, co quod fugantalias feras. Wealts of Forelts, be properip Wart, wind,
Waucke Ware, Woare and Wolfe, but legalip all wild beaſts of Venerp.

A Fozeft and Lhefeare not, buta Parke muſt bee inclofed, Che Foꝛreſt anti d afe doe
biffer in Offices and Lawes: cui rp Foreltis a Chale, but euery Chalets nota Foret. A
fubiec nap baue a Fozretk bp elpecíatl arant of the King , ag the Dukeof Lancaiter, andthe
Abbot of Whitbie bab,

Ockam cap. quid Regis Forefta fatth , Forefta eft tuta ferarum. manfio non quarumliber, (ed
filueftrium,non q 'ibu(l ber in loci: fed certis & adhoc idoncis,vnde Forefta E mutata in O.quafi
ferefta; lioceít, ferarum ftatio.

. Pudzeld 62 Woodgeld ts to be free from payment of monep £o? taking of too in amp Forclt,
But let bz noW returnc to our Littleton.

In this Section Littleron patteth an egample of a Condition in Law annexed tothe office
Of the Leper of a Parke, but this example mult bec vnderſtood Witha diſtinctiton, foz tf the
Parker voth not actend on the Parke one 02 two; ac. vapcg, this ts no fozfetture of the Of⸗

» ftc of Darkerfhip,but (Cin his default any Deere be billed.and fo a dammage to the Loz, that
ts afozfeiture ; for (that (t map be fatb once fozall) non-dfer of ít felfe without fome fpectall
damage (g no forfeiture of pꝛiuate 2D fices,but non-bdler of publique 4D fíceg Which concetne
the admimfratton of Juſtice, 02 tbe Common Wealth, ts of itfelfe a caufc of toꝛteiture.


€ Loy osfter fil voit, &c. Littleton here ſpeaketh of an Ouſter

by force of a Condition in Law, therefoge (t tg to bec feene (n What other cafes the Deantos
tray lawfully ouit bis Officer.

tía adtuerfitic betweene D ffícere that haue no other pz05t; but a Collaterall certaine

Fee, fox there the Grantoz may difcharge bins of bis — ag to be à Bayly, Receiuer, Sure

nn 859955


233


4 ) Hil. 13, 8.5,
‘ md 3 —


(*) 38.€.3.v9t. patent. por)
1.m.,1e,


(e) Hil. i3.£.3. ctram Rage
in Thefaur,


Vid: $68. x.


Vide Brake fal 321.67 316,
Britton fo!. 34.Fleta lib. 3,
AP. 34. 35^


8. E.4.15,5.L, 5. E, 4.36,"
(em.379. 330.


2, 8,7,81. 39. 8.6,33. r9.


U«
*


Lib.ʒ.


18.2.4.8. 31.4.8. grati.
Bret 34.34.H.8.ibsd.93.11.
ElC.Dier,38 5.


33.H.6.19.3.6.E,6.Dier71.


15. E. 4.3.1. 5E. 4.36.

28. Hl. 8. Bendlees enter £we/2
de Londres & Hieron, lib,9,
fil. $0.9 5.96.99.


CE) Mich.33.€.1. soram


"Rege in Thefanr. Leme/yue de
Durkams cafe,


"Pl. C0m.379.4. Sir Henvie


"Newils afe, 21 E.4.20.9 3.
Lib.8, fel.A4. Wittingharme
vfi.


Lib. fol. 44, WPistinghems
cafr.


Caps. Of Eflates Sed. 378.


uepoz, Puditoz, o2 the like, the exercife Sobereof is but labour anb charge to him, but hee mull
banc bis fee: forthe matne rule of Law (8, Chat no mam can fruftrate op verogate from big
sine grant te the prctudice ofthe Grantee. And where albeit the Grantee hath no other prox
fit but his fer, vet that fe (g to bee percelued and taken ont of the profits appertayning to the
Lord Within his D ice, for therethe Grantor cannot diſcharge im of bis feruice op attens
Dance, for that may tarncto the pretudtce ofthe Gaante , if the Gzantoz Wilt not grant the


D fice at all, But in all cafes where the Officer relinquiſheth bis Dice, andretuleth to ate


tend, be lofeth his sDfficc, Ser, 3920fit and all.


‘
1


|


bere is another otuerfitie Where tbe Granter befides s certaine fee hath profite and a⸗


uaples bp rcafon of bts £D ice, there the zantoz cannot difcharge him of his feruice op atten⸗


dance, fo; that fhould bc to the pretudice of the Granta. As if a man doth grant foanotber the —


Dice of the Stewardlhip of his Courts of bts Mannoꝛs With a certaine fee, the Grantoz
cannot difcharge bim of bis feruice and attendance, becanfe be hath other profits anb fees be-
longing to bis D fice, which he ſhould lole, tf he Mere diſcharged of his Dffice, And as in the
cafe which Littleton here putteth of the D fice of the Xa aper of a Parke, fog that hee hath not
onip bis feecertaine, but profits anbauaples alfo, in vefpec of bis office, ag Deere Skinnes,


Hhoulders, tc, Wut now tet bs proceed and fo what other particular foifettureg in Law


bee of this D fice bere fpoken of by Littleton, and ſomewhat cf Conditions in Law in gee
nerall,

Bnd it ig tobe vnderſtood, that (£anp Keeper kill any Deere without warrant , 02 fell
01 cut any Crees, 1009,02 Underwods, and congert them to his owne ble, it is a Fopfets
sure of bis xD fice , forthe deftrucion of vert is, by ameane, deftruction of Uicntfon. So ít ig
1£ he pul don the loge oz any boufc Within the Dark for putting of Hap (nto ít£oz feeding of


the Deere oz fuch ltke, tt (o a fozfetture,and the rcafon Wherefore the D fice in thele amo in like


cafes (ball be Forfeited (f£) íg quia in quo quis delinquit in eo de iure eft puniendus.
As to Conditions tn Law, pou (hall vnderſtand tbey bee of two Natures, that is to fay,


by the Common Law, and bp Statute, Andthofebp the Common Law are of two face
tures, that ts tofay, the one is founded bpon Skill and Confidence, the other Without Skill


02 Confidence Upon Sil and Conkidence,as here the D fice of yarkerhip, and other sDfa
fices inthe next Section mentioned, andthe Ifke. ,
Touching Conditions in Haw Without Hill, «c. fomebec bp tbc Common Law, and
fome bp the Statute. By the Common Law, ag to euery eftatcof Cenant bp the C
Tenant in Taple after poſſibilitie of iſſue extinct, Cenant tr Dower , Cenant fo? 3.
nant for Peares, Tenant by Statute Merchant, o? Staple, Tenant by Elegit, arbvein,ec,
there isa Condition in Law focretlp annexed to their Eſtates, that if thep alien in fee, ec,
shat hein the reverfion oz remainder map enter, and fic de fimilibus, o2 (£ they clapme a greater
hate in Court of Recoꝛd, and the like. . i
Concerning Conditions in Law founded bpon Statutes, for fome of them anentric is ate
uen, and fo fome other a recoucrp by action : Where an entrícís giuen, ag bpon an alíenatís
on in Mortmaine, ec. andthelike. where an action ts giuen, ag for waſte agaínft Œenant

£o; life and peares, and the like.
Et tiel Condition que efl entendue per la ley eſtre annex a aſtun chofe eft


auzi fort, &c. Here it ts worthy the obferuation to take abictwof —


the dinifions afozefatd infome particularcafe. As fo? example. Admit that an D fice of Par⸗
herfbíp be granted 02 difcendtoan infant o2 Feme &oucrt , i£ the Conditions in Law an⸗
need to this D ice Which require Sktil anb Confidence bec not obferueo and fulfilled, the
D ffíce ig loft £02 euer, becanfe as Littleton faith, here tt ts as ftrongas an expꝛeſſe Conditt-
on. But (£a Leafe fog life be madeto a Fem Covert, oz an infant, and tbepby Charter of
fcoffinent alien (n fee, thebzeach of this Condition in Law , that ts Hoithont SKI , ac. is no
abfoluteforfcitureof their eftate. So of a Condition in Law ginenbp Statute, Which gi⸗
Seth an Entrie only. As (£an Fnfant opa fem Couert With her hufband aitens bp Char⸗
ter of feoffment in Mortmainc, tbíg is nobarretothe Jnfant, oz fem Œouert, Wut tf a rez


ffe, Tez 4


L


«


couerp be hadagaint an Finfant oz Fem concrt in an Acton of wafte, thcrethep are bound .


and barred fo? ever,
And tt ig to be obferued, that a Condition (m Law bp force ofa Statute Which giueth a re=


couerp is in fome cafe more frong then a Condition ín Law without a recouery. Foꝛ it XLeffeg
fo life make a Leaſe for peares, andafter enter into the land, anb make Watke , and the Leffoz
réconer inan Action of wate, be ſhall auoid the Leaſe made befoge the waſte done, Wut (f the
Lette for lifemake a Leafefor peares, and after enter epon bim , and makea fcoffment {n fes
this fopfetture (ballot auoid the Leaſe for peares. 4202 in anp of tbe ſaid caſes a precedent
Bent granted out of the Land hall be auoyded. Foꝛ i£ Leſſes Cox life avant a Kent charge,and
after doth waſte, anb the Leos recoucreth (nan Acton of wate, be (pali hold the Rand 2


Lib. vpon Condition. $e8.379.


ged During the life o£ the Œenant £o; life, but tf the rent Were granted after the waſte Done, the
Aeloz (ball auoto ít,

—.— 2inb tbereafon Sober c£ozc the Leafe fox peares in tbe cafe afozefatd, (ball bc auoyded, (s bes
cauſt of nccefTítie the Watton o£ wale mutt be brought agatnft the Weiler for 1ife, So bich in that
cafe muft bind the Lee for peares, o2 elfe bp the Act ot the ALefley fo; life tbe Leſſoꝛ ſhould ba
barred to recotier Locum vaftatum, Which the Statute giueth.

FE a man hath an D ice Fos life Which requiveth Skill and confidence, to Sobícl) D fice he
hath a boufe belonging, and chargeth the houle with a Rent during his life, and after commit
a forfeiture of his D fice, the Rent charge hall not be auoyded during his life, for regularly a
man that taRcth aduantage of a Condition in Law (ball take the Land With fuch chargeas
hefinds it, Bnd therefore Littleton ig here to be vnderſtod, that a Condition tn Law ts ag
trong as a condition (n Deed, ag to abotde the eftate o2 (ntereft it {elfe, but mot to auotde prez
€tbent charges, but in forme particular cafes ag bp that which hath bene fatd appeareth.

Qr bere be at this dap moze conditions in Law annercd to offices then were when Littleton
rote ; for example, fox offices in anv Wile touching the adminiftration 02 execution of Jus

ice, oz Clerkſhip in anp Court of Recoꝛd, o? concerning the Rings Creafure, Reuenue, Ace
count, Cuſtomes, Alnage, Auditoꝛſhip, Rings Surnepoz,oz keeping of anp of his Maieſties
Galles, Forts, ec, Foꝛ i£ any of thele officers bargaine o; fell anp of the fatd offices oz anp

- SDeputatíon of ths fame, 02 take anp money 02 profit, op anp pzomife, coucnant; bond 02 af-

france, to hauc anp money oz reward £02 the fame, the perfon fo bargatning oz felling, o2 that

Hall take any fuch pzomife, couenant, bond ot affurance (bail not onlp fozfete bis cítate, but

allo eucrp perfon fo buying, giuing o2 alluring be adtudged a difabled perfon to haue 01 eniop

the fame office o2 offices,seputation oz deputations,éc. Dud that all fuch bargaines; fales,
promiics, couenants and aflurances, as be before {pecified, fall be boite, except as in tbe fato

Bc isercepted, i

Dir Robert Vernon Knight being Coferer of the tings houfe of the kings gift, and hac
ning the recett of a great fumme of money pearcly of the Sings Reuenue, bib fo? a certaine
fumme of money bargaine and fell the fameto Sir A.L. anb agreed to ſurrender tbe fato efftce
to the hing, to the entent a grant might be made to Sir A. Who furrendzen it accozdingip:
anb thereupon Sir A. was bp the Kings appointment admitted and ſworne dCofcrer. And tt
Spas refolued bp Str Thomas Egerton doro Chancelloz.then chtefe Juſtice and others to
Sohom the Wing referred the fame, that the fato office Was vopde bp the fato Statute, anb tat
Siz A. Was difabled to hauc o? take thefatd office, anb tat no Non obftant could difpence
Sith this act tocnable thefatd Sur A. forthe reafon and caule befozc-mentioned, Sect.1 82,
Bnd hereupon Sir A. Was remoucd, and Dir Marmaduke Dariell fwogne ( bp the kings
commandement) inhis place. Bnd note that all promifes, bonds and aflurances aſwell on
the part of the bargaincr, as of the bargatnee are bopdeby the fald ad. (*) Nulla alia re magis
Romana refpublica interiit,quam quod magiftratus officio venalia crant.

(g) Iugurthum going from Rome, fatd to the € (tie, Vade venalis ciuitas, mox peritura fi
e£mprorcm inucnias.

Therefore by the Lato of England it (e further pꝛouided that no Dicer oz Minilſter of
the King ball be oxdained oz made for anp gtftoz bzocage, fauour oz affection, mo that anp
Sbich purfueth bp him o2 anp orher, printlp oz openly to bein anp manner of office, {ball bee
E ín tbe fame office 02 in anp other, but that all fuch officers (hall be made of tbe beft and molt
awkull men and fuffictent, À Law worthy tobe wꝛitten tn letters of gold, but moze worthy
tobe putin duecxecution, Foꝛ srample, newer (ball Juſtice be duly admintitred, but when tbe
SDftícerg and minifters of Juſtice be of {uch quality, and come te thetr places in fuch manner
ag bp thts lazo ig required.


€ Tiel condition que eft entends per la ley eftre annex a afcun chofe, ei
auxi fort ficome la condition fuit miftin eférips. And this accozds toit}


that ancient vule; Vtiquè fortior & potentior eft difpofitio legis quam hominis.
Sell. 379.


CE Nm̃ ł᷑ manet ett pt this manner it is of Cs Encfchall. qt
De grants Doffi= 4 grants of the offices this 3 bauc fpo-


ces Dc Senelehall, of Steward, Conftable, —

Conſtabulat Bedela⸗ Bedelarie, Bayliwick, or —

ry Bailiwich ouautg athe canines, Butif tying hath beme foie
efore,


834


3.H.7.04.1 2. Auditor, Re-
emer, Batlile, Keeper of a
Caflle, Mafter of the game
Keeper or Parker, of any
Forreft, Parke, (hafe rc.
g.E.6.ca.1 -Trefurer Receiuet
Collector, "Batüfe, re,

5:2. 6.ca.16.


Mich.1 y Iacobi Regis,


Lib.3.f0.83.ColBils cafe.


* red. fo.35 3.
(g) $2145.


12, R. 2.66.2.


Vidt Se. 419.429.439.


231.£,4, 20, P[, Co 579.


$. E.4.€


Lib.;.


e


fe ) Magee Latest. ty


W.res.7.


Sranf. fe.t «2.
35.48. ce. 18.


37
$-


MSIF. JER UG:
AG: Ph.


( ap.5-


befoze. But a Conſtable
tg often taken in tbc laxo
foy a Warden op Keeper,
ag Conftabularius caflri
de Douer & $.portuum ;
fo the warden of the
@aftic of Dover and the
Cinqueports,ec- So as
ft this fence Conftabula-
rius íg taken fo» Caftel-
lanus, and this is pꝛoued
bp the Statute 4(*) of
W.1.c4.7. Des prifes des
Conttables ou Caftellains
faitz desauters,&c. Bnd
Magna Carta cap. 19.
aullus conftabularius vel
ejus balivus capiat blada
vel alia catalla alicujus


Of Eftates


offíces,ac, Des (i tiel
office foit grant a bn
borra aver a occupter
per luy ou fon Deputie,
dong fi loffice foit oc⸗
cup? p lup, ou per fon
Deputte ficor il Deuoit
per le ley eftre occupte,
ccofuffí pur lup, ou
auterment le grantoz
& teg bcíreg potent ou-
ſte le grantee, come eft
auantDdit,


Sedl.380. |
fuchoffice bee granted
to a man To hauc and to
occupie by himfelfeor
his deputie, then if the
office bee occupied by
him or his deputie, as.
it ought by the law tom
bec occupied, this fuf-
ficcth for him,or other-
wife the grantorand his
heires may oufte the
grantee as is afore-
faid.


qui non fie de villa vbi caftrum fuum fitum eft,&c. Stanford,fo.152. Conftabularius Turris
London, foz Cultos turris, 32.H.$.ca.28. Conftable of the Foꝛreſt, fo? the Keeper of the


Fozrek.


¶ Bedelarye. Bedell is Deviucd of the French 10010 Beadeau,
hich Ggnificth a melTenger of the Court oz vnder Waplife, in Latyn Bedellus.

Anothe ath of a Wedeil of a Mannoz ts that be fbali pulp and truly execute all fuc At⸗
tachements and other 1920ce9 as hall be directed to him from the Loꝛd oꝛ Steward of big
Court, and that be that: prefent all pound Wreaches, Which (ball happen within his office,
and all chattels wayued, and cftrapeg.


€ fajliwicke. DE this tufficient hath beene Laid befoge.


€ €re Littleron
H termeth Soords

of imitation to
bee Convitions in lak ;


£21 bis firſt eramplets;


¶ Durant le co-


aertare enter eux.
Durante coopertura inter
«os Œhis YozB( Duratec)
ig properipa Word o£ 1
mutation; ag Durante vi-
duitare, 81 Ducante virgi-
mitate, oz Durante vita,
&c. Bud properip a Cone
Bitton in Lawis as hath
bene faite Shere the
Hato createth the fame
Without exprelle
Sos.

Dum, alfo maketh a it-
mitation, as (£a Leaſe be
made, Dum fola fuerit, og
Dum fola & cafta vixerit.
Dummodoíg alfoa $0938
Œ Hmítatíom ag Dum-


anp


Seil. 380.


€ [Gem eftates de
treg ou teneméts
purront eftre fur coti-
Ditton en ley, coment
que fur leftate fait, ne
fuit afcun mention ou
reherlal fait Dele con-
Dition, Sicome mits
tomus d bn leag (oit
fait a le baronet à (a
feme, à auer et teneca
eur Durant E couetture
enter cup, en ceft cas
tis ont eftate pur term̃
Delour Deur bies fur
condition en lep, 8, (f
br De Deux Deute, ou
que Beuogce Coit fait
enter eux, Donque bien
. divroit


Lfo eftates of lands

or tenements may
bee made vpon con-
dition in law, albeit vp-
on the eftate made
there was not any men-
tion or reherfall made
of thiscondition. As
put the cafe that a leafe
be made tothe husband
and wife, to haue and to
hold to them during the
thecouerture betweene
them. In this cafe the
haue an eftate for termé
of their two liues vpon
condition in law,s.if one
of them dy,orthat there
bea diuorce betweeae


Lib.3. vpon Condition.
lirroit a le leffoz et à them, then it fhall bee


fes heires dentrer, lawfull forthe lefforand
ae, — hisheirestoéntet&c.. £a man grant arent ont
1 : of the SPaunoz of D.


Quamdiu the Gzantoz yall bec dwelling bpon the Mannoz this is gw0,07 Quamdiu fe be-


nc gefferit.


Bnd fo be thele woꝛds, Donec, Quoufque, Vfquead, Tam diu, Vbicunque.


€ 5i 1n» de cux demie, crc. Foz if one of them Dic the couerture ig
pifoiuen, and confequentip the tatc Determined by tbe imitation. uS t.
v ML Os quedinorce foit fait enter cux c. here is a diſtinction to be
"mbeeftoob : fox chore be t$00 kinde of diuozces,viz. one a Vinculo matrimonij, * and the other
A menfa & thoro, Dinortium dicitur à diuertendo, 93 Diuoitendo quia virdiuertitur ab vxore.
Diuoꝛces A vinculo matrimonij ate thefe Caufa Præcontraëtus, Caufa Metus, Caufa Impo-
tentiz feu Frigiditatis,Caufa Affinitatis, Caufa Confanguinitatis,&c. Bnd J reade in an an=
tient Kecoꝛd Coram Rcge Termino Pafch.30.E.1. William de Chadworthes cafe, that be was
diuozced from hig wife foz that he did carnallp know her daughter before he married the mo-


Setl.381.


modofolueret talem red=
ditum. Quamdiu alfo (g
a woꝛd of limitation, foz


ther ; Bil Sobícl are caufes of Dinozce preceding the marríage.

A menfa & Thoro, ag Caufa Adulterij which diſſolueth not the marriage A vinculo Matri-
monij;fo? it (s fubfequentte tbemarríagc. And the Miuorce that Littleton here fpeakcth sf
ts tntende of fuch Diuozces, as víTTolue tie marriage A vinculo matrimonij, and maketh the


iffue baftard, becauſe they Were not luftæ aupriæ. Bnd therefore in Littletons
huſband and wife be DinozcedD Caula Adulterij, pct the freehold continueth,


cafe though the
becaufc the Coc


Gerturecontinueth, And it is further to be buderftod that many Diuozces thar ere of fo1co


by the Cannon Law, When Littleton wꝛote, a


not at this Bap in fozce, for bp the Statate


Of 32.H.8.ca.38. it f$ Declared that all gerfong belaSofull (hat is, map laSofulip marry ) that
be not probibiten bp Gods laSoe to marry, that ts to fay, that be not pzohtbites by the Lenitis


call Degrees, j


# man married the Daughter of the After of his firk wife, and swag dra wne in quettion (n


the Eccleſiaſtican Court fez
it was refoined (a)bp the


this marriage alledaing the fame to be again the Cannons, anv
Court of Common-rieas bpon conGoeration hav of tbe latd Sta-


tute that the marriage could not be tmpcaches, to? that the fame was declared bp the fato Ac
of Parliament to be god, ín aſmuch ag ít Was riot prohibited bp the Leutticall degrees, Er


fic de fimilibus.


Seif.


Crz que tls ont slate put

terme de lour Deux dies,
Probatur fic,chefcun home que ad
eftate De franktenement en afcun
terres ou tenements, ou il ad e=
ſtate en fee, ou en fec tatle, ou put
terme De Ca biedemefne, ou pur
terme Dauter bic, et per tiel leafe
ils ount franktenement, meg (1g
tiont p ceft grant fee, ne feetaíle,
ne pur terme Dauter bie, Ergo, tig
ont eſtate pur terme De lour bies,
mes ceo eft fur condition en Iep,
ele forme auantdit, et en cett
cas fils ficront watt, le feoffo? a-
uera enuers eux bzicfe De wat


381.
j AN: that they haue an eftate


for term of their two liues,is
proued thus, euery man that hath
an eftate of freehold in any lands
or tenements, either he hath ane-
ftate in fee, orin fee taile, or for
terme of his own life,or forterme
of another mans life, & by fucha
leafe they haue a freehold, but
they haue not by this grant fee,
nor fee taile,nor for terme of ano-
thers life, Erga,they haue an eftate
for terme of their owne liues, but
this is vpon condition in lawe in.
forme aforefaid, and in this cafe if
they fhal do waft,the feoffor (hal

Nan 3


235


14€. 2. Grant 92.


37.H.6.27.


10. M 4. 6. E, 3.8.9. 314
3-£.3 18. Amuaty 40.
19-H.6.545 Temps E.A.
vAnnuity 1 50, 11. (D p.8.
aL. AL p.18. 26.£. 3.65.
9-E.4,16. 9.E. 4.25.26.
9.H.6.39. 14.H.8.13
"47-83-27. 39.Æ.3.32.35.
11.41, 4.14.76.
Braltenfo.2y8-

18.E.4.28. 24. H.8.baflard;
Br. 44. 39. E i bagard2r.
22.€.qtir ('onfnitat. 5.
6,.£3.249. 25. E. 3.37


(") Vid. $8. 129.
33. H.8.«a. 38.


(n) Tr.2 Tac. Rot.1634,
Richard Parfens aft.


Lib.3.


Pl.Com.561.6.


Vi Sell. 345 finie.


37.H.6.27.


VI Brak. lib 6.414.


Caps.


Of Eftates Sec. 382. 383.


fuppofant per ſon breife, Quod haue a writ of wafte againft them
tenetad terminum vite,&c. mes  fuppofing by his writ, wed tenet
enfon count il Declare coment. ad rermins vite,dre.but in his count
&en quel maner le leas fuit hee hall declare how, and in what
fait. manner thc leafe was made.


€ P Robatur fic. By this argument logically Deatone a diuifione,

ít appeareth, How neceflarie it isthat one Student hould (ag Littleton did) come
from onc of the Qi ntuerfitteg, te the ſtudie of the Common daw, Sohere he may learne the lide⸗
tall Arts,and efpectallp Logicke, for that teacheth a mars not ontlp by inf argument te conc
clude the matter in queftion, but to difcerne betweent truth and falfebab, and to bfe a geod mes
thon in bis ſtudye, and probably to ſpeake to amp Legall queftion,and is defined thus, Dialc&i-
ca eft fcientia probabiliter de quouis themate differendi , whereby it appeareth how neceflarte tt


te foz our Studtent.


€ Suppofans per [on briefe


the ret of this Section {5 eufdent and plaine,


€ S! un Abbe.
Doit is ofa
UB ifhop, arch=
Deacon, and other
Œcciefalticall oz tem=
porall Wodie Poli⸗
tique oꝛ Coꝛpoꝛate,
oz of any sDfficer 02
Dravuate , 03 the
itke,
€ Refigne
on fort depofe.
And fo tt ig of a
Œranflation and Ceſ⸗


€ [ /72E Dafifs

íg a Woke of the

Reports of Cafes
ín the ratgne of King Edward
the third, anb ít íg called the
bokeof Affifes, becaufe the
greatett part of tbecafes ther=
in are bpon toute of Affi-
{es brought, as hath been fafo,
re which hath bene cited


02€.
€ Denifa les Tene-
ments 4 vendre per fon


Executor. Chismutt


fait bn eate abn hoe,
a auer et tener a luy Dus
rant le temps que E Icf-
fo c(t Abbe, en ceft cafe
le Leſſee ad eftate put
terme De fa bte Demefit,
mes ceo eft fur conditi-
on en Iep, 5, que fi labbe
refigna, ou foit Depote,
Son, que bien litroit aS fuc-
ceflor Dentrer, ac.


Seti. 392.


€ ER mefine E man⸗


ner eft. fi bn Abbe


Qd tenet ad terminum vite &c. Chis and


N the famemanner it i$
if an Abbot makea leas


toa man for yeares, to
haue and to hold to him
duringthe time that the
Leffor is Abbot ; in this
cafe theleffee hath an E-
ftate for term of his own
life:butthis is vponcon-
ditionin Law, s. That if
the Abbot refigne or be
depofed,that then it fhal£
be lawfull forhis fuccef-


for to enter, &c.


Setlion. 383.


€ [Loan bóc poit
beter en le Lint


Dalſiſe, viz.an-.
no 38.E:3.p:3. DUPE:
Daft, en ceft forme


que enfuíft s $, Un
Aſſiſe de Nouel Dit
feifin autetfoitg fuit
port bers A.que ple-
Daal Affife, et.troue


fuit per verdict, Que |


laute


Lfo a man may
fee inthe Booke

of Aes, Anno
38. E. 3, p. 3. a plea of
Affife in ie form fol-
lowing, s. An Affife of
Nonl Diffeifin was
fometime brought a-
gainft A.who pleaded
to the Affife,and it was
found by verdict, thar


Lib.s.
launceftoz le plaintif
beuífa fes Gr enemts
a benDze pecie De⸗
fendant, que fuit fon
— Œtecutoz.et de faire
Diftribution des de-
niers put fon ali:
Ct fuit troue que
maintenant apres la
mot le Teſtator vn
bone luy tendift cec-
- taíne fummede deni-
ets pur leg Cene=
ments, mes non pag
- al balue,# que te y-
€cuto? puis auoit te-
nus les Cenements
enfa main Demefne
per deux ans, alen-
tent deles vender
pluis chier a afcun
autet, et troue fuit q
fl auoit tout temps
pritt les profits De
les Cenements a $
bfc demeſne fans riẽ
faire pur lalme le
mot, ac. Moubray


Juſtice difoit, Lere- E


tuto? en tiel cafe ett
tenus plalepa faire
le bender a plug toft
que il purrdit apres
la most fon Cefta-
to?. et troue eft que il
refute De faite vendẽ
Fiflint (Lauoít 6n De-


fault en lup, e: íffínt b


od fozce del Deuífe il
if tenus dañ mig
touts le profits auc-
Hants de les Tene⸗
ments al fer moze,
et troue eft que il ad


vpon Condition,


the Anceftour of the
Plaintife deuifed his
lands to bee fould by
the Defendant who
was his Executor, and
tomake diftributionof
the money for his
Soule. And it was
found, That pref: ently
after the death of the
Teftator, one tendred
to him a certaine fum
of mony for the lands,
but not to the value,
and that the Executor
afterwards held the
lands in his own hands
two yeares, tothe en-
tent to fell the fame
deerer to fome other,
and it was found that
he had all the time ta-
ken the profits of the
lands to his own vie,
Without doing an
thing for the foule of
the deceafed,&c, Moy-
Pray luftice faid » The
Xecutor in this cafe
is bound by the Law
to make the fale as
foone as hee may after


the death of his Tefta- Ale


tor, and itis found that


hee refufed to make wii


fale, and fo there was
a default in him,and fo


uice he was bound to
put all the profits
comming of the lands
tothevfeofthe Dead,
and it is found that he
tooke them to his


y force ofthe De. 18


Sed 383.


be intended to bee of Lande
beuifable by Œuftome , (oz
Lands by the Common 145»
Were not deutfabie, (ag bath
bene ſayd: foa in this Heti-
on is implied a DiuerGip, viz.
10 ben aman beuífetb that his
Exccutoꝛ hail feu the Land,
there the lands difcend fn the
Ineane time tothe beire, and
vntill the fale bee made » the
beire map enter and take the
profits. Wut when the Lana
is deutfedto hig Œrecutoz to
be foulb, there the deuiſe tas
Beth away the difcent > anb
brftetb the hate of the land in
the Executoz,and he map en⸗
ter anb take the profits, and
make fale according to the de⸗
uffe, Bud here (t appeareth
by our Authos, Chat ben a
man dentleth bis Qr enementg
to be fould bp bíg Œrecutos,
ít is all enc ag tf be had dents
ſed his Cenements to bis ex⸗
ecatozs to be fonib : and the
teafon ts, becanfe be deuiſeth
the tenements, Wherebp bee
bzcakeg the Difcent,
€ Mowbray.Tohn
Mowbray ag a "renomenb
Pudge of tbe Court of Come
Mon pleag, and diftended ef a
Nobie Famiite,
¶ Lexecutor en tie]
cafe eft tenus per la Leya
faire le vender a plua
toft que il Purroit apres
la mors fon T. eflator crc.
And the teafon hereefis, fo;
that the meane profite taken
befoze the fale, {ball not bee
8, fo as be map be come
Pellable to pap debts Soi
thefame,ana therefore the law
fll enfo:ce him to fell the
lands ag fone ag bee can, fog
othæSvife hee hall take ap
Hantage of hig one laches :
utt€ a man deutfe that big
Crecutoz ſhau feli big lamb ;
there hee map fell it at anp
time, fez that bec hath but a
bare power , and no profit,
And bp thie cafe tt appeareth,
What conftrution the Law
maketh fos the fpedie pap-
ment of debts, Bnd here ig
tobec abitruc⸗ AE bat masp
org


_ 236


Lib.


Mick. 31.47 13. El. in tho

im s Benz, Crickmers safe
edmdge, D765. 6. fe. 74.
5. 5.6.76.


pd


Vi, Sef. 238.


BraB.lj.3.fo 16.17 .A[ p.32.
$.E-3. 43 E.3.1.45. 5.5.17


41 f. 13:7 H.6.43.
,H.6.33. 32.8.3. 408. 30
,K. 3, Amaustic 44.


39A fp. 1. 30 Af p 11.


1.3.


Cap.s.

Words in a will bor make a
Condition in aw, that
make no Condition in a b&b:
ag brre to deuiſe lands to an


Œrecutoz ad vendend , fo tf
lands be deuiſed to oncad fol- -


uendum 20.!. to 1.5. 02 pap=
ing twentie pounds to I-N-
this amounts to a Conditi⸗
on, Bnd Crickmers cafe Was
this, À man feifed of cers
taine lanog holden in £502
cage had iffuc two Daughters
A. and B. and deuiſed all big
lands to A. and ber detres, to
pay vnto B. a certaine ſumme
of monep at a certain Dap and


place, the monep Wag not payd, an ít was adtudged,


Of Eftates


pite as bfc dmefne,
et iffint auter Default
enlup : yer quc fuit
adiudge que le plain⸗
tiferecoucra, Et il⸗
ſint appiert per le dit
iudgement, que per
fozce Del Dit Deuife,
letecutoz nauoit C-
ftate ne potet en ies
Cenements,fortque
fur condition en ley.


Seël.384.
owne vic, and fo ano-
ther default in him.
Wherefore it was ad-
iudged , That the P?


(hould recouer. And


fo itappeareth by the
fayd ludgement, That
by force of the fayd
Deuife the Executour
had no eftate nor po-
werin the lands, but
vponcondition in law.


Chat thele Words, To pay, Fe, DID aa


-


mount iH a Will to a Condition, and tbc reafon was, for that the land was deulled to A.fog M |
that purpofc, otherws'e B. to whom the moncp Was appointed to be paid, ſhould beremedticile, —


Et intereft reipublica: fuprema hc


aduall Eiectment recourred the moitie of the lano againft A.


€ Ex ifSins appiert per leindgement, &c.


Chis conciufion bpon a


minumteltamenta sata haberi: andthe dif of B. Upon ag — —


Judgement is of great authozitie in Law,Quia Iudicium pro veritate accipitur; and as it hash M
bene fapb, Iudicium {g quafi iuris dictum. F


€ Host appeareth


Bhat Aimications

Sobich (as hath bin
fspb, Littleton termeth Con⸗
bítíong in Law )may be plea
ded Without Ded, and the
reafon of our Author ts ob=
ſeruable, becaufe the Law in
it felfe purpozteth tbe Condi⸗
tion, whereot fomeSwbat hath
bene fapd before: and theres
fore loke backe tothe «Lonbís
sions in LaSv,0 390105 of Its
mítatíon , and withall that a
franger map take abuantage
oF aliizitation, ag bath bene
fapd.

Littleton bauing fpokcn at
large of Conditions tn Ded
anb ín Law, fomciwhat fe-
meth neceTarie to be fapd of
defeafances, wherby the Kate
62 tígbt of Freehold o2 Inhe⸗
rigarice map bee Defeated and
auoyded.

Defeafance , De-
feifantia {8 fetched from the


French $0010 De faire, i- to defeat 02 bndoe,


Setl. 384.


€ ER mults au-
ters chofes ct
cafes y tont De(lateg
f condition Ela Lep,
et en tiels cafes il ne
befoigne dauer mon⸗
ſtre aſcun fait rehear⸗
fant ia Condition,
pur ceo que la Ley en
lup me(me purpost E
Condition, at,
Ex paucis dictis. in-
tendere plurima poffis.
€ Plus ferra Dit
De Conditions en te
prochein Chapter,en
le Chapter de Kelea⸗
fes, et en le Chapter
De Dilcontinuance,


Nd many other

things there. are
of Eftates vpon Con-!
dition in Law , and in
fuch cafes hee needed
not to haue fhewed
any Deed, rehearfing


the condition, for that
the Law it felfe pur


porteth the Conditi-
on,&c.
Ex paucts dictis ine
sender e plurima poſſis.
More (hall bee fayd
of Conditions in the


next Chapter, inthe
Chap.of Releafes,and_


inthe chapter of Diſ⸗
continuance.


infedtum reddere quod fadum eft. Œbere (s ante


uerfitie betweene Bnberitances erccuted, and Juheritances executozie, as Lands executed bp
Linerie,®c. cannot bp Indenture of Defealance be defeated afterwards. Bnd fo (£a 3D ((Teifat
releafe to a Dieifoz, (t cannot be defeated by Bnventures of 3Defcafance made afterwards,
but at the time of thereleafe oz Ceoffement,ac, the fame map be defeated by Indentures of Des
fealance, £02 it is Marimeins Lew, Que incontinenti fiunt in cffc videntur,


Lib. vpon Condition: Seit.385.


. But Rents, Annuities, Conditions, warranties, and fuch itke that bee Inheritances
Executoꝛie map be defeated by Defcafances made epther at that time, 02 at anp tímcafter,
And fo the Law ts of Statutes, Mecognisances, Obligations, and other things Exrccutosy,


€ Ex paucis dicfis intendere plurima pofsis.


Uerles at the Gr(E Were inucnted for the helpe of memozp, and it ſtandeth Well With the gras
uitie ot our Lawyer to cite them, Uy this Verſe of ont Authoʒ, Finfcrences and Conclusions
in like cafes are $oarrantable,

Lattip, ſome what Were neceflary to be fpoken concerning claufes of prouifocs, contapning

- Power of Keuocation, Which Guce Littleton Swzote, arecrept into boluntarie Conuepances,
Sobich paffc by rapfing of bles, and executed bp the (^) Statute of 27.H.8. and are become berp
frequent, and the Inheritance of many depend tbercupon, As tf a man fetfeo of Lands tn fer,

and hauiug {lue diners Sonnes bp Deed indenters, couenanteth in confideration of Jratberip
Tone, and the aduancement of bis Wiowd, o» bpon any other god confideration toftand feifen
of thee Acres of Land to the vle of biufelte foz life, and after tothe vſe of Thomas hig eldett
Sonne in taple, and foz default of fuch tue to the bfc of his fecoud Son (n tale, with diuers
like remapnbders ouer. With a Pꝛouiſo that it fall be la EH £02 the Couenantoz at anp time

- ‘during his like to reuoke any of thefaid dics, c. Chis 3910uifo being coupled with an vle,i¢

- allowed tobee gwd, and not repugnant to theforzmer States. Wut in cate of a frcoffement,

- 91 other Conucpance, whereby the Feoffee o1 Grantee, ec. (9 (n bp the Common La, fuch a
Pꝛouiſo Were meerelp repugnant and void,

… inbfirft in the cafe aforefaid, t£ tbe Coucnantoz Who had an effate foz life doc reuoke the v=

fes according to bis power, he is feifed againe (n fee ſimple Without entry o2 clapme,

Sccondlp, be may reuoke part at one time, and part at another,

Œbiroty, 1€ hemake a keoffment in fee, or leuie a fine, tc. of any part, this doch extinguiſh
his power but foz that part, whereas in that cafe the whole Condition is extinct. Wut tf ii be
made of the whole, all the power is ectinguithed. So as to fome purpofeg, ít is of the nature
of a Condition, and to other,in nature of a limitation,

—- Fourthip, JE hee thathath {uch power of revocation hath no pzefent intercft in the Lan,
nozby the Ceiloz of the fate (hall haue nothing, then bis feoffment o2 fine, tc, of the Land (g no
extinguithment of his power, becaufe ít ts mere collaterall to the Land.

—.. Fifty, Wy thefame Conuepance that the old vſes bee revoked , by the fame may new bee
created 02 limited, Sobre the fozmer ceafe ipfo facto by the reuscation, totthout entrie 02 clapme,

&»(xtlp, Chat theſe renocations are fauourablp (mterpzeteo, becaufe many meng Inhert⸗
tances depend on thefame, And here F map apply the aboucfatd verſe.


E x paucis diétis ĩntendere plurima poffis.


 Cuar.6. Difcents que tollent Entries. Seét.385.


EM {cents which
Mtoll Entries are
© intwomaners,


Deut manere, ceftaf-
cauoít, ou diſcent c(t
en fee, ou en fee taile:
Difcents en Fee
que tollent entries
font, ficome home
ſeilie De certaine ter=
teg ou tenements eft


to wit, where the dif-
centisinfee, or in fee
taile. Difcents in fee
whichtoll entries are,
as ifaman feifedofcer
taine lands orteneméts
is by another diffei-
fed , and the diffeifor
hath iffue,and dieth of


Doo


i — $0020 dif-
cendere, id eft , ex loco füpe-
riore in inferiorem mouere ;
and fn legall vnderſtanding (t
ig taken When Land, ec. after
the death of the Ancefter te
caft by Courfe of Law bpon
the heire, Which the Law cal=
letha Difcent, Bud this (s
the nobleff and Swozthtelt
tmeanes Soberebp Lands are
Berined from one to another,

becanis


30,4] 9.7.7. E.4.29.
browning dr Befons cafe. Ti,
(m.131. 38. H.8.'Dier 6.


25. H.8.15. 38. R. a. deno 16.
v lbanies cafe lib. 1074


(C) ag. H.9 esp. 16.


ec


Lil.1.fol.173.194. Digges
aafe. Lib. y .fol.1077. Alban
ntes c (fe. Lib. 30.fel. 143.
Scropes cafe. Lib. fol 32.135
Sir Francy Englefields caſe.


Mirror,cap.2.§.5. "Brallon
Itb. s, fol.370. & 434.
"Britton fol.At 5.215.

Vide $ed. 5.


Lib. ʒ.


(*) Zracten lib. 4 fel. 104
209. Brittonfol.115.

F leta lib. 4.cap.2.

(a) 5o. E. 3.21. t. A4 ff.13.
40H. 3. 4/432. 9.48.1 5-
29..A[T. 64. 26.4/f-12.

ar. 4:18.43. [fife 17.
(b) Lamb.explicar. fel. 120
7o.


X1, H.7,13, 45. E. 3.24.


33-E-3. gard, 163.6. B. 4.4.
39. E.3. 36. 15. E.4.14.
B.N.B. 143.4.

7. H. 4. 12.5. Aff. p 9°

21, E,3.2.


(ap.6.


becaufeít (g Wrought anb bes
ſted by tbc ict of. La, and
Bight of Aioud, to the woꝛ⸗
thief and next of the Bloud
and Kindzed of the Bneefter,
and therefoze ít bath not in
the Common Law altogether
the fame fignification, that it
dath in che Ciutl Law, fos the
Cintitans call him, Hæredem
qui ex teftamento fuccedit in
voiuerfum ius teftatoris. But
bp the Common La% hee te
only Petre Which fucceedeth
bp Right of Bloud. Andthts
agreeth ‘well with the Etp⸗
mologte of the woꝛd( etre )to
Sbom the Lands difcend, for
Heres dicitur ab hærendo,
quia qui hzreseft hzret, hoc
eft, proximus eft. fanguine illi
cuius eft Heres. So ag be
that t¢ Heres, fanguinis eft
heeres & hærus hereditatis.


¶ Difcents que tol-
lent entries font en deux
Manners. Bere is
an cract and perfec diuiſion


made by our Autheur, and
Withali plaine + perfpicuous,


Of Difcents.


p bn auter Difleitie,«
le diſſeiſor ad iflue &
mo2utt De tiel eftate
fetfie , o2e les tene-
ments difcendont al
iſſue Del Diffeifoz per
courte De la lep come
Iheire a lup: Ct put
ceo que la ley mitte
les terres ou tenc-
ments fur liflue per
fozce Del diſcent, if-
fint que liffue bient à
les tenements per
courte Delep, a ucimp
pet fon fait Demefne,
lentrie le diſſeiſee eft
tolle, a ileft mig De
fuer vn betefe Dentre
fur diffeifin enuers le
heive le Difleifoz, De
recouerer la terre,


SY € d . 385.
fuch eftate feifed, now
the Lands difcendto
theiflue of the diffei.
for by courfe of Law,
as heire vntohim. And
becaufe the Law caft


|
I


the lands or tenements,


vpon the iffue byforce «
of the Difcent, foas —


*


theiffue commeth to —
the lands by courfeof —


Law, and not by his
owne Act, the entrie
of the Diffeifee is ta-
kenaway, and hee is
put to fue a Writ of
Eritrie far diffeifin a-
gaint the heire of
the Diffeifor, to re-
couerthe Land.


Mow ag a Difcent is the worthieſt meanes tocomcto Lands, ac. fo hath the Heite moze
priutiedges, then any that by other ezder ez meanes cometothe Lande, gc. ag thallappeare


hereafter,


Nota, In ancient time (*) it the 3D ((Teifop hav bin (n long voſſeſſion, che Diſſeiſee could not


haue eutreo bpor hin. (a) Likewiſe tbe Difletfecouid not haue entre bpon the fFeofFæ of the

3D ifleifoz, tf he bao continued a peare anda dap in quiet poſſeſſion. But the Law ts changen

in both thefe Cafes, only the dying fcifeo being an Ad in La doth holdat thig dap, ano tbíg

feemeth to be very anctent, for thts was the Law befozc the (Lonqueff, (b) Porroautem quam

maritus fine lite & controuerfia fedem incoluerit , eam coniux & proles fine controuerfia poffi-

dento, fi qua inillum lis fuerit illata viuentem , eam hæredesad fe (perinde atqueis viuus) acci-
junto.

And one of the rcafong of this ancient Law may be, that the heire cannot fuddenip bp en⸗
tenbement of Law, know the true fate of his Œitle. And for that manp aduantages follow
the pofteition and Tenant, the La taketh away the entric of him that would not enter vpon
the Mnceftoz, Who is pzefumedto know his Citic , and datueth him tobis Action again him,
that may be tanorant thereof,


¶ Et mornf de tiel eflate eifie. Œo à Ditcent that taketh away an


entric, a ping ſetſed is neceflarp, ad here tt appeareth,buta man to other purpofes map Dane
Lands by Difcent, though his Anceftoz died not feifed, as hath bane fato befoze, .


Œ Des terres ou tenements. [hat is of fucb tenements as bec
corporeal, and doc lis in liuery, andnot of Pnherttances, Which Tío in grant, as Pouowwions,
Bents, Commons tn arofíc, and fuch like Which be Finberitances Bneezporcall , am pet are
included Within this $5010 (tenements. ) oz Dilcents of them voc net put Him that ríabt
hath to an Acton, and thereafon of this dtuerfitiets , for that honfes feruc for the bebttatton
of ncn, and lands tobe manured fox their fultenance ; and therefoze the heire after a Difcent
fball not be moleſted o2 difturbed in them by entrie,


€ Ef pur va auter difeifie. The like Law ts, of an abatement


oꝛ intruſion, and of the Feoffees, o: Denes, tc.
Upon


- Lib. Of Difcents. Setl.386.
Apon the Words of Littleton a diuerſitie map be collected, that (€ a reconerp be bad bp A. as
' gaintt B.andbefoze erecution B. die feifeo, this Difcent Hall not take away the entrie of the
Ber . Wut after execution B. had diſſeiſed the Recencroz and died ſetſed this difcent
fball take away the entrie of the Recoucroz Within the expzefle woꝛds of Littleton: and fo tt
is in caſe of a Fine.
_ (n) B recovery is had againſt Tenant foz life, Where the remainder is ouer tt fee, Tenant
foz life dieth, be in remainder entrcth before execution, and dieth, theentrie of the recoueroz is
EM » becaufe bec ts patute in eſtate, otherSwife (t ts t£ the Difcent had bene after exe⸗
tution,
.. A. veconereth an Aduowſon again B. ina tozit of Right, andhath iudgement finall, the
Fucumbent dicth. D. by bfurpatíon pꝛeſents tothe Church, and big Clarke ig admittes and
inflituted, B. dieth, À. is put out of poſſeſſion, and the heire of B. ig not fo bound bp the tudge⸗
ment cither in bloud o2 eftate, but he ſhall pꝛeſent (o) B. leutea &neto A. of an Aduowſon to
. bin and bis heires, after the Church become bold. B. pzefent bp vſurpation, and big Clarke
is admitted andinfituted , this (ball put A. tbe donufe out of pollefion, Bnd the reafon of
thefe tivo cafes te £o» that at tbe Common Law , enerp prefentation toa Church did put the
tíabtfull Patron out of poſſeſſion, and did put him to his watt of Right, whether the prefen=
tation were by Title o Without , andtherefose albett the blurpation Were ín both the laid ca⸗
fes before exccution, pet tt put the rightful Watron out of poſſeſſion. So note a diuetũtie be⸗
tiene a recouerp of Land, and of an Aduowſon.


© Lentricle diſſeiſee est tole. Here is one of the Prtutledges which
the Law giveth to the beire by Difcent of Boules and Lands.

Cp) Bt the Common Haw if the Dilleifoz, Abatoz, o» Intrudoꝛ had died feífeb fone after
the wꝛong done, the Dilleifæ and his betres had beene barred of big and their entrie without
any time limited by La, but now bp the Statute (q) made fince Littleton Sogote, tt ig enas
ted, that except {uch Ditletloz hath beene in the peaceable poſſeſſion ot fuch Mannoꝛs, Landg,
æ. Sobereof he (ball ote feifed bp the ſpace of uc veares next after fuch diflcifin, &c, Without
entrie o? continuall clapme, c. that therefuch dping feifed, az, (ball not take away the entrie
of (ucl) perfon 01 perfons, at, ut after the fiue peares the Diſſeiſeo muſt make fuch continual
clapme ag our Buthoz hath taught vs, the learning Whereof is neceflarp tobeknowne, And
tt is faidthat Abatoꝛs and Intrudoꝛs are ont of this Statute becaule the Statute ts penall
and extends only to a DiMleiloz,and that ag che moſt common milchtefe,Et ad ea qua frequen-
tiusaccidunt iura adaptantur.

Œbe Feofee ofa Diſſeiſoꝛ (s out of the fato Statute,e remayne at the Common Law, But
toa Diſſeiſoꝛ the ſtatute ts taken fauourably fo, aduancement of theancient right : fox whether
the diffeifin be without force, 02 With Force it is Within tbe Htature, And albeit the Statute
fpcake of him that at the time of fuch Difcent had title of entry, tc, oz his hetres, pet the ſuc⸗
ceſſors of bodies Politique oz Cozpozate, fo pou hold pour felfe to a difleifin , are Within the
remedic of this Statute, forthe Statute extended cleerely tothe Pzedeceſſoꝛ, being diſſeiſed
and confequentip Withoutnaming of bte Succeſſoz extendeth to him, for he ig the perfon chat
at thetime of fuch Difcent had títle of enttíc.

But fa man make a Leafe £o? life, and the Leflæ oz life (s diſſetſed, and tbe Diſſeiſoꝛ die
ſeiſed, the Leſſee £o? life may enter Within five peares, but t£ he dic before hee dethenter, it is
fao that the entry of bím (n the Keuerſion is not laSofull , becaufe his entrp was not lasofull
vpon the 3Di(icifozat the time of the Difcent,ag the Htatutelpeaketh. But it Lefle for life
bab dyed Girl, andthen the Difleifoz had diedfetfed, bc in the Rerierfion had bene within the
remedie of the Statute, becaufe he had titie of entry at the time of the Wifcent , as the Stas
tute fpeaketh, and fo Within the expꝛeſſe letter of the Statute, albett, the Ditetin was not
immediate to him, and the like is to be ſaid ot arcmapnber, ac,


«© Breife dentrie fur aiffeifin, Breue de ingreffu fuper diffeifinam. Df
this tozit fomewhat (pali be faíb (n the next Section,


Sethion 386.


[ens in Tayle

which take away
Entries are, asif a man
bee diffeifed , and the


$292


€ [ )3 ets Etaile

.— quetollét en-
tries font, ficome
home c(t diſſeiſie, et


ŒN AOruft de tiel e-
M fate feifie.

GE a Difeiloz make a gift
ín taple, ano the Done dil=
contínaetb in fea, and ss"

6


238 +


33-E. g.title 3. Entrieconge
51.45.E.3.guar.Imp 03 ye
25. E.3.88. 9.H.6.49.
21.H.6.17. 3.E.4.6. —
12.€.4.19. 3. H.7.3, 6E. 43
11.7. H.7.15. $.H.7.31.
16,H.7. 5.5.

Cn) 5.H,7.2-


45.E. 3. quare Imp.1 39.


(0) 8.7.3. quare Imp.16 8,


(p) Lefiatw de 53. 1.3.22.
Vide Sell. 423. 336, 1
(9) 37.H. 6.1.


Pl. (om, 47. in Wimbefbes


cafe,
Mich. 4.dr 5. Elic . 9


Dier 219. acc.


Vide Pl.(Cors.22. vbi fupre,


F.2CB.121.


9 Higa he


15, H.4.8.5.

31H. 6. g. b. per Meyle.
34. N.6.11. 4, jr (uiam.
Tad. 560.355.


13.8.3. By. tip. Eu⸗ri⸗
Cong. lo.


19. H.6.4 6. gM. $5.9:
"7BraBon.lib. 4.09, 319.9.


dr 3184 Brisson, fe. 264.365.


Fleta bb. s .enp. 3 5.

3$. EK. 3.316.

(*) 33. E. 5. t f. 7. F. 3. 35.
FN 3253.


r4 M.4. o.


(1) -Molebr.té. 85.
34. E. 3.70.


(4p.6.


the Difcontinnæ, and operh
feifed, this diſcent (ball net
take away the entrie of the
bí(leifco forthe vifcent of the
fe fimple ts tanífbtb and
gone,bp the Remitter, anbal-
beit the iſſue bein by force of
the eftate tatie, pet the Done
dped not feifeo of that eftate,
and of necefittic there muft be
abpíng feifed as hath bene
fatd, Which (g a point worthy
of xem impipeth
many things,

En ceft cafe len-


trie le diffeifee eft tolle.


abut (£a MDilfeifoz make a
gift in tatle, and tbe Done


Of Difcents.


le Diffeifoz Dona m la
terre à bu auter en le
taile.æ le tenant en le
tait ad iſſue a moꝛuſt
De tiel eftate feilie, &
liffue enter, en cett
cafelentre E diffettee
eft tolle, a il eft mis
De fuer enuers liffue
De F tenant Ctaíle bu
baiefe. Dentre fur dif-
{eifin.


Se a 386. à
diffeifor giueth the |
fame land to another |
intaile, andthe tenant.
in taile hath iffue and -
dieth of fuch eſtate
feifed and the iffue en- —
ter,in this cafethe en- |
trie of the diffeifee is
taken away & he is put 4
to fue againft the iflue «
ofthetenant intailea —
writ ofEntrie fur diffei- n


fin.


hath iſſue and opeth ſeiſed, now ts the entrie of the ificife taken away, but if the (ffue die
Swithout (fruc, foag the eftate taile which diſcended is fpent, the centric ofthe Dilleiſee is reui⸗
aed, anb be map enter opon him te the tenerfion 02 remainder.


Sot there be Granfather, Father and Son, and the fon diſſeileth one, and infeoeth the


Grandfather bo dieth feífeb, and theland diſcendeth tothe Sather, now ig the entrie of the


Difleifæ taken away ; but t£ the Sather dicth fetfed, and the land defcendeth to the Sonne, | ,
noW ts the entrie of tbe Diſſeiſee reuiued, anb be may enter bpon tbe fonne, Who fball take no


aduantage of the difcent, becanfe he Did the wꝛong buto the diſſeiſee. Wut in the caſe aboueſaid
fome haue fatd that where after {uch difcent to the Father, he made a Leaſe to the fon Foz terme «
of another mang life bpon Whom tbe Ditleifee entred, the Sonne brought an Ailife and rece<
uered, andthe reafon that bath beene peelded tg for that the Sonne bad not a fee (imple which

he gained by dilſeilin, but ig a purchafer of the freehold onip fromthe Father, and the difcent rea
maine not purged.. Contrary tt were as (t (e there fato ifthe Sonne were beire to the dif: -
cent But the booke cited there in Fitzherb.tit, @ttle Placit..6 doth not Warrant thatcafe,
and 3| hold the Law tc becontrary ,viz.that the diſſeiſee in that cafe fball enter bpon the Difs
feifor, aſweli as tf the frater bad conucped the whole fee fimple to rhe Sonne, for (n that cafe
the difcent of the father ts not porged. Fe a Diſſeiſoꝛ make a Leafe to an infant £oz life,
and he (g diſſeiſed, and a difcent caft, the Infant enters, the entrie of the TD(Gcife ts lawwfull
bpon bim, Moꝛe hall befatd of the ike matter in this chapter hereafter in bis proper place,


Scé. 393.395.


€ Breife dentrie fur diffeifin. Breue de ingreflu fuper diffeifinam.
Chis Watt lyeth onlp bpon a diffeifin madetothe TDcmanbant 0j to feme of his Anceltozg, aud
of this tpzit there be fourekindes ; Firſt the #ozit that ipeth fog the Diſſeiſee againt the Diſ⸗
fcífo; bpon a diſſeiſin Done bp bimfelfe, and this is called a wꝛit of entrée in the nature of an
Bile. Che fecond is a Wꝛit of Entrie fur diffcifin en le Per hereof Littleton here fpeaketh,
foz the hetre bp difcent ig (n the Per bp hie Ancefter: fo itis t£ the Diſſetſoꝛ make a feoſtment
in feo, a gift in tatle, ozaLeafe for Life, £02 thep are in the Per bp the Difletfoz. (*) Che thir
ig a wait of Entrie Sur diffeifin en le Per & Cui,as where A.being the Feofe of D.the Dif=
feifoz maketh a feoſfment oucr to D. there the Diſſeiſes (ball haue a wꝛit of Cntrie Sur diffeifin
of Lands,æc in Which B. had no entrie but bp A. to Whom D, bemífco the fame, Who vniuſtly
and Without tudgement diffeifen the Demandant, Cheſe are called Gradus, Degres which
are tobe obferucd oz cife the ait is abatable fo? Sicut natura non facit faltum, ita neclex. _

Æ be fourth te a wꝛit of Entric fur diffeifin in le poft, which lpeth when after a bíffet(im the —

land is remoucd from hand to hand bepond the degrees, and ft is called In le Poft, becaufe the
506109 of the writ be Poft diffeifinam quam D. ininfte, &c. fecit, &c. the formes of thefe waits
pou fhail reade tn the Regifter and F,N.B. and therefoze tt were næblelle to recite them bere,
Soas a degre tg of two forts, citer bp act tn La, whereot Littleton here putteth an exam⸗
ple of a Difcent, o2 bp act of the partte by lawful conucpanccag (d afogefato, But it is tobe
vnderſtood, that at the Common Law, tf thelands Sere conucyed out of the degrees, the De⸗
manbant Was dztuen to his tait ofright, in refpet of his long poſſeſſlon info many Diners
hands, Which the Haw doth euer rcfpet and faucur, Dndthereforedp the Statute (a) of —
Marlebridge the toytt of Entricin le poft is gtuen, Prouifim eft etiam quod fi alienationes il- «
la de quibus breue de ingreffu dari confueuit, per tot gradus fiant, per quot breue illud in for:
ma prius vlitata ficri non poffit, habeant conquerentes breue ad recuperanda ftifinam fuamifine


mentione


E à * -


C «PR ds


Lab. |


Of Difcents: Sedl.385.


| -mentione graduum, adcuiufcunque manus per kwiufmodi alienationes res illa deuenerit, per


brcuc originale, & per commune confilium domini regis inde prouidendum, &c.
309 tt is neceflarp tobe knowne What doth make a degre, Firſt no eftate gained bp
Song doth make a degree, and therefoje neither Bbatement, Fntrufion, oz Dillcifin vpon
Diſſeiun doth make a degree. Neither botb euery change by la&ofull title $o01e a degree as tf
a Biſhop o; an Abbot, 02 tbe like diſſeiſe one and bít, anb bis fuccefloz is in bp lawtull titic,
fo? though the parfon bealteres, pet the right remaines Sobere it Sas, viz. in the Church,and
both 0€ them fetfed in the fame right,viz. inthe right o£ the Church, and therefoze tn the berp
tafe Bra&on (b) demands the queftion An faciunt gradum de Abbate in abbatem ficut de
harede in haredem ? Et videtur quod non magis quam in computatione difcenfus, quia etfi al-
Ern: perfona, non propter hoc alternatur dignitas fed femper manet. Bnd herewith agreth
€ ) Fleta.
F Ailo an effate made to the King doth make no degre, anb therefoze (£ a Diſſeiſor by Dede
inrolled conucy the land to the Ting, and the ting by his Charter granteth it ouer, the Diſ⸗


… file cannot fauc a wꝛit of Entrie in le per & Cui, batin le Poft, fo; the kings Charter is fe


High a matter of recoꝛd ag (t maketh no degree.

Allſo an eftate of a Cenant bp the Curtesle, o2 of the Lozd by efcheate, 02 of an execution of
an ble bp the ſtatute of 27.H.8, 02 by indgement,os recouery, 0? of anp other that come in in the
poft , Wozke no degres. (d) Wut a tenancie in dower bp Alignement of the heire doth Wozke


» a degre, becaule fhe ts in bp her bufband,bnt Alignement of Dower by a TD ((Teífoz Worketh


| € ET nota que ets


- no Degree, but (s in the Poft, as hereafter fhall be fato in big proper place.


to pen the degrees are paff, foag a watt of entrie in the Poft dothipe, vet bp enent it map be


brought Within the degrees agatne, as (f the WDilleifog fnfeoffe A who infeofes B.who infeofke 5-4


C. oz tf the Diſſeiſoꝛ die feifrd, and the land difcend to A. and from histo C, now arc the bez
grees paſt, and pet (£ C. inteoſte A.o2 E. now it (9 bꝛought Within the degrees againe.

PE the Difoifoz make a Leaſe fo? life, the rematnder in fee, Tenant for life dpeth, he (n the
remainder is in the Per,becaufe he noto claimeth immediately from the Difleifoz,and both tbefe
eftates make one degree, ,

Note there be Divers other wzits of entric, then a Wꝛit o£ entrie Sur diffei(in whereot Lit-
tleton bere fpeakes, as a Wꝛit of entríc Ad terminum qui prateri)t, in cafa prouifo, in confimi«
li cafu, ad communem legem, (ine affenfu capituli, dum fuit infra ætatem, dum non fuit com-
pos mentis,cui in vita, Sur cui in vita, [ntrufion,Ceflauit, and the like, andthat Which hath bene
faid of onc map be applpedte all. ‘ f


Se. 387.


AN note that in


€ |# a Diſſeiſez make a
fuch difcéts which


Leafe toa man anb to
bis heires during the


tiels Difcents,


que tollent entries il
couient que home
mo2utt fietfie en fon
demelne come De fee,
ou en fon Demefne
come De fee taile, Car


“pnmozant feifie pur


terme De bie, ne pur
terine Dauter bie, ne
buque; tollent entre,


take away entries, ic
behooueth that a man
die feifed, in his de-
mefne as of fee, or in
his demefne as of fee
taile;for a dying feifed
for terme oflife,or for
terme ofanother mans
life doth neuertake a-
way an entrie.


lífeof 1.S, andthe Leflee dieth
this (ball not take away the
entrie of the 3Diffeífee, bee
caufe he that died fetfed had
but a freehold onlp,and beíreg
in that cafe were added to
gieuent the occupant, foz the
beire in that cafe (ball not
hauchis age ag it was aps
{edged (tt (d) Lambs cafe.


Butif be tu the reuerllon


diſſeile his Œenant for life,
and dyeih feted, this bifcent
(hail take away the entrie of
the Ecnantfos iife.


Hott is tftherebe Conant £o? life, the rematnder in tatle the remainder in foe, and Œcnant


fn tatle diffeifeth the Tenant for itfc and dyeth feted,


@enant fo; life.


this fball take away the entrie of the


But i£ che Kings Cenrnt Éoy life be bí(Teífeb, and the TD ((Te(foz vie fetfen, this difcent (hall
Not take away the citric of tbe Leſſe, becaufe tbe Diſſeiſoꝛ had but a bare ofkate Durtng the
life of the Leffes, and Litclcron fatth, that a difcent ofan eftate for terme of another mang life


Shall not tase away an entris.


AD Er fon deme [ne come de fee.


fan infant bee Diffcifed, and the
D 00 3: Pfeil


239


"Bracfon vbi fapra.
‘Britton, visfapra.
Fleravbi füpra.

4. E. 2.616.792. 01.H.6.3,


(b) Brafon lib. 4.fo.321.
5:B.3.38.5.E.2.cnrie 66.
11,H,4.83.

(c) Fleralib,5.04. 34.


3. E. 3.entrie.1 i. 22.£.3.7.
F.N.B.191.k.


5. E. a.entrie 66.
9.€.3.360.
(A) 36. H. G.doycr 3e.


44.6.3. 4.5. 39 E. 255
.H,7.6, 3. 8,6.58.


5o, E. 3.37.


"Dier.8.Elit.353...
7.B.4.46. 8.H. 4. 154
17. E. 5. 48. 11.14.42.


(6) Ta/eb.i. Eliz, in
(Communi bance.

3.2. 3. tit. Eutr (Cong.
58.F.2N.B.14 5.5.

9 H.7.3$,4.


P* H-9.2$.


Lib.


Temps E. y Raliefe. 13.
Dier 1 4.Eliz. 308.
4o. E. 3.9.6. ,

(*) a4-E.5.47-


Vi, Sel. 303.393.


(ap. 6.


*


—


L/


Of Difcents.


Dilleilor die feifed, and after the infant commeth to full age, thebeire of tbt Dill eiſor bie] bts
fore be entreth, albeit he Dped net fetfed of an actuall feifin, bat of a fetfin in Lawe, pet that
fhali take away the entrie of the Didetfes, (*) And pet in pleading the fecond beíre bai ( ag


n


Sell.388.389.


bi


bath bene faid ) make bimfelfe beire to the vi(Tetfoz, anb that land fall notbe reconercb in bas —


iue foz the Warrantic made of other lands by che ſirſt heire,and though tbe irt heire had but


afeitin in Lain, pet he (g Spitbin the Words OF Lisrleton, Foz he $vas fefrb in big demelne


ag of fee,


€ Nd therefoze if a
A Difleifoz make a

Leafe fo? peares,
and die feifen of the 1Kcuerfi=
on, this difcent fball take as
Swap theentrie of the WDiflete
fee, becauſe hee died ſeiſed of
the ec and Jrranktenement.
Like Law (t ts (f tbe Land be
txtented bpon a Statute,
Judgment oz Retognifance,
and fott tg in cafe of a Re⸗
matnder,

Wut fhe had made a Leafe
fo? life; and die feifed of the
Weuerfion, this difcent fall
not take away the entrie of
the Wifleife, fox that though
he bad the Are, pet he bao not
the franktenement.

. Doit is ofa Cenaunt in
@atle mutatis mutandis, and
notethe Law doth euer gtue
great refpet tothe Œftate of
Freehold, though it be but foy
terme of itfe,


Sed. 388.


€ T'Tem bn dif:

cent De reuerfi=

on, ou De Ke⸗
mainder, ne vnques
tollent entrie, ifint
que en tiels cafes
que tollent entries,
per force De Difcents,
ü couient que celup
que mozuft feifie ad
Fee et Franktenem̃t
al temps De fon mo⸗
rant, ou fee taile et
Franktenement al
temps De fon mo-
rant, ou auterment


tiel Difcent ne tolle.


entre,


Lfo a Difcent of


a Reuerfion or


of aRemainder, doth —


not take away an En-
trie. So as in thofe


cafes which take a-


way Entries by force
of Diícents, it be-
hooueth that hee di-


eth feifed of Fee and”
Freehold at the time


of his deceafe, or of
Fee taile and Free-
hold at the time of
his death, or other-
wife fuch difcent doth
not take away an En-
ttie.


£a Difleifoz makea Leale foz terme of his owne life, and dicth, this difcent ſhall not take —
awap the entrie of the Dilletlee, for thoughthe fee and Franktenement difcend to the Flue, —
yet the 3D ((Te(foz died not feted of the fre and Jrranbtenement : and Littleton fatth, Chat vn⸗
leffe be hath the Fe and Jrranbtenement at the time of big deceafe, fact) diſcent Hall not take


a$oap the entrie,


€ Y this (tap-
pearcth,that
a WDifcent
ít the Œollaterall
Line doth take away
an entrie, ag Swell ag
in the Lineall.


€ Moruft feifie
ec Pere (&c.)


tmplieth Fee fimple,oz
fe tale; at


«€ T Cem comeeft bít


De ceux que moz ont fet=
fies,æc, Meſme la Ley
eſt lou ils nont aſcun iſ⸗
fue,mes les tenements
Difcendont al frere,foer,
vncle ou auter cofin de
celup que mozuft feifie,


Secl.389.


de Dilcents que
Difcendont al iffue


lands


Difcents which dif-


cendto the Iffue of them
which die feifed, &c. the «
fame Law is where they”
haue no iffue, but them
difcend to them
Brother, Sifter, Vncle,
orother Cofine of him
which dieth feifed.


Sef, |


ALS as it is fayd of.


Liz. - Of Difeents.


¶ [Gon & toit

Seignioꝛ ct te

nant, etie Ces
nant foit Di(Tcí(ie , et
le Difleifoz aliena a
bn auter en fee, et la⸗
lienee Deute fauns
beire, et le Seignicz
enter come en fon ef:
cheat, en cett cafe le
Dilſeilee poct entrer
fur le Seignioz, pur
ceo quele Seignioz
ne bient a le Terre
per Di(cent, mes per
boy deſcheat.


Sed. 390.


Lfo if there bee

Lord and Tenant,
and the Tenant be dif-
feifed, and the Diffei-
foralien to another in
Fee, and the Alienee
die without iffue, and
the Lord enter as in
his Efcheat : In this
cafethe Diffeifee may
enter vpon tlie Lord,
becaufe the Lord
commeth not to the
Land by  Difcent,
but by way of Ef-


cheat.


$6E.390.391;


€ LZ Diffeifee poet

enter fur le feig-
nior , Orc. F0 albeit
tbt Difleifoz die ſetſed, amb the
Lozo bp Sicheat commeth to
the Land by act ín Law, pet
betaufe the land diſcendeth
not to bím, the entric of the
3D ((feifee in reſpect of the Gf-
cheat Mall not be taken away,
Foꝛ a dping Cetfed, and a difs
cent, and not a dping fetfed
and an Œfcheat, doth take as
Way an entrie : foz ( ag bath
bene fapd) the otfcent is the
worthier title, Wut in that
cafe, (£ tbe 3070 bp Œfcheat
Die fcifed, and the Land dif
cent to bis beire, that dtſcent
fell take away the entrte of


24.6


the Diſſetſee. So tt tg i£ the 8 7.H.6. t. 9. M. 7. 34. bs


Difleifoz Die fetfed , and the


the hetre of tbe Diſſeiloz dieth without beíte, tbc Difteifæ cannot enter bpon the Lozd by da
cheat. Soas there is a dinerfitie as touching the aticent when after a difcent calt,the Iſſue in
C atit dieth Without Iſſue, and wher after a difcentthe heire tn fee Ample dieth Without hetre,
fo, be in the Keuerſion, oz onc bpon the eftate taile claimeth in aboue the fate tatle, and the lozo


bp Eſcheat claimeth tn onber the boire in See Gmple .


(C ITem fi home
... À fetfie De certaine

Terre em fee,
pu en Fee taile, fur
condition Dc render
certainerent, ou fur
auter condition, co⸗
ment que tiel Tenãt
feifie en fee, ou en fee
taile, moꝛuſt feifie,


bncoze file condition.


foit enfreint en lour
bies. ou apres lour
Deceafe.ceo nc tollera
pas lentric Del 4reof-
fo2, ou del Dono? ou
De lour heires , pur
ceo que le QLenancíc


Section 391.


Lfo if a man bee
fAfeifed of certain
land in Fee or in Fee
taile, vpon condition
to render certain rent,
or vpon other conditi-
on, albeit fuch Te-
naunt feifed in Fee or
in Fee Tayle, dyeth
feifed, yet if the Con-
dition bee btoken in
their liues , or after
their deceafe, this
fhall not take away
the entrieof the Feof-
for or Donor, or of
their heires, for that
the Tenancie is char-


€ V pon thefe twa Se-


ctions (s to be obfer=
Bed a Diterfitie be=


33.11.24. 31, H.6. 17.


tweene a right, forthe Which -


the Law giucth a remcdie bp
Aion, and a title for the
Swhtch the Law gineth no res
medic bp Adion, but bp entrp
onelp, oz example, Che
Feoſtee bpon Condition in
this cafe hath a right to the
Land,therefoze his entrp map
be taken a$oap, becaufe hee
may recouer bis right bp A=
dion, but tbe Feoffoꝛ o; Dos
119? that hath but a Conditts
on, bis title of entrte cannot
betaken away by any dffcent,
becaufe he hath no remedie bp
Baton to recouer the Land,
anb therefore (£a Diſcent
ſhould take away his entric,
ttthould barre htm foz ener,
AInd the Law ts alone whe⸗
ther the bífrent ere before
thecondition broken, ozafter.

Bilo


33. 4ff. 11.24;


Brooke tit. Mortmaine 6.


(n) Daſch. 33. Elia. in com
y. R2. Seir. Fas. 3. 41.€.5.
(9) *Pajch. 1. 146. Regis in


(4p.6.


Alle ho that hath a title to
enter pon a Wortmain, Hail
not be barreb by a diſcent, be⸗
caufc tben bc ſhould bee with⸗
out al remedie. And fo it is in
cafe here a womã that hath
a títlc to enter,caufa matrimo-
nij pralocuti, no difcent fhail
take aSvay bcr entrie, becaufe
the hath but a title, and no rez
medie bp Action,

It a man be feífeb of lands
in fe, and bp bis Taft will in
Sorting veuifeth the fame to
another in kee, and dieth, after
Gwhofe pece:ffe the Freehold in
daw is caff vpon the deuilſee,
the beire before amp entric
made bp the Deuilee, entreth,
and dieth feifed, this (ball not
take aap the entrie of the
Deuilſee, for if the Dtfcent,
Swhich ts an Ac in Law,
fboulo take away big entrie,
the La ſhould barre him of
bis right; and leaue bim bt-
terly without remedie. And fo
itis fox him that entreth for
tonfent to a rauifhment, ¢ fo
ít Wag refolued in the cafe of
Martyn Trotte of London, (n)
Pafchz 32.El.in Com Banco.
And accordingly was the o⸗
pinton of the Court of Com=
mon Pleas, (0) Pafch.r.Ta.
Reg. Œotbis map bee added


Of Difcents.


eft charge ouc le con=
Dition, et leftate Del
Tenant eft conditt-
onall en quecunque
mains que le Tenã⸗
cie vient, ac.


Fecl. 392.393.


ged with the Conditi-
on, and the ftate of the
Tenant is conditionall,
in whofe hands foeuer
that the tenancie com-
meth,&c.


Seé#. 392.


€ T Aem fi tiel te-
nant fur conbíc
foit diſſeiſie et le
diſſeiſor Dente ent ſei⸗
fie,æ la Et deſcẽdiſt al
beive le Diffeifoz , oze
leentrieletenant fur
condition, que fuift
diſſeiſie eft toll: Mes
vncoꝛe file condition
foit enfreint, Donque
poet le Feoffoz ou le
320902 que fierent e⸗
ftate fur condition,
ou lour beits entrer,
Caufa qua fupra.


Lfo if fuch Te-

nant vpon Condi-
tion be diffeifed, and
the Diffeifor die ther-
of feifed, and the land
difcend to the Heyre
of the Diffeifor , now
the entrie of the Te-
nant vpon condition,
who was difleifed , is
taken away. Yet if
the Condition be bros
ken, the Feofforor the
donor which made the
eftate vpon condition,
ortheirheirs may en-
ter, Caufa qua fapra.


ag a like cafe; the Rings Patentes before he enter, ec, Bnother reafon Wherefore a diſcent hail
not take away the entríe of Him that hath a title to enter bp korce of a condition, ec. ts, fog
that the Condition remaines (n the fame eflence that (t was at thetime of the creation of it,
and cannot be deueſted o2 put out of poſſeſſion ag lands and tenements map,


€ D Euie feifie, &c.
viz. ín Fee fimple, oz
tn fee tapie.


€ Et fon heire en-


ter, de. 0 as hee


hath an actnall fee imple.
€ De 123. part de


les tenements,crc.id eft,
in feueraitie,

By this Section it appca-
reth , that an entry being ta-
Ken away bp the Difcent, ts
reutued by the endofoment,
albeit the Tenant tn Dower
ſhall baue tt but fos her life.
And thecaufeis, fozthatal=
chongh the beiteentred, pet


Section 393.


CE fi bu diſ⸗
feifoz Deuie fee
fie, ac, 3 fon heire en-
ter, ac, le quel en-
botoa la ferme le Dif-
feifoz 9 la tierce part
diegtenements, ac,
En cet cag quant a
ceft tierce part que
eft affígne ala feme
en Dotoet mainte-
nant apres ceo que
lafeme enter, a apie


pof:


AL if a Diffeifor
die feifed, &c.
and his heire enter,
&c.who indoweth the
wife of the Diffeifor
ofthe third part ofthe —
Land, &c. Inthis cafe
as to this part which |
isaffigned to the wife —
in Dower, prefently
after the wife entreth
and hath the poffeffi-
on of the fame third


CR See a € |:


Lib. 3°


potte(fíon de mefme
latierce part, le Dif-
feifee poit lopalment
enter Cur Ia poſſeſſi⸗
on le feme cn mefme
la tierce part, Ctla
caute eft, pur ceo que
quant ta feme ad fon
Dower, el ſerra ad⸗
tudge eins imme-
Diate per fon baron,
Œnemp per lbeite , &
iffint quát ale frank-
tenement De mefme
latiercepart, le Dif-
cent eft Defcate, Ct
iſſint poies beir, que
Deuant le enDotomét
le diſſeiſee ne poit en-
ter en afcun part, 3c,
g ap2es le Dotoment
il poit enter fur la fe
fic, mes vncore il
ne poit enter fur les
auters Deup parts
que lheire le diſſeiſor
ad perle Difcent,


Of Difcents.
part,the diffeifee may
lawfully enter vpon
the poffeffion of the
wife into the fame
third part. And the
reafon is for that when
the Wife hath her
dower, fhee fhall bee
adiudged in immedi-
ately by her Husband
and not by the heire,
And foas to the Free-
hold of the fame third
part,the Difcent is de-
feated. And fo you
may fee that before
the endowment the
Diffeifee could not en-
ter into any part, &c.
and after the. endow-
ment hee may enter
vpon the wife, &c.but
yet hee cannot enter
vpon the other two
patts which the heire
of the Diffeifor hath
by the Difcents


Seë.393.


ben the wife (& endowed
he fball not bein bp the hetre,
(a) but immediately bp ber
bafband being the WDiiieifoz,
which ts in to» ber itfebya
Title Paramount the dping
feifed and difcent, and therec
fore in (ubgement of Law,
the Difcent ag to the Free⸗
bel», and the poſſellion which
the betre had is taken away
bp the endowment ; for the
Law abíuogeth no meane
feifin betivœne the bufband
and the Wife,

jit there bee Lord, Meſne
and Œcnant, the Meſne voti)
grant to the Œenant to acs
quite bim againft the log
and bísbeires , tbe 3020 dies
bis Dife hath the Setqntozte
afligned to her for her Dower,
and diftraines the Œenant ;
albeit the grant was only to
acquite him againt the 3,020
and big heires only, pet bes
caufe the continucd the eftate
of ber hufband,and the reuer=
fion remapne in the hetre.the
grant did extend tothe wife,
Which ts a notable cafe,

FE after the oping fetled of
the Ditleifo2, the Dilſeiſee a=
bate, agatnft whom the wife
9f the $Diffeifoa recouer by
confeffion in a ait of Dotocr,
ín tbat cafe, though the Dil
cent be auoyded ag Littleton


here fatth, pet the 1D ((Tetfee hall not enter bpon te Tenant in Mower, becaufe the recouerte
: ce — bünfcife; but {f be bad aſſigned Dower to her in paijs, fomefap hee ſhould enter
on bet.

| B man makes a gift (n taplereferning twentie Mhillings Rent, the Donce takes Wife, and
bíetb Without iMuc,the heire entrethand endoweth the Life, {hee ia fo in of the cftate of her hul⸗
_ band, that albeit theeftate tapic be fpent, and the rent referucd thereupon determined, yet after
the be endowed, the (ball be attendant tetbe heire in refpect of the fatd rent, And fo it (got 1,020
and Cenant,the Wife that (g endowed, fhail be attendant for the due Herutces, bit tf any fer=
Gites be introached, albett that ineroachment fhall bind che hetre, pet the wife Mail be contribus
tozy, but foz theferutces of right due,


€ fant poies veir que demant le dowment,le diffeifee ne poet enter, & apres
lendowment il poet enter, &c. The like hath beene fai bekore inthis


Chapter. Sect. 336. Where tbe entry of tbe Dilleilee may be taken away foz a time, and bp mat-
ter ex poft fa&o reuiued againe. : |
Nota, albett the Difleifoz after a Difcent taketh to him but an eftate fo life; pet Wher the
Difleife voth enter bpon bim,be Gall thereby deueft the Reuerllon, fos the effate of fre
bolb is that Whereupon a Præcipe doth lie, anb tberefoze theenttie of the dDifletfee ts ag auapls
able (n La, ag if he hadrecoucredit tna Præcipe. Bnd fo (tís (fa Difleife, make a Leaſe
for itfe, anb avant the 18 caccüon to the Ling, thecntrieof the Difeifæ bpon the Œenant fos
life ball denct the 1% ener&om ont of the King inthe fame manner, aw (£ the Difleife had reco⸗
Hered the lands again the Teuant £oz life in a Precipe.
Setlion


Ppp


241


(2) 8.€.2.Entrie 7$.
19. E. a Dower 171.
5. €. 2. Entris 66.
24.€.3.32.40,
38..4f.Tl26,


43. E.3. 32. 45. E 3.9. 6-
Y1.H,4. 11. 7. H.5.3-
19. EF. 3.37.28.

36. H.6. Dover 30,


31: € UG mefae s 5.


10.E. 3.26,


Vide Sect. 302. 386.
25.E. 3. 48. Pl Coms 53.


Lib.3.


Vide 9.H. 7, 34 dr 37. M. G1.


Gee before the (Chapter of
Homage.


(4p.6.


CEN «eft cafe ico
E poye enter fur le
poſſeſaon liſſue, &c.


Foz here Sag but a Diſ⸗
cent of a fReuerfior: at the
time of the dying ſeiſed, foz
the ffate of a Œenant bp the
curtefie, had comencement bp
the haning of iſſue, and ts cons
fummate bp the Death of the
ife, fo ag a fee and franktez
nement did not after the de=
ceafe of the wife dtfcend to
thebeire , and albeit the Ges
nant by the courtefe dieth afa
terwards, and the franktenes
ment ts caft bpon the beíre, fo
agno hee hath the fec and
franktenement bp 3Difcent ,
pet becaufe the etre came
not tothe Fee and ffrankte-
nement fmmediatelp after
the deceafe of the wife,
fuch a medtate Difcent fball
not take away the entrie of
the Diſſeiſee. On the other
fide an immediate Difcent
map take away an entrp foz
a time, anb mediatelp map
be auoyded bp matter ex pelt


Of Difcents.


Sell. 394.


€ ]&em, (ion fente
foit feifie De tet-
te en fce, Dont ico
ape Droit a title den⸗
tre, fila feme pzent
baron, x ont iflue en-
ter ety , et puis la
feme Dente leilie, a a=
p2es Ic baron Deute,
et liffue enter, at. en
ceft cag íco pop enter
fur le pom, liffue, pur
ceo que liffue ne biet
ales tenemts imme⸗
diate per Diſcent a-
, pres la mozt fa mere,
& eins per le mot
Del pier,

«| Contrarium te-
netur P.9.Hen.7. pet
tout le court, M. 37.
H.6.q.


Sed. 94-395.


Lfo if a woman


be feifed of land |
in fee, whereofIhaue “


right and title to enter
if the woman take


husband and haue if- :


fue betweene them,


and after the wife die :


feifed, and after the
husband die, and the
iffue enter, &c. Inthis
cafe I may enter vpon
the poffeffion of thc
iffue, for that the iffue
comes not to thelands
immediately by Dif-
cent after the death of
the mother &c.but by
the deathofthe father.

«| Contrarium tene-
tur P.9.H.7. per tout le
courte M.37.H.6..


fa&o as hath bene fato. Wut (f a dping feifed taketh not away tbe entrp of him that right
hath atthe time ofthe Diſcent, it (ball not bpanp matter ex poft facto take away bis entrp,

Fla D t(cifo2 dte Without heire his Wife pꝛiuement enfeint With an iflue, and after the (flue
is boznc, Who entreth into the Land, he hath the Land bp 3Dífcent , and pet tbercby the entry
of the Diffeifæ (ball notbe taken away, becaufe ag Littleton bere fatth, the iſſue commeth not
tothe Lands immed{atelp bp Difcent after the deceale of the Father,

Andfo tt to t£ a Ditletfoz make a gift in taple , the remapnder in fe , and the Done dyeth
Without iſſue leauing his Motte prinement enfcint with a Sonne, and he in the remapnder ene
ter,and after the Sonne (s bonne and entreth into the Land,thts Difcent (ball not takca wap
the entrp of the Difleifæ, Caufa qua fupra.


¶ Contrarium tenetur , dre. Chis is an addition, and therefore
tobe pafledouer, Andat this bay this cafe ef Littleton ig holden Foz cleere Law.


Sed.


€. TI «rem ft bn diſſeiſor enfeotfa
fon pier en £ce, le pier mo-

tuft be tiel eftate Lettie, per à

les teñts difcendont aT diſſeiſor
come fits et beite ac.en ceft cafe E
diſſeilee bien poit enter fur le Di-
feífo? , aient obftant 1c Difcent,
put


395.


Lfo if aDiffeifor enfeoffe his

father in fee , and the father
die feifed of fuch eftate,by which
the Land difcend to the Diffeifor,
as fonne and heire, &c. Inthis cafe
the Diffeifee may well enter vpon
the Diffeifor notwithftanding the


a


Lib.5.


minis.


Of Difcents.


pur ceo que quant al diſſeiſin, le
diſſeiſor Cerra adiudge eins foꝛſ⸗
que come diſſeiſor nient obſtant
le diſcent, Quia particeps cri-


the difcent,
minis.


Se#.396.397.
difcent for thatasto the diffeifin,
the diffeifor fhall bee adiud ged in
but as adiffeifor notwithftanding


Quia particeps cri-


true that albeit a difcent be cat, andthe entrie ofthe Difetfes taken away, pet if


€ O Ff this fufictent hath becne fatd before in this chapter Sect 386. Andrequiarlp itis


the 3Dí(Icifo2 commeth to tbe land agate cither by difcent o2 purchafe, of anp cffatc
92 freehold which (s impited in tbe( ac. the Diſſeiſee map enter opon him,oz baue bis atftfcaz
gaíntt him, as if no vifcent o2 meane conuepance had beene, Quia particeps criminis,


€ | Cem (i home feilie

De certaine terre
€ fee adifluc deur fits,
& mozuft feilie, le
puifne fits entra per
abatement en la terre,


- quel ao iſſue, a De ceo


moꝛuſt ſeiſie, et les te=
nements diſtendõt al
iffuc,et kiſſue entra en
laterre, en ceſt cafe le
fits eigue ou fon heire,
poit enter ꝑ la ley ſur


lilſſue Del fits puiſne,


nient contriſteant le
diſcent, pur ceo que
quant ie fits puifne
abati(t ẽ la terre apres
le most fon pier Deuat
afcun entrie per le fits
cigne fait, la lep inten=


Dra que tl entra en-


clapmant come heyre
afon pier, & pᷣ ceo que
leigne fits clapnia pec
mefmeletítle, ceftaf-
cauoit, come hepre a
fon pier il a (cg heires
potent enter fur liffue
De puífne fits, nient
obftant le Di(cent,ac,
put eco que ils clap=


Se. 396.397.
vide if a manfeifed


of certaine land in
fec haue iffue two fons,
and die feifed, and the
younger fonne enterby
abatement into theland
and hath iffue,and dieth
feifed thereof, and the
land difcend to his if-
fue, and the iffue enters
into the land. In this
cafe the eldeft fonne or
his heire may enter by
the law vpon the iffue
ofthe younger fon not-
withftanding the dif
cent, becaufe that when
the younger fon abated
into the land after the
death of his father be-
fore any entrie made by
theeldeft fonne, the law
entend that hee entred
clayming as heire to his
father. And forthatthe
eldeft fonne claimes by
the fame title, thatis to
fay, asheire to his fa-
ther, he and his heires
may enter vpon the if-
fue of the younger fon
notwithftading the dif-

D 00 z


€ E N cefl cafe le
fits eine, ec.
poet entrer far liffue


del fitz puifze, &c.
And the reafon Dercof 1g
for that the law intendett
the poungeſt fonne entred
clayming the land as
heire to bis father, and
becaufe the elds fonne
clapmetl) alfo by tbe fame
titleviz ag hetre to his
father, therefore bee and
dis heires map enter vp⸗
onthe fccond fonne and
bis heires in refpect of the
pituítp of the blond bes
tweæncthem, and of the
fame clapme by one tític,
albeit the poungeſt fonne
gatned a feetimple bp hig
entríc: foz Littleton here
calleth (t an abatement,
Which proueth the gai⸗
ning of a fee (imple,

Bnd itis tobee obfer-
ued that Affila mortis an-
tecefloris non tenet inter
coniun&as perfonas ficut
fratres & forores, &c. fj
thefe are pꝛiuie in bloud
but itipethagainit ftranz
Gers, and then damages
ateto bee recovered a=
gainfta franger, but not
againt bis bzother.

ands Sere giuen to
the bufband and Wife,
and to the hetres of their
two bodies thep had iffue
& Daughter, the wife diet,
the bufband bab tflue by
another Svtfe foure fons
and dyed, the eloelt fonne

abate


24.7


3.6. r1 E. 4.3.
2e 4.615.602

34.H.6 11. 12. H. 8.9

24 H. 8.3.9.


ral. Lib a fo 371 282.285,
7B attosfo 180.18 1. (
Fera lib. 5.ca, 1.2. oc.

2c. E.3. Darr.prefent 13.

1 2.H.3. Mordiplultimo,
13.€.1. Mord. 47

39. 4f. 1i. F. NL B.1 96.5.


Pafch.s E, 3. Coram Rege
Kanc.tn Ticfaer,


Lib.3.


3.E.3. Af 380.
4o. E.3. 24.5, ap. "Af a


yid. Brooke ivt, Entrie 27.


Cap-6-


abated and died feifed,
this Difcent did take ar
Swap the entrie of the
daughters becaufe thep
Clapined not bp one title.
And in ancient bokes
the clocft. fonne ig called
Heres propinquus, and
the pounger fonne Hares
remotus, And albeit the
eloc(t fonne path fue and
Dieth, and after bis des
ceafe the poungeſt fonne
oz big beire entreth, and
manp dilſcents bee caſt
ín bis line, pet map the
beires of the cideft enter
in refped of the p2tuitie
of the bloud, and of the
fameclapme by une title ;
but {€ the pouugett fonne
make a feoffinent tn fee,
andthe -ffesffes die ſeiſed,
that difcent fhall take a=
Swap the entrie of the el⸗
Deft in refpec the ppinity
oftheblod fatleth. And
admit that the poungcft
fonne be of the halfe bloud
to bis bzotber, pet be ig of
tbe whole bioud to big
father, aud therefore tf be
entreth and dieth feífco,
ft (ball not barre big clz
Der baother of his entríe,
abut € the eloeft fonne
entreth, and gatneth in
aduall poſſeſſion and fet=
fin, then the entrte of the
poungeſt ig a viffeifin,
And then a oping fetfed
fhall take away the en=
trie of the cloeft, £o? Pof-
feísio terre muſt beg Vaz
cua Swben tye poungett
fonne enter by abatement
ag [ ittleton faith, becanfe
hee hath moze colour tn
that cafe to clapme ag
beire to his father io
laſt was actualip fetfed.
Therefore tf after the de=
cerfe of the father an c-
ftranger doth firlt enter
anb abate, bpon whom
the ponngeft fonne en-
treth and ní((eífc him and
die feifed, this difcent
fFall not binde the eldeft,
fer be entred bp diffetin
and not by abatement,
It à man be ſetſed of


Of Difcents.


mont per bn meme
title, Gt en mefme 1e
manerilferra, (f fues
tont plufozs diſcents
de bu iſſue a bn an-
ter iflue Del puilne
fits,


Setl.397.


cent,&c, becaule they
claimeby the fame title,
And inthe fame manner
it fhall be, if there were -
more difcents from one
iflue to another ifluc of
the younger fonne,


$ed .397.


C\ACSentiel cate,

M le pier fuit
feifie D certaine terres
enfee, et ad iflue Deux
fits, et Deute, et lefgne
fits enter, a ett feifte,
ac, et puig le puifne
frere luy Diffeifift, per
quel diſſeiſin il ett ſeiſie
en fee, et ad tl eft ſeiſie
enfee, etaDiflue, a De
ticl eftat moꝛuſt (eiie,
donques leigne frere


ne poit entrer, mes eft.


mis à fon bzicfe, Den-
tre fur diffeifin, &c. De
reconererla terre, Ct
lacaufe e(t,pur ceo que
le puifne frere dient a
leg teneméts per toz-
tious Diffeifin fait à
fon cígnefrere, et per
celtozt la lep ne poit
entender quei claime
come heire a fon pier,
nicnt pluis que bn e⸗
ftrange perfon que bt
diſſeiſie leigne frere q
nauoít alcun títle,3c,
Ct tint poves beter
là Dtuerfitic, lou le
puifne frere enter a-
pres le mot le pier Dez
uant afcun entrie fait


per


Vtinthis cafe ifthe

father were feifed
of certaine lands in fee,
andha.h iflue two fons
and die, andthe eldeft
fonne enter &is feifed,
&c.and after the yonger
brother diffeifeth him,
by which diffeifin he is
feifed in fee, and hath
iffue, and of this eftate
dieth feifed,then the el-
der brother cannot en-
ter, but is put to his
Writ of Entrie far dif-


ſeiſin, &c, to recouer the


land. And the caufe is
for that the youngeft
brother commeth to
the lands by wrongfull
diffeifin done to his el-
der brother,and for this
wrong the law cannot
entend that he claimeth
as heire to his father,no
more then if a ftranger
had diffeifed the elder .
brother which had no
title,&c. And fo you
may fee the diuerfitie
where the younger bro-
ther entereth after the
death of the father be-
foreany entrie made by


Lib.3.


per leiũne feeve en tiel
cas, et ou leigne frere
enter apres da mont
fon pier et puis eft Dif-
feifie ple puifne frere,
lou le puifne fret puis
mozutt {cifie,


Of Dilcents.


the elder brother inthis
cafe, and where the el-
der brother enters after
the death of his father,
andafteris diffeifed by
the younger brother,
where the younger af-


Se#.398.


'fanbs of the nature of


WBurgh Englilh ano hath
iſſue to fonnes and die,
and the eldeſt fonne bea
foze anp entrp made bp
the poungeft enterety ince
the land bp abatement
and dieth {cifed, this (batl
not take awap the entrie
of the poungelt bzother,


ter dieth feifed.


Et fic de fimilibus. Bnd
thefe and the like cales


are all within the veafon and rule of our Puthoz, Bnd Where our Purhoz ſpeaketh onip o£
anabatement, fo it is of an intrufon, Foꝛ tf the father make a Leafe fo; life ano hath tifue
ts fonnes and dieth, and the Cenant oz life dieth, and the poungeft fonne intrude, and oie
filed, this vifcent [bail not take away the entrte of the eldelt, Wut i£ the father xo made a
Leale For peares it had bene otherwile, oz that the poſſeſſion of the Lee fo? peates maketh
the atnall freehoto tn the eldeſt ſonne. And it ts to be obferned that the reafow of Littleton (it
this cafe ( £oz chat both beethzen hold by onctitie ) Holdetb alfo in many other cafes.

BFE two Coperceners make partition to pzefent beturne, and one of them bfurpe in the
tourne of the oti. v, thts bfurpatíon {ball not put the other out of poſſeſlion tecanle they clatme


bp one title,


Ittwo Copercencrs be, and thep feucrally gac&nt to the Didinary, pet tha Church (s not


litigeous, becaufe thep claime all bp one title,


Fé Spon a Wait of Diem claufit extremum, the poungett fone be fonno hetre, the eldett fon
bab no remedy by the Common Lew bccaufe thep cli pmed bp one title, but other wife ít 19 1f
they chatrac bp feuccail titles as it appeareth inour bakes, Wut this ts now holpen by a


C) Statute made fince Littleton wrote,


3* twoperfons bc tn debate fo? tithes, Which amount aboue the fourthpart, and one man
tg 39 :tron of both Churches, no ladicauit doth ipe, foz that both incumbents clapme bp ene


ano the fame Patron, Et (ic de fimilibus.


Bnd where Lit:leton faith, ſeiſed of lande tn fee, tbe fame las» (t ig if a man be feifed of lands
tn tatie, and hath (Tue tiwo fonneg Muratis mutandis,


€ Et eſt fefe cre. ( Chat is to fap) actually teifed either by en=
trie as Littleton bere puttetb tt, 02 bp poTeffion of the Leflæ for peareg oz the itke,

€ Nauott afcun title dc. Chat ts to fap, anp pretence o2 fem-
blance of title, as the pounger brother here hath, and in many other cafeg tbere (ga great di⸗


ncrütp belben in our bokes (0) where one hath a colour oz pactence of right, awd Swben he hath
none at all, whereof por map reaoc plentifullp ín our bakes,


- Sett.


CE $8 mefine lemaner eff, (i
b home feufie De certaine Cre
en fee ad iſſue Deur files  Deuie,
leigne file entra en la tette clap=
mant tout la terre a luy, et ent
folemét prit les profits,et ad íC-
fue + mozuft feifie, per que fon
iſſue enter, quel iſſue ad iffue 3
deuie fetfie,t E fecond iſſue enter,
€ fic vltra, vncoꝛe le puifne file
ou ſon iſſue, quant a ie moitie
portenter [ur quecunque (fue
Deleigne file, nient obftant tíel

Difcent,


398.


des the fame manner it is, ifa man
feifed otf certaine land in fee
hath iffue two daughters & dieth,
the eldeft davghter entereth into
the land clayming allto her, and
thereof only taketh the proffits,
and hath iffue and dieth feifed,by
which her iffue enter, which iffue
hath iffue and dieth feifed, andthe
fecond iffue enter, & fic vitra, yet
the younger daughter or her iffue
as to the moity may enter vpon a-
ny iflue whatfoeuer of the elder


Ppp 3


243


22.2.4.4


Door, & Stud.ca.30fo.117


12, E.4. 18.


(*) 2. E.6, cap.8,


2.H.7.12.«.
See the Settiennexs following.


(o) 2.E.2.baflardy 19.
21.Ë.3.34. 32 4985.
39.E.3. 36. Tz. E.3.59.

1 I.E. 3. ^ff. 88.

21. H.6.14« T1. E, 3.40653.
Vid. Se. Ae o. & cap Garren,


Lib.3.


20. Af. 19.21, E.3.7.37.31.
26. Aff 2.27-Aff. 68. 36 aff.
p-t-43-2.3.19:4- H. 7. ie.
16. H.7.4.


See more of tha iu the chapter
of Warrantio,$e8.7 10.

38. 4/7-30.

Vi.Se8.710,


Pl, Com. $3. 39. E. 3. Le dar-
reine cafe.


L3.8.fo.101.102,8/r Rich,
Leehford: safe.


Glenu.li.7.ca 8. "Bra. ls, c,
64.19, Brit ea.70.


Vi. Soh. 128,


Cap.6.


Difcent pur ceo que ils claimont
per vn metme title, ec.mes en til
cafe  ambideux Soers auop-
ent enter apres la mozt lour
ier, ct ent fuevont feufies, et
puisleiqne Soer bit diffeifie la
puifne Soer de ceo que a lup af-
fiert, et ent fuit ſeiſie en fee ct ad
iffuc,et de ticl eftate mozuft ſeille,
per queles Cenements Difcen-
Dont al Iſſue Del cígne Soer,
Donquele puifne Socr, ne tes
heires ne potent enter,ec, Caufa
qua fupra, &c.


Of Difcents.


Sect. z99.


daughter notwithftading ſuch dif-
cent, for that they claime by one
fame title, &c. but in fuch cafe
where both fifters haue entred af-
terthe death of their father, and
weretherof feifed,and afterthe el-
deft fifter had diffeited the yonger
of her part,& was thereof feifed in
Fee, and hath Iffue, and of ſuch E-
ftate dieth feifed whereby the
lands difcend to the Iffue ofthe el-
der fifter, then the younger Sifter
nor her hcires cannot enter, &c.


Caufa qua ſupra, &c.


€ (Cim tout la terre. Here it appeareth, Chat when tbe one
Coparcencr doth fpccíallp enter, clatming the whole land. and taking the Whole prex
fits, that the gaine the one inoitie, viz. of ber fifferbp abatement, anb pet her ping
feifed ali not take away che entrte of her fifter, Sobereas When one Coparcener enters gene-
rallp,and taketh the profits, tbte fail be accounted tn Law the entrie of them both, and no di⸗


netting of the moitie of ber Sifter,


FE one Coparcener enter claiming the Whole,and make a Jreoffement in ee, and take back
anettate to her anb her heires, and bath 3| Tue and dte ſeiſed, thts etfcent (Dali take away the
entric of the other (iter, becauleby the Feoffement the pziuitie of the Œoparcenarie ag bts


tropes.


€ Claimont per n mefmetitle,oc. Di this tuffictent hath bin faid


ín th next precedent Section.


€ Ne poicnt enser dre. DE this there bath beencalfo ſpoken in the


fame Section,


Seélion 399.


€ Gif enfee. F0?
this helds not tncafe
of an cftate tatle.

«[ Mulier feu filins
mulieratus . Mulier
hath three fignifications; Firk
Sub nomine mulieris contine-
rur qualibet Femina. Ses
conblp, Proprié fub nomine
mulieris conünctur Virgo.
CThirdly, Appellatione mulie»
tis in legibus Anoliæ contine-
tur Vxor, Et fic filius natus vel
filia nata exiufta vxore appel.
latur in Legibus Anglia filius
mulieratus feu filia mulierata;
afonne mulier, o2a daughter
mulier, Sicut Baftardus dici-
tur à Graco verbo Baffaris, i.
Meretrix, fcu Concubina,quia
procreatur cx merctrice feu


(€ jem (í bone

eft feifte be ter=
taine Terre en fee,et
ad iſſue Deux fits , ct
leígne fits eft 25a-
flatb.ct E puifne fret
eft mulier, et 1c Pier
Deuie, etle Battard
enterenclaimant cde
beírea fon pier, a oc⸗
cupia la terre tout fa
bie fang afcun entre
fait furluy pec E mu-
lier, et le Baſtard ab
iſſue et moꝛuſt ſeiſie
de tiel eſtate en p^

€


Lfo if a man bee

feifed of certaine"
Lands in Fee, and hath
Iffue two Sonnes, and
the elder is a Baftard,
and the younger Aa-
lier, and the father die,
and the Baftard en- |
treth claiming as heire
to his Father, and.
occupieth the Land
all his life, without
any entrie made vpon
him by the Malier,
and the Baftard hath -
Iffue and dieth feifed


Lib.;.


et la Terre Difcen-
Dit a fon Flue, ct
fon Iſſue enter, ac,
Cs cett cafe le mulier
eft ſauns remedie,
Car il ne poit enter,
ne auer aſcun Action
pur recouerer la
(etre, pur ceo que


Of Difcents.


of fuch eftate in Fee,
and the Land difcend
to his Iffue,& his iffue
entreth, &c. In this
cafe the cHMulier is
without remedie, for
he may not enter , nor
haue any Action to re-
couer the lad, becaufe


Sell.399.


concubina. In Englith be is
called bafe bozne, anb theres
upon fome (ap, & bat a Bas
ftard ig as much tofap as onc
that is a Waſe Maturall, for
Aërd fignifieth jRature, 3i
readin Eleta,(p) Ghat there
be thee kind of WBaftards,
viz, Manfer, Nothus, & Spu-
rius , which ate defcribed in
tie old beries,


Manferibus fcortum,Notho


eſt vn antient Leyen there is anantient Law moechus dedit ortum.
tícl cate bfe,zc, inthis cafevied, dec. ^. ¥* Res trea entre


“But xoc terme them ali by the name of Baſtards, that be borne out of la&ofull marriage, By
- tbe Common Law, (r) ifthe hulband be within the foure Seas, that ts, within the 3lurifbí-


tion ofthe King of England, tt the wike hath Blue, no proofe is to be admittedto pzooue the-


child a 45aftatv, (£o; (n that cafe, Filiatio non poteft probari) vnleſſe tbe bufband hath an ap-
- parant impoiltbilitte of pꝛocreation, as if the bufband be but eight pearcs old, oz vnder the
age of procreation, {uch Iſſue is Walkard, albeit hee be bogne Within marriage. (f ) Wut te
the Iſſue be bozne Within a moneth 02 a bap after marttage betweene parties of full lawful
Age, the chtid ts legitimate. 1 Y : ;
€ Difeendift a fon 1/fue. Forté the Baſtard dieth fetled without
Fue, and the Lord by Eſcheat entreth, this dping fetfed hall not barre the Mulier , becaufe
thereig nodifcent. Itthe Waftard enter, and the Mulier dteth, his wike priuement enfcint
with a fonne, the 15 attard hath {ue and dieth feifen, the fonneis bozne, bis rightis bound foy
tser, Wut if the Baſtard dieth feifed, his wike enſeint With a fonne, the Mulicr enter, the fon
#8 boznc, tie Iſſue of the Baſtard tg barred: for Littleton putteth bis cafe,that there mutt not
enely be a Dping ſeiſed, but alfo a difcent to hts Iſſue.


€ Et foniffue enter, &c. And foit is tobe vnderſtood, albeit tbe
Mulier after the veceafe of the Waſtard doth enter before the heite ofthe Walkard , fos the diſ⸗
gent bindeth, and not the entríc o£ the heire. "ade :
0 Œ Lemulicr es fans remedie. 39ctebpit appeareth , that this diſ⸗
«mt Differeth from other difcents, for thie oifcent barreth the right of tbe Mulier, whereas
other difcents doc take away the entríc onelp of himthat right hath,and leaucth him to bis A=
tion, but here bp che opina fetfed ofthe Baſtard, his Iſſue is become lawful heire. (a) Fe
fs holden that if the Mulier be within age at the time of the dping fetfed,thai he ſhall be barred,
becauſe the Iſſue of the Baſtard ts in tudgement of Law become lawtull heire, and that tbe
La doth prcferre Legitimation before the pztufledge of Intancie.

And thereafon of tits cafets, £03 that luftum non eft aliquem poft mortem facere baftar-
“du m qui toto tempore vitz fuæ prolegitimo habebatur. Bnd fo tt ſeemeth to be, hat (£a man
1 {fue a forie being Baſtard cígne, anb a daughter, and the Daughter is marricd, the fas
ther dicth, the fonne cntreth anb dteth feifen, this fballbarretbe Jreme Œouert, And the dif

tent in this cafe of. Seruices, Rents, Reuerſions expedant bpon Eſtates Cale, 02 Eoziife,
- Spbercupen lents arc referued, ec, Hall bind therightof the Mulier, bata difcent of thefe thal
hot drive them that right haueto an Action,

So itthe Baltard dieth ſelſed, and big Iſſue endoweth the Wife of the Waſtard, pet (s not

the entrie of the Malicr lat full spon the Cenant (n Dower,foz Yig right was barred bp the


… "$ttbe Watkard eiqne entreth (nto the land anb bath Iſſue, and entreth inte Religion , thie
Diftent Mall barre the right of the Mulier.


Adiffue deux fits. FFaman hath Flue fuch a Baſtard as ts

a po, anb dieth, aud the Baſtard entreth and dieth ſetſed, and the Land diſcendeth to bis
Bue, the Collaterail Hepre of the Father is bound ag Sell ag Where there be tio fonneg,

And Where our Anthoz {peabeth of fonnes, fo (t (8 (fa man hath Bluctiwe daughters, the

eleett bring a 1Baftar®, and they enter and occuple peaceably ag heires, now the Lai in fac

Hour of Legitimation (bail net adiudge the fobole pofleflion in tbe Mulier, (3050 then bab the on-

lp right, but in both, fo ag (£ the atkard bath (Que and dieth, ber iſſue (al inherit. al


244


(p) Flet.lib. 1.60.5.
V.$«8. 380,


(r) Bref. li. 4.fo.378.275.

g H.4.9. 43.E.3.19.41,E 3
7. 44. E. 3.10. a9. Aff. $4.
98.4]. 34.1. H.6.5.19.H.6,
17. 39.E.3.13.

C£) 18.E.4.28.


Lib. 8.v01.102. Sir Rich,
Lechfords cafe.


(a) 3. E.a. Diſcent Br.4 90
BUA. 18.22. 33.E.3.Ver-
di 48. 36..4ff. 2. TL Cm.
Stowels cafe, 10.E. 3.2.


13. E. 1. tit, Baflard; 18.


14. E.a. Baflardy 26,


Sir Ric. Lechfidieafe vb. fup.


20.H,3.Bafardy 19,


Hil.18.E.3.cor Reg. Rot.144
Ebor.


17.E.3.59. F.tit.Baflard.32
Sir Rich, Leshfords cafe vb.fup.
See afterwards m the (Chapter
of Warranties,


(b) 3.€. 3.sis. Baftardie ag,


Sir Rich. Lechfords safe v5. fup.


20.€.3.Vench.119. 11,E.3.


(4p.6.


Of Difcents.


Seti. 4.00,


tbc fame cafe(t borh daughters enterand make partition, this partition fail bind tbe Muliet


fo
of the paorimitie of bloud.


Á c) Bnd an Alliſe of Mortdancefter lieth not bet weene the Baltard and the Mulier (n refpet


And the Wattard being tmpisaded 02 vouched fhall bane bis age,


€ Et le Baftard enter come beire a Jen pier.


Ff aman hath Flue Ba⸗


fard cígne and Mulier puiſne, aud the Baſtard in the life of the father hath Bus and victh,


and then the father dteth feifed, and the fon of the


and dieth feifen, thts (ball bind the Mulier.


Baſtard entreth ag heire to bis grandfather,


E Pur ceo que eft antient Ley en tiel cafe vfe, cc. As hereafter in out
Comment bpon the tio nert Hecttons fhallappearé by our anticnt Wookes anb the autíent
Statutes of the Bealme. Bnd here is implied how neceffarie (t (s after the exampleot our Bus


thor, to lose (nto tbe Æntiquitie , than Sobich ,


pleafant,


nothing ig moze venerable, profitable, anm


Seëlion 400.


€ MES il ad eftre lopinion

Dafcuns , que ceo ſerra
(ntenbue lou E pier ad bn fits ba-
ftard pet bn feme, et puis efpou-
fa meſm̃ la feme.et apzes lefpon-
{els il ad iſſue per meſme la feme
bn fits, ou bn file mulier, et puts
le pier mozutt, ac, fi tiel Baſtard
enter ac. et ad Flue et Dente fei-
fic,ac, Donque auera liſſue De tiel
Battard le Cerre cleerement a
luy, come auant eff Dit,@c, et ne-
mpaftun auter battard la mere,
que ne fuit vnque eſpouſe a fon
pier, et ceo femblebone et reaſo⸗
niable opinion, Car tiel Battard
nec Deuant efpoufels celebres pe-
center fon pier et famere, per la
ep De Saint Efglife e(t mu-
lier, coment que per la Hep Del
Terre il e(t Battard , et lint d
ad vn colour Dentrer come heire
afon pier, put ceo que ileft per
br lep mulier,æc, 8, perla Ley be
Saint Cfglife, Mes autermt
eft De baftarD que nad afcun ma-
ner colour Dentre come beíte, en-
tant que il ne poet per nul Lep
eſtre Dit mulier , cat tiel Battard
ett Dit en la ep, Quafi nullius -
lius,&c.


BY it hath beene the opinion
of fome, That this fhall be in-
tended where the father hath a
fonne Baftard bya woman, and
after marrieth the fame woman,
and after the efpoufels he hath if
fue by the fame woman fon ora
daughter, and after the father di-
eth, &c. if fuch Baftard entreth,
&c. and hath iffue and die feifed,
&c. then fhall the iffue of fuch ba-
ftard haue the land cleerly to him,
as it is faid before, &c. and notany
other baftard of the mother weh
was heuer married to his father,
and this feemethto be a good and
reafonable opinion: for fucha ba:
ftard borne before marriage cele-
brated between his father and his
mother,by the law ofholychurch
is Mulier, albeitby thelaw of the
land he is a baftard,& fo he hatha
colour to enter as heire to his Fa-
ther, for that he is by one law Ms:
lier,s.by Law of Holie Church,
But otherwife it is of a Baftard
which hath no manner of colorto
enter as heire, infomuch as he can
by no law be ſayd to be Aalier,
for fuch a Baſtard is ſayd in the
law tobe Quaſi nalis filiws, ore.
Mtt.


Lib.3. Of Difcents. Se.4ot.
M Es ad effe lopinion dafcuns cc. And ont Author here fait, Chat


1 this uin fs goo anb reafonablc, £o? that fucb a Baſtard by the Law of Holy church
6 Mulier.

( |. 2er fubfequens legitimos facit quoad facerdotium non quoad fuccefkonem propter
cenfuetudinem regni quod fe habet in contrarium. Pet the Canon Law bofeetb them Legi⸗
timate, quoad fucceffionem. Bea Parliament hoiden(q ) Anno 20.H.3. fo; that to certifie
bpon the kings sit, thatthe fonne bore befozc marrtage is Walkard, was Contra Com-
munem formam Ecclefiz, rogaucrunt omnes Epifcopi Magnates vt cenfentirent, quod nati ante
matrimonium cfífent legitimi ficut illi qui nati funt. poft matrimonium quantum ad (ucceffione
hereditariam quia Ecclefia tales habet pro lcoitimis: Et omnes Comites & Baronesvna voec
refponderunt,Quod nolunt Leges Angliz mutare; qua huc víque vfitate funt & approbatæ.


C [int que id ad vm colour dentre cc. Here ít íg to obferued, Chat


the Law more reſpecteth bim that hatha Colourable title though it be wot perfed in Law, than


bin: that hath no ritic at alias bath beene fayd Cr) befage,


« MES en le cafe


auantDit, lou


te Baftard enter a=


pres la mont le pier,
et E muliere lup outta,
et puis le Baſtard
Differ ik le mulier, et
ad iſſue, et deuie fet=
fie et liſſue enter, D6-
à lemulier poit auer
biíefe Dentre fur diff.
enuers liffue Del Ba⸗
flatb et recoucra la
terre, te. Ct iffint
poies beir le diuerſi⸗
tie lou tiel Baſtard
continue la poff, tout
fabie fans interrup=-
tion & lou le mulier
enter & interrupt le
poſſeſſion de tiel ba-
ftatb, ac,


Se&hion 4.01.


Vt in the cafe a-

forefaid , where
the Baftard enter after
the death of the fa-
ther, and the mulier
ouft him, andafter the
Baftard dificife the
mulier , and hath iffue
and'dieth feifed, and
the iffue enter, then
the mulier may hauea
Writ of Entrie far dif-
ſeiſin againft the iffue
of the Baftard, & (hall
recouer the Land,&c.
And fo you may feea
diuerfitie where fuch
Baftard continues the
poffeffion all his life
without interruption,
and where the mulier
entreth,and interrupts
the poffeffion of fuch
Baftard,&c.


€ F7 le mulier luy
aufſta. An eſttã⸗
ger (ti tbe maine of che Mulier
Without his commandement
cannot enter bpon the Ba⸗
fard, fo; that the Baſtard
map gâine the eftate and bar
the Mulier. Bnd therefore rez
gularlp none (hall enter but
the Mulier, 0? fome otherbp
his commandement, ( Bnd
therefoze Littleton faith, and
the Mulier gut him out) ne
moze then in the cafe (a) of
the 11020 Awdley: foz an e-
franaer of big owne head
cannot enter in the name of
bít that right Sao to enter
Within tbe fiue peares to ae
uoto tbe Fine. Wut in both
thofe cales, ſirſt, i£ tbe Mulier
agree thereunto befoze the
difcent o£ the Wafkard; o2 fec
condiy, he that right hath bes
foge the fine peares be paff da
afent thereunto, the clapme
is god, and fhallavota the
eftate of the Baſtard, and of
the Conuſee as tt was holders
in tbe Loꝛd Awdleyes Cafe,
Quia omnis ratihabitio retro»
trahitur, & mandato equipa-


ratur, and ſtandeth Well with


the Swords of the Htatute, fo that they purfuc their title, &c, bp Wapof Adion o1 Entry,
and fo it (8 (b) 31.H.8. tebe intended.


But in the cafe of the Baftard eiene, which te Litrletons cafe, datdein in Socage, 03 Gars


Deine in Chivalete may enter, fez they are no ſtrangers, ag in another place is plainly ſhewed.
fan Fnfant make a feoffinent in fe, an e&ranger of hig otone head cannot enter (c) tothe
bie o£ the 3infant, foz tbe eſtate is botsablc. Wut where the infant ed man of full age ig
diſſeiled an entríc by a (Iranger of his owne head is god and belketh prefentip the right in the
Bufant. So it is if Cenant for life make a feoſtment in fee , an efkranger mag enter in the
name of bins (n the Reuerſion, and thereby the eftate (ball be belted in Him, Et fic de fimilibus.


2.414 € Leu


245


* Vide Britionfe!.128 b.
166.203. Andthe Statute of
Merten. 16.H.3.02p.19,
confirmeth this epinion.

Fill 1 8.£.3, coram Rege im
Tbzfawr. Ebert.


Srafon,lib. 2. fol 65.

(q) Satur. ds Merton 20.
H.3.cap.9.

Vide "DraB lib. 5. fo. 18.417,
16..A4ff pi. 30.


(1) Vide Sef. 397.6 sop.
£err. Sek.


(a) Aichs38.& 39. Elie. 95
the Kings Bench wpew chidence
by the whole (ourt.

V ide 31. M, B.entr, conga.
Br.123.


4. H.7.e6),


Vide $98,314.

(9) 31.4.8. entr.cong.
"Br.123.
(c) "Pac. 39. Elis. in Comins
Banco per ('uriam.10. H.7, 16
7. E.3.69. 26.E.3.62. par
Thorp. 45.2, 3. reieafé 38,
[OE HIE


2. Af».


PL Cans. Tarfén da. Horylanes
[


jeg.
33. 8.6.34. 31. H.6.9.
FE, 3. 21.0.4.5. $E. 4.60


tes. dieeno ys.


290-628 eI, 2g. 15.
ag E aq di frm. sa.


(A) Vide S48. oy 3.405.


Cap. 6. Of Difcents. Seët.4 02.


€ Lon tiel Baftard continue ict poffefion [ans interruption. BE the
Mulier entreth bpon the Baſtard, and the Waftard reconcreth the Land in an Bile again
the Mulier, now is the Anterruption auoyded, and ff tbe Baſtard dieth fered, this fall barre

Mulier.
re tbe Wattard eique after the deccafe of the father entreth, and the Ring feifcti) the lano fog
fomecontempt fuppofco to be couunitted by the Watard,for Which no Freehold oꝛ Inheritance
ts Loft, but onip the profits of the Land by way of fetfnre, anb the 2baftaro dic, andbig (Toe
ts vpon bts petition rettoped to the pofteffion, foz that the ſetlure was without caufe;tbe mu-
lier tg barred fog cuce, foz tbe pollefiton o£ the Ring when bre batt no caufeot ſeiſure hati bee
adiudged the polleflion of bim £0) wholſe caufe bt feifed. But it after tbe death of the Father
the malier be found beíre anb Sottbtn age, and the ting febfeth,in that cafe the poſſeſiton of thz
ing (s in right of tbe mulier, and beffeth the actuall poſſeſſion in the roulicr, and confequencip
the Baſtard eigne (s forecloſed of ant right Fo cucr,

Bon fo ít ig When tbe king feifetb fo? a contempt oz other offence of the Sather oz ofanp other
Anceftozr, in that cafctf the Iſſue of tbe Baſtard eigne vpon a Petition be reftozco fo; that the
feifure was Without caufe,the mulier (g Rot barred,fog tbe Baltard could neuer enter,and con
fequentip could gaine no eftate in the Land, but tbe pofreffion of the ting in that cafe ſhall bee
adiudged in the right of the wulier. And tt {s to bee obſerued, that the Baſtard muft enter in
vacuam poffeffionem, and mutt continue during big life without interruption mabeby tbe Mu-
lier.


€ Interrupt le poffefüon del Baflard, Gc. Ifthe Ballard inuite the
mulier to fe bis Houfe,and to fee Pictures, ac. 0; to Dine Withhim, 02 toawke, Punt, ez
Hpox With him, 02 fuch like bpon the Land vifcended, & tbe mulier commeth bpon the Land
accezdingly, this te no interruption becaufe be came in b theconfent of the Waltard,anstheree
foze the comming bpon the Land can be noerclpatfe,but tf the mulier commeth bpen the ground
of hig owne head, and cutteth Downe a tree 02 diggeth tbe fople, oz take any paofit, thefc fball bc
interruptions, fo rather then the Baſtard ball punith bün (x an Baton of Crefpalle, the 20a
fball amount tn Law to an Entry, bccaufe be hath aright of Eutrie. So tt ts tf the mulier
gut anp of bts beafts into the ground 02 command a ftranger te gut on bis bealts, thefe boe a=
mount to an Œntrie, foz albett tn thefe cafes the mulier doth net ble any expꝛeſſe woꝛos of Eu⸗
trie, pet thefe and {uch like Pas doe Withont any Swozds amount in Law to an Entre, fo;
Ads Without Words may make an Entric, but words Without an Be ( viz.) Entrig ínto the
Hand, ac.) cannot make an Œntrie(ali Which interruptions are implyed in the fatb,ec,) More
fail befaid hereafter of Interruptions tn the Chapter of Continual Clapme.


Sect. 402.


€ S Ivn enfant deins
age ad caufe den-


trer. ‘ta man ſeiſed
of Lands (n £e die, bis Wife
priaement enfeint with a fon,
anda firanger abate anb die
feifed, anb after the fonne te
boznc, hee (ball bec bound by
the Difcent, becaufe Hee at
thetime of the Diſcent had no
vígbt to cnt, v thisis to
be gathered opon theſe words
of Littleton, ad caufe dentrer,
Which at the time of the Diſ⸗
cent be had net.


@ Ef eins per Dif-
cent, oc. Here ts im⸗
piped anp other heire collate:
Fall 9? lineall.

Bn Infant is accounted in
Rate (as hath benc often
fato, (d ) vatill hee pallet the


€ JE": fi bn en-
fant Deins age

ad fíel caufe De entrp
enafcung terres ou
tenements fur $n
auter,que eft ſeiſſe en
fee,ouen feetatle De
mefme leg terres
ou tenements. fi ttel
home que eft tiel-
ment fcífíe, moruſt
de tiel eftate fei-
fie, etlesterres diſ⸗
cendont a fon iflue,
Durant le temps que
lenfant eft deins age,
tiel Difcent ne tollera
lentrp


Lfo if ac Infant


within age hath


fuch caufe toenter in-
to any Lands or Tene-
ments vpon another
which is feifedin fee,
or in fee tayle of the
fame Lands or Tene-
ments if fuch man
who is fo feifed, dieth
of fuch eftate feifed,
and the Lands difcend
to his Iffue,during the
time that the Infant is
withinage, fuch Dif-
cent fhall not take a-
way the entrie of the


—«Lib.3.
lentrplenfant,mes q
il poit enter fur Le tf
fue que eff eins per
Difcent , ac, put ceo
que nul laches ferra
. adiudgeen bu enfant
Deins age en tiel
cate,


Of Difcents.


Infant, but that hee
may enter vponthe if-
fue which is in by dif-
cent,for that no laches
fhall bee adiudged in
an Infant within age in
fuch a cafe.


Sect. 403.


ageof 21, peates, and cers
taine printiedges be bath tn
reſpect of hig infancie,


@ Xv Laches ferra
adindee en le Infant
deins age in tiel cafe.

And Littleton Weil added
(en tiel cafe) that is, tn cafe of
Difcent, for in fome other
Cafes Laches fhall pꝛeiudice


. an 3nfant. As laches fball be adiudged in an 3 nfant (£ hee prefent not toa Church within


fixe moncthes, oz tbe Law relpeceth more the Pziutledge of the Church,that t;c Cure before
wed, than the 2tufledge of Intancie. Ancfo the publique Repole of the Realme concerning
mens Freehold and Inheritance ſhall be preferred before the pꝛtutledge of Intancy in cafe of a
fine $obere the time begin,in the time of the Anceftozr. So noncclayme of a Vulaine, of an In⸗
fant bp apeare and adap, which bath fled to an anctent Demefne, (ball take alway the feífure
ofthe Infant, And it an Fnfant bring not an Appeale of the death of his Puceftoz Within
& peare anda Dap, be is barred of his appeale fo euet, foz the Law refpects moze Libertieand
Life, thanthe Pztutledge of Jnfancic, And here itis to be obferueb, that Liuleton puttetl)
bis cafe, that an Intant ball enter opon a Difceñt, wben a ftranger opetb feifed, but hee put
ít not fobcfoze, isthe cafe of the Waſtard eigne. B. Cenantin taple infeoffcth A tn fe, A.
hath illus Within age and dpeth, 5. abatcth and dpeth feífeo, the Iſſue of A. being Mil within
age, this Difcent hati bind (c) the 3infant, £o? the Iſſue in taple {9 remitted: and tbc Law
doth moze reſpect an ancient right in this cafe , than the priuticdge of an infant that hav but
a defcafibie eſtate. And it is fato (t ) thattEthe Wing dpe fetfeo of Lands , andthe Land dif=
cond to his Succeffor, this thall bind an Intant, for that the pꝛiutledge o£ the Intant inthis


cafe holds not agaíntt the ting.


|
«LI Cem, fi le ba-
ton x fa feme
come en D20ít là
feme.ont title x droit
Denter en tenements
que bn auter ad en
fee, ou en feetatle, et
tiel tenant mozuft
feifie, ac, entiel cafe
lentrie le baron eft
tolie fur theire que
eft eins per Di(cent,
Des ( le baron De-
ute, Donque ia feme
bien poit enter ſur liſ⸗
fue que eft eins per
Diicent , purceo que
Laches le baron ne
turnera la feme ne
fes heires en preiu-
Dicene en Dammage


Set. 4.03.
AL if Husband


and Wife, as in


€ S! baron & feme


come en droit fa


rightof the wife haue feme ont title & droit


title and rightto enter
into Lands which ano-
therhath infee , or in
fee tayle, and fuch te-
nant dieth feifed, &c.
In fuch cafe the entrie
of the Husband ista-
ken away vpon the
heire which is in by
Difcent : but if the
Husband die, then the
wife may well enter
vpon the Iffue which
is in by Difcent, for
that no Laches of the
husband fhal turne the
wife or her heires to
any preiudice,nor loffe

Daaz


dentrer, Gc. & tiel te-
tenant maru! feifie, ec.


Theſe Words are gencrall,
but are particularly to bee
bnberftob , viz. Spben the
Wzong Was done tothe wife
during the Couverture, for t£ a
Feme ſole be feifes of Lands
in fee, and íg diſſetſed, and
then taketh hufband, In this
cafe the bufband and Wwife,ag
in the right of the wife, hane
tight to enter, and petthe
Dying feifed of the diffetfor in
that cafe fall take away the
entry of the Svife after the
Death of her huſband, and the
reafon ts aſwell for that the
herfelfe Swhen thee was fole,
might bauc entred and recon⸗
tinued the poflefiton , ag alfa
tt (ball bee accounted ber folly
that thee would take fuc a
bufbamo which would nos
enter befoze the Difcent.

But


33.2.3. quar imp. 46.


PL(emm»a _


(e) 13.7.4 1,2,
F.XGB. 35.70.


(£) 35.4.6. 60.


I $E, 4.d'fcent. 30,


Lib. 3


2. F724


Vid, Sel 401.


20.H.6.28 5.


0o (n) irapa.


42.E.3.1. Tl. (9m.55.
10.H.7. 13.4.7.
35-H.6.41. Pl. ((em. 256.5.
Fleta lib. 2.eap.50.


(e) Lefaiute de Marton ca, 5


9. H.7«24.


"PlCom.fe.368.b.per Sanders
Lib: 4. fo. 137.183. Bawerleys
cafe. Murer eap 1.S 9.06. s.
$ x. "Bralenfe. 65. 6r 420
"Britton f6.167.5.217.66.
Fleta 1.6.00 39-Fit(- NB.
532.6, Steuf.Trer.3 3-34.


Cap.6.

Wut tf the Woman were
Hitchin age at the time of the
taking of bufbanb , then the
Dying {etfed (hall not after che
Deccafe of her hufband take
away ber Entric ; becaufc no
follp can be accounted in her,


Of Difcents.


en tíel cag , mesque
la fem & tes heirs bn
potent enter, lou tiel
Difcent eft c(cbue Du-
rant le couctture,


Sell. 404.4.05.


infuch cafe, but that
the wife & her heires
may well enter where
fuch Difcent is ef-


chued during the Co-
fo? that thee as Within age \


uerture,

When fbc toe hulband, and
after Coverture fhe cannot enter Without her hulband, all which is implyed inthe {atd(&c,)

Laches le Baron neturnera la fem, &c. al preindice, dc. Laches
(figuitteth in tbe Common Law, rechiefneile o? negligence, Et negligentia femper habetinfor-
tun comitem Pere is a dtuerfitieto be obferuco chat albeit requiarlp no Laches fhall bee ace
countedin Infants 92 Feme Couerts ag (a afozelaid, for not Œntry o2 Ciapme to auopds
Dilcents, vct Laches Hall be accounted in them £o? not performance of a Condition annexed
totheftate ofthe Land, Foꝛ (£a Fem be infeoffcd epther before oz after marriage, referuinga
Rent, and fo ocfaultof payment a recentrie. In tat cale the aches of the Aaron hall
Difberit the Site kor euer. Bnd fo it ig (n) ofan 3Intant his Laches, fo» not performing of a
Condition annexedtoa Kate, epther made to his Anceftoz oz to bimfelfe {ball barre him of the
right of ihe Land fo? cuer.

Ff a man make a feofkment in fee to another referuing a Rent, and if he pay notthe Rent
within a moneth, that he (ball double the Went, and the Feotkee dicth, his beire within age,the
Inkant papeth not tbe Kent, he (ball not bp this aches forfeit any thing. Unt other wile it (ar
ofa Feme Couert, and che reafon and caufe of this diuerſitie (a , for that tbe 3infant ts pꝛoui⸗
ded for bp the Statute, (0) Non current v(urz contra aliquem infra ætatem exiften’ &c.ABut
that Statute doth not extend to a Fem Coucrt,ucither doth that Statute extend tea Condic
tion of a vc-entric, Which an 3infant ougbtto perfezme, for tbc Éoafeiture thercof cannot bee
called V fura. 1


Setl. 404.


“nx A€sia Court tient, lou
s M tiel title eff Done a! feme
folc , que puis pzent baron, que
nentra pas, eins fuffer bn Diſ⸗
cent, ac, la auter eft, cat ferra Dit
la folly ie feme De prender tiel
baron que nentre entemps,ec, *


Vtthe Court holdeth where


fuch title is giuen toafem fole -


who after taketh husband which
doth not enter, but fuffer a Dif
cent, &c.there otherwife it is . for
it fhall be faid the folly of the wife
totake fucha husband which en-
tered notin time, &c.


(LT Dis is avoco, and theretoze as Coymertp J haue bone J meddle not withan bosobt it
T the opinion is holden foz Law, as ít appcarctl) (n the Section next pzccedent,


€ Gre Littl. ere
H plancth a man
of no found
memory to be Non com-
posmenris. Wanp times
Cas here it appearctb )
the Latyn {002d erplanctl)
the true fence, and calleth
Him not Amens, demens,
furiofus,lunaticus,fatuus,
ftultus, 0? the like, foi
Non compos menus íg
moſt fure and legal!
Non compos mentis ig


Setlion 4.05.


«LI Cert, fi home que
eft Dc non fanc mes
n2», que cft adire en
Latin, Qui non eft có-
pos ments, ad caute
Dentre cr afcung tiels
tenements, ft tíel Dif-
cent vt fupra, fort etoe
en fa bie, Durant Ie
temps que il fuit Dc
non


LD if amanwhich

is of non fane me-
mory, thatis to fay in
Latyn, Qui non eff com-
pos mentis, hath caufe to
enter into any fuch te-
nements,if fuch difcent,
Vt fupra, bee had in his


life during thetime that M


hee was not of found


Er


NE
Er


Y


rs


; Lib.3.


non fanc memozie, a
puis Deuia, fon beire


- bien poit entet fur lup
- auceftcins p difcent,


€t eu ceft cafe popes


— beierbncas, à lheire


LO


poiet enter, a bucoze
fon ancefter que auoit
metme jetitlene puiſ⸗
- foit enter, Car celup


. que fuit hogs De fa me⸗


- mozie al temps de tiel
Difcent, (il boile enter


apres tícl diſcent ſi ac⸗


tion fur ceo ſoit fue


enuers Iup, tinadriés


À


- pur lup à pleder, ou De


- duy apder, mes adire


que il fuit De non fane
-memosíe al temps de
fícl Difcent,ac, tacco
ne ſerra tl reſceiue a=
Dire, put ceo que nul
home à pleine age fer=
ta refeetue en afcun
plee per la ley a Difa-
- blet (à perfon demeſũ,
mes ibeire bien poit
Difabler le perfon fon
aunceſter pur fon ad⸗
vantage Demefne en
“tiel cas, put ceog nul
aches poit eftre ad-
iudge perlalep en ces
- lup que ad nul Difcre-
tion cn tícl cafe,


Of Difcents.


memory, &after dieth,
his heire may well en-
ter vpon him which is
in by difcent. And in
this cafe you may fee a
cafe where the heire
may enter, and yet his
Anceftor which had the
fame title could not en-
ter. For hee which was
out of his memory at
the time of fuch dif-
cent if he will enter af-
ter fuchadifcent, if an
action vpon this be fucd
againft him, he hath no-
thing to pleade for him-
felfe orto help him, but
to fay, that hee was not
of fane memory at the
time of fuch difcent,
&c. And he fhall not bee
receiued to fay this, for
that no man of fullage
fhall be rcceiued in any
pleaby the law to dif-
able his owne perfon,
but theheire may well
difable the perfon of
his Anceftor for his
owne aduantage in fuch
cafe, for that no la-
ches may beeadiudged
by the law in him
which hath no difcreti-
on in fuch cafe.


Sell. 405.


Of fourefozts; 1.Idcota
Which frombis nativity
bp a perpetgall infirmity
{8 Non compos mentis,
2. Bee that by ficknelle,
grisfe o» other accident
wholip iefeth bis memos
tp anb vnderſtanding.
3.8 Lonatique that hath
fometune bis vnderſtan⸗
ding and ſometime not;
Aliquando gaudet lucidis
interuallis, and therefoze
be (s called Non compos
mentis fo long ag be hath
not bnderftanding. Laft=
lp, be that by bts one
vitious act fos a time des
pziueth bünfelfe of dis
memozp and vnderſtan⸗
Ding, ag he tbatís dun
hen, Wut that kinde o£
Non compos ments {ball
gíue no priniledae 02 bes
nefit to hun o2 his heires,
And a diſtent thall take
away theentrie of an Fo
Beot, albeit the Sant of
buderftanding was per-
petuall ; foy Littleton
{peaketh generally of a
man of non fane memnozy.
So lkewi i£ a man
that become Non compos
mentis bp accident ag (s
afozefatd be diſſeiſed ane
fuffer a difcent, albeit bee
Tecouer bis memory and
bnbderftanding agatne,pet
he fall neuer. auotoc the
b.fceist;anb fo ít (ga Forti-
vri ofane that hath Lucida
interualla. As for a dꝛuu⸗
kard, hoe is Voluntari-
us demon, hee hath ( ag
hath benc fatd ) no pate
utledge therebp, but what
hurt o2 {Hi foeuer hee Doth,
bis Dankenneileé doth ag-
greuate tt; Cmnecrimen
ebrietas & incendit &
detegit.


Fax Ideot make a feoffment (n fes, be hall (a pleading neucr auotdett faping that be Dag
an Ideot at the timc of Hts feoffment, and fo bad bene from hig nattuitp. Wut vpon an office
found forthe ting; the ting (ball auotde tye feoffment fo the benefit of the Ideot whole cuc
ſtodie the Lato gíuctb to the King.
L Soit (a of a Non compos, and fo tt is of him Qui gaudetlucidis interuallis,of an eftate made
During bis Lunacie:fo2 albett the parties tbemfelueg cannot be receiued to diſabte tbeinfelucg,
pet twelue men bpon the :D fice may find the truth ofthe matter. But (£ anp of them alien
by fine 02 rccouetíe, this (ball not oncip bind birafelfe, but big heires alfo, As amongtt other
things requifite to be knowne, tbefe cafes vou hall inde at large tn mp Commentaries Shere-
unto toꝛ bꝛeuity 3| referre the reader, Uponall which bakes there auc bene foure feucrail
opíniong concerning the altenation oz other ad of a man that ig Non compos mentis,&c, #02


Qa 3


fitt


147


L5, 4.13433 5. "Beuerleys cafe


39. H.6. 41.5. 49b..45:89.6
FN B.102. 5.5,3.70.
"Britton 04.28 fo.66. 25. 4]f.
B4. 35. Aff. pL. 10.


32.€.3.tit.Scire fac.'160.
Stanf. Pr.34. F.N-B.202,8


Bensrleye cafe lib.a.t 26.147
138,


j


Lib.
vit poe fui infia


(r) Lib, 4.fe. 126.127.


26.-Af:37. 31.H.7.3 1.
Stanford 16b. 8. E. 2. ("ores
412.414.361. 22.€.3. sid.
224. "Eewrley: caf vbi fup.
F.N,/B.302.D,

3. H. 7.3.

Vid.5.£.3 ait, Entrie (ont.
Statham 12,€.4.8. 39+
H.6:4. Abbr. Af-8y.

39. H.6. 43.


y y. E. 4.tir."Difeent. 30.


(4p.6.


ak + 4 J
Of Diſcents. Sec.ꝓ06.
firit Come atc of opinion that he map auoyde bis owne ad bp entrie op pica, Secondip,Dthers — —
are of opinion, Ghat he map auopdit by wait, and notbp plea. Thirdip, Dryers, Œbathee |
map auopd ít either bp plea oz bp ait, and of this optnion ts Fitzherbert {n bis Natura Bre- En
uium vbi fupra. Bnd Littleton here ts of opinion, That neithor bp lea noz bp toit o2 others 1
&vfc, hee Simfclfc (ball auopp ít , but his hetre tn refpeæ bis Anceftoz as Non compos men⸗
tis, hail anopd it bp cntríc plea, 02 Wꝛit: And herewith the greateft authozities of our aks —
agree, and fo was it refoluen With Littleton, in Beucrleys cafe, (r) where tt is ſayd, Chat it
15 a Wartme of the Common Law , Chat the partie fball not difablebimfelfe, Wut this bol 7
deth oncly ín Ciutle Caules, for in Criminal Caules,as Felonte, dc. the act anD wrong of a
iab man fhall not be imputed to bim; for that tn thofe caufes, Actus non facitreum, nifi mens |
fitrea,andhe is Amens(idelt) fine mente, without his mind oz difcretion ; and Furiofusfolofu- —
rore punitui,a mad man tg onclp panied bp big madnefle, And fo iris of an Finfant bntill «
he be of theage of fourteenc, which in Law {8 accounted the age of oifcretion,
€ Et enceft cafe poyes veir un cafe,orc. And though Littleton faith |
(Duce cafe) pet other cafes map be found tothe fame end. Foꝛ (€ there be zandfather, fü :
tber, and Sonne, and the Father Difleife the Grandfather , and make a reoffement tn Fee,
Soithout Warrantie, the grandfather dteth, albeit the right difcend to the father, be cannot enter
agatntt his owne ffcoffement, but tf bt Die, the fonnc fball enter, and auopD the eftate of the


Feoftce

Spot the Grandfather be Tenant in Taile, and the father diſſeiſe him vt fupra, mutatis
mutandis.

It Lands bc aiuen to two anb to the heires of onc of them, he that hath the Fee fimple fball
not jauc an action of waſt vpon the Statute of Gloucefter, again the Jopntenant Foz iife,but
his boire fhall matntatnean Action of watt agaínft him,bpon the Statute of Gloucefter, fo the
heire all maintains that Aion Which the Ancefto could not, ^


Sed. 406.
ANS if fuch a man of Non fane -


memorie make a Feoffement, -


€ ET {i tiel home ð non (atc
mentozic fait Feoffement,


ac. th meti ne poet enter ne auer
baiefe appelf Dum non fuit com-
pos mentis, &c. caufa qua fupra,
Mes apres la most fon bfc bieu
poit enter, ou auet le Dit Brieke
Dum non fuit compos mentis &
fon election, Meſme la Ley ett
lou enfant deins age fait 4reoffe-
ment, et Deuie, fon heire poit en-
ter, ouauer bu 262ícfe De Dum
fuit infra ætatem,&c.


€ E452 feoffement ey.


&c. he himfelfe cannot enter , nor


haue a Writ called Dum non fuit
compos mentis, &c. caua qua [upra :
but after his death his Heire may
wellenter, or haue the fayd Writ
of Durs non fuit compos mentis at his
choice. The fame Law is where
an Infant within age maketh a feof-


PF


ment and dieth,his heire may enter”
or hauea Writ of Dsum fuit infra


atatem &c.


D2 anp other like conueyante in paijs, but


Fines and other aſſurances of Recoꝛd are not implied in ¢his,( ec). T


€ Mefme la ley dun Enfant. Chis is truc, ag to the bring⸗


{ng ofa Dum fuit infra atarem, & c. but without queftion the 3 mant in that cafe might baut


entred,ag ttappearcth in tbc next. Section.


Briefe Dum non fuit compos mentis.


This norit (as it appea⸗


veth bp our Author) líctl) fo tbc hetre of bí that Sas Non compos mentis, anb not for him⸗
felfe, but a Dum fuitinfra etatem Heth ag Swell £03 the Anceſtoꝛ himfetfe after bis full age, ag


foz bis beire,


Sedi.


Lib. Ot Difcents. -


Seg.


or
€ leu fiico fue Diffeifie per AUS if [be diffeifed by an En-
bn enfant Deins age,le quel fant within age, who aliegeth
altena abn auterenfce, et toanother in Fee, and the Alience
lalienee Deute feifie,ct leg Œûts dieth feifed,and the lands difcend
Difcendont a fon beire, efteant to his heire being an Infant within
enl deins age mon entry eff age,my entrie is takenaway. &c.
Dile, 3C,


Seit.407,4.08,4.09.


Sec. 408.

ME filenfant deing age ent BX if the Infant withinage en.
~YAfurilbée que eft eins p Dif- ter vpon the heire which is in
cent, come il bien poít put ceo. by difcent,as he well may, forthat
mefme le Difcent fuitdurantfon that the fame difcent was during
nonage , Donque ico bienpuiffe his Nonage , then I may well en-
enter fur le Diffeifoz, pur teo que ter vponthe Diffeifor, becaufe by
g fon entrict! ad defeat a aníent his entrie he hath defeated and ta-
le Difcent, kenaway the difcent.


€ Ere (t appearctl, Chat tbe entre of the Infant (d lawtull, and gínctl) absantage
He the Diflerfecte enter alfo, becaufe the difcent, Sobith Has the inpediment, (s az
uopded. And it is to beoblerued, That tf the diſcent bee cal, the 3infant being

Within age, be may enter atanp time of his full age,
Bnd{o itis (£ an 3infant make a frcoffement;se, he may enter either within age, oz at aup
time after his full age, anb fo in both cafes map bis hetre.


€ E N mctme le


manner eff,
lou tco fue Diffeifie.et
le Diffeifoz fait feoff-
ment en fee fur con-
Di, et le Feoffce mor
De tiel eftate {eifie,
teo ne purroy mp en-
ter (ut lhte le feoffee:
mes fi le condition
foit enfreint, iffint q
pur cel caufe le feof⸗
fo? enter fur lbeire,
pe teo bit puille en-
ter, pur ceo que quát
le feoffoz ou (cs
beites enttont pur le
condition enfreint, le
Dilcent ef ouſterm̃t
Defeat,zc:


Set. 409.

N the fame manner

it is where Iam dif-

feifed, andthe Dif-
{eifor make a feoffmét
in fee vpon condition
and the feoffee die of
fuch eftate feifed, I
may not enter vpon
the heire of the Feof-
fee, but if the Condi-
tionbe broken, foas
forthis caufe the feof-
for enter vpon the
heire, now I may well
enter, forthat when
the Feoffour or
his heires enter for
the condition broken,
the Difcent is vtter-
ly defeated, &c.


wv


€ the reaſon hereot tg
Re apparant,foz Ceflan-
te caufa ceíTat caufa-

tum. @enantin Capite ma
hetba Feoſfment in fee to the
bfc of the Feoffæ and bis
heires, butilithe -Feoffoz pap
an hundzed pounds to him oz
bis heires, the -frcoffe dieth
bis hetre Within age, nob hath
the King the Sward{bip of the
bodie , anbíg intitulen to the
gard ef the land, But if the
jicoffo, pap the bunbieb
pounds according to the lists
tation, the wardſhip te due
ficb , both foz the bobp anb
land, amb foít is in cafe of a
condition : foy ag Littleton
here faith, the diſcent which ts
the canfe of wardſhippe, (5
vtterly defeated, Budbp tbefe
t$00 lat cafes which Littleton
bath here put, it appeareth,
Ghat there íg no difference
where the otfotnt is far
medbp a Paramount,
$obere the Gate Was neus
laws


248


Vi.the next Sef fellowings
43.E.3. rer. Entr.C ong.
Vo.N.B.126.4.F N.B,198
45Es 3.21.


V. the Self nexe preasdent.
Dyer 13 El fy. a 98,299.


Lib.


T, fe 208,


(*) V.Pl.£nv. Dame Hale:
sat.
4. E.3. 41. dv.


19. E,3. 55$.


3.N. 4.41. 16, H. 6.10. b.
18.8.4.19. 9.E.4.25. 52>
g.E.4 15. 18.E.3.34. 25.
E.1.39. 46. E.3. 25. 30.E.
1. Breifs.38ç. BraBon lib.
4 fo. 189. dr. Lib.s.fo.414.
FS ni 15. M


(ap.6.


Of Difcents.


Sed. 410.


laSfnll, (as in the cate ofan infant, and Sobere the bifeent ig uttered foa a time the eſtate
being —— Pho after beirateb bp matter cx post facto, Bp a tile e Bcssmirir


€ [st en Religion,

dre. Peeve ts
tmplteo Profetiion. Chis bif-
cent (ball not barre the entrte
of the Difletfæ , for that the
difcent commeth by the Ded
of the Sather, becaule Deo es
tredinte Religion, wherein
there is an excellent popnt
Goorthicof obferuation: Foꝛ
albett the entrtetnto ieltgt=
onmake not the difcent, but
the pzofeflion , whereof pou
haue read befoze Sect. 200.
Pethere pou map icarne bp
Littleton, Chat the Law re=
{pects the oꝛiginall At, and
that is bis entry into Re-


ligton, whichis hiscioncaa P


whereupon the protection fols
lowed , whereby the difcent
bapned, foz, Cuiuíque rei po-
tiflima pars prineipium eft.
Bnd agatne, O:igo rei iafpici
debet, whereof pou thal make
great tfe in reading of enr
Wakes. Here Lit- attribtiz
teth the caufe of the diſcent to
bis entrie into Keligion,
Which Wag his owne Ac,
Sohercas a Difcent both not
take away an entric vnleſſe tt
cometh by death, which, ag
Littleton faith , is the act of
God, and no aloz(ous pretert
of an Bet, no thongh (t bee of
Beltgion, hall Work a Wong
toa ftranget that bath right,
to oue of big entrie :
But (tig fapo, Chat in the
cafe of the Baſtard cime anb
mulier puifne, fuch a difcent
fhall bín the Mulicr, as bez
fore hath bene fapo, and fuch
an beire that commeth tu bp
fut a difcent (ball baue bis
age.


€ Car fi teo arraigne
vn Afife.cvs. Nota if


Section 410.

€ | Cem (i ito top

diſſeiſie, et le

Dilſeiſoꝛ adit-
fue et enter en Keli⸗
gion, per fozce De
quel les Tenemẽts
Difcendôt a fon tMue,
en ceft cale feo bien
puiffe enter ß liffue,
et vncore 1a fuit bn
Difcent, Mes put
ceo que ticl diſcẽt bi-
ent al (Tae per fait le
ier, $, pur ceo que
il enter en Reli—
gion, ac, ct le diſcent
ne bient a lup per fait
De Dieu, 5, per moze,
ac, mon entre eft
congeable, Car fi (eo
arraigne on Alife De
Nouel Diffeifin en-
uers mon Diſſeiſoꝛ,
coment que ti puit
enter en religiot,ceo
ne abata mp mon br
mes mõ bt non ob-
ftant) eftopera en fa
force, et mon recoue=


rp bers luy fett bof.


€t per mefine le rea⸗
fon le Difcent que a=
ueigne a fon Flue
pet fon fait demeſũ,
netollera moy D morn
entrie ac.


A ifIbee diffei-
fed, and the deffei-

for hath Iffue and en-

treth imto Religion,
by force whereof the
lands difcend to his if-

fue, Inthis cafel may
wellenter vpon the Ii,
fue, and yet there was
a difcent : but for that
fuch difcent commeth
to tbe Iffue by the At
of the father, s. for
that he entred into Re-
ligion, &c. and the
Difcent came not vn-
to him by the A& of
God, (fiilices ) by
death,&c.my entrie is
congeable : for ifIar-

raigne an Affife of No-
net diffesfis againft my
diffeifor, albeit he af-

ter enter into Religi-
on, this fhall not abate
my Writ, but my writ
(notwithftanding this)

fhall ftand in his force,
and my recouerie a-

gainft him fhall bee

good. And by the

fame reafon the dif-

cent which commeth

to his Iffue by his own

AG, fhal not take from

me my entrie, &c.


aman be Œenant op Defendant in a reall oz perfonall Actian, anv hanging the fait, the tee
nant 02 Befendant entreth into Religton, bp this the Soit is not abated, becaufe (t is bp his
stone At. 2? nbfo it is ofa Refignation,but etherwile itis ofa Depoñtion op deprtuatton,bes
canfe he is expelled bp tadgoment,and pet his offence, tc. wag thecaule thereof, {ed in prefamp-


tione Legis iudicium redditur ininuitum.


€ Moy de mm entry,cre. Were ig implied, Dz any of mp hetres, 4
se


Lib.


quen fi (co leſſe a
pn home certatue
“terres pur terme De
(20. ais. € Dn autes
moy nitet (tt, a outta
letermoz et Deuic fet-
“fie, eties tenements
diſcẽdont a fonbeire,
ieo ne purroy enter,
et bucosc E leſlee pur
terme Dans bien puit
enter pur ceo que il
- D fon entry ne oufta
lheir d eſt eins p diſ⸗
cét 5 lefrastenemt à
- ct a luy diſcẽdꝰ mes
folement claime Da-
- uet les tenemtg put
terme Dang , le quel
nett pas erpulfemet
dele franktenement
- Pel beíte que eft eins
per Difcent, Ades au-
— terment ef ou mon
tenant a terme De
Hic eft diſſeifie, Caufa
patet, &c.


Of Difcents:
Sefl. Aut.


A Lfo if let vnto a
man certain lands
forthe termeoftwen-
tie yeares, and another
diffeifeth me, and ouft
the termor , and die
feifed , and the Lands
difcend to his heire :
Imay not enter, and
yet the Leflee for
yeares may well enter,
becaufethat by his en-
trie he doth not oufte
the heire whois inby
Difcent of the Free-
hold which is difcen-
ded vnto him, but on-
ly claymeth to haue
the Lands fortearme
of yeares which is no
expulfion from the
freehold, ofthe heire
who isin by Difcent.
But otherwife it is
where my Tenant for
terme of life is diffei-


fed, Canfa patet, &c.


Se. Am. 41:


€ Vr terme de 20.


ans, It is clerc
that a Difcent thali not take
away the entry of a ilefles (07
peates as our Authour bere
fatth, nos of a Cenant bp E⸗
legit, or Cenant bp Statute
Merchant oz fuco tke, ag
haue but a &battic and no
Freshold, aud the reafon ig
fot that by their entrie vpon
the heire bp diſcẽt, they take no
Freehoiv (wbich ag often hath
bin obferucd (a fo much refpes
ced in Law) from htm, but oz
therwile it is of an eſtate fog
life, 0? any higher eltate, And
ds a Difcent of a Freehold
and Inheritance {ball take
awap the entry of btm that
tight hath to a freehold og
Inheritance, foa 3Dífcent of
a Frehold and 3inberítance
cannot take away the entrp
ef bim that bath but a Chats
tle, fog that no Difcent can be
of the fame,

@ man feífeo of an aduo w⸗
fon in fe, grants thee auoy⸗
Dances onc after another, ana
after the Church becommeth
bot, and tbc Grantoz pres
fents, and his Clarke is ad⸗
mitted and inſtituted, and
after the Church becomes
void, the Grantee map pꝛe⸗
fent to the fecond auepdance,
for hee $0ag not put out of


poſſeſſton tbercof, fozas tbc Lefloz bautng the Freehold and Inheritance cannot diſſeiſe the


pet


Leſſee £o? peares, hauing buta Chattic, thatany Difcent map becaftrotake away higentrp


ag Littleron Bere fapth: fo tn the fata cafe tbe Ozantoz hath the Franktenement ard feo of the
- ABoduowfon rightfuilp, foas hecannot make anp ofurpattonto gaine an eſtate, o2to puttbe |
_ Grantee fo out of poffc(lion as he (boulo not pꝛeſent, no moꝛe then the Lelle for peares in this
caſe to enter. Æifo in relpect of the patuttie the bfurpation of the Gzantoz fhali not put the


d


*


€ «Lem fl e(t bít,

que (i homie eft
feifte De tenements
en fce pet occupations
en temps De querte,
z ent mozutt feille en


Sei. 412.


Lfoit is faid that
if a man be feifed
of lands in fee by oc-


cupation in time of


warre , and thereof
dieth feifed in the
Rr


r


GSeante ont of poſieſſion £02 the two latter auopbancez, And this was reſolued (a) bpall
the Judges of tbe &ourt of Common Pleas, Which 3| my feltebearb and obſerued


€ P Er occupation en
temps de guerre.

Fir, It is neceflary to be
knowne bat Mall bee faid
Œime of peace, Tempus pacis,
and what fhall bee fate , Tem-
pusbelli, fiue guerrz,time of
Soars, Tempus paciseft qua LA
$


24.9


(2) Hill.18.£liz. in Core-


muni Rance.


.

Lib.3.

Inter brewia de anne 1.E,3,
parte 1. pafch.28.E, 3. in.
ger adimiscata ceram Rege. lib.
3-fol. 37. in thefanr,
Pafth.39.E.3.inter adiudicata
aeram 'R egt yn tbefaur.ltb. 2.
fel.92.


14.E.3.tit.ftirefacias 122.
but mers fully m the Recordad
barge.


(4p.6. !


do Cancellaria & alia Curie
Regis funt apertz quibus lex
fiebat cuicunque. prout fieri
confuenit. And fo as ít
adiudged in the cafe of Roger
Mortimer, and of Thomas
Garie of Lancafter. Verum
terra fit guerrina necne , natu-
raliter debet iudicari per recor-
da Regis, & eorum, qui cu»
rias Regis per legem terre cu-
flodiunt & gubernant , fed
nonalio modo.


Of Difcents.


temps De guerre, et
les tenements Dif-
cenbont a fon beite,
tiel Difcent ne oufte-
raatcun home De fon
entry, et De ceo home
poit bier en bn plee
fur bn bzeife De Aiel,


n.7;B.2.


5.


»


Sell. 4i2; ;


time of warre, and the
tenements difcend to
his heire, fuch difcent
fhall not ouft any man
of his entrie, and of


I


thisaman may fee in


2 Plea vpona Writ of
Aicl, 7.E.2.


And therefore When tbe Courts of Fluftice bee open, and the Judges anb Minttterg
of thefame map by Law protect men from Wzong and violence , and diftribute Juſtice to all,
it is fa(b to be time of peace. £o When bp Fnuañon, 3infurzecton, iRebellions, o2 fucl) ithettje
peaceable courfe of Juſtice is diſturbed and Lopped, fo ag the Courts of Julie beas tt were ~
fbut bp, Et filentlegesinterarma, then ig ttfato to betime of Swatre, And the triall hereot ig
by the Records and Judges of the Court of Futtice, fo? bp them tt will appeare,wiyether Fue
fice had her equall courfeof proceeding at that time ozno, and {hall not be trped bp Burp,

FE a man be differed in time of peace,andthe Xetfcent is caff in time of Sarre, this hall not
take awap the entry of the Dilſeiſee J

Item tempore pacis quod dicitur ad differentiam corum quz fuerunt tempore belli qucd idem
eft quod tempore guerrino, quod nihil differtà tempore iuris & iniuriæ , eft enim tempus iniu-
riz, cum fuerunt oppreffiones violenta quibusrefifti non poteft, & diffeifinz inmfte.

So as berebp tt alfo appearcth that tíme of peace ts the time of Law and right, and time of
warre tg the time of btolent oppzeffton, which cannot be refitted bp the equall courfe of La,
And therefore in ail reall ations the erpleng 0; taking of the profits are layed Tempore pacis,
fozifthep Swere taken Tempore belli, thep are not accounted of in Law,


Œ Per Occupation. Occupationtg à 10020 of art , and fiqnifieth a
putting out of a mang Freehold (n tímeof warre, anb (t is all onc Sith a Défleifin in rime of
peace, fauíng that itis notfo dangerous ag ít appcareth bp Littleton, and therefoze the Law
gaue a UO zit in that cafe of Occupauit, focalleb by reafon of that $070 in the tio2ít, in ead of
diffefiuit inthe Aflife of Nouel diffeifin, (£ the diffetfin had bene done in time of peace, Wheres
by it appearcth how aptly both in this and in ali other places, Littleton thozow big Whole
Boke ſpeaketh. Wut albett Occupatio whereot Littleton here ſpeaketh te bled only in the ſaid
wꝛit and in none other, that 3] can find 07 remember , pet hath tt beene died commonip tts Cons
ucpanceg and Leaſes to limit o2 make certatne precedent 500108, ag ad tuncin tenura & occu-
patione. 2butoccupatio is appiped to the poffeffion, bee it lawtull 03 bniawfuil ; It hath
alfo crept into fome Acts of Parliament, ag 4.H.7.cap.19.:9. Eliz.cap 1, ond Others, and occu=
parc {9 fometime taken to conquer.

€ Etdeceohome poet vier in vnplea fur briefe de MAiel, anno 7.E.2.
Derebpitappeares that ancient tearmes 03 peareg after the erample of Littleton are ta be
cited and bouched, foz confirmation of the Law, albrittbep Were neutr. printed > and that
thofe peares and thefe fpccíallp of E.1,H.3.& c, are $002tby of the reading and obfermatíong
a areat number of which J aue fesnc and obfcrued, which in mine opinion Boe giue a great
light not onip tothe bnberftanding and reafon of the Common Law, and which Fitzherb.
etther fa not 62 were by hin omittcd, but alfo to the trucerpofition of tbeancient Statutes,
made ín tbofc times , pet mine adutce te, that thep ſhould be read (n thetr time : fos after our
Studient be cnabied andarmed to fct on our pearebokes 02 reports of the Haw, let btm
teade rft tbe latter reports foz tx»o canfes : Firſt Foz that foꝛ tie moft part tbe latter Judges
ments anb Refolutions arc the furett,and therefore tt (s beft te fcafon him Smith them im the bez ,
ginning both for the fettling of bts tudgement. anb tbe retepning of them ín memory, Sex
condip, foz that the latter are moze Facile and eafier to be bnderfteod, then the moze ancient: bat
aftcr the reading of them, then toreade thefe others before mentioned, and all the ancient Bus
thers that hane Swzitten of our Law, foz 4 would With our Stuvient tobe acempleat La w⸗
per. Wut now to returne. Bs itis (n cafe of diſcent, fo tt is in cafe of pacfentation, fos no
dfurpation (n time of ar putteth the right Patron out of poffe(Tíon,albeít the incumbent come
(n bp inftitution anb induction. And time of warre doth not enip gine priutledge to them thag
be in Sarre, but to ail others Within the kingdome, and although the abmillion and infitatis
on be ín time of peace, pet (£ the pzefentment were fn time of Warre, ít puttetb not the right
Patton out of poſſeſſion.

Sel


Bratton. lib. A. f0'« 2 40.


Anglet: cap. de nonel diffessin.


Lit. 4 fol.ag.50, Ognelt af.


6.20, 3.4167.E.3.darr. pref. 3.
18. E.2.qhar RP. 17 5.
F.N,B,31.


Lib.5.


«[|Gen que nul
.. mo28t feifie (ou
les tenements bíen-
Dront abu auter pet
ſucceſſion) toilera
lentt daſcun perfou,
ec, Come De Pꝛre⸗
lates, Abbots, Pꝛi⸗
028,312 tàn$,0u Par⸗
fon defglife, ou  au-
fers cozps politike,
ac,content (ilg fue-
tont xx,morants feí-
fie, et xx. ſucceſſors,
ceo tic tolle tammes
afcun home de fon
entrie,
€ Plus ferra dit
be Difcents en le
pꝛochein chapter.


Of Difcents.


Self. 413.


AT that no dying

feifed ( where the
tenements cometo a-
nother by fucceffion )
fhalltake away the en-
trie of any perfon,&c.
As of Prelates, Ab-
bots, Pryors, Deanes,
or of the Parfon of a
Church or of other
bodies politique,é&c.
albeit there were xx.
dyings feifed, and xx.
fucceffors, this fhall
not putany man from
his entrie.


More fhall be faid of
Difcents in the next
chapter.


Se 43:414:


€ P ER fuccefiton.

This is in the Cons

mon Haw applyed
onlp to bodpes Politique og
Corporate, Which haue ſuc⸗
ceflion perpetuall and not to
natural men, as to a Biſhop
and bis fucceilozs,an Abbot,
Deane, Archdeacon, 192c-
bend, Parſon, ac. and thetr
fucceflozs, and not to I.S. op
anp otier naturall bobp and
hts fuccefforg, but to him an»
bis beires. Bnd the Succeſ⸗
Toi of any of thefe (a in the
Poft and the hetre of the naz
turall maris fn the Per, and
Succedere {g deriued of Sub
& cedere.


€ Corps politique.
(hg is a bodp to take
in fucceilion framed (as to
that capacitp ) bp pollicie, and
thercupon tt is called here bp
Litcleton a bobp polittque,and
itis alſo called Cozpozation
oꝛ a body incozpozate, becaufe
the perfons are mare into a


body and of capacity totakeand grant,sc. And this body politique oz incorporate map comz
mence and be efkablifhed three manner of wayes, viz. bp prefcription,by Letters patents, oz bp
acte of Paritament. Cuerp body politique oz Coꝛpoꝛate (s either deccicfiafticall oz lac. C cclefias
fticall either regular, ag Ab bots, Pꝛyoꝛs,ac.oꝝ Secular,as Withops, Deanes, Brchdeacong,
Parfons, Aicars ec. Lay, as Maioz and Communaltp, Waplifes and Wurgelles,ec,
Bilo euery body Poittique o2 Cozpozate, ts cither electiue, paefentatíuc, collatiue o2 Bonatine.
And againe is cither fole, oz agaregatcofmany ;as poumap reade in the third part of mp
Commentaries. And this body Politique o» Corporate, aggregate of many is bp the Ciui
lians called Collegium 0? Vniuci itas.


ep RA) Dutinuall Ontinual claim Cre out Sn:
Prev clapme eft is where aman —


~“a continuall

clayme ig. It is called
Continuum clameum, bes
caufe at the Common
Law, it muff baue beene
made Within euerp peare
anb dap, ag Littleton
bere teacbetb. Bnd pot (£
be that rightbath ma⸗
keth claíme,ano tbe Ter⸗
tenant Dpeth within the
peatc and the day, tbíg
Clatme though ít bee bat
once


gu la lou hoe |

j ad droit et
=title Den-
ttet en afcuns terres
ou tenemẽts Dont au-
tev e(t {vtfie en fee, ou


Za hath right and

title to enter
into any lands or tene-
ments wherecf another
isfeifed in fee, or in fee
taile, if hee which bath
en fce taile fi ceftp que titleto enter makes con-
aD title Dentrer fait tinuall claime to the
coutinual claime ales lands or tenements be-

re 2


230


Vid $8. 1.


9. B.3.25.5,5. E. 13. 7 33.


Lih. 3.fo.m3. inthe cafe of the
‘Deane & ( bayter of Norwi.t


Mirror cap.2.§.15.& Sa
Brabten lib. 5.f0.435.436
"Britten 107 Ab, 126.L,
Fleta lib. 6.cap. 52.5 3.
Vid. Se. 414,


Vid. $e8.385.34.H.8 9,32.


Lib.


Vid.Sol 434.


Dyer xg, Elif. "Pl. Cen 37^
15. M. 7.3.4. Taeobins safe.
28.H.6,28.


Vid.$e8. 443. 45.E.3.31.


7. H.6. 40. Centin. Clayme 1,
"Downcleri cofe. 5-E.4-4+


Brattes[éb.5.f0.436.
Flera,lsh.5.cap.§ 2-5 3+
23.H. 6.37. g Fl. 4.5.0.
1$.E. 4.3244.


ax H.6. Y.


C4p-7-
once * made as hath bene
faid fall paefcrue the entrie
of bim that maketh the
clapme.


€ 44 droit & title
denter. Bnd pet in


fome cafcg a continuall clatine
map bec made bp him that
hath right aad cannot enter

FE Œenant foz peares. Cee
nant bp Statute Stapie,
Marchant, o; Ele git be ou⸗
fted, and he in the reuerfion
diffeifed, the Aciloz e» he in
reuerGon map enter to the tn=
tenttomake bis clapme, and
pet bis entrie ag to take anp
proffits ts not la&ofull du⸗
ting tbc terme, Bnd tn the
fame manner the Lefloz oz be
in the reuerGon in that cafe
mapenterto auspde a colla=
terall $oarrantte, 02 the Leſ⸗
for in that cafe may recover
ín an Biltle. And fofome haue
holden may the Leſſoz doe tn
cafe of a Lealſe for life to this
intent to auoid a Difcent ox a
Toarrantte,

FE tbe Difleifes make con=
tinuall clapme and the Dif-
feifoz ofc feifcd within the
peare, his hetre Within age,
and by office the dking (g in-
titled to wardſhip, albeit the
entrie of the Diflcifæ be not
la&ofull,pet map be make con-
tínualiclayme to auoide a Difs
cent, and fo tn the like.


€ Vncore poet celuy
que fait tiel clayme on


Of Continual] Claime.


terres ou tenements
Deuant E mozant fei-
fie De celuy que tient
leg tenements,dongs
coment q tícl tenant
mozuftent feifi, sles
terres ou tenements
Difcendront à fon
heire, vncore poit ce=
lup que auoít fait tiel
claime, ou fon heire
enter € les terres ou
tenements iflint Dif-
cendus, per caufe De
continual claim fait,
nient contriftiant le
Difcent, Sicome en
cafe q home foit Dif-
feífíe, a le diſſeiſee
fait continual claime
ales teneméts en la
pie le Difleifor comẽt
quele diſſeiſor Deute
{cifie enfee, la terre
Difcendift a fon beire,
pucoze poit le 32it-
feifee enter fur la
poſſeſſion le heire,
nient obftant le Di(-
cent,


Seti. 414.
fore the dying feifed
of him which holdeth
the tenements, then
albeit that fuch tenant
dieth thereof feifed,
and the lands or tene-
ments difcend to his
heire,yet may he who
hath made fuch conti-
nuall claime or his
heire enter into the
lands ortenements fo
difcended by reafon
ofthe continual claim
made,notwithftanding
the difcent. As in
cafe that a man be dif-
feifed and the diffei-
fce makes continuall
claime to the tene-
ments in the life of the
diffeifor, although
that the diffeifor dieth
feifed in fee and the
land difcend to his
heire,yet may the Dif-
feifee enter vpon the
poffeffion of the heire
notwithftanding the
difcent.


fon heire enter. This is to be vnderſtood in this manner, that if the


father makeclaime, and the Dieifoz opctb the Father opctb, his heire map enter, becaufe


the vifcent was caff inthe fathers time,and the right of entrie Which the Father gained bp big
clatme (ball diſcend to his hetre, Wut t£ the Father make continuallclapme, and dpeth, and
the Sonne make no continuall clapme, and Within the peare and bap after the claíme made bp
the frather the DtMeifog dieth, this (bali take apap the entrie of the Sonne, for that the diſ⸗
cent was caft in his time, and the clayme made bp the Father (ball not auatle him, that might —
fauc clapmed himſeife. And of this opinion Sag Littleton binfelfe in our bakes here be
holveth that no continuall clapme can auotte a difcent vnleſſe it be madebp him that bath title
toenter, and in whoſe tite the dying feifed wags, See moze of this matter hereafter in this
chapter, Sect 4.16.

Bnd ag here Littleton putteth hig cafs ofthe Anceſtoꝛ and beire, fo ít heldeth inall refpecs
of the Pꝛedeceſſoꝛ and Succefloz.


Sed.


Lib3. Of Continuall Claime. Set. 415.416.


Seek.


€ E sr metnic maner eft, fi tex

naut à terme De bie alien
enfee,celuy en le reuerfion, ou
celup en le remaindet poit enter
fur lalienee, et (( tiel alienee Deute
feifi detieleftate fans continual
clatine fait ales tenements De-
uant le mozant ſeiſi del alience, 3
les tenements per caufe Del mo-
tant feifidel altence, DifcenDont
a ſon heire, Donques ne pott ce=
lup en le reuerſion, neceluy cn le
temainder enter, Des (t celup
en le reuerſion ou celup en le te-
mainder que ad caute Dentre fur
lalience fait continual claime a
les tenements Deuant le mozant
feifi Del alience, Donques tiel hoe
poit enter apzes la moꝛt lalie-
nec , auxybien come il puiffoit en
fa bie,


415.


€ [ N the fame manner it is, if te-

nant for life alien in fee, hee

inthe reuerfion or hee in the
remainder may enter vpon the ali-
enee. And if fuchalienee dieth fei-
fed of fuch eftate without conti-
nuall clayme made to the tene-
ments before the dying feifed of
thealienee, andthe lands by rea-
fon of the dying feifed of the alie-
nee difcend to his heir, then can-
not he inthe reuerfion, nor hee in
the remainderenter. Butif hein
thereuerfion or in the remainder
who hath caufe to enter vpon the
alience make continuall clayme to
the land before the dying feifed of
the alienee, then fuch a man may
enter after the death of the alie-
nee, as well ashe might in his life
time.


€ y this ít appcaretb, that a continuallclatme map bee made aſwell Where the lands are
B in the hands of a Feoſtee ac, by title, ag inthe hands of a Wifleifos, Pbatoz, o; In⸗
trudoz by xezong, ag before hath bene noted,


€ (Cen {i tert foít
leſſe bn home
pur terme De (a die, le
remainder a bn au-
teraterme De bie, le
temaínbecale tierce
enfee, fi le tenant a
terme De bie alicnaa
$n auter en fee, & ce=
luy en ie remainder
purterme De bie fait
continual claime ala
tette Deuant le mo⸗
tant ſeiſie Dalpence,


Sel. 416.


Lfo if land be let

toa man for terme
of his life, the remain-
der to another for
terme of life, the re-
mainder to the third
in fee,iftenant for life
aliento another in fee,
and hee inthe remain-
der for life maketh
continuall claime to
the land before the
dying feifed of the A-
lience, and after the

Brrr 3


€ AU" 4 B auter

in fee. Ft íg to
be obferued that a fozfetture
may be made bp the alfenatíe
on of a particular Œenant
two manner of Mapes, either
In Paijs,02 by matter of Re⸗
C010,

In Paijs, Of lands and te=
nements Which ipe tn Linerp
( Sobereof Littleton tnten=
bett) big cafe ) Shere a greas
ter eftate patet) by Liuerp,
then the particular Œenant
may lawfully make, where⸗
by the reuerfon 02 rematnder
ig deueſted, ag bere in tbe ex⸗
ample that Littleton putteth
wyhen tenant foa life ses

"


251


Vid. $:8.581.699.610.611.


Lib.;.


15, El. Dy.339.16.El.
7D1.334.


33. E. 3. Deuife s 1.15.£.4.9.
"Ui, eH 608.602.610.


3H. 6.63. Tr. 32.El.in
Inforweas. de intrwfios vers Ro-
binfin pur le Manor de "Dray-
ten Baffit, forefolued by the
Cows of Exchequer.


9yc.E. 49. 31.F.3-Gr.62.
14.€.33,7)mmmv.117.


15. £.2.Tude. 237.6. 3. a9


$E. 14. 18. E.2. Fines 120.


15. E. 4.29. 36. H. 6.29

2. H.6& 9. 4. El. Dy. 9. H. 5.
14. 32. 4.31. 19. E. 3.28.
16.4/.16.


(4p-7-


in fee, which mult bee bnder=
ſtod of a feoffement, fine, 02
tecoucrie by confent.

FE Tenant foz life, and hee
im the rematnder foz life in
Littletons cafe had topne tn
a Feolfement in £e, this had
benca forfeiture of both thetr
sitates, becaufe he in the tes
mainder tg particeps iniuria.
And foit ig if hee in tbete-
mainder for life had entred,
and oiffeifeo Tenant (oz life,
and madea Feoſtement tu fee,
this had benc a fozfetture of
theright of hig remainder,

A particular cftate of anp
thing that lies in grant, can=
not be forfeited bp any grant
ín fe bp Ded. As if tenant
fozlife oz peares of an Adz
uo%fon, Rent, Common, 04
of a reucrfion 02 remainder of
land by Ded grant the fame
in £e, his (o no forfeiture of
their eſtates, fog that nothing
pafles therby,but tiat &obich
lawfuilp map pafle, and of
that optnton tg Littleton fn
our Bokes.

Mur if Cenant Foz Hfe og
peares, the reucrfion 02 rex
mainder being tn the dking,
make a feoffement in kee, this
ig a forfeiture, and petno re:
ucrfion ozremaindcr {5 diue⸗
fed out of the Ting, and the
reafon is in refpect of the fo-
lemnitte of the feoffement bp
liuerte tending to the ings
Difberifon.

Wy matter of Record, and
that bp thace manner of
Sates: Firſt, WBy altenatton.
Secondly, bp claiming a


Of continuall Claime.


et puis lalience mo⸗
rut feifie, ct puis
apzes celup en le re⸗
mainder pur term de
pie mozutt, deuaunt
afcun entrie fait pcc
luy, en c£ cag celup en
leremainder en Fee,
poit enter fur heire le
alienee, per caufe Dc
continuall claim fait
pec lup que auoít Ic
remainder pur terme
De fa bie, pur ceo que
tiel Droit que il aue⸗
voit Dentte, alera et
remaindera a celuy
en le remainder aps
lup, entant que celup
ent remainder cx fee
ne puiffolt pas enter
ß lalienee en fee du⸗
rant la bie celup en
le remainder p terme
à fa bíc.a pur ceo que
fl ne puiffoit adongs
faire continual clau
(cat nul poit faire
continual claim mes
quant tl adtitie den⸗
trie,tc,)


Sel. AIG. |
alience dicth feifed,& |
after he inthe remain-
der for life die before
any entrie made by
him, in this cafe he in
the remainder in Fee
may enter vpon the
heyre of the Alienee
by reafon of the con-
tinuall claime made
by him which had
the remainder for
life, becaufe that fuch
rightas hee had of en-
trie, fhall goe and re-
maine to him in the
remainder after him,
in fo much as hee in
the remainder in Fee,
could not enter vpon
the Alienee infee du-
ring the life of himin -
the remainder for life,
and for that hee could
not then make conti-
nuall claime. For none
can make continuall
claime but when hee
hath title to enter,
&c.


greater effatc than he ought. Thirdly, Wp affirming tbe Keuerſion oz Remainder to be in a


ftranger.


Firkk, Wy altenation, anb that of two forts, viz. Wy alfenation diueſting, and not diueſting


the reuerfion oꝛ remainder. Dinelting, as bp ieuping of a fine, 92 fuffcring a common recoue⸗
rie of lands, whereby the rencrfion o2 remainder ts diueſted: not diueſting, as by leuping of a
finc in fee of an Aduowfon, Rent, Common, op any other thing that líctb in grant :and of thi¢
opinion (g Littleton tn our Wookes,* and fo note two Dinerfties : Ftrſt, betweene a grant by
fine Which tg o£ Beco, and a grant by deed in pais, and pet in this thep both agree, That the
reverfion 02 remainder tn netther caſe is diueſted. Secondip.Wetweene a matter of Recoꝛd, as
a Fine, tc. and a Ded recorded, ag a Ded tnrolied, (o2 tbat worketh no Cozfettare.becaule the
Ded (s tbe oꝛiginall.

Hecondip, Wp Ciaime, and that map be tntWofozts , cither expacile 02 implied. Erpreile,
ag it Œenant for life Wellin Court of Recor clatme fee, 02 tf Lefſee for pcarce beouft:B, anb
bring an Alife, Vt de libero Tenemento. Implied, Ws tf ina wrt of Wight breught agaínft
htm, he will take bpon him to topn tbe miſe bpon the mere right, which mone but Œcnant in fa
fimple oghtto dos. So tf Helle for peares loſe in a Præcipe ; anvbzing a Wait of Ereog fog
Errorin Procelle,tins is a fozfeiture,


Thirdle


Lib.3.


Of continuall Claime.


Thirdly, Wy affirming the renerfion 02 rematnbe
Ipoppaflinelp, Aduaiip, by fine manner of Mapes, ‘
a ftranger, Sobereb p he aftirmes the teverfion to bes in him,
a grant of a ftranger, and there note alfo a dtuerfitie between
a ftranger, and an Btturnentent in paijs, fos an Atturnement
AE btrblp, FE a ftranger bring a wꝛit of Entrie in cafu prouifo,
him, ik the Œenant confefe the Actton, this ts a fozteiture.4.i


tothe diſheriſon ot him in the reuerfon, this toa forfeiture,

Zion of watt againft Lele for life, be plead Nul wait fait :
Palinely, As if Cenant for life accept a fine of a ftranger,

&c. fot hereby he afírmeg of Kecord the reuerfon to be (n a Granger,


Littleton here {peaketh of the forfeiture of an eftate, and it
of & particular eftate map be foafeited, anb he that hath buta
fbail take benefit of tbe fo2feiture,
Ditletfoz,he tn the reversion 90? remainder Mall prefentip ent.
ture. Bndfo it ts t£ tbe dLefIee after the Diffeifin had leuted


t tobe (n a ffrangér, and
As firt, t£ Cenane fo?
Secondly ,
can Dtturnement ef Kecord to
in paijs Svosketh no fosfettnre,
and fuppofe tbe rencrfion to be in
f Œenant foziife plead coninonfip
HFittip,
this (9 a foxteíture : oz the like,


fur conufans de droit come cco,


f£ hee atturne to a


t€ a ftranger bring an


‘ts to be knowne, that the right
right of a remainder og reverfior,
As t£ Tenant for 1febe pi(Tetfeb ; And heleutea fine to the
ct pon the Déffeifoz fo» the Fozfet=
a fine to a (ranger, though to fome


reſpects, Partes finis nihil habuerunt, pet tg (t a forfeitare of bis right,


Littleton here fpcaketh of an alfenatton in fee abfolutelp,
Leafe £o? any other mang life, op a gift (m tatle, FF A.
B. fo? bisiife, ana B. dicth,and the Leïære-entreth,


but fo it is, tf the Heller make a
be Tenant foz life, and make a Leate to
vct the forfeiture remaineth,


BE Tenant fo? life make a leafe for life, o2 a gift in Œaile, of a Feoſtement tn Se, vpon cons


Ditton, and entreth forthe condition broben,pet the fosfeiture tematneth, Littleton
an eftate £o? life, fo tt 15 of Gena
- fti Dower, oz (ffc hath an eſtate
fo) pearcg, Genant bp Statute

Littleton fatth, Chat the altenation in fee
ranger, fo? (£ it be made to Dim tn reuerfion
€ (late, ag at large hath bene fpoken tn the

By Littleton it appeareth, Chat Cenan


fpeaketb of


tit ín Gaile apres poffibilitie, Gr enant bp the Curtede, tenant
to hin anb bts heires, during thclife of I. S. gc. and of tenant
Merchant, Statute Stapie, oz Elegit.


i made to another, which mult bee intended a
oꝛ remainder, ítamounto
Chapter of Tenant fos life,
t for life may enter Fozthe foxfeítura of the irk Ges


te à furrender of hig


nant foz life, and that if the Genant fo? life tn remainder make continual clatme, anb the Alle⸗
and (f be Bie before be bee enter, he in theremainder in fee (ali


ne die feifed, then map be enter,
enter becaufe be in the rematnbe


_ Æenant foz life gained by his


&ione 414.


FE Tenant in Tale, the remainder in fer Sith gatrantíe,
lue, and bíctb befoze execution wit hout tue, he in the remaí


Tcould not make any claime, the
entrie, Hall aoc to him in the remainder, (n tefped of the priuiti⸗
of cflatc : anbfo itis of him in the reucrfion tn fee inlike cafe,
FE two Fopntenants be diffetfen, and the one of them mab
farninoz all take benefit of bis continuall clatme,
Wut (€ Cenant fo? life make centinuall claime P
temainder, vnleſſe she Défleifoz died (n the itfe of


Fight thereunto,andig pzinie in eftate, 1
In tbe fame manner (fa Seignlorie be granted by fine to enc fo !ife theremainder in fee,the
Grantee for life dieth, be in the remaínber hall bage a Per qua feruitia, fo» be bath right totbs


femainder,and is printe tn eftate,
but be that bath right to enter,


€ M eft à bei-

era topmon
fits) coment ct en fl
Manner tiel continu
al claime ferra fait,
et ceo bien appzender
trois chofes font a
tntender, La 1 ,chofe
ett , Khome adcaute


Sef. 417.


Vtit isto be feene

of thee (my fonne)
howand in what man-
ner fuch continuall
claime fhall be made :
andto learne this wel,
three thines are tobee
vnderftood. The firft
thing is, If a man hath


refoze tbe right of entry Which


for beis aifo prtute in eftate,
e contínuatl clatme and dieth tbe
(n refpect of the pzinitie of their eftate,
this thall not gine anp benefit to him in the
Œcnant for life, fo; the caufe abone fatd, Se-


bate (ubgement to recoucr in baz
ner hail fue execution, foa he hath


ere alloappeareth, Chat none can make continnali clatme


€ Qu home ad canfe
5 en aſcuns


terres 0n tenements ere.


Ft ts notfufficientte tell one
generalp what he theid do, bug
to diret bim how œin what
manner he hall doe (tas Lic.
Doth ín this place, Bnd bere
the generali rales of eur 209»
thoz are tobe bnberfteod, that
the entrie of a manto recontíz
ane bis Anberttance o; A


à


Se. 417,


that either actuals
life paap inapd of


252


AL, E,3. 14.4. 5.2.4.2.
24-H.8.Forf; Br. Bg.li.2,f.55
56, Buoklers eafe,29.€ 23.97,
17.E.3.7.4.. 39.E.3.16.
29. E.3. 24.5. 4ff:5. 5. E. 3.
Entr. ( ong.42. 14.€.3.Re-
Se 135. 3.£. 3.32,
24.E.3.68, 1H. 7.


3--Mar. Dy, 148.


Li. fo. 5 s. Bucklerseafa,


13. E. 4.4.


39.4.15. 43. E. 3. Entrée
Cong.30. 2.4,5.7.
39-E.3.16. 45, E. 3,25,


Lib.
This hatbbeene adindzed Mich


14.0715 El. er.1458. in
the Barle of Arundells cafe.


paff 18.12.04 10. 36. Hi.
6.37* 32. A f^ 1


31. H,gageDyer 16485337.


Cop-7-


Volo mull enfac bis Paton fox
recouerieoË the fame. Ae ff
the men Ddiffeife me feuccallg
of three feucrall Acres ofiand,
being all tn one countie, and

enter in onc acre in the
name of all the thee Acres
this is gad for no moze but
fo; that Acre which di enter
into, becaufe each diſſetſor ts
feu. tali Œenant of the Free⸗
Hol, and as 3| mut bane fez
terall Actions agaínft them
£0; the recouerie of the land,
fo mpne entrte mutt bee fenes


tall.

And fo ít (c if onc man
viffetfe me of three acres of
around, and letteth the fame
fcueratly to three perfons fo
life,ec. there the entric bpon
one Leſtee inthe name of the
Whole, ts gad for HO moze
than that Acre that he hath in
bis poffcffton. Wut tf the diſ⸗
feifoz had ietten feucralip the
fapd three acres to three per-
fons for peares, there the en=
trie bpon one of the Leſſess in
the name of al the thzee acted,
fhail recontinue and rencft ail
che three acres in the dt ‘cite,
fo; that the diffetfe might


Of Continuall Claime.


Dentre eu aſcuns ter⸗
teg ou Tenements
que font en diners
ilies Deins bn m̃
Countie , fil enter en
$n parcel De les ter=
teg ou Tenements
que font en bu (ille,
en noünc Dc touts
fes terres ou Tene⸗
ments as queux i
ad Doit Dente deins
toutgles Willes De
mefme le Countie,
perticl enteric tl aue⸗
taaurp bone poftcf-
fion, et ſeiſin B touts
terres ou tencments
Dont il ad title den⸗
trie, ficomeil auoít
enter enfait en cbet-
cun parcel, ceo feme
ble grand realon,


baue bad onc Alltle againt the qp ((Icífoz, becanfe he remained
therefore one entrte fhali ferue fo; the whole.


Fe one villetfe me of oneacteat one time,
Countie at another time, in this € afe mpne entrte
fo? that one Alltle might be bzongbt agatnft hun foi both Dtilet


Wut (£ | infcoftc onc of one acre of ground bpon condition,


the fame man of another acre ín the
ons are bzoken, an entrie into onc acre
right to theland, noz acion to recouer th
mutt be made intothe fame, tn refpect 0
land in tbc name of all the land ſubiect to
railand in feucralitowncs. And ſo note a d
ucrali titles of entrie bp fozce of a condition.
Deins me[me laCountie. F0

ties, there muft befeuerall Aciong,andconfequentip
€ Exnofme de tout, S6.


anb after diffetfe me of another acre in thefi


cfame, but a bare title, and therefore fenerall entr
£thefeueral conditions. But an entrte in one part of
one condition (s god, although the parcels be (euge


tucrfitte bet weene fenerall rights of entrie, and fes


Set. 417. .

caufeto enter into any
Lands or Tenements
in diuers Townes in -
one fame Countric, if -
he enter into one pat-
cell of the lands or te-
nements which are
inone Towne, in then


name of allthe Lands


or Tenements into the


1 whichhehathrightto


enter, within all the
Townes of the fame
Countie : By fuch
entrie hee fhall haue as
gooda poffeffion and
feifin of all thelands |
and Tenements wher-.
of he hath title of en-
trie, as if he had en- -
tred indeed into euery
parcell ; and this ſee⸗
methgreatreafon. M
Tenant of the Ffreboid, €


"m


into one of AM ín tbe name of beth (& gov;
ng. .
anbat another time J inkeoſte
fame Countie bpon Condition alfo,
fn tbe name of both is notfufficient, Foz that 4 ba


andboththe conditi⸗
meno


=


2 ifthe lands lie in feuccall Cour
fcucrall entrtes,ag hath beene fato.


Bf onc Diffeife me of tooo feucral Acres”


(none Countie, and 3 enter inte onc of them generally, Withentfaping, 3n name of both,
fbaiircueft onelp that acre wherein entrie ts made, as hath beenefapd, and that is proned


our Bokes Whichfap, That (£ 3| bz
the watt, albeit it (bali reueſt that o


€ Dont il ad title dentrée.


benfozaright of Entrie.


(ng an Allile ok too acres, if J enter into ene ban:
nel» Acre, pet the Swzit Hall abate,


ere in alarge fence title of entrie is ta⸗


Sed.


Ld |
>
*

>


NE


Lib.;.


Of Continuall Claire,


Setl. 418.


€ Cx Thome boile enfeoffer
| vn auter fauns fait De cet-
taineterres outenements, que
il ab deins plufourg billes en bn
Countie, til voile liuever ſeiſin
al feoffec De parcel De tenements
Deins bn bille en nofime De touts
les terres ou tenements que tab
en mefine le bille, & en leg auters
bílleg,ac.touts fs ditstenemts,
ac, patfont per fozce De le Dit liue⸗
t» De feifin à celupa q̃ tiel feoſfe⸗
ment en tiel maner eft fait, a bn⸗
coze celup a que tíel liuery De feí-
fin fuit fait nauoit Droit en touts
les terres ou teneincnts € touts
leg villes mes per caufc à liuerp
De feifin fait De parcel De les ter⸗
tcs ou tenementg en bn bille: A
multo fortiori il femble bone rea⸗
fon,que quant home ad title Den-
terenles terres outenements en
Divers billes deins bn m Coun-
ty deuãt afcun entry per luy fait,
que per lentry fait p lup en pat-
cel De les terres en bn bille en le
nofme de touts les terres a tenes
ments as queur tap titledDenter
Deins mefine le countie, ceo bett
bu ſeiſin de touts en luy a pet tiel
entry il ad poſſeſſion a feifin em
fait,ficome il auoit enter en chef:
«uu parcel, ac,


eT


€ Fo ifa man will enfeoffe an.

other without deed of cet-
taine lands or tenements which he
hath in many townes in one Coun-
tie,and he will deliuer feifin to the
fcoffee of parcell of the tenements
within one Towne inthe name of
all the lands or tenements which
he hath in the fame towne , and in
othertownes , &c. allthe faid te-
nements,&c. paffe by force ofthe
faid liuery offeifin to him to who
fuch feoffment in fuch manner is
made, and yet hee to whom fuch
liuery of feifin was made hath no
rightin allthe lands or tenements
inall the townes but by reafonof
the liuery of feifin made of parcell
of the lands or tenements in one
Towne : A multo fortiori, it {ee-
meth good reafon that when a
man hath title to enter into the
Lands or Tenements in diuers
Townes inone fame Countie, be-
foreentry by him made, thatby
the entry made by him into par-
cell of the lands in one towne, in
the name ofall the landsand tene-
ments towhich he hath title to en-
ter withinthe fame Countie , this
fhall veft a feifin o£ allin him, and
by fuch entrie hee hath poffeffion
and feifin indeed, asif hee haders
tred into euery parcell.


Dis (e cutbent, but here (s a diuerſitie betweene a Feofiment and an entry, £0 a man
map make a feofiment of lands im another Countic, and make ltuery of fetfin within


the view, albeit he might peaceably enter and make actuall liverp, andfo map be ſhew
the Recognitoꝛs in an Aſſiſe, the tenures of lands in another Countic,but a man cannot make


$e8.418.


an entrp into lands within the vie w where he may enter Without amp fcave (for itis (*) one
thing to inueft and another to deueſt) as hereafter (ball be faid in the Section next following,


€ UM multo fortiori. D? à minore ad maius , (gati argument fre=
quent (n eur Æuthoz, and in our Wokes, thefozce of argument inthis place ſtanding thug:
it itbefo in a fcoftment palling a meto right, muck moze ttis fos the refkitutton of an ancient
right as the Wozthier and mozerefpected tn Raw, which holdeth affirmatively ag our Autho⸗

bere teacheth bs.
The three ( cc.) inthis Section need no explication. f
etf Sem.


253


38.2.3.24. 38.49.33.


(*) Vide $8. next following.
Vide SeF.4 32.


Lib.3.


Vide the Self, preceding.


TE 421.39. H,6. 5.


19.8.3,28.
11. R.2.tit.duresz,
13. /H,4.19.20.


BraG lib, 2. f. 1. V6. b.
Brittenfal. v9.66. F leta lib. 5.
cap.7. dr lib. 304p. 54.49.E 1
14. 14. H. 4.13. 39 AJ.
11. H.6. 51. 38.H.6.27.

39. H.6,36. 5. 19. H. 5.28.
4.B.4.17.12. 6.4 7.28. H.6.
B. 41.£.3.9. 11. H. 4.6.

8. Ma 5. Vide SeF.434.
W,2 64p.49.

13.H,4.dures 20,


Vide Sell. 378.
11.H.6.ç1.


Vide SeB 441.

"Pl (^or. 93. in Aff. defre[.-
force. The Parfin of Hony-
lanes (aft.


Cap-7-


€ Œreigto bee obfers
ucd , that every
Doubt o? feare is
not fufficient, foꝛ (t maft cona
cerne the fafetie of the perfon
ofa man, and net bis boufeg
oꝛ geods, fo; if hee fearcthe
burning of bis boufes, oj the
taking away o? fpopling of
bis gods this is not fufficts
ent, becaufe hee may recouet
the famc 07 dammages to the
balue without anp cogpozall
hort.
Again ff the feare bo concern
the perfon, pet it mutt not be
a batne feare,but fuch as map
befall a conftant man, ag if
the abuctfc partie lpe in Watt
in the Wap Sith Weapons, o2
by Words menace, to beate,
maphem 02 htl him, that
Mould enter , and foin pleas
ding muſt hee the fome tuft
caufe of feare , foz feare of ft
{elfe ig internall and fecret,
Bat in a fpeciall verdia, tf
the Jurozs docfind, that the
Diſſeiſee vid net enter fo;
feare of corpozall hurt, this ts
fuffictent and (ball bee tnten=
de tbat thep had evidence to
pzouc the fame, Talis enim
debet effe metus qui cadere
poteft in virum conftantem,
& qui in fe continet mortis
periculum, & corporis crucia-
tum. Et nemo tenctur fe in-
fortunijs & periculis exponere.
Bnd tt feemeth that feare


Of continuall Claime.


Seélion 419.


€ fecond chofe
€ L eft a entender,
à & hoe ad title Den-
ter en afcuns terres
outenements, filne
pfaft enter en ms les
terres ou tenemeéts,
ne en afcun parcel De
C, p Doubt à battery,
ou pet Doubt De mays
bem ou pur Doubt de
mont, {il alata ap-
proch aurp pees les
tenements, come fl
oſaſt pur tiel Doubt,
et claime pet parol
les tenements eftre
les foens, mainte-
nant per tiel clatme
il a bn poſſeſſion, et
feifin cles tenants,
aurpbü come fil oft
enter en fait, coment
que tl nauoít brique
poſſeſſion ou ſeiſfin à
mefineles terres ou
tetits Deuant le Dit
claime,


Sell. 419. |


TE fecond thing

to be vnderftood

is that if a man hath

title to enter into any

lands or tenements, if
he dares not enter into

the fame lands or te-

nements , norinto any
parcell thereof for.
doubt of beating, or

for doubt of may-

ming , orfor doubt of
death, if he gocth and
approach as neere ro
the tenements , as hee
dare for fuch doubt
and by word claime
the Lands to bee his,

prefently by  fuch

claime hee hath a pof-

feffion and feifin inthe

lands, afwellas if hee
had entred in deed,al-
though hee neuer had

poffeffion or feifin of
the fame lands or te-
nements before the

faid claime.


of (mpztfonment ts alfofnfficient, foa ſuch a feare fufficeth to auotd a Wondoz a Ded , forthe
Law hatha fpecíall regard to tbe fafeticand iibertie of aman. And impzifonment is a cozpo=
rail Dammage, a reftraint of líbertie, and a kind of captinitie, Wut fee in the fecond part of the
Fuitutes, W.2 cap.49 a notable dinerfitie betweene a clatme 02 an entríc (nto land , and the
auopoance ofan Ac 02 Deed for feare of battery,


€ Pertiel claimeil adv poffefion & feifin, cc. Here is to bee ob⸗
ſerued, that there bee two manner of Entries, viz. an Œntrie in Deed, and an Enz
trp (n Law, An entry in deed is fufFicientip knowne, an cntriein Law is Shen fucha claims
ig made as ts here erprefled, Which entrp in Lawis ag trong and ag forcible in Law ag am
entry fn deed, and that afweil Shere the Lands are in the hands of one bp title as bp Wong.
Bnd therefore bpon fuch an entry in Law an Bite doth lie afwell as vpon an entry tn Ded,
and fuch an entrp in Law (ball auotda warrantie,Æc.

Wut beteig a diuerfitte tobe obferueb betweene an entrp in Law, andanentrpin Ded,for
that acontinuall clapme of the Difeife beingan entry in La% (ball bc(E the poflefion and
fetfin in him £03 bte aduantage,but not for bis Difaduantage. And therefore tf the Dilletfes baing
an aifife, and hanging theaffife, he make continual clatme, thts hall not abate the afltfe,but he
fball recouer dammages from the beginning, but otherwile (t is of anentey indeed. Se moze
of thig matter after in this Chapter, Sect.422.

Section


| Lib.5.


Of continuall Claime: Seë.420.421.


Seclion 426.


€ ET que 1a lep eft ticl, thet

bien proue pet bti plee Dun
aſſiſe en le Liuer daff, An.58.E.
3.P.32. le tenoz de quel enfuift en
tiel fozme,€n Ie Countp de Dor-
fecdeuant Eg Juſtices trove fuit
per berdict Daffite , que le plain-
tife que auoit D20ít per Difcent de
heritage Dauer les tenements
mig en plaint, al temps Del mo-
rant (or ancefter, fuit Demurrat
en le bille ou les tenements fue=
tont, a pet parolx clatine ies te-
nements enterfes bicines, mes
pur Doubt De mot il noſa appꝛo⸗
cheries tenements, mes poat lat-
fife, {ur ceſt matter troue,agard
fuit que tl recoucra, ac,


Nd that the Law is fo, it is

well prooued by a plea of an
Affife in the Booke of Affifes, 47.
38.E.3.P.32. the tenor whereof
followeth inthis manner. Inthe
Countie of Dorfet before the Iu-
ftices, it was found by verdi& of
Affife thatthePlaintife which had
right by difcent of Inheritance to
haue the tenements put in pleint,
at the deceafe of his Anceftor was
abiding in the Towne where the
tenements were, and by parol! clai-
med the tenements amongft his
Neighbours,but for fcare of death
hee durft not approach the tene-
ments but bringeth his Affife, and
vpon this matter found , it was a-
warded that he fhouldrecouer,&c.


€ Ere tt appeareth that eut Wake Cafes are the bet profes what the La ts, Argue
mentum ab authoritate eft fortiflimum in Lege. Bnd foy proofe of the Law (n this
particalar cafe, Littleton bete cítetb a cafe i 38.5.5. but (tig mifpzinted, Foz the Orta


ginal according to tbe truth ts. In the Boke of Affifes 58 E.3.p.23. and not placito 32. fog
therebe not fo many pleas in that pcare. Bnd after the exampie of I i:tleton, Boke Cafes are
principally to be cited fog deciding of cafes in queftion, and nor any gituate opinion, Tefte me-
ipfo. Wore (palle fato of the matter implycd in this Section in the next following,


cj 3 tierce cbofe
eft a entender,
Deis quel temps &
per quel temps 1e
claime que eft Dit cõ⸗
tinuall claimeferuc=
ta x aidera celup que
ff le claime # (cg
boites, Ct quant à
ceo e(t afcauoir, que
cclup que ad title dẽ⸗
ter, quant tl boict
faire on claime, fil
ofa approacher là


Self. 4.23.
LE 3. thing is to


know within what
time &by what time
theclaim which is faid
continuall claime fhall
ferue and aid him that
makeththe claime,and
his heires. And asto
this, it is to be vnder-
ftood, that hee which
hath title to enter,
when he will make his
claime, if hee dare ap-
proach the Landthen
BU:


€ ( ^ouient s luy da-
C ler & approcher


auxi pres, &c. By this
ít ſhould fame that bp the au⸗
thozitie of our Autijoz, tthe
Dilleiſee commeth as neere to
the Land as be dare, ac. and
maketh bis claime,this ſhould
be fuffictent, albeit hee benot
Sithin the biew,

And the great authoiftie
of the Woke (* ) it 9.H.4.
(being bp the Whole Court)
íg not agaínft this, fo that
cafeís put Shere there is no
Such feare, as here our Au⸗
thour mentioneth tn him that
makes the continual claime,


any


254.


39. Af. p. 33


(9) 9-845.


Lib.3.


(yr. A. 6.5 1. atreeth with
tur Aufer in this pris .


Vid S817


Wid. Se8.38 5.426.
9. H.4.5. 14. H. 4.36.
9.8.3.37. Tl. ('em.3 56.


357.367.
Mirra pap. 2. S. 18.
Britten, fel. 45.5. & 136.


‘Vid. Se. 335.


Cap . 7° )
and then hee that makes the
continuall clatme ought to be
Within the view of the land,
and therefore the autbozitp of
this boke, ag it is commonz
Jp conceiued, to not againft
the opinion of our Buthoz in
the point afozefaid. Wut then
itis further obtected, that the
fato boke is again another
opinion of our Authoꝛ inthis
Secion, viz. that ‘where
thercisno feare,€c. hee that
maketh a continuall clapme

ought to goe to the land 92
to parceli thereof to make his
clatme, andtherefoze in that
cafe he cannot make a claime
within the view e£ the land.


Of Continual] Claime.


terre, Dong tl content
aicra la terre ou à
parcel De ceo, a faire
fon claime, et fil no-
faft approcher la tre
pur Doubt ou pauoz
Bbaterie, ou maybe,
ou mot, Donques
coutent à lup Daler &
approcher auxypres
comeilofaft bers la
tette, ou parcel De
ceo.a faire fon claim̃.


Sedi. 422.


he ought to goe to the
Jand,or to parcell of it,
and make his claime,.
and if hee dare not ap-
proch the land for
doubt or feare of bea-
ting or mayming, or
death, then ought hee
to goe and approch as
necre as hee dare to-
wards the land or par-
cell of it to make his
claime.


To this itis anfwered, that Wherea continual claime ſhall deueft any eftate in anp other pers
fon tn any lands o; tenements, there, ag ithath bese faid, be that maketh tbe claime ought te
enter into the land 02 fome part thereef accozding totheopinion of ent Author : but here
the claime ts not to Deueſt anp cftate, but tobzing him that maketh itinto actuall pofleffion,
therca clatme Within the view fufficeth;as bpon a diſcent tbe heire haning the freehold in law


may claime land Swithin che view tobzing himfeifc into acuall poffe(tton, and in that fence is
the opinion of Hull and the Court tobe tntended. Et (ic in fimilibus. Wut pet the entrie (nte
fome patceli in the name of the reudue ts the fureft Say.


cp Eins lan, & le

tour. It is to
be obferue» that the Ha in
manp cafes bath iimitted a
pearcanda dap to be a legail
and conuenfent time fo? many


purpofes, As at the Common ^


Law bpon a fine of finall
indgement gtucnin a Hzit of
right the partie qrieucd had a
peare anb a bap to make
bis clayme. So the Sife
oz heire bath a peare anda
bap te boing an appeaic
of death. It a Willetne res
mained ín ancient Des
inefne a peare and a Dap
he tg priutledged. Ff a man


bee wounded 02 popfoneb; ec.
tric.of the Diffeife for his negligence had beene taken away. After iudgemen


Sed. 422.


€ ET fi fon ad⸗

uerſarie à oc⸗
cupíale terre, moꝛuſt
ſeiſie en fee,ou en fee
tatle Dcíng lan ct 1e
iour apꝛes tiel claim,
per queles tencméts
Difcendont a fon fits
come heire alup, bn-
core poit celuy que
fi le clatme entrer
fut le pofícflion le
beite,ac,


Nd if his aduer-

fary who occu-
pieth the land dieth
feifed in fee, or infee
taile within the yeare
anda day after fuch
claime, whereby the
lands difcend to his
fonne as heire to him,
yet may hee which
make the claime enter
vponthe poffeffion of
theheire,&c, |...


and dicth thereof within tbe peare and tbe Bap, ít xs felony.
425p the anctent aw (€. the Sfeoffee of a Dilleifoz had continneda peare anb a day, theen=


t gives ina


teall action, the Plaintife Mithin the peare and the bap map baue a Habere facias{eifinam,and
in an action of debt, ac.a Capias, Fieri facias,ag a Leuari facias. A pꝛotection (ball bee allowed
but foz a peare and a Bap and nolonger, and in many other cafes.

But this time of a.peare and a bap in cafeof continuallclatme is Guce our Authoꝛ $»zott
altered by the faid Statuteof 22.H.8.ca.33, a8 befoze tt appeareth,


Sed.


Lib. Of Continuall Claime, | Sei#.423.424. - 255


Set. 423.


€ MSS eutcett cas apzeg lan

æleiour que tiel claime
fuit fait, file pere Donques mo-
tutt feifi ademain procheine aps
lan tle iour,ou bn auter tour a=
pae8,ac, Donques ne poit celup
que fitt ie claüme entret:a put ceo
. fí celup que fiftle claime boit e-
ftte fure a touts temps que fon
entre ne Cerra toll per tiel Difcent
fc.il coutent a lup que Deins lan
ælciour apres le primer claime
fait,de faire vn autec claime en le
fozine auantdit, x deins lan a le
tourapzes le fecond claime fait,
De faire le tierce claime en meſm̃
le maneca Deins lan et Ic tour de
le tierce claime, de faire bu auter
claime, a t(fint oufter, ceffatca-
udir, de faite bn claime Deins
chefcun an et tour prochein aps
chefcun claime fait Durant Ia bie
fon aduerfarie, et Donques, à
quecunq; temps q fon aduerſa⸗
rie moꝛuſt ſeiſi fon entrie neferra
tolle pet nul tiel Difcent, Ct ticl
claim en tíel maner fait et pluis
communement paife et nofme
continual claune De lup que fit
leclaime, —


BY this cafe after the yeare

andthe day that fuch clayme
was made, if the father then died
leifed the morrow next after the
ycare and the day,or any other day
after,&c. then cannot hee which
made the claime enter: And there-
fore if hee which made the claime
willbe {ure atall times that his en-
trie fhall not be taken away by füch
difcent,&c. it behoueth him, that
withinthe yeareand the day after
the firft claame made, to make ano-
ther claime informe aforefaid, and
within the yeareand the day after
the fecond claime made, to make
the third claime inthe fame man-
ner, and within the yeare and the
day after the third claime to make
another claime, and fo ouer, that is
to fay, to makea claime within e-
uery yeare and day next after eue-
ry claime made during the life of
his aduerfarie, and then at what
time foeuer his aduerfarie dieth
feifed, his entrie fhall not be taken
away by any difcent. And fuch
claime in fuch maner made is moft
commonly taken and named conti-
nuallclaime of him which maketh
the claime,&c. ;


Cl Œ (s ta be obferucd, that the pearc anb the Bay hall befoacconntet, as the bap hereon
the Clatme was made fhall be accounted one : as fo example, BE the (Llame Were made

2, Dic Martii, that day fhall beaccounted foz one, foz Littleton faith tn the Section next
befoje ( after theclapme made ) and then the peare muſt end the firfk dap of March, and the


bay after is the fecond dap of March,


Se for the Computation of the peare, De anno bifextili, and ef the dap naturall anb art(-
ficíati, and otber parts of the peare, (a ) Bra&on, (b) Britton, and(c) Fleta excellent matter.


Sell. 424. PI


CNE vncore en le cas a=
2 uantbit , lou fon jen
vie


co the cafe aforefaid,
where his Aduerfarie dierh
i5? SIT 3


Vid Se&. 335.


(2) BraBi fe.264.344:359.
(b) nf :
(€) Fleta,lib. 6.6. 11.
Sratuse de annsBéfexts li,
21.4: 3. Dier 15. Elit. 335.


Lb Copy. Of continuall Claime.  Seéf.425,426.


Vs Sears.


ſarie moꝛuſt Deins lan a 1a tour
procheine apres le claime ceo eft
enlep bn continuall claime en⸗
tant que laduerſarie Dcíng lan a
le iour procheine apzes meime


. Jaclaime mozufr, Car il ne bee


foigne a celuy que fit fon claime
De faire afcun auter claüme, mes
a quel temps que tl boct Deing
melme lan ct tour, kc,


within the yeare andthe day next
afterthe claime, this is in Lawa
continual] claime, infomuch as his
aduerfarie within the yere and the
day next after the fame claime, -
dieth. For hee which made his
claime, needeth not to make any
other claime,but at what time hee
will within the fame ycare and
day,&c.


Œbis te enfdent,


Section 425.


Cem ſi laduerſary foit diſ⸗

ſeilie deins lan et le tour a⸗

pres tielclaime , ale diſſei⸗
foy ent mogutt feiffe Dcíng lan
et le tour, ac, tiel mozant feifie
tic grieuera mp celup que fitt le
claime mes que il poit enter. ac,
Cat quecunque foit que mozutt
feifie being lan et le iour ꝓchein
apres tícl claim fait,ceo ne grie⸗
uera my celup que titt le claime,
mes que il poit enter, ac, coment
que fueront plufozs mozant fei-
fie, ct plufozs Difcentg deins m̃
lan et le tour, tc,


Lfo if the Aduerfarie be dif-

feifed within the yeare and

the day after fuch claim, and
the Diffeifor thereof dieth feifed
within the yeareand the day, &c.
fuch dying feifed fhall not grieue
bim which made the claime, but
that he may enter, &c. for whofoe-
uer he bee that dieth feifed within
the yeare and the day after fuch
claime made, this fhall not hurt
him that made the claime, but that’
he may enter, &c.albeit chere were
many dying: feifed, and many dif-
cents within the fame ycare and
day,&c.


€ H Cre (t appeareth, That the continuall clalme doth not onclp extend to the ſirſt Diſſei⸗
for in Swhofe poffeTion it Mas made, butto any other TD i(icifoz that bictb feífeb within
the peare and dap after the continuall claíme made. Bnd whereas our Æuthoz fpcae
keth of a fecond difletfoz, ec. herein 18 ike wile iplied not onelp Pbatozs and Intruders, but
the Feoftees o? Dones of the Dilletfors, Abatozs, 02 Jutruders, and any other Jf coffee o2 do⸗
n& immediate 02 mediate dying fe(feb Within the peare and day, of fuch continual clatme made,


Setlion 426.


€ eve ſi home foít diffeifie,
Jet le Diſſeiſoꝛ mozuft feifie
deins lan et P iour prochein


Lfo if a manbe diſſeiſed, and
the diffeifor dieth feifed with-
inthe yeareand day next after the


apres le diſſeiſin fait, per queleg Diffeifin made, whereby the Te-
Cenements dilcendont a fon nements difcendto his heire, inthis
heire


Lib. 2-
beite , en cett cale lentrie le Diſ⸗
feifec eft toll, car lanetie tour
que aidroit le Diſſeiſee en ticl
cafe, ne ferra pris De temps de
titt Dentre a lup accruc,mes tat-
folement De temps Del claim pet
lup fait en le manner auauntbít,
et pur cel caufe il ferroit bone p
tiel Diffeifee, pur faite fon clatme
en auxy breue temps que tl puil⸗
foit apzes le diſſeiſin, ac.


Of continual] Claime.


cafe the entrie of the diffeifee is ta-

ken away , for the yeare and day
which fhould ayd the Diffeifee in
{uch cafe, fhall notbee taken from
the time of title of entrie accrued
vnto him, but onely from the time
of the claim made by him in man-
ner aforefaid. And for this caufe it
fhall be good for fuch diffeifee to
make his claime inas fhort time as
he can after the Diffeifin,&c.


€ Dis in cafe of a 3Di(Tcifoz is now holpen by the Statute made Ance Littleton Wrote
4x ag hath been faid ; Foz tf the Diſſeiſoz die feifed Within fine peares after the Dilteifin,

though there bee nocontínuall claime made, tt all not take away the entrp of the
Difletice, but after the fiuc pearca, there mut bee fuch continuallclatme as toas at the common
Law : Wut that Statute ertendeth nottoanp jreoffee 02 Donæ of the Difletfos immediate 07
mediate, but tbcp remaine fill at the Common Law, ag hath ben fato,


Sect. 427.


€ | Cem fi tiel Diſſeiſoꝛ occu-

plalaterre pec cl, ang, ou
per plufozs ans fans aſcũ claim
fait per le Diffeifee, tc, €t le Diſ⸗
fcifee per petit (pace Dcuaunt le
moꝛt del Diſſeiſor fait bn claim
en le fozme auantdit, {i tint fo2-
tunatt que deins Ian et le tour a=
pres tiel claime le Dilleiloz mo-
ruſt ac:lentrie Ie diſſeiſee e(t con-
geable, ac, et pur ceo tl ferroit
bone pur tiel bone que ne itt
claime que ad bone title Dentrie,
quant tlopet que fon aduerfarie
giftlanguifbment , De faire fon
claime,ac,


JA if fuch Diffeifor occupi-
eth the lands fortie yeares, or
more yeares , without any claime
made by the Diffeifee,&c. andthe
Diffeifeea little before the death
ofthe Diffeifor makes a claime in
the forme aforefaid, if fo it fortu-
neth, that withinthe yeare and the
day after fuch claime,the Diffeifor
die,&c. theentrie of the Diffeifee
is congeable, &c. And therefore
it fhall bee good for fuch a man
which hath not made claime, and
which hath good title of entrie,
when he heareth that his aduerfary
lieth languifhing, to make his
claime,&c.


€ 18 Dis is euident enough, and in refped ef that Which hath ben apo , needeth nottobe


968.428.


explained,


© T Lem ficome eft


Dit en les cafes the


mifes,lou home where a man hathtitle


Lfo as it is faid in


in bis large fence te
include a right.


€ Alcan auter sitle,
f.


€ He title (g taken


cafes put


$66.427,428.


t


256


32. N. 8.64.33.
"Ui. $e/1.385.422.


Liba.


Vike 650. and £45 dre.


(ap.7. Of continuall Claime.


dc. Here is implied
Abatozs o; Intruders, and
not onelp their Xo((Teífoze but
the feoffes 0: Dones of
Difleifozs, abatozs, o? Intru⸗
berg, o; any other fo long ag
the entrie is congeable,


« I Cemales dits Pꝛeſidẽts
poies fcauet (mon fits)Deut


ad title Dentre pur
caute Dun Diffeifin,
ac, Melme la Ley
eft lou home ad droit
Dentre per caufe De
atcun auter title, ac,


Sel. 429.


866.429.430.
of ehtrie by caufe ofa
Diffeifin,&c. the fame
Law is where a man
hath rightto enter by


caufe of another title,
&c.


TAM of the fayd forefaying


thou mayft know (my fonne)


chotes, Un eft, lou home ad
title Dentre fur bn Cenant en le
taile, fil fift bn tiel claim ala fre,
Donques eft leftate Gaile defeat,
car cei claime eft come entre fait
per luy, et eft De mefine leffect en
‘Ley, ficome il fuiſſoit fur mefins
tenements, et bit ent en mefing
les (enements come Deuant eft
bit, Et donques quaunt le Te⸗
nant enletatle immediate puts
tiel claime continua fon occupa-
tion en les tenements, ceo eft bri
Difleifin fait De imefmes les te-
nements, à celup que fi(t. tícl
claime, & fic per confequens , 1e
tenant adonques ad fee fimple,


two things. One is where a man
hath title to enter vpona Tenant in
Taile, if he maketh fuch a claime
to the land, then is the eftate tayle
defeated, for this claime is as ant
entrie made by him, andis of the
fame effect in Law, as if he had bin
vponthe {ame tenements, and had
entred into the fame, as before i$
fayd. And then whenthe tenant in
Tayle immediately after fuch
claime continue his occupation in
thelands, thisis a Diffeifin made
of the fame Tenements to him
which made füch claime,and fo by
confequent the Tenant thenhatha
Fee fimple.


€ Prefidents. Chis thould be Precedents, and fo (8 the oziginalt,
Bnd this agrecth With rhe rtabt fence of Littleton.
And here it appeareth, Chat a continual clatme, Which to an entrie in Law, is ag ſtrong as


an entrie in Deed,


Title deentrie. Pere Title de entrie ig takeninthelarge fence


fo right of entrte.


Secon 430.


€ | fecond chofe eft que att-
— gy fouent que il que ad
dzoit dentre fait tiel lame a ceo
nient contrifteant fon aduerſary
continua fon occupation, augp
foucnt laduerfary fait togt & diſ⸗
ſeilin a celup que AE le claim, Et
pur


A, He fecond thing is, Thatas of-
tenas hee which hath right of
entrie maketh fuch claime,and this
notwithftanding his aduerfary con-
tinue his occupation, fo often the
Aduerfarie doth wrong and Diffei-
fin to him which made the claime,


Lib.


fes Damages, ac,
€


Of Continuall Claime.


oN cel caute auxy fouent poít ce-
up que Git m le claime pur cbef-
cuntiel toat a diſſeiſin fait a lup,
autt br beiefe De trig, Quare
claufum fregit, &c. et recouera


uer his dammages,&c.


Œrcbp alfo it appeareth, tbat an entr in La is equíualont toan entrp ín ded,
€ Accra breue de trefpaffe, quare claufum fregit & recowera és


damages. Fhe Diſſeiſee {ball baue an Action of treſpaſſe a-


gaint the Ditleifoz, and recouer his Dammages fo


2 the irk entrie Swithout anp regreile , but


after regreſſe he map haucan Baton of trefpale Sith a Continuando and recouer afiveli £02
all the meane occupation as fos tbe firbentry, Bnd ere note that Littleton doth here inciude


Cofts Within dammages, FC,


€(5s il poit auet

, bn breife furle
ftatute le 130p R.F fe-
cond, fait lan Dc for
raigne 5, fupplant p
fon breife , que fon
aduerlarie auoit ent
enfsterres ou tene⸗
ments celuy que fift
le claime , ou fon en-
trp nc fuit pas Done
per la ley, ac, a pet
ticlaction il recoue-
ta (c8 Dammages,
&c, Ct file cafe fuit
tiel, que laduerfarie
occupiat les tene-
ments oue force ct
arines,ou oue multi-
tube De gents a tẽps
De tiel claime,zc.tm=
mediate apzes mel-
miele claime, poit ce=
luv» que fittle claime,
put chefcun tiel fait
auct on betefe De for⸗
cible entrie, et reco-
uerafes treble Dam-
Mages, ac,


Se&. 431.


OK hee may hauea
Writ vpon the
ftatute of R.2. made in
the fifth — his
Raigne ; {uppofing b
his 4 his Ade
uerfarie had entredin-
to the lands or tenc-
ments of him that
made the Clayme,
where his entry was
Was not giuen by the
Law, &c. and by this
action he fhallrecouer
his dammages, &c. &
if the cafe were fuch
that the aduerfarie oc-
cupied the tenements
with force and armes
or withamultitude of
people at the time of
fuch claime, &c. im-
mediately after the
fame claime may hee
which made the claim
for eueryfüch act haue
a Writ of forcible en-
trie & fhall recouer his
treble dammages, &c.


€ 3 Peter


$.R.2.cap.7.
€ Per siel
attion il reconera fes
dammazes.


Chis ts to bee bnderfteov
that bee fball recouer damma⸗
ges for tbe firlt toncíous en-
trp, but not fo) the meane
profits inthis action thongh
be mave a regrefle. And here
notetbat alfo be ſhall reconer

coſts of faítecxpenfz litis;
which Littleton Doth include
Within thefe words ( damma⸗
ges) &c.


€ Dammaczes,dam-


na in the Common
Law hath a fpeciall Ganíficaz
tion fos the recompence that
is giuen by the Bury tothe
35laíintífe 02 Defendant £02
the Swiong the Defendant
hath done onto bí,


¶ Mulbitude. Dne
02 moie map Commit a fo2ce,
three 02 moze map commit an
tnlasofuil a(femblp, a riot oz
a rout. À multitude here ſpo⸗
Ben of(agfomc haue fatd) mak
be tern 02 moze, Multitudinem
decem faciunt. And fo (fap
tbe? ) tt is ſatd, degrege ho-
minum. Wut J could neuer
tead (t reftrainedD bp tbe
Common Law to anp cer=
tatne Humber , brit left tothe
Biferetion of tbe Judges,


€ 77 bricfe de forcible entrie & recouera [es treble dammages. Qj bia
&tt Bore


Sed. 431;
And for this caufe fo often may he
which makes the fame claime for
euery fuch wrong & diffeifin done
vnto him,haue a Writ of trefpaffe,
Quare claufum fregit, cc. andreco-


257


37-H.6.35. 34. H. 6.30.
13. H.7.15. 10. H.6.14.
2E, 4.18, 21.£.4.5.24.


10. H,7.37. K&jlvg id.
$.R.ne P7.


3.£,4.24.b. 9.2.4.4.
16, H.7. 6.0.


Lib.:
15.5.
8. H.6.cap.9. 3. E.4.19.24.
F.N.B,248. 11. E. 4. 11.6.
6.H.7.13.5.32,H.6.37.
19. H. 6. R erifter. 97.
22.H.6.57.F.N.B 242.4


10. H.7,12.


33: H.6.20.


Cap-7.


Of continuall Claime. 568.432.433.


tait is grounded bpon tbe ftatute of 8. H.6. anditeth either where one entreth with force , i
Swbere be entreth peaceablp and detayneth it with force va where he entreth by Éogce , and detets
neth ft by fozcc And in this ation without any regrefle the Platntife Mall recouer treble
Dammages, ag Well for the mcane occupation as for the ſirſt entry by force of the ſtatute. Bud
albeit he (ball recouer treble Dammages,pct (ball be recoucr cofts Which fballbe treblepalfo, ©

One may commíta forctble entrp ag hath benc faid, in refpect of the armour o2 Weapons
Sohich he hash that are not bfnallp bozne, oz tf he Boe fe biolence, and thgeats to the terrour of
another, And it thaee 02 foure qoe to make a Forctble entry, albeit one alone fe the dtolence, all
arc gilcte of force. FE tbe Wafer commeth With a greater number of fernants then vſually
attend on him ít tg à korcible entry,

It is tobe vnderſtood that there ig a force implyed in Law, as euerp Treſpaſſe and Reſcous
and DiffetGn implyeth a force, anb ig vi &armis, andthere (e an aduall £ojce, ag With wea⸗


pong, number of perfons, ac. and Shen an entry ts made Sith fuch aduall force, an action


Doth lic bpon the fatd ſtatute. Spee before moze of force and armes, cat. 249.


Sechon 432.


€ [cen ileft a beier, (i le fer-

uant dun Home que a title
Denter, poít per le commanDe-
ment fon Matter faire continu-
all claime pur fon Maſter ou
non,


AL it is to bee feene, if the
Seruant of a man who hath ti-
tle to enter, may by the comman-
dement of his Mafter make Con-
tinuall Claime for his Mafter or
not.


This needeth no erplication.


Section 433.


€ E T i femble que en atcung


cafes il poit ceo faire, cat

fil pet fon commandement bient
a atcua parcel 8 la terre a la fait
claime, ac, en le nofme fon 9pa-
fer, ceft claime eft affets bone
put fon Matter, pur ceo queil
fait tout ceo que fon Maſter co-
utent faire ou Deuoit faire entiel
cag, tc, Bury (ile Maker dit a
fon feruant, que il ne ofatt vener
alaterre, neafcun parcel dela
tette, put faire Con claime, ac, ct
que il ne ofaft approcher pluts
prochein alaterve fozfque a tiel
lieu appell Dale, et contmanda
fon feruant Daler amefine le lieu
De Dale, et la faite on claime
put lup, ac, fi le feruant iffint
fait, ac, ceo femble auxy bone
laine pur fon Maſter, —
on


PX Nd it feemeth that in fome ca-
{es he may doe this. For if he
by his commandement commeth
to any parcell of the Land, and
there maketh claime, &c. in the
name of his Mafter, this claimeis
good enough for his Mafter, for
that he doth al] that which his Má-
fter fhould or ought to doe infüch
cafe, &c. Alfo if the Mafter faith
to his feruant that hee dares not
come to the land,norto any parcell
of itto make his claime, &c. and
that hee dare approch no neererto
the landthen to fuch a place called
Dale, and command his feruant to
gocto the fame place of Dale, and
there make a claime for him, &c.
iftheferuant doth this, &c. this al-
fo feemetha good claime for his
Mafter, as if his Mafter were


Lib.s. Of continuall Claime.


fon Wafer ia fuit Eproper pet-
fon, pur ceo que le feruant aft
tout ceo que fon Malter ofaft et
Deuoit faire per la ley en tiel
cale,zc,


| € Ere tt appeareth that Where th: feruant doth all that Which he ts commanded, ant
H which hie Watter ought to doe, there tt is ag lufficient as t£ his Waker did (t him⸗
Life (02 the ruic tg, Qui peraliuin facit per feipfum facere videtur.


€ Per commandement. BE an infant oz anp man of full age aue
anp vight of @ntrie into any lands, aup ſtranger in the name and to the bfc 0€ the infant oi
man of full age map enter into tbe lands, and this regularly thall veſt the lands tn them with⸗
out anp commandement precedent oz agreement fubfcquent, (*) Qut ti a Dilleifoz leute a
finc, with Pꝛoclamation according tothe ſtatute an eftranger Without a Commandenent
paccedent 07 an agreement fnbfequent Within the hue pearcs cannot enter tn the name of the
DM ilitfe to auoide the fine. And that refoiation was grounded bpor che conttruction of the
Statute of 4-H.7.cap.24. Wut an aſſent ſubſe quent Within the fue yeares Mould bee fufficiz
ent; Cmniscuim ratihabitio retrotiahitur, & mandato æquiparatur, ag bath bene fatd,


C Auxi filemaffter dit a fonferuant que ilb me ofafl cre. Bere it ap-
pcareth that where the feruant purfuctl the commandement of bis Maſter, and doth all that
Sbich his Matter durft and ought to doc bp the Law, thists fufficient. Bnd although the
Matter feareth moze chan the fcrnant, 9; admit that the ſeruant hath no feare at all, pct if hee


Seël.434.
there inhis proper perfon, for that
the feruant did all that which his
Matter durft, and oughtto doe by
the lawin fuch a cafe,&c.


gocth as farreas big after Durand ag hecommanded, itis ſuſficient. And this ts impli⸗


ed ín tbíg Section.


€ AS? fí home

foit cp lane
guifbant, ou cp de⸗
creppte.que tl te poit
per aul maner bener
a le terre .neaafeun
parcel 5 peclou ſi vn
tcclutc (oit, q ne poit
pet caufe De fon 02-
Dec aler hors De fa
meafon, Si tiel ma-
net De perfor com-
maunda fon feruant
Daler et faire claime
put lup + tiel feruant
nc ofatt aler a le fre.
ne a afcun parcel De
ceo pur Doubt De ba-
terp, maphem, ou
mo2t, ac, et pur cel
caute ticl ſeruãt biét
auxy pres a la terre
come il ofa pur ticl


Sed. 434.


Lfo ifaman be fo

languifhing, or fo
decrepite that he can-
not by any meanes
come to the land nor
toany parcell of it, or
if. there bee a reclufe
which may not by rea-
fon of his order goe
out of his houfe, if
fuch manner of perfon
commaunde his fer-
uant to goe and make
claime for him, and
fuch feruant dare nor
goeto the land nor to
any parcell of it for
doubt of beating,
mayhem,or death, &c.
and for this caufe the
feruant commeth as
neere tothe land as he
dareth for fuch doubt

Gtt-


C Œgularlp it is trae

that Where a man

Deth leffc then the
Commandement o? 22utbozís
tp committed onto him there
(the Commandement 02 Bus
thority being not purfued )
the atis botve, Bnd where
aman doththat which be ts
autbonfco to Doe and moze,
there tt is aoo for that whith
ts Warranted, and voide fog
the reſt, pet both thefe rules
Yaue diners exceptions and
limitation.

Foꝛ the fir Littleton here
puttetl) a cafe Where the fere
nant doth le(fe then he ts com-
manded, and pet tt faffícety)
fo; that Impotentia excufat
legem, for feng the matter
cannot, and the feruant dare
not enter into the land, tt fufa
ficeth that he come ag nere ta
theland as be bare,

FE a man makes a Letter
of 3 ttozncp todeliner ſeiſin to
I.S. bpon Condition, andthe
Attorney delisereth it abfos
lute, this ts boite : and fé
fome hold t£ the warrant bc
abfolute, and be Beituereth
fetin byon Condition, the

Liuery


258


y. E. 3. 60. a. b.
45.€.3."Releafe 28.

45. E. 3. fit. B. es/e 589.

16. E. 3.62.per. j
DUAL pti. 39. 4 fF. p.18.
10.H.7.12. 4. :
31. H. 8. tif eutr (Cong.

€x tit, Fanxifier recouery 194
(*) Lil. 9 fo.196.4.

the Lo, Awdelyas cafe.


gr H.4.5.
12. MMaq. 36.4059,


Lib.3.


Se before Sef. o.


46-E.3.Pesition 18.


33- 3.0.9.
43. E. 5.8.5. 30.6.


Cap-7-
Linerp ts oíbr.
¶ Pur battery, may-


hem ou mort. Seethe
fecond part of the Inſtitutes
W.2.cap.49. a Dfuerfitp be⸗
tween the making of an n=
tric oz Claime, and the anops
dance of an Act 02 Deve,

€ Auterment le ma-
fer ferroit en tre[grand
michiefe.  Argumen-
tum ab inconuenienti eft vali-
dum in lege, quialex non per-
mittit aliquod inconueniens.
And ag hath benc often ob=
ſerued betoze, Nihil quod eft
inconueniens eft licitum.


¶ Reclufe. Reclu-
fus, Heremita, feu A nachorita,
focalled bp the order of bis
religion be is fo mured o? ſhut
bp, Quod folus femper fit, &


in claufura fua (edet ;.and can nener come ont of bis place. Scorfim enim & extra conuerfatio-


Of Continuall Claime.


and maketh the claim, |


Doubt, ct fait Eclat,
ac, pur fon matter il
femble que tiel clair


pur fon “patter efl


affets fort, a bon en
ley, Cat auterment
fon matter ferroit en
trefgranD mifchiefe,
cac il bien poit eftre
que tiel perfon à eft
languifbant , Decre=
pite, ou reclufe, ne
oit trouver afcun ſer⸗
uant que ofaft aler à
1a tert, ne afcun pat-
cel de cel pur faite le
claime pur Iup,ac,


Setl. 435:


&c. for his mafter, it
feemeth that {uch


claime for his maſter


is ftrong enough and
good in law. For o-
therwife his mafter
fhould bee in a very
great mifchiefe, for it
may wellbe that fuch
perfon which is ficke,
decrepit , or reclufe
cannot finde any fer-
uant which dare goto
the land or to any par-
cell of it to makethe
claime for him,&c.


nem ciuilem hoc profeffionis genus femper habicat : Mote here, albett the Reclufe oz Anacho=
rite bc (but vp himfctfe, fo ag he by his ogder ig met to come out in perfon, pet toanoide a Wile
cent, he mutt command one to make clatine, and {uch a Recluſe Hall alwayes appearebp At⸗
toznep (n fucb cafes obere others muft appeare tn pyoper perfon, Impotestia enim excufat


legem,


PERS ——


Sec.435.


CYA Es le matter ð tiel ſer⸗

i V2 uant foit Debone fane,et
voit, ct ofatt bien aler a les tene⸗
ments,ou a parcel De ceo De faire
fon claime,zc, fi tiel Matter có-
manda fon feruant Daler à afcuti
parcel Dela terre a faire claime
put luy, et quant E feruant ef an
alant De faire le commandement
De fon Matter, tlope per le boy
tielx chofes que tt ne ofatt bener
aatcun parcel Dela terre put fait
le claime pur fon Matter, et pur
sel caufe tl bient auxy pres la fre
come il ofatt pur Doubt De most,
ct la fait claime pur (on gipattet,
et en le no(me de fon mafter,3c.
il ſemble que le Doubt en Ie leper


tiel cafe ferroit, ſi tiel claime a=


uailera fon Maſter, ou nemp,
14 ‘pur


Vt if the Mafter of fuch fer-
uantbecin good health, and


can and dare well goe to the lands -


or to parcell of tt to make his
claime,&c. if fuch Mafter com-
mand his feruant to goe to any par-
cell of the land to make claime for
him, and whenthe feruant is in go-
ing to doe the commandement of
his Mafter, he heareth by the way
fuch things as he dare not come to
any parcellof the land to make the
claime for his Mafter, and there-
fore hee commeth as neere to the
land as he dare for doubt of death,
and there maketh claime for his
mafter,and in the name of his Ma-
fter,&c. It feemeth that the doubt
inlaw in fuch cafe fhall be whether
fuch claime fhall auaile his Mafter


d


0


Lib.3. Of Continuall Claime. 598.436.437. 259


put ceo que Ie feruant ne (E tout. or not, for that the feruant did not
ceo que fon Maſter al temps de all that which his Mafter at the
fon commandement ofat faite, time of his commandement durft


— f, Quzrc.


haue done,&c. Quere.


CT: conttnuall clatme (s botde, fo? that the ferant doth leſſe then that which is erpellp
cominanoded, and there ig no impotencte o2 feare in the Malter. f


Ci'Tem atcüs ont

Dit que jou Home

ef en priſon, ct eft

diſſeilie et le diſſeiſor
moꝛuſt ſeiſie Durant
tetemtips q̃ le diſſeiſee

eft eii pꝛiſon, per que

les tenements Difcé-

Dont al heire Del DiC-

feifour, is ont Dit,

que cco ne noiera mp

le diſſeilee que ef en

prifon, mes que il bũ

poit enter, nient ob=

| ftant tiel Difcent, put
ceo que il ne puiſſoit
fait continual claim,
Bunt il fuit en pzi-


+


. Sell. 436.


AI fome haue

{aid that where
aman isin prifon and
is diffeifed, and the
diffeifor dieth feifed
during the time that
the diffeifee is in pri-
fon, whereby the te-
nements difcend to
the heire of the diffei-
for,they haue faid that
this fhal! not hürt.the
diffeifee which is: in
prifon, but that he wel
may enter, notwith-
ftanding fuch adifcét,
becaufe hee could not
make continuall claim
when he was in prifon.


€ ant homeeſt en


p
prifon dr eft dif
Scifi. For if he bee píf-


fcífeo Sohen bec is at large,
ano the dticent tg caft during
the time ot bis tmpzifonment,
this difcent (ball binde bim.
Excufatur autem quis quod
clameum fuum non appofue-
rit, fi tempore litigij in prifo-
na detentus fuerit ita quod vc-
nire non poffit, nec mittere,
quia nulli vertitur in dubium,
& vbi cadem ratio & idem
jus erit, ideo videtur quód exe
cufari debet, quis fi per vim
maiorem, vel per fraudem,
extra prifonam detentus fue-
rit; ita quod venire non poffi
necmittere, dum tamen hoe
per certa iudicia probari pos
terit.


QU Per ceo que il
ne poet faire continual
claime quant il fuit en


py Here it is to be obferueb by the authority of. Littleton that
ts notenfozcedtn this cafe bp Law to doe (t bp his feruant oz anp ether bp bis Warrant oz
commandement, £o? things done bp deputie are felvome Well done, but euery man Will fe his


owne bufiteTe moft effecualip ſpeeded and perfozmed,
The reafon that a man tmpzifoned fpa! not be bound,in
entendment o£. Law ye is kept ( ag it (e pꝛeſumed in


and that t map be once fpoken foz all,
this and the tke cafes ig, fox that bp ths
Lai) Without intelligence of things


Abzoade, and aifo that he hath wot itbertie to qoe at large to make entrie oz claime, oz feeke


counfell. And fonote a diuerfty bet weene a 1Beclu


man tn prifon,


*A AES lopinion de touts les
€ M iE VII
Que file diſſeilin toít auant len-
Prifonment coment que P moat
feifie foit; il effcant en le pzifon,


Iuftices.


fon entrie eft toile,


9.H,7 .fo.24.b.


Sed, 457.


5,7. fuit,


fe ho might bane intelligence, and a


Vt the opinion of all the Iufti-
ces,P.11.H.7. was that if the
diffeifin bee before the imprifon-
ment, although the dying feifed
be, he being in the prifon,his entry


is taken away,
[Bis is of a nes» addition,and miftaben,foz here (e ne Such opinton,P.11,H,7 but tt 64,
b


Œtt 3


* 1i


9. H.2,34. Pl (om,36e,


Bratton, lib. 5.fal.436.
Britton, fol. 316.5.
Fleta,lib.6.cap.5 3.53.
dr lib 6.64.7. & 14.


Tl. Ca. 360, i5
Stowells cafs.


ib

Lib.
Mirror cap, 3. Bri'ton fe.21.
Fleta lib.1. cap.38. & lib.z.
en. 53. ‘Bratton (5.3.
2.6.4.1. 4.£. 4.10. 31 ,E.4.
73. 11 H 5.5. a1. H.6.50.
9. H,4.3. 31. H.6.Utlary 36.
7. H.6. 27. 21. E, 4.88.21.
£.4.37. 18. E.3. sllenage 47
21.E.4.37.. 33. H.6.45.16.
4.€.3.Usllein 41.

ASH.A 19, 11.H,4.34 Je
Eg. Dyer 193. 2.£02:176
5. Eliz. bid. 31 3. 19. H. 6.3.
8.H.6.37. 37. H.6.19.


8.H.4.7. 31. H.7.13. 19H.
6.58. 20. H.6.10. 21.H.6.
$4. 22 A.6.18.16 39. H.6.
1. 33. H.6. 51.45. 38. H.6.
33. 21.£.4. 94. 21.H.7.33
$.H.5.1. 12. H. 6.8. 11.H.
6.65 1 g. x, E. 43.27. HR. 2.


38. Af. pl.17. Vid. Se8.439.


5.E.3.50.6. 7. H 6.38.


Fleralib.6.cap.67. & 24
^Vid.W.3.««p. 48 and theexpo~
Jfition thereof, 2. part Init,

4. E.a. D ifeoit 51.


Bratton Lib. 5. Tra, 3.
Fletali. 6 ea.7. 14. 3. H.&, 4h
38.E.3.5. 31.H.6 "Barre.cé
I2.H.4.13.. 50.€.3.9.
3.H.6.48. 3 H. 4.5.
$.H.7.3. F.N.'B.7.
BraPen lib. 4 fel. 367 169.
Glen lib. Y .aap.8.38. 8.6.11,
44 H. 5. Challenge. 153.

Br, Sauer. Def. 45.


(4p.7.


€ ]z reuerfera tiel vt-

lagarie. Nota, the
oziginiall tg, Reucrfera tiel vt-
Jagaï per Bricfe de Error, and
fo (t ould be amended: for
Dutlasortes niap be reuerled
two manner of Sapes,viz-by
Pica, oy bp wꝛit of Erroz.
Gy 391ca, When the Deken⸗
Dant comn.ctb tn bpon the Ca-
pias vtlagatum, &c. bec map
bp plea renerfe the fame fox
matters apparant, as in rcs


Of continuall Claime.


«rr aurp fi tiet
f pe eft en pri⸗
fon (oit otlage in Ac⸗
tion De debt, ou tref-
pale ou en appear De
Bobberic. ac, tl reuer=
fera tiel btlagaríc
enuers luy priounce,
ac,


3


S08.437,438.


! Nd alfo if hee
A which is in prifon

be outlawed inan A-
&ion of Debt or Trek
paffe, or inan Appeale


of Robberie, &c. he.


fhall reuerfe this out-
lawrie pronounced a-
gainft him,&c.


{ped of a Superfedeas, D mífTiorof Prꝛoceſſe, Wartance, oz other matter apparant in the Re⸗
Eod and vd tn tbefc cafea fome hold, That in another Corme the Defendant is driuen te hig


matt of Erroz.


15 ut £o? any matters in fat,ag Death ,tmp2tfonment,fernice of the king, éc.he is drinento hig
101ít of Erroz, vnlelle ít bein cafe of Felonie, and there in fauorem vitz he map plead tt.

Wut albeit tmpztfonment be a good caufe to reucrfcan Outlawꝛie, pet tt mult be by procelle
of Haw in inuitum, and not bp confent orcouin, for fuch impzifonment Mall not ayepd the
D utlaiwzte; becaufe bpon the matter it (g his owne ad.


D 7 $ ts evident
€ "T eco.


Per Briefe
derror. Foꝛ hee (ball
haue no Sorte of Diſceit, be⸗
caufe thefummongs was ac-
cording to the Haw of the
land, by Summoners and
dictong, amo the land taken
tute the ikings band bp the
Wernoz,

@ Per default. De-
fault(g a french er, anb
defalta (gd legallp taken for
Non⸗apparance in Court.
There bec diuers caufes als
lowed by Law for faning a
mans default, as fir bp Im⸗
puforment, Sbercof Littleton
bere fpeaketh. 2- Per inunda-
tionem aquarum. 3. Per tem-
peftatem. 4. Per pontem fra-
&um. 5. Per nauigium fub-
ftra&tum per fraudem petentis,
noncnim dcbet quis fe pericu-
lis & infortunijs gratis expo-
nere, vel fubiacere. 6. Per mi-
norem aetatem. 7. Per defen-
fionem fummonitionis per Le-
gem. 8. Per mortcm Attorna-
ti fi tenensin tempore non no-
uit. 9.Si petens cffoniatus fit.


Seélion 438.

Uxy ( burc-
€ A coucrie foit p
Default vers tiel q cft
en prifon,il auoidera
le tudgement p brieke
De Crroz,pur ceo que
il fuit en priſon al
temps Dele Default
fait,ac, Ct pur ceo à
tielg matters De Re⸗
cord ne nopet celup


que eft Epzifon, mes


que tis ferront reuer=
ſes, at. amulto forti-
ori, (d femble que bn
matter cn fait, 8, tiel
Difcent etoe quant tl
fuit en priſon ne lup
tiopeca,ac, fpecialmt
put ceo que tine putt-
foit aler 9028 Dc pri-
fon pur fatte contís
nuall claime,#c,


ATP if a recouerie
bec by default a-
againft fuch a oneas is
in prifon, he fhal auoid
the iudgement by a
Writ of Error,becaufe
he was in prifon atthe
time of the default
made, &c. And for that
fuch matters of Re-
cord fhal not hurt him
which is in prifon, but
that they fhall bee re-
uerfed,&c.4 multe for
tiori, it feemeth that a
matter in fact, s. fuch
difcent had when hee
was in prifon, fhall not
hurt him,&c.efpecial-
ly feeing he could not
goe out of prifon,
to make continuall
claime, &c.


10. Si placitum mittaturfinedie. 11. Per Breue de Warrantia Diei. But ücheneffe ( ag one
holds) is no caufcof ſauing a Defanit;becaufe it may bo.fo artificialip comtertritcb,tbat (tatis


not be knoiwne,


Record.


L


Lib.z OfcontinuallClaime. — 502.439.


¶ Record. Recordum ig à memoꝛiall 03 remembꝛance in Rolles
of Parchment, of the proceedings and Ads of a Court of Juſtice Which hath power to bolo
plea according tothe courfe of the Common La, of reall oz mixt Actions, 02 of Actions quare
vi & armis, 02 Of perfonail Actions, thereof the debt 02 Dammage amounts to fortte Mhillings,
93 aboue, Which Wecall Courts of Recopd, and arecreated bp Parltament, Letters Patents,
92 Pꝛeſcription.

Ft is aptip deriued of Recordari, which is to keepe in memozte 02 reco20 , ag tt (e fatd, Quod
dicere nihil aliud cft quam recordari,and {n thefame fence the 35 oct bleth tt, Si rite audita recor-
dor. Wut legallp Records arc refrained to the d olles of fuch oncip ag are Courts of Recoꝛd,
and not the Kolles of inferiour, noz of any other Courts which proceed nor fecundum legem
& confuctudinem Angliz. And the Rolles being the Records o2 memoztalls of the Judges of
the Courts of Record, tmpozt in tbem fach intontrollable credit and bcrític , as thep admit no
auerment, pica, o2 pzofc to tbc contraríe, And if {uch a Recoꝛd be allcbgeb, anb tt be pleaded,
Mbat there ts no fuc) Recosn, tt fbali be tríco onelp by it ſelfe: and the reafon hereof is appa-
sant, fo? otherwife (as our old Authozs fay, and that truly) there Mould neuer be anp end of
controncrfies which [boulo beinconuentent, «Df Courts of Recozd pou map readin mp Re-
ports : but pet during the © rme wherein any indictall at (s done,the Recoꝛd remaincth tn the
breft of the Judges of the Court, and in thetr rememb2ance, andrherefoze the 1B olleis altera⸗
‘bie During that Cerin,as the Judges thal direct, but When that Cerm is paft, then the Record
4s inthe Bolle, and admitterh no alteration aserment, oa proofe to the contrarie.

FE a Grant bp Letters Patents onder the great Seale be pleaded and ſhewed korth the ad⸗
Hers partic cannot picad Nul tiel Record, fog that it appeares to tbc Court that there is ſuch a
tecozd:but inasmuch as ft (g in nature ofa coueiance, the partie map dente the operation therof,
therefoze he map plcab Nonconceffit, and proue tn euidence that the hing had nothing tn the
thing granted, o2 tbe like, andfo it was adiudged. But to returne to Littleton: what then >
bail a man that t$ in pzifon be pzintledged from Suits o2 Datlawites ? Nothing leſſe, for
it the Tenant o2 Defendant bec in paifon , hee Hall bpon motion bp ozder of the Court, vee
brought to the Warre, and citheranfWer accozding to Law, og elfe the fame beingrecozded, the
Law (ball proceed againtt him, and he fball tac no aduantage of big impꝛiſonment.

¶ Amulto fortiori. Berets an argument, A minori ad maius,
and the force of our 20 utbeze argument ts this, Jf a man in pꝛiſon hall not be bonnd bp a re-
couerit bp Default for want of anfiwer tn Court of Record tha reall Action, Which is matter
of Record, (the heigth and ftrength $obercof hath beenc ſemewhat touched) à multo fortiori, a
bífcent in the Countric,whtch ts matter of deed, fball net for Want of claim bind him that ig in
piifon, Andasthearqument aminori ad maius, deth euer hold ( as out Author hath alrea⸗
Dis told s ) affirmattuely, fo the argument à maiori ad minus doth euer hold negatinelp,as our
Buthoz bere teacheth bs: andthe reafon bereofís thts, Quod in minori valet, valebit in maiori,
& quod in maiori non valet, nec valebit in minori, 3


€ Par ceo que il ne poet aler hors deprifon, crc. Wythis it appcatetb,
hata man in paifon by proceffe of Law ought to beheptinfalua & arcta cuftodia , and bp
the Law ought not to goc out, though (tbe With a Keeper, and With the leave and fuffcrance
of the Gaoler : but pet tmp2ifonment muft be, cuftodia, & non poena , fo, Carcer ad homines
cuftodiendos, non ad puniendos dari debet.


_ Seëlion 439.


N the fame manner


€ ER meme te


manner il ſem⸗
ble,lou home eft hors
bu Koyalme, en fer-
uice le 130p, pur be-
foigne del 130palime,
fitiel hoe ſoit diſſeiſie
quant ileften Guice
let30y, et le diſſeiſor
- Mot feiffe, le diſſeiſee


it feemeth where a


man is out ofthe
Realme in the Kings
feruice, for the buli-
fineffe of the Realme,
iffuch a one be diffei-
fed when hee isin fer-
uice of the King,
and the diffeifor dieth


Ors du Roialme.

(id eft) extra Reg-

num, dg much to

fap, ag out of tbe power of
the %ing of England, ag of
big Crowne of England: foz
ifaman be bpon the Sea of
England, be ts Within the
Kingdome 02 Kealm of Eng⸗
land, and within the ligeance
of the 3&íng of England, ag
of bts Crowne of Englanv.
Bnd pet altum mare {9 out of
the iuriſdiction of the —
a;


260


Glanuill lib, 8.cap.8.
‘Bratton lsb.3 fol. 1 56.
"Britton in pyormio & cap. 37.


Tl. Com.79.b. Misb.m. dr 84
Eli. Dier 242. 17.E.3.49
37-H,6.28.6. 11. H. 4.26 6
21.H.6.34.. Érrer.Br 73.
7.H.7.4« 1904.7. Esb.4.
Sol.52.1m Ravlins ('afe.
Glarusll lib. 8 cep. 8.
Braëon Lsb.3 fel.15 6.
"Brittoncap, 17.
Líb.6. fala 1 .Tentlemans Cafe.
& 30. 45. Lib. 7. fol 30.
Lib.$.fol.6o M. & 67.4.
7.H.6.18. 19.H.6.9.


18.Eliz. Dier 353. 3..Mar,
"Dier 129. "PL. ( em. 232.
Sei. nior. Berkley: cafe.
16,H.7.11.0. 23. M. 8. Re-
cord. Br.65. 39. H 6.4.
3.E'f "Dier 187. Lib.6.fol,
15.Edens Cafe. Mich. 3 1,08
33.£ hi(. 'R 1.368. In Banke
le Rey, inter Eden & Franklyn
et "Browne.

7.H 6.38. 8.H.6.16.


Vide Ses 418.


6.R.2. Protelt.46.
Vide $e8.198. 439.441.


Rot. Pat.< 9-H 36


Temps. E.1..AusWrse 193.
Rot Vafion. 13.E.1.m.8.
"Pat. ase E, v. 1. pari Pat.
10 E,1. 8. E.3. Goron. 399.
Stamf. Ph. Corm. 5t


Vide 8eHitn 677:


8.9.3 Cont. claime 13,
4: E. 3: 46:


Brall.li. 5. fo. 436.


Brall. li. 5.fo. 416.9. dr 1635.
Erit. fo.21.316.317.Fler.li.6
€4.53.53. 1 3. HL 4. Trial 6.
p. H. 4.3. 31. H.6.Erret 27.
33. 9.6.1. 31. H.6.34.
36,H.8.ca.18, 5.0 6.€.6.


34.11,


Cap-7-
RaW, and Within the luriſdi⸗
tion of the Loꝛd Admiral,
Sobofe iurifdicion (8 berie anz
tient,and long before the raign
of Edward the third, as fome
haue fauc fuppofed, as map
appeare by the Laws of Ole-
ron, (fo called foz that they
Swere made bp ing Richard
the fir(t Mien be was there )
that there bao bene then an
Adinirall ttme out of mind,
and bp many other anttent ree
coꝛds inthcraignes of Henry
the third, Edward the firft,
and Edward the fecond, is
mott manifeft,

De hereafter in another
Cafe which Littleton put ín
bis Chapter of 1Remitter,
there he ſaith, Oufter le mere,
bepond the fea, Chis great
*Dfficcr tn the Saron Lan:
guagets called, Aen mere al,
(i.) over all the fea, Prafectus
maris, fiue claffis, archithalaf-
fus : and itt antient time the
office o£ the Admiraltie Wags
Called, Cuftodia marine An-
glic,02 Maritinæ Anglis.


Of Continuall Claime.


Sed.440.


{eifee efteant en le feifed,&c.the diffeifee :


feruice le Bop, que
tiel Difcent ne grieue⸗
roit le Diſſeiſee,mes
put ceo que tine pu-
iffoit faite continual
claime, tl femble à
eut, que quaunt tl
bient en Cngleterre,
il poít enter fur Ibeit
le Diſſeilor, ac, Car
tiel home reuerfera
vn btlagary puounc
enuers lup Durant le
temps que él fuit en
le feruice le 330p, at.
Ergo à multo fortiori,
aucta aid et indDemp-
nitie pec la Lep en
lautet caſe ac.


being inthe K.feruice,
that fuch difcent fhall
not hurtthe Difleifee,
but for that hee could
not make continuall
claim, it feemes to thé
that whé he commeth
into England hee may
enter vpon the heire
of the Diffeifor , &c.
for fuch a man fhall re-
uerfe an outlawry pro-
nounced againft him
during the time that
he was in the Kings
feruice,&c. Therefore
A multo fortiori he thal
haue aid & indemnitie
by the law inthe other
caíe,&c.


Bnd note Littlcton fatth not, Wepond the fea, oz extra quatuor maria, foz a man reucra may
be infra quatuor maria,and pet out of the Reaime of England. But Infra quatuor maria,


Eres is taken by conftrudion to be within the Kealme of England, e? the Dominions of rhe
ame.

Wut herca queftion map be demanded, what it a man be out of the Realme, anda 1Recos
uerie tg had agaínft bim ina Precipe bp defautt, whether fall he auoyd it in a wꝛit of Crrozag
(wll ag be fhoulb bot the Dutlaw rie, oꝛ it be had bene impzifoned at the time of fucb recouerp
bp default And tt feemeth that be fall not auoid the recouctie,foz by that meanes a man might
be tnfinitelp delayed of hig Freehold anb Inheritance, whereof tbe Haw hath fo great a regard,
Bnd fe o2 none qoc Quer, but ít (a either of thetr owne Freewill, 02 bp fait, for Sobatcaufe foes
Her, and be is not tn that cafe without his ogdinaric remedie, either by his wogit of higher naz
ture, 02 bp a Qued cidefcrccat. Mut Outlawꝛie ina perfonall Action ſhall beanepded in that
cafe, quia de minimis non curat Lex , and othermife he ſhould be without remedie. See Sc-
tion 437-and note the Diuerfitte betweene that cafe of the finpzifenment,and this of beetng bez
pond fea, And Littleton puttetb tbecafcof tmpzifonmens, and omitteth tbe being bepond fea
here: netther haue 3| fencanp Woketo warrant, That be that (s beyond fea (ball in this cafe
auopD the recoucríc by default.


€ EnferviceleRoy. Bracon fpetoctb, Chat the exception of be-


{ng beyond fca ts, quia fuit in feruitio Domini Regis vltra mare, viz. apud talem locum, and


that cafcíg cleere: but pou thal beare the opinion of Bra&on tn thenert Section, where he te not
inthe fernice of the King.


Set. 440.


€ [Ten auters ont Lfo others haue

Dit, que (t acum faid, that if à

ſoit hoꝛs du Royval̃ man bee out of the

coment que tine foit Realme, though hee

ett feruice le 130p, : bee not in the Kiggs
ttel


€ AC herewith the


an ient law of Eng⸗

_land ig  agreable

Sith Littleton, anv the Law
at this bap, So ag tt (g Vc-
tus & conftans opinio. Excu-
fatur ctiam quis qd clameum


Liba.
tiel home efteant
hors de leisopalme,
eſt diſſeiſie enterres
ou tenements deins
le Koyalme, ele Difs
feifour deuy (eiie aC,
le diſſeilee eſteant
bos Du Koyalme, tl
ſemble a eux ĩ quant
le Diffeifee bient bins
le Ropalme, que tl
poit enter fur Ibeite
le diffetfoz,¢ ceo ſem⸗
ble a eur per deur
caules, Wn eft, que
celup que eft bozs Du

33opalme ne poit a-
uer conufans dl deſ⸗
feit fait a lup pec
entendement De lep,
nient pluis que chofe
fait hors Du Royalm̃
poit eftre try Deins E
Ropaline per Le fere-
ment De 1 2.4 De com⸗
peller ticl Home per
lalep De faire conti=
nuall claime, Ie quel
perlentendement De
le lep ne puit auct
afcun notice, ou co-
nufance de tiel diſſei⸗
fin, ceo ferra incon-
uenient , enofinemt
quant ticldiflerfin eft
fait a luy quant il eſt
hors Du Rovaline, &
aurylemozant feifie
fuit quát tl fuit hors

Du ropalm:Car € tiel
cafe tine poit per nul
poflibility folonque
common pꝛeſumpti⸗
on faire continuall
claime, Mes auter=


Of continual! Claime:


Seruice, if füch a
man being out of the
Realme be diffeifed of
Lands or Tenements
within the Realme,
and the Difleifor die
feifed, &c. the Diffei-
fee being out of the
Realme , it feemeth
vnto them, that when
the Diffeifee com-
meth into theRealme,
that he may well enter
vponthe heire of the
Diffeifor, &c. and this
feemeth vnto them
for two caufes : One
is, that hée that is out
of the Realme, can-
not haue knowledge
of the Diffeifin made
vnto him by vnder-
ftanding of the Law,
no more than that a
thing done out ofthe
Realme may bee tried
within this Realmeby
the oath of 12. men,
and to compell fuch
a man to make conti-
nuall claime, which
by the vnderftanding
of the Law can haue
no knowledge or Co-
nifance of fuch Diffei-
fin made or done, this
fhall be inconuenient,
namely , whenfücha
diffeifin is done vnto
him,whé hewas out of
the Realme,& alfo the
dying feifed was done
when hee was out of
therealme, for in fuch
caíe hee may not by
ag


$ ecl 4.4.6.
non eppetaciits vt fi toro tem-
pore litigij fuit vltra mare
quacunque oecafione. And
this (& alfo agretabls Sith
our peare Dobes.

Nient pluis que
chofe fait hors del royalme
poet effe trie deins le»
royalm per le (erewsent de


12, And in this rule
of Law there (g Soarílp and
trulp pat bp Littleton ; thefe
Words (by the oath of 12.
men ) meaning bp a Jlurp.
Foꝛ bp certificate a thing
benc bepond Sea map bee
tried, ag Littleton Himfelfe,
Seét.102.hath fct donc, And
all matters Done out of the
calme of England concerts
ning Warre, combate,oz debs
of armes (ballbee tried and
termined befoze the Conſtabie
and Mar{ball of England,
befese whom the triali tgbp
witneſles, 02 by combate,and
their proceeding is according
tothe Œiuill aw, and not
bp the oath of 12, men, as
Littleton here fpeaketh, —
bis rule bererchearfed bp
Littleton íg woꝛthy of expli⸗
tation, It an alten (foz crs
ample borne in france bring
a reall Acton, ond thetenant
plead that the Demandant ts
an alien bozne vnder the obe⸗
Dience of the French ting,
anb out of the leigeance of the
ing of England: (bal this
cafe want triall becaufe the
matter alleaged (9 out of the
Beaime-then by the fiction of
this pleano dsmandant {bail
recouer, thcretoze in ébis cafe,
the Demandant ‘ball reglp,
that bee was bonne at {uch a
place in England within the
ings licgeance, and heres
bpona Jurp of 12. (ball bce
charged, and tf thep bane fufs
fictent enidence that bee as
bozne tn France, os im any cs
ther place out of the Realme,
then fhall they Gnd, that bee
Sas bone ont of the Rings
aileageance, and i€ thep bane
fnffictent euldéce that he Was
besnein England, og Ireland,
0? lernfey 9? Ierfey , on elfe
where within the Kings obe⸗
tence, thep (all ſind —


261


42. E.3. 2. & 8,
Vide eH. 102.


1. Ml. 4.0ap. 14. 13 M. 4. fol. a.
48.6.3. 2. & 3.


36, Erg : uerent. 3 4.27.
Af. 24+ 33. H.6.25. 15.1.4.
15.2. H. 6. 18. XR. q.4.

6. H.7.6. 7. H.7.8. F.N.B.
136. 29. 4/11. 13. E. 1.
rud. 47.12. H, 3 did. gg.
Lib.7 fol.16.27.Caluins 04fà,
Lib,6.fol.4y. Dowdales cafe


Lib.3.


SR. 2. frial $4.7


(9) 33. H.8.eap.a.
Staunferd. pl.eor 90.


(3) 3 3. Elis. cafe Orureke.
(b) 34.8 li (04/8 de Sir Iohn
"Perot.

(c) Mich.19.G 20.Elix,
Dier 350.


"Paftb.28.E lit. in aËhion de i
souenant inter Emangelif (on-
fantine Pl. & Hughgyn de
fendaut in the Kings Bensh.
Lib.6. fol. 4y. Dowdales cafe.
Vide 33.H.6.2 5.

48. E.3.3.11. H.7,16.
3.£, a eblitatien 15.


Entendement de le lj.


Vide $e8. 2 49.


Cop-7- Of Continuall Claime. $8.44. |


MM bons — — mẽt ſerroit ſi tiel diſ⸗ poſſibilitie after the |
Lethe nn Mbman. (eifee fuit deins le common prefumpti-
ner of triail in that cafe. and BopalmealtempsH on make continuall
fei ats eee Oe de DINCIOU, cura claime: But otherwife
anopdance of a fine 02a Dif: temps Del mozant it fhould be if the Dif-
ee — that be * ous Del Diffeifour, feifee were within the
— ong eee Realme at the time of the Diffeifin, or atthe
and at the time of thevifeiin time of the dying feifed of the Difleifor.
and bífcent, the aduerle party
may alicadge that hee wag at fuch a place in England, ac, whereupon iffue thall bee taken,
and then in cutdence hee map prone that he was out of the Realme, &c. Which bpor fufficient
eutoence the Furie ought to find, And in both thefe cafes and the like in a fpectall verdict
the Fury may find that bee was bozne beyond Sea, 02 Was bepond Sea at that time, ec,
he Katute of 2 5.E.5. De proditionibus doth declare , that itis Œreafon by the Common
Law toadhere ro the enemies of tbe King Within the Realme, o? Without, (£ bee beethereof
proneablement attatnt of overt fact, and that be fball fezfeítall bis Lands, ec, Aman muti
nottmagine that feing by the Common Law declared by authozitie of Parliament that ava
bering tothe Rings Enemies without tbe Realme ts high Creator, and that the Delinquent
map be attaínte» thereof, ec. that this (honte want tríati, £02 then the (ubgement of tbe Com⸗
mon LaSv and declaration of the Parliament Mould be illulorie, Which no Well adutied man
Swill thinke (n a matter of fo great confequence. Wut certatne itis that fox neceflitic fabethe
adkerencte without the Kealme muft be alleaged (n fome place Within England. And tf spon
euidence thep fball find any adderencie out of the Realme, thep Mall ind the Delinquent guil⸗
tie. But moft commonip tbep indited him (ff be hadiands ) in fome conntie Sere bis lands
víblpe, that Were to be forfeited , and this as appeareth in our bokes Was the Common ble,
And fo it tg declared by the Statute ( * ) of 33.H.8, anb that tt (hall bee tried bp 12, men of
the Countie Where the Kings Wench (ball fit, anb bee determined before the 3iuftíceg of that
Wench, oz elfe befoze fuch ComméAtoners, and tn fuch (btre of the Kealme, ag (all be alltgned
by tbe things Maieltles Commiffion , anb this Statute for this point remapnes tn force at
this day, and fo it was refolucd(a) bp alltie Judges in my time, viz. ín 33-Eliz. in the cafe
of Orurcke. Bud Anno ( b) 34.Eliz, tn Str lohn Perots cafe done in Ireland, oz that ig out
of the Kealme of England, and the cafe (ic) tn M ich. 9. & ao.Eliz. Swag ertcrlp dented, & Dit
Chriftopher Wray himfelfe ( Wys ts fuppofen to gine bis opinion in that cafe) proteften that
henever gaue any fuch optnton, but did hold thecontrarp, tohen part of the Met, efpecíally the
original ig donc in England, and part ont of the Realme, that part thar ts ta be performed ent
of the #Realme, tf (Mue betaken thereupon (ball be trped bere by 12. men, and thofe 12.men (ball
come out of the place where the tait is brought. Foꝛ example (Sobich ener doth tuftrate) te
Sas couenantedby Indenture, by Charter partic, that a Sbip ſhould faple from Blackney
Banen in Porfolike, to Muttrel (rj Spaine, and there remapne by certaine dapes.

An an Action of Conenant brought bpon this Charter partie, the Indenture was alleac
ged tobe made at Thetford inthe Countie of Nozkolke, and bpen pleading the tine Wag
fopned Mbither the fab Sip vemapneb at Muttrell in Spaine bp the fatb certaine dapes.
inb tt Was adiadged that thts tue (boni bc tríeb at Therford where the action was brought,
becaufe there the contrac twke bis original bp making of the Charter partic, and fo hath tt
beeneoften adiudgedtn ſuch like cafe.

An Dbitgation made bepond the Seas map bee fued here in England in bat place the
39laíntífc Well. Ho bat then tf tt beare Dateat Burdeaux in france: Shere (all tt befuco? And
anfwere íg mabde,that tt map be alleaged to be made In quodam loco vocat" Burdeaux fa France,
in Iflington ín the Countie of Middiefex, anb there tt fballbe tried, fos whether there befuch a
place in Ifington oꝛ no, is nottrauerfable tn that cafe. Œbefe points are neceſſary to bee
knowne in refpect of the varietie of opinions in our Wakes. Bnd of thefe thus much (bail
{nfficc, andnow (g Littleton woꝛthy to be heard.

€ Per entendement de le ley. Vide, fot tntendement of Late, Sec.


99.100.110.293 377.393.406.367.462-463. & c. 419.


€ Cro ferr inconnenient. ere alfo ag hath beene often faid ap=


peareth, that argumentum ab inconuenienti is ftrong in Law, :
QL4mter men eft fi le diffeifte fuit deins le royalme al temps del diffeifin,cre.

Seas (£a man be didetien befoze he goeth oner es, o2 commeth into the Realme agatne bes

fore the Diſcent, the Milcent (pati take away bio entric, a


Lib.3.


ev? auter mate
tet ils alleges
ont put prouct que
Deuant leftatute fait
en le temps De Bop
E.3. An. 34. cap. 16.


de fon rafgne, per


quel eftatute nen-
claime eft oufte, at,
lelep fuit tiel, que ft
bn fine foít leup de


certaine terres ou tc-


nements, (( afcun
que fuit effrange al
fine anoit Dzoit Dauer
& vecouer meſmes
leg terres ou tenes
ments, filnebenutt
& fift fon claime aceo
Deins lan a le tour
procheine apres le
fine lente, t fetta
barre a touts tours,
Quia dicebat, finis fi-
nem litib’ imponebat..
€t quelalep fuit tiel,
Heft proue per leſta⸗


- tute De Weſtminſter


2.De donis conditio-
nalibus, lou il eft par?
que ff fine foit lente
De les tenements en
taile, at, Quod finis
ipfo iure fit nullus,nec
habeant hered’, aut il-
liad quos ſpect reuer-
fio (licet fuerint plenæ
etat", in Anglia, & ex-
tra prifonam ) neceffi-
tat’ apponere clameum


fuum , &c. Iſſint ceo


Of continuall Claime.


Setlion 4.4.1.


N other matter
they alleadge

for a proofe , that
before the Statute
of King Edward the
Third, made the 34.
yeare of his Raigne,
by which ftatute Non-
claim is oufted,&c.the
Law was fuch,that ifa
fine were leuied of
certaine Lands or Te-
nements, if any that
was a ftranger to the
fine had right to haue
and to recouer the
fame Lands or Tene-
ments, if he came not,
and made his claime
thereof withinayeare
and a day next after the
fine leuied, he fhall be


barred for eucr, Quia


dicebatur quod finis fi-
nem litibus- impontbat.
And that Law was
fuch, it is ptoued by
the Statute of Weft.
the2. De dows condi-
tiosalibus , where itis
fpoken if the fine bee
leuied of Tenements
giuen in the taile, &c.
Quod finis ipfo iure fit
nullus , nec babeant ba-
redes , aut illi ad quos
fpectas reuerfio (licet ple-
na etatis fuerint, in An-
glia, & extra prifonam)
neceffitat' apponere clack
ſuum. Seit is proued,
Vus 2


Se8.4.4..


€ Eve (¢ apprarety,

Sobat the Comes

mon Daw wag
before the fato Statute,foz
Mon-clapme wpon a fine
leuied. But sow (ince Lit-
tleton Sozote bp the tas
ture of 4.H.7. fing peares
after Preclamations made
Spon the fine are gtuen to
bins that right hath to make
bis Clapme, ea purſue his
Aaion, where the Common
Aa gaue him but a peare
anb a bap. Wut this Stas
tute of 4.H.7. extend onlp
to fines and not to Non⸗
claíme bpon a Judgement
in a wꝛit of right, anb
therefore the fatd Statute
9f 34.E.3 herectted bp Lit-
tleton Which onftetb f20n-
clatme only to fines leuted,
extendeth not to a iudge⸗
ment in a to2ttof right ae
this dap, and therefoze the
Common Law (n that cafe
remapneth to this day, viz.
that claime muft bee made
Within a peare and a dap
after tudgement, Bifo {£a
fine be lenied Without 4920s
clamatíong , e; withoutfo
many ag the Law requt-
reth , then the Statute of
Nonclatme doth extend to
fuch a fine.


€ Dicebatur finis,
quia finem litibusim-


ponebat. Were you
tnap obferne the Etymolo⸗
gle ofa fine. And herewith
agreeth (a) Buttquitie,Finis
ideo dicitur finalis concor-
dia quia imponit finem liti-'
bus. Bud after the exam⸗
ple (b) of Littleton ft ig
God to fearch out the Etp=
mologie o2 right deriuatiõ of
Woꝛds fo? ignoratis termi-
nis ignoratur & ars;ag hath
bin often obferueb tn other
places, And tbe Ciuilians
call this iudiciall concezd,
Tranfa@ionem iudicialem
dere immobili,


€ Licet


262


34. €,3.16:


4. H.7.evp. 24.
See afwell this Statute, asthe
Svatuse of 31.H.8.cap.36.
well expoundedin my Reports.
Lib. 3.fel 44.45. re. cafe del
nes per toram. Lib.1.fol.g6.
97. n Sheleys cafs. lib. 2. fol.
93. Bingham: cafe. lib.8. fel.
100. Leshfords cafe, lib. fol:
I 39.149.141. Beaumends
eafb. lib 10. fol.42.b. Laxapets
safe dr 99.a.li5. 9. fol 105.
106, Margaret Podgers cafe.
lib. 5. fol.1 24. Saffynscafe. lib.
10.96.97. Seymurs cafe lib 8.
fol. 2. Grefleyscafe lib. 11. fel.
69.71.78. PL. (Cem an Smith
dr Stapl, cafe Pr inStowe's
safe & Howelseaft & Glan-
nil (1b. 13.62. V1. Bradt. 435.
Fleta lib. 6.cap. 53. Brst.2164


(a) Glarmil. 5p g cay. 33.
Bratt. lib, 5 fel. 435.
Flztalibe6.cap. 52.53.


(b) Erjmologies, dre.
Vide $28.74. 154.194.441.
$30.95.


Lib.3.


Svat de anne 18.8.1.


Cap.

¶ Licet fuerit pleno
etatis, in Anglia , & ex-
tra prifonam. In tig
tof 13 E.1, Dc donis con-
ditionalibus tg one omitted


Mhoigaddedin the Statute
De modo levandi fines, viz. &


(e) Pl.Com.Stewellseafe,359 {ana memorie(c)1But a Fem⸗


Bratton. lib. $0,435,
Britton, fo. 31 6.4.
Fletas lib, 6.ea.55.


Couerthad no priviledge of
non-claime at the Common
Law ag feme bauc faid, bcz
caufe the bad a huſband that
might make clatme fog ber.
ABut pet Bracton faith, Item
excufatur vxor quz fub pote-
ftate viri fuppofita quod cla-
meum ‘non appofuerit licet
mittere pofsit, And citeth a
tudgement tt; the point, Trin.
4H,3. in Cufins cafe But
Fleta faith, Excufatur fi fuerit
vxor alicuius, fi fucrit per vi-
rum impedita,quod non potu-
it apponere clameum. fo
they in reuerſion 0? remainder
expectant bpon any cftate of
Freehold Were barred by the
CommonLaw, and pet thep
couid make noclatme, becaufe
ag hath bene fai,it belonged
to the particular Cenant,and
not to them, becaufe their en-
trie Was not laofull, which
Was one of the pzincipall


Of continual] Claime.


proue, que ff bn e⸗
ftrange home que a=
uoit Dzoit ales tene=
ments, fil fuit hors
De otalme al temps
Del fine leuie, ac, watt
Dammage , coment
q̃ il ne itt fon claime,
ac, coment que tiel
fine fuit matter De
teco2D, Per greinder
veafon tl ſemble a eux
à bn diſſeiſin a Dif-
cent à eft matter en
fait, ne t(fínt trope
greeuera celup à fuit
diſſeiſte, quant il fuit
028 Du Koyalme al
temps De Difleifin, et
aucy al temps que le
Difleifor moruſt fci-
fie, ac, ines que il
bien poit enter,nient
contrifteant tiel diſ⸗
cent,


hath right vnto the te-
nements, if hee were
out of the Realme at


the time of the fine le-


uled, &c. fhall haue no
dammage;thoughthat
hee made not his
claim &c. though that
fuch fine was matter
of record : by greater
reafonit feemethwnto
them that a diffeifin
& difcent that is mat-
ter in deed fhall norfo


grieue him that was —


diffeifed when he was
out of the Realme at
thetime of that diflei-


fin, and alfo at the


time that the Difleifor
died feifed , &c. but
that he may well enter
notwithftanding fuch
difcent.


taufes of makingoË thefatd Statute of 34.E.5 $»bích oufted Moneclatme, Wut thefe cafes
of Couerture and of them (n reuerfion and remainder are now without queftion hoipen, and
tu pzouítion made foz the faving of their rights andtitics bp the ſaid Statute of 4.H.7. ag


by thefatd ac appeareth.


€ A Rraigne vm af-

je. To ar⸗
tatgnethe Aſſiſe is to caufe
the Genant to bee called to
make the pletnt, andto fet the
caufe in fuch order ag the Œe-
fant map be infozccd to an=
wer thereunto, and is dert=
ted of the french woꝛd Ar-
raigner, Which fgnifcth to
Oxder o2 fet (n right place. An
Arraignement is fometime
called an Bftitntion of the
Uerbe Attituocompounded of
Ad and Statuo, that is to
Place, oz fet in oder onc bp
another. In the fame fence
that Littleton here vſeth tt, tt
is tfcb ben an appeale is


+ bey 92° Harry &: 0h: 96


Sed. 442.


j'en, Quære fi
home foit Díffei-

fi, et ilatraigne bn
Aile enuers le diſ⸗
feifoz.et les recogni⸗
tozs De E attífe chatt-
ta pur Ic plaíntife, et
les Juſtices dalſiſe
voyle eſtre aduiſes ð
lour iudgment tanq;
al prꝛochein &flile,æc,
Ct en le dementiers
le Diffeifoz mozutt
feítie;ac, ft le Dit fuit
del


AU inquire ifa.


man be diffeifed,
and he arraigne an af-
fife againft the diffei-
for, and the recogni-
tors of the affife
chante for the plain-
tife, and the Iuftices of
affife will bee aduifed
of their iudgements
vntill the next affife,
&c. and inthe meane
feafon the diffeifor di-
eth feifed, &c. yet the


Sec. 442. 1


that if a ftranger that |


Of Continuall Claime. |
faid fuite of the affife
fhall bee takenin Law
for the difleifee a con-
tinuall claime, info-


Lib.3.
del affife ferra pris
enlep pur le Dit Dif-
feifee bu continual


claime, entant que
nul Default fuit en much that no default


lup, at, Was cr him,&c. of thefub{ed, and no man is


fato to be arraigned, but meerelp at the faite of the King, bpon an Enditemenc found agatnt
him, 02 other record wherewith he is charged, Bnd there the arraigument of tbe prifoner is
to take ozder, that D): appeare, and £02 the certainty of the perfonto bolo bp bis hand and to
plead a fufficient pica to the enditement op other record, whereupon thep Which follow foz the
Bing may o2derlp procwde,


€ saftices dafsife. Futices of Aile ate aligned and conftituten
bp the ing of the Judges and Sages of the La, and atc called Juices of Wilife, koz that
the wits of Aſſiſe of Noucl difleitin, ( Which in former times Were occounted Feftina remedia
and berp frequent and common ) Sere returnable before them to be taken in their proper
Counties twice eucry peare at the leaſt, Whereupon thep had authozity to gine indqement
and award feifin anb exccutton: and therefoze both £o: tbe number of thon in times paft, and
fe; the greater anthozity they had then as Juſtices of Nifi prius (which Was totrie {lues on⸗
Ip, except in Quare Impedit, and Alliſes De darreine prefentment, tn which cafes the Juſti⸗
ces of Nil prius might aíue iudgement )thep Were denominated Juſtices of Aſliſe: And bis
gers Bos of Parliament auc giuen to them great authority both in Criminal canfes and
Common pleas, Theſe Juſtices of Alife, have alfo Commilions of Oier and Terminer, of
Goale deliuerp, and of the peace, ofalloctation, and Si non omnes throughont their whole cir=
cuits, fo as they arc armed With ample, proutdent, but pet oxdinarp turileicion, foz all their
Œommilions are bounded With this expꝛeſſe limitation, Fa&uri quod ad juftitiam pertinet fe-
cundum legem & confuetudinem Anglix. Bnd tn former time accozding to the oriatnall inftis
tution and their Commilton both the Juices topnedboth tn Common pleas, and pleas of
the Crowne,
€ Site dit fuite del afsife ferra prife em ley,cre. un continual claime.
Bnd ttisholven at tits dap that it (ball amounttoa € latae, foz that there was no default in
htm as Littleton faith. (d) Some have obtected that 1€ the bringing of an Ate ſhouid a-
monntto Continuall clatme, ano euerp Continual clatine made by the DiTeits veſt the pof-
feffion anb freehold in him, therefore i€ bꝛinging the DMife,<c. ſhould amount to a Contineall
claime that then the tozitthouidabate But hereunto tt hath bene an ſwered in this Chapter,
thata Continuall claime (ganentríeby conftrudton of Law foz the aduantageof the Diffet=
fee, but not fo? dis difaduantage.
_ Sina twzit of entríc Sur Difeiin agatnft ouc, fupposng that he yad not entred but bp S.Sohe
b b bim, the Cenant fai that 5. died feifed ; andthe lano difcended to Hin, and praycb
bis age, the Plaintife counterpleaded his age, fos that he arraigned an Alife againtt S. who
Died hanging the Alliſe, and he Was ouſted of his age, for that the bringing of the Maite
amounted toa Clatme,

FE Tenant tn Dower alten tn fee With Warrantic, andthe beíre in the reuerfion bring a
tait of entrie In cafu prouifo, kc. and hanging the plea, the Cenant dyeth, the heire hall not
betobutteb 0? barred by this Warrantic, fo? that the Præcipe Did amount to a Continual
claime. Bnd herewith agrecth (*) Æntiquitp ; Et fi clameum non oppofuerit, fufficit tamen fi
ille vel anteceffor fuus faciar qd tantunde valeat, vt fi placit mouerit teneũ vel fecerit rem litigio-
fa;quia ficut plus eft fa&o appellareyquam verbo,ita plus cft clameum apponere fa&oyquam ver.
bo: Et ad hoc facit de termino Sanétæ Trinitatis, Annorcgni regis, H.3.15. in com.Hunt:de
quadam Guldeburga, cui obicéum fuit, quod clameum non appofuit, & ipfa refpondit, quod
fccit, quod tantundem valet, quia tempore finis facti implacirauit tenentem per aliud breue, &c.

Pel the gods of a Wilicine ( bcfose any feifure made by the Led) bediftrained,the Lod map
baue a Bepleupr, and notwithanding before the bzinging of the wzithe had no property,
pet the very bringing of the weit Doth amount toa clapme ofthe gods, and veſteth the gaoporz
tie in the Lo2d, ;

€ Entant que nul default fuit en ny cc. Pereby it is implied, that


ont Duthoz enclined to this opinion, that it hould amount toa Clayme, foz that no vefanis
Swag in him, Et nemo debetrem fuam (nc facto aut defedu fuo amittere, ag the rule is.


Vuu3 Sedi.


Seil.442:


arraigned, both Which are ar=
taíqneb (n french, but entres
in Latyn. Bnd tt is to bee
obferued that Littleton. faith
bere Arraigne vn afsife, and
ſaith not that the Tenant is
‘atraigned, and fo of the ape
Peale, foz thefe are the fuites


263


2.0.3.8. 6.64.24. stewards
the end. Stanf pl.oer,
195. (C. 3. .7. cer.


Vid. Sel. 614.233.314,

Mara Cn e. ;
:2.64.3.30.39.

Stat.de Ebor.ca, 3.4.

Artis. Sup. (art.ca. 16.

4-E. 3.64.11. 7. R.a-ca.

27.E.1. De finibus.ca, 4.

28.2. 1. de appellat:s.

dE cR 2. H. 5.64.8.

3. HI. 5.64.7. 13. H. 4.02.7.

——— Sod

2.£.3.00.§. 14,H.6.c4.1.

31.H.6.ea.10, 3. H.7,ca. 1,

33-H.8.c4.5. 34, dr 1 5.H.8;

£4.14.2. 6. 3,E.6.ka 22.

I.E.6 24.7. 2 Mar, Dis.

99. 3 3 Elit Dier. 30$.


(4) Seo before in this chaptey
SeB.419. Vid Se, 416.


34. E. 3. 25. 9.E.. apo 14v.
15-E.3.Counterples da rar, 6.


g.E.3 92, garrantssg,


(*) Flete, lib.8. ca. $9.
Brak. lib, s fo. 36.


33.8.3. Ropleutp. 41.
42:6,3. 14.6, 9. H. 6.25.


Lib.  (ap.7.


Nerlb.aa. 38.


P MLB 3 4.98, Wut 3.


Ere eft £t (a to bee
CH obfernse that albes «i


ít the Freehold and
inheritance is in this cafe tn
wo petfon bnt m abeíante 02
inconfideratio of law, vet an
entrie and ciaime bp one that
bathno right fpall gaine the
inheritance bp Swzong, Sox
here Littleton fatth, and of


- fuch eftate died feifed,ec. Bnd


fo itis in cafe of a Biſhop,
Darfon, UWicar, Pꝛebend, ot
any other fole Coꝛpoꝛation.
And in the ffatute of Merle=
bridge itig called an intru=
fion.

Secondip, that feing bp
the Beath of the Abbot( which
isthe atof dod) no perfon
ts able to make Continual
claíme, thercfoze a diſcent du⸗
ting that time (ball not pres
tudtce the fuccefloz, foy as
hath bene fatd, Impotentia
excufatlegem. Bf an bfur-
pation be bao toa Churel) in
time of bacatton,thts ſhall not
prcindice the fucceffor to put
him out of poſſeſſion, but shat
at the next auoydauce hee
all pzefent, T

€ Nient plui que
ils font able de fuer Acté-


on, oc. Pere that
bitch hath in thie Chapter
bene fayb (g confirmed, viz.
Chat the entríe oz continual
clatme muſt purfue the ation.


¶ Car Le Conent nef?


forfque vn mort perfon,

oc. This is Ratio
vna, but not vnica : for though
the reft of the Cozpozation bee
no moat verfons,as the Chap⸗
ter in cafe of Dean anb Chaps
ter, oz thecommonaltp ín cafe
of Mato, anb Commonaltp ,
ptt cannot thep when there (o
no dean of matoz, make claim,
becaufe tbep haue neither
abilitie no; capacitie to take on
to (ue any Acion,as our Au⸗
$502 bere ſaith.


€ Car e» temps de


Of continuall Claime.


Sed. 443.


Tem Quare ff
pu Abbe De bti
Monaſtery moꝛuſt,
et Durant L temps de
bacation.bn hoe tor⸗
cioutemt enter € cer=
taine parcel De terre
Del monafterp, claps
mant la terre à lup
et à feg heires, et De
tiel eſtate moꝛuſt fei-
fie, etla terve diſcen⸗
Dift a fon beit,et puis
apres bn eft elect et
fait Abbe De meſme
la Monaſterie, fi
meſm̃ Labbe poit en⸗
ter fur le heire ou ne=
mp, Ct il femblea
afcuns que Labbe
bien poit enter en ceo
cag, pur ceo à le Co⸗
ucnt es temps De ba-
cac ne fuit afcun pet-
fon able Dc faite con=
tinuall claime, cat
neint pluíg que is
fontpet(on abl à fuer
Action, níent pluis
tls font able De faire
continnall Clapme,
cat le Couent nett
forfque bn mort
comps fauns Tete
cac en temps De Va⸗
cation on graunt
faíta eur, ou pet
eut eft voyd, ⁊ en cett
cafe Labbe ne poit
auet Brieke Dentre
fur Diffeifin —


Seil.443,


A^ inquire if art


Abbot of a Mo-
nafterie die,and during
the time of vacation,a
man wrongfully en-
treth in certaine par-
cels of land of the Mo-
nafterie, claiming the
land vnto him and his


heires, and of thate- .


ftate dyeth feifed, and
the land defcendeth
vnto his heires,and af-
ter that an Abbot is
chofew, and made Ab-
bot of the Monaftery,
a queftion is, if the
Abbot may enter vp-
on.the heire or not.
And it feemeth to
fome, That the Abbot
may well enter inthis
cafe, forthis, that the


Couent intime of va- —


cation was no perfon


able to make continu- -


all claime,for no more
tha they be perfonable
to fue an Action, no
more bee they able
to make continuall
claime, for the Co-
uentis but a dead bo-
die without Head, for
in time of vacation a


Grant made vntothem


is voyd, and in this
cafe an Abbot may
not hauea Writ of En-
trie vpon Diffeifin, a-
gainft the Heire, for


Lib.5.
le heite, put ceo que
tine fuit bnques diſ⸗
feifie, et & Labbe ne
puifloit enter en ceo
cafe, Donques il ferra
mis a fon Briefe de
Droit, ac, le quel
ferta trope Duce pur
Je meafon,per que ſẽ⸗
blea eur, que Labbe
bien poit enter,ec,


Quæras de dubijs le-
gébene difcere fi vis :

Quare dat fapere, qua
funt legitima vere.


Of Continuall Claime.


this, T hat hee was ue-
uer diffeifed.. And if
the Abbot may not
enter inthis cafe, then
hee fhall bee put vnto
his Writ of Right, &c.
which fhall bee hard
for the Houfe. By
which it feemeth to
them, that the Abbot
may well enter,&c.


Quaras de dubijs, Le-
gem bene difcere ſi vis
Quarere dat fapere


qua [unt legitima vere,


vacation Un Graunt fait
4 cux on per emx e( void


oc. And the tcafon
ts, becaufe the bobte politique,
Which ts capable, is not cont»
pleat, but $oantetl) the ead.
abut this ts tobec vnderſteod
et an immediate Grant, fo2 i£
during the vacation of the B=
batbícot Dale , a Leaie fox
lífe,o2 a gift in Œatie be made,
the remainder to tbe Abbot of
Dale and his fucceflors, this
Fematnder (g gob, tf there bec
an Bbbot made daring the
particular cftate,

Fl chere be Maior and comz
monaltie of D.and the Matoz
dieth, a Grannt made to tte
Matos € Comonaltp of D.ts
void foz the caufe afozfato,but
ín that cafe if a ilcafe for life


Se#.4445


be made the remainder to the Maioꝛ and Commonaitte of D.the remainder ts god, tf there bos
a Maioꝛ cleaed during the particular eftate,


E Pace enter cc Here by this (&c.) is implied D2 make bis con-
tinnall aime infuch ſoꝛt as hath beene befoze eppzeiien, ;
(OQ Queras de dubijs, Legem bene difcere fi vis :
Querere dat fapere quz funt legitima vere.


Here Littleton expꝛeſſeth an excellent meanes to attaine to tbe reafon o£ the 3,350, bp enqui⸗
ting of, and conference had With learned men, of Vonbrfull cafes :


Inrer cunéta leges, & percunétabere Do&os, j
$e as Collatio peperit artes, fo Collatio perficitartes : Bud this mu bee continuall, for ag
knowledge tncreafcth, fo doubts therewith increafe alfo; Crefcente fcientia , crefcunt fimul &


dubirationes.


Bnd bere Littleton citeth berie aptlp t$vo Werles, fon itis truly fto, That Authoritates Phi-
lofephorum,medicorum & Poetarum funt in caufis allegandæ & tenenda : nd our Buthoz
both cite a berfe £o? memozte,but it is woꝛthie of memoꝛie.


3 H +


Cuar.8.


seus Cleales fot x; Eleafesare ¶ 855-0 Ere our aurboz
E Ape en bíuerg QE in diners Cd "uere

"x =] manners, d manners, a —
ceftatcauoir, Relea⸗ p viz. Re- RE DEN
fes De tout 1c b20ít d NS Jeafes of fon ws be ed
Home aden terres ou all the right which a tbe right Sbicha man bath
ALenementg, et Ke⸗ man hath in Lands or Venio d enon:
leafes De Actiong Tenements, and Re- theretsa Weleafe of Batons
perſonals et reals,et leafes of Actions Beall, of 07 (n landg oz tene⸗


ments: 02 Derfonall, of o2 in
Gong.


264.


2.H.7.13. 40. Mas.
34. E. 3. Garrantie 69.


Horace.


Vi, Mir.ca.3,.§.17.V. Brit,
101. Bradl.li, 5. Tra de Ex.
cept. & Lib. 4. fo. 31846,
Flata lb cap.14.


Lib.


[AT NT


(a) Elet.vb-fig.


Eralk.li. 4. fo. 308. Fle. vb. ſup.
9. H. 6.35.34. E. 3.27.
13, H, 4.Entr.congeab, 57.


37.H.8.39.0fan vfe.34.H.6,
44.0f an attaint. 3.E. 3.38.
sr. 8.4.81. PI. Cen. Dela-
mere cafe .


8.£.4.3-21-2.4.2-


11. H.7.4.20: H.7.29.
8.E.4.3-


ge. E. 3.24. 33. E. y Tff. Sei-
ve fae. 192.


Cap. 8.


Gods o Chattels: o1 mrt,
vartly in the Kealty, and part⸗
lp tn the Perlonaltie.


Releafe. Relaxa-
tio: DE the Etpmologie of
this word pou hane heard be=
feit, Fleta (a ) calieth ít;
Carta de quiera clamantia.


Nouerint vni-
uerit per præfentes,


&c. Pere Littleton
heweth Puchdents of Ke⸗
leafes of right: and Pꝛeli⸗
dents dee both teach and il⸗
inftrate, and therefore out
Studentis tobce Weil Korea
Sith Dachdents of all kinds.

¶ Remififle , re-
laxafle, & quietum
clamaffe. ere Lit-
tleton fheiweth, Œbat there be
3. proper 100108 of IRcleas,
and bee much of one effect :
befives, there ig Renüciare;ac-
quietare,Œ there be many other
Swords ofreleas, ag tf the leſ⸗
(oz grants to the left £o? 1t£e,
Chat he fball be difcharged of
the Rent, this (g a god Re⸗
leafe, Vide Sect.5 32.

Bnd ít ig to bee vnderſtood,
hat there bee Keleaſes in
Deco, 92 Exprelle: Keleaſes,
Sohereof Littleton heere kath
fbesoco an example. Œbefe
Exprelle Releafes mut of nez
cellitiebebp Der. Cherebe
alfo Releaſes in Law , and


Of Releales.


auters choles. Re⸗
leafes De tout E Doit
que homes ont en
(etes ou Cenex
ments, ac, font com-
munement fait en tiel
fozine ou De tiel ef-
fect, Sec?.444.

a Nouerint vniuer-
fi per præfentes me A.
de B. remififfe, relax-
affe, & omnino de me
& heredib’ meis qui-
etum clamaffe : vel fic,
Pro me & haredibus
mcis quietum clamaffe
C. de:D. totum ius,
titulum, & clameum
qua habui, habeo, vel
quouifmodo in futur
habere potero, de, &
in vno meffuagio cum
pertinentijs in F. &c.
€t eft atcauoite, que
ceux Uerbs Remifit-
fe, & quietum clamaffe
font De bn tiel effect,
fícome tiels UWerbs,
Relaxaffe.


Sel 444,445»


étions perfonalls and
realls, & other things.
Releafes ofalthe right
which men haue in
lands & tenements &c.
are commonly made in
this forme, orofthis
cffe& :

Know all men by thefe
Prefents , That I LA.
of B. baue remifed , re-
leafed, and altogether
from me and my Hetres
quiet claimed: orthus,
For mee and my Heires
quiet claimed te C.of D.
all tbe right , title , and
claim WU 1 haue,or by
any meanes may bane, of
and in one meſſuage, with
the appurtenances in F.
orc. And it is to bee
vnderftood, that thefe
words, Kemiſiſſe, & qui-
etum. clamaffe, are of
the fame effe& as
thefe words, Relax-

affe. —


they arc ſometime bp Deed, and ſometiine without Dev. As it the Lord diſſeiſe tbe Cenant,


anb maketh a Feoſffement (n kee by Ded o? without Des,


this tsa releaſe of the Seignioꝛie.


Anofo tt ig (£ tbe Dilletfee diſſeiſe the heire of the Diffcifoz, and make a dfcoffement in Fee by
Deed 01 without Ded, this is a releafe in Law, of the right, And the fame Laÿo itis of a


tight in Action,


FE the Dblige make the D bligoz bis Executoz, this ts a relcafe in Raw of the Action, but
the dutie remaines, fox the Which the Exec utoz map retaine £o much gods of the Geltatoz,
FE the Feme Obligee takethe Dbitgo: to huſband, this ic a releafcin Law, Che ithe law


(git there be too Femes Obligees,


and the one take the Debtor to hufband.


j£ an Finfant of the age of feuenteenc veares veleafca debt, this ts voyd. Wut tf an enfant


make the Debtoz his Erecutoz, this ts a god releafein L
WBut ta Heme Erecutric take the Debtoz to hufband,
(bono be a $»30n3to the Dead, and (n a Workea Deuaftauit,


a of the debt.
this ig no releafein Raw , fox that


which an 22d (n. Daw (bail


neuer Werke, Bndfott Wag aviudged inthe Kings Wench, Mich.30.& 5 1. Eliz.in Which cafe


FZ was of Counccii,


But ít is to be obferned, Chat there is a diuerſit
in La : fort the hetre of the Diſſeiſoꝛ make a lea
tothe Lelleæ for bis life, his right is gone fo» cuer.
of the WAeiloz, and make a Leafe Coo life, by this veleafc, in Law theright (9 releafe
ring the life of the elfe: foza releafe in La
the intent and meaning of the parties, than a


(e betweene a Keleaſe in Weed, and a releafe
fe forlife, andthe TDilTetfee relcafe bis right
Wat ifthe Difietfee doth diſſeile tbe beyae


b bntbtz


Sp [bail beerpounded moze favourable, accoꝛding te
releafe in Deed, which (8 the ad of the partie, Gat


Lib.5.


made Grecatoz.


Of Releafes,


Hallbe taken atoft rongly again bimfelfe,


€ Totumius,titulum , &clameum. But note, that lus 2 tight

ll fgnification includeth not onip a right fo, the which a ꝛit of right Doth tie, bur al:

x — 4 claime either by Force of a Condition, Motmaine oz the like, for the Sobtch no
action (g giuen by Law, but only an entrie;


€ [gen ceux pa-

tolr d font com-
munement mis en tís
el faits De releaſes,
$, (quz quouifmodo
in futurum habere po-
tero ) font ficonte
voides enlelep, car
nul D20ít palla pet
bn releas, foztque le
Droit que le releffoz
ad al temps dele re=
leas fait,
pier a fits , a le pier
foit diffeifte, et le fits
(biuant fon pier ) rez
lella per fon fait ale
Diffeifor tout le Droit
que il ad, ou auer pu=
tfloit, en meſmes tes
tenemts fans claute
Degatrantic, ac.et
puis le pier moꝛuſt,
@c,le fits poit lopal-
ment enter fur la
poſſeſſion le diffeifo2,
pur ceo que il nauoit
Droit en la terre en la
bie fon pier, meg le
Droit diſcendiſt a lup
per Difcent apes le
teleag fait, ple mozt
fon pete, at,


Ter⸗tenant, anb heby fezce of the warrantte to base ag


Seth 44.6;


Lfo thefe words

which. are com-
monly put in fuch Re-
leaíes,s.(qua quout[mo-
de in futurum babere po-
fero) are as voide in
Law, for no right paf-
feth by a Releafe , but
the right which the
Releafor hath at the
time of the Releafe
made. For if there


at {i ſoit⸗ Father and Sonne, and


the Father bee diffei-
fed, and the Sonne (li-
uing his Father) relea-
[eth by his deedto the
diffeifor all the right
which he hath or may
haue in the fame tene-
ments without claufe
of warrantie , &c. and
after the Father dieth,
&c. the Sonne may
lawfully enter vpon
the poffeffion of the
Diffeifor, forthat hee
had tio right in the
land inhis fathers life,
but the right difcen-
ded to him after the
Releafe made by the
death of his Father,
&c.


Dte, a man map

bane a prelent right,

though ít cannet

take effec in poſſeſſion, bntin
turo.

As hee that bath a right
toa tenerfion o? remapnoer,
andfuch aright bee tiat hath
tt, map prelentip reieafe: But
bere ín the cafe which L itile-
ton puts S$obere the Sponne
releafc fn the life uf bis father,
this relate is toto (a )becaufc
bee bath no right at all at tbe
time of the relcafe made, but
all the right was at that time
in the Father, but after che
deceale of the Sather, the
Sonne fball enter into the
Land agaínft bis one Rez
leafe.

Che Baron make a Leafe
fos Life and dteth, the iRcicafe
made bp the wike of ber
Dower to him (n reuerfion ig
god, albcit Hee bath no caufe
a Action agatnft him in prz-
enti.


¶ Sans claufe de»
garrantie. For tE there


be a Sarrantie annere to the
veleafe,then tbe Sonne fpail
bebarred, Foꝛ albeít the res
leafe cannot barre the right
fo? the caufe afozefatd,per the
Soarrantíe may rebutt, and
barre bim, anb bis betres of
future right which as not
im bin at that time: and the
reafon ( Which in all cafes te
to be fought ont) SM erefoze a
Warrantic being a Cousnaut
Teall fboulb barre a future
vigbt, (s fox auopding of círs
cuttteot action (Which (a not
fauoureb tn Haw, ag he that
made the watrantie ſhould res
Couer the Land agiint the


much (n baine agatnft the fame pers


fen: pet (g there a diuerfitie betweene a Warrantie and a Feokment, Cb ) fog (£ there be Geand-


Father, Father, anv Sonne, andthe Father vitetlery " QDsanbfatbrt , andmabe afcoffz.: nt
: bE


ín


265.


anb fe (u tho cafe ato; rfapb, Sobere the Debtos 18


(2) Britremfol.108,
17. E. 3. 67. 43-E a 21.
19, H.6.4. 15,74 9 7.
37. E. y. exi enition 130,


16. E. 3. barre 34 €.
Hees cafe 5. part. fdl.20,31,


20. H. 6.15.


(b) 39. M.5.45. s1. E. 4, Rx.
Vg. E, 4 fit. ett cone, 30.
9H. 7.1 b. 3,8, 3038,


Lib.5.


10 E.3, cenfirmation 34.

9 E 2. garr.62. 11. H.4.33.
43.E.3.17. 42. E. 3. 24. per
Finebden. 17.E. 3.67.
Lib.1 fel. 312.113. $5
Albanics cafe.


(ap.8. Of Releafes. Seél.4.47


‘in fee,the Grandfather dieth,the Father again his owne feoffment fall not enter,but (f bc Die,

big fonne [ball enter. and fo note a bíucrütte between a Keleaſe a Areoffment , anda Wate
rantie, a IBcleafc ín that cafe ts voide; a Feofkment is gow again the feoffor, but not againtt
his bctre a Sarrantie is gad both again bimfelfe and bis beires. E

Bnd here arc three dtuerlities Swoztby of obferuation,viz. jfirft, bet weene a Power 01 an
Puthoritic, anda Wight. Secondip, bet weene Powers and Buthosttics tbemfclucg, Th ros
Ip, bet Weene a ight and a 39 offíbtlitie,

Bs tothe Gr, € a Wan bp bis lad win deutteth tbat bis Erectors fall fell
bis Land, and dieth, tf tbe Erecutors releafe all thetr right and title tn the Land tothe
hetre, this ts botd, for that thep haue neither right nop title to the Hand, but only a bare Autho⸗
ritic, Which (s not Within Littletons cafe of a Releale of aright. And fo tt te t£ cefty que vie
had beuífeo that bis feoffees fhonid bane folo tbe Land. Bibett hep bad made a fceffment ouer
pet might thep fell the ble, fos their Authozttte tn thar cafeíg not gluen awap bp the Liuerie,

Be to thefecond there ts a biucrütic bet weene fuch Powers o; Authoꝛities as are onip ta
the bfc ofa ftranger, and nothing for the benefit of him that made the releafe (ag (n the cafe bes
foze) anda Power oz Buthopitie Whi h refpecteth the benefit of the Keleaſor, as inthefc vſuall
powers of reuocation, when the feoffoz, ec, hath a power to alter,change, Determine,oz reuoke
the bles(being intended for hig benefit )bc map rcleafe,¢ where the eſtates befoze Were Defcafis
ble, he map by big releafe make them abfolutc, and ſeclude bimfelfe from any alteration 02 rex
nocation, agit hath bene refoined, which vineritít pou may teade in(m ) Albanics cafe,

As tothe third, before Judgement the Plant ike in an Aaton of debt releafeth to the batle


1 €, H.5.11«


( m) Lib.i. Albaniet safe,


E TEM inthe Rings Wench all demaunds , anbafter Judgement is giuen, this Hatt not barre
— the Plaintife to haue Erecution aga (n& the baple, becanfe at the time of the releale hee had but


a meere pofltbilitie, aud neither Lus in re, nozlusadrem, but the dutte is to commence after
bpon a contingent, and therefore conld not be relcafed prefentip. So tf tbe Conufee ofa Stas


25. Aff p. 7. 27.2.3. emecnti-
tiny 30. pafch.38 Eli’. Rot.
3 t, fter Bereugh & Gray.


4p. E. 3.35.


(c) 3. E. 13. 20. H.6.35.
g. M.g. qi. 18. Æ.3. 12

8.8. 4$. 58.336

g.Z, 3.46.
Wide fall 498 4930


tntc,ac. rclcafe to the Conufoz all bis right in the Land, pet afterwards bee map fue Executi⸗


on , for he hath no right in the land till Œxecntion ,


knowwne it adiudged.


E tout le droit.

Ghis muff be inten=

Ded of a bare right,
and not of a releafe of artght,
Spbercbp any eftate palleth,az
toa Leſſee fozveareg , dc. ag
bail bee fato hereafter. Aifo
it mutt bee intended of a Ke⸗
leafe of a right of freehold at
theleaft,and not to a right fos
amp ftearme fo? peatcg 04
chattle reall, ag {€ Heflee fo;
peares bee oufted, anb bec in
the reverfion diſſeiſed, and
the 3Díffeifo? maketha Leaſe
fo? veares, the fir 1LeiTe map
releafe onto him, Bil which
ig (mplpeo inthe firlk ec. Al⸗
fo in fome cafe a releafe of a
tight made to one that hath
meither freehold in Des, nox
freehold in Law is geo and
auaileable (st Law,(c) ag tbe
Demanndant map releafe ta
tbetoucbe , and pet the tous
chee hath nothing in tbe land,
but the reafon of that ts fox


that when the bouche: entreth into the Svarrantie ;
ANB may render the Land to him, in refpect of che pz
the vonches becanfe In rci veritate, he ($ not tenant of the anb.


Sed. 44.7.


€T Cem en relea⸗
feg De tout le
baoít que Home aden
cettein terres, ac, il
coutent acelup a que
le releas eft fait en
afcun cag, que tad
lefrantenemet en les
terres en fait, ouen
lep, al temps De re⸗
leas fait, ac, caren
chefcun cag lou ce-
lup a que le teleag eft
faitad franbtencamt
en fait, ou frankte-
nement en lep , al
temps Del releas, ac,
Donque le releas eft
bone,


bnt only a polltbilitie, anb fo baue J


Lfo in Releafes

of all the right
which a man hath in
certaine lands, &c. it
behooueth him to
whom the Releafe is
made in any cafe that
hee hath the freehold
inthe Lands,in Deed,
or in Lawat the ume
of the Releafe made,
&c. for in euery cafe
where he towhom the
Releafe is made hath
the freehold in Deed
orin Law at the time
of the Releafe, &c.
there the Releafe is
good.


bc becommeth Conant to tbe Demanvant,
ínítíc, but an eftranger cannot releaſe co


(4) 4m


Bis. OklabdAO o Sage. 244


Cd) And fott is (£tbe Conant alten banging the Præcipe, the réleafe of the Demandant to ( es
E p.41.


the Œenant to the Precipeigs god, and pet bz hath nothiag (a the land.

intime o£ brcationan Danuity, that tbe perſon ought to pap map be releafed to the Pa⸗
tron in reſpect of the pꝛiuitp, but a Releafe to the Dadinarp oniv femeth not god.becauſe ce
Baunuitp is tempozail, :

BE a 3D iffcifo? make a Leafe for life, rhe Diſſellee may releafeto him, for to {uch a Keleaſe
of abareright there neds no p2iuitp ag thal! be fatobercafter, But it the Dilleifoz make a
X cafctoz peares, the Dilſeiſee cannot veleaf: to him, becaufe he hath no effate of ffrehoid.
Baud pet in fone cafe aright of Freehold (hall dꝛowne in a chattell, as (£a Femehati a tight
of Dower fhe may relcafeto the Gardein in Chiuairic, and her right of Freholo fpallozoxon
tn the chattle, becaufe the $o2ít of Dower doth lye again yim, and the beire (ball take aduan⸗
tage of it, And ttig to beoblerucd, that by che ancient magie of the Common Law a Right
of chtrie, ona Cholcin ation cannot begrattten o? tranffcrred to a (ranger, and thereby is
auoyded great oppzeſſion, inturicand intuſtice · Nul charrer, nul vende, ne nul done vault per-
petualment fi ledonor nett {cific al temps de contra&s de z.droits.s.del droit de poffefsion, &
del droit del propertic. And therefore well faith Littleton, thatheeto whom a Weleale of a
right is made mutt bauc a freebeld. ,

For the better vnderſtanding of tranfferring of naked rights tolands 0» tencments efther
by Lcieale, Feoſtment oꝛ other Sife, itis tobe knowne, that there (g Ius proprietatis; a right
of ownerſhip, lus poffefsionis a right of ſeiſin oz poſſeſſion, and lus proprietatis & poffeísionis,
a right both of propertic and poſſeſſion: and ting is anctentip called Ius duplicatum, 92 Droit
droit. Foꝛ example, if aman be diſſeiſed of an acre of land, the Diſſeiſee hath lus proprietatis,
‘the Difleifoz bath lus poflcfsionis, and if the Dillettes veleafe to the Wileifos, hee hath Ius
proprietatis & poflefionis. Bnd reqularip (t holdeth true, that when a naked right toland is
releafed to one that hath lus poffefsionis, andanather bp a means title recouer the land from
Him, the right of poſſeſſion fall dzawe the naked right with tt, and ball not leaue a right in
him to whom the Keleaſe is made, Foꝛ example,’ i£ the bette of the Difleifer being in by dil⸗
cent A.doth difleifehim, the Dilſeiſee releafets A. moto bath A. the mere right to the lano.
Wut tf the heire of the Dilſeiſor enter into the land, and regaine che pofleflion,that (b :1102a$9
Sith (t tbe mere right to the land, and fhalinotreqaine the polTeiTion onip, and Ieaue the mere
Tight in A. but by the recontinuance of the poſſeſſion, the mere right is therewith veſted (n the
beire of the Difictfoz. ' :

But i£ the Done in taple difcontinue in fec; now fs the rcuerGon of the Donoꝛ turned to a
naked right, (€ the Donoz releaſeto the Difcontinne and die, and the tue in tatle doth recos
mer theland agatnft the Difcontinue, be fail lcauc the reucrGonin the IDifcontinuæ, £oz the
{fluc tn tatle can veceucr but the efatetatle onlp, and by confequence mutt leaue the reuerfion in
the Difcontinueæ, foz the 3Dono: cannot haue it again bis rcleafe: but (€ the Dileife cuter
bpon tbcbeíre of the Ditcifoz, andtnfeotke A. in fee, andthe heire of the Dilſſetloꝛ recouer the
Soboie eftate that ſhall daaw With it tbe meere right and leane nothing in the Feoftee. Nota
the diuerſitie. Another Díuerfitic ts obfernablc Shen the naked right (9 precedent be-
fore tbc acquifition of the defeatibiceftate, £o? there the recontinuance of the defeaGbie cftate
fbali not dia with (t the preceding right. (e) As t£ the Ditletfee diſſeiſe the hetre of the Dil⸗
feifoz. albctt the heire recouer the land againft the Difleifee, pet fhall hee leaue the p2eceding
right inthe Dilletſee. So i£ a woman that hath right of Dower etffcife the heire and he recos
ger the land againtt her,per (ball be leauethe right of Dower in ber,

Another diuerfity is tobe noted, oben the meere rightis fubfequent, andtranfferred bp ad
in La, there albeit the poſſeſſton be recontinued, pet that fhall not Da So thenak: D right with
it, but (ball teaucitin bin ; ag tithe beire of tie difleifoz bee diſſeiſed, and the Diſſeiſor ins
feoffe the heire apparant of the dificife being of full age, andthen the Difleife vpeth, and tbe

naked right difcend to him, and the heiveof the Dillciloz recouer the landagaint him, pet doth
Heleauethe naked right in the heire of the Diflcife, Sot the Totícontinue of. G cnant in
tatle infeoffs the iſſue tn taie of Full age, and Tenant in taple Die, andthen the Difcontinuce
tecoucr the land againſt him, pet he teaueth thenakedright in the fue, (c) Wut (£ the beire of
the Difletfor be diffetfed, and the Dilſſeiſee releafe to the Wifletloz bpon condition. t€ the Cone
Ditton be broken, tt (ball reueſt the naked right, And foit the MiMleife had entred pon the
Breite of the Diſſeiſoꝛ, and made a feoffment in fee, bpon condition, it he entred £07 the Conditi=
on broken, andthe heire of the Dilletfoz entre bpon him, the nakcdright ſhould be left tn the
3Díleifz Wutif the betre of the Difleifoz had cntred befoze the Condition broken, then the
“Wight of the MDiffeifes bao beene goneto ener, Wut noolct bg heave what Littleton fatth,


Xxx i Section


8.5. 3.21. 46.8.3.6.6.
8.H.6.33. 31. H. m4.


Mirror.ea. 3.8.17.


Mirror vbi faprá,
‘Bratton, lib.2 fo. 32.
Bretton fo,89. 121.
‘Bratton, lib, 5 . fo. 372.


(9) $+ AR. 1.10.4516.

$0. E,3.7.4.E. 3. Eflopp. 133.
3o. 4f. 5. x1. €. 3. Estrie 56,
13.49.41. 27. E. 3.84.4882.


21. H.8.tiz. "Reftere al action


"Br.$.
$0E.3.7. Vid. $04.475.475*
478.487.


(938.6.3.16. 9.H.7.34.


Lib.3.


(a) Bratt. lib. 4. fo.306.136.
Britton, fe, 8 3.5.

Fleta, lib. 5. ca.15.

Vid. Se8.680.


42.E. 7.20, 10.11.6.1 4s
17,£.3.78, 2. E. 3. 33.


14. H. 4.61. 31, H.7.12.


(a) 33 E. 3. barre 262,
40-402. 13.H.4.
furrender , 10.


(5) 38E, 5.12.


17.£.5.77. 18,€.4.35-


Cap. 8.


€ Gre Littleton di
{cribeth $obat. a
freehold in Law fg,

fo? bee bad fpoken before iu

many places of freeholbs in

Dead, Œbig Bracton calleth

(a) Ciuilem & naturalem

poffeffionem feu — feifinam.

(Ehe natural teifin to the

freehold in deede, and the Ci⸗

uill the freehold in Law,

It a man leuie a fine to à
man Sur conufance de droit
come'ceo que il ad de fon
done, 02 a Fine Sur conufauce
de droit tantum, thefe be £coffa
ments of Record, and the
Conufee hath a freehold in
Lawe ti him befozo hee ens
terety,

pos an exchange the par=
fies haue netther freehold in
Deed noꝛ in Law before thep
enter, fo bpon a partition the
freehold is not remoucd bnttl
an entric,

(g) RE Tenant foz life bp
the agrecinent o£. htm in the
reucction furrender onto him ;
be in che reuerfon hath a free=
hold in law in him before be
enter. (h)dTpor a líaerp With:


Of Releafes.


Se#.4.48.


€ [ Sanstenement
en lep ett, fix
come bn home diſſei⸗
{it bn anter, et mo⸗
tuft feifie, per d les
tenements diſcendõt
afon fits, coment q
fon fits ne entra pas
Eles tenements, bn-
cot tl ad bn franktnt
en lep, quel per force
de Difcent eft tect fur
lup, et put ceo on re⸗
leas fait a lup, iſſint
efteant feif be frãk⸗
tenement en icy, ctt
affets bon, et fil pret
keme tint efteant ſei⸗
fie eriiep,coment que
il ne brique enter pas
en fait. a motuft, fon
feme ferva enDoto,


fn the vie no freehold ts veſted before an entrte.
It a man doth bargatue and felliand bp Deed indented and inrolled, the freehold in Law
doth paffepzefentip. And fo When dies arc ratled bp Lonenant bpon gwdconfideration.
FE a Tenant in a Præcipe being feifeb of lands in fee, Confelle himfrifeto be a Villeine to
an eftranger and to hold the lano in Utlenage of him,the eftranger bp this acknowledgement
ig actuailpfeifed of the freevold and inherit ance Without anp entrie, Wut let ve returue te


Littleton.


Sed. 449.


Sed. 44.8. 4.4.9:


Reehold in Law is,

asif aman difleifech
another and dieth fe1-
fed, whereby the teae-
ments difcend to his
fonne albeit that his
fonne doth not enter
into the tenements, yet
hee hatha frechold in
law,which by force of
the difcent is caft vp-
onhim, and therefore
areleafe made to him
fo being feifed of a
freehold in Law is
good enough, and if he
taketh wife being fo
feifed inlaw although
he neuer enter in deed
and dieth, his wife fhal
be endowed.


€ [Xem en afcuns cafes de ve-

leaſes De tout le D20it. co⸗
ment que celupa que le releafe
eft fait nad riens en le franbte-
nement en fait, ne en Icp, vncore
le releaſe eft affet $ bone, Sitcom
le diſſeiſor leffalaterre que il ap
pet diſſeiſin a On auter pur terme
de fa bic, fauant le reuerſion a
lu», file difteifee ou fon heire te-
leſſa al diſſeiſoꝛ tout Le AE.

ce


At in fome cafes of releafes

of allthe right, albeit that he
to whom the releafe is made hath
nothingin the freehold in Deede
nor in Law,yetthe releafe is good
enough. As ifthe diffeifor letteth
the land which hee hath by diffei-
fin to another for terme of his life
fauing the reuerfionto him, if the
diffeifee or his heire releafe to the
diffeifor all the right,&c. this


Lib. Of Releafes, — 508.450.451.


cel veleate eft bone, pur ceo que releafe is good, becaufe hee to
~ celupa quele veleas eft fait a= whomthe releafe is made had in
uoít ẽ luy vnreuerſion al temps law areuerfion at the time of the


Del celcafe fait,


releafe made.


ali tbc right map be geod to bim in reuerſlon, albett be hath nothing tn the Freehold,


CET. Littleton addeth à limitation to the next precedent Section,viz. that a releafe of


becaufe he bath an eltate tn him,


€ Tout le droit, c. Dr Citle, Intexeſt, Demand, oz the like,


and fo (t (s {Fe in the reuerlion hath an cftate fox life op in taile in reuerſton ag (n the like cafe


trappeareth in the next Section.


€ E N meſme le manet eff, lou

leas eft fait a bn Home pur
terme Debic, leremainder abn
auter pur terme de auter bie, le
reinainder a le tierce en Ie tale,
leremainder ale quart en fee, (i
Hu eftranger que D20ít ab a là
terre, relc{ta tout fon Dzoit a aſ⸗
£un d eurent remainder, tiel re⸗
ieas eft bone, pur ceo que chefcun
Deeur ad bu remainder en fait
beftue en lup,


€ Hi {8 another limitation that a Releas is geod to him tn the remainder, albeit bee


Sed. 450.


N the fame manner it is where a

Leafe is madeto aman for term

of life, the remainder to ano-
ther for terme of another mans
life, the remainderto the third in
taile, the remainder to the fourth
in fee, if a ftranger which hath
rightto the land releafeth all his
rightto any of them inthe remain-
der,fuch releafe is good, becaufe
cuery of them hath a remainder in
Deed vefted in him.


bath nothing in tbc frehould tn poſſeſſton, becaufe be hath an cftatc in him, as hath
benc fato. In betn thele limitations (t is tobe obferueb, that the ſtate which mac
keth a man Œenant to the Præcipe ig faib to be the freehold ag bere the fhate of Tenant £o; life,


end not the rcucrüon in fee,


€ MES filetenant a terme De

bie foit Diffeifie, & puis
celup d adDdzoit ( efteantle pot-
ſeſlion en le diſſeiſor releſſe abn
De eur a que le remainder fuit
fait tout fon D20ít, cel veleas eft
void purceo que il nauoit bn res
mainder en fait al temps De tes
leas fait, fozfque tantfolement
bn droit Del remainder,


Sect. 451.


Vtif the tenant for terme of

life be diffeifed, & afterwards
he that hath right ( the poffeffion
being in the diffeifor ) releafeth to
one of them to whom the remain-
der was madeall his right, this re-
leafe is voide, becaufe hee had not
a remainder in Deed at thetime of
the releafe made, but only a right
of aremainder,


CLE? r{quetantfolement vn droit del remainder. For areleate of a right
toonethat hath but a bare right regularly te bopde, for as Littleron hath befoze faid,

bt to whom areleafe (g made of a bare right in lands anb tenements mutt have either a
freehold tn Deed 07 (n Law ts poletlion, 02 a fate in rematnder oxveuerfon in fee og fee tatte


$2 Fo; life,


XXX 3


$ed.


267


7E eng. 14.H.4.33.5,
41.£.3.17. 49,8,3.28,
(8 vit, :


g. E.4.13. 41. E, 3.17.
703.545 4. 28.5.3.
Tit. Entrse ys,

E. 2.08. Entrbe 7,


3
F, “NB, 207. E.


Vid $«B.M5.


Lib.3. (ap.8.


apH.c.5.


€ B5 this (t appeareth,
Ghat as a relcafe

made of a right to

bins tn reuerfion 02 remainder,
Hallapd and benefit him that
hath the particular cflate for
peares, life, o2 eſtate Tayle, ſo
areleafe of a right made to a
particular Tenant fo? life, 09
in Tatie, ſhall apd and bencfit
him 02 them tn the remainder.
Fé two Cenants (n Coms
mon of land graunt a Rent
charge of 4c-s.out of the fame,
to one in fee,and the Grantee
releafe to one of them, thts
hall ertingutfb but twentie
chillings, for thatthe Gaunt
ín indgement of Law was fez
uerall. So it ig ik two men
bc ſetſed of ſeueral Acres.and
granta rent vc fupra. ue
thereis a btuerfitíc betweene
fcuerall eftates (m feucrail
lands, and feuerall cftateg tn
oneland, for if one be Tenant
foz life of lands , the reuerfion
in fee ouer to another, tf thep


* tWwototne ina grant of a rent


out of the Lands ik the gran⸗
te releaſeth either to him in
the reuerſion, oz to Tenaunt
fox life, tbc whole rent (s ex⸗
tingutfhed , fo2 ít is but one
rent, atto (fTuett) out of both
eſtates, ano fo note the diuer-
fitíc. à

€ Sile Tenaunt ad


le fait en [on poigne a


pleader. And fo it is


tn both cafes: fox albett hee tn
the renerfion o) remainder ts a
Granger tothe Ded when the


releafe tg made to tbe Cenant, andt


Of Releafes.


Sethion 452.


p nota, Que
CI releas
fait a celuy; que ad
bu veuerfion ou bn
remainder en Fait,
ferucra et aidera ce⸗
lup que ad le Frank-
tenement, aurpbien
come & celup aque le
releate fuit fait, & le
Tenant auoít le re⸗
leafe en fon poign de
pleader,


$60.451,453.


Nd note that euc-

rie Releafe made
to him which hath a
Reuerfion or a Re-
mainder in Deed, fhall
ferue and ayde him
who hath the Free-
hold, as well as him
to whom the Releafe
was made , if the Te-
nant hath the relcafe in
his hand to plead.


Sect. 453.


€ ET" mefine le

manner eft lou
bn Relealſe € fait al
Tenaunt pur terme
De bie, ou al Tenant
en Ic Gail,ceo vrera
à eur eu Ie veuecfíon,
ou à eux en Ic Ke⸗
mainder, autpbíen
come al Œenaunt de
Franktenement, et
aueront aury grand
aduauntage De cel,
fis ceo popent motis
fre,


N the fame it is,
where a Releafe
is made tothe Te-

nantforlife, ortothe
Tenant in Tayle, this
fhall enure to themin -
the reuerfion, or to
them in the remain-
der, as well asto the
Tenant of the Free-
hold, and they fhall
haue as great aduan-
tage of this,if they can
fhew it. #4


he Tenant £02 life 02 in Taile te a ſtranget to the


Shen the Keleaſe te made to him in reuerſion 02 remainder, pet ſeeing thep are petuies in effate,
none of them in pleading fpall take bencfit thersof, without (being tbofamcin Court, which


tg Wozthte to beobferneo,


¶ Sils ceo poient monfire. The one cannot plead the releafe made
to the other, Without theming of ít, forthat thep are patuie in eltate, as hath beens laps, Cheres —
Gouc of cheſe two Sections neds no explication,


Sed.


E
7


€|&em (6 foit

Seignior et te-
nant, ct lc Cenaunt
foit Diffeifie, et E feig=
tío? relefla al z2if-
feifee tout le Dpoit
que tl auoit en E ſeig⸗
niozie, ou en le terre,
cel releate eft bone, et
le Deigniozie eft ers
tinct, et ceo eft pur
£aufc Del pꝛiuity que
eft perenter le Seig⸗
níour, et le Diſſeiſee
cat files auerst Dif-
feilee fotent pris, et
De eur le Dileitee
fuift or Bepleuin en-
uets le Seiqnioz, il
compellera le Seig⸗
mío? Dauotoscr ß luy,
car fil auovoet fur le
Difleifor , Donques
fur E matter monfire
lauototp abatera cat
le Diſſeiſee ett Te⸗
nant aluy en D20it ct
enla Ley,


Of Releafes,
Setfion 454.


Lío if there bee

Lord and Tenant,
and the Tenant be dif.
fcifed, and the Lord
releafeth to the Diffei-
fee all the right which
he hath in the Seigni-
orie or in the Land,
this Releafe is good,
and the Seigniorie is
extin&: And this is by
reafon of the. priuitie
which is betweene the
Lord and the Diffei-
fee : for if the Beafts
of the Diffeifee be ta-
ken, and of them the
Diffeifee fueth a Re-
pleuinagainft the lord,
hee fhall compell the
Lord to auow vpon
him, for if hee auow
vponthe diffeifor,thé


vpóthe matterfhewen &


the Auowrie fhall a-
bate, for the Diffeifee
is Tenant to him in
right and in Law.


€ Œreupon map bee
collected and obfer=
Hed timo diuerſitiea⸗
Fil, Betweene a Speígnteue
sie 02 Bent ferníceano a r
Charg :fona Seigntor! 07
Kent terntce may be releafeD
BHD extinguithed to him that
bath but a bare right in the
Land, And the reaton hereof
is ín refpet ef tye pzriuitte
betwene the dod and
tbe Genaunt in right, foz
be ts not onipas tenant to the
Auowꝛie, but 1€ hee die hie
beire Within age,he Hall be in
Ward; andifoffullage, bee
hail pay reltefe, and if hee die
Without beire, the Hand (ball
efcheat, UBut there is no fuc
pꝛiuitie in cale of a Rentz
charge, foz there the charge ona
ip iteth bpon the Land
Abe feconv biuerfittels be,
thene a Setgniorte and g
bare right to land: fo? a Be,
leaſe ot a barerigbt to Land
toone that bath but a bar,
right; is voyd, as hath been
fapd. Wut herein the cafe o
our Buthoz,areleafe ofa fetg=
niozleto him that bath but a
tight,ts go to extinguiſh the
eigniorie.

Nota, a Seigniozie, Kent,
02 Kight, cither ia præfenti,0g
in futuro, may be releaſed fine
manner of wayes, and the firk
thre without anp p2tuttte,
Firlt, Co the Œenant of the
Freboldin Ded oz in Law,


Secondly, Œo him in remainder. Thirdly, To him tn thereaerfion. Che other tie in tes
fpet of 35 21uitic, ag ſirſt, beretbe 1020 releaſeth big Seignioꝛie tothe Tenant being viffcifed,
bauíng but aright, and no eftateat all, Secondly, in refpet of the pztuitic without any effate
9; right, ag bp the Demandant to the Wouchee, 9? Dono; to the Done , after the Done hath
bifcontinued in fe, ag appeareth hereafter in this Chapter.


€ Per caufe de prinitie &c. See fo? this 10020. Priuitie) Sed. 461.
€ Ucompellera le Seigniar danowrer fur luy, &c. Œbis is vegulatlp


268


Vi.SeB.451.


Li.10.fe.48. Lampets cafe.


Se.455.


20.H.6.9 b. 41. E. 7.26.


true, bnt tf the 1020 hath accepted feruices of the Difeifos , tbe te Dilleiſee cannot enfozce XS odit T


tbe 1.070 toauot bpon htm, though bis beats be taken, ac.
£a man bath títle to aue a watt of Œfcheat, tf he accept homage oꝛ fealtte ofthe Tenaunt,
he tg barred of his yo2ít of Eſcheat: but tf be accept rent of the Œcnant, that is no bar to him,
fo? (t may be recctucd by the hands ofa tbaplife, (d) Wut fome doc bold, that it there be Low
and Tenant, andthe Cenant be dificifed, and tbe Dilſeiſee die Without heire, the 1070 accepta
tent by the hands of the Diftetfos, thts (g no barre tobim, Contrarie tt is tf he aus fo; the
Bent in Court of Kecoꝛd, 02 it he take a cozpozall Ceruice, ag Homage o» feaitie, for the dit
feifor is in bp wꝛong: but tf the Lerd accept the rent bp she hands of the hetre of the 3D iletfoz,
02 vf bis Feoſtee, becaule they bein bp title, his Hail barre bias of bis Eſcheat. which —
e


1.2.1. Difcent 17.
26.B.3,71. 4.H.6.31.


M D w


B.144.0,
(a) 6.6.6 ir Ejohent Bra


Lib.3.


(e) 7-H.4.17. 3.


Cap.8.


b
aunt
Nm


Of Releafes.


eon; 38. — fo? make a Feoffement in fee, 9? dic ſeiſed, and after the Dilleilee die without heire, then there


Us Sell. 5 56.


(D ar.N.t.ca.is·


Lig. fe. 136. Afeongls cafe.


37. H.8.fo.4. 32.H. 8.ca.3-
Lib.9.fo.36. Bueknals cafe.


34. H.8. Awwrie Br.113.
27.H.8. 4. & 20.
Bucknals cafe vbs fnpra.


Li.9.f6.32. incafa "Dauewrie,
44,E. 3.20. 11. H.7.4.
21.H.7. 40. 34.H.6.18.
16.E 4.10. 6, R. 2. Reſcou⸗
31,


{8 no Œfchcat at all,becaufe the Lord hatha Œenantin by Citle. Bnd hen Littleton Wrote,
the Dilletfes in the cafe here put, ſhould baut compelled the 1.070 tohane anowed bpon him, ag
Littleton holdeth. But now this ts alteredbya latter Stat.ot (f )21. H.8. fo; Sobertag bp
Fines, Recoueries, Grants, anb fecret Feoſtements, tc. made by Tenaunts to perfong v⸗
knowwne, the 10709 Swere put from Knowledge of their Cenants, bpon whom bp order of law
they fhouid make their Buowztes,t. It is by that Statute enacted, Chat (f tbt Loꝛd bail
diftrepne vpon the Lands oz Genementg holoen, c. that he map auo% , Ec. Spon thefame
Lands; qc, agin Lands, tc. within his See oz Detgniozie, c. Without naming of anp perfon
tertaine, and without n.aking auowzie bpon a perfon certaine. Upon Which Stature tbefg
foure popnts arc to be obferued : Firſt, Chat the Loꝛd bath ſtill cleaion either to auow accozs
ding tothe Common Law, bp force of the Statute, by veafon of thts $9020 ( May. ) Secondip,
Albert the purutew of the Wet be general, pet all neceflarieinctoents arcto be fupplicd, anb
the fcope and end of the Ac to betaken: and therefore though he need not tomake bis anowzle
bpon any perfon certaine, pet he mutt alledge Seifin bp the Lande offome Œenant in certaine,
Sithin fortiepeares, Thirdip, Chat tf the Duowzie be made according to the Statute,eucrie
Plaintife inthe Replenin 02 fecond deliverance, be he Termoꝛ oꝛ other,may hauceuctp anfwer
to the Auowꝛte that is fuffictent ; and alfo aue apo, and eucrie other abuantage in La, (dite
Clatiner onely except) for difclatme he cannot,beranfe in that cafe tbe auowꝛie 19 made bpon no
certatne perfon, Fourthly, toherethe words of the Statutebe, It the Led diftrepne vpon
the Lands and Œenements holden, vet tf tbe X030 come todittrepne, andthe erant enchafe
bis Beaſts Which were Within the biew, out of the Land holden, and there the Lozd diftrepne,
albeit the viftrefle be taken out of bis Fee and Seigniertein that cafe, pet ts tt Within tbefatb
SHtature, foz in tndgement of Lak the diftrefle (8 la&ofull, ant ag taken Within bis Foe and
Setgniozie, and this Statute being made tofuppaefTe rand, (8 to be taken bp Equitie


Setl. 455.


home en Caile, referuant

al 320n02 et a (eg heires bn
certaine rent.fi E Donee foit DiC-
feifie, et puis le Donoꝛ relefta al
once et a (eg Heires, tout le
Dioit que tl auoit en la Cerve,et
puis le Donee enter en la
terre Cut le Diſſeiſor, en ceft cate
le rent eft ale, put ceo que le Diſ⸗
feifecaltemps de releas Fait fuit
tenant en Dzoit, eten la Lep al
320102, ct auotot a fine force co-
utent De eftre Fait ſur luy perle
320n0? purlerent aberete , ac,
Mes oncoze rien De Droit Ó ter⸗
tes, 5, de le Doit, Dele reuerſion
paſſera per tiel Releafe, pur ceo
que le Donee a que Ie Releale eft
fait, adonque nauoít tiens en la
Terre fortque tantfolement bn
Doit, et iffint le Droit Del Cerre
ne puiffoit adonques paficr al
Donee per tiel t3eleafe,


€ [ace (i tetreCoít Done a bn


A Lfo if Land be giuento aman
in Taile, referuing tothe Do-
nor and to his heires a certain rent,
if the Donee be diffeifed,and after
the Donor releafe to the donee and
his heires allthe right which hee
hath in the Land,and after the Do-
nee enter into the Land vpon the
Diffeifor, in this cafe the Rent is
gone, forthat the Diffeifee at the
time of the Releafe made, was
Tenant in Right,and in Law tothe
Donor, and the Auowrie of Fine
force ought tobee made vpon him
by the Donor for the rent behind,
&c. butyet nothing of the right
of the lands, (/ez.) of the reuerfi-
on, fhall paffe by fuch releafe, for
that the Donee to whom the Re-
leafeis made, then had nothing in
the Land butonely a right , and fo
the right of the Land could not
then paffe to the Doneé by fuch
Releafe.

€ s


Setl. 453. !


3. Entre be buderfteod ofa difcent o3 feotfement, after tbe title of Œfcheat accrned:(c) foi tfthe Wiflets |


— Lib. Of Releaſes. 568.456.457.
€ S: le donee [oit diffoifie, cc. THiS is euident bp that bohich hath


bene fato, But admit that the Done maketha teolfiment tn fee, and tbe Donor re

leafs onto him and his betres, all the right inthe land, this (ball extinguiſh the rent, bee

sanft the 11020 mutt anoxo bpon him, and pet the tenant in tafle after the Ccoftment haty no
sight in the land, But the reafon is trrefpect of the prinitie, anb tbat the (m) Donoztsbp

. mecelTitie compellabic to atio» bpon bim cmlp, £02 tf bee Hhentd auow bpon the sifcontiguce,
then (t ſhould appcare of bis oSvne being, that tbe reuerfion whereunto the vent is incident
fbouib bes out of him, and confequentip the auowꝛie (bonito abate , and fo has tt ( n ) rcfolnco
Trin. 18. Eliz. in the Coutt of Common Pieas in Sir Thomas Wiats cafe; which 3i heard
«nb obſerucd. And Liccleron fatth vere thatin cafe of the Wiiieifin of fine force, the auowꝛis


mult be made bpon the Done,


Fncore ri


ens de droit, dc. de renerfion, de. Here the diuerſitie a=


forciaw bettoane the Kent Serutceanda bare Wight to tbe Janv appeareth, À


CE? meſme le manner eft, (t
leas foit a ou pur tecme De
bít, reſeruant al leſſor et a (cs
eires certaine rent,
foit diſſeiſie ct puts Lefto? releffa
alieffce et a es beires, tout le
oit que fl ad en la terre, tapecs
le leſſee enter, coment que en ceft
cas le cent eft ertinct, tbnco2e
tien Del Doit dela reuerſion paſ⸗


fera, Caufa qua fupra.


Seton 456.


ft Ie leſſee


N the fame manner it is, if aleafe

be made to one for terme of life,
referuing to the leffor and to his
heires a certaine rent, if the leffee
be diffeifed, and after the Leffor
releafe to the Leffee and to his
heiresall theright which he hath
intheland, and after the leffee en-
treth, albeit in this cafe tharent is
extinct, yet nothing of the rightot


the reuerfion fhall paffe , Caufa qua


fipra.


€ Erebp the diuerfitp is made apparant betweene a i eleafe of a Rent Hernice Ont of
H Land, anda ikeleale of right to Land i this Sedion,


Es fi foit be-

tap feignioz
&beraptenant, er le
tenat fait on feo fit
en fee. Ie quel feoffce
ne onque Deutent te-
nant al Scignioz, fi
E Seignio2 relefia al
feoffoz tout fon D20ít
ec, ceft releas eſt en
tout bold, pur ceo q
le fcoffo? ab aul Doit
en la terre x il nett
Cenant en dzoit al


Sed. 457.


BY: if there be very
Lord & very tenat,
and the tenant maketh
afeoffment in fee , the
which feoffce doth ne-
uer become tenant to
the Lord, ifthe Lord
releafe to the feoffor
all his right, &c. this
releafe is altogether
void becaufethe feof-
for hath noright inthe
Land, and hee is not
Tenant in rightto the


Dre


€ V Era) Seignior
crveraytenant.

Chis (s to be vnderſteod of
a Lozo in fe Ginple, and of a
Æenant of like eſtate.

Chere bee toute manner of
auoweies fo; ikents and
Herutes, C, viz. 1. Super ve-
rum tenentem, ag ín the cafe
here put, 2. Super verum te-
nentem in forma pixedig@a,ag
where a cafe for lífe, o2a
gift in tatle bec maté, the re
mano tit feo, 3. bpon onead
byon bis tenant bp the man
nes omitting (verie) and this
íg oben the Loꝛd bath a pars
ticular eftate inthe Seignio⸗
tie, and fo ſhall the Donoz

Spon


269.


"Vids Se.454, 1.H.5:tie,
grant 43. 14.4.4, 38.006. 3.
fol.29 lb 6.58.

Lampets cafe vbi fnpra.


(m) 10. E£.3.26.38.E. 3.8.5. ^


31. E. 3.gerd. 116.5. 4-3.
7.E.4.27. 15. E. 4-13

in) Trm.18. Els Sw Tho-
mas Vias safe in ommum
"Dance,


Vide Afconzhes cafe lib 9. fal.
135-136. 20. H.6.9.. 2. H. 4.
24. 12.€.4.2. 16.H.6.anow-
11017. 9. lig. Dier 257.

5. Hg. 11.7.€ .4.24.

20. E, 3 .ewowrie 13i,


| Lib.3.


47 -€ .3.fal.vltion,
38.633.


anf, Bap. Ig.


4.Ë,3,22,7.2,3.8.7.E,4.17
29. H.8.659. ancwry. Br. Ti.
Kip. 3 fol. 65.66. Pennanti
sas, 7, H« 4.14.


9.5.4.6. 34. H. 6.46.
37. H.6. 39. H,8. auo wris.


AE.3.32, 47. E.3.4.


8t. M Bep 1g.


(4p.8.


bpon the Done e? Letto: bp-
onthe Leflæ, 4.Sur le mat-
tcrenlaterre, ag Within big
feand Seigniorte. As where
thetenant by Knights Ser-
nice maketh a Leafe fop life
referuing a ient, and die bis
bcíre Within age, the Ware


Deine fhall auoto bpon the


Leſſee, fcz, Super materiam
pradictam in terris & tene-


Of Releafes.
Seignioz, mes tant
folement tenant quat
al auovory faite, ct il
ne buques compelles
tà le Seigqnioz da⸗
uotoet fut luy, cat le
Seigniorz auowera
fur le feoftce fil bottle,


Sect. 457.
Lord, but only tenant
as tomake theauowre,
and hee fhall neuer
compell the Lord to
auow vpon him, for
the Lord fhall auow
vpon the feoffee if he
will.


mentis prædi@is vt infra feo-
dum & Dominium fuum. snow bp the Statute the berp Lord map anew, ag (n Landg
within hts Fe and Seigniorie, without auowing bpon anp perfon in certaine,

Pere appearcth the dinerhtte betweene a Cenantin Calle, anda Cenantin fe Simple,
foz albeit Genant in Taile make a feoffment tn fee, pet the right of the Œntaileremaine, and
fhall diſcend to tbe Iſſue intatle, Wut when the Conant in fec imple make a Écoffment tn Ce,
no rightat all rematne of his eftate, but the Whole ts tranfferred to the feofke.

Alſo the 3.010 is not compellable in that cafeto auoSo bpon the Feoffoꝛ, but (E bee illag
T itl j ton t fatti; he map auow on the fcoffæ, but fo it ig not ag hath beene ſaid (n cafe of tex
nant in tatle,

Motea diucrfitp betweene Actions and Acs Which concerne the right, and Actions anb
Acs Whichconcerne the poTeffíon only, Foꝛ a wꝛit of Cuftomes and Seruices lyeth hot ac
gatutk the feoffo2, noz a releaſe to bim ſhall extinguiſh the Setantozy. So t£ a Reſcous be mang
an Alſiſe thail not ite againt the feoffo», and him that made the Reſcous, becanle tbe feoſtee 1e
Œenant, anb tn Atle, tbefarplufage incroacheD {hail bee auopded, ro thele Actions and
Acs concerne theright,but of a fci(inanb an auo wꝛie Which concerne the pofleffion,itis others
wife, And il the 1020 veleafe to the keoſtor this is gad betweene them ag tothe pollellion and
difcharge of the Brrerages, but the keoftes (ball not take benefit of it, koꝛ that,ag hath been (ajo,
ft extendeth not to theright. Wut the fcoffoz (ball pleud a Keleaſe to the feoftee, faz therebp the
Seigniozte te ertint, as if Lellæ fo; life doth Svalte, and grant ouer his eftate , andthe Leflog
releafe to the Gzante, in an Action of toalte againſt the Leſſee, be (ball pleadthe releaſe, and
pet he hath nothing intheland, And ſo in waſte thall tenant in Dower o2 by the Courtefie
intheltke cafe, and the bouche, and the Cenant ina Præcipe after a feoiment made. And fo
{ma Contra formam collationis,


¶ Le feoffee ne vnques deneigne tenant. Nota, here an egcellent
point of Learning, viz. (£ there bec Lord and enant , and the Kent is behind bp diuers
peareg , andthe Œenant make a fcoffment in feo, t£ tbe Lopdaccept the Serutce o? Went of tha -
feoffe duc in bis time, hee ſhall Tofe the Axxerages duc in the timeof the feofFor, for after fuch
acceptance he fhall not auow pon the Feoffo2, noz vpon the fcoffee Foz the BWrrerages incurred
in the time of the fcoffoz. But in thar cafe if the fcoffoz dieth, albeit the 3020 accept the
Bent or Seruice bp the hand of the Ceoffee Due in bis time, be (ball notioofe tbe Arrerages fop
905p the Lato compelich bímte auow bpon the feos, anb that Sobícb the Law compelleth
him tnto,(ball not preindice him. 5$

Hoitisand fo the fame rcafon, t£ tbere be Loꝛd, Meſne, and Conant, and tbe rent due bp
the Melne is behind, and after the Cenant forctudge the Meſne, and the Lord recciue the
Sernices of the Meine Which ilſue out of the Cenancte, be (ball not be barred of the Arrera⸗
ges Which iſlued out of the Meſnaltie, and fo if the rent be behind, and the Cenant dicth, the
acceptance of the feruices by the hand of the bcíre hail notbasre bim of the Arrerages, for tn
thefe cafes albeit tbe perfong be altered, pet the 3020 doth accept tbe feruices of him which ors
lp ought te doe them. i

Wut ag long as the feoffoz liueth the Loꝛd Hall notbec compelled to anow bpon the feoffee,
vnleſſe he gtueth the 3.020 notice, and tender onto hie all tbe Arrerages.

But now bp the Statute the 1.020 may auow bpon the Hands fo holden, as te lands Withs
in bis fes o3 Seignioꝛy Without naming of anp perfon certains to bee Œenant of the fame,
and Without making of anp auowrie bpon anp perfon certaine, ag hath bane fato, which batis
much altered the Common Law tn the cafes aboueſaid, fos the benefit and ſatetie of the Loꝛd

Wut pet thefecafes arenecelfarp to bee Enosone ( £02 Which parpofe 3i haue added tem ) og
that the Rope map auoxo ſtill at the Common Law (f. be will, :


écct,


Lib.3.


Of Releafes.


Sed. 458.


€ A werent ett lou le berap

tenant eft diſſeilie, come
en le cas auantbít, car file berap
tenant que ett diſſeiſie tetane Del
Seignioz pet feruice à chiualer,
Æmozuit (fon heire efteant deins
age) le S»cíguío aucta a ſeiſera
le garde del heire, a iſſint nauera
imp le gard del feoffoz que fitt
le feoffment en fee, ac, iſlint él ett
graund Diuerfity enter les deur
cates, ac,


b erie it is where the verie

tenant isdiffeifed , as inthe
cafe aforefaid , for if the very te-
nant who is diffeifed , hold of the
Lord by Knights Seruice and
dieth (his heire being within age)
the Lord fhall haue and feize the
Wardfhip of the heire, and fo fhall
he not haue the ward of the feoffor
that made the feoffment in fee,&c.
So thete is a great diuerfitie be-
tweene thefe two cafes,


568.458.459.


Dé this foffic(ent hath beene fatd befoze,


CITem {i vn hoe
leffa a vn auter
fon terre pur terme
Dans, ft le lefloz re=
leffa al leffee tout for
noit, ac, Deuant que
le leſſee auoit enter en
melme le terre per
korce ð mefme fleas,
tiel releas e(t bord,
pur ceo que le leſſee
nauoit poſſ.en là ter⸗
re al temps del re⸗
leas fait, mes tant⸗
folement bn Dzoit
Dauer mefme la ter=
re pet force De mefine
1e leas, Wes file leſ⸗
fee enter en mefme la
terre, a ent eit poff,
perforce De mefine le
leas, Donque tiel re=
leas fait alup per le
feoffoz, ou per fon
heire , eft fufficient a
luy per caufe Del paí-
uitie, que perforce ol
Pss ett peventer eux,
e


Setlion 459.


: À L{ if a man let.
teth to another
his land for tearme of
yeares, if the leffor re-
leafe to the leffee all
his right, &c. before
that the leffee had en-
tred into the fame land
by force of the fame
leafe, fuch releafe is
void , for that the lef-
fee had not poffeffion
in the land atthe time
of the releafe made,
but only a right to
haue the fame land by
force of the leafe, But
if the leffee enter into
the land , and hath
poſſeſſiõ of it by force
ofthe faid leafc, then
fuch releafe made to
him by the feoffor, or
by his heire is fuffici-
enttohim, by reafon
of the priuitie which
by force of the leafeis
betweene them, &c.


yee


IA D ES que le lef-

fée auoit enter,
dre. Foꝛ before entry
the Leſſee hath but intereffe
termini, an intereft of a terme
and no poflellion, and theres
fore a rcleafe Which enure bp
Swap of (nlarging of an cffate
cannot wozke Without a pof=
feflion, for befoze poffeflion
there ig noreuerfion, and pet
tEatenantoz twentie veares
tn poſſeſſton make a leaſe to B.
koꝛ fiuc veares, and B. enter,
areleafe to tbe fir& leſſee ts
god, fo? be had an actuall pofs
fefion, and the poffclion of
bis Lcile is bis poflettton,
And fo (t is ik a man make a
leafe foz peateg , tbe remayn⸗
der fos peares , and tbe Sirk
leflæ Doth enter, a releafeto
bim in the remagnoer foz
peares is god to tnlarge big
etate,

Wut tf a man makealeafe
fo? peares to begin pacfentlp,
reſeruing a rent, ik befozethe
leſſee Doth enter the Ic(T02 res
leafeth all the right that bee
hath inthe land, albett this
releafe cannot tnlarge big ea
ſtate, yet it (hall in refped of
the patuttte ertingutth the
rent, Bnd fo it (s tf a leafe
be made to begin at Michacl-
mas, reſeruing a vent, and
befoze the dap the leſſoꝛ releafe
all the right that bee hath in
the land, tbíg cannot mr

2 We


270


13. H. 4,13. 36. E. 3. tifgara.
10, 6.H.7.9. 37H 6.1. 22,
H.6.27.7.E.6.tit. gard. Er,


49.€.3.28. 33.H6.8.
37 H.6.18. 31. E.4.37-
4. H.7.10. 15. H. 3.14.


22.€.4. Surrender 6.


+


Lib. 3.


(b) Aich.39.& 40. Elix
1n Seasoarie, berveene Sir
Henry Weadhnfe and

Sa William Palen.


(c) Tafch.38.Elix.inquare
smopedit per Bennet verf.
Luefque de "Norwich

$n ( ammmi banco.


PL(*m.431.


25.Z. 3. 553. 31.£. 34"
Confirmat. V4. 31.4 ff.
Plus.


a1, H.6.37. 2.€.4.6.b.
7-E.4.27. 8. E.4.16.
a9. H. 6. Release €.


Cap.8. Of Releafes. Fed.460. 461.


enlarge tbc eftate but to —— the rent in reſpec of the pꝛiuitie, ag (t Sas reſolued (b) in
e Exchequer Which 3| obferucd,

" A man are the next auopdance of an Aduowſon to two, tbt ont of tbem may. before
the Church become boide relcafc to the other, foz although the G2rantez cannot releafe to
them to encreale their eftate, becanfe their intercl is future, and not in poffeflion, pet onc of
them to extinguilh bis intereft may releafe to the other in reſpec of the pzinttp. Wutafter the
Church become foie, then fuch a Releale is boide, becaufe then it ts (ag tt were) buta thing
ín ation. Bnd this was refolued (c) by the Whale Court of Commen pleag, which J mp feify
beardanod obſerued. And by confequent inthe cafeof Littleton, tf a Reale for veares de made
to tio, albeit the Leſſoz befoze thep enter cannot Reltaſe tothe to enlarge their cftate, get
one of them map befoze entríc Keleale to the other.


€ Mes tantfolement un droit dre. Which ts not fo to bee vnder⸗
ftoo that hee hath buta naked right, fo? then be could not grant it ouer, but fæin hee hath
Intere fle termin: befoze entre, he map grant (t ouer, albeit fox Want of an acuall goffe(rtom he
ig not capable of a Releaſe to enlarge his eftate,


C Mes file leſſee emer en mefine le terre, cc. This is cuident, And —
herein note a diuerfitie betweene a Leale £o? life, and fo? peateg, for befoze the Leſſee Foz peares
enter, a 18 elcafc cannot be made dnto him, but tf aman make a Lente foz life, the Remainder
fo? life, and the ſirſt Leſſee dieth, TRelcafc to him tn theremainder and to bis bríreg is gap
befoze he doth enter to enlarge bis eftate, £oz tbat be hath an eflate of a Frexhold in Law in
him, bitch map beenlargeb by 1Relcafe befoze entríc.


CB


Bnd wbere our Autbhuz fpeakett onlp of a Leflæ fo) peares, the fame lap it ($ of a Tenant
bp Statute merchant oz Staple, oz Tenant bp Elegit 02 the Yke.


'y theſe two Se⸗
ctions ts to be
obferueb a di⸗
uerfitie bet weene a Œc-
nant at Will and a Gc-
nant at fufferance, foz a
teleafe to a Tenant at
will is god, becaule bes
tweene them there ts a
poffeitíon with a patuity,
but a Keleaſe to a Œc
nant atfufferance ts voyd
becaufe he hath a poſſeſti⸗
en without priuity. Ag
t€ Leflæ for peares hold
oner bis terme,Æc. a Ke⸗
leafc to htm ts botde foz
that there ts no pztutty
betMweene them, and fo are
the bokes that fpeake of
thts matter to be bnder=
ffcob.


€ * Sed contrarin


tenetur ec. This
is e£ a new addition, and
the booke bere cited ill vn⸗
derſtod, fo? it ig to be vn⸗
derftod of a Tenant at
fafferance.


€ De fa te(le de-


mene occupia. Tee
doth not fap, Dc fa tcilc


Sed. 460.67 461.


CE N meime le ma-

*— net eft, come il
femble, ou cafe eft fait
a vn home, atener De
bleſſoz a fa bolunt;pet
fozce De quel leas 1e
leffee cit poffefTion. ft le
leffoz en ceft cafe fait
bn veleas al ieffee de
tout fon D20ít,ac, ceft
teleag eft affets bon
purle paiuítie que eft
penter eur,car en bain
ferra d faire eftate per
vn liuerie De feifin a
bn auter, lou il ad pof-
fetfíot: De mefmes les
tenements per le leas
De mefme celup De-
uant,ac,

€* Sed contrariü te-
netur,P.2 .Ed.4.p touts
les Futtices,


¶ Nthe fame manner
it is as it feemeth,
wherea Leaíe is made
to a manto hold of the
Leffor at his will, by
force of which Leafe
the Leffee hath poffef-
fion, ifthe Leffor in this
cafe make a releafe to
the Leffce of all his
right, &c. this releafe is
good enough for the
priuity which is ‘be
tweene them, for it thall
beeinvaineto make an
eftate by a liuery of fei-
fin to another where he
hath poffeffion of the
fame land by theleafe of
the fame má before, &c.
But the contrarie is
holden, Paféh.2.E.4. by”
all the Iuftices, f.


Sedi


Lib.5.


Of Releafes,


Sell.A61.


Cg lou home
€M De fa tefte De-


meti occupta terts ou
tenements a la volunt
celup que ad Ie frank=
tenement, & tiel occu-
pier ne claima tiens
forte a bolunt,æc, (i
celup que ad le frank:
tenement voile velea-
fer tout fon Dzoit al oc-
cupier,æc, ticl Keleaſe
eft Loide, put ceo que
nul prtuity ẽ perenter
eur per leafe fait al oc-
cupter, tic per auter
maucecac,


BY: where a man of
his owne head oc-
cupieth lands or téne-
ments at the will of him
which hath the frec-
hold, and fuch occupier
claimeth nothing but at
will,&c. if hee which
hath the freehold will
releafcall his right to
the occupier, &c. this
releafe is voide, becaufe
there is no priuity be-
tweene them by the
-leafe made to the occu-
pier,nor by other man-
ner,&c.


Sedi. 4 61.462.


demefii enz,&c.fo ag tbíg
to to bes bnber(ton of a
Tenant at fafferance,viz.
where a man commeth to
the pefleffion ſirſt lawfui-
lp, and boluctb ouer.

(m) oz t£ a man en-
fet into land of big
atone wrong, and take
the profite, bis webs to
hold (tat the will of tbe
owner cannot qualifie his
$v10ng, but bes is a Diſ⸗
feifoz, and then tbe Res
leafe tebim ts good, oz if
the otner confented ther=
unto, then hee is a Œez
nant at Will, and that
Swap alfo the Keleale ts
gov. Wut there ts a dé
netfitp ben onc cont
meth to a particular ex
fate in land bp the ac of
the partie, and when bp
ad in Hat, for if the
Gardein held over, hee ts
an abatoz becaufe his fn
tereft came bp ad in Law,


Nul prinitye. Priuitie(g à 10020 common aftoell to the €n-

gliſh, ag tothe french, and ín the vnderſtanding of the Common Law te Fourefoulde,
1 Bs Pꝛiuies in Elkate, Whereaf Littleton here fpeahetb, ag betwænc the Dono, and
Done , ieflozand Lele , which prtuttte is euer immediate.
2 Piiules in Blod, asthe heiretothe anceftoz, e? betweene Coparceners,¢c.


3 35ituicg in Wepzefentation, ag Erecutors,€c. to the Œeftatoz,


Bnd fourthip, Pziuities in Cenure,as the 31070 and Cenant, tc. Which may bee reducedto
tio genceall heads, Pziuies in Ded, and Priuies in Law.


Seil. 462.67 463.


| Cem tome en-

feoffe autrs hoes
be faterre fur confi-
Denice, et al entent De
performer fa darreiũ
bolunt, et le feoffor
occupiaſt mefine la
terre a le volũt de (cs
feoffees, et puisies
feoffces releſſont per
lout fait a tour fcof-
fo? toutlour D20ít.ac.
ceo ad efte bis quefti-
on, ft tiel releas fott
bon ou non, Ct afcás
ont dit, qtiel velcas


Lfo if a man en- €


feoffe other men
of his land vpon con-
fidence, and tothe in-
tent to performe his
laft will, & the feoffor
occupieth the fame
land atthe will of his


Ere is a quettion
moued, anb the rea⸗
fons ot both Udes


bee, and: ag tt hath bene
obferued, the latter opinion ts
the better, being Littletons
one opinion,


€ 1 ferra entendue


per la ley que le feoffor


doit maintenant occupie


feotfees, and after the /aterre a la volunt de les


feoftecs  releafe


by feeffees. fox intend-


their deed to their ments of Law mentioned by


ds our Butho
feoffor all their right, cay in eee p


&c. this hath beene a
queftion if fuch releafe


Here is to bte obferued tbc
tntendment of Law, that
ben a fcoffmentis made toa


be good or no. And fnturetfe, ag to the perfor:


fome haue faid, that
y ve 3


tance of bis laſt wil!
feoffess fall bee feifer to pes


tbe


271


Vid, Self, 68.


(m) Temps 4.8278. Tenant
4 wolwst,"Br.15.

3-€. 4038. 18.E.4.25.
39-£.3.a$. 12.E.3. 4/86,
11.8.3, sbid.89.

12.49 21 13.£.3. Aff.93.
38.4] 11. 34.490 10.
10.E. 3.41. 8.E,3.63..


Vid.3.part of the Infistutes
Marlbr.ca.16. dr
10. E, 4.9.19.


Old N.8.117.137.
Lib.3.f6.13. Walker: safe,
Lib. 4.fe. 123.124.
Vid.348.454.


I12.E, 4.12.5. 15.E.4.
9.H.7.25.
Vid.$etf. 302. 156.340.


4: E. 4. 8.5. 9.H.7.fe.vltises.
15.H 7.3.5, 14. H.8.9.a.


SeH.99.100.119,357.377.
393-40 6.440. ;


3 5. H.6. Sdpama 23.


15.4 7.12.5. 37.8, 6.36.


11.H.4.$2. 7, H.4.22.
1. Mar,111, Dir,


V


Lib.6.fo, v7.8. Syr Edward


"ilem dr Frayni cafe lv. Oe


Cap.8.


vſe efthe Feoſtoz and of his
beíreg in the meane ome,


Ipfe etenim Leges cupiunt
vt iureregantur.


Bud reafon Would that feing
the feoffement (g made with⸗
out confideration,and the feof=
fos hath net difpofed ef the
p2ofits ín themeane time, that
bp conftrucion and intend=
ment of Law the Jjfeoffo;
ought to occupíe the fame ín
the meane time. Bnd fo ít tg
When the Seo: diſpoſeth the
profits fo2 a particulartimein
præfenti, the efe of tbe Inhe⸗
ritance ball be tothe Jreoftoa
and bis hetres, as a thing not
diſpoſed of, toherein ít ts to
bc obferned, Chat Lands and
Tenements conucped spon
confidences, bles, and tratte,
are tobe ruled anb decided, (€
queftion groweth bpon the
confidences, bles, 02 trufts, bp
the Judges of the Law : foz
that tt appeareth by tbíg and
the net Section, thep are
within the Cntendment and
conftrucion of the Lawes of
the calme,

And it ig to be obferueb(ag
hath benc fapb) that there ig
a Diverfitte betweene a Écoftez
ment oflandg at this dap bp-
en confidence , 02 tethe intent
to performe bis laft til, and
a Fcofkment to the bfeof fuch
gerfon and perfong, and of
fuch eftate and eftates, ag be
ſhall appopnt by his ial will,
for (n the Gr cafe, the Land
pafleth bp the will, and not bp
the freoffement, fo; after the
feoffementthe feoffoz Wag
feifev in Fee Gmpleas he Mag
befoze, but inthe latter Cafe
the will purſuing his power


Of Releafes.


eft bopd, pur ceo que
nul privitie fuit per=
enter les feoftees
et lout feoſtoꝛ entant
que nul XLeafe fuit
fait ap2es tícl fcoffe-
ment perles feoffees
al feoffo?, atencr a
lour bolunt, Ct aſ⸗
cung ont Dit le con-
trarie , et ceo p deur
caufes,


Seël.447.


fuch Releafe is voyd,
becaufe there was no
priuitie between the
feoffees and their feof-
for, in fomuch asno
Leafe was made after
fuch feoffement by the
feoffecs to the feoffor,
to hold at their will ;
and fome haue faid the
contrarie, and that for
two caufes.


Se. 465.


€, V7 fS ctt, Que
just ttel feof-
ment eft fait fur con
fidence a performer
la bolunt del feoftoz
il ſerra intenDue per
la Lep,quele fFeoffoz
Doit maintenant oc-
cupier la terre a la
bolunt De fes Feof-
fees,et tint tl eft tiel
manner De pziuitie
enter eur, ficome hoe
fait bn fcoffement as
auters, et tls incon=
tínent fur le Feoffe-
ment, boplent à grã⸗
terõt que lour feoffoz
occupiera la Terre a
lour volunt,ee,


Ne is, That when

fuch Feoffement
is made vpon confi-
dence to performe the
willof the Feoffor, it
fhall bee intended by
the Law,that the feof-
for ought prefently to
occupie the Land at
the will of his Feof-
fees,and fo there is the
like kind of priuitie
betweene them : As if
aman make a Feoffe-
mentto others, & they
immediately vpon the
feoffement , will and
grant, thattheir Feof-
for fhall occupie the
Land at their wil, &c.


is but a direction of the fes of the freoffement; andthe Cates pafie bp execution of the vſcs
which Were raiſed vpon tbe Feoffement, but in both cafes the Feoſtees are ſeiſed to the ble of
the Feoffoꝛ and bis heires inthe meane time, and all this and much moze concerning this mate


ter hath bœnc adindged.


Mote, bfes are ratfed cither bp tranf{mutation of the eftate, as bp Fine, Feokement, Com⸗
mon rccoueríe; €c. 02 eut of tbc ftate of the owner of the Hand by bargatne and falcbp Ded
indented and {nrolled, 02 bp couenantopon lawtull confideration, whereof pou map read plen=


tifulip in mp Reports.


A Feofee to the fe of A. and his betres, beforcthe Statute of 27-H.3.fozmonp bargaineth
andfelleth the Land to C. and big betres, who hath no notice of the fozmer ble, pet no bfe pak
feth bp this bargaine and fale, foz there cannot be two vſes in Effe, of one and tbe fame Zand,
anð ſeeing there is no tranfmutation of poffe(Tíon bp the Œerrestenant, the foꝛmer bfc cam. netz


there extine mogaltereo, And it thers conib be tkvo bles o£ ons and the fame Lanvd,thsn conib


no


Libs,


Of Releafes.


Se#.464..


3 » Statute exccute either of them for tbe bucertaintic, But it A. bifteife one to the
— — qu both Martio) and fell the land fos monep to C. C.bath an tfe, aro bere be two
vſes of one land, but of ſeuerall natures, the one, viz. Spon the bargaine anbfale to be executed

tt not.
yak Hele — all vſes aretranfferred bp Wet of Parliament, (c) into poſſeiſion, (€) 27. H.8.0.1e.
foas thecafe Sbicb Littleton here puta is tberby altogether altered. Pot tt is necellarte to bo
knotone What the Common Law was before the making of the Statute, and map ferue fo)
the bnofolcbae of the Law in lite cafe,


€ Incontinent fur le Feoffement .Quz incontinenti fiunt in effe vident’.


€ our volant, crc. ere is implyed euery tenancie at till ig
at the Stil e£ both parties, ag before in big proper placehath bene ſhewed.


€ V fà aut caufe

tis allegcont,
Que fi tícl Ere vault
FAS. per an ac. don⸗


que tielfeoffoz ſerra


Set. 464.


A bother caufethey
alledge, That if
fuch land bee worth
fortie fhillings a yere,
&¢. then fuch Feoffor


ture en affifes et en {hall be fworne in Af-


auters enquefts en
plees realx, et aury
en plees perfonalls
be quel graund fum
que leg pPlaintifes
boílent counter, ac,
Et ceoe perf Com-
mon ley de la Cerre,
Ergo ceo eft pur bn
gtaund caufe, et la
caufe eft, que la Lep
- boet quetiels Feof⸗
fozs et lour heyres
boíent occupter, xc,
et prenDer et enioper
touts maner ð pꝛo⸗
fits, iſſues, et reue⸗
nues, ac, ſitome ies
Tenements fuerdt
four mefmes fans
interruption De ies
Feofees , nient ob-
flant tiel feoffement,
Ergo mefme la Ley
Done priuitie peren=
tet tiels feoffor3 ct


fife and otherenque(is
in Plees realls, and al-
foin Plees perfonalls,
of what great fumme
foeuer the Plaintife
willdeclare,&c. And
this is by the Com-
mon Law of the land,
Ergethisis for a great
caufe, and the caufe is,
forthat the Law will
that fuch Feoffors and
their heyres ought to
occupie, &c. and take
and enioy all manner
of profits, iffues , and
reuenues,&c. as ifthe
Lands were their own
without interruption
of the Feoffees , not-
withftanding ^ fuch
Feoffement. Ergo the
fame law giuetha pri-
uitie betweene fuch
Feoffors and the Feof-
fees vpon confidence,


€. PY. the State of
2.H,5.cap.3.Statut.2.

{tig enacted, Chat in

thaee cafes he that paſſeth in
an Enquelt ougbt to hane
Lands and Œencments tothe
Value of foztie fbillings ; viz.
Sivit, Upon trial of the death
ofaman. Secondly, in Dies
teall bet weene partic and parc
tie, And thirdly, In Ples
perfonail, Shere the debt o3
the dammages tn tbe Decla=
tation amount onto fortie
Markes, And (t te Worth the
noting, Chat the Judges
that were at the making of
that Statute did conſtrue it
bp equitie:for obere the (fat.
ſpeakes tn the üundiuc debs
9)» Damages, thep adiudged
that bere the debt oz damma-
Ses amounted tefortp markg,
that (t ag within the Sta⸗
tute, Fortefcue (f£) fatth , Vbi
damna vel debitum in perfo-
nalibus A &ionibus non exce-
dunr quadraginta Marcas mo»
netz Anglicane hinc non te-
quiritur, quod luratores in As
&ionibus huiufmodi tantum
expendere poffint : habebunt
tamen terram vel redditum, ad
valorem competentem , iuxta
difcretionem lufticiariorum,
&c. Bnd fopas much as at
thetime of the making of this
Statute, the greater part of
the Hands in England in
thot troubicfome anb dangec
Tous tines (ben that vᷣn⸗
bappie controuerfie betweene
tbe Doufes of Porke and
Läcafier Wag begun spere in
tfe, Bnd the Statute Wag
malt to remedte a pm
af


272


28.H.8.Dy.fe.p.
Vi.W 2.00.38. Leflat. de 21.
E. 1. de Turati ponendu in Af~


Lfère.


S.H. 5. fe. 5.
(£) Ferrefe. eain.


e Lib.3.


15. H.7. 13.5, 13.H.7.7 5.
5-E.4.7.4. j


humo


CP) 3. B. 6. 39.Challeng. 19.
21.H.6.39.


(g) 357. H.8.ce. te. !


$7. El.c«. €.


PLCem.3 $2. b. in Dalairieret
dr 349-6. ;

n 4.141.122, 127:140.in

Chudleys cafe.

Li fe $8.8. Li. fo d

L.7 fo 33.6 34-


Fortefe ca25516517.


Flet.li.5.4.34 15. H.7.14.
ai E 4.4


(2p .8.


thatthe Sberife bfc to return
fanpie men of fmail o2 no vn⸗
derftanding, and therefore tbe
Statute proutded, Chat he
fhould returne fufficient men,
and albeit in Law the Land
Gas the Feofters,pet for that
they had it but vpon trutt
ann Cefty que vie take the
Swhoie profits.as our Authoz
here faith, and incquitte and
confctence the Land was bis,
therefore the Judges foz ad=
uancement and erpedition of
Julſtice, extended the Sta⸗
tute (again& tie Letter) to
Cefty que vfe, and not to the
Feoſtes.

(n) nt noteíta man hath
a Frechold pur terme dauter
vic, oz ts ſeiled in his Sotues


Of Releafes,
les feoffces fur con-
fidence, ac, pur qux
caufes tis ont Dit que
ticls Keleaſes faits
per tiels feoffces fur
confidéce a lour fcof-
for ou a fes heirs at.
iſſint occupant là tt,
ferta affets bon, ct
ceft le melioz opinion
come il femble.xc,

Œ Queare, cat ceo
femble nul Lep acett
tout,


Sed, 4.65.


&c. forwhich caufes |
they haue fayd , ,T hat


fuch releafes made by
fuch Feoffees vppon
confidence to their
Feoffor orto his heirs,
&c. fo occupying the
Lands, fhall bee good
enough: and this is


the better opinion , as —


it fcemeth.

Quare, for this fee-
methno Law at this
day.


right,and tg returned ona Jurie, pet {€ after hebercturned, Cefly que vie, 02 hig Wife die, hee
may be challenger, and fo tt 19 tf after the returne the lands be enticed, -


€ Etceoclt per le Common Ley. 39etetbacetbingg are to be obfers
wed, Firſt, Bhat che furreft conftrucion ofa Statute ts bp therule and reafon of the Com=
mon Law, Secondly, Chit dies were at tbe Common Law, Chirdlp, Chat noto feing
the Statute (g) of 27-H.8.cap.10. which hath bene enacted fince Littleton gete,bath tranfe
ferred the poticffton to the bfc, this cafe holbeth not at this day, but this latter opinion bet
that Statute was god Law, ag Littleton here taketh it. *


Meſme la Ley done priuitie &c. Hereot it followoeth, Chat wher
the Law giues tc any man anp eſtate 02 poſſeſſion, the Law giueth alſo a. geíuitíe ane other
neceflartes to the famesand Littleton concinderh tt Sith an Illatiue, Ergo melme la ley done pris
uitie, Which is berte obferuabic fo? a conciuGon tm other cafes. ,

And the ( Queere ) here made in theendof this Section ts not inthe Dziginall, but added
by fomcother, and cherefoze to be reiected. |

Allo (ince Littleton wꝛote the ſayd Statute of z.H.5. (s altered : fo? Shere that Statute
limited fortte Chillings, noto alatter Statute hatl ratled tt to foure pounds, an fo it ought ta
be contained inthe Venire facias. ; *

Nota, an Clfc is a Œruft or Confidence repoſed in ſome other, Swhich is not iſſuing out of
the land, but ag a thing collateral,annexed in painítieto the eſtate of the land and to the perfor


*


touching the Land, (cz. that Cefty que vfe fball take the profit, and that the Grerre Œcnaunt…


fhall make an eftate according to his direction, So ag Cefty que vic had neither Ius in re 03
Ius ad rem, but onelp a confidence and truft, fez Which he had no remedte by tbe Common law,
but fo? bacach of truft bis remedie Was onclp by Subpana in Chancerie: and petthe Judges
foz the caufeaforefapd,made the fapo conſtruction bpon the fapo Statute. }

Mote how Jurors (ball bercturmeo , both in Common Pies, and alfoin Plees of the
Crowne, and tn bat manner esidence ball be gíuen to them,and how thep (ball be kept, ors
till they give their verdict, yen may read in Forcefeue, and therefoze need not to be here tnferted, |


Sed. 465.


€ TI Cem Releales
folonquele mat:
tet en faít,atcua
foits ont lout effect
per force Denlatger by force to enlarge
leftate celuy, aque the ftate of him to


le '


Lfo Releafes ac-
cording to the
matterin fa&, fome-
times haue their effect


that Sohen a iReleafc
Doth enure bp Way of
enlarging of an cftate,
that theremult be pris
uitieof eftate, ag betweene
Leſſoz and Leſſee, Donozand
Done. jio) if A. make a
Leafeto B. fox iife, and the


€ [5 ig a certaine rule


Lib.3.


le releaſe eſt fait, Si⸗
come ieo leſſa certain
terre a vn home pur
terme des ans, per
force de que il eſt en
poſſ. a puis ieo releſ⸗
faalup tout le droit
que ico ape en Ie ter=
te fans pluts parole
mitter en le fait, + Dc-
liuer à lup le fait,
donques tl ad eftate
fo2fque pur terme de
fa vie.Et la cauſe eft,
pur ceo que quant le
renerfion ou ie re=
mainder ef en bn
hone, le quel voile
enlarger per fon tc-
leas leftateletenant,
&c, il nauera pluis
greinder eftate, meg
en ticl manner a
forme , ficome tiel
feoffoz fuit feifte en
fee , a bolloit per fon
fait faire eftate a bn
£n certaine forme, &
Deliver a lup feilin p
fozce d mefine le fait:
ftentiel fait De feof-
fement ne foit afcun
parol denberitance,
Donques il ad forſq;
eftate pur terme De
bie, a {lint tl eſt en
tiels releafes faits
per eur en la reuct-
fion ou en le cemaín-
bet, Cat ſi ieo leffala
terre abn home pur
terme à (a bie, puts
feo cele(fa alu» tout
mon Droit, fauns
plus Dive Ele releas,


à


Of Releafes,


whom the releafe is
made. Asif I letcer-
taine Land to one for
tearme of yeares, by
force whereof hee is
in poffeffion, and after
Ireleafe to him all the
right which I hauein
the land without put-
ting more words in the
Deed , and deliuer to
him the Deed, then
hath hee an eftate but
fortearme of his life.
And the reafon is for
that whenthe reuerfi-
on or remaynder is in
aman who will by his
releafe inlarge the e-
ftate of the Tenant,
&c. hee fhall haue no
greater eftate , but in
fuch manner & forme,
as if fuch leffor were
feifed in fee,and by his
Deed will make an e-
ftatetoone ina certain
forme, and deliuer to
him feifin by force of
the fame Deed: if in
fuch Deed of feoffe-
ment there be not any
word of Inheritance,
then he hath but an e-
ftate for life, and fo it
is in fuch Releafes
made by thofe inthe
reuerfion or inthere-
mainder. For if I let
land to a man for
tearme of his life, and
after I releafe to him
all my right without
more faying in the re-
leafe , his eftate is not

335


Sefl. 4.65.


Xefí maketh) a Leafe fox
reares, and aftes A. releafeth
tothe Leſſes fox peares, and
bis heires, this releafetg void
to ínlarge the eſtate, becaufe
there is no patuitie betweene
A. anb the Leflæ foz peares,

Sif a man makea Lealefoz
twentie peares , and the
Leffe make a Leafe for teu
pearcs, tf the ſirſt Leſſor doth
releafetothefccond Leſſee and
big beires, this telcafc (s botd
fo» the canfe atoꝛeſaid.

Foꝛ the fame caufe, tf the
Done intatle make a Leafe
fo? big one life,and the Do⸗
noz relcafe to the Leſſee and
his beires , this releaſe te
void to (nlarge the eftate.

And ag priuitie is necetfas
rie ín thts cafe, fo printtte on⸗
ly is not fuffictent. As if an
3infant make a Leafe £o life,
and the Leflæ granteth ouer
big eſtate With Warranty,the
3infant at fullage beingetha
Dum fuit infra ztatem , the
Œenant voucheth bis Gran»
to? , bo entreth into war⸗
tantie, the demaundant releas
{eth to him and his heires;
Bere is pptaitic in Law, and
a tenancie in fuppoñtion of
Law , and pet becaufe hee in
reivermate hath no eftate, ít
cannot cnure tobím by Swap
ef inlargement, £02 how cars
bis eftatc bee inlarged, that
hath not any,

BE a Tenant by the curtez
Gegrant ouer bis ciate, pet
be ts tenant ag to an Action
of toate , Artoznement, qc,
and pet a Kelcafe to him and
his betteg cannot enure to
inlarge bis eftate chat batbne
eftate at all,

But tf aman make a leafe
fo? peares, the remapnder Foz
itfe,areleafe bp the Leſſoꝛto
the Leſſee fos peateg, anb to
big hetres, is good for that hee
hath both a printtic and an
eftate , anv the releafe alſo to
him in the remapnoder for like
and bis heires (g geodalfo,

3€ F grant the renerfion
of mp Œenant fozlife, toan=
other Foz Itfe,now (ball not 3]
Hane an Acton of waſte: bũt
1£ 3 releafe tothe diantæ for
lifeandbis heires, now bor
bath the Fee (iple, and ball

panty


273


48.E. 3.16.soper Perf &
Finchden


41.8.3174, E, d. 17.


Lib.3.


16 H.6. releale 450
21.€.2.relea/e, Sta: bam,


(2)1 3 H.4.6. Stanf.prer. 9. b.
18. 8.4.5.2. 4 f.12.
11, M.7. 19. 130, H. 6.11.


9.EliQ. Dier.365. 10.Eliz.,
Bend oes. Litt.lib.s .fol.68.
€7.70.b. 1 30.5,


Beebefera inthe (hapteref
Fea Simple.


(b) 4o. E. 3,41. 46.E. 3.
19. H.6. 3 3.H.6. 5.10, E,4.3


16, E.4.3.5.37. H.9.tit alie-
nation. Br.31. 8, H.4.8.
49. AGS. 9 Eliz. Die 263.


Vid. Litti.fv. t, 6p.


Cap.8.


punítb the waſte boue after,

Ft ts farther to bee ob
ferued, that to a releafe that
enureth bp Soap of inlarge=
ment ofthe eftate, there (e not
onlp required pztuitic,as hath
bene faid, anb an eftate alfo,
bnt fuffictent Swozds tn Law
to raiſe oz create a new eftate,
It a man make a Leafe to A.
foz tearme of the life of B. anb
after releafeto A.all big right
in the land by thig, A. hath
an eftare fo? tearme of bis
o&enc life,foz a icafe £02 terme
ef bis one life (e higher in
tudgement o£ Law , then an
eftate fo? tearme of another
mans life,

Fla Fem⸗Couert be Tes


nant fog life, areleafe tothe bufband and
eftate in the bufband, Sobercupon the rel
(a) foz by the entermarrtage he gaineth


*


OfReleafes.


fon eftate nett mp en-
large, Wes ſi ieo re-
lefla à iup a à fes
betres,Donqueg il an
fee limple et ff teo re-
leffa à lup a a (tes
heives De fon corps
engendzes, Donques
il an fee tatle, ac, Ct
iffint il content de
fpecifier en le fait
quel eftate celup ad
le celeag eft fait aue-
ta,


@ Tout ledroit. Vide Sea. 650.


Œ Par terme des ans.
Statute, Htaple, o? Merchant,
Gardeine tn Chiuairie Which hold
tn theland, by this a freehold p
is the greateft eftate that can pafle without

jit a man make a leaſe foz ten peares,
relealeth all bis right to the Leflæ, he th
cannot Downe another, an yeares ca


aſſeth foz the


Mes fi ico releafe a luy cy a fes beires, ec.


ued that when a releafe doth enure by Swap of enlargement of a


can pafle Without apt woꝛds of Inh
Wut there is a diuerfitte betw


th See fimple, op Jrectatle,
and bp Swap of mitter leftate ,


time there ned not any words
to bis Wife, anb toa thtrd perfon andto their heires,
the bufband , this hall enure by way of mitter leita
the cftate, becaufe thehufband bad a Fe fimple, an

Hott is i€ thercleafe had bene made t


(b) FE there be three Joyntenants, and one rele
ureth by Way of mitter leftate,


Wut (f therebe two Yoyntena
doth not to all purpofes enure bp i
Sobom the releale (s made fbatl for m
releaſe fall veſt, all in the other 3


berítance,


€ pafleth the whole
nte, a


Sed. 465.
enlarged , but if Ire-
leafe to him and to his
heires, then he hath a
Fee fimple, and if I
releafe to him andto
his heires of his bo-
die begotten , then
he hath a fee taile, &c.
And fo it behoueth to
fpccifie inthe Deed
what eftate hee to
whom the Releafe is
made fhall haue,


his heiresis god , for thereis both pꝛiuitie and an
cafe may fufficientip enure by Swap of tnlargement
a kreehold in his Sotfez right, 5


So it ig (f ateleafe bee made to tenant bp
02 Cenant by Elegit, as hath bene fato, and fo likewife te
eth in fo2 tbe balue, bp bim inthe rcuet(ion of ail bts right
life of him to whom tbe rcicafe is made , fog that

apt words of 3inberitance,
the remainder fox twentie peareg,


ati haue an eftate fo: thirtie peares , to; one Chattle
nnot be confumed in peares.


Hereit is to be obfer=
n eftate no 3inberitance either
erttance,

ene a relcafe that enureth bp 5
foz hen an cffate pafleth by 5p
of Inheritance, Asif


be inthe remaynder


ap of enlargement of the fate


ap of mitrerleftate, there fomes

à fopnt eftate be made to the hufband and
the third perfon releaſeth all hig rigbtto nu
te, and not bp Sway of enlargement of

D needeth not to aue anp $2020 of In⸗

o the wike. ;

afe to one of the other all his eight, this en⸗
Fe ſimple Without thefe words Chcíteg. )
nb the onc of them reieafe ail his tight totheother, this
ap Of mitter leſtate, fozit maketh no degre, andheto —
anp purpofeg be adivdged fn from the Grft feoffoz, and this
opntenant Without thefe Wozdg ( betres. )


ut if there be too Copareeners, and the onc relcafc all bis right to the other, this fball


enure bp Day of mitter leftate and (ball
paffe the Whole fe Gmple. And tt {ot
mitter leftare, there muft be pztuítíe ofc

Ff two Coparceners be of a rent,
other map Kelcafe to her, notwithftan
Mitter leftate, and the map Keleate alfo to the Œer-tenant,


mabe a degree, and without thefe words (heires ) fall
obreobferuco, that to releafes that enure bp Wap of
ftate at the time of the relcafe.

amb theone of themtake the Cerctenant to hufband,the
Ding the rent be in fufpence,


and ít thall inure bp Soap of


and that fhail enure bp Wap of era


e piod: : butt the Keleale to her iler and to her hufband it is qo tobe fence how ít


all enure,


Littleton haning now fpoken of 1Rcle
anb of Relcafes that enure by Way of Mitter leftate
of Mitter le droit, Soag of tha
Leg, (t appearcth that fome doc entre b
ter leftate, fome bp Way of Mitter lc d

t


Extinguiſhmen


afes that entire by Swap of Eniargement of the etate,
pꝛoceedeth to Releaſes that enure by Wap
t Which hath beene and (Dall bc


fai bp out Autboz of Relea⸗


P Wap of (Enlargement of eftate, fome bp Way of Mit-
roit, bp Wap of Entricand jfeofftent, and fome bp


Seit.


\


f


Lib.3.


Of Releafes.


Se#.4.66.


C[' Tem atcuns foits releates

vrera De mitter ct befter Le
Droit celup que fait le celeate, a
celupaquelereles eft fait, Dis
come bn bore eft Dillet{t,et il re⸗
leffa a fon diffeiloz tout le Droit
que il ad, en ceft cag le diſſeiſor
ad fon doit, iſſint que lou fon c-
ſtate adeuant fuit tozcious, 02€
per tíel celeag il eft fait loyal et


Lfofometimes Releafes fhall

enure de mitter and veft the
right of him which makes the Re-
leafeto himto whom the Releafe
ismade. Asif a manbe difleifed,
and he releafeth to his diffeifor all
his right. In this cafe the diifeifor
hath his right, fo as where before
his ftate was wrongfull, now by
this releafe itis made lawfull and


Sed. 466.467.


droiturel.


right.


€ E T il releffa a fon diſſeiſor, &c. Chis veleate fo putteth the right of
the Difeifeeto rhe Dileifoz,that itchangeth the quatítp of the eftate of che x» ilTciloz
fos where big eſtate Was before wꝛongtuil, (t ts bp this Releaſe made laxofull, 45ut
how farre and to what refpedg bis eſtate is changed Ayall be fato hereafter in this Chapter in


big proper place,


(LM C8 hic nora,
M que quát hort
eft leiſi en fee (imple,
daſcun terres ou te-
nements, et br auter
voile releafer à lup
tout Ic Droit que il AD
enmefinesles tents
fine befoigne De pat-
ler de les heires ceiup
a à le releas ett fait,
pur ceo que il auoít
fee (impie al temps
De releas fait, Car (i
releas fuit fait a lup
pur bn tour, ou put
vn heure, ceo fecroit
aury fort aluy € lep,
ficome ti bf releas a
lup ct a (eg heires.
Car quant fon Dzoit
fuit ale De lup a bn
foits per fon releas
fans afcun condition


Seld. 467.


Vt here note, that

whenamanis fei-
fed infee fimple of a-
ny lands or tenements,
and another will re-
leafe to bim all the
right which he hath in
the fame tenements,he
needeth not to fpeake
of the heires ofhim to
whom the releafe is
made,forthat he hath
a fee fimple atthe time
of the releafe made,
for if the releafe was
made to him for a
day or an houre, this
fhall bee as ftrong to
him in law,as if he had
releafedto himand his
heires. For when his
right was once gone
from him by his re-
leafe without any con-

Zzz 2


QL] L re befoigne a per-
ler de les hesres,


oc. Bnd the
teafon of Littleton hereof is
fo; that the Dillcifor hath a
fee Ginple at the time of the
Keleaſe made Bnd this ap-
peareth bp that bich hath
becnefaid befoze, fo ag requ-
larlp be that bath a fcc. imple
at the time of the Keleaſe
made of a right,sc. needeth
not {peake of bis heires.


€ Car fi releafe fuit
fait a luy pur un tour,


orc. $02 the diuerſity
tg betweene a Keleaſe of part
of the efkateof a Bight. anb
between a Keleaſe of a Right
in part of the Land, Bud
thercfore Littleton here fait},
that a Kelcaſe of a Right fo2
a bap o1 an bourcig of ag
god force, ag {€ he bad releas
fco his right to bie and bis
beires, But ik aman beot(-
fetfed of two acres bee map
releafe his right in onc of
them, and pet enter inte tbc
otbtr.


€ Sans aſcun condi-
fion,


274


Vide. E. 3.17.
i2, E. 4. trt. Difcost Fa,


| Lila.


(€) 4.E.2.Releas ga.
434A X2. 17. -Aff:3-
31. 4:13. a1, M. 24.


Rer. "Dar iamen. 1°. H.6.num-
39.-4p- Gwilliam cafe. |
1o. E. 3.0ep 2. 3.H,7-fel.6*


Caps

non, Acherein is im⸗
hu tio biucrüties, ic bes
twe antity of the e⸗ ;
Pag i S an the * touts tours, is gone for eucr.

lity thereof, fox aibett the XDtflcifoc cannot relcale part of the ffatc ag hath beene ſatd, pet map
be rcloafe bis right vpon condition ag here it appearcth bp Littleton, (c) and ít agræth Sith
our bokes.

Difo here tg another diuerſitie bet weene a right whereot Littleton puttetb big cafe which
ig favoured tr Law, and a Condition created bp the party which ts edious in Law, for that
tt Defcatcth cftates. Bndtherefoge tf a Condition bc releafed opor. Condition, the Welcafe
15 GOD, andthe Condition voide. dns

bat things map be bane pon Condition is toe large a matter to handle in thts place, our
Anthoz hauing treated of Conditions befogc, onlp to gine a touch of fome things omitted
there, (bau faffice, An exprefle Manumilſton of a Villeine cannot be wpon conditton, foz once
frectn that cafe, and euer free, aifoan Attornment toa Srantce bpon condition, the Cenbitis
on ts vade bccaufe the Grant to oncefetticd, Wut this igtobec baderfiod of a Condition
fubfcquent, and not of a Condition pzecevent, toz in both tbofe cafes the Condition paccedenr


aca celup que ad fee dition,é&c.to him that


ig god. Bnt Letters pattents of Denisation made to an Aifen map be either vpon Conditic


on fubfequent o? paecedent,andfo may the dking make a Charter of pardon to a maw of bis


Sell. 4.68.
" EME lou hort ad bn reuer⸗


life vpon Conditton ag ts aboucfatb.


(ion en fee (imple, ou bu
remainder € fee (imple, al temps
de celcag fait, la (il bople releaſer
al tenant per terme dans ou pur
terme De bie, ou altenant en le
taile, il couient a Determiner le-
ftate que celup a que le releas eft
fait anera per fozce De melme le
releas pur ceo que tie! releag en⸗
urera pur enlarger leſtate de ce⸗
lup, aque Ic telcag cf fait,


Vt where aman hath a reuerfi-

oninfeefimple, or a remain-
der in fee fimple at the time of the
releafe made, there if hee will re-
leafe to the tenant for yeares,or for
life, or to the tenant intaile, hee
ought to determine the eftate,
which he to whom the releafe is
made fhal haue by force ofthe fame
releafe, for that fuch releafe fhall
enure to enlarge the eftate of him
to whom the releafe ismade.


Ok tbíg tulklclent hath bent fato before,


Sell. 469.


€ Es auterment eft lou

home ab fozfque D20ít

a la terre, et nad riens
en le teuerfion ne en k remainder
en fait, Cat fi tie! home releſſa
tout fon Droit a bti que eft teñ De
ie franbtenement, tout fon D20ít
eft ale, coment que nul mention
foit fait De les heires celup à
que le releas eſt fait. Car fi ico
leſſa terres a vn home pur terme


Vt otherwile it is where a man

hath buta right to the land,
and hath nothing in the reuerfion
nor inthe remainder in Deed. For
if fuch a manreleaſe all his right
to one which is tenant of the free-
hold, allhisrightis gone, albeit
no mention be made of the heires
of him to whom the releafe is
made: forif I let landsto one for
terme of his life, if I after releafe


Of Releafes.  Seét.4 68.469. |


fimple, tl eft ale à hath the fce fimple, it


-


D


|


Lib.


put enlarger fon eftate,tl content
q ieo releſta a lup et a feg beíteg
de fon corps engender, ou à luy
et a fes heires,oupertiels pols:


Mauer et teñ a luyet a ſes heits


De fon corps engendres.ou a leg
beires males De fon cozps en⸗
gendres, ou tiels femblables e-
ftates,ou auterment il nad pluís
greind cftate q tlauoit adeuant,


Of Releafes,
de fa bíc, (f eo puis releas a luy


tohim to enlarge his eftate, itbe-
houeth that I releafeto him and to
his heires of his body engendred,
or to himand his heires,or by thefe
words, to haue and to hold to him
andto his heires of his body en-
gendred, or to the heires males of
his body engendred, or fuch like
eftates, or otherwife hee hath no

greater eftate then hee had be-

fore, í


€ A Vn que eft tenant de franktenement. Here it appeareth that to a
Keleaſe of aright, made to anpthat hath an eſtate of freehold in Dced o2 in Law no
prtuiticatallisrequifite, Bg (£f a Difleifoy make a Leafe fo? ifc, (£ the Dilſetſo⸗


Selle. 275


telcafc to the Leflec, thts ts god, and dircelp Within the rule of Lirtleton becaufe the Leſſe
hath an etate of trechoĩd, ameit there be nopziattic. And o ít is i£ a Diſſetſor make a Leafc to
A. and bis hetres during the tífeof Band A. bieth, a Keleaſe bp the Dilletlee to bis heire bes


fore he Doth actually enter 19 qo»,


Sethon.


| €N br (mon tet à terme


bc bie, leila meſme la

terre oufter abu auter
pur terme De bie De fou leſſee, le
remainder a bn auteren fee, o2¢
ſi ieo releſſa a celup a que mon
tenant le(fa(f pur terme De bie,
ceo terra battre a touts iours.co⸗
ment que nul mention foit fait B
{cs heires, pur ceo queal temps
Dereleas fait ico auop nul reuer=
ſion mes tant{olement bn Doit
Dauerlarenerfion,car p ríelleag,
et Ie remainder oufter que mon
tenant fift en ceo cas monrener=
fion fuit Difcontinue,#c, a tiel re=
leas b2era a celup €t remainder,
Dauer aduantage Dc ceo auribien
come al tenant aterine De bie,


470.


Vif my tenant for life letteth

the fame land oucr to another

for terme of the life of his
Leffee, the remainder to another
infee, now if I releafe to him to
whom my tenant made a Leafe for
terme of life, I (hall bee barred for
euer, albeit that no mention bee
made of his heires, for that at the
time of the releafe made I had no
reuerfion, but onlya rightto haue
the reuerfion. For by fuch a releafe
andthe remainder ouer which my
tenant made inthis cafe my reuer-
fion was difcontinued,&c. and this
releafe (hall enure to him inthe re-
mainder to haue aduantage of it as


wellasto the tenant for terme of
life.


GEL Ttleron haning befozc fpoken of rcleafeg Which enure by Wap of Enlargemet,bpwap of
Mitter l'eitacc € bp Swap of Mitrer le droit, here fpeaketh of a releafe of aright Sobich in


fome refpets enurcth bp way of Crtingafhment, ag inthis cafe $obíc Littl: here puttetb,
the Keleaſe tothe Leſſee of the Leſſee doth not cnurc bp Swap oF Mitter le droit, foz then Mould
he haue the whole right, but as it Were bp wap of Ertinguidment,inrefpee! of him,that made
the KReleaſe, and that ít Hall enureto him in the rematuder which ts a quality of an inheritance

$335 extinguiſhed.


(a) Lb.8.f0.148, 24m. A
——


a1. RÀ, 6.41.


T): 1 E 4,118. Difion. F.a9


(ap.8.


etingnifhsd. Wut pet the right is not
€ Monrenerfionfn


t difcontinue, Gc. 1)


Of Releafes.


Sei.4.73,4.92.


extinct in deed, a8 thall befapd hereafter in this Chapter,
eere Difcontinue fs in a


largefence taken for Diueſted, though the entrte of she Keffoa be not taben away, which is iti»


otied in tbig ( c.)


€ Qo» come va T nt

en Le. Which
ig certainiptrue inthis cafe
ef Remainder, anb fo it (g al
fo ín cafe of a Reuerſion, as f£
a Diffcifor make a Ltaſe foz
life, and the Difletfee both
releafe all bis tight to the lefa
fer, this 3A eleafe fball enureto
bim in the reucrfion, als
beit thep hane feuerall
eftates, sa hath bene fapd ,
Which (m implted (m this
(&c)


ut t€ a Diffeifoz make a


Seélion 4.71.


€ CO At acelintent
is Qr enaunt à
terme De bie et celuy
en le remainder font
ficome on Œenaunt
en Ley, et font ficde
bn Tenant fuit fole
{eifie en fon demeſne
come De fee al temps
De tiel releafe fait a
lup,ac,


Or to this intent

the tenant for term
of life, and he in the
remainder, areas one
Tenant in Law, and
areas if one Tenaunt
were fole feifed in his
Demefne as of Fee at
the time of fuch Re-
leafe made vnio him,
&c.


Leafe fox fe, tbe remainder in Fee, albeit they to foit purpofeg (as here (s fapb) are ag
ene €enant in Law, pet ££ tbe Difletfæ releafe the Actions to the Tenant fo; life, after the
Death of she Tenant fo; life, he tn the rematnDer chall not take benefit of this reicafe, fo? it cx»


tended onelp to the Tenant fo? life,


as ít (s holden (a) in Edward Althams cafe Aud im like


manner (€ the Dilleiſoz make a Leafe fog life, and the Diſſeiſee releafeall Actions te the Lele,


(n the remainder os reucrfion.


€ S! home foit diffei-

fie, oe. his
igtobe vuderſtood where tcs
nant in Aree imple te dtileifed
and releafe : foa (£ Œenant for
life be diſſeiſed bp tipo, anD he
releafeth to one of them , this
fhall inure to them both, foz be
to Shon the releaſe (8 made,
hath alonger eſtate than bee
chat releafeth , and thcrefoze
cannotenure to him alone, to
hold eut bis companion , fos
then ſhould the Keleaſe enure
by way of entrieand grant of
bis efkate, and confequentip
the Ditleifor to Whom the re=
leafe ts mabe ſhould become
Œcnant fo; life, and the es
merGon reueſted in tbe Leſſor,
(b) $»bích ftrange tranſmu⸗
tation and change ef eftates
inthis cafe the Lao will not
fuffer. Wut (£ Lee for peres
be ouftee, an he in the reuer⸗


Setlion 472.


€ | Tem hoe fopt
Diffeifie pet Bur,
filreleffa abn Ô cur,
il tienda fon com⸗
paignion bois de
gp cette, et per ticl re⸗
leafe ti aueca le fole
poſſeſſion ct eftate cti
la «erre, Wes ſi vn
Diſſeiſour enfcotfa
Deur en Fee, et E Dif-
feifee releffa a lun
Des feoffers ceo vre⸗
raa ambtdeur de les
Feofkees, et la caufe
De Diuerfity ent ceux
deux cales eſt aſſets
peeignant, € yur
ceo


this inurcth not to him in the reverfion, and fo our Buthor is to be bnberftoob of a Keleaſe ef


Rights, and not of a Keleaſe of Actiang, te the tenant fozlife,


ag te e2 for the benefit of Him


Lfo if a man bee

diffcifed by two,
ifheereleafe to one of
them, hee fhallhold
his Companion out
of the Land, and by
{uch Releafe hee fhall
haue the fole poffeffi-
on and eftate in the
Land. Butif a Diffei.
for infeoffe two in fee,
and the Diffeifee re-
leafe to one of the
feoffees, this fhal inure
to both the feoffees, &
the caufeof the diuer-
fity betweenthefe two
cafes is pregnant c-


Lib, Of Releafes, - Seël.4 71.


cco que ils beignont enough. Forthatthey  gonvigeifeo, and the Lette

eins per feoffment.et come inby feoffment, —— the — > the

eife map cnter , foz the

lauters pertozt,@c, and the others by terme foz ps is eina Les

wrong,&c. determined, Mut otheriwits

itis in cafcof a Helle foꝛ life, forthe Diſſeiſoꝛ hath a Freehold Whereupon the Releaſe of. Ces

nant fozlife may enure but the Difletfor hath no terme Fos peares Sohereupon the Keleaſe of
the Leſſee fo; peares map enure,

And ſo it is (£ Lefle in Table be diffetfed bp two, and releafeth to one of theft thal enz
nre totbembotb. But if the ings Cenant fo? lifebe diſſeiſed by tivo, aub he releafeth to one
of thei, bc fall hold out his Companion, fog the Diſſeiſoꝛ gaincd but the eſtate fozlife. So if
the 3 opntenantg make a leafe fo? life,and after doe difletfe the Œenant £02 life, and he releale
to onc of then, be (bal bold out bis Companton, forthe Diſſeiſin was but of an eftate for life,

FE Tenant Foz life be diſſeiſed by two, ano be in tbeveucrüon ano Tenant for like topne in a
Keleaſe to onc of the Difletfogs, be (ball hold hts Companton ont, and pet it cannot enare by
Sway of entricandfeoffement, Wut (€ they feuccallp releafe tbetvfeuerall rights, thetr feucrall
Keleaſes (ball enureto both tbe Diſſeiſoꝛs.

Wut here in Littletons cafe, where Œenant (m Fe Ample is diſſetſed by two, an rcleafetb to
one of them, this for many purpofes enureth bp ay of entríc and fcoffement, and therefore be
to Whom the Weleate (e made (ball hold ont bis companion, anb be madc fole Cenant of the fee
fimple, And this hotocth not onelp in cafeofa Dilſſeiſin, but alfo tn cafe of 3Intrufion and A=
zen : but necetlartlp bec to Smbom the Keleaſe is made mutt bee in bp Wrong, ano not bp

itie.

FE two men doe gaine an Aduowſon bp dfurpation, and the right Patron relcafeth to one
of them, be {hall not hold out hts Companion, but tt fhail enure to them both ; fo; teeing thetr
Clerks came in bp admiffion and inſtitutton, which areindiciall acs , they are not meerelp in
by wzong: £02 an bfurpation thal caufe a Remitter,as (t appeareth in F.N.B.3 1.m.

dut if a Leaſe fozlifcbe made, the rematnder foz itfe, the remainder tn fee,and he in remain⸗
der Foz life diſſetleth the Cenant foz life, and then Œerant £o? life dieth, the Dilletin te purged,
and he fn the remainder fo? like hath but an eftatefoz lifc, And fo note a diueruty Where the pars
ticular eftate Foz life is preccdent,and Sohen fubfequent,

there our Buthor putteth his cafe of onc diſſeiſed, putthe cafe that two Joyntenants in
Fe be diſſeiſed bp two,F ons of the Diſſeiſees releafe to one of the Diſſeiſers al hisright,be bal
not bolo out bis companion, becaufe the Releaſe ts but of the mottie, without anp certaintte,
FE aman be diffeifed by two Women, and one of themtakehuloand, andthe Dileifæ relcafe
tothe bufband, this thallenure to theatuantage of beth the Diſſeiſoꝛs, becaufe the huſband
Gas no wꝛong Doct, but in a manner tn by titic,


€ Uanerale fole poffefion & eflate.. FE two Diſſeiſoꝛs be, and they
make a X cafcfoz life, and the Dilletfe relcafe to one of them, this ſhall enure to them both, and
to the benefit of the Leſſee for life alfo : foꝛ be cannot bp the Releaſe bane the folc poſſeſſion and
eftate, fo part of the cftate is in another.

And fo it is (ag it ſeemeth) {€ the Diſſeiſoꝛs make a X cafefez pearca;anb the Difletfe releaſe
to one of them, this Hall enure to them both, fon bp the Releafe he cannot haue the fole poffefTíonz
And it appeareth bp Littleton, Chat be mutt bauc the folc poſſeſſion, and hold his Companion,
Wut the Mozgage bpon conditton,having bzoken tbe Condition,ts diſſeiſed bp two,the Moꝛ⸗
gagoz having title of entre for the Condition broken, releafe to the one Diſſeiſoꝛ, albeit they be
in by Wwzong, pet the 18 eleafe ſhall enure to them both fo» tin caufes : Sivit, Foꝛ that they are
not Sozong docts tothe Dorgagoz,but to the Moꝛgagee, and by Litcletons cafe it appeareth,
Æbat Dzong is done to him that made the Keleaſe. Sccondlp, Chat hee that make the Mies
leafe hath but a title bp Fogce of a Condition, and Litrletons cafe is of aright, Like Law ofan
entríc £o? Moꝛtmaine, 02 a confent terantfbment, ac.


€ Mes fi vn Diſſeiſor infeoffa deux, dre. And tbe reaton of this Dí-
sertie (e, ro; that the Seofes are in by Œitie, and are pꝛeſumed to havea arrantp, which
is much fanonred in Law, and the Difletfors aremeerelp in by wꝛong. Bnd theequitie of the
Law beth pacferue in this cafe the benefit of the eſtranger to the Releafe, comming tn by one
toynt & itle, .
Pur cto que ils veignont eins per Feoffement 4 cr lanters per Tort,
This ts of a new addition, and wot in the Ozigtnall, and therefoze 3 palle tt over.


Sed.


276


19. H. 6.22.38. H.6. 38. Caj:
de Occupant.


31, H.6. 41.


Lib.;.


31. H.6 41.131, H.4.33.
g. H.7.3 5.3. A. 4. 16.

3 1.E.4.58. 13.4ff.23.
Vide 3. 8.6.58.


(45.3.


€[ «on íeo fue Diffeifie, et
mon Diffeifoz eft bíffeítie, ſi
ieo releas a le Diffeifoz De mon
diſſeiſor ieo naucra à brique aff,
neentra fur le Diffeifoz, pur ceo
que fon Ddiffetfoz aD mon. Droit
per mon releate,ec, Ct (lint il
Cemble entiel cas, f fopent rr.
Diffeifozs,chefcun apees auter,et
ieo releſſa a fe Darreine diſſeiſor,
celup Diffeifoz barrera touts les
auters De lour actions et lour
titles, «tla caufe eff, comcil
femble,pur ceo queen mults ca-
{es quant bn home ad lopal ti-
tle Dente, coment que il nentra
pas, il defeatera touts mean ti-
tles pevfon release. Mes ceo
nett mp & chefcun cag, come fert
Dit apres.


Of Releaſes.
Seclion 473.


Seël.473.474


Lio if Ibe diffeifed, and my

diffeifor is diffeifed, ifIre-
leafe to the diffeifor of my diffei- .
for, I fhall not hauc an affife nor en-
ter vpon the diffeifor, becaufe his
diffeifor hath my right by my re-
leafe,&c.And fo it ſeemeth in, this
cafe if there be xx.diffeifed one af-
ter another,and I releafe to the laft
diffeifor, this diffeifor fhall barre
allthe others of their actions and
their titles. And the caufe is, as it
feemeth, for that ia many cafes
whena man hath lawfull title of
entrie, although he doth not enter,
he fhall defeat all meane titles by
his releafe,&c. but this holds not
in euery cafe, as fhall be faid here-
after.


€ Ere tis to be obferned, that a Keleaſe bp one whoſe entrp (g lawkull to him that is
in bp Swzong, fball purge and take a&vap all meane Eftates and Cities. Bnd where
ont Authoz irl putteth his cafe of two eftates bp Swzong, and after of twentie Dit


fcifing, all Gftateg be wꝛong.


FE A. diffetfe b. oho enfeoffeth C. Sith Warrantte, Who enfeofke D. With Sarrantie, and
E. diffeifeth D. to whom B. the firft Diſſeiſee releaferh, this doth defeate all te meane Cftates
and Warranties, becaufe the relcafe of. B. (g madeto a Dilleifoz, and vis Entrp is lawful,


Section 474.


€T Tem fi mo diffeifor
leffa, dre. BE the
Difleifoz make a Reale foz
life, and tie Leflee maketh a
tcoffment in fee,and the Dif-
fetfee relcafeth to the coffee,
the Difletfo, fball not enter
bpon che Feoſffee, foz albeit
the releafe to one fopnt feoffec
of aDifleifor, ag batbbcene
fat, thal not excinde the other,
pet arclealeto the coffee of
a Œenant fos life tn this cafe
thalitake awap the Entry of
the Difetfoz for the alienati⸗
on Which Was made to his
Difinberitance, hee haning


€ je fí mor diſ⸗

fetfo2 leſſa Es te=
nements Dont il moy
diſſeiſiſt bn auter
home pur terme de
bie, et puis letenant
aterme De bie aliena
en fee, et teo releffa al
alience , ac, Donque
mon Diffeifoz ne poit
enter, Caufa qua fu-
pra, coment que à vn


foits


ALS if my Diffei-
foi letteth the te-
nements whereof hee
diffeifed mee to ano-


ther for tearme of life, —
and after the Tenant «


for tearme of life alie-
nethinfee, and Ire-
leafe to the alienee,
&c. thenmy Diffeifor


cannot enter, Casa qua ©


ſupra, albeit that at one


*


Lib.3.

foits lalienation fuit
à fon difenberitance,
at,


Of Releales,


time the alienation
was to his difinheri-
tance, &c.


Seti 4.95.


the Juberitance by diteiix,
fo as hee could aus no war⸗
rantie annexed to ít , anb tex
nant fo? life hath foꝛfeited bia


c&atc, But tf tbe entry of tbe


: qDítteifce Sere nat lawful, itis otbersoife, 20g (£a man make a ileale Foz itfe, andthe Lellee


Fo life is diſſeiſod, and that IDiffcifoz is diſſeiſed, and hein the reuerfion relcafeth to tbe ſecond
Dileifoz, the fiv(E W tfloifoz thail enter bpon the fecond 3D ((Tetfog, and his entrp is lawwfull,ans
if the Leſſee for 1ífe re-enter, be ſhall leaue thereuerfion in tbefirft Diſſeiſor, and che canfeis,
fo; that cheentrp of the Diſſeiſoz at the time of the releafe made was not iaiwfnll. Bnd the
Boke of (m) 9.H.7.2 s. ig to be intended ofan Effatetaple mutatis mutandis.

It in the caſe afozefatd, the Diſſeiſoꝛ make a Leafe fo life, and the Leſſee inteoſffeth two,and
the Diſſeiſee reicafe to one of the Feoffees, thie (Dati barre the Diſſeiſoꝛ, as hath beenefatd,but
pet be (ball not hold out his companton Foz the caufe afozcfain,


¶ ITem ( home

foit Diffetfi, Le ql
ad fits Deins age et
moꝛuſt, et efteant le
fits Deing age, le bif:
feifoz moꝛuſt feit, et
la terre DifcenDift a
fon beir,æ bu eftrang
abate, et puis le fits
le Difleifee quant il
bient afon plein age,
releffa tout fon Droit
alabatoz en ceft cafe
iheire le diſſeiſor na⸗
uera affife De 9po2-
Dancefter enuers la⸗
bato? mes Cerra bat,
pur ceo que labato?
ad ledroit Del fits le
diſſeiſee pfon refas,
etlentrie le fits fuit
tongeable, put ceo
queil fuit Deins age
al temps Del Difcent,
&C,


Sed. 475.


Lso if a man

be difleifed who
hath a fenne within
age and dieth, and the
fonne being within
age the Diffeifor dieth
feifed, and the land
difcend to his heire,
and a ftranger abate, &
after the fonne of the
Diffeifee when hee
commeth to his full
age releafeth all his
right to the abator, in
this cafe the heire of
the Diffeifor fhall not
haue an Affife of Mor-
dancefter againft the
abator, but fhall bee
barred becaufe the a-
bator haththe right of
the fonne of the Dif-
feifee by his releafe,
and the entry of the
fonne was congeable,


for that hee was within ageat the time of the


Difcent, &c.


€. te reafon of thie
| cafe íg foi that the
entríe of the heire ig


congeable, and the 26 batog is
fn the land bp $vzong.


€ Abaie. Is both
an Cugith and french word
and fignifeth in bis proper
fence to Diminiſh, or Cake
away, as bere bp his entrie
be Diminiſheth and Cakcth
aap the Freehoid in Law
Difcended te the beíre, and fo
tt ts fatd to Bbate an account
fignifptng Subtraction ei
Withdawing, «c. anb to P=
bate the courage of aman, In
Another fence it Ganificth to
Pꝛoſtrate, Beats downe op
Duerthz0w , ag to Abate
Caſtles, oules, and the
like, and to Abate ait,
and hereof commcth a Dod
of Arte , Abatamentum
bichis an Cntry bp Ans
terpofition. sow the viffes
rence inter Difleifinam, Aba-
tamentum,[ntrufionem, De-
forciamentum, & V{urpatioe
neta, & Purprefturam,ts this,

A Diſſeiſin is a wꝛongtull
putting out of bins that ts
acuallp fetfed of a Freehold
And Abatement is when a
man died fetfed of an eftate of
Inheritance, aub betweene
the death and the entrp af the
heire, an eftranger both inter⸗
pofe himfcife, aud abate.


Intrusion firk propetip (n) (d when the 2: nceftó: died felled of anp eftate of Anberitanec
expectant vpon an ciate for life, and then tenant fo? life dieth, and betSweene the death and the
sur of se avi Seat: En — pre and m

cconblp , (o) be thatentreth bponatty o ings Demefnes, andtake ofits is
faíb $0 Freeave vpon the Rings pofie(fíon, Zi 1 iara


2 aas


Thitdlx,


T7


(m)9$.H.7.35.


Pas. N° B. 1a 5. Brittencap. 5i
Bralton lib. 4. eap. 2,
F/N.B.303. f.W. 1 ap. 17,


(n) F.N.8.203. Fleta hb.
sap. 1o.


(o) Pl. Cum.cofl de wees;


Lib.


(P)EN.E.141.f.£.h.


(Q) Glamal.lib.9.cap.15.
[d ad 27.


997.35.


Bib. 1. fel. 147. Mayewer cafe.


14K 8.10 pe Tears,


Cap. 8.


Of Releaſes.


Sec. 476,47 7:


Chirdiy, (p) When theheire in ward cutreth at his full age Sithout fatiffaction foz bis


marriage, the Wait faith, quod intrufit.
pe ome compzebendeth not only thefe aforenamed, but amp man that holdeth fan


Sobcreuntoanotber


man hathright,
furpation hath two fiqnificattons in the Common ila®,


be tt by difcent o? purchafe, {9 fafoto be a Detoꝛceoꝛ. =
one Shen an eftranger that uo right


hath prefenterh toa Church, and bis Clarke (g admittedand inflituted, bee is fato to bee an
dfurper,and the waongénil ad that he bath Done is called an Q3fnrpatíon.
Hecondip, When any fubtec doti) bfe without laSofuil Swarrant, Ropall Franchifes, he tg


faid to bfurpe vpõ the King thoſe


Frãchiles.hurpreſtura 0? Pourpreftura a Purpzefture (q) Pur-


preftura eft, & c.generaliter quotics aliquid fit ad nocumentü regij tenemenu vel regize viae (vel a-


quarü publicarum)


vel ciuitatis, &c. And becaufc ít is properip when there (s a houfe builded


9; an Incloſure made of any part of the ings Demefnes, o» of an high Swap, oz a common


freet oz publike water, 02 fuch like publike things,
which Ggníficti) an 3inclofurc, butlpeciailpappiten,


€ Ere the entry of
H the diſſeilee is con=
geable, and pet
thereleafe doth not auoid the
condition becaufe the fcoffce te
ín by title, ag bath beene fato,
anb map baue a Warrantie,
And herein our Aathoz exo
prefleth a diucrfitie betweene
a Conditionin Law, anda
Condition in Deed, for in the
cafe before Swhen the Diſſei⸗
fee releafeth to the coffe of
the Œenant fo2 itfe, tbe dLon-
Ditton {n law fs taken away,
bnt otherwife it is in this
cafe ofa Condition in Ded,
abut tf the eoffæ bpon
Condition make a fcoffment
in fee oner Swithont any Cons
Dition , Ethe Dilſſeiſee relcafe
to the fecond -freoffee, the cons
Ditton {g deſtroyed bp the re=
leafe before the Condition
bzoken oz after, Foꝛ the fate
of the fecond feoffe was not
bpon anp erpzetfe Condition,
ag Littleton bere putteth bis
cafe, and he map bane aduan=
tage of the releafe , becaufe tt


Sei. 476.


CAACs (i home
Mit bi(fei(f, &
le Díffei(oz fait feof=
ment fur condition,
ceftafcauoir, De ren-
Dee à luy certaine
rent, pur Default De
payment bn reentre,
ac, file diſſeiſie relef=
fa al feoffee fur con-
Dition bncoze ceo na⸗
méd2a leftate le fcot-
fee fur condition, car
nient obftant tiel re=
leas , bncoze fon e:
ftate eft fur condition
ficome tl fuit deuant.

q Et cum hoc con-
cordatopinio omnium
Iufticiartiorum, P. 9.


H.7.q-


it is dertuedof the french $0070 Pourpris
ag ig afozcfatd, bp the Common Haw,


Vtif a man be dif-
feifed and the dif
feifor maketh a fcoffe-
ment vpon condition,
viz, to render to him
acertaine rent, and for
default of payment a
re-entry,8&c.ifthe dif-
feifee releafe to the
feoftee vpon conditi-
on, yet this fhall not a-
mend the eftate of the
feoffee vpon conditi-
on, for notwithftan-
ding fuch releafe , yet
his eftate is vpon con-
dition as itwas before.
«| And with this
agreeth the opinion of
allthe Iuftices, Paféb.
9.H.7.


(a not agaínft his otone proper acceptance ag Littleton fpeaketh in the nert Section.
Bat (Fít bc a Wꝛongkun eitle,fuch atiticis taken awap bpa releafe, ag (f A. biffeife B.to tbe


tfe of C. B. releafe to A. this (ball take apap the agreement of C. to tbe 3Difit(ün , becaufe tt
thould make him a wzong doer, ag it the diſſeiſor be diſſetſede the difleifes releafetb to the feconb
Willeifec, this taketh away the right the Grft Dicifoz had againſt tbe feconb, anb a relation
of an cftate gained bp wzong Chall neuer defeat an eftate ſubſequent gained bp tight, agaíntt
afingle opinion, not affirmed bp any other in one of our Bokes.


Section 477.
CES mefine le
manner eſt lou
home Loit diſſ.de cer-
tein terre, ple vite
02


N the fame manner
itis where a manis
diffeifed of certaine
lands & the Diffeifor,


€F7 le» Diffeifor


grant un Rent-


charge, cc. Here is
ímplpto Commeng oz any


Lib.3.


fo? grant bu rent
charge hors à meſm̃
la terre, ac, coment
que apres Je Diffcifce
tele Ha al Diffcí(02, aC,
bncoze Event charge
Demurt en fa fonce,
€t là caufe en ceux
deur cafes eft ceo, q
Home nauera aduan-
tage per ticl releas d
ferra encounter fon
proper acceptance,et
encounter fon grant
Demefne: a coment q
afcuns ont Dit que
lou lentre ð home eft
congeable fur bn te-
nant fil releafift a
mefme le tenant que
ceo auatleroit a P te-
nant, ficome tl vſt en⸗
ter fur le tenant, et
puis lup enfeoffa ac.
Ceo neft pag bofer en
cheftuncas, Caren
lepzimer cas De ceux
Deux auauntdits ca-
fes, fi le diſſeiſie vſt
enter fur D feoffee fur
condition , et puis
luy enfe fa, Donques
eft le condition tout
Defeat et auoid.Et iſ⸗
fint en le fecond cafe,
fi le diſſeiſie entraft
€t enfeofta celuy que
geanta t rent charg,
bonques eft le rent
charge antent ct a-
uoid, mcg tl ne pas
boid per aſcun tíel
teas fans entry
fait, ac,


Of Releafes.


grant a rent charge out
of the fame land , &c.
albeit the Difleifee
doth afterwards re-
leafe to the Diffeifor,
&c, yet the Rent-
charge remaynes in
force. And the reafon
in thefe two cafes is
this, thataman fhall
not haue aduantage by
fuch releafe , which
fhall bee againft his
properacceptance, &
againft his own grant,
And albeit fome haue
faid, that where the
entry ofa man is Con-
gcable vpon a Tenant
if hee releafeth to the
fame Tenant, that this
fhallauaile the Tenant,
asif he had entred vp-
pon the Tenant and af-
ter enfeoffed him,&c.
this is not true ineue-
ry cafe, for inthe firft
cafe ofthefe two cafes
aforefaid, if the Dif-
feifee had entred vp-
pon the Feoffee vpon
condition , ard after
enfeoffed him, then is
the Condition wholly
defeated and auoided.
And fo in the fecond
cafe ifthe diffeifee en-


Sel.477.


other profit out of the lands.
And the reafon is becaufobe
hal not anotd his once grant
by areleafe, hee htmfeife bath
acquired Gncethegrant, but
it the Difleifoz inthat cafe be
diſſeiſed, andthe Dilletie rto
lcafeto tbe fecond Diſſeiſor be
fall auoíb tt, ag by that
Sobichhathbeene fab, Scé.
473-appearcth, Spo likeSpife
(£ A. andB.bee topnt Dilſſei⸗
fogs, and B. grant a Rent
charge, and the Dilleifæ res
leafeto A. ail bts right.A-fhal
auotb the Kentecharge bez
caufe (t was not granted bp
bim, and fo not within the
teafon of our Buthoz.

FE there bee two Fems
topnt Diſſeiſoas anb the ons
taketh huſband, and tbe Diſ⸗
fetfee releafeto the ether, thee
{g fole feifco ; and fhall held
ont the bufbanb and wife,

Fl two Difteifozs be, anv
thep infeoffe another, and
take backe an eftate foa life og
tn fee , albeit thep remaine
Difleifozs to tbe Diſſeiſee ag
to bauc an aflifcagaint them,
pet (€ bee releafe to one of
them bec (ball not hole out
bis companion, becaule their
ftatein the land (g by keoſt⸗
ment,

FE there be two Diſſeiſozs
andthep be dilleiſed, and they
releaſe tothetr Diſſeiſor, awd
atter diſſeiſe htm, and then the
Diſſeiſee relcafe to one 92
both of them, yet the fecond
Dilletfor (ball resenter , foz
thep thall not hold the land ax
gainſt their otwne releafe, fos
Littleton here fatth,that they
fhall not auoid their osong
Grant, and bp itke reafon thep
Hall not anoid thetr oxone
teleafe, & (ic de fimilibus.


€ Come fil uff enter


treth and enfeoffeth J# le tenant & luy en-


him who granted the
Rent charge, then is
the Rent-charge taken
away and auoided, but
it is not void by any
fuch releafe without
entrie made, &c.
Baaa 2


feofe. Bere is anos
ther Kind of releafe, viz, ares
leafe which enureth bp wap
of entry anb feoffment, og if
a Dilictfee releafe to one of
the Diſſeiſors tofome purpote
tbte (ball enurc bp Soap of
entry anb fcoffment,viz.ag to
bolo ont bis companion, But
as tea Bentscharge *


278


(ap-8. Of Releafes. Seét.478,


ted by him it hall not enure by Way of entricand froffiment, fo tf the diſleiſee had entred and
enfeofed him, the ent charge had banc anopded. Aut itis a certaine rule that when the
entrie of a man is congeable, and he releaſeth to one thatis in bp title (ag hereto the feoffæ
bpon condition is) it hallnenerenure bp way of cntrit and fcoMment, either to auolde a
condition Leith Which he accepted the Land charged, o3 bis one grant, 02 to hold ont his
Companion,

rv sobere (t appcareth bp our Authozthat adg donc bp the Dilleifoz (ball not be auopded
by the KReieaſe of the 3Di(leifee. Bt is to be noted that age madeto the Miflettor himfeife hati
not be auoyded by the alteration of his eſtate by the releafe of the Dilletfes, as if the 3020 bes
fore the Releaſe had confirmed the cltate of tbe Difleifozto hold by leſſer feruices, the Wiflets
fo? thali take aduantage of it, and ſo of Eſtouers tobe burnt in the boule, and the like 1a% of
a Warrantic made nto him.

FE the heire of the Dilletſor indow bis Swtfe Ex affenfu patris, and the Difleife releaſe to
the Dietfoz, he fall not auoide the indotwment, fos that is like the cafe put bp Littleton of
the Kent⸗charge.

It an A ien be a Diſſeiſoꝛ and obtaine Letters of Dentzation, and then the Dilleilee Ree
leafe vnto him, the King Mall not haue the land, foz the Releaſe hath altered the eftate, and tt
ig ag ít were a new purchafe, otherwile (t (s (€ the Alien had beene the Feoſtee of a Difletfoz,

FE the Lozd p((tetfc tbe Cenant, and ig défleifed, the Diſſeiſee releale to the fecond Dificis
foz, pet the S eíantozp to not reuiued, foz betweene the parties the iReleafe enures bp Swap of
Entrie and Feokment ag to tbc land, but not having regard to the Seignioꝛy, and for that
the poffellion was ncuer actually removed oz reueſted fromthe Dilletfo, who clapmeth buder
the Lozn,the Heigntozpis not reuiued. Wut tf the Loꝛd and a ftranger difletfe the Œenant,
and the Dilleilee releaſe co the ftranger, there the Scigntozp bp operation of Law is rentued,
fo? the whole is befted in the ftranger which neuer clapmed vnder the Lord. And in that cafe,
t£ the Lord had died, anb theland had ſuruiued, the Seiquiozp had bencreutued, Wut LE the
Lozd had diſſetſed the Cenant, and bene diffeifen by two, and the Difleife releafcb to one of
them, the Seigniozy is notreuiucd, becaufe heclapmed ( ad hath bene fato ) bnder the Logo,


Set. 4.78.
Cl Cem ( hom̃ foít


Lib.3.


Vel briefede eux A Lit a man bee


Víd.Se8. 5144


il efliera, Ge.
Note many times tn one cafe
the Law doth giue a man fee
werall remedies, and of feues
tall kindes, as in this cafe bp
action and bp entrie,bp action,
either a wait of right, 02 Dum
fuit infra ætatem.


@ Et puis le Dif-
feifor porta breife de
droit dre. Pere it aps


peareth that there ig a great
att anb knowledge Fos a man
that hath diners remedies to
chofe his apteft remedie, as tn
thie cafe, t€ be bring hie waꝛit
of right, the Difictfor fball
be barred, but tf he ba entred
bpon the beire of the Dltene,
he fbouto haue entoped the
land fo? ener. Foꝛ tn that cafe
the beire of the Biienee after
{uch an entric (ball neue
Yaue a Wzit of right ne moze
then (€ the Difleifes entreth
Spon tbe beire of the Difets
fez, anb make a jreoffment tn
fe), (€ the heire ofthe 3D ((Teífeo


Diffeift pur bn
enfant, le quel aliena
en fee, æ alienee Deuie
fetfie, et fon beire en-
ter, efteant le Diſſei⸗
fo? deins age, ore cft
en election le Diſſei⸗
four, à auer on briefe
De Dum fuic infra æta-
tem, ou betefe Ó droit
enuers Ie beire Del a-
lience, et quel brieke
De eut à il efliera, tl
boit recouet pet là
lep,ac. Et augi tl pott
enter en la terre fang
afcutt recouerie.et en
cett cafe lentre E Dit-
feite eff coll ac. Mes
en ceſt cag file diſſei⸗
He releſſa fon Dzoit al

beire


diffeifed by anin-
fant, who alien in fee,
and the Alienee dieth :
feifed, & his heire en-
treth, the diffeifor be-
ing within age, now is
it in the election of
the diffeiforto haue a
writ of Dum fuit infra
«tatem, or a Writ of
right againftthe heire
of the alienee, and
which writ of them
hee fhall choofe, hee
ought to recouer b
thelaw,&c. Andalío
he may enter into the
land without any re-
couery, & inthis cafe
the entrie of the dif.
feifee is taken away,


Lib.j.


beite Del alíenee, et


puts E Diffeifoz posta
btc à Dit enuers lheit
baltence,et il topne le
mife fur P mere Droit
fc, le graunde affife
boit trouer per la fep
quel tenant ad pluís
mere Droit que ad le
Difeifour, ac, purceo
que le tenant ad le
Dzoit le diſſeiſie per
fon releag, Le quel ett
pluis auciét ct pluis
mere Droit, Cat p ticl
leas tout le droit le
diſſeiſee paſſa ale te-
nant, etek en Ie te-
nant, Cta ceo que al=
«ung ont Dit, que en
tiel cafe lou boiñ que
ad D20ít al terres ou
tenements (mes fon
entrie neſt pas con-
geable) fii celeffa al
tenant tout fon Droit
@c.que tiel releas b-
vera pet boy dextin⸗
guifbinent: Quant a
ceo il puit eftre Dit,
qceoeft boper quant
à cclup que releffa,
. «at poa releasilad

lup bemíte quietmét

De fon D10ít, quant à

fon perfon, mes vn⸗

€02 Ic Droit que tl a⸗

uoit bien poít paſſer

&letenaut per fon re⸗
- cafe: Car enconueni-

ent fervoit que tiel

ancient Dott ferroit

ertinct tout ouftet-

ment,4c, Caril eft

cõmunement dit que


Of Releafes,
&c.Butin this cafe ifthe
diffeifee releas his right
to the heire of the alie-
nee, and after the diffei-
for bringeth a writ of
right againft the heire
of the alienee, and hee
ioyne the mife vponthe
meere right, &c. the
great affife ought to
finde by the law that the
tenant hath more meere
right then the difleifor,
&c.for that the tenant
haththe right of the dif-
feifee by his releafe, the
which is the moft anci-
ent & moft meere right:
for by fuch releafe all
the right ofthe difleifee
paffeth to the tenant,and
is inthetenant. And to
this fome haue faid that
inthis cafe where aman
which hath right to
lands or tenements ( but
his entrie is not congea-
blc) if hee releafe to the
tenant all his right,&c.
that fuch releafe fhall en-
ure by way of extn-
guifhment. Astothisit
may bee faid that this is
true,as to him which re-
leafeth, for by his re-
leafe he hath difmiffed
himfelfe quite of his
right as to his perfon,
but yetthe right which
he hath may well paffe
tothe tenant by his re-
leafe. For it fhould bee
inconuenient that fuch
an ancient right fhould
bee extinct altogether,

Baga 3


Secl.478.
tesonter be fall detaine the
land fos ett:t,and the Feot⸗
fe (ball not maintaine ang
Wait of right, foz a bare
right fhallnener be left (n
the freoffe, bat thall euer
follow the poffefiton, ag
bath bene fato, but í£ the
Wifletfee entreth bpon the
heire of the IDifletfo;, and
make a ffeoffment in fee
bpon condition,and entreth
foy the condition broken bea
Fore the beire of the Dilſei⸗
fo? enter, hee is reſtoꝛed to
his right agatne,

2 man maketh a gift tn
taple, the remainder in fee,
Æenant in taple fett)
Without (fue, an eftranger
íntrube, and be in the res
mainder brings a formes
Don, and recouercth bp Dez
fault, andmaketh a Feof⸗
ment in fee, the Jntruboz
reuers tbe reconerp in a
Wꝛit o£ diſceit anb entreth
be (ball dctaine the land
for ever, and the #eoftæ
fhall not haue a Wait of
tight.

Bnd fo likewiſe (£ a Diſ⸗
feifoz dic feifed, and a ftran-
ger abate and the 3DilTeífee
releafe to him, the heire of
the Difletfoz fball enter
and detaine the land fo;
eucr, jreitbe right to the
poffeflion thal dꝛawe the
tight of theland to ít, and
fball not leaue a right in
hint to Whom the releafe ts
made, ag hath bene fait
befope ín the 447. Section.

€ Le droit del aif-


Stifee paſſa al tenant Gr


efl enletenam. FO»
feing tbe G enant hath the
Whole fe imple, he ts capas
ble of the Shole right of
the diffetfes, and ag Little
ton bere faith, the right ts
ín the Tenant ·

€ Zrconueniens fer-


roit. Here agaíne ag
hath bene eften obferueb,
an argument Ab inconue-
nienti fg foxcible in Law,
and that Judges bp the
anthezitp of our Æuthoz
are to iudge of inconueni⸗
enceg ag of things e


|| 279


J8.E.3.16.. 24 H.6.
Refiera alprimer afin s.
"Vid. Sell. 447,


9. H.7.99-


9. H.7. 29.


Vid Soſe.t. 138-0 39.352 ;
269,449.723.


Lib.3.


x4, H.8. €, b,


V M.8.fol,5.6.
Vt. H.7.3 56. 30.H 6,
Prfbarra. 32. 18.8.3. 10.


(25-8.


Of Releafes. Se.479.


fall,ag hereby and bp many Droit ne poit pas Kc. forit is commonly
other places tt appearcth. : : S

Cn dears ve pois morier. uet aright cannot
pas morier, Dormit *


aliquando ius, moritur sunquam. Foꝛ of fucl an high eftiination (s right in tbe epe of the
Laiw, ao the Late pzeferueth it from Death and deltrucion : troben Done it may be, but nee
wer troden out, £02 Where ít hath beene fato that a relcaf of a right both in fome enure
by wap of ertinguifhment. It is fo tobe vnderſtod either (as Littleton Both Here) in refpeæ
of him that makes the releafe, o? in reſpect that by confirucion of Lak (t enureth not alone te
Hin to Mom it és made, but toothers alfo Whode eftrangers to the releale, which ag hath
benc faío ig a quality of an inheritance extinguthed,

Ais i£ there be Lozd and Cenant, andthe Cenant maketl a Leale foz life tbe remainder ts
fee, t£ tbc Load rcleafe to the Œenant foz life, the rent tg Sbollp extinguifhes, anb he tn the rex
mainder fhall take benefit thereof, enews fo hen the heire of a Wiferfoz (g Difícifeo, and the
TD ((Icífoz make a Leafe £o; lifc,the remainder tn fee, 1€ the ũrſt Diſſe iſee releaſe to tbe Cenant
For life, this (s fatd toenure bp Sap of extinguifbment, for that tt hall enure to him tn tbe re⸗
matnbder, Who is a ſtranger to the 18 cleafe, and pet intruth the right (s mot extine but both
follow the poffeffion,viz tbe Œenant fos life hath (t Daring bis time, anb be in the remainder
to bim and to bis beíreg, and the right of the inheritance (g in him tn the remainder, fosa right
toland cannot die 01 be ectinc in Deed, and therefore tf after the death of Cenant foz life tbe
bcire of the Difleifoz bring a tait of right again kim in the remainder and he topne tbe mife
bpon the mere right, it (bal! be found oz him, becaufe im (abgement of Law be hath bp the fats
13 eleafe tbc right of the fir Diſſeiſe


Sei.4.79. 480.
€ M releates q


enutera per


Vt releafes which
enure by way of


Ere Littleton pute
teth a dinerftie be-


H tweene Keleaſes


Sobích enure bp Swap of ex»
tinguifbment agaiuſt all pers
fons and Swbercof all per
fons map take abuantage;
and Keleaſes Which in res
fpet of fome perfons ene
are by Wap of ertinguilh=
ment, and of other perfons
bp ap of Mitter le droit.
D2 dbetmene Meleafes
Sich in Deed enure bp cr-
tinguifbment foz that bee to
Sohom the Keleaſe is made
cannot baue the thing releaz
fed, and Keleaſes Swbich az
aing fome quality of fuch
Keleales are laid to enure bp
Wap of extingutifhment, but
íntrotl) Doc not, for that heto
Sohom the Keleaſe ig made
map recetue and take the
thing releafed. And here
Littleto putteth cafes here
Welcales dec abfolutclp en⸗
ure bp crtinquifhment with⸗
outerception hauing refpec
toall perfons, and firft of the
Logo and Cenant. Second=
ip of the Rent charge. Third⸗
ip,of the Common of pafturc.

Firſt of she Lord anb Te⸗
“ant, aub the 1,070 releate to


boy dextinguiſhmẽt
enuerg touts pet-
fons, font lou celup a
quelereleas eft fait,
ne poit aver ceo que
aluy eftreleas, Si-
come fi fopent Sir
&tenant, et le Siir
releffa al tenant tout
le doit que il aden
lafeigniozp, ou tout
leDzoit que (1 ad en le
terre ac, tíel veleag
ba per bop De extin⸗
quifbment enuers
touts perfons, pur
ceo que le tenant
ne poit auct. feruice
pur peender De lup
mefine,


extinguifhment againft
all perfons, are where
hee to whom the re-
leafe is made cannot
haue that which to
him is releafed. As if
there bee Lord and te-
nant, and the Lord re-
leafe to the tenant all
the right which hee
hath in the feigniory,
orall the right which
hee hath in the land,
&c. this releafe goeth
by way of extinguifh-
ment againft all per-
fons, becaufe that the
tenant cannot haue
feruice to receiue of
himfelfe.


Sed. 480.


Lib.3.


$8 meti Et ma⸗
tE ner eft De tes
leas fait al Œenant
Del terre De bn. rent
charge où common
De pafture,#c,pur ceo
queletenant ne poit
auct ceo que à lup eft
telcüe.ac. iſſint tiels
releafes beera per
extinguifbment en
touts boves,


telealed. But ín the cafe of the right of land, the Cenant of th


Of Releafes,


N the fame manner

is it of a Releafe
madeto the tenant of
the land of a Rent-
charge or Common of
pafture, &c. becaufe
the tenant cannot haue
that which to him is
releafed , &c. fo fuch
releafes (hall enure by
wayofextinguifhment
in all wayes.


fo ftrenatbentng big cítate therein


Che meſne being a Fem entermarrie with tbe Cenant perauaile,


!


$e8. 480.481.


the Œenant bis Seigniorn
this mu of neceflitie enure
bp Swap of extíngutfement to
all men, foz the Œenant can=
not baue ferutceto bee taker
of Himfeife, noy one man can
bee both Rod and Genant,
Abe fecond te of a iKent-
charge, à man cannot hae
lanb and a rent iſſuing out of
the fame land, Thitdlp, a
man cannot bane lanbanba
Common of palture iſſuing
out of the ſame land, Et fic de
ceteris. Foꝛ in all tbefe cafes
and the like he to whom the


280


Keleaſe tg made cannot bane .


anb entop the shing that (s


elan® map take anb eniop it


ifthe Lord releafe to the


Feme, the Heigniozy only tg extinct. but (£ hee Keleale to the bufbanb, both Setquiozy and


mefnaltie are extind, Bnd in this cafe,
ton hoi the releafe hal enure,


Raltie 02 a Seigniozp ſuſpended in part of the eſtate.
But here obferue a diuerſity where a Rcleafe enureth bp Swap of cttinquifhment of an ins


beritance Which is tn pofledion and map be


tf the Lord relcaſe to the bufbanb and Sife , tis a que⸗
but (t ($ noqueftion but that a Releaſe map be mabctoa Mel


granted ouer, and a Keleaſe of aright, o; an acts


qn to lands Sobícb cannot be grantedouer, (7) Foꝛ the Lozd map releafe bis Seigniozte ta
the Œenant of che lan Fox life az in tafle, Et Gc de ceteris. Wut fo cannot one rcleafe a Tight o2


an acton, fc? it᷑ tt be releaſed but for an bou
Bnd theo things are to be obferueb here,


te, it is extinc foꝛeuer, as hath beene fain,
that bp the Keleaſe of all tbe right in che lano


the Seigntozte ts extinct, ag Sell ag bp the Weleafe of all theright tn tbe Seigntozte , fez the


Heigniorte iſſueth ont of the land, Secondip,
nioꝛie 02 theland, the Whole Heigntozie


extinguiſh feuerall rights tn one anb the fame land,


, Git tberebe 10:0 and Tenant bp Fealtic and Kent,


That bp therelcafe of ail his right in tbc feig-
is erting without anp 190205 ef Inheritance.
the G enancte be giuen to a Lozd and toa ftranger and to the bers of the ftranger,the Lod tes
leafe to his Companion all the right intheland,
the Genancie, but extinguiſheth alfo his rt


ae


this Keleaſe doth not onelp paſſe hiseftate tn
gbt in the Setgniozie,and fo one Weleale ennres to


the 10:0 granteth the Setqntorte foz


pearcg, and the Tenant atturneth, the Lozd relcafeth his Deigniorte tothe Cenant fo2 peres,


end to tbc Œenant of the land generally, the Whole Seigmo
Meller alfo. But it the Keleaſe had beene ro them and their hepzes,
Bnberitance of the one mottte, and the ether moitic had bene ectine.


zie ts ectine,


and tbe ftate of the
then the Lellæ bab had the
And the reafon of thts di⸗


neritic is, becaufc when the Keleaſe tg made generally,tt can enure to the Leſſee bnt fo: 1ffe,be-


caufe tt enurctb bp way of enlargement ef c&atc, and bein
enureth bp Swap of erttnguifhment, ag Littleton bere faith
ticolar eftate in the Spetqniozte for life, Wut When the
betres, cach one takes a moitie,


fingatfbrent,


€ T Cent deprouer

que le graund

Aile doit pat-
Ser pur lc demandant
enlecafe auauntDit,
(toape ope fouent la
Lecture de XLettatute


Se. 481.


A Lfo to proue that
the graund Affife
oughtto paffe for the
demandant, in the cafe
aforefaid I haue often
heard the reading of
the Statute of Weft.2.


g made tothe Cenant of tbc Land, ít
y and then there cannot remain a pars

iR eleafe ig made to them and thetr
the one bp Swap of encreafing of theeftate , anb the other bp ex⸗


€ [i aye aye fouemt


ls Leilure> de


West. 1. Here it
ts to be obſerued, of hat au-
thozitie antient Recures 03
Beadings vpon Seatutes
Swere, for shat they bab fine ex⸗
cellent qualities: irk, They
Declared Sobat the ——


(1) 13.8. 3.88. Extisqulm-
puent y Brook, 45.42 fit. Vimcher
F.120. 30.2, 3.13. 19.H.6
19e 31.8. 3033. 38 4f 190


131 Ad. 4. tie. Releafey 31.
18.E.2 ibid, 5 .26.H,8. 5.
41. Ags.


Lib.3.


(a) 24. E. 1.35. 28, 3.96.
18.6.2. Entrie 74.
3.E.3.Entrie 7. 6.E.3.24-
7.E. y.Eut.$2-7-E.3. $4.55
19-E.4.1§. F.N.B.317.4.
Regifer 141


(b) m.a««p. $.

Wide 34.E.3.Formdon 11.

v t. Z.3.5bid. 31. 8.7.3. 59.
E, N.B.317.4.7. H.7.1 5.


38. E. 3.5. Tif [uci wirmm 1.


(4p.8.


Law was before the making
ofthe Statute, as heere it
appeareth, Secondly, They
openod the trucfence and meas
fing of the Statute, Third⸗
Ip, Chex cafes Were bricfe,
pautng at the moft one popnt
atthe 4 ommon La%, and ac
nother bpon the Statute,
Fourthip, Plaine and Pere
fpícuous, foz then the honour
of the Reader Was to excell
others in authorities, argu=
mẽts, ⁊ reaſõs fos prm€ of his
opinion, and fo? confutation
ef the obicctions againt ít,
Fitihly, Thep read, tofupz
pelle fubtill inventions to
treepe ont of the Statute.
Wut new Readings having
loft the fato former qualities,
Hane loft alfo their Fozmer
authorities:foꝛ now tbccafeg
arelong, obfcure , andintrt
cate, full of new conceits , lic
her rather to Kiddles than
Lectures , Which When they
are opened they banifh away
like ſnoake, and the Readers
are like to Lapings, who
ſeeme tobe neereſt their neſts
when they are kartheſt from
them, and all their ſtudie is


Of Releafes.


De Weſtminſter fez
cond, que commence,


In cafu quo vir amife-


rit per defaltam tene-
mentum quod fuit ius
vxoris fuæ,&c. qued
le Common Lep De-
uant meſm̃ Leftatut,
ft Leaſe ſoit fait a bn
home pur terme de
vie, le remainder ou⸗
fter en fee, et bn e⸗
firange per feint Ac⸗
tion bít recouer en-
versie tenant a fme
De bie pec Default, et
puisle Œenant mo-
tu(t, celup en Ie te-
mainder nauoit aſcũ
remedie Deuaunt le
SDtatute,pur ceo que
tl nauoit âfcun pol:
feffion Del terre,


Seét.482.


which begunne thus :
In cafü quo vir amiferit
per defaltam Tettmenii
quod fuit im vxoris ſuæ,
(c. that atthe Com-
mon Law betore the
fayd Statute, if a leafe
were made to a man
for terme of life, the
remainder ouer in fee,
and a Stranger by
feigned Action reco-
uered againft the Te-
nant for life by de-
fault,and after the Te-
nant dieth, he in the
remainder had no re-
medie before the Sta-
tute, becaufe hee had
not any poffeffion of
the Land.


to find nice cuafiong out of the Statute. Wy the authozttte of Littleton anticnt Readings
tay be ctted for profe of the La, but new Readings bauc not that honour, for that thep are


fo obſcure and darke,


€ Lefatute deW.2. which is the third Chapter,


€, Leremainder oufler en fee. Here is to be obferucd. Chat al-
though the Statute ſpeaketh of a Reuerſion, (a) pet by theanthozitie oF Littleton à remath=


der is Within the Statute,


Hecthe Statuteof 14. Eliz.ca.8 ‘Which proutdeth fully foa him in the remainder.
€ Feint AGion. Feint tg a participle of the French word Fien-
dre, Sohich ts to fcigne o2 kallly pretend , fo as a faint Baton is a falle Action.
€, Nauoit aſcun remedie dewant Leſtatute. (b) Here (t appeareth bp


Littleton, That (£a man maketh a Leaſe fog life, theremainder in fee, and Tenant (os life fats
fereth a Kecouerte bp default, that he in tbe remainder ould not pauca Foamedon by the come
mon Law: for Littleton faith, Chat bc bad not any remedie befozs the Statute, Neither de


there anp fact) $2ít in that cafe in the Kegilter, alboit in fome Bokes mention (g mabeot fuch
a wett.


Sell. 482.


€ Litres Din EK Aes fi celuy TD Vtif he in the re-
eter Moi M4 le remain⸗ B mainder had en+


éntrie of him that right hath,
ig fufficient to maintaine a
mit of Wight again the rez
€outro? in thts cafe, For albeit


bet HH enter fur le
tenant a fme De bie,
et lup diſſeiſiſt,a p

e


tred vpon the Tenant
for life, and diffeifed
him, and after the Te⸗


|


Lib.3.

le Tenaunt entre
fur lup, ct aps le
tenant a terme De
bie, per tiel veco-
uerp perde per De-
fault & mo2u(t, oꝛe
celuy ent remainder
bien pott auct betefe
De Droit enfis celup
que recouera, pur ceo
que le mife ſerra ioiñ
folement fur le meere
Droit.æc, Uncore en
ceft cafe, le fetfin De
celup en le remainder
fuit Defeat per entrie
Del tenant a terine De
bie, Mes peraduen=
ture afcuns botlent
argue et Dite , que il
nauera brief ð Dꝛoit
en ceſt cate, puc ceo q
' quant le mite € toine,
tlettioitentieluaft,
— ſi le tenant ad plug
mete Doit en le terre
en le manner come tl
trent, Gic Demandat
ad en le maner come
il demanda et pur ceo
que le feifin Del DBE
fuit Defeat pev lentry
Dele tenant a terme
Debie, ac, Donque íl
ad nul droit en matt
come il Demaund,


Of Releafes.


nant enter vpon him,
and after the Tenaunt
for life by fuch re-
couerie lofe by de-
faultand die, now hee
in the remainder may
well haue a Writ or
Right againft him wsh
recouers, becaufe the
Mife fhalbe ioined on-
ly vponthe mere right,
&c. Yet inthis cafe the
Seifin of him inthe Re-
mainder was defeated
by the entrieof the te-
nant for life. But per-
aduenture fome wil ar-
gue and fay , That
hee fhall not haue a
Writ .of Right. in
this cafe, for, that
when the Mife is
ioyned , it is ioyned
in this manner, (féi-
licet ) if the Tenaunt
hath more mere right
in the land inthe man-
neras he holdeth,than
the demandant hath in
the manneras hee de-
mádeth,& for that the
{eifin of the demadant
was defeated by the
entrie of the tenant for
term oflife,&c.he hath


no right in the manner


as he demandeth.


$68,483.


the Deifin ts vefeaten bec
tWerne the Leſlee £o life, and
dim inthe remainder, pet baa
ning regard co the 18 ecoucro2;
bois a mere Granger anb
hath no title, (t (g ſuſtictent az
gainf bít War otherswife
tt ts agatnft the partte bim-
felfe that defeated the Setfin,
and the daw is pzopenfe to
gine remedte to him that right
hath, And where fome have
thought, that there is no auc
thoꝛitie in Rake to Warrant
Littletons opinion berein,thep
atc gteatlp miftaken, foa. Lit.
bath god warrant fop ail that
be hath attten,

Lands arcicttento A. Cog
itfe, the remainder to B. foz
life,therematnder to the right
beires of A. A dieth,B.entreth
and dieth, a ftranger intru⸗
deth, the heire of A. all bane
8 Watt of Right of the Sst=
fin Sbich A. bab ag Tenaunt
fox life,

Lands arelettcn to A. and
B.anbtotbe beiteg of A. A.
bíetb, a recouerie ts had as
gainſt B. tbe betre of A. fbail
baue a to2ít of Right of the
Whole, fox eucrp Jopntenant
is ſeiled per my & per tour,

It lands be given in tagle,
the rematnder to A. in Fer,
the Done dieth Without Ilſ⸗
fue,hte wife priuemét en(cinr,
A.entreth, the Iſſue is bone


Gnd entreth bpon bím and diz


eth without Bue, A. thail
havea wꝛit of Right, of rhe
Setfin Which be had.

3f Lands be giuen fn tatle
to A. the remainder to big
tight heires, A. dteth without
Puc, the collaterali heire of
A: ſhall bauc a zit of Right
of thefeifin of A.

Bur fo note a diuerũtis bos
twenea Seiſin tocaufe pof-
fefTio fratris, &c. foz there (e
required a moꝛe aduall fetfin,


and a Seifin to maintatne a torte of Bight, And hetebp alfoarethe (&c.) tathis Setton


seplatned,


Ces poít cffte Dit , que
€ A car parolá (modo & for-


Se. ap, 462


X O this it may be faid, that
thefe words (mede dr forme


ma put &c.)inmultg 68 cafes (Ot prost,cre.)in pany cafes are words


parols


25 bb


282


7. E.3 62. 38.8.3. 37. Tit.


Ipr.wtr.t.


4.8.3: 6.17.


40. E. 3.8.43. E, 1.20.57.4/.4
34-E,4.24. 9. H.5.4. 11.1.4
11.


Li b E 3.


(€) 9-H.6.1. 49.E.3,5%
21. E.4. 22. F.À.B.206.4.
42.£.3.5.
32-H.8.iffue Br. 80.

Vide SelB. fequent.


13 E.4. 4.


Vide $8. preata.


10. E.4.7. B.E. 4.15.
20.2.4.3: 31. E. 4.5.
Merlebr.cap. 5.


Cep.8.


parols De fozme De pleder, ene=
imp patolg De fubftance, Car (i
home port baiefe Dentre In cafu
prouifo, Del alienation fait per le
tenant en Dotozr a fon difinkert=
tance, et counta delalienation
fait en fee, et le tenant Dit, que il


ne aliena pas en le manner comte


ledemaunDant ad Declare, et fur
ceo fount a iſſue, et troue eft per
berdict,que le tenant alpenatt en
letaile, ou put terine Dauter bie,
le DemaunDant recoucra : oncoze
lalpenation ne fuiten le manner
come fe DemaunDant auoit Dex


Of Releafes.


Se#.484.

of forme of pleading, and not
words of fubftance, for if a man
Dring a Writ of Entrie in cafu pro-
aiſo, of the alienation made by te-
nant in Dower to his difinheri-
tance, and counteth of the alie-
nation made in fee , and the tenant
faith,chat he did not alien in maner
as the Demandant hath declared,
and vpon this they are at iffue, and
is found by verdi& , that the Te-
nant alicned in taile, or for tearme
of another manslife , the Deman-
dant fhall recouer, yet the aliena-
tion was not in manner as the De-


clare, 3t,


point of tbe wꝛit o2 Wetton, there Modo & forma ,
bere in the Cafe of che writ of Entrisin cafu prouifo,


mandant hath declared, &c.


€ Tere Modo & Forma are of thefubftance of the iſſue, and where but Words of
VV forme, this Dinerfitte is tobe obferueb , (c) Swbere the iflue taken goeth tothe


atebut $0108 of forme, ag


and fo ts the ( c.) Sell explained in this


Section: Wut other wile tt is, when a collaterali point in pleading (g trauerſed, ag (f a teoſt⸗
ment be aileadged by two, and this is trauerfed Modo & Forma, anb ít tg found the feoffment
of ene, there Modo & Forma is matertall, So (f afeoffment be pleaded bp Ded, aub it is


trauzríco Abfque hoc quod feoffauit modo & forma,
forma are fo eifenttall,as the Furp cannot finda fco


€ ] Rone eff per
TEE que
il tient per fealtie >


"auum. Pere is
another víucrütic te bee
ebferucd, Chat. albeit
the (Tue be bpon a colla⸗
terall point, pet tf bp the
finding of part of the
iſſue, ít (ball appeareto
the Court that no fuch
action lieth fog the plains
tife no moze then 1£ the
Whole had benc found
there modo. & forma
arebut words of forme,
ag here in the cafe which
Littleton putteth of the
Lord and Œcnant, aps
peareth,

€ Car le matter
del iſſue eft le quel sl
stent de Lu () Ou nemy,

€


Here ít appeareth,that


Seilion 484.

€ A Urr ( foient

A3". at, alet
tient 51 Sft per feal-
tie Colement, et le Siar
Diftreine le tenant pur
tent & le tenant porta
baiefe De Treſpas en-
uers fon Seignior de
feg auers tint prites,
tle Seignioz plebe
que le tenant tient de
luy per fealties certain
tent, t pur lerent arere
il bient a diſtreiner ac,
& demaunde iudgemẽt
De briefe pszt bers luy,
Quare vi & armis, &c.
& lauter Dit que il netí-


ent Delup en le maner


come il fappofe, et fur
ceo


bpon this Collateral Iſſue, modo &
ffment Swithont bob.


Lío if there bee

Lord and Tenant,
and the Tenant hold of
the Lord by fealty only,
and the Lord diftreine
the Tenant for rent, and
the Tenant bringeth a
Writ of Trefpaffe a-
gainft his Lord for his
cattle fo taken, andthe
lord plead that the tenat
holds of him by fealtie
and certaine Rent, and
for the Rent behind hee
came to diftreine, &c.
and demand iudgement
of the Writ brought a-
gainft him, ware vi e
armis, dr. And the other.
faith , that hec doth not


Lib.


ceo font a iflue.et troue
eft pet berdict que él
tient De luy per Fealtie
tantunt, en ceft cafe le
bziefe abatera, et vn⸗
core il ne tient De lup en
lemaner come le ſeig⸗
nioz auoit Dit, Carle
matter Del iffue eft, 1c
quel le tenant tient de
lup ounemp, car filti-
ent de luy, coment que
le Seiguioz diftreina
le tenant pur auter ſer⸗
uices que ite Doit quet,
bneoze, tiel briefe De
Œrefpalle, Quare vi &
armis, &c. ne gift en-
uersle Seignioz mes
ferra abate,

Quare vi & arm, Ge.
Lord, but fhall abate.


Of Releales.


hold of him inthe man-
ner, as he fuppofe , and
vpon this they are at if-
fue, and it is found by
verdi& that he holdeth
of him by fealtie only.
In this cafe the Writ
fhall abate , and yet hee
dothnot hold of him in
the manner as the Lord
hath faid, for the matter
of the iffue is whether
the Tenant holdeth of
him or no, for if hee
holdeth of him , al-
though that the Lord di-
ftreine the Tenant for o-
ther feruices which hee
ought not to haue , yet
fuch Writ of Trefpaffe,
doth not lie againft the


$e8.485.


t£ the matter of tbe (lue
be found tt is fufficient,
Bnd this rule holds in
Criminal canfes. Fos if
A. be appealeb , 02 indi⸗
sted of Wurder,viz. that
hee of malice prepenfer
Killed I, A. pleabdech that
be (e not quiitte modo &
forma, pet tbe Jury map
find the Defendant guti⸗
tp of Man-laugbter
Swithont malice prepens
fed, becauſe tbe billing of
I. tg the matter andma=
lice paepented is but a
circumftance.

3n Alſiſe of Darreine
prefentment, ff the plaín-
tife alleadge the anops
Dance of the Church bp
priuatton, ano tbe Jurp
finde the bopdance bp
beat), the Dlaintifethait


282


Pl. Com. toi.


6.K.3.41.b. ag, E, 3050,
9.H.7.3: 13, H.7.14,
29.E,3.38,


baue tudgement, forthe —


manner of bepdance tg
not the titie of the
Plaintife, but the bops
Dance is the matter.

(d) FE a Gardeine of
an ofpitall bring an


Alife againſt the Oꝛdinary, hee pleadeth that in his vifitation he depꝛiued him as Dzdinary,
Soberenpon (fiue is taken, anb ít ts found that he deprtucd bímag Patron the Dadtnarp {ball
haue tudgement, for the Depriuation ts the fubffance of the matter.

The Leſſee conenant With the Lefſoꝛ not to cut down any trees, ac. € bind bimfelfe in a bond
of fo:ty pounds £o performance of Coucnants , the Lefe cut Downe ten tres, the Leflos
bringeth an Action of Debt bpon tbe bond, € a(fignetl)a breach that tbe Leflee cutteth Done
twentictres, Whereupon iſſue is ioyned e the Jury find that the Leflee cut Downe ten, iudge⸗
ment fhall bec giuen fog the 39laímtite, Foꝛ fufficient matter of the iſſue is found, fo» the


Plaintite.


Seif. 485.


€ A” en balcte

de treſpaſſe De
batteríc,ou ds biens
empozts, file Defen-
bant plebe De rien
culpable, en Ie matt
come le Jlaintife
fuppofe , et troue eft
que le Defendant eft
culpable en auter bil-
le ou à auter iour que
le Plaintife fuppofe,
vncore ti vecouera,


Lfo in a Writ of

Trefpatfe for bat-
terie , or for goods
carried away , if the
Defendant plead not
guiltie, in manner as
the Plaintife fuppofe,
and it is found that the
Defendant is guiltie
in another Towne, or
at another day then
the Plaintife fuppofe,
yet hee fhall recouer.


Wbbb 2


apr briefe de tref-
palfe de battery &
des biens emports , dre.

Were Littleton {peaketh of
Actons bought for things
tranfitozie. Jn Which cafes
the $v10ng becing done in onc
Towne, the 39laíntífemay
not onlpalleage tt in anorber
Æowne , ag Littleton here
fatth, bat alfo fn another
€ ountíe, andthe Juroꝛs ops
pon not autitte pleaded, are
boü to find foz the plaintits.

Neither can the aſſault, bat⸗
terie o? taking of gong, ac.
alleadged in another Countte,
betrauerfco without ue

ca


(d) 8.E.3.79.8..4f- 19. &
39-9.€.3.338.14. 8.3.34
5-H. 4-2 7. H.4 11. Pl (Cem.
92. 3. Mar. Deer, 116.
4o.E.3.35.


D e.a dr 3y.Pb dr Mar.
115.6.

Trsm. 32. Eliz Ret. gi.
Wlman: cafe.
48.E.5.38.* 34. 47-3.
30-.4f-5. 41.F.3.28.
33.E. 3. verdit. 47.

21 E. 5.1.6,48.£.3.48,
3 Y, E. 3. account. 58.

a8, Aff 48.


(ap.8.
caufe of tuftification Swhich
ettenbeth to fome certaine
piace, ag (£e Œonftable of a
somone in anothcr Countte
arreſt the bony of a man, that
bzeaketh the peace, there hee
may trauerfothe Countp( but
he malt notreft there) but all
other places faning ín the
Towne Whereof he t¢ Con⸗
ftabic, Andfoit is of taking
of gods, the Defendant iu⸗
ftifie £02 damage feafant (n a=
nether Countie he mult tras
uerfe ag before. Wut bere
thecaufe of the tuftification is
uot reftrained to a certame
place that is fo locall ag tt
cannot be alledged in anp o⸗
ther Towneas ín tbe cales
befoze alledged, and the itke,
then albeit the action bee
broughtina foraine Coun=


Of Releafes!


Et iffint en plufors
auters cales , cour
patolg,8.cn le maner
come le Demaundant
ou E plaintife ad ſup⸗
pofe, ne font afcun
matter De fub(tance
Del (ffue, Car € batefe
De Doit, lou le mife
eft topne fur le mere
Droit, ilefta tant a-
dire et a tiel effect, 8,
le quel ad pluis mere
Droit, le tenantou le
demandant al chofe
en Demand,


Seët.485. |


And fo in many other
cafes theíe words, s. in
manner as the deman-
dant or the plaintife
hath fuppofed,doe not
make any matter of
fubftance of the iffue,
for ina Writ of right,
where the miſe is 10y-
ned vpon the meere
right, thatis as much
to fay, & to fuch effect,
viz, whether the tenat
or demaundant. hath
more meere right to
the thing in demand.


tie, vet be muſt alledge his inftification inthe Countie $obere the action is brought. As té a
man be beaten in tbe Countp of Middlefex, and be baingeth bis action (n the Œountie of
Buck. the Defendant cannot pleade that the 19 aintífa affauiteb him inthe County of Midd.
&c.and trauerfe the County, but he muft pleade his tuftification in tbe dLounty of Buck. fog
that the caufe of hig infttficatton ts gadinany place. And fo it is in cafe of batlement of
gods, and other cafcg foz tranfitorp things, as £02 crample.

In an action bpon the cafe the 391afmttfe declared foz fpcaking of (lanberoug woꝛds which
is tranfitozíc, an» fato the $0205 to be fpoken in London, the Defendant pleaded a concozd _
fo; {peaking of words in all the Counties of England fauingin London, anb traucried the
{peaking of the Swozds in London : the Plaintife in his replicarton dented the concozd, Sheree
upon the Defendant demurred, and tudgement Was given for the 391atntife, oz the Court
fatd, that tf the concozd tn that cafe Mould not be trauerfed. tt would follow that bp a new and
fubtile inuention of pleading, an anctent principle tn Law, (that for tranfitozte caufes of actte
on th: Plaintife might alledge the fame in What place o2 Countte be would ) ſhould be fubuers
ted, Which ought not to be fuffereo, and therefore the Judges of botÿ Courts allowed a tras
uerſe byon atrauctfe in tat cafe: Bnd the wiſedome uf the Judges and Sages of the Law
haue alwayes fupprefled new andfubtile inuentions in derogation of the Common Law.
Bnd tbercfo2c tbe Judges fap in one boke ( c ) Wwe Will not change the Law Which alwayes
hath bene vſed. Bnd another ſaith ( F )it is better that it be turned tu a default, then the La
fhould be changed, 02 anp innouation made.

A man did grant a rent, With a new inuented claufe of Difkreffe,viz. That the Grantee
fhould hold the DiGretic agatnft gages and picdges, and pet bp the whole Court he (ball gage
beltaerance, for otherwife bp this new tnucntion all Repleupes fball be taken awap.

(*) Se many other new inventions in derogation of the Common Law diſallowed bp
the Judges and bp the Court of Parliament.

(h) Where the Fury ts bound to finde afwelllocallthings in many cafes ag tranfitozp in
other Counties, fe atlarge in mp Reports,

By this Which hath bene faíb pou fhall know the aww ag itis now in ble in tbefe cafes,
and thebetter vnderſtand our (1) bokes when pots (ball reabe them concerning as well locali,
ag tranfitosp things, wherein pou fhall finde great barictp of opinion in our bakes,


Œ Sile defendant plead de rien culpable. Chis t8 & good tue if the
Defendant committed nobatterp atall, but regularlp bp the Common Law fftbe 3Defcnbant
hath caufe of tuftiication o2 excute, then can he not pleade not guíltp, for then bpen the ent=
Bencett (hail be found againſt htm, for that he confelleth the battery, and bpon that fluc cannot
tuftiiett, but bemnft pleade thefpeciall matter, and confefle and tuffifie the battery.

The like Law to ti other cafes, and therefore this is alearning neceſſary to be nowne,fox
thatthe lofle of inoft cauſes dependeth thereupon. As (f tn batterp the Defendant map iuſtifie
the fame to be done of the Plaintifer owne aſſault he muſt pleade (t fprcíallp, and malt net
pleade the general (Tac, and fo of thelike. In treſpaſſe of bꝛeaking big clofe, bpor not —


Trin. 30. Elit · inthe Kings
bensh betweeue Englebert and
Lanes, And herewith agreeth
aindgemont sn the (omrt of
Common pleas, Path.

33 Eliz Ret.1656.


(c) 38.£.3.1.

(£) 3. RH. 4.18.

3 E. 3. Garer deliner 5.

(*) 42. Aff. 1a. 4. E.3.c2.5-

18.E.3.ca.1. & ca, 6.

4. H. 4. ca. 3.

(h) Lb. 6. fe. 46.47.

"Deywdale: cafe. 3.2.3.

Mff. 446. 27-E.3.86.
1. f. 16. 3. f 4. 6.44.4.

$--A[f-7- 18.B.:.58.

21.4.8. 25. AF. 5.

44. E, 3.6.b. 14. H.4.35.
g.H.5.2. te. H. 6.15.
21.H.6. $1. 37. H.6.2.

7-E-4.45- 18.£.4.1-

22. E.4. 19. 13. H.7. 17-
2.Mar. Br .attaint.10 4-
yo. EliQ Dier, Vy v.

(i) Yo. H.6.48. 11. H. 6. 16,
43. E. 3.23.5. 46. E. 3.3.4.
9. H.6.63. a1. H.6.27.

14. H.8.24. 18.E.4.1.
30. H.6.3. 34. H. 6.42.
14. H. 6.31.32, 4. H.6.13.
31. H.6. 25. 12, E, 4.12.
28.H.8. Dier.29.
a1.E,4.19.80.27.H.8.19.
r1.H.8.1. 11,H.4.65.
19.H.8.6.


Lib. Of Releafes, Seét.485.


be cannot gíue in entocnce, that the beaffg came thozes the Piaintites hedge, Which he ought
to sepe, not bpon the generall iffue tuffifie bp reafon of a Rent-charge, Commmon.oz the ike,

In d. tinue the Defendant pleadeth Non detinet, he cannot gine (5 euidence, that the gods
ere pawned to him fo? moncy, and that ít (s not paid, but mutt pleade tt, but be may giue tn
eutdencea gift from the 39laíntiEe, oz that pzoueth, he detaineth not the Plaintikes gods.

(d) Soin an action of waſte, bpon tbe plea Nul wait fait, be map gíue in eutoence anp
thing, that pꝛoueth it no waſte, as bp tempeft, bp lightning, by encmícg, and the like, buthe
cannot gine in eutdence tufttfiable Wake, ag to repatre the houſe oz thelike. (e) FE one doth
waſte, and befoze the action brought the Leſſes repatreth ft, and after the XLe(lo? brinaeth an
Action of wafte, and the Leſſee plead Quod non fecit vaftum, hee cannot gtue th eutdence the
efpectall matter,

FE two men be bound fn abond topntip, and the one ic fuco alone, he map picad this matter
inabatoment of the Wait, but he cannot plead Non eft factum, foy (t ta his Deed, thoughit be
not big fole Deed. (f) Sain Whelpdales cafe, Swbere a man may fafelp plead Non cit factũ,
and Where not, and the former bog that treat of that matter Mell reconciled,

(g) Upon Plene adminiftrauit pleaded bp an Executoz Eciffint riens inter maines, t€ ít bee
proved that he hath qwds in his hands Which Were the Teſtators, be map giue in entdence,
that be hath pato to that balue of bis one money, and neod not plead (t fpectalip.

In an Aſtiſe t£ the Tenant plead Nul tort nul diflerfin, hecannot gtuc in eutdence a Rez
leafe after the Diſſeiſlin, but a Releaſe before the Dilleifin he map, foz then there ig no Diflets
fin bpon the matter. .

In a tort of Right tf the Cenant topne the Mite vpon the mere right, hee cannot aine in
eutdence a collatcrall $oarrantíe, £02 he hath not any right bp tt, and therefoze tt ougbtto bane
bene pleaded,

DE thts learning you ball reade plentífullp in our bokes, andin mp Beports. Chie little
tafte (ball here fuffice to make the reader capable of the reft. iBegularip Whenfoouer a man
dath any thing by force of a warrant o2 authozity, he mutt plead tt.

Wut alitbat hath bene fa(b mult be onber two cautions. Firſt that Whenfoener a man cans
not bauc abuantage of the fpecíall matter by Way of pleading, there he Mall take aduantage of
itin the euibence. Foꝛ example the rule of Law ts, tbata man cannot tultifie in che killing
02 death of a man, and therefore (m that cafe, be fhall be receiued to give the clpectall matter in
eutdence, as that it was Se defendendo, of in Defence of his houſe th the night againſt theeues
and robbers o2 the like.

Secondly, Chat in any ation bpon the cafe, Œrefpañe, Battery, oy of fatfe impꝛiſon⸗
mentagaint any Juſtice of peace, Matos, 02 Wailite of Citteor Cow corporate, headbo⸗
rough Poꝛt⸗reue Conſtable, Cithingman,Collecoz of Sublidie o? Siftene,tn any his Ma⸗
ieftíes Courts tn Weftminfter, o2 elfewbere concerning anp thing bp anp of them done by reas
fon of anp of their offices afozefatd,and all other in their aide o? alliance oꝛ bp their commans
Dement, zc. thep may plead the gencrall iflue, and gine thefpectall matter foz theire excuſs oz
iuſt ißcation in euidence,

An en Action of trefpalTc o2 other fuite againtk any perfor £02 taking of anp Diſtreſſe oz other
Be doing bp force of the Commtfton of SeWers, the Defendant in anp fucb Acton Hall
anb may make Auowaie, &onufance or Jullification generally, that it was done bp authozitp
of che Commiflionof Sewers foz Lotte or Cay allefled by that Commiflion,ec. and the
Slaintike (all reply be did tt of bis otonc Wong without fuch canfe, And both tbefe ace
Swere made fos anopding of pzolixity and captioufnelle of pleading tending to the great charge
and danger of 1D ficerg and mínt(terg of Juttice,tc. Evidence, Euidentia. Chis $0020 tn les
gall vnder ſtanding doth not onlp containe matters of Record, ag Letters patents, Fines,
Recoveries, Jurolments, and thelike, and wꝛitings vader feale, as Charters and Dede,
anb other Writings without frale,as Court Rolles, Accounts, and the like, which are cale
led Entdences Inftrumenta, but tn a larger fence ít containeth aifo Teltimonia, tbe Ceſtimony
of Svitnelles, and other profes to be produced and giuer to a Jurp, for the finding of anp (fue
fopned betweene the parties, And (t te called Euidence, becauſe therebp the point tn ifue ts
to be made cuibent tothe Jury. Probationes debent effe euidentes; ( id eft ) perfpicuæ & faciles
intelligi. But let bo now returneto Littleton.


Œ 04 aster iour que le Plaintife (uppofe. (9) AS if the Treſpaſſe
ere done the fourth of Wap, and the Platntife alledgeth the fame to be done the fiftbof May
onthe irkof Day, when no trcfpaffe Was done,pet (€ bpon the eutdence tt falleth eut, Chat the
CTreſpaſſe was Donc before the Acton brought.tt fulFiceth : and this is Warranted bp Littleton
Soho ſpeaketh indifinttelp, that the Flurie map find the Defendant guiitteat another dap than
the laintife ſuppoſeth.


€ Er atieleffect. Here is to be oblerucd, Chat the Law of Eng-
5 bbb 3 lanh


283
35.H.8. Br,


22.H.6.;3.


(d) 12 H.8.1. 19.2.2.
wafle 30. ao. E. 3.*w4ff. 25.


(€) 10. Ez Dier,276,
NEED


(£ ) Lib. s. festis,
W'belpdales «afe.
g-£.4. 5.7 E. 6.Br. Non sf
fa. 34. 1.4.9.1.

14, H.8.28. Pl. Com,

Diue & Man safe,

36. H.8.Dier 59. 2..Mar.
Dior 113. 1. Eli( Dyer. 167.
(g) Hill.10.H.8. Rot.333.
in Comum banco, Er “Mick,
6.€.6, in (Comuni bauce
"Bendloes.

7. H.5.9- 6.H.7.10,
34-E.3.Drost.29,


9-€.3.32- 8.6.3.34.
33.E.3.Verdit, 18.H.6.24,
39.H.6.38. 18. E. 3.19.
"Pl.Com.81.173. 21.4.9 96
16. Keliyeya1.€,4.11.
21.£.4.45. 13, H.7.15.
Stanf. PL. Cor. 15.
22.455. 37. H. 6. 21.


7. Ia ca.5.


23. H B.ca. 50


(g) 19-H.6.47. 3.8 4:5.
21.8.4. 66.


£s.£.3.7-


¥ Sel. 447.


5-Af-1.10.Af-16.


(4p.8.


Of Releafes.


$:8.486.487.


land refpedeti the effect and fubffance of the matter , anb not enerie nicitie of forme o2 cixcum⸗


u— hæret in litera, hæret in cortice, & apices iuris non funt iura,


Section 486.


© T Cem ft home foít difleifie,
et le Diſſeiſor Deute ſeiſie,
ac, et fon fits et Weire eft
eins per bí(cent , et le Diſſeiſee
enter fur lheire Difleifor, le quel
entric eft on Difletfin, ac, ſi lheire
port Alife ou 282íefe De Entre
en nature De 3f (fife tl vecouera,


Lfo ifa man bee diffeifed, and

the diffeifor dieth feifed, &c.
and his fonne and heire is in by dif.
cent, andthe Diffeifec enter vpon
the heire of theDiffeifor, which
entrie is a Diffeifin, &c. if the
heire bring an Affife or a Writ of
Entrie in nature of an Affife, hee


fhall recouer.


the charge of the grand Adife bpon their Dath is bpon the meereright, and not bpon


€ Aix thereafen hereof (8, fo; that in the t02ít of Right mentioned in the nett Section


the poſſeſſion.


€ —— fi le heire le
Diffeif: or, CC.
Here is a biuerfitieto bee ob-
feruco concerning that which
hath benefapd, when the pofz
fe(Tíon all daaw the right of
the land to ft, and ben not.
And therefore When the pof-
feffion ts firft,and then a right
commeth tbercunto, the entrte
of himthat bath right to the
voſſeſſton fhall gaine alfo the
right, Which ag befoze (t ap-
pearet tn tbofe cafes there
put, followeth tbe poffeffion,
and the right of poflefiton
draweth the right onto it, but
When the rightis fir, and
then the pofeflion commeth
to the right, albeit the pofief=
Gon be defeated , (ag here tn
Littletons cafe it (a bp the
heire of tbe Diflcifoz) pet the


nore of the Difeifce remat= :


€ Briefe Dentrie en
le Per. A. Dieth fci-


fed, andthe land difcendeth to
B. bis fonne, before he entreth
an eftranger abatetb and d{eth
fetfed , B. entreth, againft
Sobom the hetre of the —
recouereth ín an Alife, B.
tap ane d weit of —

danceſter


Sect. 487.


EN Es fi lbeire
port Briefe
De droit en⸗
uers le Zailfeifee il
ferra barre, pur ceo
que quant le graund
Alife ef ture, lout
ferement eft fur le
mere Droit, et nemp
fut le poſſeſſion. Car
filbeire le Diſſeiſor
fuit bn Aſſiſe Be No-
ucl diffeifin, ou betefe
Denire en natut daſ⸗
fife, et recoucraft $8
le Billeifee, et ſuiſt
executiõ, bucoze poit
le Difleifee auer bte
Dentre en le Per en-
uers lup, Dele Diffei-
finfatt a lup per fon
pere, ou tl poit auer
enuerg lheire baicfe
De droit.


Vt ifthe heyre
Deis a Writ of

Right againft the
Diffeifee, he fhall bee
barred, for that when
the graund Affife is
{worne, their Oath is
vpon the meere right,
and not vpon the pof-
feffion : For if the
Heyre of the Diffei-
for fue an Affifeof No-
uel diffeifin, or a Writ
of Entrie in nature of
an Affife, and reco-
uers againft the Diffei-
fee,and fueth executi-
on,yet may theDiffei-
fee haue a Writ of En-
trie inthe Per, againft
him , for the Diffeifin
made to him by his fa-
ther, orhe may haue —
againftthe heirea writ —
of Right.


Lib.3.


OF Releafes, Se4.488,489,490.


dancefter,anb recouer the land againſt him. And il the Diffeifin had heene done to A. ac, then
after the recouctte in the Bile b. Mould jane hada wit of Entric inthe Per, becaufe the hepre


that (g tn bp difcent (s in the Per.


C S (i le Heyze doit
a Mons enuers le Diſ⸗
feifee en Le cafeauantdit, per bte
De Droit, Donque tout fon dzoit
ferroit clerement ale, purceo que
iudgement final ferroit Done ens
uers luy, que ſerroit encounter
reafon,lou le Diſſeilee ab pluis
meere Dott ac,


© sagement final.
Sotaton of this Chapter,


Seël. 488:


BY if the Heire ought to reco-
ueragainft the Diffeifee in the
cafe aforefayd by a Writ of Right,
then all his right fhouldbe cleere-
ly taken away, for that iudgement
finall fhall bee, giuen againft him,
which fhould bee againft rea-
fon where the Diffeifee hath the
moremecre right.


The forme tobereof you fball tee in the laſt


€ Que ferra encounter reaſon. Argumentum ab inconuenienti.


Se&ion 489.


€ E Œ facies mon fits queen

betefe De Doit, apres ceo
queles quatet chinalers ont eflie
le grand Affife, Donquesil nad
pluis greinder Delay queen bn
beiefe De Formedon, apzes ceo
queles parties font a iflue, ac,
et file miſe foit iopne fur 1e Bat⸗
taile,Donques il ad meind Delay,


D. UN know (my fonne) that ina
Writ of Right after the foure
Knights haue chofen the grand Af-
fife, then he hath no greater delay
thanin a Writ of Formedon, after
the parties be at iffue, &c. And
if the Mife bee ioyned vpon bat-
taile, then hee hath leffer de-
lay.


€ B dus See for this word in the lat! Section of this
apter, +
€ Mw,dc. Di Demurrer, which is an Flue (o Later


Se#.490. € 491.


€ [Gem releatede tout E doit,
ec. en afcun cate eft bone,
fait a celtip que eft fuppofe tenat
en Lep, coment que il nad cíeng
enles Œenements, Sicome en
Przcipe quod reddat, ff le Œenat
aliena la terre pendant le bzicfe,
et puis le Demaundant — a
up


Li a releafe of all the right,
&c. in fome cafe is good
made to him which is fuppo-
fed Tenant in Law, albeit he hath
nothing inthe Tenements. As ina
Pracipe quod reddat, if the Tenaunt
alien the land hanging the Writ,
and after the Demandant releafeth


284.


V.Sth.87.G 6


(hj i8 E,4.1 3. AL 41
21. 4] 13.33. E.3.21. 35. €
3. 40.38. £ 3.10.11 7. E.5.


9.61 4.15.39. H.6.40.17.7f.
24.8. H.4.5.30,. 4f: 3.14.E.
3. Procedends,4.9.E. 3.17.


(ap.8.
lup tout fon boit, at, cel veleafe
eft bone pur ceo que il eft ſuppoſe
Deftretenant per le fuit Del De⸗
manDdant, ct bncoze il nad viens
d la Terre al temps De Beleate
ait,


Of Releafes.


Sed.491492.
to him all his right, &c. this Re-
leafe is good,forthat hee is fuppo-
{ed tobe Tenant by the fuit of che
Demandant, and yet hee hath no-
thing in theland at thetime of the
Releafe made.


Seci.A9T«


€ E fà, metme le manner eff,

fi € Precipe quod reddat le
tenant vouche,æ le Wouchee ent
en le Garrantie, (i apzes le De⸗
mandant celcffa al poucbee tout
fon Dzoit, cco eſt aſſets bone,pur
ceo quet q1oucbee apres ceo que
il auott enter en le Garrantie,
et Tenant en Hep al Deman⸗
Daut,ac,


N the fame manner it is ina Pra-

cipe quod reddat, che tenant vouch,
andthe V ouchee enters into War-
rantie , if afterward the Demands
releafe tothe vouchee al his right,
this is goodenough, for that the
Vouchee after that he hath entred
into Warranty is Tenant in Law to
the Demandant,&c.


€ H Ere it both appeare, That therets a Tenant (s Deed and a Conant (a Law , anv
Littleton tr tbíg and tbe next Section puttech two examples of Tenants in Law,
viz (h) the Œenant to a Præcipe aiter alienation, anb of the Uouchee, Sobertof


ſomewhat bath bene ſayd before.


And itis obfermable , That Littleton fattb , Chat in both cafes hee is Genant in Law


to the Demandant, and pet he hath nothing in the Rand,


And therefore tf after the Wonche


bath entre into warrantie, and become Œcnant (n Lair, an Ancettoz collateral ofthe deman⸗
bant releaferh to the Nouchee With warrantte, be fhall not pleadthts againft rhe Derraundant,


fozthat the Keleale by the Ettranger te voyd, w


hich beGides the authorit ies befoze bonched,ape —


32 E.3.Quare Impedit 3.
Dyer 17. Elit 341.
Sed. 447.

* Vid usnt,Se®, 437.


peareth bp Littleton bímfelfe, * £0 be faith, Chat be is Cenaunt ín Aa tothe Demaundant,;
Gohercby be excludeth, that hes Œcnant intefped of any eftranger.


Glanu.ls.1.ca.v. "DraB.li. 3.
fe. o1. Brus. fo.71, Fler lst,


Mir. cá. 2. S.i. Brattevb fup,


€ Ota , there bec tivo
kind of Acttons, viz.

one tbat concern tbe

Pleas of the Crowne, Placi-
ta Coron, 03 Placita Crimi -
palia, another that concerne
Œommon Pleas, Placita
Communia feu Ciuilia. DE
that Which concerneth leas
of the Crowne, Lirtleron
fpeaketh hereafter in this
Chaptcr. Df Actons cone
cerning Common cas,
Littleton fpeaketh tn this
place. And thefe are three⸗
fold (that is to fap) Keall,
Perfonalland Mire, Placi-
torumaliad perfonale, aliud
reale, aliud mixtum. 93 A-
&ionum quzdam funt in


Seélion 4.92.


[Cem quant al
releafes Dacti-
ons reals et ps

fonalg , il eft ifint,

quc afcuns actions
font micten le realty
et en le perfonaltie,
ficome bn action de

Waſte fue enuers te=

nant aterme De bie,

ce(t action cff en lere«
altie, pur ceo que le
lieu wWaſte Cerra re⸗
couer, €t auxy enie

per


Lfo as to relea-
fes of Actions
Realls , and

Perfonals it is thus.
Some actions are mixt
inthe realtieand inthe
perfonaltie, as att acti-
on of waft {ued againft
Tenant fer life. This.
A&ion isin the Real:
tie, becaufe the place
wafted fhallbee reco-
uered, and alfo in the.
Perfonaltie , becaufe


Lib...

perfonaltie, put ceo
que treble Damages
ferront recouers p
le toztious noa fait
ple tenant, & pur ceo
en ceft action , bites
leas Dactions reals
eft bon plee en barre,
et iſſint c(t on releas
dactions perſonals.


€


Of Releafes.


treble dammages fhall
bee recouered for the
wrongfull wafte done
by the Tenant, And
therefore in this acti-
ona releale of actions
reals isa good plea in
barre, and foisa Re-
leafe of actions perfo-
mals.


Tenant pur vie. Aud fo it is tf it bee bꝛought


Sed. 492.


Rem,quædam in Perfonam,&
quzdam mixtæ. Bnd gencrale
lp. AQio ig defined, (i) A-
&io nihil aliud eft quam ius
profequendi in iudicio quod
fibi debetur. 92 A&ion neft
auter chofe que loiall deman-
de de fon droit,

(k) Bnd by the releafe of
all Actions, canfes of actor


be releafed, but within a ſub⸗


mi lion of all actions to atbíz
trement, caufce of adíon are
not contained,


againft tenant


for peares becaufe it agreeth With the reafon of Littleton here rendzed, viz that the place waz
fed hall be recoucred, and rherefoze foundeth (n the veaitte,


Auxy en le perfonaltie pur cea que treble damages férra reconers ,
Swhicy Doe ſound in the perfonaltic. toherefore Littleton conclubeth, that (nan Acion mixt
a làcleafc of all actions rcaig ($a good barre, and fois a releale of alladiong perfonals.
And here is co be obfcrueb a diuerfitte betweene the ad ofthe partie, & an at in Law , fora
man bp his owne a cannet alter the nature of bis ation, anb therefoze tf the ieflee fox lite 0g
elle for vearcs doc waſte, now tg ar action of waſte ginen to the Leſſoa, wherein be fail res
coner t$0 things, viz. the place waſted, and treble Daminages;fn this cafe (£ the Leſſoꝛ releafe
allactions reals, he (hall not haue an Betton of wate in the gerfonaltie only. And tf he releafe


ali Actions perfonals he Mail not have an
CD) And fo tt ts ££ thc Leſſee Bath Wake,


Action of waſte in the rcaltíe only.
and after furrendzeth to the Leſtor his eftate, and


the Leffoz accept thereof,the ALeffoz (ball not banc an Action of waſte.


But by ad in Law the nature of the adíen map be changed
terme dau:er vie, and the Leſtee doth Waſte, and then Cefty que vie dieth,


, ag í£ a man make a Leaſe pur


an Action ef toafte


hall {te (o? Dammages only bccaufe the other is determined by act in Law.


Bnd agatne, hereupon ts another dinerfitiet
and part ofthe Actton determéneth by actin Law ,
but proceed, But where by the Determination of
there the Action Sell commenced (hall abate,
ant, pur terme dauter vie, and hanging the
but the Plaintife (ball reconer Damages
ction bionaht the Lefoz might haue an actt⸗
brought, andthe tearme incurreth


Sell begun,


refiducis giuen, there the wꝛit ſhall not abat:
part the like action remayneth not fo? the refibue,
20s i£an Action of waſte be bꝛought agaínft ten
Wait Cefty que vie, dieth, the tozit Hall not abate,
onlp,becaufe if Cefty que vie had died before anp à
on of waſte forthe Dammages: Sot an Eicétione firme bg:


obcoblerucd, that in caſe when an action is


and pet the like action fox the


hanging the ation, petthe Dcion [hall proceed foz Dammages onlp, becaufean Eicétione bath


lie after the tearme fox dammages only.
fty que vie dieth, hanging the t02ft; albett the wꝛit
bate, becaufe no Aſſife can be maintainable fozdammages only.


Wut it te nant pur auter vic,
&pere well commenced, pet the weit {ball ae


bring an Alife, and Ce-


So if an Baion of watte be bought by Waren and Fem (is remainder, fn efpectatl tatle


and hanging the wait the Wife dieth Swithont (Tae; the Wꝛit fhall abate,


Action of waſte mult be ad exhzredationem.


Fa writ of Annuitie be brought,
t0 it faileth fozeuer, becauſe no like A


to be recoucred, there albeitbg ad tn Law , the like 2 dion


the Annuiticand Arrerages,


Wut Shere dammages onlp are


bccaufe euery kind of


anb the Annuitie determineth hanging the tozit, the
tíoncan be maintained fog the Arrerages onlp, but foi


Heth not afterwards, pet the Action Well commenced fhall procesd, (m) ag i£ a Confpiractebe
brought again two, and onc of thom dieth hanging the wert, (t fhall proceed.


Bnd (x an Allile of Nouell diffeifin, a wut of A


nnuitie, Quare impedir and other mixt Acl⸗


ons, areleafe of Acions reals tg a god lea, and fo it ig of a releafe of Actions perfonalg.


. Wut tf the Jepntenants be diffeéfen,
tethe Diletfo all Acions perfonals, this ſhall barre him,


and they arraiqnean Alſilſe,
but ít fall net barre the other


and one of them releafe


Platnttfc, foz having regard to them therealtie ſhall bec pacterved, & omne maius trahit ad fe


minus dignum: (n) And tra 102
the other , but (ball'enureto


companion out,


€ ct


(tof ward byougbt by two, the releafe of the one (hall not
his beneñt , fez he (hall vecouer the whole tard, and hold


But here a diuerlitte (g to be ebferuco betwee reall actions Sobertin bammages are to bee
€ reco⸗


285


(1) Vide SeB.444. |
Braf, 116.3 fal.y8.
Flava lib.t.cap.t 5.
Mart cap. 3. S. 1.


(k) Lib 8.153.Alihame
eafe. 35, H.8."Dier 57.
$.Mar.217.V ide 36.H.6.8.
Vide 42. E.3. 22. 23.


(1) 19.H.6.66. 14. H.6.14
I iR 2.Wafe 99. 14.H.9,14
23. H.8.Br.Wafte.


11.H.6.43. 9. B. 4. 505
24,B.3.73. 18. £. 3.38.
9. H.6.30.


2. H. 4. 22. 6. R. a bricfallo7.


34-H.6.20. 9. E. 4-35.
14. H.7. 31,18, E. 3. Scire
faciat 12.


(50) 23-R.2. briefe 888.
18. £. 4.4.


3. H. 4.13. 9. H.6.57»
3o. H. 6. "Barre $9.
(n ) 36. H.6.v9i fapra.


4 5E. 3.fol. 6. 18. E, 3.fal. 56.
21.H 6.18.«.


Lib.;.


(o) Merten eap, 1n dar.
loc capi;


9. B.4. 65.
23. 8.6.17. b.


(4) 11-.4ff o. 18.E.5.2.25.
24 31.Ë.3 quare Dmp. 161.
g.E.3.5.9.t .3.5 19. E. 3. 30
231, E. 3.2.13. H.4 73. E. 3,
gnare mp. A5. 38.E.3. 39.11,
$.E.3.15.21.£.3,16..5.
5. H. 2. 34.8 H.«.14.22,0.
28.36.1.H 5.34.27.5. 3.81.
32 H.6,5.b. 17. 4935.
2.H.7,14.13, H.B. 13.14.
44 E. 3.12.46. F. 3:13.
16.E.4.11.24.E.3 34.
4.E. 4.18.9. M. 4. 34e

3, R, 2 encumbent 4. 33 . E.J.
guare Imp.194.


La


13. £.4.2,6.


(t) 19.08,6,23.4.


(4p.8. |


Of Releafes. ~  Seff.4.93.464.


onered ommon Lai, ad in an Bile, ec, and reall adíong Sobre Dammages att
— by the €ommon Law, but are given bp the (o) Statute , for there a ves
leafe of all Actons perfonais (s no barre, ag tn the Uo zit of Dowwer, Entrie {ur diffeifin in le per


&e.Mordanc’, Aiel, &c.


en Quareimpedir, f re⸗
GF e dactions perfonals eft


Sed. 493. -


Nd ina Quare impedit , are-
A leafe of — perfi onalsisa


bone plee, a iſſint eft vn releaſe good Plea, and fo is a releafe of
dactions reals, Per Martin, qd’ Actionsfeals, Per Martie. Quod


fuit conceflum H.g.H.


eL


63747


is ig an addition to Littleton , which although (t be Law
zd vct 3 palle it oncr, Wut pet note bp the Wap that a releafe of Aciong perfis


fuit conceffum. Hill.9.H.6.fol.57.


anb the Bokc tale


nalg, ts alſo a god barre fti à Quarc impedit , bz caufe it ig an Baton mípt.


€[ € diffeifor bien
poet pleder, &c.
Nota,enery man fhall plead
fuch Pleas ae are proper Foz
him, and apt foz bis defence
to be pleaded. (a) Aga diſ⸗
{cifoz that bath nothing in the
land map picad a relcaie of
actions p.rfonais, becaufe
Lanimages are to bee recouc=
ted again ff him, and therefore
foz bts defence bec mapplead
tt, but a rclcatc o£ acttong re»
ais hee cannotplead, becauſe
be bath ne cftate {nthe Land,
and none (ball plead avclcafe
of Adions reais in an Alife,
bnt the tenant of the Land, Fc
fic decæteris, But the Œe-
mant in an Aile (ball plead a
rcleafc of Actions perfonaig
to the Dilleifog,fez that 491ea
Hwoucth that the pDlatnetfe
bes. no caufe ofaction againtt
im.


FE the 3o ifleite releafeto the Diſſeito all actions.reals ,


Sel. 494.


CET mefme le
€r maner eft en
affife De Noucl diffei-
fin, pur ceo qve il ett
mixt en le tealtie et
€ te perſonalty. es
fivn tíel aff, fort ars
raigne enter ie Diflei=
fo et le tenant.le dif=
ſciſor bien poit plebe
bir releas Dactiong
perſonals, pur bat-
reriafl.mes nemp bn
releas Dactions re-
alg, car nul pleDera


teleag Dactiong re⸗


alg en afr, fozfas Ete-
nant,


and the Dillello⸗


[N the fame manner
itis in an Affife of
Newel diffe:fin,for that
it ismixt in therealrie
and inthe perfonaltie
but if fuch an A ffifebe
arraigned bee againft
the Diffeifor, and the
Tenant, the Diffeifor
may well plead a re-
leafe of A&ions per.
fonals to barre the Af-
fife,but nota releafe of
Actions reals,for none
{ball plead a releafe of
A@tions reals in an Af-
fife, but the tenant,


maketh a feeffes


ment in fee, and an, 20 Cife (a brought againft them, the Scotter fall not plead tbe relcafeto the


dmn fox that be is net prinieto the releafe,


2inieg.


BE a DiKetfoz make a leafe fon Ufctherematuder in fee,
tothe Œenant Fos ive, after the death of Tenant foz Ií


the fii: releafe,


£ tbe D fIcifo» releafe all Scions ra the Dificifoz
fe his heire fail bauean Beio
MAP appearca manífeft diuerlit ie bet wan a rcleate


life, fc after bis vece


n (0) as fome
of a Kight, and a réleafe of Aaiong,


for a releafe of adiong fbail onip ertenb to


and the TD ifletfee releafe ati Batons,
fesbe in the remapnbder (hall not plead


anb die, this doth barre him, bnt for hig


ane ſatd. Bnd bercbp


set,


Lib.


Section 495.


¶ ITem /en tiels actions reals

q̃ couient deſtre ſue enuers

le tenant ðl franktenement,
(iE tenant ad dn releas Dactions
reals Del demandant fait a lup
beuant le batefe purcbafe, et fl
plede ceo, tl eft bon plee pur le de⸗
mandant adire, que celup que
pleda le plee nauoit vien, en le
franktencment al temps Del tes
icas fait, car adonque il nauoit
caufe dauer aſcun action real en-


A Lío in fuch A@ions Reals
which ought to bee fued a-
gainft the tenant of the Free-hold,
if chetenat hath areleafe of actions
reals from the Demandant made
vnto him before the Writ purcha-
fed, and he plead this, itis a good
plea for the demandant to fay,that
hee which plead the Pleahadno-
thing in the Freehold at the time
of the releafe made , for then hee
had no caufe to hauean Action re-


uers luy.


all againſt him.


reals muſt be made to him that is Tenant of the Land, becauſe a reall Action muſt


eT Bis (d cufdent enongh bp that Which hath beenc fao , that a releafe of all acions


be brought againſt fucha Cenant.


€ T Cementicl cas

ou home poet

enter en Ter⸗
res ou Œencments,
et auxy poit auer bn
Action real De ceo
que eft Done p la Ley
enuers le Cenant, (f
enceftcafeic Demat:
Dant releffa al tenant
touts maners Dc Ac=
tions reais , vncoꝛe
ceone tollele oᷣman⸗
Dant De foa entric,
mes le Demandant
bien poit enter nient
contrifteat tiel releas
pur ceo que nul chofe
eft releffe fo2(quelac-
tion, tc,


Sed. 496.


Lío infuch cafe ¶


where a man

may enter into
Lands or Tenements,
and alfo may haue an
Action reall for this,
which is giuen by the
Law againítthe tenant,
if inthis cafe the De-
mandant releafeth to
the Tenant all manner
of Adtions realls, yet
this fhall not take the
Demaundantfrom his
entrie, but the De-
maundant may well
enter notwithftanding
fuch releafe, for that
nothing is releafed but
the Aion, &c.


Oct enter. Herve
it appcarsth, Goat
Sobttc à man may ens
ter, a Keleaſe of all Actions
doth not barre him of big
right, becanfe be hath another
remedy,viz.to enter. And this
is agreeable With the authotis
tícofour(() Bokes. But
where his entrie is not law⸗


full, there a Keleaſe of all Tr


Actions is bp conicquencea
barre of bis right, becaute be
hath releafed the mean where⸗
by be might recouct big right,
As tf the Diſſeiſee teleafe all
Actons to the beire of the diſ⸗
feifor, Which is tn bp Difcent,
he hath no remedie to reconer
the land, but pet the difleifes
hath aright , fos that be hath
telealed big Action, 3 norhis
right ag thal be faid hereafter
ín the Chapter of Remitrer ty
bis proper place, It the beíre
of the Wiletfoz make a feoff=
ment in fee to t$00,anb tbe diſ⸗
fcife releafeth to one of the


Feotftees all Actions and hee dicth, t e Suruiuour Hall not plead £bíg rcleafe £0) tbe canfeg
aboucfard, Bnd hereby alſo again appearcth another diuerſitie bet weens a veleafe of aright,and


a rcitafc of Aatoug.


€cec 2


Bt


- Of Releafes. — 568.495.496. — 286


(£) 18.E.5. 54. 19. E, 4.
Title 35.


Lib.5.


19. 4/3. 30. E. 3.19.6.
19. H.6.4.6, 21, M. 7. 23.4.
7. H.6.6.


Glemil. lb. 10.14.13*


41, E.3.5.


(0 4r. E.3.3. 8.H. 6.18.
38.39. a1. E. 3.28..


(u) 10.H.6.1e. 31.H.6.1.
34*H46.4. 14. H.4.23: 34^


27.

(x) 20.H.6.45. 19.E.3.
Saucrarae 14. 31.E,3.5b.33.
41, E. 3.13. 40. E. 5.35.


(ap.8 Of Releafes.  Sed.497.498.499.


It is tobeobferned Soben a man hath ſeuerall remedieg foy oneand the felfefame thing be
it reali, perfonall, 07 mixt, albeit be relcafeth one of bis remedies, be map ble the other.


Seël.497.


CE f meme le manet eft De [N the fame manner is it ofthings


chofes perfonals , ficorit
home atort prent meg biens, f
tcotcleffa a inp touts actions
perfonals, vncoꝛe ieo puiffe p le
lep prenDer mes biens hors De


fon poficffíon,


cp de detinue.


Breue de detentione

dicitur a detinendo ,
becanfe Detinet {g tbe pꝛinci⸗
pall $0020 tn the tozit. Bnd it
lyetl) Sobere anp man comes
to gods either bp deliuerp, 02
bp finding, In this wait tbe
3Olatntífe fbatl recouer the
thing detaineD, anb therefore
ít muf bee fo certaine ag ít
map be knowne, anb fos that
caufe, itipeth net foz monep
out of a bagae,oz cheft, and fo
of cozne out of a facke and the
ithe, thefe cannet be knowne
from other, (t) A man fball
baue anacion of Detinue of
Charters which concerne the
inheritance of his land (£ hee


Chis of tt felts is euident.
Sed. 4.98.


€ A? (í feo ap
afc caufe daũ
breife de Detinue de
mes biis bers bn au-
ter, coment q teore-
leffa aluy touts actí-
ons perfonalg,bncot
ieo puifle per le ley
prendre meg biens
bozs 6 fon pofteffion,
put ceo que nul Droit
$ leg bieng eft releffe
alup, mes folement
lactíon,ac,


perfonall, as if a man by wrong
take away my goods, if I releafe
to him all actions perfonals, yet I
may by the Law take my goods
out of his poffeffion.


Alot I haue any
caufe to haue a
a Writ of Detinue of
my goods againft an
other, albeit that I re-
leafe to him all a&i-
ons perfonals, yet I
may by the Law take
my goods out of his
poflefiion, becaufe no
right of the goodsis
releafed to him but
only the action, &c.


kno the certaintie of them, and What land thep concerne, o2 1€ thep be in Bagge fealed, 03
Chet locked, though he knoweth not the certaintie of them: and (t is god pollicie ( tf poffiblp
he can ) (n that cafe to declare of one Charter in efpectall, (u) and then the Defendant (ball
not Magebis Law. (x) Bn adton of Detinue fox Charters doth found in the realty, foa
therein fummons and fenerance lyeth, and in Detinue of gave a Capias bot; ipe, but fos


Charters in fpeciall a Capias Ipeth not, and peta Releafe of actions perlonals in a wꝛit of
Detinue of Charters ts a gobbarre.


¶ i2 Er cauſe del Sta-
I sate. That is


to fa the Statute of 4. H.a.,
cap.7.and 11 H.6.ca 4.

€ Car fil voet ple-
der le releafè general-
ment. Here it appea-
teth that when the Statute
had giuen the action veall a=


Sed. 4.99.


€ | Gem fi hom foit
diſſeiſie, ele diſ⸗
feifoz fait feoffment
a Diuers perfons a
fon bfe,et le diſſeiſor
continualment pzift
les profits, ac, et le
diſſeiſee releſſa a lup
touts


Lfo if a man bee

diffeifed, andthe
diffeifor maketh a
feoffmét to diuers per-
fons to his vfe, and the
diffeifor continually
taketh the proffits, &c.
&the diffeifee releafe —


Lib.3.


touts actions reals,
et puis il fuíft bers
lup bte entre en
nature Da life p caute
De leftatute, pur ceo
queil pzent les p20-
fits,#c, Quære,comét
le diſſeiſor (erra aide
pet Ie Ditreleag : cac
fil botle plebet le re⸗
leas generalment ,
Donques E Demandat
poit Dire Q il nauoit
riens en le frankte-
nement al temps Del
releas fait a (il plena
releas (pecíalment,
Donques tl couient
conu(tt bn Diffeifin,
et Dongs puit le Dc-
mandant enter en
lefre,zc, p fon conu-
fang DcE Diffei(in ac,
Mes peraduenture
ꝑeſpecial pleader il
lup poit bart Delacti-
on quetl fuift;ac, cos
ment le Demandant
poit enter,


| L6 (i home fuit

appeale De felonp
Del mozt fon ancefter
enuers bn auter, co-
ment que lappellant
teleffa ai defendant
touts maners Dacti-
onsreals et pfonals
ceo ne aidera mp le
Defendat, pur ceo que
cet appeal neſt pag


Of Releafes,


to him all a&ions re-
als, and after hee fueth
againft him a Writ of
entrie in nature of an
aflife by reafon of the
ftatute,becaufe hee ta-


keth the proffits, &c. hs


uere, how the diffei-
for (hall bee ayded by
the faid releafe, forif
he will plead the re-
leafe generally, then
the demandant may
fay that hee had no-
thing in the freehold
atthe time of the re-
leafe made, and if hee


pleadthereleafefpeci- feit


ally, then he muftac-
knowledge a diffeifin,
and then may the de-
mandant enter into the
land, &c. by his ac-
knowledgement ofthe
diffeifin, 8c. but perad-
uenture by  fpeciall
pleading he may barre
him ofthe actio which
hee fueth,&c. though
the demandant may
enter,


Sef. 500.


Lfo if a man fue

an appeale of fe-
lony of the death of
his ancefter againft a-
nother, though the ap-
pellant releafe to the
defendant all manner
of actions reall & per-
fonall, this fhall not
aide the defendant for
that this appeale is not


Cece 3


Seël.soo.


gaint the peugoi of the
proffits, it enaBeth bím to
takeand pleabea a Releaſe of
alladions reals, anb pet be
hath neither Ius in re, nop
jus ad rem, Which point is
Sworthp of obferuation foz
mantfefation of the equity
the Law.

€ Dorques il co-


sient conu[ire un diffei-


[mór. Ana Wꝛit of


ower the Œenant pleaded
that before the tozit purchase
feb A. was fetfen of the land,
€c. dntil by the Genant him⸗
felfe hee was difletfeo, and
that hanging the Weit A.rez
couered again him, ac.
tudgement of the tozit, and
adiudged a god pica, ín
which plea the @enant cons
feiled a Diffetin in hime
€,
€ Donques poit le
demandant enter. So
might bc baue done ín this
cafetbat Littleton putteth,
albeit the Œenant confefen
no difleifin, And therefore it
is no pretudtce to the Te⸗
nant to confeffe a difleifin tn
dimfelfe,éc and then, ag : ic-
tleton here boloctb, the action
fhail be barred.

iBut the reader {g to ob-
ferue,tat now by the Sta⸗
tuteof 27 H 8.ca 10. bich
execute the pofeflion to the
vle, all the Statutes againſt
Cefty q vic, oꝛ pernoz ef the
profite hase loft their force,


€ Ar Buthoz haning
O Spoken ef Lome

mou pleas now
tveateth of certaine Pleas
criminal! oj Pleas of the
Crowne whereof tt is fato,
(a) Item, criminalium alia
maiera, alia minora, alia
maxima, fecundum criminü
quantitatem; Sunt enim Cri-
mina Maiori & dicuntur
capitalia e6 quod vltimum
inducunt fupplicia,&c. Mi-
nora veróquz fuftigationem
inducunt, vel poenam pil-
leralem, vel —

T


287


3.4.7.3.


15,2.4.4.b.


28. H.8.Dier. ja,
27.H.8.64.1@, |


(4) 874A on, Ub, 5 fo. 1o t. b.


Lib.;.
fb) Fler.b.y.ca.15.


Ce) Mir.ca,1.§.4. des. 4,
des paines en der: manners.


(4) Mir.ca. 3, S. 7. BraP..i. 3
fe.137. "Brit.ea 23.21.
Flet.li.X.0a,51.32:33-


(y ) Glomill Lib.7.cap.9. Et
Lb Ya ap. tuet 3:


344H.8.62 13. 1,8 1,c4.1.


Letb. Ex pof.verb. AA Éimatio
Flet.h.1.00 43. Heucc.f. 3544.


ar H. 6.16.


Cap.8.


vel carcerisinclufionem,&e.
(b) Criminalium quedam
fententialiter mortem indu-
cunt, quedam vero minime.
(€) De peche ef briefe diuifi-
en, car elt mortal ou venial
folonque ceo que appiert es
paines. Bnd that crime ts
Called mogtall oz co:pogall:
moztall, becaufc it delerncth
Death;and fuch crimes are cal-
led Qieníall, ag map bee redee=
med o» fatíffieb bp fome other
punifhment than bp death,
€ Appeale de Fe-


lose. (x) Appellum
fignificth accufatio, an Accu⸗
fation, and thercfoze to ap=
peaica man is as much as to
accuſe him,and in ( y ) anttent
Wokes he that doth appcale
ts called Accufator,anD ig pce
cultarlp tn legall fignification
applicd to Appeales of three
forts. Firſt, DE wrong to
bis Anceltor, Whole bctrc
male be ig, and that ig onclp
of death, Whereof our Author
here fpeaketh. Œhe fecond tg


Of Releafes.


action real, entant
que lappellant ne re⸗
coucra afcun realtie
en tiel Appeale: fe
tiel appeale neſt pas
Action perfonal, en-
tant que 1c tot fuit
faitafon Aunceftoz,
etnempalup, Mes
fii releffa a ie Defen-
Dant tout. manners
Actions , bonaque il
ferra. bone barre en
Appeale, Ce iffint
home poit veyer que
releafe nc tours ma⸗
ners Dactions , eft
melíoz que Keleas De
Actions reals a pet-
fonalg,3t.


Sec. 500.


an Action reall, in/as
muchasthe Appellant
fhall not reconer any
Realtie in fuch Ap-
pezle, neither is fuch
Appeale an Adion
perfonall, in as much
as the wrong was done
to his Anceftor , and
not to him. But if
he releafe to the De-
fendant all manner of
Actions,thenit fhal be
a good barre inan Ap-
peale. And fo a man
may fcethata Releafe
ofall manner of A&i-
ons is better than are-
leafe of Actions reals
and perfonalls,&c.


of wzong to the bufband, and (g by the Wife onclp of the death of her bufband to be profecuted,


Che third is of Wrongs done to the Appellants themfeines,as Wobberie, Bape, and May⸗ j


bem, The 10020 A ppellum ts derined of Arpeller, tocalt. becauſe A ppellans vocat reum in iu-
dicium. Be calleth tbe Defendant to tudgement, and tbe Plaintike is calle tbe Appellant.


€ 4 ppeale. Appellatiots a temoouing o£ a caute in anp Eccleſi⸗
aficali Court to a Superioz, but of thig there needeth ao fpeech in thts place.


¶ De mort. Appeale of Death is ofttoo forts , of Mur der and
of Homicide. Murder ts oben one ts flaine With à mang Will, and Swith malice pocpenícb 02
forethought. Homictde ag ít (s legally taken, ts when one te ſlaine with a mans ill, but not
With malice pꝛepenſed. Chancesmedite, 02 Per imtertunium,fg When one is Maine cafuaily,and
by mifaduenture, Without the Will of hin that bot! the act, whereupon veath infueth, but ef
this no Appeale doth le, Adurdercommeth of the Saxon $9010 Mordieu.

Were ig an olo Saxon Word fometime Wzitten Wera, andfignificth the price of the Tic of a
man, Eftimatio capitis, that tg, fomuch as onc papd fog the killing of a man, bp Which (t appeas
reth, that fuch qoucrnment as in tholedapes, ag (langbterg of mon were moft rarely commite
ted, as Matter Lambardcolleteth. And pou bal not read of anp tnfurrection oz rebellion bez
fore the Conqueſt, when the biew of Frankpledgeand ot jer antíent Lawes of thts Realty
Herein their right die.


Mes filreleafeal Defendant touts manners d'alions, &c. And the
reafon is, for that then all Actions, as Well criminal ag veall, perfonalland mígt , be releaſed.
But a rcleafeof all Actions rcatl and perfonall cannot barre an Appeale of death, becaule that
Reieate ertendeth to common oz ciuile Actions, and not to tions criminall : but releafeg of
ail Actions criminatl o) meztall, o2 coneerníng Pleas of the Crowne, are geod barres (nan
Appeale ot Weath, anb fo che ( &c-) in the end of this Seton is well explained.


| Sedi, i


1j
4


"n


Lib.


Of Releafes,


Se.5 01.502, :


Section 501.


Œ | Ceimen appeal de Robbe-
— [tie & E Defendant boit plea-
— Derbnreleafe de lappellant
Detouts Actions perfonals, ceo
femble nul Plee. Car Action 1
Appeale, ioulapellee atta iudge⸗
- Ment de mort ac, eft pluis hault
que Action perfonal eff, et nef
PAS pꝛoperment Dit Action per=
forral: Ct put ceo fi ie Defendant
boiloít plead vn releaſe Del ap⸗
peliant De barter lap Dappeale,
en cet cafe il coutent Dauer vn
releafe à touts mantis nappealg,
pu touts manners Dactiong, coe
fl femble,zec,


Alle inan Appeale of Robbe-
rie, if the Defendant will
plead areleafe of the Appellant,of


all Actions perfonalls, this fee-
meth no Plea: for an Ac&ion of


288.


Appealewhere the Appellee (hall —


haue iudgement of death, &c. is
higher than an AGion perfonall is,
and is not properly called ana&ion
perfonall, andthete if the Defen-


dant will plead à Releafe ofthe ap-.


pellant, to barre him of the Ap-
peale, inthis, cafe hee muft haue a
Releafe ofall manner of Appeales,
or all manner of Actions, as it ſee⸗
metli,&c.;


¶ Robberie. Roboria properly ts ben there is a felonious ta⸗
King aay of a mans amos from bts perfor, and ít (s called Robberte , becaufe the gods are
taken ag tt were Dela Robe: from the Robe, thatis , from the perfon : but fometimes it te tas


Benin alarget fence.


€ ludgement de mort, &c. By this (&c.) (8 implied Appeales of


Rape, of Arion o1 Burning, of Felonte oy Larcente,foa therein alfo (s tudgement of death,and


are Within our Buthors reafon,


€ Come il fernble,-c. It is to be bnberftood, Chat Grft a veleafe


of all Actions criminall, moztall orconcerning 391eas of the Crowne. Speconoip, À Releaſe
otal Actions genexally. Chirdip, 2 releafe of al Appeales. Ana Ia(tip , a veleafc of all Des
miands ate god barres in all thele kind of Appeales,


€ Es en ap;
Mrs cc
bem, bn releale de
touts manners Dac-
tions perfonals eft
bonc plee en Barre,
pur ceo que cn tiel
Actionti ne recoucra
fozfque Damages,ac,


Seth. 502.


BY in Appeale of
Mayhem a Releate
of all manner of A@i-
ons perfonals is agood
pleain Barre, forthat
in fuch an A&ion hee
fhall recouer nothing
but dammages.


€ A»bem Ma-
/ hemium,mem-
bri Mutilatio


02 Obrrunca-


tio, commeth of the french -


$0020 Mchaigne,andfigntfierh
à Cozporll Wurt hereby
hee loofeth a Wember, by reas
fon $obereof hee ts leſſe able
to fight; ag bp putting ont
his epe, beating ont bis fore-
teeth, breaking his ſcull, tris

g off his arme,hand 03 fire


Bin
ger, Cutting of his leg oz foot, 02 Sobereby he looleth the bie of anp of his fato members.
Ml, Damages,ére. V.Sedt.194. |


D Releale de touts manners CA étions Perfonalls eff bone Place. And


thereafon {s,fo2 that eucris Action w
fn Lei taken £02 an Acton perfonail,


herein dammages onely are recenercobp the Wiaintife,.e


Sedi.


22. 19.


VW. 1.94.30;


V .8:G. 508,


Mir. ea. V.S. o, G Lann,li. 1 4»
64.7. Brat li. 3 Tra. 2.6.34.
Brit ſo. 48,04, 2 5. Flet.li. 1.
63,38. Stanf. Pl. Cor. fv. 38.8.


28.7.3.94. 8. H. 4. ar-


A1 M. 6.16,


Lib.3.


Vi.li.s 1 .fo.39-41.in Mat-
salfeseafa pen what iudgmits
and award; 4 writ of Evrer dette
die.


Li, q, fo. 1 11, Poney enfe.
; 0 dg d m


5.£1 Bye 317.


Zig fo. tig S Zecharo À.


58..4f.49. 13. £.3.Vtlag. 3.
33.E 3.13. M ch. 4. dr S. El,
Dy .fo.222.Vi.SeB. 197.


1,H. 4.6.


Cap.8.


€ Riefe de Errer.

Chis worit lieth

hen a man ts

grieued bp an? ers
t0; in the foundation, pꝛocee⸗
‘Ding, tudgement.oz execution,
and thereupon it is called Bre-
ue deertorecorrigendo. Wut
Without a tudgement 62 an ae
Sard tn nature of a iudgment
no ait of Crroz Both ite, Foz
the words of the wait be, Si
judicium redditum fit : and
that indgement muſt rcgalarz
lp be giuẽ bp judges nf recozd
andina Court ot Recozd,and
and not bp any other inferiour
FJudges tn bafe Courts, for
tbercupon a ꝛit of falſe iudg⸗
ment doth lie, In this cafe of
Utlawete bpon Pꝛoceſſe the
fubgement is giuen (in the
Countie Court, Which is no
Court of Kecoꝛd) by the Cos
toners, (fauing in london
ínogment is giuen by the Ke⸗
coꝛder, and not bp the Watoz,
bois Cozoner bp the Cus


OF Releafes; |


Sethion 503.


E Taam i Home
foit btlage en
Action — petfo-

nal per proces fut 1c

Drignal, et port bte

Dertoz, fi celuy aque

fuit il fuit btlage,

boile pleader enuers
lup oti releas à touts
manners actions

Perfonals,ceo feme

ble nul plee, car per

le Dit Action il ne re=
couera vien en perfo=
naltie forfque tant-
folement De renerfer
le Utlagarie : meg
bn Keleaſe De Wrtefe

Derrour eft bonc

plea,


Seél.503,


Lfoit a man bee
outlawed inan A-
tion perfonal by pro-


ceffe vpon the Origi- -


nall, and bringeth a
Writ of Error, if hee
at whofe fuit hee was
outlawed will plead
againft him a Releafe
of all mannerof A@i-
ons perfonalls ; this
feemeth no plea, for
by the faid action hee
fhall recouer nothing
in the perfonaltie, but
onely to reuerfe the
Outlawrie : But a re-
leafe of the writ of er-
ror, is agood plea, :


ſtome of the Cities) foz af⸗ :
ter the Defendant ts Quinto exa&tus,anb maketh defanit, tbe (nbgement is, Ideo vilagetur per
iudicium Coronatorum, andin London, Per iudiciuui Recordatoris :f9 ag bp the Outlaweie
the Dlatntife recovers nothing, but the thing taketh the whole benefit thereof, for the Law did
tntend, Ghat the Defendant would rather appcare andanfwer tbe Piatntife, ec. than to fozs
feit all his Gods and Chatteis, Debts and Duties to the Aing,by his defanit amb contuma⸗
cie, Wut Littleton fg to beintended, Chatthe Hherife dee returne the Exigent whereby the
£DutlaSo1(e appeares of Record, ez that tbe Dutlazie be remœucd bp Certiorari , fox before
that time that tbe Outlawꝛte appeare of Recoꝛd, the Defendant doth not ferfeit hig
Gods, noz the Plaintife can be bifabled, noz any wꝛit of Erroꝛ doth lie in that cafe, And this
ts the caufe that tbe gods of Dutlawes cannot be claimed bp Pꝛeſcription, becaufe thep are
not forfeited vntillthe Outlawꝛie appeare of Recoꝛd Vid. $cét. 197. Shere tt appearcth bp
DN > Chat tbe. 39latnttfe cannot be bifableb bp sDutla&oite, bnleffe ft appeareti) of
ecozd, :
€ Car per le dit Action il recouera rien en le perfonaltie. Hereupon is
tobeobferued a diuerſitie, when by the toit of Erroꝛ the Plaintite (ali reconer.oz be reſtoꝛed


te any perfonall thing,as Debt, Dammage, oz the like, for then bp the veafon tat. Littleton —


bere peelocth, the veltafe of all Actions perfonalg is a good plea, £0? that tbe Plaintife (gto re-
$ouer, oz to bereftored to fomething inthe perfonaltíc. And fo like wiſe When land is tobe re=
soucred,oz to bereftored in a ait of Erroz, a laelcafe of all Actions reais ig aged barre, Wut
Sobere bp a ait of Errez the Plaintike (hall nor be reſtored to any perfonal oz rcall thina, there
a releaſe of all Actions reall o2 perfonall,is no barre, andtherefore Littleton here puttetb big
cafe With great caution: Zlfa man (faith be) bp Pꝛoceſſe oppon tbe SDz(gtnall bee outiaswed,
there in deed he (ball be reftozed to nothing in tbe perfonaitic agaínft the Plaintife. Wut Where
bp the Dutlawate he forfetted all his goods and chattelg ta the King, be fhall be reftezcd to
ther ; alfo tberbp he fall be reftozed tothe Law, anb to be of abilitie tofueec, Wut ifthe 391
in a perfonall Acion recouer anp debt, €c, 02 dammages, and be outlawed after fudgment,there
fna Wait of Crroa brought by the Defendant bpon the pzinctpail indgement,a releafe of al] 202
disse perfonalls tsa god pica, ^ Bnd fo (t ig Wherea Pudgement ts atue in a teall Acion, a
releafe of all Ydions reals is a god barre ina writ of Erroz brought thercuson.


i 3t


Lib.3. Of Releafes. Sei.504.


AE the Cenantinareall Paion releaſe to rhe Defendant after reconery his right tnthe
Rand, be Hall not banc a wait of Error, fos that be cannot be reftozed to the Land.

And fo it is (£ vebt, &c. 0? Dammages be recouercb ima perfonall action bp falfe Uerdict, anv
the Defendant bringcth a wꝛit of Bttaint, a (a) relcafe of all Actions perfonals is aged
barre of the attaint, fo» therebp the Plaintike is te bee reſtoꝛed to the debt, ec. oy dammages
Svbích he loft, thelike Ua is if a Judgement be ginen bpona falfc QU erbí is a reali Acton, a
seleafe of all Actions reals ts e geod barre Ran Bttaint, Fozboththe watt of Erroz, anb
the tozit of Attaint doc infuethe nature of theformer Action, ec.

And fo it (g (£ a Wait of Audita Quercla bebzonght by the Defendant inthe former action
to bí(cbarae himfcife of an crecutton, a 18 eleafe of all actions pexſoualls is a god barre, becaufls
be tg to diſcharge bimfelfe ofa perfonall Execution,


€ Mes un releafé de bricfe de error eff bone plea, de. Syoagintbig
fpectail cafe here put bp Littleton wherein tbe Plaintife is to recouer oj be reffoeo to nothing
agaínft the partie, pet £o? that the Plaintite in the Former Action is patuy to tbe Recoꝛd, a ree
Laſe of a toit of Errozto bim is fufficient to bar the Plaintike (n the wꝛit of Œrrog of the fat
€ deration by the watt of Erroz. And fo note that an Action reall ez perfonail doth (mplp a res
sonerp of fomctbing inthe realty o2 perfonaltie, 02 a reftisutiontothe fame, but a Swzit tue
pipeth neither of them tohich (g woꝛthy of obferuation,


Seétion 504.


€[grem, ft home
tccouet Debt ou
Damimages, til re⸗
leffa al Defendant
touts maners Dactt=
ons, vncoze id puit
loíalment fuer exe⸗
cution per Capias ad
fatisfaciendum,ou pet
Elegit, ou Fieri facias,
car execution per tiel
baícfe ne poit eftre Dit


Lfo ifa man reco-

uer debt or dam-
mages , and hee relea-
fethto the defendant
all manger of Actions,
yet hee may lawfully
fue Execution by Ca-
pias ad fatisfaciendum,
or by Elegit , or Fieri
facias : For Execution
vpon fuch a Writ can-
not bee faid an Adi-


€ His appeareth a bí»

uerfitíc betweene an

Acton andan Eres
cation, Foꝛ regularip an
Zion (s fatd (n bis proper
fence to continue vntill iudge⸗
ment bee giuen, and after
Judgement then doth Pro⸗
cctte of Execution begin, and
therefozea releafe of ali Adis
ong regularly is (b) nobarre
of Execution, for the Execu⸗
tion doth beginne when the
Action doth end, And theres
fore the foundation ef tho frit
is an optginall tezit, and both
determine bp tbe J ndgement;


and ibzits of Erecution aro
action, Du called Hobictail, becaufe teg
ate grounded bpon tbe 3iubgeimt;


€ rer Cap. ad fatisfaciemduw. [his (8 atudictall 19ait £o? the
taking of the bobte in Execution vntill be hath madefatiffacion, where a Capias ad fatisfaci-
endum lyeth at the Common Law, and where it (g giuen bp Statute pon map reade at large
ín my Reports.

J haue read two ancient Records touching tbc ta&íng of tbe bobp in Crecution, whereof
to my remembzance, J neuer read any touch in our Bokes, pes Will 3| recite them; and leaue
them tothe tubicious Reader, William de Walton brought an Action of Treſpaſſe of bzea⸗
king bts Cloſe again Lohn Martin, anb bpon mot quiitie pleaded, hee was found guiltte and
Dammanes allefled, whereupon (ubgement Was gluen that the wWlatntife Mould recouer bia
Dammages, Et quod prædiétus Iohannes capiatur. Bndthe Becozd faith Qnod pradictus Io-
hannes venit coram Domino Rege & reddidit fe prifone, & quia conftat Curiae per infpe&tionema
corporis ipfius Iohannis,quod idem Iohannes eft talis «tatis qued poenam imprifonamenti fubire
non poteit, ideo di&um eft ei, quod cat inde finedie; She other Recoꝛd ia, Chat Ellen Allot
brought an Appeale of 1B obberp again Iohn Boskifeleke @iarke, Richard Charra and others
Sohe pleaded not gutity, anb Mere not found guiltp : Sobereupon Judgement Wage gtuen that
thep Hhould gee quite, Et predict» Elena pro alfo appello fuo committatur prifonz , &c. (fog

Cb)bp the Statute the ought to beimpztfoned tn that cafe for a xeare.) But the Recoꝛd faith,
iacadem Elena prægnans fuit, & in periculo mortis,ipfa dimittitur per manycaptionem, &c.

ad habendum corpus vfque Quind. Michaelis &c. .
Das» f bera


289


9.H.6.47.


(3) 26. H.8. 3.15.8. 2.1.2,


34. H.6.31.3 5. H. 6.19.
29. 4]f: 35. 47, E. 3.6.
34.E.3.37,


Vide $48.235.


8.3.9..4,E. 3. Attorney 18:
33: H-6, 45. 34. H. 6.51.


(b) 13. H.4.R eleafe 53."
19. H.6. 3.26. H.6, E&ee
[iT Fn


Sir William Merberts safe
Iib. 3, fol. x1. 12.


Paftb. V4. R. 3. Rot. Yoé.eo-
rem Rege in Tée[anr Sw 1e].


«Mich, 41. E.3.Rof. 37. cater
Rege (ornub.in Theſam.


(b) m. 2. cap. 15


- E .
Lib.;. Cep.8. Of Releafes. C Seéh.504. -


There be certaine marimes i the Lai concerning Executions, ag takiteg fomc ín ſtead of |
many, Ea que in Curia noftra rite acta funt,debitæ executioni demandari debent. Parum eft
latam effe fententiam nifi mandeturexecutioni. Executio iuris non habet iniuriam. Executio
cítfructus & finis legis, Luris cffc&us in executione confiftit, Profecutio legis eft grauis vexas
tio, executio legis coronat opus. Boni ludicis eft iudicium fine dilatione mandare executioni,


Fauorabiliores {unt executiones alijs proceffibus quibufcunque, Wut now let bs heare what
Littleton faith. i


€ Per Eheir pbís ts alfo atudiciall nait, and ts given by

the Statute either bpon a recovery Fox debt oz Damages , oz pon a IRecognisance in anp

(9 2 esp. Court. Bnd (t ig called a togit of Elegit , fog that accogding to the ſtatute that faith, (c) Sic
de cæterd in electione illius, &c. fequi breue quod Vicecomes ficri faciar, &c. vel quod liberet
ci,&c. The words of the wꝛit be Elegit (ibi hberari , &c, And thereupon ít ig called as Ele-
git. Wy this watt the Sherike (ball deltuer to tbe 39latmtite O mnia catalla debitoris, (exceptis
bobus & afris carucæ) & medietatem terra. Bnd thts mus be done by an inquef tobe taken
by the Sherike.

(a) vi. E. i ftat de Hon oben Littleron weote, by force of certaine Mas (d) of Paritament, execution might bee

Burwell. 13.E.1.de mercatori- ‘ad of Landa (beGdeg by force of the Elegit) bpon Statutes Merchant, Statutes Staple,

bus. 29-K-3.04p.22. Vide and Recognizances taken in fame Court of Wecozd, and (ince he wrote pon a IRecognizance

Fia! $5725: 353 gr Bond taban bp fonce of the Statute (*) of 23.H.8. before onc of the Chicte Jutbices, ez the

—— — Matoꝛ of the Stapie, and Recorder of London out of Cearme , Which wath the effect of a
Statute Staple. The manner of the Exccuttons bpon Wodie,Lands and Gods, appearcth
inthe Statutes qnored in tbe argent.

(0) 32-H.8.64p. s. Since Littleton ete a profitable Statute hath bene made (c) concerning executions of
Lands, Tenements and Weredittaments, whereby itis proutved that (Fafter fuch Lands,ec.
be had and deliuercd tn Execution bpon a talk oz lawtull titic, whereMithall tbefatb Lande, ac.
Were liable, tied oꝛ bound at fach time, as thep were deliuercd oz taken (nte execution, Mall be
Yecoucrco, deuelted, taken, o3 euicted out of, o1 from the pe(te(T(on of any fuch werfon , &c, bee
fore fuch times, as the ſatd Œenants bp Execution their Erecutozs où Aſſignes ſhall hane tul⸗
1p leuicd their debt and dammages, fos the Which the fato Hands, ec. Were taken (a Œrecutis
on, then euery fuch «Recoucroz. D blige,and Kecoguiſee,ſhall hane a Scire facias eut of thefame
Court from Whence the former Execution did proceed, agaínft {uch perfor os perfons ag the
former Excution Was purfued, their heires Executozs o? BLignes, to aue Grecution of
other Lands, ac. ltable and to betaken in Œrecution Fos the reduc of the debt 02 dammages.
Sed opus eft interprete. j

Lib.g.fol.66.Fubvoedsease.’  ŒVerefoze firft it {9 to be knowne, that where the Cenant bp Crecution hath remedie gts

EN. sen to him bp law after euition, there the Statute extendeth not to tt, forthe Aa faitb , bp
reafon whereot, the fato Recoueroꝛs, Dbligas and Recognizes, auc bene clereipfet with⸗
out remedie, tc. and the bedie referreth to the prcambie,and the part ought not to bane Double
fatiffaction, one by the former Lawes, anb another bp this Statute,

And therfore tf part of tbe Land, ec. bc eu(dcofromtbe Cenant by Execution , this Stas
tute extendeth not toit, becaufe he ſhould Hold the refdue, till bebe folly fat{{fied,and he mak
be contente tf all be euicted faving one Acre to hold chat, though (t bee but a poe remedis: fog
no neo Execution in that cafe hee can baut bponthis Statute, Cherefore tf the Connie
bath remediein præfenti for part, oz in futuro fozall, oꝛ part, this Sptatute extendeth not
to it.

Secondly, fa man be bound to A. ina Statute of a thoufand pounds, anb bya latter
Statute to ^. tm a hundzed ponds, anb B. ſirſt extendeth, anb then A.ectendeth and taketh
the Land from B. pet B . (ball haue no aide of the Statute, becauſe after the extent of A. B. fail
re⸗entoy the Land, bp foaceof his foꝛmer Execution.

Thirdip, Ikthe wifeok the Conuloz recouer Dower again the Cenantby Exeeation,
he ſhall hold oncr, and (ball haue no apdeof thts Statute.

Fourthip, Jfa man putout bis Leſſee for peares , oz diſſeiſe bis Deflee for life, andafter
knowledge a Statate, and Execution {5 {acd againk him, and the Leſſees re-enter, the Gea
pus by Œrccution after the Leafeg ended, {hall hold ower , and bane Ho alde of tbíg

tatute.

Fiftlp, This Statute mul not be taken lítteratlp but according to the meaning, thereforg
obere the letter is vntill bee, tc. of hig Dllignes thall fuilp and Wholly hane lented the Whole
debt 02 Damages : if he hath afliques fenerail parcels to fenerall Aſſignes, pet all tbty (bail

haue the Land, but tíll the whole debt be patd.

Syirtlp, where the words be, fez the SMbich the fatd Lands, ec. were deltuered in Erection,
A Difleifoz conuep lands to the King Who granteth tbe fame ouer te A. and his heires to hole
bp fealtie, and tiventp pound rent, and after grantetb the &eígníogis to B. B. knoWiedgery a


Statute,


Lik3i  OfReedes $e8. 504.


Statute and Crecution is feed of the Seigniory. A.bisti Svithent betre and the Connfæ ens
terctb, and is evicted by tbe Wifleifes, be (bali baue the aide of this Htatute, and pet ít te one
of tbelstter of the Law, fos the Speigniony Was dslisered in Execution and not the tenancp,
but be was Tenant by crecutton of thole iands,and therefoze Within tbe ffatnte, Wut the pcr»
quifite of a Allleine being euicted 19 out of the flatute, fos he (g Œenant (m fe Ample thereof
and not Tenant hp execution, |

Seuenthly, Where the Words be ( deltacred and taken ts execution )pet tf after the Liberate,
the Conule entercth, (as be um ) foas the nd is newer delinersd, pet ts be Snithis the remc-
Die of this (latute, fos he is Œeuant bp execution, |

Cighthip, where tbe ffatute faith,then euerp tach econeroz, Dblige,€ M3ecogníse fall ec.
anb faith not, their Erecutozs, Bdmeiniftratoss o; Ailignes, but they are omitted (n this mas
seriall place, pet by a benigne fnterpictatten, this ffatnte (ball extend to them, beraufe thep are
mentioned in the next precedent claufe of the eniction, and the semedte mnft by conftrudion be
€xteribco to all the perfong, that appeare bp te Ac to bee griened, a point worthy tbe obs
feruation.

Hinthip, Sobcre the Statategiucth a Scie fac’ ent of thefame Court, ec. (€ the Reco be
Semoued bp watt of rro; tuto another Court, and there affirmed, tbe Genane bp Execution
that is euicted ſhall haue a Scire fac’ bp the equity of this Statute out of that Court, becaufe
the Scire fac’ mult be grounded bpon the Kecord, Et (ic de fimilibus.

Tenthiy, Where the Statute giveth the Scire tac’ againſt fuch perfow oy. perfona, ac, that
Were partícs tothe fir Crecation, their Beires. Executoꝛs ez Bilignes,ec. this matt not be
taken fo generailp ac tbe Letter is, fos tf the firtt Œrecution were bad agaínft a qurchafoz.ec.
fo as nothing was itable (n bts hands but the Hand reconsred, if thio and be euited from
Æenant by Crecutton, no Scire fac’ fpall be awarded againftbim, bis Hetres, Excentors op
Bllignes, but if bc bath other lands fubtect tothe Execution, then a Scire fac’ ipeth again
him o1 his BAtques, but not againtt bis Œxecutozs, neither in that cafe can he auea Scire fac"
bpon this Statuteagatné tbe firft Debtoz o2 18 ecogutzoz, becaufc tt glueth tt onip again
bím,&.tbat was partie to tbe fir(t Execution bis Heires, Œrecntoz o2 lignes. Bot tf there
be ſeuerall Aſſignees of feuerall parcelis of lands fubiet to the Exccntton, onc Scire fac vpon
this Statute hhall lye againft allthe Aſſignes. Sed c(t modus in rcbus. This little taffe fpaii
gíusa light tothe diligent reader, not only to fea (nto tbe fccretg of this Statute, butto otberg
alfo of {tke nature. :

Bnd by the Statute of :3.H.8, (t is pꝛoaided that the $Dbiige ec. (all banc in euery point
againt fuch 18 ecognifor,ec. like Pꝛoces Execution, Commodity and aduantage (n eucrp bes
balfe, as hath beenc had 0 made bpon the Statute (faple, and vnder fuch manner anb fozme,
as ts for thefame Statute faplepzoutded: bpforceof which bzanch, (f the Cenane by eres
cution bp force of the act of 23.H.8 be ented, be fhall haus the remcdie prouided foz Tenants
byerecution bpona Statute ffaple by the Ac of 32.0.8. In like manner bp force of that
tlaufc of 23.H.3. it theertendozs Spona Statute Kaple,gc. doe ertend the lanag.ac. at to
high a rate, the Obligee map pray, that tbe Ertendors themfelnes map take the landg,¢c. at
that rate,c. bp force of the fatd Statutes of A@on Burncl, ano De Mercatoribus. fo ne
execution (bal be ſaed againſt the beire Within age,

Wut note that bpona tait of Elegit the 39latntife cannot make anp fuch praper,becawfe thofe
ancient Statutes Doc extend to a Statute Merchant ozs Statute Staple onip, and neither
E a Becouerp of debt o2 Damages, Noz to a Recognisance in Court, anb fo hath it beng
tefolucd. (F)

Nota, tt appcatetb by the Preamble of the fato Hc of 32.H.8.and bp diners ( g)bokeg,that
after s full and perfect execution had by ectent returned anb of Record there ali neuer be anp
en bpon amp eviction : but (€ the extent be infufficient in Law, there map qoe out a new

rtent.

Ch) 3f a man auc a Judgement giuen agaíntt bie £o? debs o; Damages, 02 be bound ine
Recognizance and dieth hig beire within age, oz hauing two baugbterg, and the one within
Age no erccatíon (hall be fueb e£ the lands bp Elegit baring the minozitp, albeit the hetre ts not
fpecíallp bound but chargeb ag Terre tenant (i) and fo agaínft an betre Within age no crecutí-
on hall be ſued bpona Statute merchant 0; Staple no) bpon the Dbitgation oz Kecogni⸗
jance vpon the Statute of 25.H.8. for it is excepted (ni the Proces againũ the heire. either
que betre Within age indow wis mother (bal Œrecution be fuco agataſt ber during bis

O2ítíc,

Mote, that by tbe Statute (k) of 27.E.3, the erccution of Lands bpon a Htatute ffaplc
{8 referred to the Statute Werchant, and bf the Statate Dc Mercatoribus no Œrecation
Hail be had againtt the betre, fo long as beis within age,

Bile ince Littleton wrote there (s aright profitable Statute (1) made againft franbulent
HFeofwents, Sifts, Grante,ec, Judgements = — afwwell ef Hands anb Genes

BBz


Mewes,


290


40.E 3.36.6, 44.E.3.
2. 4.4. 17. 15. H. 7,15.


(f) Mich 4 dr 5. Th. dr
Mar. Bendloes, by all tha
Tufiscos of the (orwenen pleas,
15.6.3. Extast y.
(g) 15-E. 4. Extent.g.
32.E. y Reeouery im value.
22. 31.2.3. Extsnt 11.
19.E.3.56. 15. E. 3. Scire
fee. 11 8. 7-H. 4.19.
21.407 44. 23.E.3. fo.vie.
44.E.3.10. 9.H.7.9.
¥5.4.7.15.13.Elsx. Deer
399. 39.H.B, Stat. M er-
chant Br, 40,
Ch) 11. £. s. ago 4
I $48.3.ag69 5. 24. E. 3.28,
39.4017. 39. E.3 50.
47 Mf. 5. 0E. 3.7. lib. 3,
f9.13.8ir Wiliams Hepberts
cafe. Brooke,age 3 3.
(1) Tempi £.1..4/f.403.417
16.5.6. Linwodenir.g45.
Brooke, age 33.
(k) 27.2. 3.649.213,
(1) 13-Elig.osp.g,
Liíb.3.foBo. dre. Twynes cafe,
Lib. § fo.60. € onde safe.


Lib.3.


Lib.6.fo.18. Pakeman safe.
Lib. 1e fo. 56.the Chane. of
Oxford: cafe.

Se: the flatutei of 3. H.y.ca.⸗4.
& 50.E.3.ca.6.

Mich 13, dr.13.Eliq.
Dier.ags, At. Bli( 351.
Dye.


W,2.04,18.


(m) Lib. 3.fo.v1. Sir mil
liesu Herbert cafe,


(n) 19. H.6.5. 18. E.4,7.


. (ap.


Of Releafes. $etl.50


=e


ments, ag et Gods and Chattels, to delay, hinder oz defzaud Creditors and others of thee |


fut and iawtuu Baions, Suites, Debts, Damages Penalties, Foꝛteitures. Her 0t6, Wozts

tuarícg and iReleafes, fox the expofition of Which and other Statutes fe the Burhozuties
noted in argent.

7 Sno tt rh obferued that tbe words of the fato Act of 13-Eliz. ave, Be it therefore decla-

red, ordained, and enaéted : and therefoze ithe cafes in femblable mifchiefe (hall be taken with⸗

in the remedie of this Ba, by reafon of this 50018 ( Declared ) Sobereby tt appearcty, Sobat

the Raw was before the making of this Da. Wut let vs now returne to Litrlctor,


¶ Fieri facias. Chis is a Wꝛit mentioned in the faid Statute,
but ig a wgit of execution at the Common aw, And (g called a Fieri facias, becaufe the
words of the toit directed tothe £»berife be Quod fieri facias de bonis & catallis,&C. anb of
thofe Swords the wzit taketh his denomination.

But note that a Capiasad fatiffaciendum, ig not mentioneo in thefatd Statute, becanfe na
Capias ad fariffac’ did Ips at the Common Law bpon a Judgement fox debt, xc. o2 Damages,
but onlp when the oziginall actton Was Quare vi & armis,&c. But latter flatutez Dame gis
gen a Capias ad fatiffac’ $obert debt, ec. 02 Damages are reconered, as (t appearcth at large
(m) tn Sir William Herberts cafe $obereunto J referre the reader,

And ít (s to be obferned that tbefe thꝛes Wꝛits of exccution ought to be ſued out Within the
peare and the dap after iubgement, but tf the Wlaintife fucth out any of them Within the
eate, he may continue thefame after the peare visttll he hath execution, Bnd to none of thefe
toatts of Executionsthe Defendant can pleabe, but tf he hath anp matter (ince the tudge=
ment to diſcharge him of @recution, he may bauc an Audita querela, anb reltene htatelfe that
Soap, but pleadhe cannot, As it the Plaintite after Releaſe vnto the Defendant all Crea
cutíong, pet in none of thefe thzes Wꝛits be (ball plcabeít, but is datuen to big Audita querela,


as hath bea fato,


asc facia.
Chis is a indicte

all wꝛit and pz02
werip ipeth after the
peare @ bay after iudge⸗
ment ginen,and (9 fo cal=
ied becaufe the Words of
the watt tothe Sberife
be, Quod Scire facias
præfat T. ( being the
Defendant ) Quod fit
coram,&c. oftenfurus fi
quid pro fe habeat aut di-
cere fciat, quare» &c. £g
ag by tbc tait (t appea-
tet) that the Defendant
ig to be Warned te plcab
any matter in Warre of
Crecutton,and therefore
albeit ít bee a tudtetall
Writ, pet becaufe the
Defendant may therez
bpon plead, this Scire
facias ig accounted in
Haw to bee in nature of
anadton, and therefore
(n) a Beleafe of all actt-
ons is a qb barre of
the fame, and likewile a
Keleaſe of Executtons
is a god barre in aScire
facias this Walt Wag gís


Sed. 505.


AACS Ht apres
M et tour le
plaintife boit fuer on
Scire facias, a facher ff
le defendant poit rien
Dire pur que le plain=
tife nauera execution,
Donques tl femble que
tiel releas De touts ac-
tions ferra bon plee
en bart: Des atcung
ont femble contrary,
entant que le briefe De
Scire facias eff on bte
Derecution,¢ ef Dauet
epecutio,ac, Wes bn-
coze entant que fur i E
batefe E Defendant poit
pleader Diners matta
puis f iubgement ven:
Due De lup oufter dexe⸗
cution,come btlagatp,
ac.et Diners auters
matters,


Vt if after the yeare

and day the plaintife
will fue a Scire facias, to
know if the defendant
can fay any thing why
the plaintife fhould not
haue execution, then it
feemeth that fuch re-
leafe of all a&ions fhall
be a good plea in barre.
Butto fome feemes the
contrary,in as muchas
the writ of Scire facias
asisa writof execution,
and is to haue execution
&c. Butyet in afmuch
as vpon the fame writ
the Defendant may
plead diuers matters af-
ter iudgement giuen to


ouft him of execution, «


as outlawry,&c. and di-
uers other matters, this


€ E ieo crop,que en bn Scire fa-
cias 9028 Duu fine, bu teleas


Lib.3. Pi


Of Releafes,


Se8.506.507.


matters,ceo bien poít may bee well {aid an a- Pe tn this cafe by the


eive Dit action,ac,


étion, &c.


tatute of W.». fuz at
the Common LaSve if


the 39laintifc had farceafeb to fne Execution by Fieri facias, @ Leuari facias apeare and a


bap, be bab bene dp tucn to big neko opigin


all.


Ceo bien poct efle dit action. Here itis to be obſerued that euery
Wut Xobereunto the Defendant may pleade,be it original op tuditiall (& in Haw an atoms,


Seét,506.


AN Itake thatin a Scire fa-


cias vpon a fine, a releafe


De touts maners Dactíong, eftbon of all manner of ations is a
good plea in barre.


Chis spon that Which hath bene faid (g euibent of ít felfe,


plee en barre,


CK AEs lou home
— —
ou Damages, et eft
accord perenter eur,
que le plaintife ne


fuet execution dongs


ticoutent d le plain-
tife fait bn veleag a
lup Detouts maners
Derecutions,


Sect. 507.


Vt where a man

recouereth debt
or damages, and it is a-
greed betweene them
that the plaintife fhall
not fue execution,
then it behoueth that
the plaintife make a
releafe to him of all
manner of executions,


LEZ consent. Albeit
Littleton here fatth,
bec ought oz mnff,¢c.

pet there bee other words

Which WAI releale an Execu⸗

tion Without expzefle $0020g

of a rcleafe of Execution.


As i£ a man releafe all.


fuíteg the Execution ts gene,
fo? noman can baue Execu⸗
tion without prayer and fuit,
but the King onip,and there=
fone t£ the Bing ccleafetb all
fuites, it & no barre of bie
Grecution becaufe in the


Rings cafe the Judges ought to award execution Ex officio Without aap fuite, bnt a releafe


of Erecntions doth barre the ing inthat cafe, And fo notead


all actions, and a releafe of all futtes,


Soit the body of a man be takers (n Execution, andt
fball be remaine in Execution, but t€ he releafe all Debtg
Executton becanfe the debt 0? butte (tfelfets Difcharged.

In the fame manner {€ Execution befued bpon a 18
fe by Ded make a Defeafance, tbat f£ tbc Conufoz v.
jante ſhall be bofoc;by this tbe Execution (s difchargen,


tuerGtp bet$oemne a releafc of


he Plaintife releafeth ali actions, pet
o; Duties he is to be difcharged of the


ecogntsance bp Elesit, and the Conte
oth fac an act, that then the Kecogni⸗


So it is if tudgement be giuen in an action of Debt, and the body of the Defendant is tas


ken in execution bp a Capias ad fatisfac’ ampafter

this the boby (ball be difcharged of the Executton.
PFE the Dlatntife after Judgement relcafe all dema

appeare bp that which nert hereafter (ball be fat,


the Plaintite releaſeth the Judgement, bp
nds the Execution ts difcharged, ag hall


Bf A. Le accountable to B, and B. releafeth him all his duties, this {9 no barre in an Adis
en of account, fo Duties cctenb to things certaine, and ‘what ſhall fall ont bpon the account


is incertaine ; anb albeit the Latpn $0070 (g Debita, pet Daties
that is certaine, anb therefore vifchargeth Judgements in per’


ons alfo.


D ddd ;


doe extend to all things due
fonall actions, anb Executi⸗


Sefion


291
97.3 eap.43.8.E.3.297.298
18.E,3.3 3e [6.3 filii.
Sir Piliom Heybertscafz,
Flers, lib, 2.cap.Y2a.


19. H. 6.4. 36. H.6.
Execution 4. hb. . fo. 153.
Ealtbame cafe.

Vid, Brooke pis. Keleafei 87e


26. Hl. 6. tst, Execasion,7,


30, 7f p.7.


a6. M. 6. v!) fupra,


3e, H, 6.6, per Pafen.


Lib.3.


Lio, Sel. 44 gr. lite
$4.10. PL Comm, StoiBs enfe
352,6.


38. N.8. it. Relsafei Br.9-
€.H.7. 14. 19. H.6. 3,4. 39.
AGPL5 40.E.3.33.49 E41
3.5.50. "f pl.5.14. H. 4.8.
Y3.R. 2.84. Anew. 8 9. Lb. 8.
fo 153. Ed. Althann cafe.
Lit. 170.$68.,7 48. Dyer §.
Bl.ary.


Cep.8.


Ost; sanners
t de demand.


€ Demande , De-
mandum íg a 1001b of Bre,
anb (n the bnderftanding of
che Common Law fs of fo
large an extent , ag mo other
one $0020 in the Law ig , bu=
lefleitbe Clameum , bereof
Littleton mabeth mention
Sedt.q4s. And bere te to bee
obferned, that there bee two
kind of Demands 63 claimes,
viz. à Demand 03 Claime in
Ded, and a demand 07 claime
in Law; 09 an erp2eiieand an
implied Demand o2 claíme, Lit-
tleton here putteth examples
of both,and firft be ſpeaketh of
iR call Actious, Wherein hee
that bzingeth bte Action mas
keth big Demand, and theres
fe2t be ts pzoptrl called a dee
mandant, and hee that defen=
beth is calles Cenant, because
be is Œerant of tbe Freehold
of ticiand,


Of Releafes.


Seétion 508.


€ [Cem i hee re⸗

leſſa abn auter

touts manners
De Demands, ceo eft
le plus melioz celeafc
alup a que le Keleaſe
eft fait que il poet a-
uer, et plus brera a
fon aduantage, Car
per tiel releafe De
touts manners De
Demands, touts ma-
ners Dactions reals,
perfonals, et Actiôg
Dappeale font ales et
ertincts , et touts
manners De erecuti=
ons font ales et ex⸗
tincts,


T ANB


Seë,508.509.


At’ if a man re-
leafe to another
all manner of demáds,
thisis thebeft releafe
to him to whome the
Releafe is made, that
he can hauc , and fhall
enure moft to his ad-
uantage. For by fuch
releafe of all manner
of demands, a! manner
of Actions realls, per-
fonalls, and Ac&ions
of Appeale, aretaken
away and extinct , and
all manner of executi-
ons are taken away
and extinct,


DE demands (mplíto,oz (n Law, Littleton patteth eramples: Firfk, DE ali Actions perſa⸗


nalig, Secondly, DEF Appeales, Foz (s both thofe cafes he that baingeth the fuit (s called Plain⸗
tife, and not Demandant, and he that eefenbetb is called Defendant, Chirdip , DE Erecutts
ong, Faurthip, Of title o right of Œntrie, either bp force ofa Condition , og bp anp former
right, which meerlp {s a Demand eg clatme in Law, but otberivife tt is in the ings cale. Hilts
ip, Df a Rent feruice, Rent charge, Common of pafture, tc. Which alfo are mere demaunds oz
claimes in Law, Bil Mbich, Littleton hereand in the t$00 next Sections Éoliowing, putteth
but for examples, for by tbe reicafe of all Demands other things alfo bereleafen, ag Rents feck,
ali mixt Actions, a Warrantie Which íg a Cowenant reall, anb all other Conenants reall and
perfonall, Eſtouers, all manner of Commons anb profits apprender, Conditions befoze they be
bsoken 02 performed, o2 after, Anuuities, Wecognifances, Statutes Merchant o; of the Stas
ple, Dbligattens, Contracts, fc, are releaſed and diſchatged.


Sed. 509.


CE fíbóe ad title be entrp
enafcuns terres ou tene-
ments, per tícl Keleafe fon title
eft ale, away.

@ Sed quære de hoc, cayFitz- Sed quare de boc, for Fitz-
Iames chiefe Æuftice De Engle= Z4mes chiefe Iuftice of England
terre tient lecontvatíe, put ceo boldeththe contrarie , becaufe an
que entre ne poit peoperment Entrie cannotbe properly fayd , a
eſtre Dit Demande, P.19.H.8.*  Demaund.


| ANd ifa man hath title ofentry
into any Lands or Tenements
by fuch a Releafe,his title is taken


© Tile.


JOY


A


Lib


Of Releafes. : : Se8.510.51.512:


¢ yu Here Citle is taken in the largett fence, incluning
Kight alſo.


4L" Sed quere,&c. This is an addition and no part of T"


Littleton, and tbe opinion here cited cleerelp againtt Law.


Seton 510.
CET (i bome ab tient fer-
bob


uice ou Bent charge, ou


Common de Palture, se, per tíel


releaſe De touts manners De de⸗
maunDs fait al Cenaunts de la


' Terre, dont le feruice ou lerent


eſt iſſuant, ou en quele Common
eff, le leruice, le Rent, et le Com-
mon eft ale et extinct, ac,


Ndif a. man hath a Rent fer-

uice or Rent charge, or Com-
mon of Pafture,&c. by fuch a Re-
leafe of all manner of demaunds
made to the Tenants of the Land
out of which the feruice or the rent
is iffuing, or in which the Com-
mon is,the feruice,the Rent and the
Common, is taken away and
extint.


Chis tpon that Which hath beene fapd,nædeth no further explication,


Sed. 51.


Tem (G bone Lío ifa manre- ¶ Varrels. Que-
teleffaa bn aut leafeth;to ano- rela, à querendo,
touts manners ther all manner emat ee A
Dequartels.outouts ofquarrels,orallcon- mire at the Bigbeft, fos the


controuerfies ou De-
bates enter cut, ac,
Quære à quel mat-
ter ct a quel effect
ticls parois fop ex⸗
tenDont,#c,


trouerfies or debates
betweene them, &c.
Quaré to what matter
and to whateffe& fuch
words fhall extend
themfelues.


laintife in them is called

uerens, and in molt of the
Waits it (9 fatd Queritur.
And pet ik à man relcafe aii
Quereles (a mans ded being
taken met ftronglp againt
btimfclt )it (i8 as beneficlatiag
al actions, fog by tt al Actions
reall snb perfona! are releaſed.


And by the releafe of all quarz
relg,ail canfes of Adions art rcleafed thereby, albeít no Beton be then Depending £02 the fame,


€ Quarels, Controuerfies,and Debates, are Synonima, and of
one Ggnification, Litis nomen omné Aëtiore fignificat, fiue in rem,fiue in perfona fit Ff a man
telcaft omnes loquelas, (t f$ ag large ag omnes A Giones,fo3 omnis A &iocft loquela, anb it cte
tendet ag Swell to Acions in Courts of Recoꝛd, as bale Conrts,fox the tozit of Error fayth,
In Recordo & Proceffu, &c. loquelz quæ fuit inter,&c. and fothe toztt of faife Judgement
fatty, Recordari facias loquelam, where the iudgement Was given inthe Countie Court,om-
nesexa Giones fem to be large woꝛds, 602 Exa Gio deriuantur ab exigendo,anb Exigere flanífictb,
to enquite oz Demand.


Sed, 512.
em ff home p Lfo ifa man by Eleffa al obli-
he fait foit obs A his Deed bee €n D eum:


lige à bn auter em bound to another ina essere. Che reafon
at


292
34 H.. tit Relen B. 9, ,
Chaunceys cafs. Ls, 3, fo. 1535 1
temer safe.


40. FE. 3.47 b. Ed. Altar:
Cafe vbi fupra,
35H. 8. Der. 57.


9.E.4.44.


39. H.6.g.


Lib.S fel. 1 $3. Altham / (af
31.1,6.16.4.F .Q-B.23.180


50..4f.é6. 40.B.3.23,
13/03. nere 89.


Lib.3,


YYH. 4.41.43.


(o ) Trin 1.14.i Cot Bancs.
fater Middleton & Rinnet.

(0 18.M.6.33.b.Pl.Com.277.

178. In Greibrekes Cafe ger
Welle.


s. Elis. "Bier 217.


Albans (afe vbi Supra.


g, H7. 544.


45. €.3.8.17. H. 6.36.
13.H. 4. dwewrie 240» .


3e. £.3.13.5, 47. E. 5.14.


Y6. E, 2. Exeeutwn 137.
16.E. 3. 5bid.138.. 16.E 3.
Sire Fas.4. R. NR. 267.
2.E. 3.7.


s Map, AB ienfur le safe.
Br.108. 3. Mr. Dier. i r5.
Lib, 4. fs. 9 4. lada: cafe.
Lsb, c fel.91.b. Ferdeseafé.


15. H.6.28.5. «.E.4.45.
2 N. 4.103. 02.8 t Reltofe 39


Cap. 8.


of this caſe is, fro» that the
Debt ts a thing confifting
meerelp in Action, and theres
fozealbsit no Action lieth koz
the debt, becauſe it is debitum
in prafenti, quamuis fit fol-
uendum in futuro, pet becaufc
the right of Action is in im,
the releafe of all Actions is a
bifcharge of the debt tt elfe,
Co) Añd ſo may an Executoꝛ
dekoꝛe probate releafe an Bat=
on, and pet befeze 3920bate he
can bane no Action, becaufe
theright of the Action is in
him, and lo it was abiudged.
And ſome fap, that an Oꝛdi⸗
narie map rcleafe an Action,
and pet be can bane none. But
{£a man bp Ded voth cones
nant to buílo an houſe o2 make


nant befoze tt be boeken,


ER Eleafé touts 4c-

tions. Dig tes
Ica fc fall not barre tbe Lefios
of bis Rent becaufe it was
neither debitum noz foluen-
dum at the time e£ the releafe
mabe, foztfthe land be euicted
from the iefice befoze the
Rent become onc the Kent is
auopbcb, fo? itis to bee paid
out of the profits of the land,
and (t (g athing not merelp
ín action becaufe ít map boe
granted ouer. Wut the Lefloz
before the bap may acquite og
releafe the Bent, Wut (£ a
man bee bound in a Bond 03
by Contract te another to pay
a bunbzeb pounds at &ucfes
uerall dapes,he Mall not have
an Acton of Debt befoze the
laſt day be paſt, and ſo note a
diuerſitie betweene duties


Of Releafes.


certaine fumme De
monep à payer al
Feat De S. Micha⸗
el prochein entrant,
filebligee Beuant le
dit Feat teleffa al
Obligoꝛ touts Acti⸗
ong il ſerra barre Del
Dutit a touts temps,
et bucoze il ne puit-
foit auer Action al
temps De Keleale
fait,


Self.513.
certaine fumme of
money, to pay atthe
Feaft of Saint Aicha-
ei next enfuing,if the
Obligee before the
fayd Feaft releafe to
the Obligor all Aài-
ons, hee fhall be barred
of the duty for euer, 8
yet hecould not haue
an Action at thetime
of the Releafe made. :


an poate, oa before Ds — sre the — *
1 il Actions, Suits, ano Querrels, this doth not oticharge the Couenant tt
Pirsig hisharnsco er of i Reicale, nihil fuit debitum,there ag no bebt o? Dutie,oz caufe of
Icion in being. Wut in chatcate a Keleaſe of al] Coucuants is a gob bifcbarge of the couce


Sed. 513.


€ Cs fi home
M leſſa terre a
Dt auter pur terme
Dunan,renDant alup
al feats S. Mich,
ꝓchein enſuãt 4c. $.
& puis deuãt mefm E
featt ti releſſa ailefice
touts actions bnc a=
pres mefine le featt il
auera act De Det put
non payment De les
40,8, nient obftant
ledit releas, Stude
caufam diuerfitatis en⸗


ter les deux cafes.


Vtif amanletteth

land to another for
a yeare, to yeeld to
him at the Feaft of S.
Mich, nextinfuing 40.
s. & afterwards before
the fame Feaft hee re-
leafeth to the leffee all
actions, yet after the
fame Feaft hee fhall
haue anaction of debt
for the non payment
of the 40.s. notwith-
ftanding the faid Re-
leafe. Stude cau(am di-
uerfitat&between thefe
two cafes.


which touch the reaitie, andthe more pcrfonaltic. But it a man bebounb in a Recognisancs
topap abhunbdzed pound at five fencrall dayes paefeutlp alter the firt bap of payment be (ball
haue erecutton bpon the Recogntzance fo? thatfumme, and (bail mot tarrie tiũ the lak be pak,
foi that tt ts inthenatnre of fcucrall Judgements. And fo note a bíncrfitp bet weene a debs
due by Wecognizance, anda Debt bue by Bond 02 Contract. Aud fo it ts of a conenant 02 20s
wile, after the ſirſt befanit an Beton o£ Couenant , or an Action bpon the Cale doth ite , fox
en a fensrall (n thetrnature, Laſtly, note a bínerfitp betweene Debts and Coucnants, o3

20tti s.

It a can hath an Annuity fos tearme of peares,or Foz lite,oꝛ ms fee, and he before (t be bebiscb
beth releafc atl Vatons,this hail not releate the Anuuity , fo itis not marcdp tn Aion, bez
caufe (t map be granted ener,


fedt,


Lib.


jee ou home boile
fuer briefe De 3220ít,
él coutent quel counta
Del feifin de lup, ou De
fes anccfto?8 , x auxy
GE ſeilin fuit en temps
De mefme le Boy come
ilcounta en fon count:
Car cett bn ancient lep
bfc, come appiert pet E
Repost Dun plee en ie
CiteDe Nottingham,
titulo Droit en Fitzher-
bert, cap.26. en tiel
forme qenfuift, John
Barre poat fon briefe
De Doit enuers Key⸗
Hold de Aſſington, et
Demaunda certainete-
nements,æc.oule mile
eft topne en le bank, et
original & le Prꝛoces
fueront Demandes Des
vant Juftices errats,
ou les parties bien-
Diont, leg 12-China=
lers fieront Iout fere=
ment fans challenge
Des parties Deftre al-
lowes, put ceo que e=
lection fuit fait per af-
fent Des parties, oue
les quater Chiualers,
ælc fercinent fuit tiel,
Que teo herity Dirt,
fc. Ie quel 13, De #, ad
plus mere Droit a te-
net les tenements que
John Barre demanda
bers luy per fon bzicfe
De Doit, ou Jobs, De


Of Releafes,
Section 514.


Lfo where a man

will fue a Writ of
Right, it behoueth that
he counteth of the feifin
of himfelfe or of his an-
ceftors,and alfo that the
feifin was in the fame
Kings time, as hee plea-


deth in his plea. For this f


is anancient Law vied,
as appeareth by the re-
port ofa Plea in the Eire
of Nottingham, tit. droit
in Fitzherbers,cap.26. in
this forme following.
Iobn Barre brought his
Writ of Right againft
Reynold of LAfineton ,
and demanded certaine
Lands, &c. where the
mife is ioyned in banke,
and the originall and the
Proceffe were fent be-
fore the luftices errants,
where the parties came,
and the twelue Knights
were fworne without
challenge of the par.
ties,to bee allowed, be-
caufe that choife was
made by affent of tlie
parties , with the foure
Knights, and the Oath
was this. That I fhall
fay the truth, &c. whi-
ther R. of 4. hath more
mere right to hold the
tenements which John
Barre demandeth againft
him by his Writ of


Right, or John to hane 1


Sect 5 14.


€|: couient que


il counta del
feifin de luy on de>


fes aunceflors. fo
t£ neither bee noz anp o£
bis A s Were {et=
Len of the land, ac. with⸗
in the time of limitation,
hee cannot maíntaínea
Wait of Wight , for the
etfin of him of Sohom
the Demanndant hima
felfe purchaſed the land,
8c. anapletl) not,

And ſo it to ín a wꝛit
of Bight of 39 onoxofors,


Œ Auxy que le
ſeiſin fuit en temps
de meſone le roy come


il counta. Werebp
tappeareth,that not one
Ipafeiin (as hath bin
faid) is requifite, but al⸗
fothat the fcifin be hadin
the thine of the fameking
according to his Count.
€ Report coma
meth of the Latin 028
reportare, à re, & porto,
id eft, referre, à re, & fe-
ro. Budinthe Sommes
Law, it Agnifiety a pube
like relation, o3a beings
tng againe to memolp
Cafes tudicially arqueo,
Debated, reſolued, 02 ada
tndged in anp of the
Kings Courts of Ju⸗
ftíce, together Sith fact
caufeg ans reaſons ag
ere Delíucreb bp the
Judges of the fame,and
in this fence Littleton 6a
feth tbe 50025. ín this

place.
€ Ene Eire
de» Nottingham,
Eire, Iter, Ban tt fige
nificth the Court of ths
Julſtices in Eire, and
therenpon thep were cal=
199 Iufticiari] Itineran-
tes, in refpect that the
nftices refiding at
poste


294


For the timo of limitation. Ses
she\Staiute of 32, H, 8.cap,
Vide SeB.179,


F.X.B. 30. 2.3. E. 3.25,
Litt. 118.3.


Lib.3.


(p) Jmrereap.2. 9.3. & &
s5-dr cap. q.leofiee des Infis-
asin Eire, G lannsl.lib.9.04p.
1l b. B. eap. prime. Britton
fol.1.b.9.8.dre. BraB. lib. 3,
f.i q. dre Fleta lib. 1. cap.
15. re. 4B. 5.32. 6. E. 3.35.
33. E.3.21.154 £3. 5.

Vida $48.445.233.33^


3.3, 3. Th. Dron F. 38.


(45.8. |


wellminſter Were catis
Iufticiarij refidentes,ant
were much itke in this
refpet to the Juſtices
of Aflife at this day, al⸗
though foz authozitice
manner of proceeding
( Whereot pou fhail read
Cp) tn the auctent Au⸗
theag of the Law) farre
différent, Bnd ag the
power of the Juſtices of
Zilifes by manp Bae
of 39arltamcent, and o-
ther Commtilions in⸗
creafed,fo thefe Juſtices
Ftinerant bp littic and
ifttie vaniſhhed awap.
And tt is certaine, that
the authortty of Juſti⸗
ces of Aflifes Itine⸗
rant thzongh the Whole
Realine, andthe Inſti⸗
tutton of Juſtices of
Weace in cuery Countie
betng Dulp perfogzmed,
are the moft erccilenc
meanes £0; the paeferua-
tton ofthe Kings peace
and quiet of the Realme
of anp other (n tbe Chꝛi⸗
ftían 150310,

@ De Notting-


ham. {his (boul
bee Northampton atcogs
Ding ¢o the Daiginall,
CThis report Sobereof
Littleton here maketh
mention, pou fall finde
an Æbitract of (t in 3.6.
3- fince Littletons time
putin paint bp Fitzher-
bert when he Sas Se⸗
stant in 11.H.8. andis
not tn the Beports o;
Wakes at large. And
pet here it appeareth,
that thep be of great au-
choritie, and vouched bp
Littleton bünfelte £o; the
viofe of amapne point
in Law. And hereby tt
alfo appeareth how nes
celary it is toread Reo
cozos and leas repozs
ted oz vecorden , though
thep Sere neucr printed,
Foꝛ thofe and the like
Wecozds are Veritatis
& Vetuftatis veftigia.
@ Ti. drois in


Fitzherbert 26. ig


Of Releafes.


auer eux, ſicome il de⸗
maund, € pur vien Dit-
ta que le beritp ne Dit-
ta, ficome moy apde
Dieu, ac, fang Ditca
lout efcient, Ct Ciel ſe⸗
tement ferra fait en at-
taint, et en2Battaile,
& en ley qaqer,car eur
mittont chefcun chofe
a fine, Mes Bohn
Barre counta ol ſeiſin
Dun Kafe fon ancetter,
en temps le 130p Hen⸗
t», & Bepnolde fur le
mite iopne tendift De-
my mark pur le temps
ac, Ct fur ceo Herle
Iuſtice dit al grand af-
fife, apzes ceo que ils
fueront charges furle
mere 3220ít, ous
gentes, Keynold do⸗
nat demy marke al
Boy pur]e temps, al
entent que fi bous tro:
ues Glauncetter John
nefuit pag fetfte en le
temps que le Demaun-
bant ad count, boug
nenquires plug auant
Del Droit, et p ceo hous
nous Dires,f quellaii-
ceſter John, Wate per
nofine, fuit fetfie en
temps le Bov Henry,
come il ad count, ou
non, Ct {hous troucs
que il ne fuit fetfie en
celtemps , boug nen-
quires nient pluig,
& fi hous troues que
il fuit ſeilie, donques
enquires ouffer Del
biíefe, (Cf puis le

graund


|
Sed. 514.

them as he demandeth
and for nothing to let,to
fay the truth, fo helpe
mee God, &c. without
faying to their know-
ledge. And thelikeoath
fhall bee made inan At-
taint and in battaile, and
in wager of Law, for
thefe doe bring euer
thing to anend. But Ze/»
Barre counted ofthe fei-
finof one R4/fe his An-
ceftor in the time of K,
Henry,and Reynold vpon
the mife ioyned tendred
halfe a marke for the
time,&c. And hereupon
Herle Tuftice faid to the
grad affife afterthatthey
were charged vpon the
meere right. You good
men, Reynold gaue halfe
a Marke to the King for
the time, to the intent
that if you find that the
Anceftor of ohm was not
feifed in the time that
the demadant hath plea-
ded , you fhall enquire
no further vpó the right,
and for this, you fhall tell
vs whether the Anceftor
of John, (Ralfe by name)
were feifed in K.Henries
timeas he hath pleaded,
ornot. And if you find
that he was not feifed in
this time you fhall en-
quire no more, and if
you find that he was ſei⸗
fed, then you fhall en
ME further of the writ. |

nd after the grand A |
fife came in with their


Lib.30 2,
graund Ale: reuien⸗


— debt,


teRoy D, per que futt
agard que Reynold ti⸗
endroit ES tencinents


pers luy demandes à,


lup a (cg beireg quites


bc John Marre a ſes


heires a rannant, Et
John en 1e merce ; ac;
Œt le caute pur que ieo
äpe monilre ic» atop
mon fits ceft plee, eft


pur pꝛouer le matter
precedent q cit dit en


bricte De 3230it,ac, car

tl femble pec cet plee,

que fi Beinold nattoit .
pas tendue ónty mark
put enquirer di temps,

&c,Donques ie graund
aUe Duifoit eſtre

. charg tantfolement dl

mere droit, Enemy Del

poſſeſſion ac, Ct iſſint

(touts toits en beiefe

De Droit, Hie poſſeſlſi⸗
On Dont Ie Demandant

counta foit en temps le
Bop, cori tl auoit cotit,
Donques le charge Del
grande atfite ſerra tat=
folement fur le mere

Droit, coment que le

poſſeſſion fuit encoun-

terlelep, come d eft Dit

adeuanten cett. Chap:

tct, ac,


iſont Que Gate ne
t pas ſeiſie € temps


Of Releafes,


vcrdi&t ; and faid , that
Ralfe was. not feifed in
the time of King Hearse,
whereby it was awar-
ded that Reynold fhould
hold the ‘Tenements de-
manded againft him ; to
him and his heires quite
of Joba Barre and his
heires to the remnant.
And Joha in mercie, &c.
And the: reafon why: I


‘Thaue fhewdto thee my


Sonne this Plea, is, to
pou the matter prece-

ent whiclr is faid in a
Wiit of right, for it fec-
meth by this Plea, that
if Reynold had not ten-
dred the:halfe marke to
enquire ofthe time, &c.
then the grand Affife
ought tobe charged on:
ly to enquire of the
mecre right, and not of
the pofleffion, &c. And
fo alwayes in a.Writ of
Right if the! poffeffion
whereof the demandant
counteth" bee ‘in the
Kings time as hee hath
pleaded, then the charge
of the grand A ffiife fball
be only vponthe mecre
right, although that the
poffeffion were againít
the Law, as it is faid
before in this Chap-
ter. &c.


As el.514
of a new addition , and
therefore thongh it bes
truc, pet notto bee al⸗
lowed.

¶ E: le originall
Gr le proces fuer’ de-
enaude deuant Infti-


ces Itinerants. 401
it (8 to bee bnderftoon,;
that all Pieas either (n
the realtie o2 perfonaltíe
that were bequnne and
not determined befoze
Juſtices in Give were
adfourned bp them into
the Conrt of Œomort
Pleas.

€ Les 12. chi-
ualers fieront lour
férement fauns chal-
lenge, ce. pur ceo
que le election fuit


fait per affent des
parties one les 4. chi-
ualer:.

Here ate foure things
t9 be obferued.

Six, Chat omnis
confefus tollit erroré,anDd
again hig, own coufent
dee cannot. challenge the
twelue.

Secondix, That the
foure Knights Electors
ef the grand life are
nod to be challenged, fog
that in Law they bee
Judoges tothat purpofe,
and Judges o Juſtices
Cannot bee challenged,
And that (g the reafon
that Noblemen that ts
cafe of bigh Treaſon
are to paſſe bpona Weere
of the Realme cannot be
challenged, becaufe they
are Judges of the fact,
and the Magna Charta
faith, per iudicium pas
rum fuorum.

Thirdly, Chat the
twelue befoze anp affent


may bechallenged before the foure nights Clecozs, but after a(Tent oz returne of tye pannel
befozethe Jultices there fall be no challenge tothe panneli no2 tothe polics, 1

Fourthly, Itthere be not foure Kuights for Életozs inthat Countie, the next to them tn
that Countic thall be taken, Ne curia Regis deficeret in iuftitia exhibenda.


€ Sauns dire a lour efciemt. Andhere it appeareth, that where the


tudgement is finall, here the Dath of the grand BM


t
Gece z


fe oꝛ Jury íg abfolute and not to their
knowledge,


294


E. 3.41. Peuarals cafe
Mirror ,
Glanuil
Bratton
Brition |
Ficta


$ Ubi fupra.


30-E.1. tit. challenge 173.
21. E.4 77:39.€. 3. 1,44. E.
3.6,11./1,6.13.


4-E.3.13;


Magna (hartacæp. 29.
39. E. 3.2. 7. Hia.


7-H.4.298


Lib.3.


Vid. Sef.1 93.
Kggsfirure.


33H. B.ca. 13. 3. E. 6.64. 36.


16.£.5.30, 31. E. 3.drois 11
22. E.3. 17. 18. H. 3. droit. 62.
31.6. 3.15d. 39.
Lamb.explicat varborum
verbo Mancyfa.


F.N.B.31.«. 31. E. 5.droit.
15: 6E. 3.sbid.a4.


Mirror,ea.1.§.17.04.3.
de Attaint.ca.5.§.1-


Byallow.fo. 388.382. 47c.392.


Tritt f2.241.345.246.drc.
Fleta dsb. 5.ca.31. 7 34.
Fortefcue,sa. 26.


(2) 23-H.8.64.3.

3 Eli(. Dier.1301.

7. E.6.ibidem.8 1.

3. Mar. sbid. 129.

7. Eli( .sbid.335.

24. H.8. Br. Atsaint 26.

4. Mar ibid. 127. 30. H.7.5.
41,E. 3.26. P. N. B. 107. D.


Mirrer ca. 1.6. 3. ca. 3.6.
sa. 5 §.1. Braden, ib. 3.
141.6. or fo.330. 331.
Glanul. lib.3. eap.3.4- $-
Lib. 8.«a. 9. Lib 4.68.1.
"Britt.fa, 40.42. 43.81.


175-190. Fleta lib. 1.64.32.


dr lib.3.ca.48.

(b) 4.E.3. 41: 17-E.3.
19. H. 6.35. 1.H.4.3.
39.8. 3.10. 19.E. 3.12.
13. B. 4.4. Stanf.154. 178.
17 Eli{-Dier 9-E.4.356-
1.H.6.6. 3.H. 6.65.
Vid.lib.o. fe. 3a.b. dr 3 3.5.


Mirrer ca. 4. Del office
des Inflices orc.


Gaol lib, 1 un 9. lib.8.ea.8.


Cap 8. Of Releafes. Seél.514.


knowledge, ag here in the watt of Right, inthe Attaint, and (m Svager of Las, for the
tubgement in eucrp of thefe thao is finall. í |

€ Lemife efl ioyne. Mifc ig a 0020 of attappaopaiateb only to à
Watt of Bight, (o called becanfe both parties hane pnt themfeines bpon tbe mere right to be
trpcb by grand 2j (Tífc oꝛ bp battle: foas that, Which in all other Actions is called an Flue, in
a ibat of 18 (gbt in that cafe (a called a Wife. Bud tn thts fence Littleton taketh {there But in
à Wyitof Might tf a Collateral point is to bc tryed, there itis called an Iſſue: and te beris
ned of this Swozd ( Miflum ) becaufe the $obole caufe is put bpon this point, It te alfa taken
for expences, ag Mife & Cuftagia. Bnd fometine it fignifictha cuftomary grant re the King
oz Lozds Marchers of wales bp thetr Tenants at their ſirſt comming to their Lands,


€ Tender di marke al Roy. Maſter Lambard faith that Mancufa &
Marca 3axonice Mancup.7. Mearc' Nummus 30. valens denarios. And this Meare now called
a Darke being an olo Haron $0020 is thecaufe that England mo commonly reckoned bp
Maͤrkes, Libra Saxonice {8 à pund,a pondo, which ts called fo ontíll this bap. Solidus qui a=
pud nos eft pars libra vicefima, denarios per idtemporis continebat quinque;nunc duodecim, and
Scilling tga Haron woꝛd, and with bg bfco to this day. Denny Saxonice pennig, Zatpne
Denarius, but the balue of thefe auc not beenc alwayes one, | j
An a toit of Right of Pouowion brought by the King, the Tenant Mall not tender tbc
Di,matke, bccaufc Nullum tempus occurrit Regi, and therefore the ing (bail alleage, that eg
0? bis 3910gcníto? was {cifer Without fhewing any time.


€ Exattaint Atrinda,ts a Wꝛit that lyeth tobere a falle Verdict
in Court of Record bponan iſſue topned bp the parties ts gtucn. And of ancient toziters (t is
€alleb Breue de connictione. Bnd tgs deriuedof the principle Tinétus, 92 Attinéus, foz that tf
the p:títc Jurp be attainted of a falfe oath, they arc ftapned with perturte, anb become infaz
mous £02 cucr, fo? the iudgement at the Common Lawin the Attaint impogteth eight great
and grícuoug punífbmentg, 1. Quod amittat liberam legem imperpetuum, that is, 6e (ball bes
fo intamoug as fball neuer be receiued tobe a Witneſſe o; of anp Jury. 2,Quod foriffaciat
omnia bona & catalla fua, 3,Quod terre & tenementa in manus Domini Regis capiantur.
4. Quod vxores & liberi extra domus fuas eijcerentur. 5, Quod domus fuz proftrentur. 6.Quod
arbores fuz extirpentur. 7. Quod prata fua arentur, Et 8. Quod corpora fua carceri ma ncipentuür.
So odious (s pertury in this cafe intheepe of the Common Law, and the fenerítp of this
puniſhment is to thts end, Vt poena ad paucos, metus ad omnes perucniat, foz there {s Mife-
ricordia paniens, anb there i¢ Crudelitas parcens, And fecing ail tríallo of reall, perfonatl and
mixt actions depend bpon the oath of 12.men, prudent Antiquity inflicted a (frange and fes
were puntfoment bpon them tf thep Were attainted of periurp.

But (nce Littleton Wrote a Htatute hath beene made in mtttigatton of tbefeueritp of the
Common Law (n cafe when the petite Jurye is attainted, and therefore tt ts taken by eqnía
tye. Foꝛ where the Statute faith, that the party grieued fall baue an Attaint againk the
party which (bati haue tudgement bpon the Aerdic, pet an Attaint (ball be maintained pon
that Statute againft the Erecutors of the partie, Et fic de fimilibus.(a) But fee the Statute
and Authozttpes quote inthe Wargent. Only 3| thought gen to obferüe thee things,

Firk,that no Attaintcan be maintained bpon this Statute but betweene party and party,

Secondly, that no Conufance canbe granted bpon anp Ættaint, becaufeall Attaints are
to be taken epther before the king tn his bench, ozbefoze the Jullices of the Common place,
and in no other Courts, tc. ) i :

Œbtroiy, confider what pleas map be pleaded in an Attatnt bp force of this Bc, ana
bat not. "


Œ Exbattaile. Duellum, Monomachia, And ít fignifieth in the
Common Law a trpall bp finale fight, bp battatie oz combate, Monomachia. (b) Bnd tn the
Writ of Wight neither the Cenant o? Demandant fall fight for tbemfelucg, but finde a
Champion to fight for them: becaufe (E either the Demandant oz Cenant fboulb be flapne,
no tudgement comld be giucn foz the Lands o2 & cnemente in queftion, Wut in an Appeale tbc
Defendant ball fight for bimfelte, v fo (ball the Plaintike alfo, for there {€ the Defendant be
flapne, the Plaintite hath the cffe of big fuite, that ts the death of the Defendant ; the ozder
and folemnítty Sohereof pou may reade in our ancient andiatter Bokes, And this the Law
Did inſtitute, when the Cenant failed o£ his titnefles, or Œufdences, oz other profes, and
the pꝛeſumption of Law tgs, that God Will giue bítozy to hier that bath right. |


€ Ley zac. Vadiare legem, Bud there is alfo Facere legem, bp
making of hig Law, That te totake an oath ( for example ) that be oweth nottbe debt pes
manded of bin vpon a fimpic Contract, noz anppennp thercoh Bud tt is called toager of
Law,


Lib. Of Releafes. Seél.514.


Raw, becanfe of ancient time be put infaretp to make bis Lab at fücbabap, ano (t ig callen
making of bis La, becaufe the La doth gtue fucl) a fpecíall benefit to the Wefendant to
barre the Plaintite foz cucr in that cafe. (r) Wut he ought to bring With him eleuen perfona
' 9f bis neighbours that Swill anew bpon thetr oath that in their confciences be fatth truth, fo
ag be himicife muft bc ſwoꝛne Dc fidclitate, anv the eleuen De credulitate.

*- Bnd wager of La lyeth not when there is a fpectalty, of Deed to charge the Defendant,
but when it groweth bp $0025, fo as bc map pap o2 fatifüe the patty tn fecret, Sherco the
Defendant bauing no teffimony of witnelles map Wage bis Law, and thereby the Wiain-
tifc is perpetually barred, ag Littleton hore fatth, for the Law pꝛeſumeth that no man Will korꝛ⸗
Hoeare himfeife for any woꝛldly thing ; bat mens confctences boc grow fo large ( {pectally in
this cafepailing without impunitie) as thep choofe rather tobsingan Action bpon bte cafe pz
on bis promife, wherein ( becaufc it tg Trefpatfe fur le cafe) hecannot Wage big LaSv, then an
Adion of bebt,

A man Outlawed; attainted fran Attaint, oꝛ opor an nditement of confptracte,oz of pera
tarp, 02 otherwiſe hereby be become infamons (hall not Mage hig Law,

Biman bader the age of 21. peareg Halinot wagehis Law, buta eme coucrt together
With her huſband (ball Wage her Law.

Toben the fuite is fo: the King, 0; for his benefit, agin a Quo minus, the Defendant ſhall
not Mage his Law.

FE an Fufant be Platntife the defendant ſhall not wage his Law, An Alien (hall Wage
bis Law in that lanquage be can ſpeake.

In no caſe where a Contempe, trefpafle, vifcette, o2 intnrie tg ſuppoſed in the defendant :
he fbali Sage bis law, becaufc the law will not trot him with an oath to difcharge bimfelfe tn
thoſe caſes, onip tn ſome cafes tn Dett, Detinuc, Pccompt, the Defendant (g allowed bp law
to wage bis Law.

Fin an Action of Account againſt a Kecetwoz bpon a recefpt o£ moncp by the hand of anos
ther perfon fo: account render ( vnleſſe tt be bp the hands of bis Svife, 02 of his Commotgne )
the Defendant fpall not Wage his dato, becaufe tbe receipt is tbe ground of the Action which
ipeth not tn priuity betweene tbc Plaintike and Defendant, but in the notice of a third pers
fon, and {uch a receipt is trauerfabte. (d) Bůut in an Acton of debt bpon an Atbttrament,
0; in an Action of Detinue by the batlement of anothers hand, tbe Defendant {ball wage his
Law, becaufethe Debct andthe Detinet ig the ground of thofe actions, and the Contract
67 Watlement though it be by another hand, is but the conuepance and nottrancrfablo, In
an ation of Accennt agaínft a Bailite of a Mannoꝛ, the Wefcwdant cannot vage bis Law
becaufe itfoundeth in the realty. In an action of Debt Which concernes the realty, as foz
Debt, Rent vpon a Leafe for peatcg, oz an action of Detinue for Detapníng an Indo wmen
of a ieafefor pearce, the Defendant fhall not $oage bis Law, much icfe fo; Carters 0)
Meds Which concerne tnheritance.

Bu anacion of Debt £z a Fine o2 Bmercinment tw a Lete, the Defendant bal not wage
his Law, becaufe tbe Lete is a Court of Recozd, but in an ation of Debt fox an Amerctas
mont ina Court Waren the Defendant Hall wage bie Lawe, for that it is no Court of
Kecoꝛd.

Yn debt vpon an account before Auditoꝛs the Wefendant (ball not wage his Law, and
this by conſtruction of the Statute of W.2.ca.r1. hich gtueth them great authority and
faith, Coram Auditoribus, and therefore of an account befoze one auditor tbe Lawipeth, So
££ the Loꝛd before Buditozs be found tn furplufage , (am action of Debt brought by the Ac⸗
comptant, the Lozd fhall not wage bis Lak bp confiruction alfo opor this Statute, ag an
incident riffing bpon the Accounts.

In an action of Debt by a Gaoler again the Mztfoner for his victuals the Defendant
hall not Hage bis Law, for be cannot refufe the Pꝛiſoner, and ought not to faffer bim to bpe
for default of fuftenance, otherwife it is for tabling of a man at large,

Jnan action of Debt brought by an Attoznep forhis Fes the ocfendant fhall not wage
bis Law. becaule he is compellabletobehis Attorney. And fotf aferuant be retatned accezs
ding tothe Statuteof Labourers in an action of Debt for his Balarp wis matter (ball not
wage his La, becanfe he was compellable toferne, other wiſe it ig, (£ be be not retatned ac-
cording tothe Statute.

tObercfoener a man is charged as Crecutoz or Adminiſttatoꝛ, he thall not $oage bis Law,
fox no man hall Wage his Law of another mans Den, but in cafe of a Succeſioꝛ of an Abs
bot, fo? that the boufe neuer dyeth.

in Debt bpon apcnalty giuen bp Statute, the Defendant (ball not wage bis Eat»,
There is another kinde of wager of Haw (ma real action, of Nonfummony, bnt thereof Lic-
Vcton fpeaketh not.


€ Et for ceo Hetle Iuſtice dit dre. Hereby itappeareth that it is
eee s tes


295


Lib.10.ea.5.

Bralon,kb. 3. tralf, 3,04.37.
& b. 5 fo. 410.

Britton, fo.56.

Fleta lth.2.€4.5 6.61.

(r ) Magna (arta,ea 32. 7
Brafton. lib. 5 fs. 410.

Fleta lib. 2. €4.63. “Dimer fiticy
des (owts, 33. H. 6.8.


33. H. 6.3 2.
11,H.6.49,15.£.4.2.
32, H.6. 24. 8. H. s. Ley 66,


35. H.8. Ley. Br. 102.


26.€.3,63.b.
21.41.6.43.


44.E.3.32. 18.E,3.4
24.€. 3.39.


15.Ë,4.16. 10, E.4. 5.


(d)33-H.6.23. 11. H.7.3,5
21. H.6.41. 1. H6 1 b.
8.H.6.11. 18.H.8.3
3.E.3.28. 11. H.4.54.
5H. 5.13. 21.H 6.30.
24.€.3. Ley 63. 30 €.3.19.
9.£.4. T.
34H.8. Ley Gager Ér.97.


10.H.6.7. 1.H.7.25.
6. Eli. Bendoes.


9.H.5.3 8.H.6.15.
22.H.6.35. 38, H.6.6,


14.H.6.63. 38.H.6.6,


28.H,6.4. 19.H.6.20.
22.H.6.1 3. 39. H.6.18.


21. H.6,4.

38.H.6.23. 39.F.6.18.
3.H.6.38. 1.H.7.3$.
13. H.7.


10.H.7.18,


Lib.3.


G lanu.li. Y 3.64. 1. 6.
"Irason k. $.f al, 338


Lii, 5 fol.8 g ."Pemrins cafe.


34. E. 3 ludi m, 2 56.adtudee
accord X3. H. 4. Iudjm. 145.
1o. H. 6.8.30. M, 6.38.4.
ar. H.6.34.6. 26. 0.9.8.5.
1.4Mar.Dy.58. Li. 5.fo.8 5.
"Temm esfe FN. B 5.11, 31-


"Bral.li, a. fo, 32.0. G7 58,59.
*Bru.235.


* Lit pag. fequen.


Brad. li. 2. 58.


"BraB.li. 3.fe.37.58.38. H.6.
34.37. Tl (Com. (ount.de
Lassefters.cafc.


10.€.2.Côfirm.34.33.E.3.9.


(e)Fler.ls.3.6a.1467 U. 3.6.5


44a i


L3.9.fo. 142. Beamond: safe.
Flatts. 3,64. 14.


Cap.8.


Of Releafes.


the office of the Judges to inſtruct tbc grand Bilife o Bury in points of Hain, foz ag the
avauno Hilfe o» other Jurors arc triers of the matters of fat, Ad queftionem fadi non re
{pondent Ludices, fo Ad queftionem juris non refpondent luratores. Bnd ‘accegdinglp . the
Judge in this cafe directed the grand 2) (Ife, viz- 1f they tound that.ec, — *

€ Per que fuir agard. Tete are two things to bee obſerued.
Sixt che forme of a Judgement ſinall. S» ccondip, that a Judgement finall iste be gtuen in
this particular cafe, $foz the formeof tbe &nailindgcment fog the & chant is here, expaeten,
that the Œenant (ball hold the Cenements Demandedagaink Dim,to bin « his heirs quite ofthe
Demandant and bts heites foy euet, and the Demandant iw the mercp. Qu


Sc. 515.


uod: tenens tenear
terram illam fibi & haredibus fuis in pace verfus petentem & haredes fuos in perpetuum, | 5,01

ro the fecond point fesing the Mile is topned pon the mere right, albeit tbc Q1erbíd of the
Grand AWiile be qiuen pon another point, pet iwdgement finail Hall be gluen. Andfo (tig —
ifthe Cenant after the Wile topned make default, og confefletheacion, o2 if the Demandant


be on-faite, and pet in mone of tbefc cafes they of the grand Allile gaue their verdict pom


the mere right.


€ Come eff auantdit,Vid.Sect.478.


Cu


AP mation 19:
Confirmation. Con-
firmatio commeth of the ecrbe
* Confirmare, qd eft irmum
facere,and therefore it is fatd,
Æbat Confirmatio omnes
fupplet defe&us, licet id quod
actumeftab initio, non valuit.
A Confirmation is aconnep=
ance of an cffate 62 right in
cie, whereby a voidable cftate
tg madefure @bnacopdable,
0» hereby a particular eftate
{8 increafed,
A Confirmation votb not
firengthen a vopde eftate.


AP


Confirmatio eft nulla vbi donum praece


— € com
munement en tiel
fozme.ou atiel cfect,


Nouerint vniuerfi,&e.


mafte C.de D. ftatum
& poffeffionem , quos
habeo, de, & in vno
mefuagio, &c. cum
pertinin F. &c.


ime


iH


:
Seil. ss.

| Deed ofcon-
r firmation : is
3 commonly in


Tura 13
. this forme, or tothis


effect : Know all Men
Ge. That 1 A. of


-B. haue ratified
me A.de B. ratificaffe, ' Na
approbaffe & confir-


prooued , and confir-
med to C. of ,D.
the cflate and poffeffi-


on which I baue 0


"and 1a one. Meſſu-


age dc.withthe-Appur-
tenances in F. &c.


dens eftinualidum, & vbi donatio nulla omnino nec va~


lebit confirmatio : foꝛ Confirmation map make à boidable 02 ocfeatible cftate god,but (t cans
not Werke bpon an Eſtate that ts bopD in Law, Non valet canfrmatio nifi ille qui
confirmat fit in pofleffione rei vel iuris vnde fieri debet confirmatio, & codem modo ni(i ille cut
confirmatio fit,{it in poffeffionc. Bnd another fati), (c) Confirmare eftid quod priusinfirmum
fuit firmare. Et donationum alia incepta, & defectiua, & poft tempus confirmata, cenfirmatio
enim omnem fupplet defe&um, poterit enim effe in pendenti donec per ratihabitionem here-
dis cum ad statem peruenerit robore:ur.

€ Ratificaffe. Ratificare eft ratum facere , and (8 xquipollent to
Confirmare whichag bath becnefapd, (9 firmum facere... *

Œ Approbaffe commeth of Ad and Probo which (8 tomate per=


fet an god,


@ Confirmaffe. Here ts to bee obferued, That there bee tivo
hinds of Confirmations, viz Confirmations expꝛeſle o2 in Deed, Whereof Littleton hath here
put thele three examples and Confirmations implied,oz (m Taw , whereof Littleton hereattes
fpeaketh in this Chapter, Quzlibet confirmatio, aut cft perficiens;cietcens,aut diminuens, and
o£ all thefe Littleton pntteto examples tn this Chapter, And hereof Fleta faith, Carta autem
de confirmatione cft illa quz alterius fa&um cenfolidat $c confirmat, & nihil noui attribuit,
quandoque tamen confirmat & addit. $ed.


Lib3.


& en aſcũ cafe
E faít Dc Con-
firmation eft bone ct
auailable, lou en tíel
cafe bn fait Be Ke⸗
leafe nett patfe bone,
ne auatlable, S»ícóc
{eo lea Terre a on
home nurterme De fa
bie,le quelleffa met
latette a bu auter p
terme De ti, ans, per
force De quel il eft ets
poffeílion, Stieo p
mon fait confirme
teftate Del Œenant a
termedans, et puis
le tenant a terme De
bie mozuft Durant le
terme Des ans, feo
ne puis enter en la
Œerre Durant le Dit
terme,


Of Confirmation. 568.516.517.


Setlion 516.


Nd in fome cafe a

Deed of Confir-
mation is good and a-
uailable, where in the
famecafe a Deede of
Releafe is not good
nor auaileable. As if
I let land toa man for
terme of his life, who
letteth the fame to a-
nother for terme of
fortie yeares, by force
of which he its in pof-
fefion: if I by my
Deed cenfirme the E-
ftate of the Tenant for
ycares, and after the
Tenant for life:dieth
during the terme of
yeares, I cannot enter
into the Land during
the faid terme.


€ eras in this chaps


ter putteth eight Di⸗

uerſtties betwene a
Confirmation and a Relcafe,
and thereof foz illuſtration
here be puttctl) two cafes tn
this and the nert Sections
hich vpon that which hath
bene ſayd in the precedent
Chapters, ts faifictentlp cxz
plained, Dnelp in both chefe
cafes this (gto bee obferucd,
Chat bere a Confirmation
fhail enlarge an citate, there
pꝛiuitis is required, ag weil
as in the cafe of the Releafe,
as bp manp amples hich
Littleton puts in this Chap=
terappcareth. And note here
{3 tbe firft cafe Wherein a Ke⸗
leafe anda Confirmation voc
difter:

Lette £02 life made a Leaſe
for thirtie peares, and after
the dlefloz and Leflæ fo» 1ífc
made a Leafe fo? ſixty peares
toancther, which cafe foz
fictie peares the Leffor din
ürft confirme, and after the
ALefoz confirmed the  leafe
fo» tbírtic peares , amo atz
ter Tenant for life dyed
within the thirtie peares, and


ít was adiudged, (d) Chat the Leafe Fos thirtic peares Mas determined by the Death of Leilæ

life, and thatthe Leſſee foa ũxtie peares might enter,fo2 that albe? the Xeafe £o2 itp peares

Sede the iatter in time, pet Sas (t of greater force in Law, fozthat the Lello Who had power to
cenfirme Sobich of them be would.did firft confirme the fecond Leaſe.

3n this Chapteris aifoto be obſerued etght Cafes, whercin a Keleaſe and a Confirmation

bane the 1e operationin Law,


Seil. $i7.


€ V foco (Leo per món fait
be Keleaſe auop releas al
tenant a terme Dans en la bie le
tenant a terme De bte, cel Keleaſe
ſerra voyd purceo que adongs
ne fuit atcun pzíuity perent mop
et le tenant a terme Dans, cat re-
leafe neft auaiicable al Tenant a
terme Dans mes lou eft bn pziui-
tie perent luy ct celuy d velcafatt,


YE if [by my Deed of Releate
had releafedto the Tenzat for
yeares inthe life time of the tenant
for life, this Releafe (hall be voyd,
for that then there was not any pri-
uitie betweene me and the Tenant
for yeres : for a Releafe is not auai-
lable to the Tenant for yeares, but
where there is a priuitie betweere
him and him that releafeth.


Œbig belongetb to the irk binerfitie betweene a Weleafeand a Confirmation,


Sel.


9. H.6,32. Tit Releafe 44.


(4) Inter Vrwel ÿ Ledge.
temp. Rez Eliz.


Lib.


A Mg. 1o by Read,
—


£9 E.,6,33, 6, E. 3. Cmfirm.4.


Cap.9.


€ Hg» is tbe

fecond bis

uerfity be
tiene w Releale and
a Confirmation, Wut
tf tbe Dilletfoz makea
Leafe fo» peares to bes
gin at Michaclmaffe,
and tbe Dilleiſee con=
firm bis eftate,this is
bopd, bccaufe be hath
but intereffe termini,
anb no eftate tn bim,


Of Confirmation:


Seétion 518.


Nmeſme le man-
PLE eft, (( teo foy
bí(feífte , et le Diſſeiſor
fait bn Leale a bn auf
pur terme dans , fico
teleffa al termoz, ceo eſt
boyDe,nes ff (eo confit
ma leftate le termoz.ceo
eft bone & effectual,


Swberreupon a Confirmation map cnurs.


Sell. 519.


Seé.518,519.


N the fame manner it

is if Ibe diffeifed, and

the Diffeifor make a
Leafe to another forterna
of yeares, if I releafe to
the Termor thisis voyd:
but if I confirme the E-
ftate of the Termor, this
is good and effectuall.


«LI Tem fi teo {op difleific, «
feo confirma leftatele Diſ⸗
fetfoz.tl aD bone ct dꝛoiturel

eftate en fee (imple,comt queen

le fait De confirmation nul men-
tion eft fait De fes heives. pur ceo
que tl auoit fee {imple al temps
de Confirmation, Car en tiel
cafe (t le Diffeifee confirma leftate
le diſſeiſor A aneret tener a Iup
e«t a (eg heires De fon cozps en⸗


gendres, ou a auct et tenera tup


pur le terme De fa bie, bncoze le
diſſeiſor ad fee (imple, et eft ſeiſte
en fon demeſne come De fee, pur €
que quant fon eftate fuit cofirim,
Donque il auoit fee imple, et tiel
fait ne poit changer fon eftat fas
entry fait fur Iup,ac,


Lſo if I be diffeifed;and I con-
firme the eftate of the Diffei-
for, he hath a good and rightfull


cftate in Fee fimple , albeit in the.


Deed of Confirmation no men-
tion be made of his heires, becaufe
he had Fee fimple at the time of
the Confirmation. For in ſuch cafe
if the Diffeifee confirme the ftate
of the Diffeifor , To haue and to
holdto him and his heires of his
bodie engendred, or to haue and
to hold to him forterme of hislife,
yet the Diffeifor hath a Fee fimple,
and is feifed in his Demefne as of


Fee, becaufe whenhis eftate was


confirmed, hee had thena Fee fim-
ple, &duch Deed cannot ‘change
his eftate, without entry made vp-
on him, &c; -


firmatíon to a Difetfos in Œaile,oz Ce? anp particular eate, io of the liite foꝛce as w


€ Hit is the firft cale wherein the Releafe and Confirmation doth agree, viz.a Cone


Releaſeto a Diſſetſor, during fuch effate, Which in both cafes is god for euer, In


the fame manner ít (e, tf the Difeifoz make a gift (n tatle, and the DtAetlee confirme the effate
0f the bore fez the life of the done, this confirmation enures tothe $obole eftate taílef02 & cone


firmation can make no fraction ot any eftate, to extend but to part of the eftate ontip : Et fic de |


Sef,


caeteris.


|


I


- Lib.


€r f2 Melme le
maner eft. ff (on
eftate (oit confirme
pur terme De bn tour
ou pur terme dun
beure.il ad bon eftate
eu fee imple, put ceo
que fon eftate en fee
fimple fuit on foits
- confit, Quia confir-
mare idem eft quod
firmum facere, &c.


Seclion 520.


N the fame manner

itis if his eftate bee
confirmed for tearme
of aday,or for tearme
of anhoure, hee hath
a good eftate in fee
fimple, for this, that
his eftate in fee fimple
was once confirmed.
Quia confirmare. idem
eff quod firnmm facere,
Qu c


Of Confirmation. — $62,526, 521.


€ Tre is the feconà
cafe wherein the res

leafe and Confirmas
tion bot agree, Che reaſon of
this is for that the Diterfog
bath a fe fimple, and there=
fore tf hig effate be confirmed
but foz an houre it is qoo fog
euer becauſe( fatti Littleton )


Confirmare idem eft quod .


firmum facere.

Nota, a níttetütíe betweens
& bare a((ent. without anp
right og intereſt, and an aſſent
ceupico With aright o» (ntes
teft ; and therefore an Attors
nement cannot bee made foz
atime no? bpon Condition ;


but tf the verfon make a Leafeforahundsed yeares, the Patron ano tbe Ordinary map coria
firme fiftic o£ the peaves, fos thep auc an tntcreft, and map chatgetn time of bacatíon. Bnd fa
if a Diſſeiſoꝛ make a Leafefora Hundred peares , the Diſſeiſee map confirme parcell of thofe
peares butthen tt mult be bp apt Words, for he mulk not confirme the Leaſe op demile 02 the c=
flats of the Leitæ, for thon the addition Éoz parcell of the tearme Mould be repugnant when the
Ghok Was confirmed befoge, but the Confirmation muft be of the Land Cop pat: of the tearme,
Ho map the Confirmation be of part of theland,as (t ft be of foꝛtie, be map confirmetwentie,
_ @c. Ho if tenant £02 life makca Leafe for a hundꝛed peares , the Leſſoz map confirme cither

foz part of the terme 02 foz part of the Land. Wut aneftate of freehold cannot be confirmed fog,
part of the cftate, £2 that the eſtate is intire, and not feuerall as pearcs be,


Tein & mon Diflet=
+} for fait bn leas a
terme De bie, le ve-
mainder oufter en fee,
fico releas al tenant a
terme De bie ceo beera
à celup en le remain⸗
Der, Mes fiteo cons
firm leſtate ble tenant
a terme De bie, bncoze
apres fon Deccafe teo
puis bien enter, pur
€«0 que tiens eft coti»

. firme koꝛſque leftate te
tenant aterime De bie,
iffint que apres fon de⸗
Ceafe, ico puis enter,
Mes quant ico releſſa


Seth. 521;
Lfo if my Dif.


feifor maketh a
Leafe for life,

the remaynder ouer
in fee , if I releafe
to the Tenant for
life, this fhall enure
to him in the re.
maynder. But if I
confirme the Eftate
of the Tenant for
tearme of life, yet
after his deceafe I
may well enter , be-
caufe nothing is con-
firmed but the E-
ftate of the Tenant for
p diii


€ Cre de the
H third Cafe

Soberein the
teleafe, and confirmatt«
on differ, forthe confirz
mation te tbe Œenané
fo; itfe doth not snure
to bim tn the remaín-


Ber.

And foít is When the
ſeuerall eftates be in one
perfon, ag tf the Diſſei⸗
foz make a gift ín talle
the remaynder to the
right heives of Œenant
intatle, ££ the Difletfee
confirme the cftate tr
taple, it (ball not extend
tore fimple, ne moze
then tf the Dilleifos haw
made a gift in tatle, the
rematndee fos life, the
remainder to the right
betres of tenant in tate,
thie ettenncth onip to
the eBate tatis, and -


297


Léb. y. fe, 81, Fere; cafe,


Lib.5.


Vide 29.Af: 17. 30. H.8.
Reco en value Br, 30, 13. E.3
entr, cong. Br. 3270


(4.9.


to she remapnder fog Tite,
10; to the remapnber in
fee. Wut it the Dillei⸗
foz makea leaſe fo; life
to A. € B, and the 3Dif-
feife confirme the eftate
of A, B. (ball take ab-
wantage thereof , fo;
tbc eftate of A. Swhich
Was confirme “as
fopnt Sith B and ín
that cafe the Dilſſeilee
ball sot enter into the
Zand, and deuelt the
moitie of B.

FE tie Willetfor in⸗
fcoffe A. and B, and the
hetres o£ B. tf the Dit
fetfee confirme the eftate
of B fo» bis life, this
{hall not onlp extend to
bis Companton,as bath
b&ne fatd, but to big
Whole fee fimple, becaufe
to manp purpofes bec
bad the whole fe imple
tn him, and the confirs
mation (ball bee taken
moft (rong againt him
that made tt.

&Ecnant in taplc dif=
continueth in fe and
bícth, the Diſcontinuee
make a leafe foz lífe, and
granteth the reucrfon
tothe tine, be Hall baue
a Foꝛmedon agatnit tez
nant foz itfe , for bp bis
Foznedon he mutt recos
ucr eftate of Inheri⸗


tance, andthe elles fo? life hath mot the Inheritance, but the iſſue intatlehimfelfe hath it.


Of Confirmation.


tout mon Dioit al te-
nant a terme De bie,ceo
pera a celup en 1e tes
mainder, ou en E reuer=
fíon, pur ceo que tout
mon D20ít eft ale per
ticl releas, Mes on
ceft cag, ſi le diſſeiſie
confirme leftate a le ti-
tle celup en le remain⸗
der fang afcun confir=
mation fait a tenant a
terme de bie.le diſſeiſie
ne poit enter fur Ic te-
nant a term De bie,put
ceo que E remainder eft
Dependant fur leftate
le tenant a terme De
bie, a ſi ſon eftate ſer⸗
voit defeate, le remain-
Det ſerroit Defeate, per
lentrie le diſſeiſie, + ceo
ne ferra reafon que il
per fon entre Defeate-
toit le remainder en-
counter fon confirma⸗
tion, ac,


Sell, s2i.


life, fothat after his de-
ceafe I may enter. But
when I releafe all my


right to the Tenant for —


life, this fhall enure to
him in the remainder or
in the reuerfion,becaufe


allmy right is goneby ~


fuch releafe. Butinthis


cafe if the Diffeifee con- ^


firme the eftate and title
of him in the remainder
without any confirmati-
on made to Tenant for
life, the Diffeifee cannot
enter vpon the Tenant
for terme of life, for that
the remaynder is depen-


ding vponthe ftate for _


life , and if his eftate
fhould bee defeated,the
remainder fhould be de-
fcated by the entry of


the Diffeifee,and it is no


reafonthat he by his en-
try fhould defeat the re-
mainder againft his con-
firmation, &c.


It (coffee bpon condition make a Leafe Fos life, 02 a gift intatic, and the fcofforrelealethe -


Condition to tie Feoffæ, he fpall not enter b


bte ancient eftate.


pon the Leſſee ot Done, becanfe be cannot regaine


BE the Feotkee bpon Condition make a Leafe fo2 life, the remapnder infes, (€ the feoffosres
icafe the Condition to the Lefle: Foz life, (t hall enurc to bim ín the vemapnder, afinell agin
the cafe of the right, o2 of a Went, ec.

FE a reme Difletforelic make a feaffinent in fee tothe tfe of A. fox life, and after to tbe tfe


of berfel£e in tate, and the remapnder tothe bfc of B. in fee, and then taketh bufbanb tbe Di
fetfce,and be relcafeth to A - allhis right, this fball cnure to B, and to big owne Swife aifo, fos
bp the rnie of Littleton (t muſt erum c to all in therem ynder.

Wut (£ A. letteth to B. fox itfe, and B. maketh a Leafe to C. fo bis life, the remapnoerto A, fre
fee. À. releafeth to C- all bis right, this te god to perfca theeftate of C. for his life, But when
C. dieth A. Hall bec in of bis old c(fate for bis relcafe could not enareto himfelfe to perfect bis
defeahibie remapnder, but his ancient rightremapneth, And note that in tbefe two cafes the
Seis deuelted, anb befked all at one inftant, in the fame manner, ag (£ tenant im tatle makea
Loafe foriife, atthe fame inftant che eftatc tafle ig deueſted out of the one, andthe reueru⸗


en ín fee ont of the Donoz, and a new fee veſted in Cenant (n tatle. Bnd fo tf thehulband —
mabe a Leafe tozlits of bis wines land, he deueſteth his owne effate, that hebath in her right, —


Ln Inheritance ot his Wife, and at the fame fnffant vc(Ectb a new veucrüon (ina (n bimus


@ Mes en cesi cafe fi le diffeifee confirme leflate & titleceluy en le remayn~
der. Here tg the third cafe wherein the Kelegle and Confirmation
bse


Lib.3. Of Confirmation. Sed .522¢


boc agree for the Confirmation made to bim in the remapnder Mali anale the Tenant for life,
as muchas the Keleafe fai.


¶ Pur cee que le remaynder eft dependant, dre, Wy this fome haue
gathered that (f a 3D iMcifor make a Leafe foz life, referuing therenerfon to bimfcife, and tbe
3Dtffeifee confirmeth the (tate of the Diſſeiſoꝛ that he map enter bpon the Lele, bécaufe the ex
flate of him in the lBcacr&on dependeth not bport the (rate foz tite as the Bemainder, but all te
one, foz bp the Confirmation made to him ti the M everson, all the right of bim that confirmeth
is gone, as vell aa when be maketh it to him in remainder, and hecannot bp his entrie auoide
she eſtate o£ the Lette fos life, but be muft auotve the (tate of the Helo: Which again bis
one confirmation, be cannot Doe, and ft hath bœne adiudged, that if a Dilſſeiſoz mabe a Leafe
foz life, and after leuie a Fine of tbe reuerfion With zoclamations, and the fine peares patte,
fo as the Dilſeiſce tg foa the Reuerſion barred, be ſhall not enter bpon the Letles £o; lite.


€ Leremsinder ferra defeat. Ft is reqguiarly true, that toben the
particular eftate (g defeated, that the remainder therebp (ball be alfo deteated, but (& fatleth in
divers cales,

#02 Gers the particular eftate and tbe remainder depend bpon one title, there the defeas
ting of the particular eſtate is a Defeating of the remainder. ut There the particniar eftate
ts ocfeafibie, anv the remainder by gedtitic, there thong) the particular eſtate be befeateD the
remainder is qos. Be (€ the Leffoz ot(isife A. LelTeæ foz life, ario make a Reale £o B. fox the
life of A. the remainder to C. in Ce, albeit A. re-enter, and defeate the eltate £o? life, pet the rez
maínber to C. being once veſted by god title (ball not be anopbso, Fox it Were again reafon,
that the Leſſoꝛ fhouid sane tbe remainder againe againtt big owne Linerp, and this (s Scil
&varranteb by tbereafon of. Littleton tn thigcafe. So it is it a Reafe be mate to an infant
foz life, the remainder (n fee, the Anfant at bis fall age Difagres to the eſtate Coa life, pet the res
mainder 18 god, foz that it was once deed bp god title, Fos is botb theſe cafes, there Was &
particular eftate at the time of the remainder created,

BE a Leale be made to A. fo; the life of B. the remainder to C. infec, A. dpethbefoze an oc⸗
Bp entreth, here ig a rematnber Dithouta particular eftate, anb pet the remainder conti⸗
nueth geod,

Brent is granted to the Cenant of the land Fox life tbe remainder (n fer, this is a qed res
maínber, albeit the particulas effate continued not,foꝛ Eo inftante, that he tobe the particular
eftate, Eo inftante the remainder belted, and the fulpencion in indgement of aim grew after
the taking of the particular eftate,

Fela man grant a rent to B. £0; the ltfs ef Alice, the remainder to the beireg of the toby of
Alice, thts íg a gob remainder,and pet it mat belt bpon an inſtant


Se&. 522.


| | Gin & font deux Lfo if there bee Bis is the fourth


€


Diffeifozs, et le
Differtee releſſa a on
De eur.tl tiendza fon
- compagnion hozs de
la terre. Mes ff le
Diffetfee confirma le-
ftate de lun, fang
. pluíg Dire en le fait,
afcuns Diont à fl ne
tiend2a fon compag⸗
nion dehors. Mes
tienda ioyntm̃t oue
lup put cco que viens
fuit confirme fos(que


two diffeifors and
the diffeifee releafeth
to one of them, hee
fhail hold his compa-
nion out of the land,
but if the diffeifee
confirme the eftate of
the one without more
faying in the Decd,
fome fay that he fhall


‘not hold his compani-


onout, but fhall hold

ioyntly with him for

that nothing was con-
d tffz


safe Soberein the re⸗

leafe anb thecenfire

mation ſeeme to differ, being

ee bnto ons o£ the Diets
918.


€ Confirme forfque
fon cfate,cre. Heteby
it agpearetb thas {€ che DiC
feifes confirme the sftate of
the one iDtüsifes in the
lands, Go haue andte belb
the lands oj tenements, e»
theright of the TDiTetfes, to
bím and bis heires, bee ball
held eut the o:ber 3D((feifoy,
and that appearsth bp Little-
ton, Sr spon thele os
( Confirmethe ftateof one)
Swithons moze faving t» she
Der


298
Pl. Com. Delaruer: aafá ,
Vid.Se8.334.


Vid. Pl (em.
Cobsherfti mfi.


17. E.3. 48.


3, E, 3. b. AR.


g. Bi. 4. d.


Lib.5.


44: E tit. Confer.


(ap.9. Of Confirmation. — 566.523.524.


Ded,viz. Co Wwe and to (or eftate que fuit firmed but his 'eftate


f Be, (5 j ^
M arce. (ONCE, which was ioynt,&c. -


zeſſe Words is, for that à
siete outre bat his eftate whieh was topnt, Thirdly, tbe next two Sectiong
make tt plaine Sbere the Habendum fg added.

Hereby allo it appearctb,tbat ad eleafe is moze foꝛcible in Rak then a Confirmation, FE the
Diffeilæ and a Mranger Willette the betre of the Dilleilon, and the dilleilee confirme the eftate
of bis companion, this Mail not cxtinguifb bis right that was fnfpenbeb : foas (f the beire of
the Diffeifoz resenterthe right of the diſſetlee is reutued. Andfottis, t€ the Grante of a


Rent-charge and an eftranger dileife tbe Cenant of the land, and the Grantee confirme the
eſtate of hig Companion , tbe Cenant of the land re-enter, the Went is reuiued, forthe Conus «
firmation extended not to the Rent fufpended, other wile tt is of a Beleate in both cafes,


Setl. 523.


€ E« pur ceoatcung ont Dit,

que (í Deux iointenants
font, et lun confirme leftate lau⸗
ter,que tl nad fo2tque toint effat,
ficome il auoit adeuant.Mes (il
ad tiels parols ene fait De con=
firmation, a auer et tener a inp
et ales heives touts les tenc-
ments Dont mention eft fait Cle
confirmation, bonqueg il ade-
ftate (ole en les tenements.2c,
Ct put ceo il eft boti et fure cbofe
en chefcun confirmation Dauer
ceux parole ; Bauer et tener les
tenements.ac, en fee, ou en fee
taile, ou put terme de bie, ou pur
terme Dang, folonque ceo que le
cas eff, oule matter gift, -


Nd for this fome haue faid

that if two ioyntenants bee,
and the one confirme the eftate of
the other, that he hath buta ioynt
eftateas he had before, but if hee
hath fuch words in the Deed of
confirmation, to haue and to hold
to him and to his heires all the te-
nements wherof mention is made
in the Confirmation, then he hath
afole eftare in the tenements,&c.
And therefore it is a good and
fure thing in euery confirmation
to haue thefe words, To haue and
to hold the tenements, &c. in fee,
or in fee taile, or for terme of life,
or for terme of yeares according -
as the cafe is orthe matter lyeth.


€ Nd this Confirmation leaueth the ate ag it way, and doth not amount to anp fes
A ucrance of the tepnture as fore haue fato,


¶ Mes fil adtiels parols en le fait de. This tS plaine and


enidentenough,


€ Et pur ceo il eff bone d furechofecrc. Bhis is good countell


anb Swozthp to be followed,


8.524.


Cretbebíaeüte is EC Ar al entent
CH C patcung, (i hõe


apparant betwane
& Confirmation of


Orto the intent of
fome, if a man let-


ons qu i ie tr leŒa terre a bn auter tech. land (api
2814, 0 JVID 19S FAID for life, and after con-
fate in the land fo bí pur terme De bie, et for life,

big — this Pd pos puis confivmafon ex firme hiseftate which


fate


Lib.3.

ftate que tl ad en m
laterte, à auct ct te-
ner fon e(tatea lup et
ates heires,ceft con-
fivination quant &
fes heires eft void,
car fes heires ne
poíent auct fon eftat
que ne fuit fosfque
pur terme De fon vie,
Mes fil confirma
foneftate ꝑceux pa-
tolg,a auer mefme la
tette à lup et a fes
beits, cett confitima-
tion fait fce (imple en
cett cafe à lup en la
terre, put ceo que leg
parol’ a auer et te-
ter, c,ba a le terre &
nemp al etate que il
ad, dec,


C | Gen ico tetfa

certaine terre a
bu fem (ole put term̃
9 fa bie, la quel prent
baron, et puis íco
confirma ieftate ie
baron et fa feme, aa-
uet et tener put term̃
De lour deur vies
en cet cate Ie baron
ne tient iointment
pue fafeme mestient
en D2oit Dc fa feme
putterme de fa bie,
Mes ce(t confirma-
tíou beera a le baron
per boy De remain⸗
Defi terme dela vie,
fü ſuruequiſt fa feme.


Of Gé


hee hath in the fame
land, to haue and to
hold his eftateto him
and to his heires, this
confirmation as to his
heires is voide, for his
heires cannot hauc his
eftate which was not


but for terme of his *


life. But ifhe confirme
his eftate by thefe
words, to haue the
fame land to him and
to his heires, this con-
firmation maketh a fee
fimple in this cafe to
him in the land, for
that the words to haue
and to hold, &c. goeth
to the land and not to
the eftate which hee
hath, &c.


Sek. 525.


Sedt.525.


large bis eftate, (o? bis effate
being but £o; lite, that eflate
cannot bee extended to bis
betes. Wut in that cafe tl ye
confirme the ftate foz itfe ín
the land tn the premiles of the
Wed anb the Habendum ig
inthis fort, To baue and to
hold tbe lano to hin anb bis
beires; this (hall enlarge his
eftate and create in him a fee
ple.


Wherein íg to bee noted
(c) that the Habendum and
the preméfles doc (n fubffance
Weil agree together, and that
the Habendum map enlarge
the pꝛemiſſes but not abaidge
the fame.

And fering that in conueps
ances, limitations of remaine
berg arc ofuall and common
affürances, it (& dangerons
bp concetpts 02 nice diftindis
ong tabzing them tn queftion,
ag bauc ín latter thine bene.
attempted,


Œ 5e» effate, vid.
Sec#.650.


nr I let certaine
land toa fenie fole
for terme of her life,
Who taketh husband, &
after I confirme the e-
ftate of the husband and
wife, to haue and to
hold for terme of their
two liues. In this cafe
the husband doth not
hold ioyntly with his
wife, but holdeth in
right of his wife for
term of her life. But this
confirmation {hall enure


to the husband by way:


of remainder for terme
of his life, if hefurui-
ueth his wife.


F tt; 3


€ Gre ts the fourth

cals whexein the

Releafeand con-
firmation Docagræ, and in
this cafeít tg to be obferned
that the Baron hath fuch
an efatein the land ín the
right of bis Wife ag hee is
capable of a confirmation
toenlarge bis eftate, and
therefore ik the confirmatts
on had besne made of hig cz
flate to him alone to bague
and to hold the land to him
and tobis hetres, thig hap
beene god to haue conugpeb
the fe (imple to him after
the deccafc of big ‘wife,
fox tf fn tbíg cafea Releate
be made tothe bufbanb and
bis heres, this is fnffici-
ent to conuep the inbertc
tance of the lano to the
huſband.


€ Ne tient ioins-


ment 04 fa feme. FO?
£500 caules, Hirt —


299


18.6, 3. 40e


(€) Vid. Pl.Com. in
7 érogmortons cafe fo,
Wretofleyes ca e 1974


Wid, Se® 573.


1 6.H.6. tit. Releafe 45,
23. E, 3 rit. Releafe Statham,


Lbs ane Of Confirmation. Seël.516.


13.5.3.20.


18. 4 f pe y. Eis Om frag
17. B. 3.68. 38.8.3. 95.
Ao E. je Af 10.


the wife hath the sobole for berlife. Secondly, Fopntenants wut (ag hath bene before ſayd
in the Chapter of Foyntenants,) come inby one title. Wut in thts caletf rhe Confirmation
bad beene made ts the huſband and inife, To bane and tohold the lanb te them tivo and to their
beíreg, they had bene Bopntenancs of the He fimple, and the bufbanb fetfeb tn the right of
bis Wite fog her life, £07 the huſband anb the otfe cannot take bp meitics Duringthe Goucre
ture.

FE aman letteth land te tbe bnfbanb anb foífe,to haue and to hold the one moitie to tbe buf»
band fo» tcrmcot big life, and rhe other mottte tothe wite foz heriife, and tbe ALcfloz confirme
the eftate of them bothin theland, To baut anb to hold to them anD to their heires, bp this
Confirmation as tothe moitie of the hulband, tt enureth onelp to the bufbanb 9 bis hepres,foz
the Wife had netbtng in that moitie , but ag to the moitie of the Wife, thep arc topntenants, ag
hth bin fapd,to2 the haſband hath fach an eftate in his Sines moitie fa ber rígbt,ag (5 capabie
of a Confirmation. Wut tf ſuch a Reale £o; litebe made to t00 men bpfeuerall moities, and
the 16102 confirme thetr eſtates inthe land; Co haue and to bolo te them and to their heires,
thep are Tenants in Common of the Inheritance, fozrequiacip the Confirmation Mall enure
according tothe qualítit and natureof the Eſtate Which (t doth enlarge and tncreafe.

Fe a icalefoaltfcbe madeto A.therematndsrto B. fozitfe, andthe Leſſoa confirms their


' Qítates tn the land, Co hane and to hold to them and their heires, A. taketh one moitie to him


15. H.6.9.!


V.408. 573,


?PI. («m Colthirfts cafe.
Dod. dr Stud. ca. 11.

9 16. H.6. n Releafs 48.
(0) » 2.4.18.
(P)6-E.3 9.

(9) 15- E. 1.68. b.


17. 4.3.68. 5. V.Sir Ba. Ca
ryercafesli. Se.


508.3. 17.9. PI. Comet 8.4,
3f. H.6.33. 14. H. 4.15.
13.8. 3.35 Pl. (Com. Dame
Malercafs. so Af. p.15.

A H.6. 5.7.6.8 9 H.6.t3
37-LUAG, 31. 4.7.99
81,8, 4. 49. 86.4.8.7.


anb bis hetres, and therefoze of the one moitie he ts felled foz life, the remainder to B. fo; life,
and then to bímanb bis hetres: DE the other motttc A. tafetled oz irfe, the immedtate Inheri⸗
tanccto B. and his heives, becanfeas tothe moític Dhith B. takes, the fame is exccuted:as ifthe
Benerfion be granted to Cenant fozitfe, and to a ranger, tt ts executed fo? 0nc moptie ( ag
bath bene fapd before) and therefoze in this cafe thep arc Cenants in Common.

It lands be giuen to two men, and te the hetres of thetr two bobícs begotten, and the Doe
1107 confirmeth their tie cltates in theland, To hane and to bolo tbt lanb te them tivo and ta
their beires : In this cafe fome are et opinton, Ghat they (ball be Xopntenantg ct the fer fius
pie, becanfe the Donees Here topntenants fos life, € (fap they) the Confirmation n.n& enure
according to the eftate Which tbep baut tn poſſeſſton, and that Wag fapnt. Wut others held the
contrarie ; £02 Girt thep fap, Chat the ones hauc to fome purpofes feucrall 3noeritanceg
executed, though betwene tbe Donees furninez (ball hold foꝛ cheiritues. Decondip thep fap,
That ben tbe Whole eftate Which compzehendeth ſeuerall Inheritances, teconGrmes, the
Confirmation mutt ennre according to tbefenerali Anberitmces , which is the greater amb
moft perdurabie eftate, and therefore that the Dones Mail be Tenants in Common of the In⸗
heritance in thts cafe,


¶ Per vey de remainder cc. Bere fome que(tíon hath beene made

ef this terme Remainder, without anpcanfeatall, becaufe in Law (t (8 (m masure of a Rec
mainder. Foꝛ in caſe of a fine, Shen a renerfion expectant bpon an cftate for life in A. (8 grans
tedto B. Et quz ad ipfum reuerti dcbet poft mortem A. ;refato B. & haredibus fuis remancant,
&c. anb a moze colourable exception might be taken againft this $00) Remancant there, thar
in the cafe of Littleton.

3t (s truc,hat (n* 16H 6. (t (s called a RenerGon : in (0) 9-E.4. ft is called a Remainder e
in (p)6.E.s ít (gfapo, Chat by the Confirmation an eftate accrue to the bufband for terme
of his life, Fn (q)17.E.3. the huſband, ituing the wife, hail bane nothing but im abepance afe»
ter the death of hte fife. Wut left there Hould be pugna verborum, $obícb learned anb wife
men ener auopd, all doe reſolue, Chat the eftate of the hafband (s gad, andthatit doth enure
Soap of tncreafe and tniargement of bis eftate. And albeit in thig cafe of Littleton , the
band bp the Confirmation gaineth an eftate Foz life in remainder, (ag Littleton termeth tt) pes
tf tbebufbanb doth watt, an Scion of matt (bail lie agatnft him and bis Sife, notsefthllane —
ting the meaneromatnver, becanfethe bufband himfcife committeth the Waſt, and Beth the
ieng : Bnd therefore (ball not excufe himfcife £o? his commítting of walk, tn refpes ke biere
{clfe hath the remainder, no moze than ££ a man ieflethto A. during the life of B. the remain der
to him during the life of C. (£ he commit oaft;an Action ef toak allie again pim,


Sed. 526.


¶ PiBiste the seth cate qr Mts ft ico lef- BY: if I let land to


Spbert f
RS CURIE fa al feme a Feme fole for


L pe — itis tobe obs fole terre pur terme terme of yeares, who
de Roue 65; —— dans, le quel prent taketh husband, and af-


baron


Lib.3.
baron, et puts teo
confirma leffate ie
baron ct fa feme, a
auct et tener la terre
pur terme dlour dur
vies: en cett cafe tig
- ont topnt eftate en Ie

Franketenement de
. là terre, pur ceo que

la fem nauoit frank-

tenement adeuat,ec,


ter I confirm thecftate
of the husband and his
wife, To haue and to
hold the land forterm
of theirtwo liues : In
this cafe they haue a
ioynt eftate inthe free-
hold of the Land,
for that the wife had
no Freehold before,
&c.


Chips, and the ithe, are noe gta
nen tothe bufbanb abfointoly,
(as all Chatteis pesonali¢
are) bp theintermarriage bat
conbítíonalip tf the bufban»
happen tofuruine ber, and be
bath power to alien them at
bis pleafote : but (athemcan


‘time the huſbãd is poſteſſed of


tbe Chattels rcall in ber right,
Hecondip, hat the bufz
band bath ſuch a pofic(Tíon tn
her right of the Ehattel, as ts
capable £a Confirmation, oz
of a Releafe,
Thirdip, Chat the Conr⸗


mation {x this cafe to the Yufband and Swife fo; their lines, maketh them Jopntenants for life,


becaufe a Chattellofa


Feme Conert may bee downed: and fo note a biucrütíc betiwecne 8


Ascafe Éoz life, anda Leafe foz peares, made toa Feme Couert ; oz hee eltate of Freehold cane


hot be altered bp the Confirmation made to her


Svbcreof her bufband may make bifpofitíon at big pleafare,


CITem G mon
diſſeiſor granta
abn cent charge

bo:$ belaterre Dont

il mop Díffe((((t,et ieo

reberfant le dit grat

confirma mefine le
~grant,et tout ceo que
eft compaife deins
mefme le graunt, et
puis ieo enter fur le

Dilſeiſoꝛ, Quære en

ceft cafe .- (CE Œerre

foit Difchatge de le
tentounemp,


Selon 517.


At’ if my Dif

feifor granteth to
one a Rent charge out
ofthe Land whereof
he diffeifed me, and I
rehearfing the fayde
Grant, confirme the
fame Grant,and al that
which is comprifed
within the fame grant,
and after Ienter vpon
the Diffeifor, Quære
inthis cafe, if the land
be difcharged ot the
Rent or no.


if tbe heire of tye Dilleiſor grant a Bent charge, anb the Dillet


couer the tanb, be ſhall not auopd the rent : and pet in neither of t


geable at the time of the ConGrmation.


«€ p (i vn pat-
fon dun Efglife
charge le giebe
de fon Eigliſe per
fon fait, a puis F pa-
fto et Lozdinarie


Settion 528.


Lfo if a Parfon

of a Church
charge the Glebe land
of his Church by his
Deed, and after the pa-


tron & Ordinary con- f


bufbane agb her,


ag the terme foz pcareg Wap,


€ Tex tg the fifth cafe


wherein the Releas

anb Confirmation
Doe Der, Foz a 18 cleafe to the
Drante inthis cafe ( a) ere
bupd. It ts holden bp fore
anthozitie ince Littler. &pote,
Ghat the Dilleifæ after big
re-enttle (ball not anopd the
Bent charge againt his own
Confitmation: and there a
general tale is taken, that
fuch a thing ag J may defeat
by my entrie, 3 maÿ make
808 bp mp Confirmation,

FE the Seotke bpon Con⸗
bition grant a Went Charge
in fe, anb the Feoſtor con firs
meth tt, and after the Condi⸗
tion is broken, andthe Feof⸗
fo? enter, bee fbali not anoyb
the Rent charge. And ſo ítíg


t€ confirmeth (t , and after res
befe cales, bis entrie was com-


€ P Arfon. Perfona

ín the iegall fautficas

tion it {9 faken fo;
the leo) of a Churchpars-
Chéall, ano (d called Perfona
Ecclefix, becaufe hee aſſumeth
and taketh open bim the pare
on of the Church , —


Of Confirmation. — $£8.527.538. joe


(a) 11.4.9. 38. Lov fe. 147,
Anne Mayoyi qfi. 3 Ha. 16


Zit fo.147.1 48. Anne


Meayowes esfc,


Glami.li.13 c4.21,3 453 5.
"Braff.li.4.ca.385, dre. .
Brit. fo. 334.6, dre, F les.li.g ,


4.19.30. & Di. 6169,
FN, 2.48.49.


8. Reg.


- eight


Nro fe.


8.6.5.36.43. 33, E 5.4.
gMar.Dy.115.


q.H. 4.15.


(b) rg. E1.y.35 6.387.
11.H.6,9.33.H.8.18 Charge
Br.st.


Beo move of thefe kind of (re-
Srasavions in my Reports,
MM 24.L1.1.155.
£33.34 L3. g fo. 21.81,
Ls 10.6.0. 11.19.15.6,34.


31. E. 3.Grans.61.26.0f- 38.
8.£1Dy.3g3. Vi, lj. fo.
Leoëfe do Deane & (haptes
de Norwich,


x3. H.4.11,. 19. L.37.

y-Elig. Dyer, 3 38. 11.H.6.9.
10.Eh£.Dyers — 6, E, 3.19.
3.2.3.29. 9.E.4.6. 2.H.
418, 38,8,3.19.25.1.3.34


Cap.9.
fapd to be ſeiſed in iure Eccle-
fiz, andthe Law bab an ex⸗
cellent end herein, viz Chat
in bis perion the Church
fue toz and defend ber
tight,and alfo be fuco by any
that had an elder and better
, and when the dLpurc)
45 full,tt íg fapd tobe viens &
confulta effuch a one Parſon
thercof,that ig full ano prout-
ded of a Parſon, that map
vicem feu perfona eius gerere.
Perfona Imperfonata, Par⸗
fon Jmperfone ts the Res
it0; that is in pofteflion of the
Church Parochiall, be tt pzes
ſentatiue, oꝛ impzopztate, and
of whom the Church ts full,
ere are diuers things to
bco noted : Firſt, That the
Confirmation (& of the grant,
Sohich in deb (g but a mere
affent by Deed to the Grant,
And therefore (t is holven,
That tf there be Parſon, Pa⸗
tton and Dadinarie, and the


Of Confirmation:


confirmont meſme le
grant, a tout ceo que
€ compzife Deins 11 E
grant, Donques 1e
grant eftopera en fa
tozce. folonque E put-
poit De mefime ie
graunt, Mes entiel
cafe content que ie
Patron eit Fee fim-
pleenlauotofon, cat
fiinad eftate en Lax
uotofon forfque put
terme De bic, ou en le
tatle Donque E grant
ne eftopera fopique
Durant fa bie, ala hie
le Parſon que gran:
tatt,4c,


Setl.528


firme the fame grant,
andallthat is compri-
fedin the fame Grant,
then the Grant {hall
ftand inhis force, ac-
cording to the purport
of the fame Graunt.
But in this cafe it be-
hooueth, thatthe Pa-
tronhath a Fee fimple
inthe Aduowfon , for
if hee hath but an E-
ftate for life or intaile
inthe aduowfon, then
the Graunt fhall not
ftand, but during his
life, and the life of the
Parfon which granted
&c.


Patron and Orldnarie glue itcence bp Deed to the Parlon to grant a Kent charge ont
of the glebe,and the arfon granteth tbe Rent charge accordingly, this is god,and ball bind
the Succefloz,and pet heere (& no conftmation fubleqnent,but a Licence precedent,

Secondiy, The Ordin tte alone, without tye Deane and Chapter, map agree thereunto, cís
ther by Licence precedent, 02 Confirmation fubfequent, fo: that the Deancand Chapter hath
nothing to Doc With chat Which the Wifhop votb as Dzdinarie, in theitfe time of the Biſhop.

Thirdlp, (b) Wut it the Biſhop be Patron, there the Biſhop cannot confirme alone,but the
Deane and Chapter mak confirme alfo, for the Aduo wſon o? Patronage ts parcel of che pofz
ſeſlien of the U5tfhopzicke, and therefore the Wilhop Without the Meaneand Chapter , cannot
make the Grant ged but onelp during bis owne life; after the Deceafe of the Fncumbent,cither
by Licence precedent, 01 Confirmation fubfcquent.

A. Parfen of D. ts Patron of the Church of S. ag belonaingto his Charch, and prefent
B. Soho bp confent o£ A and of the Ozdinarie grant a Went charge out of the Glebe, this ts mot
ged to make the ent charge perpetaall, Without theaflent of the Patron of A. no moze thar
the affent of the 15 (fbop Mho ts Datron, Without the Deancand Chapter, 02 no moze than the
affent o£ the Patron, being Cenant tn Catle 02 fo2 ife as Littleton f tb. Bnd Littleton here
faith, Ghat the Patron chat confirmes mult haue a Fee ſimple, meaning to make tbe chargeper=
petuall, Bnd Littleton after fatth, That inthe cafe of the Parlon the fe (9 in abeyance, and
feeing the confent of the atron ts in vefped of his interelt as bere, tt appeareth bp Littleton,
he map confent bpon Condition, otherwife (t is of an Bitormement becaute that te a bare affent.
Bio tEthe eftate of the Patron becondittonall, anb be confirmeth , and after the Convition is
broken, his Confirmation ts voyd.

Fourthly, He that ts Patron mutt be Patron in Fe ümple, foz (£ hes be Œenant in Œaiie,
oz Œenant fox itfe, his Confirmation o? Agreement ts not geb to bind anp Succeſſoꝛ but inch
ag come into the Church daving bis life, But tf the Watron be Cenant in Taile, and diſcon⸗
tinne the eftate in tatle, the Leafe Hall ſtand god during the Difcentinuance,oz tf the eſtate tate
be barred, it (ball ftand god fo? ener.

ut here te tobe obferned a diuerſitie betweene a folc Corporation, as
Glicar, and the like, that bane not theabfolute fee in them, for tothett zante the 39 «tron
mutt giue bis confent, Wut if there be a Cozpozation aggregate of many, ag Dean anb Chapa
ter, Watker, Fellowes, and Schollers of a Colledge, Abbot o» 152102, Covent, and the ithe,


arfon, Pzebend,


zany fole Coapozation that hah the abfolute fee, as a Biſchop withcenfent of the Deane and


Chapter, they may by the Common Law make any grant of 02 out of tbeírpole(Tione o 1


their founder oz Watron,aibett the Abbot o1 352102, ec. Were prefentabie: anb fo tt (s ofa Ite
fbop, becaufe the wholecttate and right of the Land was (n them, and ther may refpetiuelg
malntaine a wꝛit of Right. 3t


Lib.3. Of Confirmation,  Seël.529..0


Zea Withop hath two Chapters, and be maketh a grant, both Chapters muft confirme tt
6 2 elfethe Huccefloz (yall auoid tt, But f£ one of the Chapters be diſſolued, then the Confira
mation o£ the other fufficcth, but it needeth not the Confirmation of tbe King who ts Foun⸗
der and Patron of all Withopzickes.

And note a v (uorfitit betweene a Confirmation of an Eftate,and a Confirmation of a Dev,
for if the Diſſetſor makea Wharter of fcoffiment to A. With a Letter of Attoznep , anb before
Ainery the Diſſeiſee confirme the eftate of A. oz the Deed made to A, this is cleerelp votd,
though Lincrp be made after, Wut tfa Biſhop had madea Charter of feoffment With a Letter


of Attoznep , andthe Deane and Chapter before Liuery Confirme the Ded, this its a god


Conkrination and Liverp made afterwards ts gad, And ſo it hath beene adiudged.

The like Law ig of rConfirmation of a Dev of grant of a Reuerſion before Attoꝛnement.

In the ſame manner it ig (£a Biſhop at tbe Common Law had granted lands to the King
in fe by Deed, andthe Deane and Chapter by their Deed confirmethe Deed of the Withop,
and after the Ded ofthe Wifhop ts tnrolied, this is go albeít the Confirmation of tie
Deane and Chapter bec not inrolled , fozthe alent vpon the matter is made tothe Biſhop.

Wut this Confirinatton that Littleton here fpeaketh o£ muſt bee made in the le) and during
the (ncumbencteof the perfon, and fo tn thelife ofthe Biſhop, oꝛ of any other fole Corporation,
15 ut tt fs to be knowne that Grants made bp Parſons, Wacbends, Wicars, Withops, Maz
fer and Fellowes of anp Loilledgc, Deanc and Chapter, Waker o? Gardeine of any Polpt=
tail oz any hautug anp S pirituall o2 EccleGafttcall Lining are reſtrained bp. (e) diners Acs
of Parliament, fo as they cannot grant anp rent charge, 02 to make any alienation, oꝛto make
anp Leafes other thenfuch ag are mentioned in thofe Ads hich pou may reade at large,
Bnd the crpohttons bpor the famt in mp (*) Commentaries,


«CT Aen home
leffa terre pur
terme De bie,

1e queltenant à term
De hie charge la terve
ove bn rent en fee , a
celup en le reuerfion
tonfitma mefine le
grant, le charge eft
aflets bone & effec=
tuall,


Sed. 529.


Lfo if a man let-

tethland for term
of life, the which Te-
nant for life charge
the land witha rent in
fee, and hee inthe te-
uerfion confirme the
fame grant,the charge
is good enough and
effectuall,


€ Ht ts a diuerfitte


to bee obſerued

where the deter=
mination c£ the Rent is exa
picficd in the ded, and When
it is tinpiyed tn Law. fo
ben Cenant for life grans
tech a rentin fe this bp Law
{s determines by bis death,
and pet a Confirmation of the
grant bp him (n the reuctüomn
make that grant geod fozeuer,
Without $»oies of inlarges
ment, o) claufe of Diftreffe
Which would amount to a
ne grant. Bnd pet (f che


Tenant for life had granted a Bent to another and his heites by crpae(e words , during the


life o£ the Grantoz, andthe Lefloz had confirmed that arant,


Death of Œenant fos life.


that grant bond octermine bp the


Tenant £02 life bpon a Condition grant a Went in feo , the Letloz confirme thegrant, and


after the Condition tg broken, the Leſſoz re-enter,


>


Cy een ft foít bu
perpetual chan=
terie, Dont lordina⸗
tie nad vien a medler
nea faire Quære file
patron Del chaunte-


Sed. 530.


Lfoif there bee a
perpetuall Chan-
terle wherewith the
ordinary hath nothing
to doe or meddle.
Qwsere if the Patron of


‘


Gags


be fall not auoid the avant,


€ Dig id meant of a
Chauntery Dona
tine wherewith the

Dadinarp bath not to Deale,

anb bp this grant, when Lit-

tleron Swzote, the Chaunterie
fhoulb have bare chargen fox
euer, becaufe mo other had ae
np interelh in this —

aue


301
Terms R,2.tit. grant 104.


50. E. 3.111. fife Stathaths
it, £t. Der 282.


3 3-E.3. Confirm, 22. 31. E.3
Abbot 10.21. H.5.1.

Vide $eH.353.dr 643.

(6) 13- ElQ · cap. 10.

1. Elig.cap, 18. EliQ.cap.tt;
1.1ac.cap.3.

VsdSett.593. dr 648. ,
(9) Lib.2 fol. 46.(1b.4.76-
X 20. lib. 5.9.6.1 4.l15.6.37.
lab.J. 8. lib. 11.67.


36..4/F.P1.38. A5. AP PLA
Lib.i fol.347 Anne
AMaiewei cafe,


UA ff. TL 145


Vide Soh, 648.


Lib. 3.


(a) 39-H.8.enp. 4.
ruin:


Bra. lib. 2. fol. c9 b. 31. H.6.
fesffmenns & fairs 103.
21.H.6 42. 14.H. 4. 36-
59. H.6,44. 7H. 7.16.
32.6.3. briefe 391. Breoke
- tit. Confü goa: iom 30. ! 4.4.9.4
37.H.6.17. Dier.B.Elix;
4. H.7. 19. 33, E.4 36.
49. E.3.41.


WraBon, lb. 2.fol.5 g. b.


(6) 33. E. 3 brio a 291.
"Brooke tit. Confum.20.
Dodo (effate de Gloc.cap. 4.
(f) 7.5. 3.9


Hrafn.


144 H.4. 56.
156.5 fol. 1 5, in Neweemens


safe.


Cap. 9.
faue onlp the Patron and
Chauntry Prtelt , and the
grant ig made Concurrenti-
bus hijs quz in iure requirun-
tur. But GneeLittleton Wzote,
all, and ail manner of fre
Ghappelg and Chaunteries
gerpstuall, Mhercof Littleton
Herefpeakes, are by (a) Acs


Of Confitihsden.


Sed. 531.


t», ele Chapleine De the Chantery, and the


mefme le cbauntecp
potent charg E chaũ⸗
terp ouc bn veut
charge en perpetui-
tie,


Chapleineofthe {ame
Chantery may charge
the Chantery with a
Rent charge in perpe-
tuitie.


of Parliament gtuentothe Crowne , andthe bodies ‘olitike thercef diſſolued. Se here-
after, Section 648. moze at large of all this pzefent Section.


& Ere Littleton pgoc
ceedeth according to
the former diuifion
to {he words that in Law
boe amount toa Confirmatt=
on, Bnd here is to bee obfer=
ued, that forie Smogds are
large And auc agenerall ex⸗
tent, and fome hawe a proper
and particular appitcation,
Œ Ye Former fost map containe
the latter, ag Dedi, 92 Con-
ceſſi map amount toa grant,
à fcoffment, agtft, a Leaſe, a
Rcicafe , a Confitmation, a
Surrender, sc, and te te in
the Election of the partie to
vle to Which o£tbefc parpofes
he Swill,

Eft autem confirmatio qua-
fi quedam ratihabitio , fuffi-
cittamen quandoque per fe,
fi etiam in fe contineat dona-
tionem; vt fi dicat quis , dedi
& confirmaui , licet iuuari
poffit ex aliqua donatione
pracedente.

But a Weleale,Confirmarc
tion, 92 Surrender, ac. can
not amotit toa grant, ec.not a
Surrender to a Confirmatts
01,02 to à Keleaſe,xc.becauſe
thefebee proper and pccultat
manner of Conueyances,


Sell. 531.


¶ [Xem en afeun

cag ceft verbe
Dedi ou ce verbe
Conceffi, ad mefme
leffect en fubttance,a
vrera à mefine len=
tent, come ceft berbe
Confirmaui. Hicome
teo fue Difleifie Dun
catue Deterte, & ico
face tiel fait; Sciant
prefentes, &c. quod
dedi a le diffeifoz, ac.
vel quod concefh ale
Dit diſſeiſor le Dit
carue, ac, x ico Deli-
uct tantfolement le
faít à lup faung at-
cun linery De ſeiſin
Del terre,ceft bn bone
confirmation, aury
fort en lep, ficome tl
auoit en le fait cet
berbe confirmaui,é&c.


anb are deftined to a fpeciall end.


€ Dei G Concefi, cc. Pere is implied that there be moze words


Lfo in fome cafe

this verbe Dedi,
or this Verbe Con-
cef hath the fame ef-
feét in fubftance , and
fhall enure to the farre
intent, as this verbe
Confirmaui. Asif Ibee
difleifed ofa Carue of
Land, and I make fuch
aDeed. Sciant prefen-
tes cc. quod dedi to the
Diffeifor &c. or quod
concefi to the faid
Diffeifor, the faid
Carue,&c.and I deli-
ucr only the Deed to
him without any liue-
ric of feifin of the
land,this isagood có-
firmation, &as ftro
in Law,asif there had
beene inthe Deed this
verbe Confirmaui, &c.


then Dedi and Conceffi, that Stil amount to a Confirmation, as dimifi. (e) In anctent Sta⸗
tutes and in originall w2its,as in the watt of €ntríein cafu prouifo,in confimili cafu ad Com-
munem legem,andmanp others,this $020 dimifi (g not applied onfp to a Leaſe for lift but ta
a gíftín taile,anbtoa State in fec, (£) Alſoit aman makca Leafeco A. fez geateg, amb alter
by his Deed the Xeffoy Voluit quod haberer & teneret terram. pro termino vitz fuz. & big ig
adindged by this berbe (volo) to bea go Confirmation fos terme of his life,Benigneenim fa-


ciendæ fant interpretationes cartarum propter fimplicitatem laicorum vt res magis valatquam —


percat.

And he to Whom fuch a Deed compztbenbing Dedi, &c. ig made, map plead if ag d Grant,
ag a Releaſe, o1 a8 a Confirmation at big election. 4 j
FE a Parlonand 2D zotnarp mae a Leafe for peares of the Wiebe to the Patrar , — the
a⸗


Lib.3. Of Confirmation. Seé.532.533.534; 302


‘Patron bp his Deed granteth tt oner, op if the Dilleiloz granteth a Went to the Wit
ifes, and be by bis Deed granteth te ouer, aud after resenter , (n both thefe cafes onc anb
she fame words Boe amouut botbto a Grant, aud toa Confirmation in tudgement of Lai of


ons and the fame thing, neres pereat. And (o tt is (f a Diſſeiſoʒ make a Reale Fos life, o1 a atte
án taíle, theremapnder to the XDiReifes tn fee, the Diſſeiſes bp bis Ded granteth over the res


apnbtr , the particular Cenant attopseth ,


the 1D í((Tetfes fall uot enter bpor the &mant fog


iit og ín tatle, £02 then be fnenib guoph bis ofone grant , Ibhich amennteb £e a arant of there


Gate, and a Confirmation alfo,


Sef.


¶ ITem ( ico leffaterre a bn

bome pur terme Dang , per

force De quel il eft en po(fef-
fion, ac, Ct puis (co face bn fait
@lup, ac. Quod dedi & conceffi,
&c. le Dit tette à auer put terme
De fabíe, ædeliuera a luy le fait,
ec. Dong; maintenant il ad eftate
en le terre pur terme De fa bie,


-—


532:


Lfo if I let landtoamanfor

tearme of yeares, by force

whereof hee is in poffeffion,
&c. and after I make a Deedto
him &c. Quod deat c concefsi, Gs.
the faid land to haue for tearme of
his life, and I deliuer to him the
Deed, &c. then prefently he hath
aneftate inthe Land for tearme of
his life.


€ HZ ts the irt Cafe wherein tbe Confirmation anb tbe fReleafe Dos agree, Sinbíg


euident anb needeth wo explication,


Se&ion. $33.


CET (i co Dieenlefatt, a a⸗
uec a tener a lup & a fes
bites de fon corps engendzes il
ad citate en fee taile, & MicoDie
enle fait, a auecatenecalupaa
fes beireg.ilab eftate en fee ſim⸗
ple, cat ceo bacca a luy per force
De confirmation Denlarger fon
eftate,


JA if I fay in the Deed, to
haue and to hold to him and
tohis heires of his bodie ingen-
dred, he hath an eftate in fee taile.
And if I fay inthe deed, to haue &
to hold to him and to his heires,he
hath an eftate in feefimple. Forthis
fhall enure to him by force of the
Confirmation to inlarge his eftate.


€ Bis alfo is euident anb nedeth no explication , fauing that Sobenfosner a Confire
T oxi doth (nlarge and gíue an effate of 3inberitance, thers ought te besapt oss
(ag Littleton here expꝛeſſe them) died for the fame,


Section 534.
Cl Tem a hom̃ foft Lfo ifa manbe dif- Vant al heire del
diſſeiſie et le diſ⸗ A ſeiſed, & the dif- € diffeifor dre. les


feiſoꝛ deuie feifle, et feifordie {eifed,& his semements paſſont per
fon heire eff eins per heirc isinby — voy de feoffmens. fu
59g 2


Lib.5.


21.H.7.34.5. Tl. (om 59.4.
yn WFimhs|Les safe.


"Pl. Cam. $9.4.

"PL. em. 140.in Brownings
vafe. 3. H.5.7. 13. H. 7.14.
13.€.4.4.4, 27.H.8.13,
Maé & 17. Eb. 339.


Lib.1fe.76, Braden. cafe,


39.2 ls. Dier.3 39.


C ap 9.

the land ſhall ence gaffe from
him that hath the ftare of the
land inbim, As if Ccity que
vie ane his feoffes after the
Sptatuce of 1.2.3, and before
the Statute of 27.H.8, cap.
10. had topned tn a Feoffment,
it [bail be the feoffment of the
Feoſteos, becaufe the Kate of
the land wag tn him.

So it is (€ the Cenant £o?
life, anb he tn the rematnder
02 reuerGon tn fe ioyne in a
feoffinent bp Dede, The
Liuery of the trechold fail
mouc from the Lellæ, and the
inheritance from him in the
reuerfion o? remainder, from
each of them accozding to big
cftate. for it cannot be abs
{udged bp Law, that the
fcoffment of Œenaut foz life
both drawe tbe reuerfion 02
temaínocr ont ef the dleflos
ozbimin remainder, o? doth
Swozke a Wong becaufe thep
topneb together,

FE there bee Œenant foz
life, the rematnder in tape,
the remainder in taple, dc,
and Genant Fo life and he im
theremainder in taple leup a
Fine, this is no diſcontinu⸗
ance 9; deueſting of anp c
flatc ín. rematnder, but each
of them paffc that which they
baue power and authority to
palfe.

A: Œenant foz life the vez
mainder to B. Foz life, tbe vez
mainder tn taple,the remains
berto the right hetres of B.
A-andB (opne tn a Jjreoffs
ment by Deeb, albeit ít map
be fato that this is the fcoffz
ment of A. and the Œonfir=
mation of B. andconfequent=
lp bee in the rematnder in
taple cannotenter foi the £o;
feiture During the life of B.
PutbecaufeB topnidin the
Feoffment Which Wag tozrct=
ous to him ín tbe remainder
fn tatle, and is Particeps cri-


minis, therefoze they fozfetted both their eftates,
fe? the fosfetture. Wut tf be in tbe reuerfion ín foe
bv parol, this fhall be ( ag fomc hold ) firft a forr
then the fcoffment of him tn the Keuerſion, for 0
Leflee then he in the renerfion might enter fo? th


Of Confirmation:


difcent.et puis le Dif-
ſeilee a heire le Dif-
feifoz font tointment
bn fait abn autet en
fee ct liuery De leiſin
fur ceo eft fait (quant
al beire le diſſeiſor,
que enfealatt le fait )
leg teneméts paffont
et tont per mefme
le fait p bop De feoff:
ment, et quant al
diſſeiſee que enfealatt
mefme le fait, ceo ne
beera fínon p boy de
confirmation. Mes
fi le diſſeiſee en cett
cag port briefe Den-
treen E Peret( uien-
uers lalience Del beit
le Diffeifoz, Quære c0=
mẽt tl pledza cel fait
enuers f Deinandant
per boy de confirma:
tion,zc, €t Caches
mon fits,q ef bn des
pluig honozables,
laudables et profita-
bles chofes en noftre
ley, De auer le fcience
De bien pleder en ac-
tions reals et petfo-
nals, et pur ceo teo
top counfaile efpecí-
alment De mitterton
courage et cure B ceo
appzender,


valeat ) fhalibeconftrned moft ftronalp agatuft bimfcife,
And (t (a to be obfernedthat Littleton bere putteth a bífcent, fo as tbeentríe of the 3Dileifog —


{8 not lasofull,


tothe land, and make iLinerp,


Grmation o£ the 3Di(Teifoz,


Se 534.


and after the diffeifee, |
and the heire of the
diffeifor make ioyntly
a Deed to another in
fee, and liuery of fei-
fin ismade vpon this,
(As to the heire ofthe
diffeifor that fealed |
thedeed)the teneméts
doe paſſe and enure by
the fame deedby way
of feoffment, and as
tothe diffeifee who
fealed the fame Deed,
this fhall enure but by
way of confirmation,
But if the diffeifee in
this cafe brings a writ
of entrie in the Per
and Cwi againft the a-
lienee of the heire of
the diffeifor. Qware
how he fhall plead this
Deed againft the de-
mandant by way of
confirmation,&c. And
know my fon that it is
one of the moft hono-
rable, laudable & pro-
fitable things in our
law to haue the fci-
ence of well pleading,
in actions reals & per-
fonals, and therefore
Icounfaile thee efpe-
cially to imply thy
courage and care to
learne this.


amb be (n tbe remainder im taile might enter
and Œenant for itfeiopne in a Feoſtment
ender of the eftate of Œenant for life, and
ther wite tf the whole hhould pañe from the -
efozfetture, and euery mangad(Vtres magis ——


for (f the Diffeifoz and 3D ifleifee topne in a Charter ef fcoffiment, andenter ine
(t fpall be accounted tbe feofinent ofthe Didleiſee amo the cons


Quare


Lib. Of Confirmation,
€ uere coment il pledera ceft fait &c.


sens of the heireot the Diſſeiloz, andthe Confirmation ot the Widsiler ag (t hath beene plcaz
Bed anb alloted,


€ Es faches mon fits, quecft un de plais honorable, cc. Tete ig tobe
ebfcrueb the excellencp of god pleading, and Littletons graud aduice, that tbc ſtudent ſhould
fmplop bis courage and care fo? the attatning thereof : Sobích bee ball attaine onto bp thre
meanes ; Sirk bp reading, Secondip bp obferuatten, and thirblp by bfc anb exercife, Foꝛ is
antient time the Seriants and Bppzentices of Law did draw tbcír otonc pleadings, which
EN foem god pleaders. Bnd in thts fence Placitum may be dertued A Placendo, quia omni-
us Placet.
- 0 feing god pleading ts fo honourable anb excellent, anb that manp a god caufe is
Baily loft for want of geod and ojbcrip pleading, ít ts neceſtarp to fet Downe fome few tules
C among many ) of the fame, to facilitate this learning, that ts fo highly commended to tbe
fudtous reader. Foꝛ when | Diligentlp conffder tbe courfe of our bakes of peatcs and termes
from che beginntug of the raigne of E.3. 3 obferue, that moze tangling and queſtions growe
bpon the manner of pleading, anderceptions to fozme, then bpon the matter tt felfe, and
ftünite Caufes loft o; delayed for Want of gwdpleadiug, Eherefore ít isa neceflirp part
of a * common Lawyer to bea go Pzothonetarp. And now wee will perfozme our
paomtfe,
Œ be order of gad pleading ts to be obferned, Which being inverted great pretudice map grow
$0 the partic tending to the fubucrfion of Law. Ordine placitandi feruato, feruatur & jus,&c.
Fick in geod oder of pleading aman mult pleade to the (nrífoítton of the Court. Sez
condly to the perfon, and therein fitit to the per fon of the Plaintife, and then to the perfon of
the Defendant. Œbirdip to the Count. Fourthly to the Wait, Fiftly to tbe Action, ec,
(a) Which order and forme of pleabíng pou fbali reabe in the ancient Authors agreable to
the Lave at this vay, andit the Defendant mifozoer anp of thefe, bee loſeth the benefit of
thebarreto the Count, ec. and


the former.
' X ye Count muft be agræable and conforme to tbe wozit, the
indgement to the Count, foz nonc of them mutt be narrower 02 broader than the other.

B Count oz Declaration, Which anctentip and pet (g called Narratio ought to contame two
things, (b) viz. Certainty and Ucrity, foz that ít (s the foundation of the fuite, wyereunto the
Aduerſe party mul anfwer, and Mhereupon the Court is to gine his tudgement : (c) Certa
debet effe intentio & narratio, & certum fundamentum, & certa res quz deduciturin judicium.
Wut it muft be vnderſtod that there be the kinde of Gertainties ; Firſt toa common intent,
and that ts fufficicnt in a barre which ts to Defend the party and to excuſe him. (d) Second:
lp a certaine intent ingenerall, ag in Counts, BReplicattons, and other vicadings of the
Milatntife, that is to connince the Defendant, and foin Andttements,e¢c. & irl, a certaine
intent in every particular, ag in Eſtoppells.

(c) ie pleadeth a plea tn abatement of the wꝛit ( Which of anctent times was,
tallied Breuc ) Gz a plea after tbe latter continuance ought to plead it certainip,

CF) Cheanctent formes of Counts are to be duly obferued, ag Cum dimifit, o$ Cum de.
dir, and not to fay, thar he Was feifed, aud demiſed, ec ( And pet tf he fap fo, it maketh not
the Count bitious ) (e) but in a barre replication oz other kinde of pleading, the partie mut
alledge a feifin in the LReflez 02 Donoz, and ancient formes of pleading arc alfo tobe eb ferued,

Ch) Counts, oz ſuch as betn nature of Counts (as an Auowꝛie wherein the Defendant
ig an 20802 ) ned not to be aberred, but all other pleag in tbe JY firmatíue ought to be auerred,
Et hoc parati cft verificare,&c. but pleas meerelp in the Negatiue ougbt not tobe auerred be⸗
cauleanegatiue cannet be pzoucb.

C 1) wheretherets but one Cenant o) one Defendant, he cannot iue two
each of them doe gos te the whole, but Where there ave diners, each of them may pleabc fence
tall pleas which extend to the hole.

(k) Chat which is alledged bp Way of connepance o2 inducement to the ſubſtance of the
Matter need not to be fo certatnip alledged, as that which is thefubftance tt felfc,

C1) Guerp pica mut be direct, and not bp wap of argument, o2 rehearfall. |

(m) there a matter of Recoꝛd tg the Foundation o2 ground o£ tbe fuite of the 191aintife,oz
of the {ubsftance of the plea, there it ought tobe certainlp and truly alledged, othersmife ít is,
Where it is butconucpance, Wut tbe proceadings and fentences (n the Ecclellaſticall Courts
way be alledged fammartlp ag that a Dinozce Was had betSwenefuch parties, fo fuch a caufe,
and before fuch a Judge, and Concurrentibus hijs quz in jure requiruntur, fes the Judge muũ
be alledge>, tothe intent the Court may Site to him if (t be denied,

Qm matter muft be pleaded in gad forme, ín apt time, and in due oder, 67 otherwiſe great
aduantages map be loft,
Gogg 3 (n) General}


Hee map pleade the feo:


and pet ts


fuch pleag, as


Sect. x34.


303
aaa


Seem "refaet to the $5
"Beoke of m) Reports.


(a) BraËlon, lib, 55. 409;
Britten, fo, 4 i.a © 132.


Vid. isi, S-fe.120.121,
(e) Bra&on lib. a. fo. 140,


(d) Lif.s.120.111.

Lenis cafe. PL Cow, $6.
Wimbifbos cafe,

(c6)7.H 6.17. 33.H.6.13.15
Pl. (ems, 334.
(D 34.H.6.48. 8 H.s,4. E;
21.E 4.52 5. E. 3.15.
39.H.6.3. 10.H.6.a,
21.H 7.26.

(8) 48.€.3,8. 2. M. 4.11.
6. H. 4. a.b 10. E. 4,2,

F X. B. 156.c.

1I. E. 3 Aide 32° 9.H.6.59.
10.E.4.4.

(h) Fi Con. Bretscafe ,3 45.
37./.3.37. 27 H 6 9.H.7,
(1) 49.E.3.31.32.35.

4U É.3.11. 9 H.6.46.
27.E.3.81. 44.E, 3.23.

45 8.3. Double plia 39.

Ay 5.3.21. 36. H.6,39.
37. H. 6 13.33. H. 6.51,

1§ E.4.25. 7.H.4.12
41.€ 3. "Double pleang.
(k) Pl €om 81. 11.4, 4.85
34. H 6.48. 19.R.3.

Adi⸗ fv le cafe 53.
22-€.3.19. 30.E 3.9.

(1) 5-H 7.8. 6.E.4.3.
MP mete
22.4.6. 19.€.4.7.
22.E.4.8. : ^

(m) 771, (wm é6g.a.b. &
160. 376. 419. 22. h. 6, 38
19.H.6.49. 37. H. 6. 14.

36. H.6.5. 21. E. 4. 54.
11.H.6.15. 38.H.6.23.

42. Aff. 1. 48.2.3. 11.
4.E.4.12. 9.Ë.3.46.
31.6.4. 52. 55.H 6.35.
16.H.7.9.15. 11, H, 5.8,
83.E.2.2. 34. H.6.37.
13.H.8. 5-6. 7. E.4. 33.
9,E.4.24. B.B. 4.31.
8..4f29. 5. E, 4.70,
3.6.4.1.


Liks (ap.9. Of Confirmation. Sell.534.


H6 3 9 31.84.91 enetall eftates in fes Qinple map be generallp alledged, but the commencement of E⸗

n5 * » hey a at aid e anb other ded tates reguiarip mutt be been, vnleſſe in fome cafes Sobere

* vef 2 thep are alledged bp wap of inducement , and the life of & mant in Œafle,op fo) iife,ought to be

— 6 auerred.

CE ViSeB193.3.H.6.47 — o) toben anpfpeciall and fabttantiall matter (s alledged bp either partie, that ongbt tobe

41.E.3.32. 9. fg. efpecíally anfzoeteb, and not to be palled ouer bp a generall pleading.

Nis. iEn (p) Che ica of euerle man ball beconftrned (trengip agatntt pira bat pleabetb it Foy cues

| 2 EE 5 — UR tie manis » efumed te make the beft of his owne cafe: Ambiguum placitum interpretari dcbet
(p)EH73. aere. (a) Œuerie pica that a man pleadeth ought to be triable, foa Soítbent tríall tbe caufe cam ree

14H44. 27-H.6.8.6. celue no ends Et expedit reipublice vt fit finis litium.

M arae — (0) Che Conant befowbía delauit taued, map plead all Pleas Tobích prone the toate abateb,

iQ tes Dry giis. aS death, Gc. op matters apparans in the vo zft, bnt ne Plea, which proue (t abateabie as taking

Line. (Col. osfa, of bufbanb,tt. :


(q) 33 E4.40 3.3. (f) tohen a man {9 antheztfed tà b66 anp thing by the Common Lato,bp —⸗
— m on, Ac of Barliament, 0; by Cultome, be ougbt to purfue the fub(tance and effec of the fame
(1) 4o.E. 3.40. 43.46. accordingly,

41.8£.3.3, 18.€.3.16. (t) Aũ neceſſarie circumſtances tmplied bp Lao tn the Plea need not to be expzeſſed, ag (n


36.3.68. 42.£.3.3-19-46 tbe plea of a Feoſtement of a Mannoʒ Linesie anb Ættoznement are tmplicd,

E CE (u) tobena Count, Barre, Replication, ac. (8 defectine tn refpect of omiff{on of fome circum⸗

zi, a: 1 EE. et ' — ftanceas time,place,ec.therett map be made gud by the plea of the abucrfe party;but if (tbe ine

7: H.7.3- fufficient (n matter, itcannot be ſalued.

(0) 10.E,43. 27.H.648. Cw) Œnerie man fhall plead fuch pleas ag are pertinent for him, accosding to the qualitis of
— dere bis cafe;eftate;o2 tntereft,ag Dilleiloꝛs, Cenants, incumbentes, D zdinaries,and the like,

— Lie 33e (x) Surplafage tall neuer make the ica dicioug,but where it is contraríant to the mate

PL. (em.79. 16.E.4.10, ter before.


ee ay AM (y) That which (g apparant tothe Court by neceffaríc collection out of the Becoꝛd neede
etii. ni. notto beaucrred.
35.B.3.50.b. 23-4] (a)# man (g bound to performe all the conenants in an Indentute:it all the conenants be


2. Eli( "Dier.184. ‘ in the DHirmatine, he may generally plead perfoxmance of all, but (£ anp be in the negatine,tofo
(t) Pl.Com.i494.6 1054 many be mult plead {pcctallp( fos a negatiue cannot be perfoymeb ) and to the reſt generallp.(b)


2 cs So fF any bein the nitancine,he mui che Sohich of them be hath performed. o (f anp ate to
[t SHARE Hz,  btbontof Recozv,he mult fbeto that fpecíalip,anb cannot inuoiue that in general pleading.
35.H.6.17.18.19. (c) 3n manp cafes the Law doth allow generali pleading , for auopbing of paolírítíc anv


18.E.3.34. Pl.(om.219-b- tebteufne(Tean that tbe particular Mall come on theother fide. ;
Lib. 8.1 33.Turwerr. cafa. (d) Pleadings Which amount to the generall Iſſue ote not toberallexotb , bnttbe generali
dd. istam Pitueis to be entered, Vi.Scét.1 0.48 $-499.

(x) 19.H.6. 39.13. (c) €ueríc plea ought to have his proper € onclufion, ag a Plea to the wꝛit to conciube ta
Pl. Com.r32.b.0 fol.sea- — tbe toit, a Plea in Warre to conclude tothe Action, an Gltoppel to relie byon tbe C ffoppelg,Ec


per Die & 503. fic de fimilibus.

qe hl aed a : "(f ) toben the Conclufion of a Plea, Et iffintEt fic, is the aſtirmatiue, ft (ball not waiue the

iiid. li.ife1g4. fpecíall marter,foz there the fpccíal matter (s tbe fubffance e founvation of theconcinfon , and

ete ans geese firmed by thefame, Wut Where the concladon is in the negating, there the fpectall matter ree

2)21.H.7.15.4 17-9-12-19-% aularip (8 weiued.

aE Irene 1 (g) tohenfoeuer fpectall setter ie risen, anb the Concinfion (Et fic) ($ to the popnt of the

ér fo.120. Benbamni fe. tozit 02 Action, the fpecfall matter is watued.

Lib.9.2 5.61. Li. 16.100, Ghe names o£ legall Recoꝛds are, a 102ít,a Count, a Barre, a fveplícatíoma Kelopnber,a

erigi. MEE PCIE FERE inertie dé yog dc motte ui, NN
EAE ars aH. KA (1) New and ſubtill denices and inventions of pleading "n

— reu. oen. bane — (ree pt RS

14.14,H,8.34,7 2.3.13. e Count o2 Declaration (S an cx t > D

bs r D ONT neceflarte circumſtances, that the fame map betriable,and anp imperfection in tbe Count doth

| Haga, abate the weit.

BOA ie ad Pleadings are dintbedinto Barres, TReplicationg,iBelopnberg , Hurretopnder¥, Bebate

3. El. Dy.184. ters, anb Surrebutters,ec. Shep are Words of Srt,and arccalleb Warres, Barrz, fo called bee

(£) Pl.Cam — ——* cauſe (t barreth the Diainttfe of bis Baton. Replicationes, a Replicando Reiunctiones, à Re-

49.2. Pu x nd "^ J iungendo, Rebutter, of phe French woꝛd Rebouter, i. à Repellendo, Œo put Backeos auopb, and

vey ape a£... (006 Spurvedueter,

42. 22.2.3.13.39-4.6a5. But each partie maft take heed of the ordering of the matter of bis pleading, left bis Repii⸗

FT MR kr depart from his Count, o2 bis Retoynder from bis nr & E: — s catia |

37.H.8 12.6. i)Fnantient toziters a War tg calleb Exceptio peremptoria, & iReplication was }

nf PA pe Replicatio, ag new tig: a Mefopuder, Triplicatio ; a Surrelopudet, Quadriplicatio, & fic vl-

(0v. $28. 48 5. terius in infinitum.

(Y BraG. ls, s. f^, 400. 3

Eke), l 6.02.37,


Lib. Of Confirmation. Seil.534..


+ 28 departure in pleading ts fapd to be when the fecond Plea containeth mattcr not purfyent
to his former, and Which Coztifictl) not thefame, andthereupon (tig calied Deceflus, becanfe
he Departcth from hts fozmer 13162, and therefore Whenfoener the Retoynder ( taking one exam⸗
plefoz atl) containcth matter fubfequent to ihe matter of the Warre , and not fortifping te
fame, this is regularly a departure, becauſe it leaueth the former, and gectb to another matter,
219 finan Mie the tenant picada difcent frombhts father, giueth acolour,the Demandant
tntituleth bimfelfe b» a Jreoffement from the Cenant bimfeife, the Plaintife cannot fap, Chat
that Jreoffement Mas bpon Condition, and to thew the Condition broken , foz that Hould be
à cleere departure from his Barre, bccaufe tt contatneth matter “ublequent. Wut in an Al⸗
fife, i£ the Tenant pleadeth tn Barre, Chat 1.5. Was fetfed and infeoſſed him, tc.and the platn=
tife ſheweth, Chat be bimfelfe was fetfeo in Se, ontillbp I.S. diſſetſed, who infeofted the Qr e-
nant, and he recentred,the Defendant may plead areleafe of the 391aíntife to L.S. for this doth
foztifie the Warre.

Fa man picad performance of Couenants, anb the Plaintife replie, Chat hee did not fuct)
an act accoꝛding to his Coucnant, the Defendant faith, Chat he offered to doc it,and the plaine
tife refufed tt, this ts a departure becaufe the matter is not purfuant,fozit (6 onething,to do a
thing, andanother to offer to doe tt, and the other refuled to Doc (t : therefore that fhould haue

besne pleaded in the former Plea. Vide & caue tii a Quare impedit, what 49'ca lhall bee fatelp
pleaded in primo placico.

toben a man in his former Plea pleadeth an effate made by tbe Common Law , in the fez
cond lea regularly he Hall not make it go bp an Bd of Parliament. So wher in his £025
mer Plea he tntitulctt himfelfe generally bp the Common Law, tn big fecond 191ea bec (ball
not enable htmfelfe by a Cuſtome, but Mould haue pleaded (t rit,

Ffaman picadan cltate generaily, (as foz example a freoffement tn Free) hee inhis fecond
Pica all not maintatn tt bp other matter tantamount ín La, ag bp a Difleifin and Weleafe,
91 bp a Leafeand Kelealſe, o2 a gift in Œaile in Barre, andinthe fecond Plea a KRecouerie tn
brine, fo; this ig a Departure : buthe tn thet cafe Hall count of a gift, and maintaine (t in his
Replication bp a Recouerie in value, becaufe he could haue no other Count,

Se moje ot this matter, Where the Dlaintife barping from time og place alledged in the
count of Acions tranfitozte, (ball commít no departure,

Che Plea that containes duplicitic o2 multtplicítícot diftinc matter to one & the fame thing,
Swhereuntofencrall anſwers (admitting cach of them to begod) are required, ts not allowable
in Law, Bnd this rule pou fe extendethto Pleas perpetual o2 peremptorte,and not to Pleas
Dilatozie, for in their time and place a man map vſe diuers of them, andhercof antient Weiters
*fpeake notably ; Sicur Actor vna A&ionedebet experiri faltem i!la durante , fic oportet tenen-
tem vna exceptione, dum tamen peremptoria (quod de dilatorijs non eft tenendum ) quía (i lice-
ret pluribus vti exceptionibus peremptorijs fimul & femel ficut fieri poterit in dilatorijs (ic feque-
retur,quod (iin probatione vnius defecerit ad aliam probandam poffit habere recuríuh quod non
eft permiffibilesnon magis quam aliquem fe defendere duobus baculis in duello,cum vanus tantum
fufficiar.

Wut Where the Cenant 02 Defendant may plead a gencrall Iſſue, there bpon the generati
^j (iue pleaded, he may give tn eutbence ag many diſtinct matters tobatretbe Action o2 right of
the Demandant 02 39lafütíte,ag hecan,

A {pectall Verdict map containe Double o2 treble matter, and therefore inthole cafes the Cea
nant o2 Defendant map either makechogce of one matter, and to plead tt to barre the Deman⸗
dant oꝛ Dlatntife, o1 to pleadthe gencrall Iſſue, amo to take aduantage of all, oz hee map plead
to part onc of the leas tn Warre,and toanotter part another 331ea; and hig conclufion of his
ica (hall auoyd vonblenefie, and bercbp neither the Court noꝛ the Furie ts fo much inuetg=
ied, as tf one Plea Mould contatue diners biftind matters. Bud if the Cenant make chopce of
One Pica in Batre, ano that be Connbagatnft hin, pet he map refozt to an Action of anhigh=
er natute,and takeaduantage of any other matter. And the Law tn this popnt ts by them that
bnderftand not the reafon thercof mifliked, faptng,Nemo prohibetur pluribus defenfionibus vti.

And it (8 woꝛthie of obferuation, Chat in the raignes of Edward the fecond, Edward the
firft,and bpwards, the Pleadings Were plain a fenctble, but nothing curious, euermoꝛe hauing
chiefe reſpect to matter, and not to formes of woꝛds, and Were often holpen With a Quefitum
eft, and then the queiltong moued by the Court, and the anl wers by the parties Sere alfoen-
trod into the Bolle. But eun in thofe dayes the formes of the Kegiſter of oꝛiginall Hozite

erethen punctually obferueb, and matters {n Law excellently debated and reſolued, and
Spbetc anp areat difficultte was, then it Was refolyed by all the Judges and Sages of the La
— matters in Law called Concilium Regis ) and their aſſemblie and refslution

entredinto the Rolle. Be for crample, In the great cafe in a Quare impedit , bet&veene

dhe Ting and the Prior of Worceſter, concerning an Dppzopziation, Whether it wers Woste
maine, the Recoꝛd faith, Ad quem diem venit przdiétus Prior per Attornatum fuum, &c. Et
examina-


/


304


39-E.3.13.6.39.H.6.1 9.
6.H.7.8. 21.H.6.32.

Pl. em 105.1..Mar, Dier gs
38.H,8.thidews, 2 1.


6.H.5.3.5. H.6.Deparme.a


8.ELDy.353.23. El. Di.age
6.£03.3.40,E.3032. 43, 6.3.
1I. 1, E.M. 4. 18.E.4.24.
S-H:7,217.8.H.6.11.33.H,6
14 \


PL. Cora.10 5.5, Fulvserflono
cafe, 21.H.7,25. 27.H 8.3.
21,H.7.17.37.H,6.5.

38. H.6.1 s. i


31. H.7. 35,1. E.4. 4.
3.8.7. 5. 3. H. 7.2.


V.SeB. 48g.


*P1,Com.139.143,


* Flee.li, 6.22. 36.
Brak li. 5. fo. 400,


17. E.3.73.


33. 6.296


Hil 32,E X (er. Rez.in fra
Reig.


— —


Lib.5-


(3) Ockamfe.17.


(b) "Pafch.s .R.x. Cor.Rege,


(c) 1. H.3 Rot. pat,
Brad. fepe.

(à) Bratt fers.
(6) 8.6.5. 31.


(£) Ret.pat. 34. H.3.

(£g) Liber eius de Legibus
axtat feript temp. EY.
(h) Rot.Pat iz E. 2.


12.43.


© 36, E,3.ca.1 5.46, E, 5.21.
‘Dy.299.Li 8.fe.161.
Ls.ro.fo.131.


Ls. to.fe 88. P I, Cem.411.


Cp-9- Of Confirmation. Seël.535.


examinatis & intelletis recerdo & proceífu coram toto concilio tam thefaurario & Baronibys
de Scaccario,quam Cancellario, ac ctiam Iufticiarijs de vtroque Banco infpecta cauſ⸗ jpro qua,pro
Domino Rege dicunt,quod ad ipfum Regem pertinet præfentare,&c. confideratum eft, &c. fox
in thofe dayes, though the Chancelloz and Œrcafurer were £o? the mok part men of the church.
pet Mere they expect and learned in the Lawes of the 18 calme:

Bs fo) example, in the time of the Conqueroz, Evelricus Epifcopus Ciceftrenfis vir antiquifli-
mus, & in Legibus fapientiffimus, ag elſewhere Jhaue fapp,

(a)Nigellus Epifcopus Elienfis Hen. 1.Thefaurarius in temporibus fuis incomparabilem habuit
Scaccarij Scientiam, & deeadem fcripfit optime.

(b) Henricus Cant. Epifcopus, H.Dunelm Epifcopus, Willielmus Elienfis Epifcopus. G. Rof-
fen{.Epifcopus.

(c) Martinus de Patefhul Clericas Decanus diui Pauli Londoñ conftitutus fuit capitalis lu»
ftic' de Banco, quia in legibus huius Regni peritiffimus.

(d) Wilfus de Raleigh Clericus Iufticiarius Domini Regis.

(e) Iohannes Epifcopus Carlienfis tempore H.3.

Robertus Paffclewe Epus Ciciftrenfis temporc H.3.

(f) Robertus de Laxintonio Clericus conftitutus capitalis Iuftic' de Banco.

(g) Iohannes Britton Epifcopus Hercford.

(h) Henricus de Stanton clericus, conftitutus fuit capitalis Tufticiarius ad placita with manp
others. And fo were diucrs and manp of tbe s2obilitte,who ben matters of great bifficulz
tie Herc bzoughe into the bpper houle of Parliament by 102(t of Erroz, Adtornnement, oz
Other 39arltamentarte courfe, did by the ailiftance of the reucrend Judges, who cucr attended in
that Court, tudge and determine thefame ag by fozmer and antíent Recoꝛds, and fpcctallp
bp thefapd Kecoꝛd of 5.R.1. Doe mantfefflp appearc , and therefoze the Loꝛds of ASaritament
ere called fo? thofe purpofes, Concilium Regis,and ltke to theafoze mentioned recogd there be
verte many.

In theraigne of Edward the third, Pleadings grew to perfection both wit hout lamencTe, and
curiofitic, £02 then the Judges and 3920feffozg ofthe Las iwere excellently learned, andthew
knowledge of the law flourifbed, the fericants of the Law, ¢c. Dico their owne pleadings, and
therfoze trulp fato that reverent juſtice Thirning, tn the ratane of H.4. thatin the time of Ed.3,
the Law was in a higher Degree than (t had bene anp time befoze ; fo» (faith he) before that
time the manner of Pleading was but feble in comparifon ofthat tt was afterward in the
ratgne of the fame thing.

In the time of Henne thefictthe Judges gaue a quicker eare to Exceptions to Piecadings,
than etther their Pꝛedecellors did, oz the Judges in the raigneof Edward chefourth, when dur
Author flourithed, o2 fince that time haue done, aiuing no way to nice Exceptions.fo ong a8
the ſubſtance of the matter were {ufficiently Hewed. And as in the ratgne of King Edward
the third,bp an Act of Parliament * itis pzoutded, Chat Counts oz Declarations ſſould nof
abatcfo long ag the matter of the Acton be fully ſhewed inthe Declaration and tort, fofince
out Duthoz W2ote, in the ratgne of Queene Elizabeth pꝛouiſion (g made, Chat after Demure
rev the Judges (ball gine tudgement according to the right of the canfe and matter th Law,
Without regarding any imperfection, defect, o2 Want of forme in any Wꝛit, Ketoꝛne, Paint,
Declaration, 92 other pleading o2 courfe of proceeding &obatfoener , cxcept fuc) ag the partie
bemurríng ſhall ſpecially hew, Jn whitch At, Appeaics and Finditments of Felony, Mura
der, 02 Œreafon concerning mans life,and the forfeiture of his lands andDgads , arc excepted,
Bn excellent anb a profitable Law concurring with the Wifedom and iudgment ofantient and
latter tines, that auc diſallowed curious e nice exceptions tending to the ouerthꝛow o1 delap
of juſtice, apices juris non funtjura: pet (t 18 good foz a learned pzofelloz to make all things plain
€ perfect, ¢ not to truft to the after atd 0; amendment, bp Force of any frat left his Citents caufe
matcheth not therewith ; and ag it is in 39 bpfiche for the health of a mans bodie, ſo (t is in re⸗
medies fop thefafette ofa mang caufe, In La, Praftat cautæla quam medela.

Wut now let bs returneto our Author,


Seélion 555.536.517.


€ E fí fopent Seignioz et À Líoittherebe lord & tenant,
Œenant.mefque le ſeignior albeit the Lord confirme then
confirma leftatequeletenat eftate which the Tenaunt hath
adenles tenements, bncoze le inthe Tenements, yet the Seig-
Deigniorte eutierment Demurt nioric remaineth entire to the
ale


Lib3. . Of Confirmation, Se.536.5347.538.


ale Sfircome il fuit abeuant,


Lord as it was before.


Set, 536.
€E Nmeſme le manner ett, & TN the fame manner is itifaman
Home ad bn vent charge À hatha Rent charge out of cer-


hors de certein terre, a él confit:
ma leftate que le tenant ad en la
terre, bncoze demurt ale confit:
moz le cent charge,


Sec,


€r 2 mefine le manner eft, (
bu bone ad common de
patture en auter terre, fil con-
firma eftate De le tenant De la
terre, vien Departet Delup De fou
commod, meg cco ment obftant
le common Demurt à Iup com

fuit adeuant,


taine Land, and hee confirme
the eftate which the Tenant hath
in the land, yet the Rent charge re
maynethto the Confirmor:


337^


[D the fame manner it is if a mari
hath common of pafture in other
land , if he confirme the eftate of
the Tenant of the Land nothing
fhall paffe from him of his Com-
mon, but notwithftanding this,the
Common fhall remayne to him as
it wasbefore,


€ Ere is the (ist Cale Wherein the Releale and Corifirmation doe differ, fo? bp the re=
Hi of the Seigniory, Kent charge 0? Common areectind. And fo thefethze Ses
tions be cuident and need no explication, fauing that fome doc gather bpon thele two


lat Sections and tbenect enfuíng , that a man cannot abꝛidge a Went charge o? common Pas
Cure bp a Confirmation as he may doc a Rent SHernice inrefpect o£ the priuitp betwee the
Lord and Tenant,foas (fap they) atenure may bee abꝛidged bp a Confirmation, but not a
Kent charge ez Common: and therefoze Littleton beginneth the noct Section Sith an Ads
uerbe abucrfatiue, viz. (mes bat) &c, But aman may releafe part of hig Rent charge, 02


Common, 3€,


€ €s i fotent
M Santo: €
tenant, Ie quel tenãt
tient De fon Seig⸗
nioz perle fernice Dc
fealtie & 2o.9, tent,
file Seignioz pet
fon fait confirma Ic-
ftatcietenant, a te⸗
Her per 12. D, ou per
bn Denier, ou per vn
maile, en ceft cate le
tenant eft difcharge


Seil. 538.


Vtifthere beLord

and Tenant which
Tenant holdeth of his
Lordby the feruice of
fealtie, and 20. fhil-
lings rent, if the Lord
by his Deed confirme
the eftate of the Te-
nant to hold by 12.
pence or by a penny,
or by ahalfe penny. In
this cafe the Tenant is


difcharged . of all the
bybb


€ ND the teafom
Swherefoie ne feruice
. of another cannot
be referges bponthe Confirs
mation ig, becaufe as long ag
the Kate of the Land contís
nuctb ít cannot by the Gon
firmation of tbe Hed bee
tharged Soith anp new fers
nice, Seas it (a cuident that
the 1020 by his Confirmati=
on may dtminthh anb abztoge
the feruices , but te re
bpon tbe Confirmation neo
fctuiceg he cannet,folong as
the former effate tu the Gea
nencte- Continneth. And as
Myers a Confirmation doth
inlarge


305


28.£.3.92.93 86.4/7-37.
6.Els?. Deer 230,5.7,E. 4.
25.4. 31. E. 4.62. per Briame
Ag. E. 3.8 aM owrie 100.


Lib.3.


7.E.3.19. 20.3.3.18. 6.


4.3.19.


4.£, 3.19. 9.E.3.1. 13.2.4,


11. 16.8.3. fines 4.
6. Eliz. Dier 23e.


L 4


Branton fel.57.177.40.E.3,
31.47.48.18.2.3.36.


go. A. 6.1 4. H.4.8.


1 3X. 3 f auwrie Bg.
Nese Eum Fsizb.


(4p-9-


Of Confirmation,


ia


Seil.539.


inlargean etatetniand,there De touts leg auters other Scruices , and
—— — ſeruices a ne vendra fhall render nothingto
a Confirmation doth abge rien a le Seignioz, the Lord, but that
teratces there ought tobe H^ fovfos ceo Get coms which is comprifed in

And thercfope here Liu Pelle Deing meſme le the fame Confirma-
UM pas e e en Confirmation, uon.


there is gainitie, Bnd tberfoze tf tbere bc Lezd, Mefne and Cenant tbe 101b cannot confirma
the eftate of the Cenant to bolb of him by leſſer ſeruices, bnt this is boid , foz that there is mo
peiuity between them, anda Confirmation cannot make fuch an alteration of Œcnures.

Bnd the cafe in 4. E.5. maketh nothing agatntt thts eptnton,foz there thecafc in fubftance is
this, lohn de Bonuile held certaine Lands of Ralfe Vernon, and befoze the Statute of Quia
emptores terrarum, leuted a fine of the fame lands to the Abbot of Cogfall and bis Succef=
ſors to hold of the chtefe Loꝛd (which ag Ralfe Vernon) by the ferutces bue and accuſtomed.
Ralfe Vernon made a Charter tothe fato Abbot in thele words. Conceffi ctiam eidem Abbati
& facceforibus fuis relaxaui & quietum clamaui totum ius, &c. quod habeo, vel potero habete
in omnibus tenementis quz idem Abbas habet de dono Iohannis de Bonuile. Tenendum de me
& heredibus mcis in puram & perpetuam Elcemofinam. And adiudged that it Wasa godtes
nare (n Frankaimoigne, Which cafe pꝛoueth nothing that the Loꝛd Paramount may bp big
Confirmation to rhe Cenant perauatle extinct the Meſnaltie (ag ít is abztdged bp Ma⸗
fter Fitzherbert in the title o£ Confirmation, P1.3 1.) foa the tmmediate 31620 did rhere make che
fato Charter, and net anp 3070 Paramount, (And therefore (tí cucr god to relie bpon the
Woke at large, for many times Compendia funt difpendia, anb Meliuscft peterc fontes, quam
{eftari riuolos.) And of this opínton Swag Walter Plowden bpon god aduifemcnt anb cons
beratíon.

And ber ete the feuenth Cafe Wherein the Releafe and Confirmation doth agre, fos if therz
be Lord anb Gr cnant bp Fealtie anb twentie fillings rent, the 1010 may releaſe all his ught
in the Setantorp ozin the Cenancis faning fealty and ten thillings tent, but be cannot fauca
new kind of ferutce, fo bc map eſ well abstoge hts ſeruices vpona Releaſe ag bpon a Confirs
mation, Bndag there ts required pztuític oben the 3Loz0 abstdacth the ſeruices of bis Ces
nant by bis Confirmation: fo muft there be alfo, when the Lod bp bis Keleaſe absidacth che
feruices of bis Grenant, And therefeze the Loyd Paramount cannot releafe tothe Tenant
perauafiefaning tobítm part of bts ferutces, but the fauing in that cafe ts ton,


€ E: rendra rien a fon Seignior forfque ceo que eff comprife, Gta
Which words arc thus to be vnderſtood, thatthe Tenant hall not render anp moze Bent
02 annuall Seruice to the 1020 then tg containedin the Deed, but other things notsottb(tane
ding the (ato Confirmation the Conant hall peeld to the 3,020, as reltefe, apde pur file marier,
and apde pur faire fitz Chiualerjbecaufe thefe are incidents to the tenure that remapne,and (bail
not be difcharged Without fpectall $o0209, bp the generati words of allother Actions, Herute -
cesand Demands, And ſo if a man Dolo of mcbp Knights Serutce, Rent, Suite, ac. ana
J releate to him all mp riahtin the Seigniozy, excepting tbe Tenure br Knights Scrutce,
02 confirme bis eftate toheidof meby Knights Seruice onlp foz all manner of Serntees,
€racions, and Demands, Pet hail the Lozdhaue Ward, Marriage, Reltefe, Ayde pur file
marier, & pur faine fitz Chiualer, fo? thefe be incidents tothe tenurethat remapne. Wut itis
holven that (£a man make a gift in tatle bp Deed referuing two (bülinagrenta luy & fesheires
pro omnibus & ommimodis feruitijs exactionibus fecnlaribus & cunctis demandis, tf the Done
Die his heire of full age, tbe Donoꝛ (ball bane no velícfe, becaufc in tbe oztginall Deed of the
gift in taple tt is expꝛeſſely limited, that bp tbe Seruice of two fhillings Rent he fhailbe quite
of all Demands, (and Kelieke lieth in Demand) and by reafon of thofe Words faptheptbere
cannot any Keliefe become due, but Lome doc bold the contrary tn that cafe,


Sei. 539.


«LM Cs tile Seignior voile To Vt if the Lord will by his

— — B Deed of Confirmation that

que le tenant en cet cas Dott the Tenant in this cafe fhall yeeld
render i


Lib. 3. +
render a lup bu efperucr, ou bn
roſe annualment à tiel featt,ec,
cett confirmation eft boide, put
eco que tl referua a lup bu nouel
chofe que ne fuit parcel De fes
feruices deuant la confirmation,
&t iſſint le ſeignior poit bien pet
tiel confirmation abzidger les
fernices , per queue le tenant
tient De lup, mcg il ne poit refer=
uer a luy nouel ſeruices.


Of Confirmation.


Sec. 540.
to him a Hawke ora Rofe yearely
at fuch a feaft,é&c. this confirmati-
onisvoyde, becaufe he referueth
to him anew thing which was not
parcell of his feruices before the
confirmation, And fo the Lord
may well by fuch confirmation a-
bridge the feruices by which the
tenant holdeth of him, but hee
cannot referue to him new ferui-
ces.


¶ Thi⸗ vpon that which bath bone fatb before in the next preceding Section ig eutdent,


and needeth no farther explication,


Sedi. 54.0.


| Tem fi ſoit feignior, mete,
et tenant,et le tenant eft t
Abbe, que tient de mefne per cet-
taine fecuíce anmualment,le quel


nad afcun caute Dauer acquitäce -
enuers fon mefne, pur porter:


briefe De Meſne ac. en ceft cas, fi
lemefne confirma leftate d labbe
adenla terre, a auer et tener la
terrealuy eta fes fucceflozs en
franbalmoiqne,ac, en ceft cas Ie
confirmation eft bone, et adon-
ques labbe tiendza De k meſne ers
frankalmoigne. Et la caute eft
pur ceo que nul nouel feruice eft
veleruc car touts les feruices e⸗
fpecialment {pecifies font ex⸗
tincts,et nul vent eft referue al
mefne forfque que labbe tient De
luplaterre, et ceo fí(E il deuant la
confirmation car celup que tient
enfrankalmoigne, ne Doit faite
afcun co2po2ail ſexuice iſſint que
Her tícl confirmation il appéert,
que le metae ne reſerua a lup af-
tun nouciferuice, mes que les
tenements {erront tenus De Iup
come ceo fuit Deuant, Ct en "s

cafe


APS ifthere be Lord, Mefne,
and tenant,and the tenant is an
Abbot that holdeth of the mefne
by certaine feruices yearely, the
which hath no caufe to haue ac-
quitance aeainft his mefne for to
bring a writ of Mefhe,&c. in this
cafeif the mefne confirme the c-
ftate that the Abbot hath in. the
land, to haue and to hold the land
vnto him & his fucceffors in frank-
almoigne,or free almes,&cs in this
cafe this confirmationis good,and


‘then the Abbot holdeth of the


mefne in frankalmoigne : andthe
caufe is for that no new feruice is


referued, for all the feruices fpeci- .


ally fpecified bee extin&t, and no
rent is referued tothe mefne, but
the Abbot fhall hold the land of
him as it was before the confirma-
tion, for he that holdeth in frankal-
moigne ought to doe no bodily
feruice, fo that by fuch confirmau-
on itappeareth the mefne fhall not
referue vnto him no new feruice,
but that the lands fhall bee holden
of him as it was before, and in this


BDD 2


206.


Lib.3.


4-E.3.19. $8. X. 9.15.6.
the Lerd Wakei caf,
3e. K. 5. 5.

15.8.3. Confirmar.
4.£.3.19.39.
FN.B.136.h.6 9.
A.E.4. 35. 11.E.1.
Map ss.

11. E.3, Amewsie 10e.
$2 E.3,18.b. 3o.E.3.13.
16.1.3, 4nowsse 243.


4§.2.3,10. 30.8.6.
wi. barra so. Reciffrum 103.
1. H.6.cap. $-


Brooke (is. Property 38.


(2) BraFen lib. 2.99.6.

24 2,3.119. dsfcont.15.
43. E. 3.18. 40.2,3.17.

41. À.3.4. 9. E 4.38.

Die 1e. Ehit., Grewshes afi.


Cap.9.


cafe labbe auera bn baiefe De
melne, ſil foit diftretft en fon De-
fault per force De E Dit confirma
tion,lou per cate tine puiſſoit a=
uet bn bzíefe adenant,ec,


Of Confirmation.


cafe the Abbot fhall haue a writ of |
Mefne, if hee bee diftrained in his
default,by force ofthe faid confir-
mation, where percafe bee might
not haue fucha writ before.


Seël.sar.


auing feenethe former Mokes putteth bis cafe that tbe mefne max

C [-] $555 Conttmation to bolo in Frankalmoigne and not tbe Lord paramount.
€ Et enceft cafe labbe anera breife de mefne. Berets to be no⸗
ted, that bpon a Confirmationte hold im Freealmoigne there ipeth a wꝛit ef Meſne, albeit tg
caufe of acquitall begin after the Seignioz, And fo bpon fucha ConGrmation tbe Genant
Shall jane Contra formam fcoffamenti.


€ Ere is to bee obfer-
H ued a Diuerfitp bez

twane the caftobp
9t the bodp ef a tard Within
age, and a right of inberitance
in the bovp of a bilieine in
Grofle, foya man map be put
outof polleſſion o£ tbe cuftos
bie of hts ward but not of bis
billeine in grofle no moze then
aman can be o£ big pzifoner
Sobtch be hath taken in ar,

Allo of things that are in
grant,ag Rents, Commons,
anb theltke, ít is at the elects
Onof the party whether bee
Sul be dtMeifed of them oz
110, a9 fhall bee faid after in
bis proper place, But of a
bilictne in groffe he cannot at
all be piffeifed, (a) Non valet
confirmatio nifi ille qui con-
firmat fitin poffeffionc rei vel
iuris vnde fieri debet. cenfir-
matio, & codem modo ni(i ille
cui confirmatio fit fit in pof-
fcffione.

Bnd matcr(allp doth Little-
ton put his cafeofa Willeine
in aroffe, for of a tiilleine res
gardant to a Mannoꝛ, the
Lord may be put out of pofs
feflion, fo? bp putting bim out
of pefleflion of the Mannoz
Sobtch ig the principal, hee
may likewiſe bee put out of
ipoflc(Tion of the tilleine rec
gardant which ts but acceffo-
tp. And by the reconcrp of
the Mannoꝛ the villeine ts res
conered. ut (£anotber doth
take away my billeine ín


groſſe op regardant be gaineth no


Sed. $41.


Ci «Lem  teo fue
feifie Dun billets
come De billeine

en gros, et ou auter

lup prent hors De ma
pofleffion, enclaimat
lup Deftre fon billein
la ou il nauoít afcun
droit Dauer lup come
fon billein, ct puts
teo confirnta à luy le⸗
ftate que tlad € mon
billeine, ceft confir-
mation femble Loin,
puriceo que nul poít
auct poífeffíon De bu
home come de villeiũ
en grotfe,(i non celup
que ad Dzoit De lup
auct come fon billeíti
en groffe, Ct iſſint

entant que celuy à

que le confirmation

fuit fait, ne fuit feilie

De lup come de fon

dilleine ale temps de

confirmation fait,
tiel confirmation efi
boíD,


« A Lfoif I befeifei


of avilleine as of
a villeine in groffe,and
another taketh him
out of my poffeffion,
clayming him to bee
his villeinthere where
hee hath. no right to
haue him as his vil-
leine, and after I con-
firme to him the eftate
which hee hath in my
villeine, this confir-
mation feemeth to be
voide, for that none
may haue poffeffion of
aman as of a villeine
in groffe,but he which
hath right to haue
him as his villeine in
groffe. And fo in af-
much asheeto whom
the confirmation was
made, was not feifed
of him as of his vil-
leineatthe time ofthe
confirmation made,
fuch confirmation is
voide.


pofelion of him. And this doth wellappearedp the tose of


Natiuo habendo, foj that topit (s mot bzougbt agatnt any perfon (n certaine ( becaufe mo mam


tan


I


given aremedp again the Song borr, as the Lak Doth inthe cafe of a tard,
Pow fleeing it doth appeate by our Bokes (2) ( andby Littleton bimfcife by implication
fpeaking onlp of a billefne ín groffe ) that if a man be bí(feifeb of th


But Sobere the cntrie of the diffetie is iawwfull, he

map ſeile the Willeine regardant, 03 pasfent to the Bonowfon, ac, beloꝛe be enter into the 9ipan-

wd MY (t (8 where bis entrisis not la&vfnil, ano fo arc the ancient Buthozs (b) tobe
eb,


Se®. 542.


€ Mése celt cag, RY in this cafe if


fitiels parolg
fueront en le fait,ac.
Sciatis me dediffe &
conceffiffe tali,&c. ta-
lem villanum meum,
ceft bone, mes ceo b=
rera per force et bop
De grant et nemp per
bo» De confirmati=
On, eC,


€. 5 Taccun toits ceux berbg
Dedi & conceffi , Heeront


thefe words were
inthe deed,&c, sciatis
me dediffe & conceffiffe
tali, &c. talem villanum
meum this is good, but
this ſhall enure by
force and way of
grant, and not by way
of confirmation, &c.


Sed, 543:


€ Hi it is to be ob:


ferned that & mar

hath an ínberta
tance ín a O3 (lle(ne, Sobereof
the Wife of the 10,75 hall be
endoWed as hath bœne fato,
fo? in bins a man map baue
an e(late in feo 03 fœ taile fos
life 03 peateg, Bnd therefore
Littleton fg hereto bee Daders
fod, that in the rant there
were thefe Words (his heires)
02 elle nothing patted but fog
life, ag of other things thas
lpe in Grant,


AN fometimes thefe verbes,
Dedi & comefi, {hall enure by


Per bop Dertinquifbment del
chofe Done ou grant, ficome bn
tenant tient de fon feignioz per
cettetne rent,et le feianioz gran:
ta per fon fait aletenant et afeg

cites le vent.ac, cco vrera a le
teñ pet bop dextinguiſhment,
tat pet cel grant le vent eft ex⸗

1,8,


Way of extinguifhment of the
thing giuen or granted, as ifa tenzt
hold. of his Lordby certaine rent,
& theLord grant byhis deedtothe
tenant and his heires the rent,&c.
this fhall enure to the tenant by
way of extinguifhment, for b
this grant the rent is extin@, &c,


Bnd this grant of the rene (atl enmwc bp vay of zeleafs,


Hhhh 3


Seifion


Se8.542,543 307


(a) Bras, fs, 344,
Britton, fo.126,


(*) 9.4.38. 3. H. 4.15.
18. E.3. 44. 16.6.3.
Quar Irep 146

1s Ra. Irjp.iyg

19. H.6.33. 21. H.6 g,


SR, F. NB, on ab,


3408.3. Difcong, 16;


3.81% od ff.7.


Lib.3.


24.8.6.


(p.9.


Of Confirmation. Sed.544.545.546.


Setlion 544.


€ p Mmetine le mance eff, lou |


bn ad bu rent charge hors
De certaineterre, et il graunta al
tenant Dc la terrele Rent charge
ac, Ctlacaufe ci, purceo que
appiert per leg parolg Delgrant,
que le bolunt le Dono? eff, que le
tenant aucra le rent, *c.et entant
que tl nepuit auer ne perceiuer
afcun vent hozs De fon terre de⸗
metne,pur ceole fait ferra inten⸗
bue et pris pur le pluis abuátage
et auaile pur te tenaunt que putt
eftepzis, et ceo ett per voy dex⸗
tinguiſhment.


N the fame manner itis where
one hath a Rent Charge out of
certaine Land, and hee graunt to
the Tenaunt of the Land the Rent
Charge, &c. And the reafon is,
fur that it appeareth by the words
ofthe Grant, That the will of the
Donoris, That the Tenaunt fhall
haue the rent,&c.and in as muchas
hee cannot haue or perceiue any
rent out of his owne Land, there-
fore the Deed fhal be intended and
taken for the moftaduantage , and
auaile for the tenant,that it may be


taken, and this is by way of extin-’


guifhment.


ranger, ft ail be extinguilhed but foz the moitie :and foit (got a Seignioꝛie.


€ B Ut (£ tbe Grantee of the Went charge granteth itto the Cenaunt ofthe Land anba


Sell. 545.


¶ ] & em ſi ieo leſſa Terre à bn

home put terme Dang s puts
feo confirma fon eftate fang plus
íg potolr mitter en le fait, per
cel il nad pluis greinder eftate
que pur terme Dans, (ícome il a=
uoit adeuant,


5 ed,


€ MES fi teo veleffa a lup

mon D20ít que teo ape en
le terre fang plug parols mittec
en le kait, il ad eftate De frankete-
nement, ‘Mint popes entend
mon fits Diuers grands diuerſi⸗
ties perenter Keleales & confit:
mations,


Ate if [let Land to a man for
terme of yeares, and after I
confirm his eftate, without putting
more words inthe Deed, by this
he hath no greater eftate than for
terme of yeares, as heehad be-
Ore.


546.


DB If I releafe to him all my
right whichIhaue in the Land,
without putting more words inthe
Deed, hee hath an eftate of Free-
hold. So thou mayft vnderftand
(my fonne) diuers great diuerfities
betweene Releafes and Confirma-
tions.


Anthele tio Sections is the fenentb cafe Whereina Melonfe and Confirmation do biet,


Sed.


Lib. Of Confirmation, Sei#.547.548.549.


Sed.


€ * (f (co eſteant deins

ageleſſa terre a vn aut pur

terme De pp, ans, et puis il
grauntel terre a bn auter p tme
Der, ang, iſſint fl granta fort:
que parcel De fon terme, enceft
cafequant ico fue De pleine ane,
ſi ieo veleffa al Grauntee De mon
leffce;ac, cef releate eft boyd, pur
ceo que tl ny ad afcun pziuitie
perenter luy et mop,ac, Mes (i
teo conficime fon eftate, Donque
ceft confirmation eft bone, Wes
fi mon Leffce graunta tout fon
eftat abn aut, Dongs mo releafe
fait af qratee € bone et effectual,


547:


A if I being within age , let
; À land to another for terme of
xx. yeres,and after he granteth the
land to another for term of x.yeres,
fo hee graunteth but parcell of his
terme: In this cafe when Iam of
full age, if I releafe to the Grantee
of my Leffee, &c. this Releafe is
voyd, becaufe there is no priuitie
betweenehira and me,&c. but if I
confirme his eftate, thenthis con-
firmationis good. But if my leffee
grant all his eftate to another, then
my Releafe made tothe Grantee is
good and effectuall.


€ Ere are two things to beobferuco: Firſt, Chat rhe Heale of an Enfant in thts cafe
is not voyd but bopdable, Secondly, thts (s che eighth cafe put bp Littleton, where=
in the 15 cleafe and Confirmation boc bíffer,


Seti, 548.


€ [Cem &home granta bn cét

charge ifluant hors De fon
terre a bn auter pur terme De fon
vie, et puis ilconũrma fon eftate
en le Dit rent.a auer et tenera Ius
en fee tatleou en fee fimple, ceft
Confirmation ef bopD , quanta
enlarger fon eftate, put ceo que
celup que confirme nauoit afcumn
teucr(ion enie rent,


AE if aman graunt a Rent-
charge iffuing out of his Land
to another for terme ofhislife and


after hee confirmeth his eftate in


the fayd rent, To haue and to hold
to him in fee taile or in fee fimple,
this Confirmation is voyd as to in-
latge his eftate, becaufe hee that
confirmeth hath not any reuerfion
inthe rent,


€ Eere the Diuerlitie fe apparant, betSomnt a rent nefwlp Created, and a Rent tn effc :
ie nedeth no explication. Onip thigis tobe oblerned, That Littleton intendeth

bis Ded of Confirmation not ro centaine any claufe of Dikretle, fo) otherwilc, ag
to the Confirmation tbe Dedis boyd, but tbsclaufe of Diſtreſſs doth amount to anew grant,


88 in the Chapter of Rents bath beene fab,


Seton 549.
€ ME? bore foit feiffe en D Vtif amanbe feifed infee ofa
fee De Rent feruiceoude EJ Rent Seruice,or Rent Charge,


ent


308


7. E.4. 6.6. 18. E.4. 2.
9-4.7,24,


31-E.3.47.13. E, 4.8.5,
"Pl. Com. 35.8.4. 4.19,


Lib.3.


Vide SeB.656,


Cap.9. Of Confirmation: Seél.550,


vent charge, et il grant le vent and he grant therent to another for
abn auter put terme De bie, et le life, and the tenant attorneth, and
tenant atturna, et puis ilconfit= after hee confirmeth the eftate of
ma leftate De le grantee en fee the grantee in fee taile, or in fee
taile,ouen fee (imple, ceftconfit- fimple, this confirmation is good,
mationeft bone, quant aenlar= as co enlarge his eftate according
ger fon eftate. ſolonq; les parols to the words of the confirmation,
ie confirmation, put ceo q̃ celuy for that he which confirmed at the
q̃ confirinatt al téps de cOfirma- time of confirmation had a reuer-
tion, auoit bn reuerſion Del rent, fionofthe rent. - |
CH Ere (g the cight cafe wherein tbe Keleaſe and Confirmation doth agre, anb it ig
bete to be obferued that to the grant of the eftate fozitfe Littleton doth put am
attoznement, becaufe itis requiGte, but tothe Confirmation to the Grantee of the


rent toenlarce bis effate, there (g none neceflarp, and therefore he pntteth none, but of this
moge {hall be fato in the chapter o£ Attosnement,Sc&-5 $6,575,


Sed. 550.


CMS: en cas auantDit Tou Vtinthe cale aforefaid where

bome graunt bn rent: aman grant arent charge to a-
charge a bn auter pur terme De nother for rerme of life, if he will
pic, fl voile q le grantecaucroit thatthe Grantee fhould hauc an e-
eftate en le taile, ouen fee, il co⸗ ftate intaile, or in fee, it behoueth
uient que le fait De grant del that the deed of grant of the rent
rent charge pur terme D bie, foit charge for terme of life be furren-
ſurrender ou cancell, ædonques dred orcancelled, & thento make
ü faire bn nouel fait Dautielvent anewDeed of the like rent charge.
charge, A auer a perceiuer ale To haue& perceiue tothe Grantee
grantee en le tatle, ou en fee, ac, intayle orin fee, &c. Ex pancis
Ex paucis plurima concipit inge- plurima soncipis ingenium. ;
nium.


as Vrrender on cancel. Pote by cancetlation of the Deed therent
Dhichipethenly in grant ceafeth (ag here tt appeareth) afsocil ag bp the Surrender»

And the reafon Wherefore (tf the Gzantoz make a neto grant of the rent, and not en⸗
large tt bp Swap of Confirmation ag Littleton mul be intended) the Ded (bolo befurrendzen
o cancelled, ts icaft the Bzantoz Mould be doubly charged, viz. with the old grant koz lile, and
With the nex grant in fee, og as hath beenefaíb, the Grzantoz map grant to the dpzantes fog
life and hts hetres, that he and big heires hall diſtreine for the rent, dc. and this fhall amount
— a m gré and pet amount to no Double charge, Mhereof pou map fa befoze in the Chav-
(44 (tg, à 1 ;


Chap.


Er ibis.


Cuar.lo.


Eus tone:
ER | menteft,
(uw come f
x1! foit Stir
- tenant,
&t Sũr boile gran-
ter p fon fait les ſer⸗
vices OS fà bu aut
purterme Dans, ou
per terme De bie, ou
entaile, ouen fee, tl
couient que E tenant
atturna al grauntee
en le vie le qcantos,p
force & vertue Del
grant, du auterment
ie grant ef bord, Ct
atturnement ctt nul
auter en effect korſq;
quant le fad opedel
grant fait ps Sir,
q̃ meſme ie tenant a=
greca per parol ale
Dit grant, ficome adi⸗
reale grauntec, ico
. mop agree à le grant
fait à Vous , tc, ou
teo ſue bien content
De le graunt fait a
vbous, mes le pluis
common atturnemt
eft, adire, Sir, teo
atturna a bous per
fozce Del Dit graunt,
ou ieo deueigne otc
tenant, ac, ou liue⸗
tct al grantee 6n De-
nier. ou bn maile ou
bn farthing per bop
Dattoznement,


Of Attornement.


Of Attornement.


PAY) Ttornemétis,
Si asifthere be


erm
se:U—M
1 TRE


LES Lordandte-
nant , and the Lord
will grant by his Deed
the feruices of his Te-
nant to another for
terme of yeares, or for
tearme of life, or in
taile, or in fee, the
tenant muft attorne to
the Grantee in the life
of the Grantor by
force and vertue of the
grant or otherwife the
grant is void. And At-
tornement is no other
in effect, but when the
Tenant hath heard of
the grant made by his
Lord that the fame te-
nant do agree by word
to the faid grant, as to
fay tothe Grantee, I
agree to the Grant
made to you, &c. or I
am well content with
the grant made to you,
but the moft common
Attornement is, to
fay, Sir, I attorneto
you by force of the
faid Grant , or I be-
come your Tenant,
&c. or to deliuer to
the Grantee a pennie,
orahalfe' pennie, ora
farthing by way of
Attornement,


3tít


Se&. 551,


Sedl.551.


€ 4 *
y €
D


the grant
of the S elgnioay,o3 of a rent,
02 of the Done in taplc 07 te=
nant fo? life o? pearcg , to &
grant of a Reuerſion 02 Re⸗
mapnder made to anotber, It
tg an ancient $0020 of art, and
in the Common Law fighíz
fiet) a touning o2 attozning
from one to another , wee die
alfo Attornamentum ag &
Latine $0020, and attornare to
attone, And fo Bracton
(a) vſeth ít, Item videndum
eft i Dominus atrornare pof-
fit alicui homagium & ferui-
tium tenentis fui contra vo-
luntatem ipfius tenentis, &
videtur quod non.

And tbe reafen why an
Attomement ie requifite is
peloed fn olde Wakes to bee,
Si Dominus atternare poffit
feruitium tenentis contra vo-
luntatem tenentis talc feque-
retur inconueniens quod pof-
fit eum fubiugare capitali ini-
mico fuo, & perquod tenerc-
tur Sacramentum fidelitatis
facere ei qui eum damnificare
intenderet.


€ Z'couient que le»
tenant attorza al gran-
tee en la vie del grantor,


c. And fo muſt hee
alfo ín the life of the Gzantee,
and this ts buderftod of a
grantbp Ded. Bnd the reas
fon hereof ig for that enerp
grant mult take effet ag to
the ſubſtauce thereof in rhe
life both of the Gzanto; and
the Grantee, Bnd in this
cafe tf the Grantoz dieth be-
foze Pttorznement, the Seig⸗
niozp, Rent, Keuerſion, oz
Remapnder difcend to hig
beire , and therefore after bis

Deceale


T
*


309


Brak on lib.2.fol.8r.
Brittonfo.voS. b. va dr 197,
Fleta lib. . cap. 6.


(a) Bratfon iff.» fol.81.6,
Fleta, Britton bi fupra.


Bralfon lib.2.fol.81.6.
Britton ubs fupra.


Wide Litt.fol.128,
11.H.7.19.


Lib. v.fal.104.10 5.
Shelley: cafe.


40. [19.3 4. H. 6.7.
a0. H.6,7.


Lib.3.


34 H.6.7. 3o. H.6.g.
"BraBon lib. 2. fol. 81.834


«eo,


Lib.6. fol.68. Sir Adeylas
Finches Café.


37. H.8.cap. 16.
Vide $e. 584.


Lib.6. ubi fupra.
Vide $«8.149.


ap. E.3.4. 344 H 6.8.
6, E. 4.13.


Lib. a.[2l. 67 b. Tooker! cafe.
13. Eliq "Dier 302.
Teokers cafe vbt ſupra.


Lah. 3. Teskers cafe vbi fupra.


(2) 18.2.3. 219, variance 63.


12. F.3.18.


Teokars cafe, vbi fupra.


39. H.d.5. Teokerionfi.
Vi fupra,


Capo. OfAttornement. Sed.551.


deceale tbe Attoꝛnement commeth tw late, fo likewiſe (£ the Gꝛantee dieth before Attornement.
an Btrosnement to the boire ts votd, fo; nothing difcended to ble, and (£ beefhouid take, bee
thonid take it as a Purchafoz, where tbe heires Were added but ag woꝛds of limitation of tbe


eftate, and not to takeas Purchaſoꝛs.


But í£ the grant Socre bp fine then albelt the Conuflos o» Conulee dpeth , yet tbe grant is
god, Foz by fine leníco the Rate doth palle tothe Conufe and hts hetees andthe Arcornement
tothe Conufec o2 his heires atany time to make prinitie to diſtraine is fufticlent, Wut alithie
ig to betaken ag Littleton bnderfteod (t , viz. of fuc) grants as bauc their operation by the
Common Las. Foꝛ fince Littleton Wzote (£ a fine bc leuted of a Seignioꝛp, €c, to anotherto
the dle of a third perfon and bis heires, he and bis helires Mall Diftraine without any Attones
ment, becaufeheis inby the Statute of 27. H.8,cap. ro. bp tranfferting of the fate to the fe,


and fo bc ts in bp ad tn La


Andfo ít ig and for thefamecanfe, ik a man at this dap bp Ded indented and inrolled ac
cording tothe Statute bargaineth and felleth a Hetguiozry.tc. toanother, the Setantozy Matt
pate to bim Without anp Ættognement, and fo it is of a Went, a Renerflon, anda Kemayn⸗
ber. So ag the Law ts munch changed, and the ancient priutleoge of Cenants, Denes,


and iefless muchaltercd concerning Attoinement fince Littleton Swzote.


Wut (€ the Conule of a fine before anp Attoꝛnement by Ded indented and inrelled , Barz
gaineth and felleth the Seigniory toanother,the bargainee fball not diſtreine becaufe the bar⸗
gainoz could not diſtreine. Et fic de fimilibus, foy nemo poteit plus iuris ad alium transferre
quam ipfe haber. Vide Seét.149. where opon a rcconerp, the Recoucroz ſhall diſtreine and a=


How Without Attoznement.


A grant tothe thing ez bp the Kingto another is gor without Ætronement by his Je |


togatine,


€ Attornement eit nul auter en effect, Ge. Ft is to be vnderſtood
that there be to kind of Dttoznements, viz, au Attognement in ded ozerpzelle, and an At⸗
tonement in Law o2 implicite. DE Attoꝛnement expꝛeſſe op indeed Littleton fpeaketh here,
and of Attoanement in Law be fpcakcth after inthis Chapter, And to both thefe kinds o£
Attoꝛnements tbere (s an incident infeparable , that is, that tbe Cenant hath noticcof the
grant fo an Attoinement being (an agreement 02 confent to the grant, &c. ) be cannot agree oz
confent to that Sobícl) he knoweth not. 205b tbe df{uail pleading ts, to Which avant the Tenant
attozned, BDndtherefoze i£ a Wapip ofa Manno; Who bfcb to receine the rents of the Ces
nants putcbafc the Manno; , andthe Cenants having no notice ofthe purchafe continue the
papmint of the Rents to him, this is no Attoznement. So tf the Loꝛd leute a fine of the
Seigniozy, and bp fine takebacke an eftate in fer, tbe Cenant continucth the payment of the
rent tothe fir Conulos without notice of the fines, this {s no Attoꝛnement. Wut itistobe
knoSone that there be two kind of notices , viz. a notice in Deed 02 expzeſſe, whereot Litrle-
ton herefpeaketh, when be fapth, thatthe Cenant agresth to tbe grant , anda notice in Lato


02 (mplyed, Sohercof Littleton hereafter ſpeaketh in this Chapter,


Del grant fait per (on Seignior. Here ts to bee feene toben the


thing granted ts altered What becommeth of the Pttoznement,


JE chere be Lord, Welneand Cenant, and the Melne grant ouer bis Mefnaltie by Ded,
the Load releafeth tothe Cenant whereby the Meinaitp is extinct, anb there is arent bp [ure
plufage, an Ditornemeut tothe grant of this tentfecke ts gad, although the qualitie of that


part of the rent is altered, becaufe (t ie altercdby ad in Law.


It a reuerſion of two Acres be granted bp Deed, and the Leflor before Dttoznement lente


a fine of one of them, and the Œenant attozne, this is gad foz the other Acre.


(a) BE the Reuerfion be granted of tia Acres, and the Leflee agree to the faid grant foz
one Acrethis ts god forall thee, anh fo itis of an Attornement in Law if the reuerfion of
shace Acres be granted, and the Lellce furrender one of the Acres to the Diantce, thig Attoz-
nement ina barre fhallbe god foz the whole renerfion of the thaee Acres accozding to the


Gant.


€ Ft le tenant agrea. Hereafter in this Chapter Littleton Doth


teach bat manner of Œenant fhail attogne,


€ eres per parol, dre. And (o hee may and moze fafely by bis


Deed in Writing,


€ Sicome adire ale grantee, &c. Here is to be feeneto what man⸗
ner of Grantees the Bttoznement is gov, Regulatly the Attornement mutt bee according to


tbe grant epther exprelelp, o2 (implpeblp, Ot tbe ſirſt Littleton bath bere fpoken.


Fm


<
=


E


|


Lib.3. Of Attornement. Sect 552,


implpeolp, ag (fa reuerfion be granted to twobp Weed, anb the Lellee attorne to one of
them according tothe grant, this Drtoznement ts geod, but not to beff the reuerſion onlp (n
him to whom Attozncment ts made, but tt Mall enure to both the Drantecs, for that ts
According to the grant, and foz that ít cannot teft the reuerfion only tn him to Thom the Ate
tomementis made, And fo ttis tf one Gzantcerieth, tbe Attoznement to the Htirniuoz t$


b.
sot the Lord grant bp Deed bis Heiqniosp to A.fon life,the remapnber to B. in fee, A. dyeth
anb then tbe Cenant attogne to B, this Actoznement ts bold, becaufe (t ts not accozbíng to the
grant, fozthen B. ſhould baue a rematnber Without amp particular effate.
Sita reuerfion be grantedto a man anda woman, thep arcto baue moities in Haw ] bat {€
thep entermarrie and then Attoznement is had,thep Mail baue no motties, (and pet bp tie pur⸗


port of the grant they are tohaue moities.) becaufett ts bp act in Law,


\
1


t


It a eme grant a reuerſion to a man in Feo, and marrp With the Grantee, this is a god At⸗
tornement in Law tothe huſband.

Sita reuerſion be granted bp Deed to the bfc of T. S. and the Leſſee hearing the Deedread,
02 baníng notice of the contents thereof attozneto Cefty que vic, this (gan implpeo Attoꝛne⸗
ment to the Grantee. à

Fea A be granted fozitfe,the remapnder in taple, tbe vemagnber (n fe, the Mttorne=
tent to the Grantee foz life (hall enure to them in the remapnder to belt the remaynder in
them.

. And in thofe cafes t£ the Cenant ſhould fay, that J voe attoinc to tbc db -antee forlife, but
that it {ball not benefit any of them tn remapnber after bis Death, pet the Attosnement is qon
to them all, fox hauing attoꝛned to the Cenant for life, the Law (tohich hee cannot controll)
Doth bel alitheremaynder, Andof tbíg moze fball befatd hereafter inthis Cyapter.

Littleton bete putteth fiac erampleg of an expꝛeſſe Atternement , but of them the laſt ts the
bef, becaufe the cate is not only a witneſſe of the Words, but the epe of the deltuerp of the
penny, tc. ano fo there ig dictum & fadum. Bnd ang other words Which import an agrees
ment 02 aflenttothegrant doc amonnttoan Attoꝛnement And albcit thefe fiuc erprefle At⸗
toznements be all fct done by Littleton, to be made to the perfon 0€ tbe Grantæ , (b) petam
Attoznement in tbe abfence of the Gzantes ts fuffictent, for if he Verh agre to tbe arant eyther
ín bis picfence o2 in hig abfence, tt is fufficient. :


oeil, 552.


r


€


Ere (t {a tobee


€ file Seig⸗
nío? graunt E fer=
uice De fon tenant a vn
home, # puis per bn


> fait portant pn Dat-


reine Date, il granta
memes les feruices a
bnauter,æE tenant at-
tozne a le feconD gran⸗


- tee, osele Dit grauntee
j ad les ſeruices, a comt


E


v


que apres le Œenant
boile attozncr a le pri⸗


‘Mer grauntee ceft cler⸗


Ment oid, ac,


-  Grantorbefoze Attoꝛnement confirm
— Quante fo, the fee Ginplets void,
In the fame manner, ita Reuerſion bpon an eftatefo
fo? confirme the eltate of the Lelſer (og life be -— afterwards attozne,
fiéz


AL if the Lord

grant the feruice of
his Tenant to one man,
and after by his Deed
bearing alater date hee
grant the fame feruices
to another, and the Te.
nant attorne to the fe-
cond Grantee, now the
faid Grantee hath the
feruices,and albeit after-
wards the Tenant will
attorne to the firft Gran-
tee,this is cleerely void,
&c.


tt


obferued, that
Littl. erpzetietly
not What eltatets grana
ted, and berp matertallp,
fot í£ the fozmer grant
Swercin fee; and the late
ter grant ‘weve fox life,
and the tenant doth firff
attozne to the fecond
Grantee he cannot after
attozne to che irl gran⸗
te to make the fee fimple
pafle, for that ſhould not
be accozding to the grat,
bnt in that cafe the aita
topnementto the firft is
countermanded, Bnd fo
itis ££ a Reuerfion ers
petant opon an cülate
f0; life be granted to ans
other in for ,anpafter the


ethe eſtate of the Le (n tayle, the Btternement to the
2 ptateg be granted iy fes, and the Lele


3t


316


Tooker’ cafe vbi fupra,
Vi H.7.13.


a0. H.6.7.


Toskers cafe bi fipra,


"Pl Com. 6g. 483.


3.2 a lit. Attornement 8.


Temps E.t. Attorn.42,
18,E.4. 7.


(b) Lib.a.fel 68.69.
Tookers cafe.

28 H.8.tip. Attornemant
Br. 40.


Lib.5.


11H. 7.19. 3.2.2 vbi were.
P.3.Eli{.Bendleer,


11, H,y.13.


Temps. E. 1 d tternement,
48.E. 3.15.


TP afih P. 3. (Coram Kege.
Suffex sm The fur.
st. E. 3.47.

34 E. 37Double plea 34.
42. AT p 6. 43. p.22.
30.F.3.(29,.8.3.


26.E.3. Ter quafermisia 21.


8.H.4.0b. 12.4.4.
20.H 6.7. 3 s. H.6.
9.E.4.31. 13.H.7.14.4.
1. Ho. 31.

4. 6:6. Atrermmment;Br.10.


Capo.


Of Attornement.


Setl.553.


Es Feme fole maketh a Reale fozlife o» praveg referning a vent aw granterh tbe Ni entrüs


onín fa, andtaketh bufbanb,
bere our Authoz patteth big
nerfion, anb one of them grant


mat foz the moitie.


f in the cafe that out Author herep
both ofthem,the Mttoznement (o botde,


this ig a Countermand of the Bttoznement,
cafe of the whole reucrfion, t£ tio Coperceners
eth her moity bp Fine, the € onufa Mall pauta Quid iuris cla-


bee of a res


attetb of fenerali grantees, (£ the Œenant Artozne ta
becanfe tt is notaccozding to the Brant, Ff a reuer⸗


for life, amo after it is granted to thefame Grantee fot peares and tbe Lefles
het " as rante it ác voide foa the incevtaintie ; A multo fortiori, ff the Loꝛd bp one


b this Seignioꝛy te I, Withep of Lo
s 5 hop t London and to bis Succeffozs,


ndon and to bis beftes, and bp another Dede
anb tbe Cenant attorne to both grants, the


t ig botde, foz albeit the Grantee we but one, pet be hath feucrall capacities, anb
Race fenerall, and the Bttoznement (s not accozding to either of the Grants.
*But tf A grant the reuerfon of Blacke acre 02 white acre, and the Reflee attozne to the


rant, and after che (rante maketh bis election,


this Atroznement {9 good, for albeit the fate


Swag incertaine, pet he attogned to the Grant infuch fort, as ít was made, and fonote a bíg.ra


ütíc betwerne one grant andfenerall grants,
expectation, and get nothing pated at the time of the


fequent.


€ Sre it is to bee obs
H ſerued that When &
man maketh a
feoffment of a Mannez the
feruices Doe not pale but rex
maine in the Jfeoffoz bnttil
the Freeholders dec attozne,
and When thep doe attozne
che Attoznment (all haue res
latíon to fome purpofe and
not toother, Foꝛ albeit the
Bttoanment be made many
peares after the feoftiment;pet
ft fball have relation to make
ít pate out of the jreotto;
Ab initio enen bp the Liuery
vpon the fcoffment, but not to
charge the Tenants With anp
meane atrerages 02 for waſte
inthe meane time, 02 the ltke-
FJfarcuerfion of Land be
gtantco toan Bien by Ded,
and befoze Attoznement the
Alien ts made Dontzen, and
then the Attornment is made,
the King Upon office found
fall baue the land : foz as te
the eſtate betweene the par⸗
ties ít paſſeth bp the Dede
Ab initio.
FE aman plead afeoffinent
ofa Dannos bee needs not


Sedion 553. -


Cl] Tem & hom foit
feiffede bn man
1102, quel manto? eft
parcel endemefue, et
parcel en feruice, Cl
botlealiener cel ma⸗
nora bn auter, il co⸗
uient que pet force
Del alienation, que
touts les tenants à
teiqnont del alieno
come Defor manoz,
attognevent al altes
tice, ou autermẽt les
feruices Demurront
continualment en las
lienoz, forpriſe te-
nants a volunt, car il
ne befoigne que tes
nants a bolunt ats
turnent fur ticl alies
nation,tc,


and obferue tn this cafe an Attoznement geod in
Attomement but bp the election fubs


Lfo if a man bee
feifed of a man-
nor, which mannor is
arcell in demefne,
and parcell in feruice,


if hee will alien this |
mannorto another, it


behooueth that by
force of the alienati-
on, all the tenants
which hold ofthe ali-
enorasof his mannor
doe attorne to the a-
lienee, or otherwife


the feruices remaine |


continually in the a-
lienor, fauing the te-
nants at will, for it
needeth not that te-
nants at will doe at-
torne vpon fuch alie-
nation, &c.


pleade an Attoznement of the Tenants, but ( i€it be mater(all ) (t muſt be dented 02 pleaded
of the other fide,

Bnd bpon confideration had of allthe bokes touching this point Swbether the feruíceg of the
SFrechoiders doe pale, Wherein there ant beene tWie {emerall opinions,viz. fome haue holders
that the feruices voe pale ín the right bp the Liuery ag parcell of the Wannoz, but mot to aa


* Row Without Atrornement ag tw the cafe of the Fine. And others haue holden, that they both


pale ín right anb ín volleſſion to diftreine Without Attognement. And che third opinion ig,
that in this cals the ſaid Leruices patre neither in poeGion noa in right, bat nti] atto mement
remaine


Lib. Of Attornement, 308.554.955. 311


remains continnally in tbe Allenor ag Littleton here holdeth. And fo (t Was refoluco Pafch,rs. VidHilli4. Elf. —
Eliz. betweene Brasbitch and Barwell accoꝛding to the opinion of our Pathos, Bnd ji neuer — Ae. 508.im Comuni bance,
pet Knew anp of Littletons cafeg ( albeit J hane kno wne many of them ) to bec brought in

queftion, but inthe end the Judges concurred With our Autbog, ^


And Where our Author fpeaketb of the Attornement of tbc Freeholders, (£ the Lord make


a Leafe fo; peares og fo? itfe of a Mannoꝛ,
the reucrfion of the Mannoꝛ be granted,


and the Frecholders attozneto the Leſſee, t£ after
the Attoꝛnement of the Lellæ fo peares 02 life Mail


binde the Freeholders, fo: by thetr foymer Attoꝛnement, they bate put the Attornement into


the mouth of the Lefleæ,


€ Forfprifé tenant a volunt chc. Here is
by coppp of Court Rolle accozding to the cuttome of tbe
beritance both of lands in the hands of Œenant at weil b
fall pate both (n right anb ín poſſeſlion Without any Bttosnement


€ I Tein (i fotent tir

et tenant, et le te=
nant leffa la terre a
br auter pur terme de
bie,ou Dona la terre en
letaile fauant le reuer⸗
fion à lup,ac, fi 1e
Seignioꝛ en tiel cag
granta fon feignio2y a
bn auter, il coutent q
celup en le veucrfion
atturna al grauntec,
et nemp le tenant a
terme De bie, ou Ie te-
nant ent taile, pur ceo
que enceft cag celuy en
le reuerfion eft tenant
al &»cíanío?, & nemp
letenant à terme De
bie, nele tenant en le
tavle,


€ E $8 mefme le manet eff, Tou

font feigniour, mefne, et
tenant, (í le Seigniour boile
granter les (ecuíceg Del mefne,
. coment que il ne fait afcun
. mention en fon grant delmefne,


Sell. 554.


Alf if there bee
Lord and tenant,&
the tenant letteth the
Jandto another forterm
of life, or giueth the
land in taile fauing the
reuerfion to himfelfe,
&c. ifthe Lord in fuch
cafe grant his Seigniory
to another, it behoueth
that hee inthe reuerfion
attorne to the grantee,
and not the tenant for
terme of life, or the Te-
nant in taile, becaufe
that inthis cafe he inthe
reuerfion is tenant to
the Lord, and not the
tenant for terme of life,
nor the tenant in taile.


Seélion 555.


implied Tenant at toíll og
Mannoꝛ, fo as the Freehold and in-
v the Common Law 03 bp Tuttome;


€ D3 it (d & marime

in La, that no

mar (ball attozne
to any grant of anp
Seigntorp, Rent fers
uice, Reuerfion 92 Ke⸗
mainder, but bec that (g
immebdiatip patnie to the
Grantos, and becaufe in
this cafetbere is no pats
Uitic betweene the Lod
and the Œenant fos life,
03 Done (n taile, but ors
lp betweene the Lozd and
him in the reuerGon, for (t
this cafe the Attornement
of bim (n the Keuerfion
onip ts gad.


@ Samant le re-


nerfios a luy, Ge.
Thatisto fay, Without
limitation of anp re-
mainder ouer, and this
tg but temake bis opinis
en plaíne,as to tbe poins
that be putteth (t.


@ TN the fame manner is it
where there are Lord,Mefne
and Tenant, if the Lord will

grant the feruices of the Mefne,

albeit hee maketh no mention in
his grant of the Mefne , yet the


bncore fl content que le mefne Mefne ought to attorne,&c. and


attuma,ac, ct nemp 1e tenant


petas Titi 3


not the Tenant perauaile, &c.


9.Ë.2.fit. Attornement 18.


21E,3.47. 5. H. y. 12. 6.
Vid. Litt-Selt. 540. 5 56.


ee titles sui de id td


o p—áLÉV-—


133. H, 6.9.9.


Capo.


Of Attornement.


Sedl.556-


perauaile at. put ceo Glemefne forthat che Mefne is Tenaunt vnto


ett tenant a lup, ac,


him,&c.


Chis ſtandeth bpon the fame realon that the next epecedent cafe DD,


€ Ere is to be obftts
ued a Diuerfitic bee
tweens a Went fer=
niteanda Rent charge » 0%
a Bent fcche; fo; ag te the
Went fernice, no man (ag
hath bene fapo ) can attonne,
but he tat (g pztuie;fo in cafe
of a Rent charge it bebes
nett that the Cenaunt of the
Freehold doth attozne to the
Granteæ , without refpect of
any priuitie, Bnd therefore
the Dineifoz onelp tthe cafe
of a grant of a Kent charge,
ſhall attozne, becaufe he tg. as
Littleton fatth) tenant of the
Freehold, but in cafe of a
grant of a Went feruice, the
Attomement of the Diletfee
fuiceth,

It there be Loꝛd anb Œez
nant by homage, fealtic, anb
rent, the Œenant is dilſeiſed,
the 11020 grantcth therent to
another; the Diffctfee attoi-
neth, this (s voyd: butif hee
had grauntcd ouer his Swbole
SHetgntozte, the Attoꝛnement
bab bene god, and the reas


Section $56.


« Cg autermt
Ma , lou Cet-
taineterre eft charge
bun Bent charge, ou
Bent feck, cac en tiel
cate fi celup que ad le
tent charg ceo grant
abn auter, il coutent
q̃ tenant del frank-
tenement atturna al
@rantee,pur ceo que
lefranktenement eft
charg ouc le rent.ec,
et en rent charge nul
auctozie Doit eftre
fait fur a(cun perfon
pur le diſtreſſe paite,
ac, mes il auotocra
le petite bone et droi⸗
turel, come en terres
ou tenements iffint


Vt otherwife itis

where certain lad

is charged with a
Rent charge or Rent
fecke, forin fuch cafe
if he which hath the
Rent charge grant this
toanother, it behoo-
ueth that the Tenaurt
of the freehold attorn
to the Grátee, for that
the Frechold is char-
ged with the rent, &c.
And in a Rent charge
no Auowrie ought to
be made vpon any per-
fon forthe diftreffeta-
ken,&c. but hee fhall
auow the prifel to bee
goodand rightfull, as
inlands or Tenements


Con ot this bineriti i$ hare charges à fon Di= fochargedwithhisdi-
gíucn bp out Authoz.foz that -
When the rent Was — ſtreſſe, ac. ftreffe &c.


onely, ít paſſed as a Rent ſecke, ano confequentlp the Diſeiſor being Cerre- Tenant, muit ats


E Wut ben the Detgniote is granted, then tbe Difieife in vefpet of the paluítig may
ane,


€ Content que le Tenant del Franktenement chc. And therefore ifthe
Tenant of the land charged With a Went charge 02 a Rent ſecke, make a leaſe forlife, and hee
that hath the Bent charge 02 Went fecke grantetl) it ouer.tbe Œenant fos life hall attozne, £03
be is Genant ofthe Freehold,accozding to tbt expzeſſe faping of our Author, and ( ag hath ben
fapd) there needeth no pituittc.

And tt Wag holden bp Dyerchtefe Fukice of the Conrt of Common Pleas, anb Mounfon
Juſtice, tn the argument ef Bracebridgcs cafcabouefayb, t not —— tt he that hath arent
charge granteth tt oner £02 tfc, the tenant of the Land atto therunte,æ after he qranteth the
Seucrfion of tbe Rentcharge, that the zante for life may attorne alone And chatthele Words
of Lit'leton ave to bee bnderftood When a Went charge o? IBentfecke ts granted in pollefion z
And rhereWith agreeth «6.E.3. Where it appeareth, Chat the Quid juris clamat in that cafe,
did lie againſt the Grantee for life T |

20 man maketh a leafe oz itfe, and after grants to A. a Bent chargeowtoftherenerfien, —
A. granteth the rent ouer, bee inthe rencrfion muft attorne and wot the Tenant of the freehol, —
fo? thatthe freehold is not charged With the revit, Coz a Keleaſe mabe to him bp the Grauntee
both not extinguith the rent, And Litileton is tobe vnderſſcod, that rge Œenant of the revs


46. E.3: 37.3, H.6.9.
Vi. Lit Se, 547 € 553»


Lib.3.


Of Attornement.


5olb mut atturne when tbe Frabhold ts charged, — ;
© Eten Rent charge nul Auowrie doit efle fait far aſtun perfon , dre.


Chis ts the reafon that Littleton gineth of the difference


Bentcharge. $20$p tt map be layd,


betwene the Went fernice and the


That this rcafen ts taken away bp the Statute of


z1.H.8. fox bp that Statute the Lozo needs not auoto fo anp rent os ferütce bpon anp perfon
fn certaine, and then bp Littletons reafon there needeth no pztuttie te tbe attorncurent of a feigs
niozie, fo? (fap thep ) Ceffantecaufa vel ratione legis ceflatlex. Bg at the Common a mo
aid Yas grantable of a Granger to an Auowꝛie: becaufe the Buowzeie Was wade of a certaine
perfor, but now tbe Puoiwztebeing made by tbe fapo Act of 21.4.8. bpon no perfon, therefore


the reafon of the Law being changed, the Law it {elfe (g alfo changed,


andconfequentipin an


Auowrie, according to that Ac, apd fbatl be granted of any mart, and thelike in many other cas
(ca, Swbich cafe is granted to bc god Law: bus albeit the Lord (as bath bene ſayd) map take
benefit of the Statute, pet may he auo$o Mill at bis cletion byon the perfon of bis Genaunt,
Bifo aibett the manner of tbe Auowꝛie be altered, pet the priuitie (wobich ig the truc canfe of
the fapd difference) remaínctb Rill ag to an Attoꝛnement.


Rent charge, &c. It is tobcoblerued, totobat kind of Inheri⸗
tances being granted, an Attornement is requiũte. And in this Chapter Littleton {peak
offine: irk, ofa Seignioꝛie, Sentferuice,œc. Hecondly, of a Rens charge, Chirdly, of a
Bent fecke, And hereafter in thts Chapter of two meze, viz. of a Reueruon anb Bemainder of


Lands ; fos the Cenant (ball neuer need to atto
matnder, 02 papmentofa Kent ont oflanb, And


ane but where there ts Cenure,attendance, res


therefore (fan Annuitic,€ ommon of patture,


Common of Eſtouers, oz tbe ike, be granted fog lifeos peares,ec. the reucrfion map be granted
Without anp Attornement , and aibeitfometimes in fome of thele cafes o7 thelthe,an Attoꝛne⸗
ment bepleaded, pet tt is ſurpluſage, and moze than needeth, becaule in none of then there is anp
Tenure, Attendance, UW cmainder,oz payment out of land,


Sed.


CT Cem & foit Seignior et
tenant,et Ie tenant leila fon
tenement abn auter ptine

$ bie, remainder a On aut en fee,

et puis le Seignior granta les
feruices a bit auter, ac. et le tefit

à terme De Die attozna,cco eft aſ⸗

fet s bone, pur ceo que le Tenant

a terme De bie eft tenaunt en cett

cafe al Ceíqníoz ac, et celuyen le

remainder ne poit eftre Dit tenãt
al ſeignioꝛ qãnt a cel entét foat-


que aps la mozt le tenant a fme


De bie, bncoze en ceft cafe (t celup
ent remainder mozutt fans bte,
le ſeignior aucra le remainder p
Lop Defcheate, put ceo que come
que E feíanío2 entiel cag content
Dauower furletenant aterme be
Die, ac, bncoze tout lentier tene⸗
ment quant a touts leg eftates
B franktenement,ou ð fee impr,
ouauterment,æc.en tiel cas font
entemble tenus dle feignioz,æc,


€ es


557:


Lfoif there be Lord and Te-

nant,andthetenantletteth his

tenement to another for term
of life, the remainderto another
in fee, and after the Lord grant the
feruices toanother,&c,and the Te-
nant for life attorne, this is good
enough, for thatthe Tenaunt for
life is Tenaunt inthis cafe to the
Lord,&c. and he inthe remaigder
cannot be faid to be tenant to the
Lord,astothis entent, vntill after
the death ofthetenant for life ; yet
inthiscafe if hee inthe remainder
dieth without heire,the Lord fhall
hauethe remainder by way of Ef-
cheat, becaufe that albeit the lord
infuch cafe ought to auowe vpon
the tenant for life, 8c. yet the
whole entire Tenement ; as to
allthe eftates of the Freehold or
of Fee fimple, or otherwife, &c.
in fuch cafe aretogether holden of
the Lord, &c.


Set .55 7:


E.


ar. H. S. edp. 5,
Kid. deli s^.


23. H 4.4. b,


81. H.7,5.


1.H. 51.37 74714. 36. A.
pl.3. 31-94. 8, rig, _Attorna,
784n8, 7,59.


Lib.3.


s
y g. E. 3..Attorn. 10.12, E. 4.4 €


18.H.6.3. 9.E.23.119. At-
torn.18.18.E.4.7, Lomps E.1
Attern.22

Vi Se. 580.


3. H.6.1.Old Tenures 107.
(215.8.413.5.


AM. 3. H.6. 1.


| (Cape.


¶ * Wes nemp de faire A⸗


Of Attornement.


Seël,558.


« * But not to make Auow-


uotozíe fur eur touts enfemble, ric vpon them all together, «21.3.
M.5.H.6. H.6.


T le Ti enant a terme de vieattorma dc. 02 he that iS (ag hath


boone fapb) pzíuíc and immediately Œenant to the Lozd, mull attozne: and that is in


this tafe, Zhe € cnant for life, and fo of the other Ade tf a Scigniszte be granted to


the Attornment to the & erant fog life ts an Atteꝛn⸗


ment totherematnder alfo ; rilede (t be that thep tn the rematnder ought to baue acquitall, oz
other painilenge, (whereot they fhould bepzciudtced) and then albett an Attoznement bee had
to the Cenant Foz life, and he acknowledge the acquitall,ec. pet after big pcccafe be in remains
der (hall not diftrepne batíll he acbnoxolcoge the Acquitall, notwithfanding the Attoznment


ofthe Genant foz life.


_auera le remainder per voy defcheat. For the remainder is bol-
von of the Lozv,bnt not immediately holden, and in thts cafe by the efcheat of the remainder the


Seignloꝛrie ts extinct, for the Fe (imple of the Seignioꝛie being extinct,
@enure and attendance oucr,
But other wile it is of a Ment charge, foz (f


particular eftate £02 life thereof, in refped of the
ston £g Littleton (a) bimfelfc tn our Wakes.


there cannot remain a
and of thts opíc


that be granted £07 life, and after he ín tbc reuerficn purchafe the land, foas the reucrfton of the
iRentchargeis ertinc,pet the Giante for life thall eniop the vent during hig life, foz there ts


no Œenure 92 attendance in this cafe,


L «Mes nem) de faire Auowrie, de. Chis ig added to Littleton, but
itis confonant to Las, and the authozitte tralp cited,


Section 558.


¶ | Ten fi foit &»cígnion et te-

nant etle tenant leffa les te=
nements a bn feme pur terme DE
hie, le remainder outter en fee.ct
lafeme pzent baron, et puts le
feigniog granta les ſeruices, ac.
alebarou et fes heires, en ceft
cafe le feruice eft mig en ſuſpence
durant le couerture. Mes fi la
keme deuie viuant le Baron, le
baron et ſes heires aueront le
rent De ceux en Lc remainder, ac.
ct en ceo cafe tl ne befoigne afcun
attoanement per parol, ac. PUL
ceo que le baron que Doit attorũ
accepta le fait Del graunt deles
feruices, ac, le quel acceptance
c(t bu attornment cala Ley,


Lfo ifthere bee Lord and Te-

nant, andthe Tenant letteth
the tenements to a woman for life,
the remainder ouer in fee , and the
woman taketh husband, and after
the Lord grant the feruices, &c.
tothe husbandand his heires, in
this cafe the feruiceis put in fuf-
pence during the Couerture, but if
the wife die lining the husband,
the liusband and his heires fhall
haue the rent of them in the re-
mainder, &c. And in this cafethere
needeth no Attornement by parol,
&c. for that the husband which
ought to attorne, accepted the
deed of grantof the feruices, &c.
the which acceptance is an attorn-
ment inthe Law.


€ es quel acceptance ef un attornement en la Ley cc. Littleton hauing I
fpoken (as hath benc fapd) of Betorxnements in Deed ozerpzefle, no commeth t6. — r
ſpeake of Attornements in Law, o2 tmpited,and bauingbefoze fet Downe fine expzelle ^
Attoꝛnments {i Ded, doth in this Chapter enumerate 7. Attoznments in Law. Heere it is


Less ag AM tobe pnperthod, That tbc erprele Attornement of the bufbanb Swill binde the Wife after the
pint ite couertute,


Lib. Of Attornement.


conertare, and in ag mach as this acceptance of the grant is an Betopnemtent in Law witha
outa Word of Attormement the 4 eigniojto ſhall paſſe. Bnd this is the Gr ecampie that Lic-
deron patteth ef an Attoznement in Laie; fobích amonnteth to anexprelle Attornement, foz


chat ít (6 am agreement t9 the grant,


BE the Roi arant his Axeígnioyp to tbe Œenant of the Land, anb toa ffranger ; and the
A enant accept the 3D eb, this acceptance is a Joo 2ittemeiacut to extinguiſh the one moity⸗
anb to belt the other moity in the Granites, as bath bane fatd,


Seton 559.


Cpe if E manner eft, (f fop=
- ent Seignior a tenant a
letenant pzent feme , & puis le
Z»cíaníos granta les ſeruices a
là feme a {es beícg,s le baron ac⸗
cepta lefait , en ceft cag apꝛes la
moꝛt le baron, la feme a fes bres
aueront les feruices, ac, car per
Je acceptance Del fait per E baton,
ceo eft bone attoznement, ec, co=
ment que Durant la couetture
leg ferutces font mis € fufpence,
a.


qj the fame manner is it , if
there be Lord and tenant, and
the Tenant taketh wife, and after
the Lord, grant his feruices tothe
wifeand his heires,& the husband
accepteth the deed. In this cafeaf-
ter the death of the husbandthe
wife and her heires fhall hauethe
feruices,&c.for by the acceptance
of the deed by the husband, this is
a good attornement, &c, albeit du-


"ring the couverture the feruices (hal


be putin fufpence, &c.


1 CE. is the fecond erample that Littleton vutteth of an Attoruement in Raw anb


ſtandeth bpon the foamer reafon,


€ Sont mife en fafpence. Sutpence commeth of fufpendeo, and


$e8.559.560;


ín Legal vnderſtanding ts taken When a Seigniozie, Rent, 3920fit apprender, qc. bp reafon
of bniticof poſſeſſion of tbe Hetantozie, Bent, ec. and of the iandont of which they í(Tue are
notin cfTc foza.time; & tunc dormiung but map be reuiued 92 awaked, Aud thep are faid t


be extinguiſhed when thep are gone kor euer & tunc moriuntur and can newer be reutwed, that is
Soben ene man bath ag high and perburable an eftate in the oncag in the other,


[Cem i fopent
Seignioꝛ « te-
tant,t E tenat gran⸗
ta les tenements a
br home pur terme 5
fa bie, te remainder a
$u auter en fee, file
Seignioz granta tg
fernices ale tenant à
terme De bie en fee, er
cett cag Ie tenant à


Sei. 560.


L{ if there bee

Lord and Tenant,
and the Tenant grant
the teneméts, to a man
for tearme of his life
the remayader to ano-
ther in fee,ifthe Lord
grant the feruices to
the Tenant for life in
fee, inthis cafe the te-
nant for tearme of life

HBG


4
I


€ rs ta the third cafe —


 Atbat Littleton pnta

... .ttthof an Attoꝛne⸗
mentin Law, Bnd (t is to
bee obferucd that aibeit a
grant, ag hath beene fad, map
enure bp Wap of releafe,and &
telcafe to the Genant foritfe
doth worke an ablolnte ex⸗
tingnifhment, &obereof hee in
the temapnber Hall take bc-
nefit, pet the Law fall nener
mabe any contruction again®
the purpost of ths grant ta
the pꝛeiudice of anp,ez again ®
Che meaning of — as
ere


n


4.E. 3 tit. Fine; 37e
LI


25144.


Woo


Lib.


Capo.
here tt ould, for if bp cone
firuction(t fhould enureto a
velcafe, the heires of the Œes
nant fozlife fhould bee diſhe⸗
xited of the rent, and theres
Foxe Littleton herefapth, that
the heires of the Waantec thal
bancthe Seiqniozy after bis
Death, Bnd here is an Are
toznement in Law toa grant
fufpenocb that cannot take
effect in the grantee fo long ag
be lineth but fhall take effect in
bis beires bp vifcent forthe
Inheritance of the Seignio⸗
rie was inthe tenant foz life,
anb the fnfpenfion onlp due
ting bis lite,


Of Attornement. —
terme De bie ad fee


en leg fernices, Mes
les feruices font mis
en fufpence Durant
fa bie, es leshtes
letenant a terme De
bie aueront Eg ferut=
ces apres 5 Deceafe,
ac, Ct enceftcasil
ne befoigne attorne⸗
ment, car per laccep=
tance dl fait ó celuy,
q Doit attourner, ac.
ett ceo attournement
Delup meſme.


Section 561.


ces ;. but the feruices
are putin fufpence du-
ring his life, Butthe
heires of the Tenant
for life fhall haue the
feruices after his de-
ceafe, &c. Andinthis
cafe there needeth no
Attornement , for by
the acceptance of the
Deed by him which
oughtto attorne , &c,
this is an Attornement
of it felfe.


Sed. 561.5620 |


hath a fee in the ferui-


€ MS? lou le tenant ad cy
grand a haut eftate en Ps
tenements, ficome le Scignioz
ab en le Seiguiozy, en tíel cate,
file Seignioz graunta leg (ec-
uiceg al tenant enfee, ceo sera
per bop dextinguiſhment, caufa
patet. ,


BX where the Tenant hath as
great and as high eftatein the
tenements, as the Lord hath inthe
Seigniory, in fuch cafe if the Lord
grant the ieruices to the Tenantin
fee, this fhall enure by way of ex-
tinguifhment, Can/a patet,


€ re Littleton intendeth not onip ag great and high an Cate, but ag perbnrabig
atfo, as hath beene fatb, foa a Difretfoz 02 Œenant fn fee bpon condition hath as
ud and great an C Rate but not fo pevdurable an € ffate » 88 fall makean ertin


Se.


€ Gre mm this ¶ T rem f fopent
LIS bee ín tbe Seignioz & te-
nant, & le tenant


Keuerſion of
the tenancy mutt attogn,
becanfe beta tbe Cenant


562.


Lio if there bee
Lord and Tenant,
and the Tenant ma-


to the Lord, and perthe kait dn leasa bn home kethaLeafetoaman for
Selgniogie Hhailbectat- pur terme De fa bie, fa= terme of his life, fauing


pended during the life of


the Grante beant MANET teuertiona lup, the reuerfid ro himlelfe,


bath an eftate foritein file


SDHeigntor granta ifthe lord grarthe Scig-


ous co | Seigniorie 8 le te: niory ro tenant for life in


Heignitorte by 3D (fcent,


hanta terme De bieen fee. Inthis caf it beho-


Ci rcoreiines fee, encett cate il cout: ueththat he in the reuer⸗


ent


|


reuerſton atto2na al


Lib.3.


ent que celup en le


Of Attornement. Set 563.
dient, Ge. Quis ig


added, anv net ín tye oz mall

and is again tawe, and

therefoze to be retecteo,
Tenant al Seio-


nior. ce. Were tS to
bee bnberilon a binccütie
ben thewhole eftate in the
Setamozy te ſuſpended, and
Sgen but part of the citate
inthe Seigniory is fufpenz
ded, And ta this caie tie
Seignioꝛy ts fulpended but
fox terme of life, (a ) and ther⸗
fore as to all things concers
ning the right tt hath bis be=
tia, but as to the poſſeſſion
during the particular cffate


fiofi muft attorne to
thetenant for life by
force of thisgrant, or
otherwife the grant is
voide, forthat hee in
the reuerfion is tenant
tothe Lord,&c.


tenant aterme de bie
per fogce à cel grant,
gu auterment Le grat
eft boide, purcco que
celup en le reuerſion
efttenat al Sũr ac,

«* Ct bneozeti ne
tienda Del tenant à
terme De bie, Durant
fa bie, Caufa pa-
tet."«r


*« Yet hee fhall
not hold. of the te-
nant for life during
his life. Cana pa-
tet ere.


the Orantes ſhall take no benefit of t, therefoze during that time he fball haue no Rent, Sers
nice, wardſhip, 18 elíefe, Warrtot, orthe tke, becaule thele belongto the poffeiton, but tf foe
- Tenant dieth without heire the Cenancie (ball efcheate vnto tbe Wzante, for tat is fn the
right, and pet ben the Seigniory ig reutued by the death of the Cenane, there (ball bc tarde


fbtp, as tf the Cenant marrp With the Heigntozelleand dicth, his hetre within age, the wife
Hall baue the wardihip of the hetre. Bile tn tbe cafe that Littleton pere puttctb, albeit the
fergniozp be ſuſpended but fo? liée, petfome hold that he cannot grant (t oner becaufc rye Gran⸗
t& rokett fulpended, and tt was ntacr In efc in htt, but ££ the Tenant mae a Leaſe for
peares oz fozlife to the 1020, cherc the Loꝛd map grant tt oucr becauſe the Scignioꝛy was In


- effe in him, and the fee Gruple of the Setantorzpis not fulpended, but t£ the 3.020 pi(lcifc the


Tenant, 02 the Conant enfeofke rhe Logo vpon Condition there the whole eftate in the Seig⸗
niozy is ſuſpended, and therefoze be cannot during the fufpencion take benefit of anp Œicheat,


9; grant ouer his Seigntery.


¶ ITẽ ſi foient feig-


nioz ct tenafit, et

le tenát tient Del
Seignioz per rr, Ma:
ners Des ferutces, et ie
SHeignior granta fon
feigniozy a br auter, tí
letenant papa en fait
afcun parcel Dafcun De
leg feruiceg al graun-
tee,cco eft bone atto2n-


- ‘Ment, De et pur touts


les feruices, comt que


Caen De k-tett fuit


attourner foꝛſque De
celparcel, pur ceo que
lefeigniozy c(t entier,
coment que ils font Di-


Sel. 565.


Lfo if there bee

Lord and tenant,
and ‘the tenant holdeth
of the Lord by xx. ma-
ner of feruices, and the
Lord grant his Seignio-
ry to another, if the te-
nant pay in Deed any
parcell of any of the fer-
uices to the Grantee,
this is a good Attorne-
ment,of and for all the
feruices, albeit the en-
tent of the tenant was to
attorne but for this par-
cell, for that the Seig-
niorie is intire although
there bee divers man-


BEBE 2


€ Gre ft appeaz
Li tet) that an
Bttoznement
being mane For parcell tg
good fog the whole, fon
feing hee hath attozned
fo? part, tt cannot bee
voide £o? that, and god it
cannot be vnleſſe it be fox
the whole; but of tbig
futficient hath bone fato
befoze tn this chapter.


€ Paya aſcun par-
cell des ſeruices.
Here te tbe fourth erame
ple of an Btroznement (n
La, fos papment of a=
ny patcell of the fernices,
is an agreement in Law
tothe arant.


Œ Coment que
lentent del tenant


fuit dattorner , dc.
Quia


314 T ,


(a) 3447 9.1 €.


16.€.3.ti8 Vencher. 88.


5-5. 3. Tweugi cafa.


4 6.3.55. Malmans safe.
2).E.3.23. 5.E.4.2,
23.49 66. 7.H.4.1@
35.4.6,8. Per Prefers.


40.€ 03.34


i te 2 —


Lib.ʒ.


20. M.c.


48.EB.3.24. 3. L. 3.
Quidsuri: clamar.

a E. 3.28.39.
37.H.6.14. per Moyle,
V7.1, 3.35.


Capo.


Of Attornement.


Se.564.565


Quia intentio infervire uers maners Des fer= ner of feruices which


debet legibus, non leges
intentioni. Bnd pet ag


farre ag it map (temp Doit fatte, at,


with the rule of Lak, tt


uices que le tenant the tenant ought to


doe, &c.


ts honourable foz ali Judges to iudge accozding tothe intention of the patties, anb fo they
ought toboc, Bnd of thts fomewhat in this Chapter bath bene fat befoge, :


€ Œre is to be obs
fcruco that this
imogement in
the Scire facia: ( which te
no moze but that the De=
mandant (bal! baue eres
cution,éc,) is a god At⸗
toznem€t,albctt t£ ts prec
ſumed that Ludiciü reddi-
tur ininnitum,¢ that an
Dttormement in Law of
any part ts god for the
hole And this ig the
fift example that Little-
ton putteth of an At⸗
toznement in Law.
otethat in cafe of a
Desde nothing pafleth
before Attoznement ag
bath bene fiib ; In the
cafe of the fine, the thing
granted pafleth as to the


Sei. 564.


€ Cem fi foit Seig⸗

nio? ct tenant,et le
tenant tient Del Sũr
per plufozs mauers
des feruices, et E Sar
granta les feruices à
vn auter perfine, & le
grantee (ua bn Scire
facias hors Del mefme
lc fine put afcun parcel
De les ferutces, et ad
tudgement De recover,
cel iudgement eft bone
attoznement en lep,
pur touts les feruices,


Lfo if there bee

Lord and tenant,
and the tenant holdeth
of the Lord by many
kinde of feruices, and
the Lord grant the fer-
uices to another by fine,
if the Grantee fue a
Scire facias out of the
fame fine forany parcell
of the feruices,and hath
iudgement to recouer,
this iudgemét is a good.
attornement in Law for
allthe feruices.


Gate, but not to diſtraine ac. without Brtoznement. Fn the cafe of the King the thing grans
ted doth paffe both in cltate and tn pztaitp to diſtraine, ec. Without Ættoznement, bnle(fe (t be


of Lands 0; Cenements that are parcell of the Dutchy of Lancatter, anvipe out of the Couns


tie Palatine.


Sed.


Cl Cem i le Seignior dun
vent ferutce graunta les ſer⸗
uiceg à bn auter, et le tenant at=
tozna per bn Denier, et puis le
grauntec diftraine pur le vent a⸗
rere, et Ie tenant a luy fait vef-
cous, en ceo cas Ie grauntee na⸗
uera aflife Del rent, forfque
baiefe De refcous, put ceo que le
Dott del Denter per le tenant, ne
fuit fo?(que per vor Datto2ne-
ment, #c, Des (Ete tenant auott
Done ale grauntee le dit Denier,
come parce! De le rent, ou bn
matle, ou bn farthing per bop de
fei its


565.


Lfoif the Lord of a Rent fer-

uice grant the feruices to ano»
ther, and the tenant attorne by a
penny, and after the Grantee di-
ftraine for the rent behinde, & the
tenant make refcous, In this cafe
the grantee fhall not haue an Affife
for therent buta writ of refcoufe
becaufe the giuing of the penny
by the tenant was not but by way
of attornement, &c.- 7o te-
nant had giuen to tel ree the
faid penny as parcell of the rent,
ora halfe penny or a farthing by
way of feifin of the rent then this


y


Lib. ʒ. Of’Attornement. Sed.566.


feifin del vent , Donque ceo eff. isagood attornemetit, and alfo it
bone atto2nement, et augp eff. isa good feifin to the Grantee of
bon feifin al grauntee Del rent, therent,andthen vpon fuch ref.
et Dong fur ticl vefcous le gran cous the Grantee fhall haue an af-
tee auevaaflite,ac. fife&c.

¶ IIEreupon ig to be obſerued a vinersity betioérrie menep ginen bp way of Attorne⸗
# H ment, and Sobere it ts qiuen ag parcell of the rent bp Wap of fein of the rent. Foz


albcit the rent be not buc befoze the bap, peta papment of parcsil of the rent befoze
hand is an atuati feifin of the rent toaucan Bittle, And fo ttis it be gtue an oe, a bojle,


305


39.H.6.3.36. 3. E.4. 3.


Vid. Se8.235,
25.E.3.44. 49. Z. 3.1 5.


a ſheepe, a Zsnife, oz any other valuable thing in name of feifin of the rent beforehand, this te


Gd, Bnd thereforeapapment in name of fetin ts


moze benefictall foy the dzantes ; becaufe


that (s both an adnall fetfin and an attoznenent tn La and pet being ginen befoze the pay in


Which tbe rent ig duc, tt Hall not be abated ont of the ren


t. Syo,ag te give fctán o£ the rent,tt (s


saben foo part of tbe rent but as to the papment of rhe rent, (t is accoutitco ag no part of the


tent,ano the reafon of the Dinerat
Sen anonrablp. Here alfoappe
rent, whereof (as Littleton here fpeaketh ) an 2M fife doth |
Grante hath by Attoꝛnement befozc actuali poſſeſſion.


¶ ITem ſt font plu-
ſors Jointenãts
que teignont p cet-
taine feruices, et le
Seignioꝛ qvaunta a
hx auter les ferui-
ces.ct bn à les Join⸗
tenants attorna al
grauntee, ceo eft
auxp bon ficde touts
vſſent attorne, put
€co que le ſeigniory
eft entict, 3c,


Sect. 566.


Lfo if there bee

many Tointenants
which hold by cer-
taine feruices, and the
Lord grant to another
the feruices, and one
of the Ioyntenants at-
torne to the grantee,
this is as good as if all
had attorned, for that
the feigniory is en-
tire,&c.


v tg for Chat remedies to comc to rights oz Duties art ener tax
aretb that there is an actuall fcíün, o7 a fctfin in Dede o£ 8
pe; and afeifin tn Law Which the


€ Œrcig to be obferz
ned what manner

" Of @enants {ball

aftezn tothe Grant. 2? no firkk
Cb) t€ there two o? moze
Fopntenants and one of
themattozne tt (g fuffícient,
fozas it hath bent often fato;
there cannot bee an Attorne⸗
ment in part, And albeit
there is great Authoritp as
gaínft Littleton, pes toc Law
hath bene adiudged accosding
to Littletons opinton, ag tt
hath bene in other ef bis caz
{es wien thep baue come (m
queffion, and ag (t ts of am
Attoznement; fo ít is of a
feífin, a feifin of a Rent bp


the hands of ons 3lopntenant (g god foz all, and a feifin of partof tberent is a god feifin of


the whole.


(c) GE etther the Gzantoz op the Grante vic, tbe Attoꝛnement is Countermanded, bat

dE the Tenant die he that hath his effatemay attozne at anytime. Fe the Œenant grant ouer
his citate, bis Allignee may attorne,
(d) Afan Fnfant hath lands by purcbafeos by vifcent he (ball be compelled te attoine tira
Per qua feruitia, and mo mifthtete to tbe infant, for oben be commeth so full age bee trii? BIE
aime to hold of htm, 02 he map fap thathe hold by ieflerferuices, but there ſhouid be a greater
tnifchtcfc £02 the Lord tf the Attornenent ot an Intaut ſhould not be god, fox hee ſhouid lofe


bis fernices in the meane time,


Bf an 3nfant be a Lele he (ball be compelled to attorne in a Quid iuris clamat. Che Bee
"tomonent of an Intant to a grantbp Deede is god, and Mall binde him, becaufe tt íg alaw=
ad, albeit cbe not vpon that grantbp Ded compellabie to attozne, OF Baron and Fem
Littleton putteth many cafes in thts chapter.
(e) man that is deafe and Dumbs, and pet hath bnderftanding map attone by Ganes,

Cf) but one that is not Compos menti: cannot attogne, fog that be Chat hath no bnderftanding


cannot agree te the rant.


tohat conneyances fall be good Without Attornements moze (hall be fait in thie Chapter


in ble proper place.


Kkkk 3


Settion


37-H.6.39. 49.49, p.6.
34. H,5.43.

15 £.3.Executien 63.
40. E. 3.22. 38. H.6.6 5,

9: H.4.3 Bits Attorney Br. 97,


(b) 39.H.6.3.26.
SeeTookers cafe Mi füprá,
andthe Ausherities thera
sited,


(€) Vid ib. 4 fol.8. 18.6.


F0l.57. hb p folis 4.


Víd.4. H 6.39. 1 8. E.4. 10.


(4) 41. E. 3. dra 33.
26.E.3.63. 35. H.B. tit, AP
sorna: Br. a6. E. 5.63.
38.45.37. 32. E. 3.

Fit per qua feruie g.

2. E.g. Autern,78.
2.€.2.6id.97, 18. H 6.2.
Lib.p.fo.84.8 5 (Conyes eafe,
4. Mar. Die 137.
21.E.3. Ace 85.

7-€.2- det 140,

ie) 36.E.3.61.

(£ ) 18.8.5. 52.


Lib.3.


(g) 6.E.3.53. 25-F.3-5}-
Brook. Tif. Astorn. 48.


32 E. 3. Seir fac. 101.Dy. 1.4


(4p.10.


Of Attornement. $6£1.567.568.


Sed. 567.


€ [Tem & home leſſa tenerfits

aterme Dans, per force De
quelleafe le Leſſee eft ſeiſie, et
puis le Leſſoꝛ per fon fait gran=
ta le reuerſion a auter pur terme
De bie, ouentatie, ouenfee, él
content en tiel cafe quele Tenãt
aterme Dang attorna, ou auter=
ment rien pattera & tiel grantee
per tiel fait. Ct (t en ceft cafet te-
nant a terme Dans atturna al
Grantee, Denque maintenant
palfera le Franketenement al
®Grauntee per ttel atturnement
faung afcun liucrie De ſeiſin, ac,
put ceo que & afcun liuerie 9 fei-
(it. ac, ferra , ou befoigne Deftre
fait encel cafe, Donque le tenant
aterme Dans ferroit al temps De
liuerie De feifin oufte De fon pof-
ſeſſion, le quel fervoit encouniter
reafon, tc,


A ie if amanletteth teneméts
for terme of yeares, by force
of which Leafe the Leffee is {ei-
fed , and after the Leffor by his
Deed grant the reuerfion to ano-
ther for terme of life, orin Taile,
or in Fee, it behooueth in fuch
cafe that the Tenant for yeares at-
torne, or otherwife nothing fhall
paffe to fuch grantee by fuch deed.
And if in this cafe che T enaunt for
ycares attorne to the Grantee,then
the Freehold fhall prefently paffe
to the Grantee by fuch attornment
without any liuerie of fcifin, &c.
becaufeif any liuerie of fcifin,&c.
fhould be or were needtull to bee
made , thenthe Tenant for yeares
fhould beatthetime ofthe Liu

of feifin oufted of his poffeffion,
which fhould bee againft rea.
fon, &c .


Gre Littleton hauing fpoken of Graunts of Hetantoztes and Kent charges
€ H Rents fecke iſtuing out of iand,here treateth of a Bunt of a 1R euerüon of are :
onan eftate fox peares, feng thie grant of the Reuerſion mutt beby Dad, anm
the agreemont of the Leſſee for peares requifite thereunto, the Freehold and Inheritance do
thereby, ag cell ag by Liuerie of feifin, if (t were in poicífton: and the grant of the reue
bp Deed With tbe Attornement ofthe Leſſee, voe connteruatle tn Law a jresffement bp Linea
rie, as to the paling of the Freehold and Inheritance. x


«D Aterme dans. (e) And pet a Cenant bp Statute Merchant,
02 Genant bp Statute Stapie, 02 by Eleuir, mut aifo attoꝛne, forthe Grantee map bane &
Venue facias ad corpurandum, 03 tender the money, ec. and dif-hargethe Land, and (Cte reuer⸗
fion he qranted bp fine, they [ball be compelled to attorne in Quidiuris clamat. * p"
2inufo the Erectors chat baue the Tan? batill rhe debts bee paps, muſt attozne opon the
arant of the Keuerſion, although thep baue not an certaine termetoz poarcs, obs


Se. 568. ,


€ H Ere Littleton, fpea=


keth efa Keuerſiõ

expectant bpon an
an eftátetorti£c, 02 a gift in
Gaile,


€ Z conient que le
Tenaunt de la Terre at-


ments ſoiẽt leſ⸗

fes a bn home

pur ferme De bie, ou
Done en letaile pe
e


€ Lae fi Qr ene-


À
ifT en
—
for terme oflite,or gi-
uen in Taile,fauing the —
reuerfion,&c.ifhee ia


^


—


Lib...

leveuerfion,æc, fice:
lup en le reuerſion en
tiel cafe granta le re⸗
uetfion a bn autct
pcr fon fait. il couient
que le Œenaunt dela
Terre attourna al
®rantee en la bie le
@zantoz, ou auter-
ment, leGraunt eft
bord,


Of Attornement.


the reuegfion in fuch
cafe grant the reuerfi-
on to another by his
Deed, it behooueth
that the Tenant of the
Land attorne to the
Grauntee in the lifeof
the Grantor, or other-
wife the Graunt is
voyd.


Sed.569.
ternt al Granntee , crc.


Ret bs therefore ſpeake firft of
Œenaunt £02 life : and pet tn
forme cafe albeit Tenaunt foz
life bath granted ouer bis Gs
fate, pet he (ball atturne, (a)
ag tt Œenant in Dower o? bp


- the Curtefic, grant over vig oz


bereftate, and the heire grant
ouer the reverfon,the Cenant
in DoWer ozby the Curtefe
may atturne, becaufe at the
time of the Grant made thep
Svercatttenbant to the hepse
in reuevGion , andthe Gzarte


tanuot be Cenant in 3205065, 02 Tenant by the Gr urtefie, And it the iR cuerfon bee granted
bp fine, the fine mutt fappofe that the Cenant in Dower ozbyp the dLonrteie, did bolo the
land, albeit thep had fosmerTp granted over their eftate, and albeit the Keuerſion doth paſte bp
the Fine, pet the Quid iuris clamat muſt be brought again him that was Tenant at the time
of the note leuied. Wut pet after the reucrfion ts granted ouer, tbe Gꝛantee ball net baucanp
Adion of tak again the Tenant in Dower 02 bp the Curteũe, but the Acton of wat mak
be brought againſt their Aſſignee, and not agatnt themfelucs for Cenant bythe Curtcfie oz
Œenant in Dower cannot held of anp but of the betre : andtherefoze tn refped of the pziuitie,
thep hall attogne and be fubiect te an Action of waſt, as long az the reuerfion remaineth in the
beire, albeit thep bane granted over their whole eſtate. And tt is $oortbte of the obferuation,

- that t£ the grantee of the reuerfion doth bzing an action of Malt agatntt the aſſignee of the tenant
bp the curteffe,(b)the pl mutt rebcarfe the fat. hich proueth that no pzobibition of Wak in that
Cafelay at tbe common lay, as (t did t£ the beire had brought (t agatnft thetenant by the curtcae
himicife:t therfore ferme doe hold, Chat it the heire vo eraut ouer the reucrfion,that the attoꝛu⸗
ment of tbc Signe ofthe Tenant by the d urtcüe, op of Cenant in Dower is fuffíctent, be=
canfethep afterward mut be attendant and ſubiect to the Adton of tak,

FE the reuerſion of Lefle for itfe be granted,and Leſſee 07 lite aſſigne oner bts eftate,the Leſ⸗
fee cannot attoune, but the attoznement of the Aſſignee is god,becaufe(ag Littleton here faith )
ít behoueth that the Œcnant of the Land vocattogue, and after the allignement there ts note=
nore ozattcndance, ec. betweene the Leſſee and him in reuerfion,

Fé Lette For lifeaMigneth over bis cltate bpon Condition, he hauing ucthing in him but a


Condition fall not attozne, but the Afiiqne: map attormebecanfebe (8 Cenant of the land.


€ E fa meti ma


nec e(t, ſiterre


foit Done en taíle , ou
leſſe a on óc p terme
De bie.le remainder a
bn aut en fee, (f celup
en le remainder boíle


Seclion 569.


N the fame manner
is itifland be granted
intaile, orlettoaman
for term of Jife,the re-
mainder to another in
fee, ifhe in the rein wil


graunt this remainder.


€ Ittleton allo {peas
I here of an ts

tognement bp tenant
ín Œalle, anb truc it is that he
map attozne,but where the re=
ncrüon (8 granted bp fine, hee
tg not cOpellableto attozn, bez
caufe he bath an eftate of Finz
beritance Which may continue
fozcucr. Andfoitisof a te


; ffibititie
granter cett remand to another, &c. ifthe ^ Pd dnd + —
abmauter,tc, filete= tenant of the land at- pc abet reete fot is


nant dela tert attur=
na en la biele Gran:
to), donques E grant
de tiel rem eft bon ou
auterment nemy.


+


torne in the life of the
Grantor, then the grat
offucha remainder is
good, or otherwife
not.


^


Inher itance Which was once
ín bím. (c) But ik Cenannt
in taíle after poſſibilitie of Iſ⸗
fue ectine grant ouerchis E⸗
ſtate his Bilignee (bal be com=
pelted to attorn,becanfe be nes
uer had but a bare ftate ipw
ü


316


(a) 10,H.4,si8. Attorne. 16
11.H.4.18. 30.E.3.16. 38,
E.3.13. 18. E. 3. 3. 10. E, g.
Quidiurss alam, 41. 41.E.3.
19. Temps C. i. tit. Moſt, 122.


FRB. $5.8. Regi. fo.
4. E.3.16,


(b) £etf.72 .


18.E, 4.15.0. 26. B. 5.62.


$.H. 5.10.


13,E, 4.3.4. 3. E. 4.11,
43. E. 31.46, E. 3. 13.


s. M.5
35.8, 3. Quidiuri clam, vos


(c) Seethe (Chap.of Tenans m
Tatle after poffibilitieof fue
extin®. And Ewins see thera,


ested tobe adiudped,


> a


Lib.3.


13.E.4.3.4.


Capo.


Of Attornement. Seë.570 571;


But ag to Cenant in Taile notea diuerũtie bet weene a Quid iurisclamar,ano s Quem red*
ditum reddit, 93 a Per qua: feruicia ; fox againt a Tenant in Œafle, no Quid iuris clamat lieth,
ag (g afogcfapd, Wut if aman mabe a gift in tatic, the remainder (n fe, andthe Seignionte op
Kent charge wing ont of the land be granted bp Fine, tbe Conule fpallmaintaimea Per que
feruicia, 0; a Quem redditum, and compeli bim to attone,foz berein bis eftate of Anberitance
{8 no paiuiledge te him,foz that a tenant in See Gmple(ag big Bate was at the Common law)


ig alfo compeilable in tbefe cafes to attozne,


Setlion 570:


€ P 12.E.4. Et la eft ten?

* per tout le Court.que
Tenant en Catlene ferra arct
Datturner, mes fil atturna gra-
tis, ceft aflets bone, *


12. Edw.4. It is there hol-

* den by the whole Court,that

Tenant in Taile fhall not be com-

pelled toattorne, but it he willar-
torne gratis, it is good enough.


€ Dis is added to Littleton, andtherefoze though tt be god Law, anb tbe Bake trnty
— Brie 73 palle ít over, :


Seétion $71.


€ T Cem fiterve foit lee abn

home pur terme dans lere⸗

mainder a vn auter p terme
De bie, referuant al Leſſour bn
certaine vent per an,et liuerie De
feifin fur ceo eft fait al tenant p
terme Dans. fi ceſtuy en Ie reuer=
fion en ceft cate granta le reuet⸗
fion a on auter, ac, et le tenant
que eft en le remainder apzeg le
terme Dans fop attourua, ceo eft
bone Attournement, et celup à
que cet reuerſion eft graunt per
fozce De tícl Attournement Di-
ftrepnera le Tenant a terme
bans purle Bent Due aps tiel
Alttoznment,coment que te teũt
aterme Dans ne vnques attour-
nat alu», Ct la caufe eft.p ¢ que
lou le reũſion eft Dependant fur
leftate Del franktenem̃t, ſuffiſt
que let del franktenem̃t attour=
na fi fiel Geant del Keũſion, zc,


Lfoif Land bee let to a man

for yeares, the remainder to a-
notherfor life,referuing to the Lef-
for a certaine rent by the yeare,and
Liuerie of Seifin vpon this is made
tothe Tenant for yeares, if hee in
the Reuerfion in this cafe grant the
Reuerfion to another, &c. and
the Tenant which is inthe Re-
mainder after the terme of yeares
attorne, this is a good Attorne-
ment, and hee to whome this
Reuerfion is granted, by force of
fuch Atrornement fhall diftreyne
the Tenant foryeares forthe Rent
due after fuch Attornement, albeir
that the Tenant for ycres did neuer
attorne vnto him. And the caufe is
forthat where the Reuerfionis de-
pending vponan eftate of Freehold
it fufficeth that the Tenant of the
Freehold doe attorne vpon fuch a
Grant of the reuerfion,&c.


€ S V ffift que le Tenant del Franktenement attorna. Note Littlet. faith
not Here, That the Cenant of the Franktenement ought (n shia cafe to attorne , on
2 at


v


Lib.


Of Attornement.


that tt fuficeth that he doth attozne, And ZI heard Sir James Dier Chtefe Juſtice of the Coma
mon Pleas hold, that tn this cafett the tenant foz peares pip attojn it Would belt the reuerfion,
fo; fering the eftate fox peares (s able to fuppozt the cftate fox life, he ſhall binde him in the vez
mapnoes bp his Attornement in refped of His ctlate and pzinitie,


Sect.


€ ET eft afcauoír, que lou

$5 leas a terme Dans,
ou a terme De bie ou Donc
en taie eft fait a afcun home,
referuant a tiel leſſoꝛ, ou Dono?,
bu certaine vent, ac, ſi tiel leſſor,
ou 00n02, graunta fon reuer(ion
abuauter, æ le tenant Del tette
attourna, le rent pafla al graun⸗
tee, coment q̃ en le fait Delgrant
De ceuetfion nulmention foit fait
Delerent, pur ceo que le rent ett
incident al reverfion en tiel cafe,
& nemp à conuerlo, &c. Car ft
bome boile graunter le rent eu
tiel cafe a vn auter, veleruant à
luy le reuerfion Del terre, coment
que le tenant attozna a legraun-
tee, ceo ferra fozique ou vent
fecke, ac,


571.


AE it isto be vnderftood, that
where a leafe for yeares or for
life,ora gift in taile is made to any
man referuing to fuch Leffor or
Donor a certaine rent, &c. if fuch
Leffor or Donor grant his Reuer-
fionto another,& the tenant of the
land attorne,the rent pafleth to the
Grantee,although that in the deed
of the grant of the Reuerfion no
mention be made of the rent, for
thatthe Rent is incident to the Re-
uerfion infuchcafe, and not e con-
uerfo, Ge. For if aman willgrant
the rent in fuchcafe to another, re-
feruing to him the Reuerfion of
the Land,albeitthe Tenant attorne
tothe grantee, this fhall bee but a
Rent fecke, &c.


DE this Littleton hath fpoben befoze in the Chapter of Rests,


Section 573.


€ | Tem fi home leſſa terre a 0n
auter teur à fa bie a puis
ilconfirma p fon fait leftate
Ditenant a term̃ ð bie,le remain⸗
Der abn auter en fee, e le tenant
aterine ð bie accepta le fait, don⸗
ques eſt le remainder en kait en
celup a que le remainder eft Done
oulimitte permefmelefait, car
evlacceptance Del tenant a term̃
e bic De le fait, ceo eft vn agree⸗
vient Delup, a iſſint bu attorne⸗
ment en ley. Mes bucoze celuy


en le remainder nauera aſcun ac
tion


AH oifa manlet land toanother
for his life, and after hee con:
firme by his Deed the eftate ofthe
Tenant for life, the remaynder to
another in fee, and the Tenant for
life accepteth the. Deed, then
isthe remaynder in faitin himto
whom the remaynder isgiuen or
limited by the fame Deed. For
by the acceptance of the Tenant
for life ofthe deed,this is anagree-
mentofhim , and fo an Attorne-
ment in Law. But yet hee inthe
remaynder fhall not haue any acti-
L1H


56.572.373.


Pafeh, xg. £ hein Brasbrit
ches Cafe in Communni Banco.


Lib.3.


Weds Leh. 525.975.

Wide Th. (Com. $n (eltbivffs
Cafe. De®. & Sid. cap.30.
fsl.93.94. J
8.7.3.0 walte ite Laure oferio
45. E. 3 eenfirPat, 4.


35. H.6 fel 8. 14. H.8.
PL. Com, 49.58 There kreor-
tons cafa. 45.E.3-14.15.
Et. H.4.39. 14. RH. 4. 31.


Cap-1o.


tion de toafte, ne auter benefit
pertiel remainder, { non que il
auoit le Dit fait en poigne,per que
Fremainder fuit taile ou graunt
alup, Ct pur ceo que entíel cag
Etenant a term de bie bolle p cag
retcigner le fait a luy, a cel entent
quecelup enle remainder naue-
toít afcun action à waſte enuers
lup , pur ceo que tl te poít bener
Dauer le fait € (à poſſeſſion, il fer=
rabone & (ute chofe en tiel cas
put celup enleremapnder, que
bu fait endent foít fait per celup
que voile faire tícl confirmation,
8 leremapnder oufter. ac, a que
celup que fatt tícl confirmation
Deltucra bn part Del Indenture
al tenant a terme De bie, ale aus
tcc part à celup que aueta le rez
mainder, Ct Donque tl per mon-
flrancedele part Del endenture,
poit auer action De waſt enuers
le tenant a terme De pie, a toutg
auters aduantages que celup en
le remainder poit auer en tiel
cafe, ac,


Of Attornement.


Sedl..573.
on of Wafte nor otherbenefit by
fuch remaynder vnleffe that hee
hath the faid Deedin hand where-
by the remaynder was entayled
or granted to him. And becaufe
that in fuch cafe the Tenant for
life peraduenture will retaine the
Dcedto him to this intent that he
inthe remaynder fhould not haue
any Action of Wafte againft him
for that hee cannot come to haue
the Deed in his poffeffion it will
beea good and fure thing in fuch
cafe for him in the remaynder,that
a Deed indented beemade by him
which will make fuch Confirma-
tion, and the remaynder ouer, &c.
and that hee which maketh fuch
Confirmation deliuer one part of
the Indenture to the Tenant for
life,and the other part to him that
fhall haue the remaynder. And
then he by fhewing of that part of
the Indenture may haue an Action
of Wafte againft the tenant for life
and all other aduantages that he in
the remainder may haue in fücha
cafe, &c.


€ Cre Littleton putteth acafe of aremapnder Sobereunto an Attoꝛnement is requi⸗
Hie Bnd this ts the ſixt crample ofan Attoznement in Law,


€ Remaynder a vnauter de. DE this (uficient hath been (aid


in. the Chapter of Confirmation, Sc&. 515.


©, Si non que ilauoit le faiten poigne. And albeit he hath no reme⸗
bie to come to the Deed during thelife of Tenant Foz life, pet becaufe hee to privy in eftate hes
fhalinot maintaine an Action of waſte without {being the Ded, but When the remaynder
19 once executed, be fall not need to fhe tbe Deed · .


€ Z ferra bone & fuer cbofe, cc. Werebp it appeareth bote necef
fary it is to fe learned abnicein a mans Œcnuepance , for thereby (ball bee prenented manp
queftfong, anb not to follow tbt aduice of bím that is experimenteb onip. Foꝛ ag in Phiucke
Nullum medicamentum eft idem omnibus, foin aww one forme o2 preGdent of Conwepance


él not Gt alicafes,


Se,


Crcem deur

Joyntenants
foat,L 8 queux
leſſont lour tert abn
auter pur terme De
bie, rendant acura
lour heires certaine
rent per an, en ceſt
cafe (( bn Des
opntenants en le
reuerfion , cele(fa a
lauter Joyntenant &
mefme le veuerfton,
ceftreleas eft bone, &
celup à que Ie releas
eft fait, aucta folcint
le tent. Del tenant a
terme De bie, a aucta
folement bn batefe De
toa(te enuers luy co-
ment Gil ne onques
attorneroit per force
de tiel releas ac, Ct
la caute eft pur le pꝛi⸗
nity que bn foits fuif
perenter le tenant a
terme De bie, a eut en
le reuerfion,


Of Attornement.


Sell. 574.


Ale if two Ioyn- ¶


À tenahts bee who
let their Land to ano-
ther for tearme of life
rendring to them and
to their heires a cer-
taine yearely rent. In
this cafe if one of the
Ioyntenants in the re-
uerfion releafe to the
other loyntenant in
the famereuerfionthis
releafe is good, and he
to whom the reléafe is
made fhall haue only
the rent of the Tenant
for life, and fhall only
haue a Writ of Wafte
againft him although
hee neuer attoined by
force of fuch releafe,
&c. And the reaforiis
for the priuitie which
once was betweene
the Tenant for life
and them in the reuer-
fiori.


Set. 574.


Ewx Iointenants ,
Bnd fo (tta (ag ít (9
bereto be vnderſtod)
aibett there bee thaee 01 moze
Fopntenants,and one of thers
releafeth to one of the other.
It ts true that there toa
difference betweene thefe ves
leafeg, fox the Keleaſe tn the
one cafe maketh no degree but
hee to Sohom the iReleale tg
made is f{uppofed in from the
fir(t Feoſtor, anb in the other
it wozketha degree, and hee
to obo the Reieafe tg made
ig in the per bp him, pet in
nepther of tbefe cafes there is
requifite any Attoꝛnement, fos
both of them are within Lit-
tletonsreafon (£92 the prints
tie,€c.)
€ Pur le priuitie,
de. For if one Joyn⸗
tenant make a Leaſe fo
peares referuing a Rent and
Dteth, the Surutuoz Mall not
haus the Rent , ano therefore
Littleton here abbetl) mates
tfallp fog tbe p2aiuitp that was
betspeene the Œenant for life
and them tn the reuerſion.

. Bnd bere ít ts ged to bee
feene What grantozs or ethers
that make Conuepances, tc.
are fuc) ag their Gants op
Œonucpances are either god
Without Attognement , og
Shere tbe Cenant fd no wap
compellable to attozn, Qr erant


fo»lífc fhall not bee compelicd to attoine in a quid iuris clamat bpona grant of a reuerfion
by fine holden of the King in Chtefe without licence, but the reafon hereof {a not becaufe the
Æenant for life might becharged With the fine, for his e(fate. ag moze anctent then the fine
leuted, but becaufe the Court Will not fuffer a pretudice tothe king, anb the ing map feife
the reverfion andrent, and fo tbc Œenant {ball be attendant to another. Alſo (t is a generait
tule that when the qrant by fine te oefcaüble; there the Grenant (batl not bee compelled te at⸗
tonne.

As if an 3 n£ant leute afine, this te oefeafible bp wꝛit o£ (ros during bis minoattie, anb
therefore the Œenant fball not becomptlle" te attozne.

So it the Land be holden in ancient Demeſne, and hee in the veuerfion leuteth afine of the
reuerfion at the Common Lavo, the Tenant (bail not be compellable to attojme , bccaufe the c»
flate that pafled is reucrüble (m a wꝛit o£ Deccit.

Soil Tenant tn tapte had leuted a fine, tbe Cenant ſhould not be compelled to attoane , bec
cauſe it was defeaGbie by theiffue tn taple,

Wut now the Statutes of 4-H.7.anb 12 H.8 bauíng ginen a further ſtrength tofines to
barre tbe iſſue tn taple, the reafon of the Common Law being taken atwap, the Cenant in this
tafe (ball be compelicd to attonne, as tt Was adiudged (*) (m luftice Windhams Cafe,

FE an altenation be (n Moztmainethe Cenant (ball not beecompelied to attoꝛne becaufe the
1.020 39 atament map defeat tt, : Zl -

Z See


38.


2. Elis: Dier. 15


45-E.3. 6.5.

13.E D. Bier 188;
Lib. 3.fol.86.1upica
Windloams caſo


36.H.6.15.


.E3.25. 31. E. 3. Anciens
"D emefse 16.


24. E 3.15.5. 37:H,6.32,
48. E.3.33.


(*) Lib.3.fol.86. za,
Ge cafe. *


47.5, 3.7. 32,8,3,18,


Lib.5.


Wid. SB. 645.653.556.


46.E. 3.30.5. 3-H. 5:4
3.H.512. 34. H. 6.6.
18. E.3.47. 9. H.6.tc.


(€) Brasbrisches cafe
Pis. Eli


Cop 106
Sed.


Cf £o meine lemanet, pur I


mefime Ia caue eft, lou hoe
leffaterreabn auter pur terme
Debie, Le remainder a bn autet
pur terme De die, referuant le
tcuecfion al Icffour, en ceft cas fi
celup eniereuerfion releſſa à ce⸗
lup cn le remainder ct a fes
beíteg tout fon baoít ac. bonq;s
celup en le remainder ad bn fee,
&t, et il aucta bn bꝛiefe De Waſt
enuers le tenant a terme De bie
fang alé attoznement De Iup,ac.


Of Attornement.


$60.575.59 6.


575. j


N the fame manner, and for
the fame caufe is it, where a
man letteth land to another for
life, the remainder to another for
life, referuing the reuerfion tothe
leffor, inthis cafe if hee inthe re-
uerfion releafeth to him inthe re-
mainder and to his heires all his
right,&c. Then he in the remain-
der hath a fee,&c. and hee fhall
hauea writ of Wafte againft the
tenant for life without any attorne-
ment of him,&c.


€ Hore hane bene
| now in all fez

uen examples,

that Littleton putteth of
an BDttoznement in Law,
And here he putteth two
caſes alſo of a notice in
La. And the reafon of
both theſe ate here ren⸗
died by Littleton, Firſt
foz the notice Littleton
faith that the Leſſe (hall
not bp Law be miſconu⸗
fant of the feoffments
that Sere made of and
bponthe famciand, na
the reafon of the Attoꝛne⸗
ment is becaufe the
Sohole fee fimple paſſeth
by the Feoſtment, and
the ilcfiee bp big regrefle
leaneth the reuerfion in
the jrcoffee which fatth
Littleton fg a god At⸗
toxnement. be fame
La it is of a Œenant
bp Statute Merchant
62 Staple, oz Elegit. And
fo it (& of a Leaſe fo2 life,
ag Littleton here fatth,
and fo it was refolued
(e) in Brasbritches cafe,


El.
Deane of Paul caf 10; Eli, and alter ín the Deane ot


Pauls his caſe in the


This needeth no erpitcation.


Sethion 576.577.


€ [TM ſi home leila
terres ou tene⸗
ments abn auter pur
termeDes ans, et puis
tl oufta fon termour,ct
ent enfeoffa bn auter
en fee,ct puts le tenant
aterme Dans enter fur
le fcoffee, enclaimant
fon terme.ac, et puis
fait boaft,en ceft cafe le
feoffee auera perla ley
bn briefe oc waſt cns
vers lap, ct bncoze tl
nattorna(t pas a luy.
Et la caute eft, come
teofuppofe, B cco que
celup que ad droit De
auer terres ou tene-
ments pur teri Dans,
ou auterment, ne fer=
toit per là ley mifco-
nufant De leg feoff-
ments d fueront faits
De


Lfo if a man lett

lands or tenements
to another for terme of
ycares, and after he ouft
histermor, and thereof
enfeoffeanother in fee,
and after the tenant for
yeares enter vpon the
feoffee, clayming bis
term,&c. and after doth
wafte, in this cafe the
feoffee fhall haue by
Jaw a writ of Wafte a-
gainft him, and yet hee
did not attorne vnto
him. And the caufe is
as I fuppofe, for that he
which hath right to
haue lands ortenements
for yeares, or otherwife
fhould not by lawe bee
mifconufat ofthe feoff-
ments which were made
of and ypon the fame


Lib.5.


de et fur mefines les
terres, ac, et entant
que per ticl fcotfment
letenant a terme Dans
fuit mis hors De fon
poſſeſſiõ ct p fon entre
tl caufatt le reuerfion
Deftrea celupa que le
feoffinent fuit fait, cco
eft bon attornement,
car celup a que le feoff-
ment fuit fait, auoit
nul reuerſion Deuaunt
que le tenant a terme
Dans auoit enter fur
lup, pur ceo que il fuit
en poſſeſſionen fon Dc-
mefue come De fee, ct
per lent Del tenant a
teri dans (Lp ad forſ⸗
que dit renerfion, quel
c(t ple fait Etcít a term
dãs sſ. p fon entrie,ac,


Of Attornement,


lands,&c. and inafmuch
as by fuch feoffinentthe
tenant for yeares was
put out of his poffeffion,
and by his entrie he cau-
fed the reuerfion to bee
to him to whom the
feoffment was made,
this is a good attorne-
ment, for bee to whom
the feoffment was made
had no reuerfion before
the tenant for yeares had
entred vpon him for
that he was in poffeffion
in his demefne as of
fee, and by the entrie of
the tenant for yeares,
hee hath buta reuerfion,
which isby the a& of
thetenant for yeares, s.
by hisentrie,&c.


Seit.577.


Eſme la lep eff,
eM come tl Cemble,
lou bn Leas eft fait
pur terme ð bie, fauant
le reuerſion al Leffour,
file Leffour diſſeiſiſt 1e
Leflee,s fait feoFment
en fee, (f le tenant a
terme De bie enter et
fait waſt, le feoffee a-
uera briefe De wate
fans afcun auter at-
toutnement, Caufa qua
fupra, &c.


He fame Law is, as

it feemeth where a
Leafeis made for life,
fauing the reuerfion to
the Leffor if the Leffor
diffeifethe Leffee, arid
make a feoffment in fee,
if the tenant for life en-
ter and make wafte the
Feoffee fhall hauea writ
of wafte without any
other attornement, Cau-


fa qua ſupra, &c.


Se.577,


(onion piace; But
fall the Helle (n this
Cale whether bec wili 02
no doe an act that a=
mount to an Attorne⸗
ment, viz. by his regreſie
og eifelofe the pꝛoũit of
bis land ? Bnd forme doc
bois that tn that cafe tf
the Refles fo» 1ife Doc rea
cover tu an. 2o tfe, this
igno Attornement, bee
caufe hee come to tt bp
courte of Law, and not
by bis voluntary ad.
And vet in that cafe ag
ín the cafe o£ the fine the
ftateof the reuerfon is
ín the Heofke. (f ) Wut
others boe hold ft all one
in cafe of a reconerp,and
a regreſſe.

(g) It tbe Leflor diſ⸗
feife Œenant fog life 02
onfte Œenant for pears,
and maketh a feoffment
in fee, by thts the rent
teferued bpon tbc. Leaſe
fo: life oz peares is not
extinautthed, but by the
tegrefic of the Leſſee the
tent (8 reuiued, becaufe
ft is incident to the re-
uerfon : and fo hath (f
bene adiudged. But {€
8 man be fcífeo of a rent
in fe, anb Diffetfe the
Tenant of tbe lano, anb
make a feoffment in fe,
tbe Genant re-entreth,
this rent is not reuínen,
And fo note a bíuerfitp
bet weene a rent incident
to a renerfion,and a rent
not incidẽt toa rcucrfo,

HE two topnt Lefles
foz peares oz fox life bee
ouſted 02 diſſetſed by the
Leloz, and he enfcffe as
nother tf one of the Leſ⸗
feg re-enter this te a
God Ættoznement , and


fball binde both, for an -


Attornement in law is
ag Grong as an Bttozns
ment in Ded,


any hich might

ims either hath the Gzantes for life the land tn pofſeſſion, foag he may well be mifconufant
of the feoffment made bpon the Land, and fo out of the realon of Littleton, But pet the reuers
fion infe doth pale to the Seoker,


AML 3


$ eios ?


319


$4 #67,


(F) 18.E.3.48.5.
Lib.6.f0,60.b.
Sir Moyle Fsrches cafe.


(8) 9 4.6.16. Deane of
epauls cafe V bi fupra,


Lib.3.


Wi Sek. 124.275.


Capo.


€ Eere tt appeareth,
that $oberc the Ans

ceftoz taketh an €s

Gate of Freehold, anb after a
Bemainder ig limited to bis
right Beires , that the fe
Gmplo vefteth in himfelfe, as
well as tf (t had bene limited
tà him and his heires, Foy bis
ight beireg are in this cafe
010g of limitation of eftate,
and not of purchafe. Dtber-
wile tt (8 here the Aunce⸗
fto; taketh but an eftate foz
yeateg : Bs (€ a Leaſe fos
peates be made to A. the rec
mainder to B. in Caple, the
temaínbet to the right heires
of A. there the reminder bee
flet) not in A. but the right
heires (ball take by purchafe if
A. ble during the eftate Gratie,
fopas the Buncettoz and the
Wepre ate Co:rclatiua of ne
heritances , fo are the Teſta⸗
toz and Erecutos, 02 the In⸗
teffatcano Bomintftratour ef
Chattels. Ænbfoit is (£ A.
makca 4reoffement tn fre to
the dfe ef B. £o? life, and after
tothe bfc of C. fog life o2 in


Tatle,and after to the bfc oftheri


Setlion 578.


¶ J Cem ft teas foit

fait pur terme de
bie,lerematnder abn
autec en le Taile, le
remaind oufter ales
Droit heires le tenant
a terme De bic, Cn
ceſt cate f( lc tenant a
terme De bie granta
fon remainder en fee
à auter per fon fait,
celremainder maín-
tenant paffa per le
fait fans afcun At⸗
tourmment,ac, Car ff
afcun Doit atto2nc en
ceft cafe, ceo ferroit
letenant a terme De
bie, et en bain ferroit
que tl atturneroit fur
S grant Demelne, ac,


Of Attornement.  Seël.578.579.


Lfo if a Leafe be

made for life, the
remainder to another
in Taile,the remainder
oucr totheright heirs
of the Tenant for life:
In this cafe if the Te-
nant for life grant his
Remainder in fee to
another by his Deede,
this Remainder main-
tenant paffeth by the
Deede without any
Attournement,&c. for
thatifany oughtto at-
tournein this cafe, it
fhould be the Tenaunt
for life, and in vaine
it werethat he fhould
attorne vpon his owne
Grant, &c.


gt heirs of B. B. hath tbe fre ümple (aim as wel Soler


itis bp way of limitation of bfc, ag when it is by Dt executed. 3
€ Ex vaine ferroit, &c. Quod vanum & inutile eft Lex non requi-


it. Lex eft ratio fumma, qua iubet quz funt vtilia & neceflari
guments Dane from hence are forcible inlaw,


$ed.


€ | Cem fi foít Seignioz et te-

nant,et le «Tenant tient Del
Seigntoz per certaine vent,et G-
uíce De chiualer. fi le Sr gran-
tales (eruítes De fon teñt p fine,
les feruices font maintenant en
le grantee per force Del fine, mes
bucozele Sfr ne poet pag Di-
fltepnep afcun parcel de les fer-
utces tang attournment: Mes fi
le tenant devia fon heire Deing
Age) ie Stic auera le gard del


corps


a, & contraria prohibet ; anb avs


379:


A Lfo if there be Lord and Te-
nant, and the Tenant holdeth
of the Lord by certaine Rent and
Knights feruice, if the Lord grant
the feruices of his Tenant by fine,
the feruices are prefently in the
Grantee by force of the Fine : but
yet the Lord may not diftreine for
any parcell of the feruices, with-
out Attornement. But if the Te-
nant dieth, his heire within age,


the Lord fhall haue the Wardfhip


Lib.5.


co2pg Del beíte, et De fes terres,
&c, coment que il ne vnq; attur=
natt, pur ceo que le Seigqniogte
fuit en le grantee maintenant p
fozce ol fine, Ct auxy en tiel cas,
filetenant mozut fans bete, le
Seiguioz auera les tenemts p


Of Attornement.


$68.58 0.581.


of thebodie of the heire, and of
his lands, &c.albeit he neuer attor-
ned, becaufe that the Seigniorie
wasin the Grauntee prefently by
force ofthe Fine. And alfo in fuch
cafe if the Tenaunt die without
Heire, the Lord fhall haue the Te-


bop Defcheat,


nancie by way of Efcheat.


€ Her Littleton beginneth to (beo What aduantages the &onufo of a Fine map
take befoze Attoznement.and What not, (h)8..3.44. 26.83.63."

10.1.6. 16.3 4. H.6.7.

12.E.4.4. 40. E. 3.7.

$. H. 5.12 48.£.3. 15.5.

3-E.2. Droit 33e


Ch) Fuſt, Wecannot diſtreyne becaufe an Auowꝛie is in lieu of an Action, and
thereunte priuitie ts requifite, So lhe&otfe,anb foz the fame caufo hee can baue no Action of
Woalt, noꝛ Wiit of Entrie,ad Communem legem, 92 in Confimili cafu, oꝛ in caſu prouifo, pit

9f Œuftomes and Seruices, noz wꝛit of toard,¢c.

at (fa man make a Leafe for peares, and grant the renerfion bp fine, if tbe Leſſee bec ou⸗
Hed, and tbe Conuſe villeifed, the Lonulee Without Attoꝛnement (hall maíntatne an Atle,
fo? thts wꝛit (g maintained again aftranger, Sobere there needeth no pituitíe, Bnd fuch
things as rhe 1020 map feife o? enter into Without fuing anp Acton, there the Conufe befoze
anp Atroznment may take benefit thercof,as £0 fetfe a ward 02 Heriot, oꝛ to enter into the lands #
02 tenements of a Ward, o2 efcheated to him, oꝛ to enter £o; an altenation of Œenant £o lite op :
peares, oof Œenant bp Statute Merchant, Staple, 07 Elegit; tohts diſheriſon.


Set. 580.581.582.


€ H meſme le IN the ſame manner € JE is av^ in our boks, 40.€.3.7.43.€. 3.5.
po eft, fí itis, ifamangraunt qd LED —
Hoe granta le reuer⸗ the reuerfion of his notte — of paf, se NES
fion de fon tenaunt a Tenant forlife,toano- Sranv other priuiledge, t£ bee
| hattozne Without faut
terme de bie a bn 2 * by fine, the reuer- bis — cat be ath
per fine, le reuerfion fion maintenant paf- leffít:Sobicb is forobee tw-
pafla maintenant al fethtothe Grantecby à Qué es denos eds
Grantee pet fozce BI forceof the finc, but bp the Conufe ofafine, that
finc, meg legtantee the Grauntec fhall ne- ose bat arrome genes,
íammes natia Actié uer haue an A&ion of bis puintledge isla, fop that
: n. the Watt fu tm to b
0 uoa fang atturn⸗ Waft withont Attorn- but a bit Genant fon ife,
ment,zc, ment, &c. and bp bis generall Attorne⸗
ment according to the t0 2ít
Sedi, 581. ts — — ae
any prtutledge buta bare Es
€ Es vncore ft Vt yet ifthetenant atefoziife. But if bpon a
Menanta D fo) lic diem garer byte,
terme De bie alienaft in fee, the Grantee terne, bec lofeth no patutienge,
enfec,le grantee poet may enter, &c.becaufe UN riv MM
pM pur cco que me Reuerfion was in in pa AD EMA At-
reuerſion fuit en luy him by force of the  fomesent in Las, 29s it the
2 z Let
pet force del Fine, et fine, and fuch Aliena- — ete Slt al
tiel alienation fuit a tion was to his difhe- tn Fs and the Leffee re-enter,
fonditb erit ance, ritance: this (8 an attoznmentin law,


Seff.


bicb Hall not pzetxdics plus


és — —— "1


Lib.3.


(b)43.E.3- 5


d E.3. 11.2. Vet. X Ein
Per qua feruiein. §.E.3.
»Mefne 56.& Per qnæ fir-
mesa 16. 370H,6.33.39.Heob.
25.18.6.4.7.


ys, ell. 5 55.


Capa.


of anp printicdgesfo it to (£ the
ZLefloz lente a fine of the re=
Herfion, and the Conulee die
Without beirc, whereby the
Beuerfion cichcateth, in this
cafe the La doth fupplp an
Attoznment, and therefore the
Lei fhatiiofe no pztutiedge.
Bat in the Quid iuris clamat,
ik the Lellæ them bis eſtate
and big printiedge, anb is
rcabíc,fautng tohimbts p2t-
utledge,tc. to attoane, bercbp
either bis printiedge [ball bee
allotoco and entred of record,
02 be fball not be compelled to
attogne: ( b ) and tf the plaín-
tifebce within age, foas hee
cannot acknoWlendge the pric
utledge,the tenant {bal not bee
compelled toattozne vntil big
full age, Sohen bee map ace
knowledge it, Wut other-
wile tt is, Casfome hold) tf a
Quid iuris clamat bee brought
bp Waron and eme, the
Prtutledge (ball be entred into
the Kolle notwithftanding
the is Sfewe Eouert, And
ina Per que feruicia bꝛought
by the Œonufæ of the Wefne,
the Cenant may thew that he
held bp homage Aunceltreil,
and fauing te him bis tars
rantieand acqnittall,he ts reas
Bie to attozne. In the fame
manner, (f tbe Cenaunt hath
anp other acquitall, and the
Meine lente a Fine to one fos
it€e,the rematnder to another
in dre, the Œenant foz life
bitngeth a Per que feruicia,
and tbe @enant is readte to
attozne fautng bis acquítall,
and the laintif acknowled⸗
geth tt,and thereupon the tec
nant attozne, tenant foz itfe
dieth; in thts cafe albeit reo
galarlp the Ættomement to
the Genant fo? life (e an At⸗
toznement to bim in the Bes
mainder, pet in this cafe hee
tn the remainder fhall not bí-
Grepn,til he hath acknowied-
ged the acquítall, hich mult


Of Attornement.


Sed. 582.


Sect. 582.


Es ence cag
€ M lou le Snr
granta les feruices à
fon (enant per fine,
fi Tenant deuic (fon
beite efteant de plein
age)le Grantee per le
fine nauera telíefe,
ne vnques Diftrepne-
rapur reliefe, finon
que él auoít lattoꝛne⸗
ment Del @enaunt
que moꝛuſt, card tiel
chofe que gift eu Di-
ftreffe, fur que le 25fe
ð Kepleuin eft fue,æc,
home Doit & content
Dauotoet F prifel bot
et D20íturcl,ac, et la
couient eſtre attoan-
ment ol Tenant co⸗
ment que le graunt
De tiel chofe foit per
fine, mes Dauer le
gard De les terres ou
tenements iflint ten?
Durant le nonage
Ibeíte,ou De eux auct
per boy defcheat, la
ne beſoigne afcun diz
fivefle, ac, mes bn
entricen la terre per
force De le D20ít Del
feigniozy que E gran⸗
tee ad per force Del
4rítie RC, Sic vide di-
uerfitatem,


bein a Perque feruicia bꝛought bp him againff the Tenant.


€ Mien enfee cc.


Precedent Section.


PreceBent Section,


Vt in this cafe
where the Lord
granteth the feruices
of his Tenant by fine,
if the Tenant die ( his
heire being of ful age)
the grantee by the fine
fhallnot haue reliefe,
nor fhall euer diftreine
for reliefe, vnleffethat
hee hath the Attorne-
ment of the Tenaunt
that dieth: for of fuch
athing which lieth in
Diftreffe , whereupon
the Writ of Repleuin
is fued, &c. a man muft
and ought to auow the
taking good & right-
ful; &c.and there there
ought to be an attorn-
ment of the tenant, al-
though the graunt of
fuchathing be by fine.
But to haue the ward-
fhip of the lads or tits
foholdéduring theno-
nage of the heire,or to
haue them by way of
e{cheat,there needs no
diftrefle,&c.but an en-
tric into the land by
force of the right of
the Seigniorie, which
the Grauntee hath by
force of the fine, &c.
Sic vide diutrfitaté cc.


Of this fuffícient hath been fapdinthenert
€ Navera reliefe, de.


ME this futfícient hath been faíb inthe next


Set,


| Lib.3.


¶ [ge fifoit Seiqnior,mefne

é tenant, 4 lemeîne graunta
per fine Ics feruices de fon tenat
abn auter en fee, a puts le gran:
tee mozutt fans eite, ocles fer=
uices Del melnaltie Deuiendzont
& efcheate al Sreignior Para⸗
mont per boy Delcheat,t (Lapseg
leg feruices Del mefnaltie font
ADerere, en cet cas celup que
fuit Seignior Paramont poit
diſtreiner le tenant.nient obftant
que le tenant ne vnques attur=
nati, et le cauſe eff, pur ceo que le
mefnaltie fuit en fait en le gran⸗
tee per force De le Dit fine, a Ie
SHeignio2 Paramont putffoft a-
uower fur le grauntee, pur cea
que él fuit ton tenant en fait, co-
ment quetl ne ferroita ceo com
pelle , ac, Mes ft le grantor
en cct cafe Deuiaft fans Dette en
la bie le grantee donque tl ferroit
compelle dauower (ur le grantee,
etaury entant que le Seigniour
Paramont ne claime te mefnal-
tie per force Del graunt fait per
fine leuie per le mefne, mes per
bertue De fon Seigniozie Para⸗
mont, $, per bay deſcheat, il a⸗
uota fur le tenant pur les fet-
uices que le mefne auoít, #c, .c0-
ment quele tenant ne buques at=
turna pas,


Of Attornement,


$e.


585.


Líoifthere be Lord, Mefne

and Tenant, and the Mefne
grant by fine the feruices of his
Tenant to another in fce, and after
the grantee die without heire,now
theferuices of the mefnaltie fhall
come and efcheate to the Lord Pa-
ramont by way of efcheate, And
if afterwards the feruices of the
Mefnaltie beebehind. Inthis cafe
hee which was Lord Paramont
may diftreine the Tenant,notwith-
ftanding that the Tenant did neuer
attorne, and the caufe is, forthat
the Mefnaltie was in dced inthe
Grantee by force of the faid fine,
and the Lord Paramont may auow
vpon the Grantee becaufe in deed
hee was his Tenant,albeit hee fhall
notbecompelled tothis, &c. But
ifthe Grantor in this cafe had died


without heire in the life of the


Grantee, then he fhould bee com-
pelled to auow vpon the Grantee
and alfo in as much the Lord Para-
mont doth not claimethe Mefnal-
tie by force of the grant made by
fine leuied by the Mefne but by
vertue of his Seigniorie Para-
mount, viz. by way of efcheat he
fhall auow vpontheTenant for the
feruices which the mefne had,&c.
albeit that the Tenant did neuer
attorne.


€ Gre Littleton putteth a Cafe Where one that clapmeth onder a Conule bp fine map
diſtraine oz maintaine any Aion, albeit there Wag never anp Attoznement made to
the Conuſe o? to Sun that hath bis etate,


Seël.s83,


And hercis a diuerſitie betwene an ac tn Law that giueth one Inheritance in liew of an⸗
other, and an Act in Haw that conwepeth the eftate of the Conufe only. DE the former Lic-
tleton here putteth an example of the efcheat of the Welnaltie Which drꝛowneth the Sctanto=
tpi9iraront, andtherefoze reafon Would that the 1Lozo by this ac in Law ſhould haucag
much benefit of the Meſnaltie clcheated, ag he had of the Deigntozp that ts dzotwned, and the
Father korthat the Law caftetb it bpor him, and hee hath no remedte to compell the Tenant ta


m um attoang


ju


44.8.3.3. 34. H. 6.5.
37.H.6.38. 19. H.6.32.
5.H.7. 18. per Curiars,


Lib.6.fel.68, Str Moyle
Finchas café,


Lib. :


(€) Temps € a, LAttorn. 18.
39-H 6.38. per Prifos.


Sir Moyle Finches cafe,
vis fupra,


(d) 45.E. 3.2.34. H. 6.7.
5, H.7.18, per Curiam.


t 3H, 4 aunyrie 237


Lib.6.fol.88. in Sir Moy'e
Finches caſe.


27.H,8.c4p.1e.


Capo.


Of Attornement. Sef..584.585.


attoꝛne. Bnother reafon hereof Littleton here peelveth, becanfe the Lord commcth to the Meſ⸗
naltie bp a Hetgntozie Jaramont, and therefore there needeth no Bttopnement (c ) As tf Lefe
fee Foz life be ofa Mannoͤꝛ, and be ſurrender bis eftate to the Lefioz there needeth no Attorne⸗
ment of the Tenants becaufethe Leſſoz (9 in bp atitle Paramount, Wut (£ th: Conule
dieth, andthe Law cafteth bis Heigniorp bpon his hetre by difcent,he (ball not bein any better


eltate, then his Anccftoz ag, becaule be clapmeth ag beíre meerelp by the Connie,

Ho itis (ag bath bene fato) ifthe d onufe of a fine before Attoꝛnement bargainety and
felleth the Seigntory bp Deed indented and inrolled, the Warganee (bali not diftraime becaufe
the Bargainoz,from Whom the Seignioꝛy meueth,had neuer actuali poſſeſſion. »

So and foz the fame rcafon t£ a Renerfion be granted by fine, andthe Conufæ before Attoꝛ⸗
nement difeife te Tenant fo life and make a fcoffment in fee, and the Melle resenter,the feoffee


Hail not diftraine,


€ Ere Littleton

exprefleth two

Dtuerlities, fir ſt
betWeene an ad in jaw,
and the grant ef the par-
tie, Chis cafe tg put of
an (d) efcheate , which
is a mere at in La,
but foítiS , when itis
Partip by Adc in Law,
an. partly by the Ac of
the partie, ag tf the Co⸗
nuſee of a Statute
Merchant extendeth a
Heigntozy o2 Rent, hee
fball diſtreine Without
any Bttoznement, Fea
man make a ileafe foz
life o? yeares, and after
leuie a fine to A. tothe
bfc o£ 8.and big beires.
B. fball dtftraine and
haue an Acton of Wate
albett the Conufee neuer
bab any Attoznement
becaufe the reuerfionts
veſted in him by force of
the Statute, and bath
No remedte tocompell the
Leffec to attoine.

And fo it tg of a bats
gaine and fale bp Deed
indented and tnrolled,
but this tg by force of a
Statute fince Littleton
&n10tc,


Sed. 584.
€ E N meme Te ma=


nec e(t, loulere=
uetfion Dun tenant a
terme De bie foit grant
per fine a br autet en
fee, a le grantee apres


moꝛuſt fang Heire, 02€


le Seignior ad le ce=
uerfion p bop Dc(cbcat,
Ct ti apres le tenant
fait taff, le Seignioz
auera baícfe De watt
enuers luy, nient con-
trifteanr que il ne vn⸗
ques atturna , Caufa
qua fupra. Mes lou bit
home claime per force
Del graunt fait per ic
fine, 3, come beire , ou
com aflignec,tc,la il ne
Diftreinera ne auotoc-
ta, ne auera action De
waft, ac, fans Alttoz=
nement,


È the fame manner it
is where the reuerfion
of a Tenant for life is
granted by fine to ano-
ther in fee, andthe
grantee afterwards dieth
without heire, nowthe
Lord hath the reuerfion
by way of eícheate, and
if after the Tenant ma-
keth wafte , the Lord
fhall haue a Writ of
Watte againft bim, not-
withftanding that he ne-
uerattorned, Cawfa qua
fupra. But where a man
claimeth by force of the
grant made by the fine
.s.as heire or as aflignee,
&c. there hee fhall not
diftraine nor auowe, nor
haue an action of wafte,
&c. without Attorne-
ment.


Secondly, tohere tethat commeth fn bp Actin Law (9 in the per, ag the hetre of the Cor
nufe, Mholerteth in his Anceſtoꝛs feat, Tanquam pars anteceffonis de fanguine; and the Lowe
by efcheate, which is an efranger, and commeth in meerelp in the Poft,


€ [Qon enancient Boroughs
æ Cities , lou terres a tenc-


Sethion 585.


ments


A Lfo in ancient Boroughes and
Cities, where Lands and Te-


Lib Zo
ments deins mefmes leg bos
touœbes et Cities font Deuifable
per teftament per cuftome et bfe
fee, ſi en ticl boꝛough eu citie hoe
foit (cí(ic De vent feruíce, ou de
rent cbacge;ct Deuífa cel rent ou
leruice a bn auter per fon teffa-
ment ct mozuft.en ceft cas celup
à que tícl Dewtfe eff fait, poit Diz
ftreincr le tenant pur le rent ou
feruice aderere, coment que Te
tenant nattozna pag,


Of Attornement.


1


nements within the fame Bo-
roughes and Cities are deuifable
by teftament by cuftome and vie,
&c.if in fuch Borough or Citie a
man be feifed of a rent feruice, or
of arent charge,and deuifeth fuch
rent or feruice to another by his
teftamentatid dieth, Inthis cafehe
to whom fuch deuifeis made may
diftreine the tenatit for the rent or
feruicearere, although the tenant
did neuer attorne.


€ Eredoth Littleton put a cafe Where a man map havea S e(quíonp, Bent, Reuerſi⸗
H on, 02 emalnder meerely by the act of the party anb raap oí(fratne, anb hane as

np ation without anp Attornement, and that io bp deuiſe of lands bentfable bp
cuſtome ben Uittleton wzote bp the lak will ano A effament of the owner.


Seël.


CF H metmete manet e(t lou
bomo lela tiels teneméts
Deuifables abn auter pur terme
De bie, ou pur terme dang, et De-
uifa le reuerſion per fon teftamét
abn auter en fee, ou en fee taile
et mozuff, et puis le tenant fait
twat, celuy a que le Deuife fuit
fait auera bztefe De toa(t,coment
quele tenant ne vnque attozna,
€t la caule eft pur ceo,que la bo-
lunt le Deutfour fait pec fon te-
ftament ferra. perfozme folon-
que lentent bel Deutfour.et lef:
fect De ceo girroit [ur lattourne-
ment Del tenant, Donques per
cate le tenant ne bople vnques
atturner, ct Donques Ie bolunt
del deuiſor ne fevcoít brique pers
forte, tc, ct put ceole Deuifee Diz
fireinera,zc, ou anera action De
toaft,ac.(ans attouctiment,Cat
fi home Deutfa ticls tenements a
vn auter per fon teftament, Ha-
bend’ fibi imperpetuum, moꝛuſt,
et le deuiſee enter, il ad fee

pie,


596.


N the fame manner is it, where

a man letteth fuch tenements
deuifable to another for life,
or for yeares, and deuifeth the
reuerfionby his Teftamentto ano-
therin fee, or in feetaile, and dy-
eth, and afterthe Tenant commits
wafte, he to whom the deuife was
made fhal] haue a writ of wafte, al
though the Tenant doth neuer at-
torne, And the reafonis for that
the will of the Deuifor made by
his Teftament fhall bee performed
according tothe intent of the De-
uifor, and if the effe& of this
fhould lye vpon the Attornement
ofthe Tenant, then perchance the
Tenant would neuer attorne, and
then the will of the deuifor fhould
neuer bec performed, &c. and for
this the deuifee fhall diftraine,&c.
or he fhall hauean a&ion of wafte,
&c.without attornement, For if a
man deuifeth fuch tenements to a-
nother by his teftament,Habend’ fj-
bi imperpetuum, & dieth,and the de-
Mmmm 2 uifee


$e8.586.


322


34 H.6,6.. 5.M.7.18.
19.H.6.14. 31. H. 39,4
F.N.B.121:8.


Lib.


Vid.Seët.167.

"Bran. ub. Y. fel. 11. & fe,60
Fleta.lib.3.ca.1 5.

Britton, fel 78. C7 fe. 313.5.


$3. E,5. 16.34. H. 6.5.
1 5, H,7.13« 19. H.8.4.


Vid, $e8.165.


Cap. io.
ple, Caufa qua fupra, bncoꝛe fi
fait de fcoffment bit efte fait a
lup per le deuifoz en fa ble De
smefmeg les tenements, Habend
fibi imperpetuum, et liuery De fei-
fin fur ceo fuit fait, il naueroit
eftate forfque pur terme De fa
bie,


Of Attornement.


$:8.587.


uifee enter, hee hath afec fimple,
Cana qua fupra, yet if a deed of
feoffment had beene made to him
by the deuifor of the fame tene-
ments, Habend’ fibi imperpetuum, &
liuery of feifin were made vpon
this hee fhould haue an eftate but
forterme of hislife.


€ D 2:5 this anv the precevent cafe ftand bpon one andthe fame reafon which Littleron
B here peeldeth, viz. becaufe that the Stil of tbe TD eutfoz expꝛeſſed bp big Œeftament hall


be perfozmed according to the tntent of the Dentfoz, and (t (ball notipe in the power
of the Cenant 02 Lelle to fruftrate the willot the Deuiſor bp denying bis Bttoznement, Here


Littleton menttoneth a magime of the Common Law,viz.


Quod vltima voluntas teftatoris eft


perimplenda fecundum veram intentionem fuam; andreipublicæ intereft fuprema hominum te-


ftamenta rata haberi.


€ Teftament.Teftamentum .i. teftatio mentis, tohich (8 made nullo


prefentis metu periculi fed fola cogitatione mortalitatis. Omne tcftamentü morte confummatü,
€ Car fi home denifa tiels tenements a vn auter, &Ic. Bere Littleton


putteth a cafe where the entent of the Ceftato; fball betaken,viz. where a man bp deutfe Gall
bauc a fe fimple without thefe Swords heiress, and bere Littleton puttetb tbe dinerfitp betwen


a will anb a fcoffment,


0% bp the Statutes of 32.and 34.H.8.( as hath bene fatd in the chapter of Margage)
Lands, Cenements and iereditaments are deutfable, as by the {ato Bags boc appeare,


Sect.


«LI Cem fi hom̃ (eiie Dun man-

1102 quel eft parcel en demeſũ
et parcel en feruice, et ent foit
Diffeilie, mes les tenants que
teignont Del mannoz ne bnp ats
tournant a le Diſſeiſor, en ceft
cag coment que le Diſſeiſor mo-
cult feifie et fon heire foit eins
pet Dilcent,ac, bncoze pott le
Dilleifce Diftreine pur le rent a=
rere, ct auer leg feruices, ac,
Pes ( les tenants biendzont
al Difleifor, et diont, nous De-
beígnomug voſtre tenants,ac,
ou auter attournement a luy fe=
fopent,æc, et puis Ie Diſſeiſoꝛ
moꝛuſt feifte donque le Diſſeiſee
ne poit Diftreine pur le rent, ac.
pur ceo que tout Emanoz difcen-
diſt al heive le Diſſeiſor ac,


€j


587.

Lfo if a man bee feifed of a

mannor which is parcell in
demefne and parcell in feruice,and
isthereof diffeifed, but the tenants
which hold of the mannor doe ne-
uerattorne to the Diffeifor. Inthis
cafe albeit the Diffeifor dieth fei-
fed, and his heire is in by difcent,
&c.yet may the Diffeifee diftreine
fortherent behinde, and haue the
{eruices, &c. but if the tenants
cometothe Diffeifor and fay, We
become yourtenants,&c. or make
to him fome other attornement,
&c. andafter the Diffeifor dieth
feifed, then the Diffeifee cannot
diftraine for the rent,&c. for that
all che Mannor difcendeth to thc
heire of the Diffeifor,&c.


Ittleton having fpokenof eftates gained by law full consepances doth now fpeake of
4 eftates gained bp wꝛong. Bnd here putteth a cafe of a bí(Teí(im of a Mannoz Where (t


appcarttb, that the Difletfes cannot diſſeiſe the Loz of the renta 0 ferutceg —
[4


Lib.3. Of Attornement,
the Sttoznement of the G enantg to tbe Dilleiloz, feg fering an Betezriewtent is tequíGte to a

. Éteftinent and other lawtull connepances, A fortiori, a Dilletfos ox other SMzong doce (ball not
gaine them without Btornement. Che itke law is of an Pbatoz and an Antrudoz, Wut albez
t the Diſſeiloꝛ hath once gotten the Becopnement of the Cenantg and payment of thetr tents,
pet map they refule afterwards, fop auopding of their donbie charge; Bao here the Attoꝛue⸗
ment of the Tenant of a Mannoꝛ toa Diffetfos of the demeanes thall difpollefle che Lord of
the rents and ferutces parcell of the Mannoz,becaule both demeancs,rents and feruiccs make
but one entier Wannoz, and the oemeanes are the pzíticipall : but otherSife ít te of rents anv
fernices in grofic, ag in this next Section our Buthoz teacheth bg,


Sed. 588.589.
CSS fi 6n tient Dc mop per BY: if one holdeth of mee by


Se8.588.589.


tent feruice,le quel eft bn

feruice en groſſe et nient p rea-
fon De mon mannoz, ct bn auter
que nul Droit ad, claima le rent,
et tefceiue et pzent meſme ie rent
De mon tenant pct coberifon De
Diftves, ou per auter fozme, et
diſſeiſiſt moy perticl prender de
tent, coment q tiel diſſeiſor mo-
tutt (Tint feilie Epernant d rent,
bncore apes fa mort (co puiffop
bien Diftreiner le tenant pur Ic
tent que fuit adercre Deuant le
Decealedel Diffeifoz. et aurp a-
pres fon Deccatc. Et la cauſe eft,
pur ceo que tiel Diffeifoz nek pas
mon Dileifor fozfque a ma ele-
ction ct ma bolunt, Car coment
que tl pent Prent Demon tenant
&c, bncoze ieo puifloy a touts
foits Difireiner mon tenant pur
le rent avete, iſſint Gil eft a mop
fozfque come (eo boíle ſuſfferer
le tenant eftre per tant De temps
arere p pater a mop m le rent,ge,


rent feruice, which is a feruice
in groffe, and not by reafon of my
Mannor, and another that hath no
right, claimeth the rent,& receiues
& taketh the fame rent of my tenät
by coertion ofdiftreffe,or by other
forme, and diffeifeth mee by fuch
taking of the rent. Albeit fuch
Diffeifor dieth fo feifed in taking
of the rent, yet after his death I
may well diftreine the tenant for
the rent which was behinde be-
fore the deceafe of the Diffeifor,
and alfo after his deceafe. And the
caufe is, for that fuch Diffeifor is
not my diffeifor but at my ele&ion
and will. For albeit he takeththe
rent ofmy tenant,&c. yet I may at
all times diftreine my tenant for
the rent behinde, fo as it is to mee
butas if I will fuffer the tenant to
bee fo long time behinde in pay-
mentofthefame rent vnto me;
&c.


Sec#. 589.


€ Cat le payment De mon te-
nant a bn auter,a queil ne

Doit pag payer, neft pas diſſeiſin
amop, ne outta mop pas De mon
tent fans ma bolunt et maclecti-
on,tc, Cat coment queíco puiſ⸗
fopauer Bile enuevg tiel Per⸗
1102,


fo the payment of my Tenaunt

to another to whom hee ought
not to pay, is no diffeifinto me,nor
fhall ouft me of my Rent, withour
my willand election, &c. For al-
though I may haue an Affife againft
{uch Pernor, yet this isat my elec-

Mmmm 3


323


6.B.5.14. 1 1. H.5.38.
11-H. 4.14.6. b,


Cap.io.


Of Attornement.


Sett.590.


1102, bncoge ceo eft amor electi= tion, whether will take him as


on, (i teoboile pꝛender lup come
mor diſſeiſor ou non, 3 (fint tiels
Difcents Dc rents en grog,neou-
fteront pag le feigning 5 Diftrep=
nec, meg a chelcun temps ils
popent bien Diftrepner pur E rent
areve,ec, €t en ceft cafe fi aps
le Diftreffe De luy que iffint tozci=
oufment prift le vent, feo graunt
per mon fait le feruicea bn aut,
et Ie tenant attourna, cco eft af-
fets bone, et les ſeruices per tiel
grant et attournement mainte-
nant font en? Geantee, ac. es
auterment eft lou le cent e(t pat-
cel Del Danoz,ct le Diffeifoz mo⸗
rut Ceifie del Manor entier, cóc
come enle cafe pzocheine auaunt
eft Dit,#c,


my Diffeifor, or no. So fuch dif-
cents of Rents in groffe fhall not
ouftthe Lord of his Diftreffe, but
at any time he may well diftreyne
forthe Rent behinde, &c. And
in this cafeif after the diftreffe of
him which fo wrongfully tooke
the Rent, I graunt by my Deede
the Seruice to another, and the
Tenaunt attourne, this is good
enough , and the feruices by
fuch Grant and Attornement are -
prefently in the Grantee, &c. But
otherwife it is where the Rent is
parcell of a Mannor, and the Dif-
feifour dieth feifed of the whole
Mannor, as inthe cafe next before
is fayd,&c.


€ Ere Littleton putteth a diverfitte bet$o&nea Rent ferutce parcell of & Manno,
ii Svbereof hee had {poken befoze; anb a Ment fernicetn Ozofle. Forza man cannot
be diſleiſed of a Rent ferutce in Gzofe, Rent charge, oz Went fecke bp Bttornement


02 payment of the Rentto a ranger, but at bis Clection ; for the rule of Law (s, Nemo reddi-
tum alterius inuito Domino percipereaut poffidere poteft ; and ont Æuthoz hath before * taught
bs, bat bc 3D ((Teíüng of Rents feruices, Rents Charges,and Ment feckes, andpapment te
8 Granger ts none of them, but at the 30108 elecion,as our Duthoz here fateh,


€ Pernor, i. Che taker of mp rent, But if the diſſeiſee bzing an
Alife againſt fucha Dernoz, then he doth admit himlelfe out of poſſeſſion.


€ Difcems. Adifcentofa Kent in avoffe bindeth rot the right
owner but that he map diſtreyne, albeit he adinitteD himfelfe out of poſſeſſion, and determined
bis cletíon, ag bp bꝛinging of an Allile, ec.

, FEthe Cenant of the land pap the Kent toa ranger Which hath no right thereunto, and the
Fight owner rcleafe to him, this 1B elcafe (g god, becaufc hee thereby admitted himfelfe to bae
eutof poſſeſſion. But if the Cenant had gtuen him anp thing in name of Attoꝛnement, and the
right owner had releafed to him, this Releaſe had beene voyd becanfean Attoznement only can
be no diffeifin of the Rent,


¶ Leo grant per mon fait, re. This alfo prooucth, Chat the right
Meis is tr pet of poſſeſſion, and that thig grant ouer ts a Demonftration of his eleaton that
eis (n gofteitíon,


90/5, Sel. 337.338.239.340


24. E.3. 4. 1. F. 4. 4.

See the Authorssses there
fellewimg in the next Taroffe,
q. E. 4.1.33. H. 3.04. [f 419.
34.€.3:40.34. 16.4 f. p.15.
16. E. 3 Releafe 56. Y E. 5.5»
F.N.B.179. E. 1 5. E. 4.8.
Flies. 4 aa. 1.


Setlion 590.


€ [ Cem fi ico fue ſeiſie bun ATP if I be feifed of a Mannor,

manoz parcel en demeſũ, et parcell in Demefne, and par-

parcel en feruice,et eo Done cell in Seruice, andI giue certaine

cettaineacres Delterre, parcelDe acres of the land, parcell of the

Demefne De mefme le matioz a vn ~Demefne ofthe fame Mannour, to
auter


Lib.3.
auterenietaile, rendant a mop
et ames beires bn certaine rent,
ec, Si en ceft cate tco fue diſſei⸗
fie de la Manoꝛ, et touts les tc-
nants atturnont ct papont tour
rents al Diffeifoz, et aury le Dit
tenant en lc tatlepapale vent per
mop referue al Dilleifoz, et put
le Dilleifor moꝛuſt fcífíe, ac, et
fon heire entra, et eft eins p Dits
cent, vncore en ceſt caſe ieo puiſſe
bien diſtreigner le Tenant enle
taile, ct fes heires, put le vent p
moy referuc fur le Done, 8, autp-
bien pur le tent c(tcant aderere
Deuant le difcent al heire le Diſ⸗
feifoz,et auxy pur le rẽt que bap-
pa deſtre aderere ap2es meſme le
Difcent, nient obftant tiel mozat
ſeiſi dl diſſeiſoꝛ ac. Ct la caule €,
pur ceo que quant home Dona te=
nements ene taile, fauant le te-
uerſion a luy, et il ſur le Dit Done
referua à luy bn Bent ou auters
ſeruices, tout le rent et les ſer⸗
uices font incidents ala reuerſi⸗
on, ct quant bn home ad bn re⸗
uerſion, il ne puiffoit eftre oufte 5
fon reuerfion per le fait bun e⸗
frange home, finon que E tenant
foit oufte De (on eftate et poſſeſſi⸗
on, ac, cac cp longement que le
Tenant enle Taile x fea heirs
continuont Iour poſſeſſion p fozé
De mon Done,cylongement eft te
reuerſion en mop ct en mes his,
et cantant que E rent et les Guices
referurs fur tiel Done font inci-
Dents ct Dependants al reuerſiõ,
quecunque que ad le reuerfion,
aucta meſme le ent et Serui⸗
ces EC,


Of Attornement..


Se8.590.
another in Taile, yeelding to mee
andto my Heiresa certaine Rent,
&c. if in this cafe I be diffeifed of
the Mannour, and all the Tenaunts
attorne and pay theirrents to the
Diffeifor, and alfo the fayd Tenant
in Taile pay the Rentby me refer-
ued , to the Diffeifor, and after
the Diffeifor dieth feifed, &c.and
his heire enter and is in. by Dif-
cent, yet in this cafe Imay weldi-
ftreynethe Tenant in Taile and his
heires, forthe rent by me referued
vponthe Gift, féz. aswell forthe
Rent being behind beforethe dif-
centto the heire of the Diffeifor,
as alfofortherent which happeth
to bebehindafter the fame difcent,
notwithftanding fuch dying feifed
of theDiffeifor,&c. Andthe rea-
fonis, for thar when aman giueth
lands in Taile, fauine the reuer-
fion to himfelfe, and hee vpon the
fayd gift referueth.to himfelfe a
Rent or other Seruices,all the rent
and Seruices are incident to the
Reuerfion, and whena man hath a
Reuerfion, he cannot be oufted of
his Reuerfion by the A& of a
Stranger, vnieffethat the Tenaunt
be oufted of his eftate and poffef-
fion, &c. For as long as the Te-
nant in Taile and his Heires conti-
nue their poffeffion by force of my
gift, fo longis the reuerfion inme
andinmy Heires: and inas much
as the rent and feruices referued
vpon fuch gift, be incident and de-
pending vponthe reuerfion, who-
foeuer hath the Reuerfion, fhall
haue the fame Rent and Serui-
ces, &c.


Seéf,


324


(8) 18. 4/ p. 2.38. H.6.55.
Pl. (om. Fulmerfiens cafe 103
Lib, s.fel.11.:2 25.

19. E.ↄ. Briefe 845.

4.0.3. Briefe 715.


eo le fa parcel Del demeſfũ
Ra bn auter pur terme
erme Dans, rendant
à moy certaine tent;ac, coment
(ico (op Diffeifie Del mànos,aC,
et Le Difleifoz mozutt feifie,ac, ct
fon heif cfteant eins per Difcent,
vncoꝛe ico Diftreiner pur 1e rent
arere vc fupra, ntent obftant ticl
Difcent, Car quant home ad fait
tícl Done en tatle, ou tiel leas pur
terme De bie, ou pur terme Dans
del parcel De le Demefne De bn
manoz,ac, fauant Ie reucrion a
tiel bonout ou leffour,#c, et puis
él {oit Difteifie De lemanoz,#c.tiel
teuer(íon apzes tiel Diffeifin eft
fener Del manoz en fait, coment
que ne foit ſeuer en D20ít, Et iſ⸗
fint popes veier mon fits)diuer=
fitie, lou (1 p ab bn Manoꝛ par=
ecl en demefne a parcel en feruii-
ces, leg queug feruices font pat-
cel De mefine le MPanoz nient
incidents a afcun reuerfion, ac,
&lou ils fontincidents al reuer⸗
ffon, eC,

cp


Gre Littleton putteth a diuerfitie


Ticucrüon parcell ofa Mannoꝛ.


Of Attornement.


Sed. 591.


Sec. 591.
Paso mefmele manereft,lou |


N the fame manner is ir, where
Iletparcell of the demefnes of
the Mannor to another for terme
of life or for terme of yeares,ren-
dering to mee a certaine rent,&c.
albeit I be diffeifed of the mannor,
&c.and the diffeifor die feited,&c.
and his heire bee in by difcent, yet
Imay diftreine for the rent arere
vt fupra notwithftanding fuch dif
cent, for when a man hath made
fuch agift in taile, or fuch a leafe
for life or for yeares of parcell of
the demefnes of a mannor,&c. fa-
uing the reuerfion to fuch donor
orleflor,&c. And after he is diffei-
{ed of the mannor,&c. fuch reuer-
fionafter fuch difleifin is feuered
from the mannor in deed, though
it benetfeueredinright. And fo
thou mayeft fee(my fonne) a diuer-
fitie, where thete isa Mannor par-
cell in Demefne and parcell in Ser-
uices, which Seruices are parcell
of the fame Mannor not incident
to any Reuerfion, &c. And where
they are incidentto the Reuerfion,
&c.


betweene Rents and Herutces parcell of a


Manno, (wbercof hee bad fpokenbefoze) and Rents and Herutces incident to a


And the reafon of this diucrfitte ts foa that ag long as the Donc in tatle, Leſſee fox life, oz
Leſſes for peares are ín poſſeſſton, thep pꝛeſerue the Reuerſion (n tbe Donos oz Leſſoꝛ, and fo


long ag the Reuerfion contínuc inthe Donoꝛ oꝛ Lelloz , fo long doe the Rents and Services

Sobich arc incident to rhe Weuerfion belong to the Donoz os Leflez. either can the Donor o2

Leftoz be put out of his Reucrfion vnleſſe the Done 02 Leſſet beeput ont of their polleiiion,

and tf tbc Done 02 Lette be put out of their polleilton, then confequentip is the Donor 0; Lek

fox put ont of thetr Reuerfion. Wut if the Donæ o2 Leſſee, make a reqrefle and regaine

Lea cftate and poſleſſion, tbercbp boc thep ipfo fa&o, rencft the Reuerfion (n the Donor of
effo2,

Bnd heve ig tobe obferned that When aman {9 feifed of a MPannoz, and maketh agit fn
taple, o2 leaſe foa life, €c. of parcell of the Demcfne of tbe Mannoꝛ (a) the Reuerſion is part
9f the Mannoz and bp the grant of the Mannoz the Reucrfion fball palle Sith the Attornee
ment of the Donec 02 Lefle, Wut it the Lord make a gift in tale, of a leaſe for itfeof the Mole
Mannoz, excepting blacke Acre parcell of the Demefnes of the Mannoz, anb after hee grams
teth alway his Mannoz, blacke Bere fall not paſſe, becaufe during the effate tate og teale v.


Lib. Of Difcontinuance:


life tt (a fenered from the Mannos. And fonote a dinerGtie, that a Reuerſion of part map be
parcell ofa Wannoz in potTefT(on, but apart in poſſeſſion cannot be parcell of the AK euerfion of
a Wannos expectant bpon any eftate of Freehold. Wut tf a man make a leale £o? peares of a


Sedl.5 92:


Mannos excepting blacke Acre, and after granteth away the Wannoz,blacke Acre ſhall patie,


- becaufc the gFreehold being entire tt remapneth parcell ef the 29
hole Maunoꝛ (ballfcrae, Wut other Wile itis in cafe of the gift in taile og
ceptingauvpart , there malt befcuerall wꝛits of Præcipe, becante the Free


Cnuar.tr.


ancient
parol en la ley, aai
diuers ſignificatiõs,
fc, Des quant à bn
entent, il an tiel ſig⸗
nification, 5, lou bn
home ad alien a bn
auter certaine terres
ou tenements a mo⸗
rut, et bn auter ad
Droit De auer meſm̃s
les terres ou tene=
ments mes il ne port
entrer en eur per
caufe detiel alienati-
Ott, EC,


Se&ion.


Of Difcontinuance.


| TES mde is
3) ananciét word
#8 in the Law, &
hath diuers fignifica-
tions,&c. Butas to one
intent it hath this fig.
nification, viz. where
aman hath aliened to
another certaine lands
or Tenements and di-
eth, and another hath
right to haue the fame
Lands or Tenements,
but hee may not en-
ter into them becaufe
of fuch an alienation,
&c. :


annor, anb one Præcipe of the


fe fo? life cx⸗
tg fenerall,


——


Sed.592.


CEE
22 +


and con-
tinuo , fo? continuare {g to
continue Without intermiſti⸗
9n. sow by addition of de
(Euphoniz gratia dis t9 it)
Dbich ig prinatine, it fgnis
ficth an intermiſſton. Difcon-
tinuare nihil aliud. fignificat
quam intermittere,defuefcere,
interrumpere. Bnd ag our
Buthoz fatth, (a) (t (s a ber
ancient $5029 in Law,

A difcontinuance of effateg
in Lands o Tenements is
properip (in legall vnderſtan⸗
Ding) an alienation made oz
fuffered bp Tenant in tapie,
oꝛ by anp that ts ſeiſed in au.
ter droit, whereby the tilue in
taple, oz the hetre 02 fuccefloz
9? thofe in Keuerſion c2 Res


maynder are driuen te their Adion,and cannot enter,
Ail Which (e implyed by the diſcription of our Puthoz, and bp che (&c.) (n the endof this


FZ haue added (properly) by gad Warrant of our Authoꝛ himfelfe, fozSectione 470 he vleth
3Difcentinuance for a deueſting o2 diſplaciug of à Reuerſion, though che entric bee not taken


away,


Æbis Difcontinnance confifteth in doing ozfuffering an Ait to bee bone , ag hereafter fbali


appeare, And where our Buthozfatth , that it hati) diucre Ganificattons, there (e alfo a Diſ⸗
continuance of Pꝛoceſſe confifting in not doing, where the Poceſſe ig not continued, cona
cerning Which thereis an excellent Statute made tn furtherance of Juſtice in (b) 1.E.6. and
ig Sell expounded in mp Reports, and therefore ncco not here to be inſerted.

Mhereis another errontous proceding and that confilteth (n mifdoing , ag Shen one Prꝛo⸗
ele (et awarded (tt ftead of anobher, o1 when a dap ts gtuen Which is not legal, thig is called
a mifcontinuance & tf the Cenant oz Defendant make default tt is erroz.but if he appeare,then
the mifcontinuance (c falued, otherSwife it is ofa Difcontingance. But let og returne to the
HDifcontinuance of Eſtates in Lands Whereof Littleton doth entreate in thie Chapter,


 Significations. Here (agin many other places) it appeareth
how neceflarp ít (a to know the fignification of words.

Andin this Chapter ft appeareth, that Whew Littleton wꝛote, the Eftate in Lands anb tea
nements might baut beene difcontinucd fiuc manner of Mapes, viz. bp Jfreoffment , bp Fine,
by Releale With toarrantíe, Confirmation With Warrantie, and bp faffering of a Becoue⸗

nn


fau rig


223


Vide SeB.61 Go


(2) 8.H.4. 8:5. 11. M. 4.
$5.5.


(b) Wide, tbe Sé tutes of
1.6. 6. ca.7. & 31 Elb( ea. à
Lib.7. fol.30. 31. dre. le eafa
de difcentimaznee dz preces,


33. £. 3.9. 4. 46.E. 5.59.
7. H. 6.15.26.
9. E. 4.18. 12. €.4.


m


Vide $e8,74. 074.194.
441-520,


Lib.3. Cap-n. Of Difcentinuance. — 565.593.594.
rie in à Precipe quod reddat. Bnd this Sas to the prcindice of fiue kinds of perfong , viz.of
wines , of Beires , of Succeflers, of tbofe in Reuerſion, and of thofe in IR cmapnbes,
Wut for tines, and their Wetres, and for Succeflors the Law (s altered bp Actsot Parlias


FAN 8.19 5. Bratton lib. 4.
fsl. 5a. Fleta lib. 5. æp. 34.


mint (nce Littleton $920te, ag fn this Chapter tn thetr proper places Hall appeare,


€ Ere Littleton puts
hy tethancramplesf a
difcotinuance made
bp one fetfed tn auter droit,ag
bp an Abbot Who had a fee
fimpletn the right of big Mo⸗
nafterp, and therefore bis B=
lienation Sithout the aflent
of big Couent had bene a
Difcontinuance at the Com⸗
mon dLaso;an had dziuen bis
Succellor toa Wꝛit De In-
greflu fine aflenfu capituli.


€ De Ingreflu fi-


ne affenfu capituli,&c.
Ft is calicd fo becaufe the As
lienation ag fine affenfu
capituli, for (f (t had beme
cum affenfu capituli, tt fhould
fauc beene a barre to the fuc=
ceffoz, And becaufe the fuce
cefloz could not enter, the
Common Raw gane him
this watt, and ts focalleb of
thefe words contained in tbe
wWꝛit, Sbich wꝛit pou map
reade in the Kegiſter € Fiuz-
herberts N.B.
And here ts to bee noted,
* that in Law the Covent, al=


Section 593.


€ S dcm bn Ab⸗
be feifie De cer⸗
taine terres ou tene=
ments enfee, a altes
naft memes les ter=
reg ou tenements à
bu auter en fee, ou
en fee taile, ou pur
terme De bie, a puíg
labbe mouft, fon
ſucceſſor ne poit en⸗
ter en les dits terres
pu teneméets, coment
que tl ad D20ít eux a⸗
uet come en Doit De
fonmeafon.mes ileft
mis a fon action De
recouerer mefines Ps
terres ou tenemets,
quel c(t appelle Bre-
ue de ingreflü fine af-
fenfucapituli, &c.


Sifan Abbot be

feifed of certaine
Lands or Tenements
in fec,and alieneth the
fame Lands or Tene-
ments to another in
fee or in fee taile or
for terme of life , and
after the Abbot dieth,
his Succeffor cannot
enter into the íaid
Lands or Tenements,
albeit hee hath rightto
haue them as in right
of his honfe, butheis
put to his action to re-
coucr the fame Lands
or Tenements, which
is called a Writ, Brese
de ingreffu fine affenfu


capituli, &c.


bett thepberequiar and dead

verfons in Law, pct are they fatd (n Law tobe Capitulum te tbe Abbot,afiwell ag the Deane
and Chapiter, chat be Sccular to the Wihhop. But it iste bee obferucd and implped in this
(&c.) that a folc bodte politique that hath the abfolute right in them, ag an Abbot, Biſhop
anb tbe itke map make a Difcontinnance, buta Corporation agaregate of many ag Deane
and Chapter, toarden and Chaplaines, Waker and fellowes, Watoz and Comminalte, dc.
cannot make anp WDifcontinuance , foz if theptopne, the Grant is god, anb f£ the Deane,
Warden, Waker, o2 Watorzmake it alone where the hodie ig aggregate of manp tt is void,
and worketh a difleifin. Wut no (ag hath bene fa(b) bp the Statute of 27.H.8. and 31-H.8-
all the Abbots, 3911029, and other i cliqious perfong arc ſo diffolucd as there be none remay⸗
ning this dap, and bp the Statutes of 1.Eliz. and rs. Eliz cap.1c. and 1.Iac.cap.s. Bihops
and ail other Œcclefiafticall perfons are diſabled to alten op difcontinueanp of their Eccleuaſti·
call Linings, ag bythelame Ads Both appeare.


ar. E. 4.86.


See anova of this matter bare-
after imshss ( baprar, Sel.
G42 and before $48. 528.


Sed. 594.


CE" droit fà feme, € m fi bore Lfoif a man bee
oc. That ig feifie De terre feifed of Land as.
to fap, (a fee finp!s - fe tatle, come en Daoít in right of his


bc


iba.


De fa ferte, ac, enter
€ fcoffa bn auter, ac,
femozutt , 1a fente ne
puít enter mes cft
mis à fou action, le
quel eft appel Cuiin
vita, &c.


Of Difcontinuancé.:


wife, &c. and thereof
infeoffe another, &c.
and dieth, the Wife
may not enter, but is
put to her Action, the
whichis called, Cuisn
vita, &c.


oz fox life, Bere Littleton
putteth another cafe Swhersa
man is feífeb in auter droit,
and inap make a Diſconti⸗
nuance, as the bufband ſeiſed
in the right of bis wife, and
therefoye the Common Law
gate her a Cui in vita, andher
betrea Sur cuiin vita becaufe
thep could not enter, But thie
ig altered fince our Anthor


Wrote by the Statute of 32.1.8. bp the purntew of Which Statute, the wifeand her heires


=


Sed.594;


after the deccafe of ber ufbanb map enter into the Lands 02 &enementg of the wife notwith:
Ganding thcalienation ofher huſband.

Bnd here is onc of the alienations to make a Dilcontinuance , viz. a feoffment , and Swhere
our Authoz ſpeaketh of a huſband fetfed in tbertgbr of hts Wife, fort ig, where the bufband
. Gnd wife aretopntlp fetfed to them & tbeít hetres of an eftate made during the dr onctture, a the
huſband make a feoftment in fee, & dieth,the $oífe now map enter Within that ſtatute, although
ft Was the Jnheritance ofthem both. And fo tt is t€ the fceffment bee mave by the bufband
and intfe, (albeit the Words of the Statute be bp the hulband onlp ) fo; (n fubftance this ts the
act of the huſband only.

FE the bufband caufe a Precipe quod reddat bpon a faint title to bee brought againſt him and
_ bis Site, and faffereth a recouerie without anp Toucher, and Execution to bee hadagaink
himand bis Site, pet this ts bolpen by the Statute, for this bp like conſtruction is the ad of
the hufband, and the Swords of the Statutebe, made, fuffered, done.

Hl the bufbanb make a feoffment in fec of. thedands , Which hee holdeth in theright of his
Wife, and after they are tiuozced Caufa przcontradus, pet the Weman map enter within
the puruiew of that Statute, and (8 not dziuen to her wꝛit of Cui ante diuortium,ag the Wag
at the Common Law, albeit the entrie be by the Statute atüen to the wife and now bpon the
matter the Mas nouer hislawfull wife. Wutitfufftceth that the was hts wife De facto at the
time of the alfenatton, ann where her hufband dicth thee cannot bee big wife atthe time of the
entric,

FE the hulband leuie a fine With Pzoclamations , and dteth, the Life mult enter o2 auoid
the Œftate of tbe Conufes Within Gue peares, 02 elle (hee is barred fo cucr by the Statute of
4-H.7. fox the Statute of 32-H.8. doth belpe the Difcontinuance but not the barre, and the
Statute lpcaketh of a fine, and not of a fine with Wzoclamattons. i

FE lanbs be giuen to tc hufband and Swife, and tothe heires of their two bodies, anb tbe


bufbanb maketh a feoffment tn fee and dicth, the wife is holpen by thefato Statute as bath ‘V4


bene faid, and fo ts the iſſue of both tbetr bodies. rem tenant tn taile taketh hufband,the hul=
bandmaketh a feoffment in fes, the wife before entrie dieth without (Que, hee inthe tBeuerüion
02 Remapnder map enter. 4502 ſirſt the Renerfion o? Remapnder cannot bee diſcontinued tn
this cafe becauſe the eſtate tapicis not difcontinusd, Sccondlp, the woꝛds of the Statute be
Shall not be preiudiciall or hurtfull to the wife or her heires, or füch as fhall haue right title or
intereft by the death of fuch wife, but rhat the fame wife and her heires,and füch other to whom
fuch right fhall appertaine after her deceafe, fhall or lawfully may enter into all fuch Mannors,
Lands, &c. according to their rights and titles therein, bp hich words the entrie of him in the
Keuerſion o? Remaynder (n that cafe is preferned. Che huſband ts Œenant (n tatle, the rea
maynder to the Wife in tale, the bufband make a fcoffment in fee, by this the bufband by the
Common Law did not only difcontinue his owne eftate taile but his Wines remapnder bat at
this dap after the death of the huſband Mithent fue, the wife map enter bp the fato 20d of
32.1.8. It the bufband hath iſſue and maketh a fcoffement tn fee of bts Sines Land, and the
wite dicth, the heire of the Mife fall not enter during the huſbands like, netther bythe Con:
mon Law nezby the Statute,


© Cuiinvita, &c. Here is alſo implyed a Sur cuiin vita, alfofos


the beirethis weit here mentioned tn our Authoz is ſo called of thofe woꝛds contained (n the
Watt Which you map reade in the Kegiſter and Fitzherberts,N-B..


Nnun 2 oet,


326


BraGton lib. 4. fol. 103. & 33.
& 334. Fleta lib. ç.cap.14.


& 36. F.N.B. 193, Regi.
32.H.8,6ap,38, " Te


Dior 4. & 5, Ph. & Maris.
146.3. € NC. Dect 191. Lib.8,
fel.71.ga.Gremeleyi cafe,


Greucleys cafe, vbi faprdn


6.E.6,'Dier.72.b.
4.H. 3.6.24.


veweloys cafe vbifuprd,
3 ifol.7 Iac. es


8.2.2.0. Cul in vite.aé,
34- E.1.ibidem 30.10.E. $5
12, Disy a1. Elif 365.


Lib.5.


Fleta,lib, 5.€4.3 4.
BLN B.ath.212.Regifr.


(d) 11.4.7. «4,30.
VVid.$e8.697.


(e) Lib.3.fe.co. 51. Sir


George Browne: cafe. eodem


hb, — fo.60, crc. Lanc. (oll,


safe. lib. A. fo. 17 6. .Milde-
aye: cafo.

Dier 3. dr 4 Th. Mar.
146 idem 8.Eliq . 248.


17. Eliz.340. idem 19, ELC.


354-ldem.20. &li(. 362.
27.H.8.3 3. Lib.5.fe.79.
Fit(hcafr.

Li. 8.fs.71.72.
Greneleyseafe.


(a) 4223.38 43.83 25e


a, K. 4.25. F.N.B.124.
(b) 3. E.3.Dreir. 28.


(c) F,N.B.133-


(d) a1.E.3. 11. §.2.3.23-


11H. 4.49.


(€) 2. E. 3. Droit. 38.
13.H.7.14. $.£.4.2.
20,€.3.Amowry 131.
F.NiB.10. 40. E. Mif.
(niimvita 33.


Cap.ii.


€E Nf. vM 4n-

ter crc Were ts
implyed, ez make a gift in
taile 02 an cftate oz itfe. ere
Littleton putteth a third ex⸗
ample of a Difcontinnance
madebp Tenant in taile fo
ag big iſſue is put to big
Formedon fn the Difcender,
which is atuen to the (fue in
faile by the Statute sf 13.
k.1.cap.1. becawle he cannot
enter.


Tenant en taile.
Œbis ertendeth afxoell to a


Of Difcontinuance.


Setl. 595.


Cl Cem à teh en
tatle De certaine
terre ent enfeofta bn
auter.æc.et ad iſſue et
mogutt, fon iflue ne
poit pas enter en la
tett coment que tad
title et Dzoit à ceo,
mes eff mis à fon ac-
tion que e(t appel
Formedon en le Dif-
cenDer.,#c,


Seël. 595.


AG i£ tenant. in
taile of certaine
land, thereof enfeoffe
another,&c. and hath
iffue and dieth,hisiffue
may not enter into the
land albeit he hath ti-
tle and right to this,
but is put to his aéti-
on which is called a
Formedon in le dif-
cender, &c.


woman Tenant (n tatle ag
toa man, and was generally god Law ben Littleton Mote, but now by the Statute of
Cd) 11, H.7, tithe woman hath anp eftate tntatle iopntip with her hufband, o; onip to ber
felfe oz to her bfc in anp Lands oz Bereditamcnts of the inheritance oz purchafe of ber huſ⸗
band, oz giuen tothe bufband and wife in taile bp any of the Anceſtoꝛs of the huſband, op bp
any ether perfor fetfedto the bfe of the bufban oz bis Bnceftozs, and (all hereafter being
folc o; with anp other after taken. bufband difcontinne,¢c. the fame: euery fuch Difcontinus
ance fhall be oopbe, and that (t (hall be lawtull fo? cuerp perfon to whom the tntorelt, title, og
inheritance, after the deceafe of the fato Woman ſhould appertaine, tocnter,t. So as it ſuch
a feme Genant tntatle doe makeanp Difcontinnance tu fo, (is tatle, ex foz life, although ft be
Sithout Warranty,pet this Doth not take awap the entris after her death cither of the ifluc oz
of him in reverfion op remainder. Chis Statute hath bene ercelient!p erpounded bp diners res
— and tudgements (c) which Jhaue quoted in the margent, and are Worthp of due
obſeruation.

FE lands Were cntapledtoa man anb to his wife, and to the hetres of their two bodpes,
and the hufband jad madea Jreoffment in fee and died, and then the Wife died, this had bene
a offcontinuance at the Common Law : foz the title 0€ the (flue ts as beire of both thetr bo-
Dpcg, and not ag betre to anp onc of them, and bis entric muſt enfue hts title oz action,


€ De formedon. De forma donationis, fo called becaule the tonit |
doth compzehend the forme of the gift. Bnd there be three inde of tzits of Foꝛmedon vie.
he firlt in the Diéfcender to be brought by the í(Tuc in tatle, Which clapme bp dilcent Per for-
mam doni. The fecond is in the Reuerter, Which ipeth for him tn the reuerGon ez his heires
92 Bitanes after the ſtatetatle be fpent, The third isthe Remainser, Which tbe Law giveth
to him intheremainder, his Dettes o2 Aſſignes after the determination o£ the eftatc tatle, of
ail wbich pou mapreadeinthe Regiſter and F. N. B.

Here Littleton heweth that the tue in tatle (ball haue a Foꝛmedon in the Dilcender. What
other actions G enant (n tatle may hauc, and not haue, ts gad to be fene.

(a) Œenant (n tatle ſhall haue Quod permittat.

(b) Cenant ín taíle (ball have a wꝛit of Œultomes and Seruices In le debet, & folet,
but (ball not haue tt in tbe Debet only, i

(c) Jn lise manner be ſhall hauc a Scéta ad molendinum in le debet & foletjbut mot in the
Debet tantum.

(d) Æenant tt taile fball bane a wꝛit of Entre in confimili cafu and an Admefurement, and
a Natiuo habendo, Ceflauit, Efcheat, Wa (te, and tbe itke. ^

(e) Wut Œenantin tale (ball not have a wꝛit of Wight Sur difclaymer, moz & Quo jure,
102 à Nc iniufte vexes,r02a Nuper obijt, 07 Rationabile parte, mo? a Mordancefter, 103 d Surcui
in vita, £z tbefc and thelike none but Cenant in fee (ball haue: and the highe szit that a
Tenant in tallecan haue is a Foꝛmedon.

Sefton


Lil:


Sellion 596.597.


Cj Tein (toit teñ en

letaile,le reuerſion
efteant al Dono? et a
fes heives, filetenant
fait fcoffment, ac, ct
moꝛuſt fans iffue, ce-
lup en le veuerfion ne
poit enter, meg c(t mis

a fon action De Forme-
don en le reuerter,


Lfo if there bee te-

nant in taile the re.
uerfion being to the
Donor and his heires,
ifthe Tenant make a
feoffment, &c. and die
without iffue, hee in the
reuerfion cannot enter,
butis put to his action
of Formed in le reuerter.


Seir,597.


€ E $2, metmer ma-
ner eft,tou tenãt
en letatle feí&e De cer⸗
taineterre Dont Ie re⸗
mainder e(t a on auter
enletaile, ou a ou au⸗
ter en fee, Si le tenant
en le taile alienat eu
fee, ou en fee taile, et
puis Deuiaft fans if-
fue, ceux en le cemaíu-
Dev ne poiét enter, mes
font mis a lout briefe
De Formedon en 1e te
mainder ac. et pur ceo
que per fogce De tielx
feoffments et alpena-
tions en leg cafes a-
uantDdits,et en ſembla⸗
bles cafes, ceux queur
ont title et Doit apzes
la mozt de tíel feoffour
ou alienour, ne potent
pas enter, mes font
mifes a lour actions
Vt fupra, et p ceo caute
tiels feoffments et ali⸗
enations font appels
Difcontinuances,


what Law isthe alfenatíon of Œenant intatie a Diſcontinuance at


N the fame manner is

it where tenant in

taileis feifed of cer:
taine land whereof the
remainder is to another
intaile, orto another in
fee. If the tenant in taile
alien in fee, or in fee
taile, and after die with-
out iffuethey in the re-
mainder may not enter,
butare put to their writ
of Formedon in the re-


mainder, &c. and for fi


that that by force of
fuch feoffments and ali-
enations in the cafes a-
forefaid , and the like
cafes, they that haue ti-
tle and right after the
death of fuch a feoffor
or alienor may not en-
ter, but are put to their
actions, Vt ſupra, and for
this caufe fuch feoff-
ments and alienations
are called difcontinu-
ances.


finnns;


Of Difcontinaance.  Seë.506.59%.


er^ feoff memi

Ge. here is
implyed Fee Amvie, Fee
tafle, 02 eſtate fog itfe,
andinthis and the nct
Section Littleton put=
teth twocafes, where if
the iflues in tatle fatic,
thep in thevenerfion and
temaínber are dziuen to
their Formedon ín reuer⸗
fion 02 retnatnder, and
this remaincth as ít
was ben Littleton
Szote not altered bp as
ny Statute, And the


teafon whereot hele As.


lienations tn the fenerall
cafes in thig and the
next Section doe make
a Difcontinuance,- ago
put him inthe reuerſion
92? remainder that right
had to bis Aion, and
tobe aap his entric,
was fo; that hee wag
pitute tn etate, and fog
thebenefit of the Pur⸗
chafoz, and fo? the fates
gardof big Warrantte,
fo ag eucrp mans right
might bee preferuend, viz.
to the Demandant foz
bis ancient right,and ta
the co for the bene-
t of big iDarrantic,
which was Founded tips
On great reafon and ec
quitp, which benefit of
the Warranty thonid bee
Prevented and auoyded
ft the entrie of bim that
Fight had were lawful,
andtherby aifothe dan-
ger that many cimes
happeneth bp taking of
potfeftiong Was warily
paeuenteb by daS&p.2but
then ít map bee demans
ded, feíng that there
Swag noreuerfion 03 res
matnver erpedant pon
anp eftate tatle at the
Common Law, noz the
iTuetntatle bad anp rez
medp by the Cominon
Law, ik the Genant tn
tatle had aliencd, then by
this dap to the iſſue tw

taile 2


327


Vid. Se&.§ 92.5 97.6016
917.638.


3o. E. 1. Fermeden €.
19. E.2. Formeden,61.
18,E.3.46. 12.€,413e


Lib


18. E. 3.12.19, E. 5.Ere 468
34. E, 5.28. 36.4908.
32.R.2. Diſeon. S.E. 4.3.
a H.7.A7. 33. E. 3. Formdin.
& 13. H.7. Pl. Com, Smith
ex Stapletons cafe.


Capi. Of Difcontinuance. Sell.598.


tatle 02 to bit in reuerſion og remainder, — whereunto itis thug anfSmered, Chat it ig prouts
bed by the Statute of W.2,ca.1, Dedonis conditionalibus, quod non habeant illi quibus te-
nementum fic faerit datum poteftatem alienandi,&c, Gipon thele words the £yaaco cf the
Faw fauc conttrued tbe fato Act according to tbe rule and reafon of tbc Common Law, and
that in Diners and ſundrie variable manners, For fome Blienations of Tenant fn tatie, tbe»
haucadiudged vopdably by the 3iffuc (n talle by ation onip: fome atthc election of the Fue
in taile toauopde it by Action, Entrie, 02 Clapme, fomeare merelp bopee by the death of the
Tenant in Catie: Which feucrall Confrucions Were made bpon the feifc tame Swozvs afozés
fap. í
as tor example, € Tenant in Taile make a Feoffement infer, this datues tbe Iſſue in
Œatlcto his Acton, which tg calledin Law a Dilcontinuance, and this Confructon was
made, foz that at the Common Law the feoffement of an Abbot 07 Wifhop, oz of the hut⸗
band fetfed tn the right of his wife, Did worke a Difcontinuance , and dtd bruce the Suc⸗
ceffoz and the wife tothetr Baion , and fozeclofed them of their entrie : and as the entrte
of the fue Was taken away, ſo contcquentlp of them in reuerion and remainder, Alſo (f an Ab⸗
bor, Bihop, oz hulband in the right of his wife, fetfed of a Went, o2 of anp other 3inberi-
tance that iteth in @zaunt had aliencd, it was inthe clet(on of the Srccellour oz Swife af-
ter the death of her hufvand.toclatme the rent, ec. oztobsingan Aion, for that alicnation
bio not worke a Difcontinuance , and fo it ts bp conftruction in cafe of Cenaunt in Cape,
Lattip, 3€ the Abbot, Withop, o1 Hulband, hadgranteda Rent newly created out of the land
ec. to another in fee, this had btterlp ceafed bp their Death ; and fo tt fs allo bp confiruction in
cafe of Œenantin Catle. &»oas thefe Mozdg, (Non habent poteftatem alienandi) doc wozke
tbefeeffctg, viz. ag to Lands, Chat a fcoffement barreth not the Iſſue, tc. of his Aion,
but Worketha Difcontinuance to barre him of his Œntric : as to Rents oz any thing in ele,
that lic in grant,that thefapd words doe take away bis power to make anp Difcontinnance:
ag to Rents,#c, neWip created, that they takeaway bis power to make them to continue ions
ger than during hts itfe.

at there ig a diuerutie betweene an Bitenation Working a difcontinuance of an eftate
Which taketh away anentric, and an Hitcnation Working, dineſting oz difplacing of Cates
Sobich takethaway noentrie. 20s (£ there be Œcnantfoz life, the rematnderto A. in Table,
the remainder to P. in fer, (€ Œenant fozitfe doth alien in Fee, this doth diuelt ano difplacethe
remainders, but Svozketh no difcontinuance, And thercin itis to be oblerued, Chat toeucrie
3Dt(contínuance therets neceflasic a diueſting, oꝛ oífplacíng of tbe Eſtate, and turning the fame
t0 a right: fo2 tf tt be not turned to aright, thep that bauc the Œftate cannot be dituen to an
Action, Andthat tg thercafon that fuch Inheritances ag lie in Gꝛant cannot by Gant be
Difcontinued, becaufefuch a Gant dinefteth no Eſtate, but paſſeth onclp that Which he map
lawfully avant anb fo the eſtate ft felfe Doth diſcend, reucrt, ox rematne, ag hall befapd heere=
after inthis Chapter.

A-maketha gift in Caile to B. Hho maketh a gift in Catlets C. C. maketh a Feoffement
in Fee and dieth Without Iſſue, b. hath Iſſue and dieth, the Filme of B-fhail enter, for albeit
the Feoffemcent of C. pfo difcontinue tbe renerfion of the ra fimple Which B. had gapneb vp⸗
on the Eſtate tatle made to C. pet could tt not vifcontinue the riaht of Intaile which B. had,
Which Wag difcontinucd before : and therefore When C. died without Iſſue, then dtd the dis
continuance of the eftate Œafle of B. Swbich paſſed by big Liueric, ceaſe, and confequentip the
entrie of the fluc of B. lawful, bich cafe map open the rcafon of many other cafes,

Mito note, Chat a Difcontinuance mabc by the bnfband, did take away the entrie onelp of
the wife and her heircs by the Common Law, and not ofany other which clatineb by titie pac
ramonntaboucthe Difcontinuance. As tf Lands hadbeneginen to the bufbanb and wife and
to a third perfon, andto their heires,and the huſband had made a #eoffement in See, this had
bene a difcontinnance of the one moítíc, and a diſſeiſin of the other moitic: ff the huſband had
Died, and then the $otfc had died, the furutuoz fhould hate entred into the Whole, fox hee clatmed
not buder the difcontinuance,but bp title paramount from the fir Jrcofroz and feetugtberigbt
by La vett) furuiue, the Law doth gine him a remedie to take aduantage thereofbp entrp,tos
other remedie £02 that moitie he could wot haue. "


¶ Fee,on Feetaile. And fo tt is of ancttate fog life.


Se&. 598.599.600.


€ ITem & Tenant en Taile AS if Tenant in Taile be dif-
foit Dittei(ie, et (1 releſſa pet feifed, and hereleafeby hs
_ fon


Lib.3.


fon fait ale Diſſeiſor et a fes
beires tout le Droit, le quel (1 ad
enmefme les tenements, ceo né
pas Difcontinuance, pur ceo que
rien De D20ít paſſa al Diſſeiſor
foz{que pur terme De bie Del te=
nant en le Œaile que fift le Ke⸗
leate,ac,


OfDifcontinuance. Seé#.599.600.601.


Deedtothe Diffeifour and to his
heires all theright which he hath


inthe fame Tenements, this is no


difcontinuance, for that nothing
oftheright paffeth to the Diffei-
for, but fer terme of the life of te-


nant in Taile, which made the re-


leafe, 8c.


Set 599.


€ Mf 2 ver feotiunent bet te-

nant en le Caile, fee

fimple patfa per mefine le fcoffe-

cip pet fozce De Liuerie De fet=
40


Vt by the Feoffement of Te-
naunt in Taile, Fee fimple paf-


eth by the fame Feoffement by
force of the Liucrie of Sei-
fin,&c.


$ed. 600.


€ MS perforce Dun releafe
tien pafiera fozfque le
Droit que il poct lopalmt, a D20i-
turalment releffer, fans lep5 ou
Damage as auters perfons quc
. ent aueront Doit apres fon De-
ceafe,zc, Flint il eſt graund di⸗
verſlitie perenter bn feoffement
Dun tenant en lc taílc, et vn Ke⸗
leaſe fait per tenant cn Ie taile,


€


BY by force of a Releafe no-

thing fhall paffe but theright
which he may lawfully and right-
fully releafe,without kurt or dam-
mage to other perfons who fhall
haue right therin after his deceafe,
&c. So there is great diuerfitie be-
tweene a Feoffement of Tenant in
Taile, and a releafe made by Te-
nant in Taile.


Ur Buthos haning pat eramples of EGatcs pafling bp tranfinutatíon of an Œftate
and pofleflion, deth tn thts and thetwe Sections following put a Biuerfitte be-


tweene a Feoement anb a releafc 02 confirmation of a bare right : foz it is a rule in


Law, Chat the Difletice o2 anp other that hath aright onelp by bis Releale or Confirmation,
cannot make any difcontinuance, becanfe nothing can paſſe thereby bat that Which may law⸗
futip pafle. Wut otherwile tt ig of a Feoffment in reſpect of the Linericof Seifin, for that (t
ts the moft folemne and common afturance in the Œountrie, and to be maintained £02 the coms
mon quíct of the Kealme: and by the ffeoffement the Freehold (whichis ſo much eſteemed in
La) doth pale bp open Ltuerie to the Feotfee, and bp the releaſe a bareright.


Seélion 601.


Cs il eff Vtitisfaid, That @ [^ Bereaton why the
E Dit, que ſi if the Tenant in Lai tcène
le tenant & Taileinthis cafe mabeth a Difcontinnance,
tatenceftcagrvelef: releafe to his Diffei- V ec * vis,
faafon Diffeifoz, et for, and bind himand  fhouid enter, the Svarrantie
oblige lupetfeg bts his heiresto Warran- (Mbichisfo mach fanomeo


in Haw) fboulb be wenn
nb


328


9 E 4.1§.12.E. 4, v2.
5-H. 4.8. 21. H. 6. 58.


te


3- hl. 4. p. 32.8 8. Diſcout. 5@
13.2.4.11. 31.42,7.9,
43. R. 3.8. 15. E.4. as. Di
6.30.


Vi. S88. $96,602.635.6 58.


Lib.3.


(ap.1.


and therefozeto tbe end that
1€ Aſſets tn Fee fimple toe
Difcend, beto hom the Kes
leafe (g made, may piead the
fame,and barre the Deman⸗
bant: by Which meanes all
tights anb adnantages are
faucd, Andthat A may note


Of Difcontinuance. -


à Garranty ct mot,
et ceft garranty di
cendifta fon Iſſue,
«o eft Difcontinu=
ance per caufe de Ie
gatrantíe,


$e.602. 607,


tie, and dieth,and this
Warrantie difcend to
his Iffue, this is a
Difcontipuance , by
reafon of the War-
rantie,


ít oncc fozall, an (left dit)


With Littleton, 18 as gwd ag a Conceflum in a Beobe cafe,


Seélion 602.
Es ibn home ad Flue TD Vt if aman hath iffuea Sonne
€ M fits per fa reme, et [a by his Wife, and his Wife


fememozuft, et puis il pzent
auter Feme, et tenements font
Dones a lup ct a fa feconD Feme,
et ales heires De lour Deux corps
engendze3,et ils ont iffue bn au-
ter fits,et E feconD Feme mogzuft,
et puis le Tenant en letaile eff
Diffeifie, et i teleffa al Diffcifoz
tout fon dzoit,æc, et oblige lup a
fes heires a le garrantie, ac, et
Deuta, cconeft pas Difcontinu-
ance al iſſue ene Taile per E fe=
cond ferac,mes il poit bien enter,
pur ceo que le garrantie diſcen⸗
Dit a fon eigne frere que fon pier
auoit per le primer feme,ac,


Sedf.


€ ER mefine Ie manner eft,
lou tenements font Dif-
cendable ale fits puifne folongs
le cuftome de Burgh Cnglitb,
queur fontentailes, ac, et ie te-
nant en Te tale ad Deur fits ,a ett
Di(Teí(ie, et il releſſa a fon Diſſei⸗
fo? tout fon D30ít oue garrantie,
ac, et mo2utt, le puifne fits poit
enter furle Diſſeiſor, nient ob-
ftant le garrantie, put ceo que le
garrantie DifcenDift al eigne
fits, cat touts foits le Garran⸗
ti


dieth, and after hee taketh another
wife,and Tenements are giuento
him ando his fecond wife, and to
the Heires of theirtwo bodies en-
gendred, and they haue iflue ano-
ther fonne , and the fecond Wife
dieth, and after the Tenant in taile
is diffeifed , and hee releafe tothe
Diffeifor all his right, &c.and bind
him and his heires to Warrantie,
&c. and die , this isno Difconti-
nuance to the Iffue in Taile by the
fecond wife,but he may wel enter,
forthatthe Warrantie difcendeth
to his elder brother which his Fa-
ther had by the firft wife,&c.


603.


[N the fame manner is it, where

Lands are difcendible to the
youngeft fonne after the Cuftome
of Burrough-Englifh, which are
entayled, &c. and the Tenauntin
Taile hath two fonnes , andis dif-
feifed, and he releafeth to his Dif-
feifour all his right with War-
rantic, &c. and dieth, the younger
fonne may enter vponthe Diffeifor
notwithftanding the Warranty, for
that the Warrantie difcendeth to
the elder fon:for always the War-


Lib.3.


Of Difcontinuance.


Se#.604.605:


tie Difcendera a celup d eft heire rantic fhall difcend to him who is
heire by the Common Law.


€ 'y tbcfc two cramples inthis andthe Decion next following, tt appcareth that a
Béssnsssens added to a tcleafe o? Confirmation, anb difcending bpon him chat


pec le common Icp,


right bath to the Lands maketha Difcontinuance, otbersotfe it is out of the reafom -


ef tbc La, anb worketh no Difcontinuance t&the warrantie diſcendeth bpon another.
¶ Ovi garrantie, dre. Mere ig implyed that he Doth bind him and
bis betres to warrant to the relcafec and his heires. Lee
€ Touts foits le garransie difcendiff [ur le beire al Common ley. This tS
a Marime of the Common Law, and hercof moze hall be fato in tbe Chapter of warrantic.
Sc&ione 718.735.736-727-f0a8 tt ig not the Marrantie onlp that maketh a difconttuuance,but
she arrantie and the Difcent bpon him that right hath togerher,


€ | Cem fbn Abbe

foit Diffeifie, %
firclefla af diſſeiſor
puelque garvantie, €
neftpas Difcontinu-
ance à fon Cucce{loz,
put cco que vier pat-
fa pet cel releas forſ⸗
que le D20ít quc il ab
Durant ic temps que
il cft Abbe, ele Gar⸗
tantie eft erpire pet
fon pziuation,ou per
fa moot,


Seil. 604.


Lfo if an Abbot

bee diffeifed and
hee releafeth to the
diffeifor with warran-
tie, this is no Difcon-
tinuance to his fuccef-
for , becaufe nothing
paffeth by this releafe
but the right which
hee hath during the
time that he is Abbor,
and the Warrantie is
expired by his priua-
tion, or by his death.


€ T Be reafow hereof

peeldedby Littleton

te fox that thewar⸗

rantie ts expired bp bts pats
Ratton 02 Death.

¶ Per fon priuation


ou per fa mort. dote;

that pziuation is here refenie

bled to death, aub fo te tranfe
latton alfo, woherein this dts
nerfitíoig Wazthp vf obſerua⸗
tion.that when a Biſhop, tC.
make an effate, leafe, grané
of a Rent charge, toarrantte,
92 anp other Ba Which map
tend to the diminution of the
reuenues of the ABifhopiicke,
fc. which Mould maintains
the fucceiion, there the priuaz
tion 9? trantlation of the Bic


329


13: H. 4. Garantie 9 4e
1g F · 3. Garrantse 100


Wop, sc. ig all one With his death. Wut Wherethe Withop (a Patron and Oꝛdinarie, and
£enfrmetha Leale made by the Parſon Without the Deane and Chapter, and after the Para
fon dieth, andthe Biſhop collateth another, and then ts tranflated, pet his Confirmation re=
mapneth gad,forthe Reuenues that are to maintainethe Succefloz are not thercbp dimini⸗

' fev. And tbe like dinerfitievoth hold in cafc of tefignation,notwithlanding ( m ) the anthos
Bitty te the contrary,


| Seti. 605:


Lfo if a man feifed in the


Vide 39.B.3.16,


(m) 19. E.3.16.557,
drant.ggs


Tem fi home ſeiſie en D2oít

fa feme eft diſſeiſte a tl velet- right ofhis Wife be diffei-

fa,ac, ole gatrantie,ceo nett fed, and he releafeth, &c.

pas difcontinuance a Ia ferme ſi with warrantie, this is no difcon-

elfuruefquift fon baron,meg que tinuance to the wife if thee furui-

 elpoit enter ac, Caufa patet. ucth her husband,but that (he may
P enter, &c. Caufa pater.


€ “is (a euldent, vnleſſe the Wife be betre to the bufband (ag bp 1a% (pec map bee) and
T $e (t is a atfcontinuancefes tbecaute afozefatn,


Does Ss.


Lib.3.


(Cap. Of Difcontinuance. Se4,606.607.608.


Seélion 606.


CI] Cem li tenant en taile de
certaine terre, leffa mefme
la terre a bn auter put term̃

des ang,per fozce De quel Je leſſee
ent eit poſſeſſion en quel poſſeſſi⸗
onletenant en taile per fon fait
teleffa tout le Droit que tl auoit €
mefme le terre, à auer & tener a Ie
leffce a a fes heires a touts tours
ceo neft pas Difcontinuance, mes
apzes le Deceafe E tenant en taíle
ſon iſſue poít bien enter, put ceo
que per tiel releas viens paſſa
fozfque pur terme De la bie Dele
tenant en Ie tatle,


AUS if Tenant in tayle of cer-
taine Land letteth the fame
Land to another for tearme of
yeares, by force whereofthe Lef-
feehath thereof poſſeſſiõ, in whofe
poffeffion the Tenant in tayle by
his Deed releafeth all the right
that he hath in the fame Land, To’
haueandto hold tothe Leffeeand
to his heires for euer. This is no
difcontinuance , but after the de-
ceafe of the Tenant intayle, his if-
fue may well enter, becaufe b
fuch Releafe nothing paffeth but
for tearme of the life of the Te-
nant in tayle.


€ Or per ticlreleas riens paffa.330te (e one of tbe maximes of tbe
Qe dnd Law vebearfeb bp our Authoz, whereot bee doth put diners ccampleg


hereafter.


Sed.


€ E N meſme le manner ett, à

le tenant en Ie tatle, confirs
ma leftate le leffee pur terme Deg
áang,aauera tenecalupaafeg
beiteg , ceoneft pag Difcontinu-
ance, put cco queriens pafla per
tiel confirmation forſque leftate
que le tenant en le taile auott put
terme De fa bie, ac,


607.


I5 the fame manner it is if the
Tenantin tayle confirme the e-
{tate of the Leffee for yeares, To
haue and to hold to him and to his
heires , this is no difcontinuance,
for that nothing paffeth by fuch
Confirmation , but the eftate
which the Tenant in tayle hath
fortearme of hislifej&c.. — -


€ R Tens paſſa per ticl confirmation. Here is another of the marimes
of the Common Law rehearſed byonr Author , Whereok be putteth erampleg perta


af


ter, ?
$19 ose {hall be ſaid hereof inthe next Section following,


Setlion 608. . à


Cj Tem i tenant entatleapzes
tielleas grantale reuerfion


A Lfo iftenant in taile after fuch
leafe grant the reuerfion in fee


ence pet fon fait a auter, & boile by his Deedto another, and wil-
que


Lib.


que apacs le terme fine,G meſme
le terre remaind2oi¢ à le grantee
eta tes heires a touts tours, le
‘tenant a teeim dans atturna, ceo
neſt pas difcontinuance, Cat
tiels choles queux palfont en
tiels cafes de tenant en 1e tale
tantfolement per bop De graunt,
ou per confirmation, ou per tíel
releafe, rien poit paſſer pur faite
eſtate a celuy a que tiel grauut,
Nu confirmatis.ou releate cf fait
fozfqueceo que le tenant en taile
poit Deoiturelment faire, et ceo
neft forlque p terme De (a bie,zc,


Of. Difcontinuance.


leth that after thé terme ended,
that the fame land fhall remaine to
the grantee and his heires for euer,
andthe tenant for yeares attorne;
this is no difcontinuance. For fuch
things which paffein fuch cafes of
tenant in taile only by way of
grant, or by confirmation or by
fuch releafe, nothing can paffe to
makean eftate to him to whom
füch grant, or confirmation or re-
leafe 1s made, but that which the
tenant in taile may rightfully
make, and this is but for terme of
his life,&c.


Seid. 609.


C3: ſi ieo leſſa terre a bu Dort

purterme De fa bie,æc, et le
tenant aternte de vie leſſe meſm̃
la terre abn auter pur terme des
aug.sc, et puts mon tenant a
terme De bie qraunta Ic reuerfié


a bur auter en fee, et le tenant a


terme Des ang atturna, en cett
cafe le grantee had en Ie frank
tenement korſq; eſtate pur terme
De bie Con qtaunto?,3c.3 160 que
(uis enleveuernon de fee limple.
ne puifle enter per fogce De cel
grant pel reuerlion fart per mor
tenant a terme De bte, put ceo
que per ticl grant mon veucr{on
nett pas Dicontinue, mes tout
temps Demurtamop, ficome il
fuit adeuant, nient obftant tíel
grant del reuerfion fait al gran-
tecalup et a fes Deíteg,ac, put
ceoqueriens paffa pec force De
tiel grant fozfque eftate que le
grantoz quott , Ee,


Or if I lettland to a man for
terme of his life, &c. and the
tenant for life letteth the fame
land to another for terme of years,
&c.and after my tenant for life
grant the reuerfion to another in
fee, and the tenant for yeares at-
torne, inthiscafethe grantee hath
in the freehold but an eftate for


‘terne of the life of his grantor, &c.


And I which am in the reuerfion
of the fec fimple may not enter by
forceof this grant ofthe reuerfion
madeby my tenant for life, for
that by fuch grant my reuerfion is
not difcontinued, but alwayes re-
maine vnto me as it was before
notwithftanding füch grant of the
reuerfion made to the grantee, to
him and to his heires,&c. becaufe
nothing paffed by force of fuch
grant, but the eítate which the
grantor hath,&c.


Oooo 2 Sek.


Sel.609;


330


(ap.u. Of Difcontinuance.’- Sed.610.611.612.


Sect.


CEN metmele maner eft, le
eat aterme De bie, per
fon fait confirmelcftate fon leſ⸗
fee pur terme Des ang, à Auer et
tener a lup eta ſes heres, ou tes
leſſa a fon leſſee ct a fes beiteg,
bucoze E lefec aterme Dang nad
eftate fozfque pur terine De bie
De le tenant a terme De bic, tc,


610.
CN the fame manneris it, if te:
nant for terme of life by his
Deed confirme the eftate of his
Leſſee for yeares, Tohaue and to
hold to him and his heites, or re
leafetohis Leffee and his heires,
yetthe Leffee for yeares hath an
eftate but for terme of the life of
the tenant for life,&c.


Œ ^ tiels choſes que paſſont en tiels cafes de tenant en le taile; crc. Pere
Gi ig relearfed another Ancient maxime of the Common Law touching Gzants, anv

hereby ít appearcth that a feoffment in fec(aibeit (t bebp Paro! ) ía Of a gre:ter o-
Peration andcftimation in Law, then a grantof a reucrfion bp Ded though it be enrolico
and Attoznement of the Leſſee foz peares of a Releaſe, op a Lonirmation bp Ded for the
reafons afozefatd. Andthis tg mantfelked bp tbc Examples Which our Authoz here in thele


thre Sections putteth.


See.


6.


Corine effate


per term dans,


oc. Here it ts im⸗
plped that albeit the
feoffment made by Leſ⸗
fee for peanes be a feoff-
tent bet ween the Feof⸗
kor and keoffee, and that
by this fcoffment the fee
fimple pafIctl) bp force of
tbe ltucry,pet (9 it a dif
feifn to the Lelloz, Bnd
here tt is Swozthp to bee


€ Ms auterment

eft quant tenat
a terme De-bie, fait bn
feoffinét en fee, cat pec
tiel fcoffment le fee
fimple paffa, Car te-
nant a term Dang poit
faítefeotfiment en fee,
et per fon feoffment le
fee fimple paffera, et


Vt otherwife it is

when tenant for life
maketh a. feoffment in
fee, for by füch a feoff-
ment the fee fimple paf-
Íeth. For tenant for
yeares may make a
feoffment in fee, and by
his feoffment the fee
fimple fhall paffe, and


obferucd, that our 2005
tho; faith that Œenant
fo; terme of peares map
mabe a fcoffiment, wher⸗
bpon it follotoctb, that
the jfcoffo? may therc-


buceze il nauoit al Sethe hadatthe time of
temps Del feoffinent the fcoffnent made but
fait foꝛſque cflate pur an eftate for terme of
terme Dans, at.


yeares,&c.


gnto annexe a tDarrantíe, whereupon the ra» map bonch bin, bat of this pou (fall reabe


moꝛe in the Chapter of tDarranticg,Sect.698.


Sed.


C [rem fi teñ en letaile gran:
ta fon terre à bn auter pur
terme De bie De metme Ie tenant
entaíle, ct liver a luy ſeiſin ac. et
apres per fon fait il veleffa à le
tenautet à (cS beireg tout le
droit


612.


A Lſo if tenant in taile grant his
land to another for terme of
the life of the faid tenant in ta le
and deliuer to him feifin,&c. and
after by his Deed hee releafeth to
the tenant and to his heires all the


Lib.3. |


Droit que il auopt en meſme la
terre en ceſt cag leftate Del tenat
Delaterre nett pas enlarge per
force De tiel releas, pur ceo que
quant letenant auoit leftate en
le tette pur terme De bie Dele te-
nant en le tale, Donque él auoit
tout le Droitque le tenant en le
taile puiſſoit dꝛoiturelment grã⸗
tcc ou releſſer ifint que per tiel
releas nul Droit palfa, entant
que fon droit fuit ale adeuant.


«L| Cem fitenant en taile per
. fon fait grant a bn auter
tout fon eftate que tl auoít en les
tefits aluytaties, a auct et te-
nertout fon eftate al auter et a
Les heires a touts tours, et Deli-
ueraa lup feifin accozdant, en
get cagle tenant a que laltena-
tion fuit fait, nad auter eftate
fozfque put terme de bie del te-
nant entaile, et illint il poit bien
eſtre pyoue,que letenant en taile
ne pott pas graunter ne aliencr,
te faire afcuu droiturel eftate De
franktencment a auter perfon,
forfque pur terme De fa bie De-
mele, zc,


Of Difcontinaance. Se. 613.614:


rightwhich hee hath in the fame


land, Inthis cafe the eftate of the


tenant of the land is not enlarged
by force of füch releafe, for that
when the tenant had the eftate in
the land for terme of the life of
the tenant intaile, hee had then all
the right which tenant in taile
could rightfully grant or releafe.
Soas by this releafe no right paf-
feth, inafmuch as his right was
gone before.


Sec, 613.


Ae if tenant in taile by his
Deed grant to another all his
eftate which hee hath in the tene-
ments to him entailed, To haue
andto hold all his eftate to the o-
ther, and to his heires for euer,and
deliuer to him feifin accordingly.
Inthis cafe che tenantto whom the
alienation was made hath no other
eftatebut for terme of the life of
tenant intaile. And fo itmay bee
well proued, that tenant in taile
cannotgrant nor alien, nor make
any rightfull eftate of freehold to
another perfon, but for terme of
his owne life only, &c.


€ HDe meaning of Littleton tn both tbefe cafes tn this anb in tbe Section next preceding
(e, that having regard to the tſſue tn tatic, and to them tn renerfien oz remainder; Gea
nant in tatic cannot lawtullx make a greater eftate then foz terme of hig life, and
therefore this Keleafeoz Grant is no Difcentinuance. Wut in regard of Himfcife this Ree
leafe o? Grant leaueth no reuerfion in him, but put the fame ín abctance, fe ag after thig Ree
leafe oz Gꝛant made he fhall not baue anp action of waſte, sc.


€ Grant tout fon cftate Vid Sed.650. Action of waſte ac. there is
implied that he (bail not enter £o? a forfeiture tf after the 18 cleafcoz Gꝛant the Leder maketh a


fcoffment in fe,

Sed. 614.

( Ar fi ieo Done LOrifIgiuelandto @ [re Lileon pros
" C Terre a n F a man intaile,fauing dede
bomeentaile, fauant the reuerfion to my Gaile hash novighsfull


#2 600 3


effate
having


13. 8.5. 10.4.
Brooke Relea/e ps.


D -7


Lib.3.


(n) Brak lig fo 231.
Flez, lt. 5.62.11.


328, de Elo. vH fupra,


(0) Mfr.»o. 5.6.13.


W'eff vo. 3.84. 4.


Cap. i.


hauing reſpect to tive perfons,
the one (g tothe TD 0102, whofe
reverfion is diueſted and bifa
placed, and the other to the
73 flue in aile, who (d datuen
to hig Action to recouer bis
Might.
LA tort luy deforce.
ir) Deforciare tg a $o02D Of
rt, and caunot be expreiled
bp any other 30025, fo? t Age
nifterh, Go withhold lands 02
tcncments from the right 9502
net, tn Which cafe either the
entrie of the right owner is
takin awap, o1 the 3Detooceon
holdeth tt fo fab, ag the right
ewner is oituen to bis reall
Præcipe, wherein it is fayde,
Vnde A. eum iniufté deforce-
at, 07 the efozceoz fo diftur=
beth theriqht owner, ag bee
cannot enfoy hie ons : and
therefoze tt is fap, Per hoc
autem quod dicitur in breui
vitime preefentationis deforce-
ant, videtur quibufdam quod
querens innuat per hoc quod
deforcians fit in feifina , ficut
in breui de reéto, fed reuera
non eft ita; fed fatis deforceat
qui poffefforem vti feifina non
permiferit omnino vel minus
commode impediat præfentan-


OfDifcontinuance.


ie reuerfion à mop, et


puis le tenant en 1e


palle enfcofa n


auter en fee. le feoffee


nad pas daoiturell
eftate enlestenemts


pur deux cauſes. Un
eft, pur ces que ꝑtiel


4renffement ma Re⸗
uerfidé difcontinue,
E quel eft a tort fait ẽ
nép à Daoit fait, Qiu
auter caufe eft, ft le
Tenant en tatle moa
rutt, ct fon iſſue ſuiſt
WBaicfe be Formedon
enuers le feoffee le bt
Disra.et aury E count
rec. que t feoffee a toat
lup Deforce, €, Ergo
fila tort Iup Defozce,
ac, il nad pag Deol:
turel eftate,


Sed. 615.


felfe,and after the Te-
nant in tayle infeofteth


another - in- Fee, the


Feoffee hath noright-


-fulleftate in the Tenc-
- ments for two caufes-:


One is, For that by
fuch - Feoffement my
reuerfion is difconti-
nued, the whichis a
wrong and nota right-
full Acts»: Another
caufe is, Ifthe Tenant
in Taile dieth, and his
Iffue bring a Writ of
Formedon againft the
Feoffee, the Writ and
alfo the Declaration
fhall fay, &c. That
the Feoffee by wrong
him deforces, &c. erge
if he deforceth him by
wróg,he hath no right
eftate,


do,appellando, impetrando fecundum quod dicitur de diffeifitore, fatis facit diffeifinam, qui vei
non permifit poffefforem vel minus commode licet omnino non expellat. In this cafe that Lit-
tleton putteth, the Difcontinue being ín by wzong, is no Dilleifoz, 20batog, oz Intrudoꝛ, but
à Defozccoz, and hereof commeth Defozcement, and thus did Bntiquitte detcribe tt 2(0) Dew
forcement, come fi afcun enterenautertenement tout come le veray Seignioreftal Market, ou
ailors, & retorne, & ne poctauerentrecins eftceluy deforce & debotue. Bnd fo? that at the
firft the withholding was With bielence and fozce, ít Has called a deforcement of the Lande
92 Œenements, but now tt generally extended to all kind of wzongfull withholding of Lands
62 Cenoments from the right owner. Chere is a wꝛit called a Quod ei deforceat, anb lieth
Shere & enant in Carle, 07 Cenant £02 life, loofeth bp bcfault, bp the Statute he ſhall bauc &
Quod ci deforceat agaín(t the Recoucroz,and pet be commeth in by conrie of Law,


Sed. 615.


© [ Lem (i terve fort leſſe bn

home pur terme De fa bie,

le remainder a bn autet en
le Cale, celup en le remainder
boile qraunter fon remainder a
bit autecenfee per fon fait, etle
“Tenant a terme de bie atturna,
cto nett pag difcontinuance De le
remainder,


Lfo if Land bee Jet toa man
for terme of his life, the re-
mainder to another in Taile, if he
inthe remainder will grant his re-
mainder to another in Fee by his
Deed, and the Tenaunt for life at-
torne, this is no difcontinuance of
the Remainder.
gee.


Lib.


Of Difcontinuance: — $e8.616.617.618.


Seth 616.


€ joan fi home ad Kent fers

uícc ou Rent charge en
Taile et il granta le Dit Kenta
bnauter en fee, et le tenaunt at⸗
toma, ceoneft pas Difcontinu-
ance,ac,


Seét.


€ Tem fi home foit Cenant
en aile De bn aduotofon
engrofle, ou de bn Com-
mon en grofle, fil per fon fait
boile graunt laduotofon, ou le
. Common à bnauter en fee, ceo
nett pas difcontinuance, Caren
tiely cafes les Grantees nont
eftate fo?tque pur terme De bie
dele Cenant en Caile que itt
le Grantee,


€


Lfoif aman hatha Rent fer-

uice or Rent charge in Taile,
and hee graunt the fayd Rent to
another in Fee, and the Tenaunt
attorne, this is no Difcontinu-
ance, &c.


617.


Ale ifa man bee Tenaunt in
Taile of an Aduowfon in
Groffe,or of a Common in groffe,
if he by his Deed will graunr the
Aduowfon or Common to ano-
therin Fee, this is no Difcontinu-
ance ; for in fuch cafes the Graun-
tees haue no eftate but for terme
of the lifeof Tenantin Taile that
made the Grant, &c,


y tbe cafes in tbefe thres Sections (t appeareth, Chat (£ a Remainder oꝛ e Went fers
nice, oz a Rent charge, 02 an Aduowſon, 02a Common , o? any other Fnheritance


that iteth in Gzant,be granted bp Cenant in Catie st {5 no Diſcontinuance, as foze


merlp bath bene ſayd.


Cp) Mote, berets an Aduowſon named by Littleton, ag a thing that lieth in Grant, and


vaſſeth not by Liuerie of Seiũn. :


€ E «L nota.quebe
E tiels choles
que pañont per bop
bc graunt per Fatt
fait en pays, et fans
lincrie, la tiel graunt
ne fait pag Difconti-
nuance, come en les
cales auantDits,# en
auter cafes fembla-
bles, ac, et coment
queticls chofes font
graunts en Fee per
fineleute en le Court


Section 618.


AN note that of
fuch things as
paífe by way of grant,
by Deed made in the
Countrie, and with-
out Liuery, there fuch
Grant maketh no dif-
continuance, as in the
cafes aforefayd,and in
other like cafes , &c.
And albeit fuch things
bee graunted in Fee,
by Fine leuied inthe
Kings Court, &c.


€ Hs is tbe gencrail


rcafon pelded of

the psecedent cas

fes andthe like, foz that it is
a Maxime in Law , Chat a
Brant (d) by Ded ot fuch
things ag doe lic (rt Gzaunt,
and notin Lincrie of Seifin,
Boe Wozke no difcontinsance,
Hut the partícular reafon te,
foz that of fuch things the
Grant of Cenant in Tapie
Sworbeth no wrong, cítber to
the Iſſue in Catle, e; to him
in reuerlion og remainder, fo;
nothing doth pae but onelx
baring the life of Œenant in
Qr stie, wyich ts lawtull, anb
enery difcontinnance Moaketh
8 Meng, ad hath beene fapd.
(a) 3€


33%


Bra? jj. 3.55. Sy: & fe.366.
378. Brit fo.187. Mir.a,3
§.1y. Fles.li.5.ca.1 5.


(p)s-E.3.58.21.B. 3.37.38
43-E. 3. 1.4. 11. H. 6.4.

5. H.7.37. 18.H.8.

16, El. Dy. 385. b.


(d) 6.£,3. 46. 32.2.3. Dif-
mnt. 3. 33.4, 8. 4. H.7.17.
31. H.7, 42.15. H.7.1g.
21,H.6.$3.83. 5.£. 4.3.
31, B.4 $, 23. Ra. /Difeen. $6
38. H.8. "Diffeb. 35 Brooke,
I9. E. 3. Bre. 468. P4. (em.
415. 18.47.»


Lib...


(q) 33-£.3.Ferned. 47.
35. H.5. 10. 356,4 (f 8.
4.H.7.17.


(x) 3 H.7.12.


p. E.4.33.


(6) 38.4.8. T aen Dr. 101.


"Pl.(0m.233. Lii. fo. 16.
wilten Weeds cafe,


48.E. 3.23.


{t) 15.€.4.0it. Diſcont. 30.


6.2.56.57-


Cap-u.


Of Difcentinuance.


(q) 3f Tenant in Œaple
of a Ment feruice , ec. 02
of a, Reuerfion , oz Res
mainder in Gaile, ec. grant
the ſame in A unas

andicaneth Acte tn
——— Dteth, this is netther barre moz diſcontinuance to the Iſſue in Carle, but he may di⸗
ftraine foz the 18 ent ox feruice, 02 enter into the land after the Deccafe of Œenans foz life, Wut
££ the Jue bringeth a Foꝛmedon in the 3D (fcenbér, and admit bímfclfe ont of polle(rion , then
bc thal be barred by tbc warrantis and Allets.

(1) Œenant in Taile of a Went diſſetleth the Cenant of the Land, and maketh a freoffes
ment in Fee With Warrantic and dteth, this is no difcontinnance of the Went, butthe Rue
may Ddiftrepne foz the fame, and albctt the warrantie extend to tbc Rent, pet bp tberule of Lic-
tleton, it Heth not in Difcontinuance : anv where the thing Dork ite in Liuerie, ag Aands and
Menements, pet (£ to the connepance of the Freehold o2 Juheritance, no Linerte of £»eíün is
requifite, it worketh no dtfcontinuance, (() Baié Cenant in Satie exchange lands, ac, ez
1€ the King being Tenant in Catic, grantby his Letters Patents the Lands in fro, there
is no Difcontinuance $»20ugbt.


¶ Per Fine. Of athing that licth in Geant, though (t bee gran⸗
teb bp Fine, pet (t Mosketh no Difcontinnance, and this is regulari true,

(t) It Cenant in Œatlemale a Leaſe for yeates o£ Lands, and aftericuie a fine, this is

a Difcontinnance, for a Sine (g a Feoſfement of Record, andthe Freehold pafleth, Wut tf te»

nant in Gatie maketh a Leaſe for big owne life, and after teutea fine , this {8 no Difcontia


Se#.619.


le 130p, Wt, pncore yet this maketh not
ceo ne fait Difcontt= a Difcontinuaunce,
nuances, &c.


nuance, becaufe tbe Reucrfon expectant bpon a ſtate of Frechoiv Which itcthonelp in Grant —


vpaſſeth thereby,


Sed. 619.


¶ NX] Ota, fiteo Done terre a on
auter en taile, et tl leſſa
mefmelaterrea bn auterp tme
Dans, et puis le Leſſor graunta
le reuerſion a bn auter en fee, et
le tenant a terme dans atturna
al Grantee, et leterme eft expire
Durantia bie le tenant en taile,
per quele Grantee enter, et puts
ie tenant en taile ad iſſue et duie,
en ceo cafe ceo neft Difcontinu-
ance, nient obftant quele Geant
foit execute en la viele Cenaunt
en Haile , putcco que al temps
De Leafe fait a terme Dang nul
nouel Fee fimple fuit referue en
ie Leſſoz, eins Ie Reuerfion De-
murt a lup en Earl ficome il fuit
Deuantie Leate fait, *


€ "TS (s abbeb to Littleton, aub net inthe Dziginall, and therefore J pnrpelslp.


Noes If I giue Land to another
in Taile, and hee letteth the
fame land to another for terme of
yeares, and afterthe Leffor graun-
teth the reuerfion toanother in fee,
and the Tenant for yeares attorne
tothe Grantee, andthe terme ex-
pireth during the life of thetenant
in Tayle, by which the Grauntee
enter, and afterthe Tenantin Taile
hath Iffueand die : in this cafe this
is no Difcontinuance, notwith-
ftanding the Grant be executed in
the life of the tenant in Taile, for
that at the time of the Leafe made
for yeares,no new Fee fimple was
referued in the Leffor, but the Re-
uerfion remained to him in Taile,
as it was before the leafe made.

*


omit it: Pet ts the cafe geb tn Law, becaute er the Realefo; pears, nos
the grant of the Lenerfion bincketh anp cen.” *


Sed.


Lib. Of Difcontinuance;
| Sed. 620.

AES ff Ietenant [) Vt if the Tenant in

€ M: x fait leas taile makea leafe for-

aterine De bie le leſſee, tearme of the life of


fc, en ceſt cafe le tenát
erste taple ad fait bn
nouel reuerfion De fee
fimple en lup , pur ceo
que quant il if leas p
continua lc tatle, ac, p
fozce De meſm̃ le leas,
€ aurp il Difcontinua
ma ceucc(ton, ac, 3 il
coutent que la reuerſi⸗
on Dc fee (imple foit en
aſcun perfor étielcas,
etilne poit eftre en
mop que fuc Donoz, en=
tant que mon reuerſiõ
eft difcontinue, Ergoil
coutent que la reuerſiõ

De fee foit en le tenant
 enletaile, que difcon=
tínua ma reuerſion per
ticlicas, ac. En fien
ceft cafe le tenant en le
_ faile graunta pet fon

fait ceft reuerfion en
kee a bu auter, et le tet
nant a terme De bie at-
turna, ac, æpuis le te=
nant a term De bie mo⸗
ruſt, biuant E tenant en
le taile.et le grantee De
le reuerſion entra, ac.
en la vie le tenant enle
taile, Dongs ceo eſt bn
Difcontinuance en fee,
Æffapzes le tenant en
- Ptaile moꝛuſt ſon iſſue
nepoitentrer, mes eft
Mis a fon bt De Forme-


the Leffee, &c. Inthis
cafe the Tenant intayle
hath made anew reuer-
fion of the fee fimple in
him, becaufe whem hee
made the Leafe for life,
&c. he difcontinued the
tayle, &c. by force of
the fame Leafe, and alío
hee difcontinued my re-
uerfion, &c. Anditbe-
houeth that the reuerfi-
on of the fee fimple be
in fome perfon in füch
cafe.And it cannot be in
me which am the donor
inafmuch as my reuerfi-
onis difcontinued, Ergo
the reuerfion of the fee
ought to be inthe tenant
in tayle who difconti-
nued my Reuerfion by
Leafe, &c. And if in
this cafe the Tenant in
tayle grant by his Deed
this Reuerfion in fee to
another, andthe Tenant
for life attorne, &c. and
after the Tenant for life
dieth,liuing the Tenant
intaile & thegrantee of
the reuerfion enter, &c.
inthe life ofthe Tenant
in taile,then this is a dif-
continuance in fee, arid
if after the Tenant in
tayle dieth, his iffue may
not enter, but is putto
his Writ of Formedon.
ppp


Se@.626.


cp” r terme de»


vie del leffee,
dre. Pere is im⸗


piped 02 for tearme of
another mans life,


Nouel reuer-


Jion de fee fimpler.
Which mult bec vnder⸗
fon of a fee Ginpie des
terminable bpon the itfe
ofthe Helle, which our
Buthoz here calleth a
fee Ampic,fo2 tf the Leſ⸗
fee bieth, the Donec ts
Tenant in taple againe
as he Was before, and
that is the reafon that
tEtn that cafe hee gran⸗
teth ouer the reuerfon
and dteth, and after the
Death of Tenant in taile
the iLeflee dieth the entrp
of the iſſue (g lawful,
becaufe bp the death of
the Leſſee the Difcontts
nuance (e determined,
anb  confequentip the
grant made of the reuerz
fion gained bpon that
bifcontinuance is void
alfo,

FE Cenant in taple
makeïh aleafe foz three
lines accezding to the
Statute of s2.H.3. that
ts no diſcontinuance of
the eftate taple oz of the
renerfion , becaufe itiz
authoilen bp Adc of
Paritament Sobereunto
euery man in tudgement
of Law ts partie.

And yet in fomecas
fes the freehold may bee
diſcontinued and not the
renerfion, (u ) As t£ the
bufbanb and Soife make
à leafe for life bp Dad
of the Wines Land rez
feruing arent, the bufs
band diet) , this was a
Difcontinuance at the
Common Law fos life,
and pet the veuerfion
was not difcontinuen
but semapned in the
Wife. Dtherinife (t =


333


x $E. Tis Diſſent. 38.


33. H.8 sap. at.


(u) 38.E.3,33.. 18. 4f. 5.
18. E, 3.54. 32, H.6.34.


Lib.s. (apu.


tf the batband hed made don Et la cafe elt, pur
M m uu, COQUE Ceftuy GauoitE
vescryras. 0 QL Er puss lete- crane de tiel veucrfion


Difisxt, 30 nant a terme de vie


moraf, Ge. The
like Law itis if the tec
Mant foz life furrendes
to the @zantes, otf the
Wrante recener in an
Action of waſte, 0? ens
ter forthe forfeiture.


¶ Anoit fafin
e execution. AND


hore it is to be obferued,
that Shen the reuerfion
tn thie caieis erecuted in


en fee Simple,auoit le
{eifin & execution De
mefmes les terres ou
tenements Daucr a lup
eta fes beites en fon
bemefne come De fee,en
la bic E tenant en taile,
et ceo eft per force De
grant De mefine ic te-
nant en taile,


33.E.3.Difcons s.

43.68. 3. £ntr. (eng. yy.

3. 4.4.9. 22,R.2. difcont se
34.406. Pl.4 38. ^ f. 6 p.
6. 43.4/f.6.48.(18.E. 3.43.
31, H.6, 53.15. E. 4.108. Dif-
euntinuance 30.Breeke.tst.ds/~
ont... 14.4. H.7,17.

2r. H.7. 11.


ftatefoz life paſſed by liuer y


oe EE continuance albett the remapnder be nct crecuteb ín


ont eftate and paſſeth bp one liuerp,


Of Difcontinuance:


Sef.620.


And the caufe is for that
he which hath the grane
of fuch reuerfion in fee
fimple hath the feifin
and execution of the
fame lands or teneméts.
To haue to himand to
his heires in his De-
mefne as of fee in the
life of the tenant in taile,
And this is by force
of the grant of the faid
Tenant intayle.


tbelífeof. Tenant in tale, (t is equiualent in iudgement of Law to a feoffment ín fe » forthe


(w) Ff € cnant in taple make a leaſe for itfe,the remayn der (n fee, this te an abfolntc 3Dif-
the fe of Œenant in tapie, becaufeall ig
Bnd fo note a diuerfity betweene


a grant of a reuerfon,


and a limitation of aremapnoer. B, C enant tn taple makert) a gift (n taple to A.and after B res
leafetb to A anb bis hettcs, an» after A. dteth Soithont iffue , the iMuc of the firft Done map


enter bpon the coliateratl hetre, becaufe A. had not fcíGn and
land in bis Demefne ag 0€ fee, ag Littleton here ſpeaketh.


execution of the renerfion of the
But (££ Tenant ín taple make a


leafe fop the itfe of the Lelle, and alter relcafeth to him and his beíreg, this is an abſolute Dif.
continuance, becaufe the fee imple is executed in the life of Tenant in taple.


Cy) 34.E.1. Quare Impedss
379. 32-E.3.6. 19.E.3.3.
336.3. Quare Imp.196.
33.-4f-8. $0.68. 3.26.


auc prefented,


Cv) FE Œenantintaple of a Mannoꝛ $»bercunto an 2I buosofon (s appenbant maketh à
Ecoffiment in fee bp deed (as tt onght to be) of onc Bere With tbe Pouowion ; AND the Church
becommeth boib, anb the fcoffer psefent, Cenant in taple dieth ,
the (flue fall not prefent bntili he hath recontinued the Bere.
cutedthe fame by prefentment, then the iſſue in tapiefhould b


the Church becommeth botde,
But tf the fcoffee had tot eres
And fo Was (tat


the Common Law of the hufband fetfed in tbe right of his $oífe, mutatis mutandis


36..4f 8. 43.£.3.20.
2.2. Difcont, 50.
rise SNA executed (n tbe ttfe of Tenant in tayle.
S1.H8.5283
Brooke tit." Difeentim 3.
ar. H.y.rx.Libi.fel.85.


Asb.10.fol.96.97. :

€ Et ceo efl per force del grant de mefine le tenant en tale.
(9) E. Dien. je. Littleton bünfelfc(s of the fame opinion, (*) asttappearct
Vide 50.6 430 Cenant tn taplemakea Leaſe £02 itfe, and erant the «Beucrü


and that zante: granteth ft oner, and the Levice attozne,
ag tbc Benerfion tg exccuteo inthe life of Cenant in taple


but that after the death of Cenant tn taple the (Te map ente


JE a fine belenicdtoa Cenant tn tape, and bec granteth and tenbzeth the Landto him and
bis beires and dic befoze execution, thts is no Difcontinuance. Other Wile (t is, (Fit bad beng


FE Tenant in tayle make a V.cafcfoz life of the Leſſes, and after grant the Reuerfion with
Svarrantíe , anddicth befoze execution, this (a mo Difcontinnance ; becaufe the Wifcontis
nuance was (ag hath bene faíb hut £0; life, anb the Svarrantíe cannet enlarge tbefame,


Hereupon


h be agir our Beokes, that if
on infe , and the Leſſee attone,
and then the ALcffe fo2 life dteth , fa
> Petthis is no Difcentinuance,
r, becanfe ag Littleton bevefaith,


bc tc not tn of the grant of the Œenant ty taple, bnt of big Grantee,
if at thts dap Cenant in taple make a Lcaſe for ikfe, andafter bp Ded ínbentebanbínrole


ledaccording to the Statute be


bargaineth and feiletb tbe Reuerlion to another ín fes, and the


Leffæ dieth , fo as the Reuerſion ts executed in the life of Cenantin taple,aibett the bargainee
id not ín the per bp the Grenant ín taple, vet in afmuch ag bee clapmeth the Benerfion tmmee


diately from him, which te executed in his itfe time,


this ig a 3Dtfrontínnance, Bnd fo it Le


and for the fame canfe tf Cenant in tale had granted the IReuerfon to the tícof another anb
bisbeires Xf Cenant in tavie maketh a Leafe for life ; and after difleifeth the Leflee fos life


anb maketh a feoftment in fee, the Lellæ dicth,
cxecuted, vet fo? that the fee Sas not executed
tlcton (t appeareth ít onght tobe) (ig no Dilcontinuance.


and then Œenant in taple dieth, albeit the fe bs
by laSotull meanes, (ag tm ali the Cafes of Lic-


sex.


Lib.3.
Sed.


q En Ie manner ferra,

À (í en le cate auantDit, le te-
nant a terme De bie apres Tat»
tournement al grantee bf alien
enfee, ele grantee vſt enter pur
forfeiture De fon etate, & puis le
tenant entaile vſt deuie, ceff vn
Difcontinuance, Caufa qua ſu-
pra. q.


621.


IN the fame manner fhallit be, if

_inthe cafe aforefaid the Tenant
for tearme of life after the Attor-
nement to the Grantee had aliened
in fee,and the Grantee had entred
by forfeiture of his eftate, and af-
ter the Tenant in tayle had died
this is Difcontinuance, Caufa qua


fuprs. €j.


€ TI His is added in this place, but in the Dalgtnall (t commet in after in this Chaps
tcr.


Section 622.


€ M en ceff cas, fitenat en

taile que granta levener=
fion, ac, mozutt biuant le tenant
a terme De vie et puts le tenant à
terme De bie mozutt, e puis ce=
lup aque le reuerſion fuit graunt
enter, ac, Donque ceo neft pas
Difcontinuance, mes que liſſu del
tenant en taile poit bien enter
fur le grauntee Del Keuerſion
pur ceo que Je Keuerſion que le
grauntecauoit, ac, nc fuit exe⸗
cute, ac, en Ie bie le tenant en
taile, ac, Ct ifint tet graund
Diucr(itic quant tenant en taile
fait bn leas pur terme Dans , &
lou il fait leas pur terme De bie,
cat en lun cag il ad ceverfion en
taile, ten lautet cag il ab bn ve-
uerfion en fee,


B inthis cafe if Tenant in taile
that grants the reuerfion, &c.
dieth lining the tenant for life,and
after the Tenant for life dieth, and
after hee to whom the reuerfion
was grarited enter,&c. then this is
no difcontinuance, but that the if-
fue of the tenant in tayle may well
enter vpon the Grantee of the re-
uerfion , becaufe the Reuerfion
which the Grantee had &c. was
not executed,&c.in the life of the
tenant intaile,8cc. And fo there is
a great diuetfitie when Tenant in
tayle maketh a Leafe for yeares,
and where hee maketh a Leafe for
life, forin the one cafehee hatha
reuerfion in tayle, and inthe other
cafe he bathareuerfion in fee.


€() 4 this fufficient hath bene fa(b before, and is of (t felfe maniteſt and needeth no tpe


plication.


Like Law wag atthe Common Las of a hufband feifen of Rand (n right of his


Spífg  Mutatis mutandis.


Pppp 2


Set.


Of Difcontinuancé. | Seë.621.622: 34


2v. B.6. 53,536 1j Ea Di
sen. 30,


18. Afb. 21H06 $2.


Lib.3.


9.2.4 31. 30. H.d. 14.
Visi. i8.E. 3.8.


(a) s. E. 4.3 4.8.


Lab. n. fo, 140.50 ( budlyes vafe


Cap.u.


Of Difcontinuance. Se8.623.624. 625.


Se. 623.


CC terrefoit Done à bth
hoe et a (eg heires males
defoncozps engendzes, le quel
ad iſſue Deux fits, etleigne fits
ab iſſue filcet Deup, et le ten en
taile fait bn leas put terme Des
ang,et Deup, oe le veuerlion Dif-
cenDift a Ie fits puifne, pur ceo
que le veuerfton fuit fozfque en le
taile, ctie fits puifne e(t beite
male,ac, Mes ff le tenant bft
fait bnleas put terme De bie,c.
et puis mozuft, oze le reuerfion
diſcendiſt a le file Del eigne fits,
pur ceo que le reuerfion eft en fee
fimple, et la file eft beire gene-
rabat,


Fort land bee giuen to a man
and to his heires males of his
body engendred, who hath iffue
two fonnes, and the eldeft fonne
hath iffuea daughter and dieth,and
the tenant in tayle maketh a leafe
for yearesand die, now the reuer-
fion difcendeth to the younger
fonne, for that the reuerfion was
but inthe taile, and the youngeft
fonne is heire male, &c. but if the
tenant had made a leafe for life,
&c. and after died, now the reuer-
fion difcend to the daughter of the
elder brother, for that the reuerfi-
onis in the fee fimple, and the
daughter is heire generall,&c.


This is entdent alfo and needsth no explanation.


Setlion 624.


€ [Ten (í home foit feifie en

tatle De terres Deuífableg
per teftament,ac, et il ceo Deuifa
abn auter en fee, et mogul, et
lautet enter,#c, ceo nett pag Dif-
continuance, pur ceo que nul Dif-
continuance fuit fait en la bie
Del tenant en le taíle ac,


Lfo if aman be feifed in taile

of lands deuifableby Tefta-
ment,&c. and hee deuifeth this to
another in fee, and dieth and the
other enter,&c. this is no difcon-
tinuance, for that no difcontinu-
ance was made in the lite of the *
Tenant in taile,&c.


€ Dis ig maniteſt and nerbetb no erplanation; Only this (s te be obferued,that no Diſ⸗
| continuance can be made bp G enant in tatle, but fach ag (g made, and taketh
in btc life time, which to here tmplieb tn the ( &c, )


Set. 625.


FAD of this opinion ts

Littleton (a) fn onr

bohes, aub. fatth that
fo tt was adiudged.


 Enfeoffe le donor,


de. Chis mutt bee
dnderfton Shere the reucrfis
on of the Deno, is (mmebts


€. [ Cem à tert foít
Done en taile,fac
want Ie reuerſ⸗
on al Dono2,et puis le
tenät en taile per fon
fait enfeoffa P Donoz,


Lfoif land be gi-
uen in taile,fauing
the reuerfion to the
Donor, and after the
Tenantin taile by his
deed enfcoffe che Do-


a


Lib.5.


a auer et tener à lup
et ales beíts atouts
touts, et liuer a lup
fcí&t accozDant, ac.
ceo nett pas Difconti-
nuance, put ceo que
nul poit difcontinuer
leftate en Ie tatle, ſi⸗
non d il difcontinue
le reuerfion celup que
ad le reuerfion,ac, on
le remainder, ft afcun
ad Icremaínber,ac, t
entant que per tiel
feoffment fait ale do⸗
noz (le reuerfion a-
Dong efteant en lup )
fon reuerſion ne fuit
Difcontinue ne alte-
rate, ac. ceft feoffmét
nett pag Difcontinu-
atice, zc,


Of Difcontinaance.


nor, To haue and to
hold to him and to his
heires for euer,and de-
liuer to him feifin ac-
cordingly,&c. this is
no difcontinuance,be-
caufe none can difcon-
tinue the eftate taile,
vnleffe he difcontinu-
eth the reuerfion of
him who hath the re-
uerfion,&c. or remain-
der, ifany hath the re-
mainder,&c. and in af-
muchas by fuch feoff-
merit made to the Do-
nor (thereuerfion then
being in him) his re-
uerfion was not dif-
continued nor altered,
&c, this feoffment is
no difcontinuance,&c.


Se8.626.


atelp expectant pon the e⸗
Gate of the Done (b) fos tf
aman make a Gift in taíle
therematnder (n tatle, refers
Ging the veucrfion to bis
feife; An totg cafe tfthe Dez
nee entcoffetbe Donoz, this
is a diſcontinuance becaufe
there is a meane eftate,and fo
Deth Littleton bere put bis
cafe of a reverfon immedi⸗
atelp expectant bpon the gift
intatle. Bifo itis to be in⸗
tended of a fcoffment made
to the 3D ono folp oz onip.foz
t€ the Donæ cnfcoffe the
Donoꝛ ano a. ftranger, this
ig a bífcontínuance of the
Sbolc land,

wut t€ Cenant for life
makea Leafe fo? his one
like tothe Leſſor, the remain⸗
berto the Leſſor and an ez
Granger ín fe, An this cafe
koraſmuch as the limitattor
of the fee fhould worke the
zona, it enureth tothe Lef=
foz ag a furrender foz the one
tnoptp , anda fogfeiture as to
the rematnbder of the ranger,
foz becannot giue to the els
fo? that which be bab befoze,


ag our Buthos here faith, anb ag to tbe remainder to tbe ffranger, (t te a fozfeítnre for bis
moity, and when tbe Lefloz entreth be (ball take the benefit of tt. Wuti€ two 3lopntenantg be,
and oneosf them enfcoffe bis Companion anda ffranger, anb make Liuery to the ranger, this
Shall weft only in the ftranger, bccaufe the Linery cannot enure tobía Companton,


€ Nev poet difcontinuer leflate en taile, finon que sl difcontinue le reuer-


fon, cr c.on le rematnder cc. And therefore fog this caute i£ tbe reuer⸗
fion oz rematnber be (n tbe Ring, tbe Tenant in tafle cannot bífcontinue the eftate taple.
(c) But Genant tn tatle,tbe reuerfion in the Ring, might Yaue barred tbe effate tatle bp a
Common reconerp bntillthe Statate of 34.H.8 ca.20. which reftrapneth fuch a Cenant in
taile, but that common recouery netther barred nos difcontinued the Rings reuerfon.
. . #ote the reucrGon may be reveled, and pet the Diſcontinuance remaine. (d) As if a Heme
' Gonert be Tenant fozitfe, and the bufbano make a jreoffment in fee, andthe Leffoz enter foz
the forfetture,here te the renerfion renetted,and pet the Difcontinuance remained at tbe Com=


mon Law.


€r N meſme le maner eff, lou
terres font Dones a bn hoe
ett tatle.le remainder a bn auter
en fee,et le tenat en taile enfeoffa
celuy,que eft en le remainder, a
Auer et tener alup,et ates heirs,
ceo neft pag Difcontinuance,


Caufa qua fupra.


Set. 616.


qua fupra.


I the fame manrier is it where

lands are giuentoa man in taile,
the remainder to another in fee,
and the tenant in taile enfeoffe him
that is in the remainder, To hauc
and to hold to him &to his heires,
this is no difcontinuance, Cauſa


LE remainder a on anter. Pere it appeareth tbat(ag hath bin ſaid


ftats tatio.


Pope 3


ín cafeof arenerfon ) that the remainder muff betmmediatelp eppectant byes the o»


506.


335


(b) (1.4/3. 418.3:


83. H.E. Dicr. i3;


40.4.36. 31.4 36.
18.E.3.45.F.N.B.143-6,
PI Çom.555.


(c)53- H.8. ti, Taile.Br.41,
PL Com.vbs fopra.


(d)27-Af'p 60. 29.49.43»
IL Af 11+ 16, 44.11.
18.E.3. 45.


Libz. (apu. OfDifcontinuance. Sei#.627.628.629.


Sed. 627.


€ [Tem tión Abbe ad vn Ke⸗
uct(üion ou Bent feruice,ou
ent charge, et Voile graunter
cel reucrfon, ou Bent feruice, ou
Bent charge a bn auter en fee,et
lc tenant atturna,gc, ceo né pas
Difcontinuance.


ALP if an Abbot hath a Reuer-

fion, or a Rentferuice, ora
Rent charge, and he will grantthis
Reuerfion, or Rent feruice,or Rent
charge toanother in Fee, andthe
Tenant attorne, &c. this is no dif-
continuance.


DE Fnberitances that ite (n Grant, ſuſticient hath bene layd before,


Seélion


# mefme le manner lou
2 E Abbe eft feifie dun Ad⸗
uotofon , ou De tícly choles que
paffont per bop ð grant fang lí»
uerie De feifin,#c,


but in Grant,


628.


N the fame manner where
an Abbot is feifed of an Ad-
uowfon, or of fuch things which
paffe by way of Grant, without Li-
uerie of feifinj&c.


€ H°: (t appeareth, (ag hath beene fapd) Chat an Aduowſon doth not lie in Linetp,


Section


[Tem (i Tenant en Taile
leſſa fa terre a bn aut put
terme De bie, ct puis il

graunta en fee le Reucrfion a vn

auter, et le tenant atturna,é pui

f tenant aterine de bie alienaen

fce.ct le Grantee de reuerfion en=

tra, tc, en le bfe le Tenant en ie

(Gr ate , et puts Ie Cenant en te

aile mozutt (on Iſſue ne poet

enter, mes eft mis a fon Brtefed

Formedon, put ceo que Ie Reuer⸗

fion en fee (imple que le Graun⸗

to? auoit per le qrant Del tenant
en le qr aile. fuit erecute ent bie

De mefme e tenaunt en Ie Cattle,

et put ceo ett bn Difcontinuance

en kee ac.


629.


Lfo if Tenant in Tayle let-
teth his Land to another
for life , and after he gran-

teth in Fee the Reuerfion to ano-
ther, and the Tenantattorne , and
after the Tenant for life alien in
Fee, arid the Grauntee of the Re-
uerfionenter, &c. inthe life ofthe
Tenant in Taile, andafterthe Te-
nant in Taile dieth, his Iffue {hall
not enter, but is put to his Writ
of Formedon,becaufe the Reuerfion
in Fee fimple which the Grauntor
had by the Graunt of the Tenant
in Tayle, was executedin the life -
of the fame Tenant in Tayle, and
therefore it isa difcontinuance in
Fee,&c.


DE thig fofficient hath beenefapd before .


Seé?,


Lib.3. OfDilcontinuance. Se#.630.631.632.


* Seclion 630:


€ ET nota que atcung font

Difcontinuances p terme
de vie. Sicome Cenaunt en le
taile fait bn Leaſe pur terme De
bie, fauant le reũſion a luy auxy
longement que le reuerſion eft al
tenant en taile, ou à fes beires,
ceo nek difcontinuance, fozfque
Durant la bie le tenant aterme de
bíc.ac, Ct ſi tiel tenant en tatle
Donales tenements a bn autet
en taíle, fauant le reuerſion don⸗
ques ceo eft difcontinuance Du:
rant le fecond taile,xc,


Ndhote that fome make dif:
continuances for terme of
life, Asif Tenant in Tayle

makea Leafe for life,(auing the re-
uerfionto him as long as the Re-
uerfionis tothe Tenaurít in Tayle
or to his Heyres: This isno dif-
continuance but during the life of
Tenaunt for life, &c. And if
fuch Tenant in Taile giuerh the
lands to another in Tayle, fauing
the Reuerfion, then this is a


Difcontinuance during the fecond


Tayle,&c.


€ Dis is maniteff, and hath bene handled befoze, and needeth uo explanation , onely
À this is to be obferued, Where Littleton putteth hereafter cafes of Difcontinuances

bp feoffement,ec. he hath a double entendment : Firſt, Wy Feoffement oz bp anp

other Convepance Which map makea Dilcontinsance, Secondly, ( &c.) tmplicsh a Difcons


tinuancebp a gift in Œatle,oz aleafe fog itfe,¢c,


Sel. 631.


€ M lou le tenant en taple
fait bn leafe pur terme
dans, ou put terme De bie, le re=
Mainder a bn auter ets fee,et De-
linet liuerie De ſeiſin accozdant,
ceo ett Difcontinuance en fee, put
ceo que le fee (imple paſſa pet
fozce De linerte De fet (ít ac,


B wherethe Tenant in 'Tayle

maketh a Leafe for yeares or
for life, the remainder to another
in Fee, and deliuereth Liuerie of
Seifin accordingly , this is a Dif-
continuance in Fee, forthatthe fee
fimple paffeth by force of the Li-
uerie of Seifin,&c.


Sis is cuivent allo, and hereet faiciont hath beue fyoken befoge,
Sell. 632.
€ Fe effafcauoit, A Nditisto be vn- ¶ D IfContinuamces


q̃ aſcuns tiels


derſtood, That


Sait fur Condi-


Difcontinuances font
fait (ut conpítíon xc,
tt pur ceo que leg
conditions font en-
freints, ac, ou put


fome fuch Difcontinu-
ances are made vpon
Condition,&c.and for
that the conditions be
broken, &c. or for


tion, c. Peere (S to
be bnberftoob a 3D(netüt bes
twene a Cenbition in Deed,
Swbercof Littleton here {peas
keth,anda Condition ín iato;
Svbercof fomewbat hath bons
fap befoze in tis vy

3B


36


Lib.3,


4.H 6.3.9.H.7-24.6.
Lib.8-f0.43.44. Vint timphanm
mA.


Whiringhems Cafe vbs fupra.


Wsiptingheons Cafe vbi fupra,


Cop».


viz Where the Feme is tenant
foz itfe, and the bufbanb mac
het) a Sfeoffement in fee,
andthe Lefloz entreth for the
Conpition in Law,

Ql, Conditions font


enfreimts,@c. Berets
tmplicd, Oꝛ any cauſe giuen
either bp diſabilitie of the feof.
fes, o? bpany condition pera
fozined on the part of the feof=
£02, 02 otherwife, hereby the
ftateis in any fort auoyded.

€ Come fi le Baron


foit feifie de certain terre


en droit fa feme , &c.
bere it appeareth, Ghat foz
tbe Condition broken, the
beíre of the hufband map en=
ter, fos albeit no right vifcend
from the hufband to bis betre,
petthe title of entry bp force
of the Condition Which the
bu(banb created bpon the
Feoffement, and referned to
bim and bis belreg , doth
Difcend to his hepze, and Lit-
tleton faith truly , Ghat fo (t
bath bene adiudged.

Sur le beire Nota,
tohen tbc betre in this cafe
hath entred fo? the & onbítton


Of Difcontinuance.


auters caufes.folon-
que le courte 6 laley,
tiels eftates font Dc-
feates, Donques font
les Difcontinuanceg
Defeates, et netollét
afcun home pet foace
De eur, Defon entrie,
ec, Come fi le Ba⸗
ton foít ſeiſie De cert
ttc en droit fa freme,
et fait Feoffement
en fee fur condition,
et Deute, file beire a=


presenter fur f feof-


fee pur le Condition
enfreint , lentrie la
Feme eft congeable
ſur le heire, pur ceo
que per lentrie del
heire le diſcontinu⸗
ance eft Defeat, come
eft adindge,


Se. 633.


other caufes, accor-
ding go the courfe of
LaiwMuch Eftates are
defeated, then are the
Difcontinuances de-
feated,and fhall not by
force of them take any
man from his entrie,
&c. Asif the husband
be feifed of certaine
land in right of his
wife, and maketh a ~
Feoffement in Fee vp-
on Condition, and dy-
eth, if the Heire after
enter vponthe Feoffee
forthe condition bro-
ken, the entrie of the
wife was cógeable vp-
onthe heire, forthat
by the entry of the
heire the difcontnu-
ance is defeated , as is
adiudged.


broken, and bath auopded the ffeoffement, the eftate of theheire oant(beth awap, anb prefents
Ip the Eſtate veltet h tn the eme oz her hetres , Soithout any entric oz clatme by her oz them;
forthe bette entreth inrefped of the Condition, spon tbe reall Contrat, and not of anp right,
as bath benc fapb, and (£ the bufband himfelfe had re-entred, the Hate had belted in his wife:
And therefore Sobere Littleton and onr Wokes fap, Chat the wife Hall enter pon the hepze,
the meaning to, that after the re-entrte of the heire fhe may enter,


€ De reafon here ren
T» by Lirticton,ig,
fo? that the hufband
cannot entcrin bis ownright,
but tn the right of his Wife ;
and the betre of the Huſband
cannot enter , £02 no right 02
title diſcends onto him, anb
the Wife in this cafe hall take
benefit of the nonage of ber
bufband, and enter inte the
land,
FE an Finfant be Cenant
foz another mans lífe, and


make a jreoffenent (n Fes, and +


Cefty que vie bíetb, tbe En⸗
fant bimfelfe (all net enter,
becauſe he hath no right at all.


Sed. 633.


€ jen f Feme
inheritrix d ad


AL ifa Woman
Inheritrix hath a


fn Baron, quel Ba⸗ husband who is with-
ton c(t deins age,etil inage, and hee beeing
efteant deins age fait within age maketh a
bn Feoffement Deleg Feoffement of che Te-
Œenements fon fée nements of his wife in
en fee, et mozutt.ilad Fee, and dieth,it hath
efte queftiou, fila fée beene a queftion, If
poit entrer, ounon, the Wife may enter
ac, Ct tl femble à or not,&c. And it (ce-
afcung, que lentrpla meth to fome, thatthe


jane


Lib.

Feme apres la mont fa
baron, eſt congeable en
ceft cag, Car quant fa
baron fealoit tiel £coff-
ment, ac, il puiffott
bié enter, nient contri-
fteat tiel £cottinét, ac,
Durat la couerture, a él
ne puiffoit enter en fon
Dzoit Demefne, mes en
ledzoit la feme, Ergo
tiel Droit que il auott
Dentrer en Droit fa
feme,æc,ceft Deoit den⸗
trer Demurt al (eme a=
pres fon Deceale,


OfDifcontinuance. ::


entrie of the wife after
the death of her Huf-


band is congeable in this.


cafe, for when her Huf-
band made fuch feoff-
ment, &c. he might well
enter notwith{tanding
fuch feoffment, &c. dus;


ring the couerture, and |
he could not enter in his:


owne right but in the
right of his wife, Ergo
fuch rightas hee had to
enter in the right of his
wife, &c. this right of
entrie remayneth to the
wife after his deceafe.


Se. 634:


3ittbebufbano with⸗
in age tdheto Sito feme


» tenant intaple aenctall;
,ana tbe bufband make a


gift in taple and dicth
withinage, in this cafe
the wike may enter, ag
Littleton ere holdeth,
02 the betre of the huſ⸗
band in refpect of the
new reuerfion diſcended
bnto Dim may enter.


But it the bette enter


pzeſently thereupon his
eſtate vaniſheth Sites
nant in tayle boing
Within the age of onc
anb t$ventp peres make
afcoffment (ufo, and
after is attainted of fea
loníc anb dieth,the entrp
of the iſſue is not law⸗
full, for his entry ts not
lawful in reſpect o£ his
etate onlp , bnt of big


blond alfo Which is cozzupted. and tbercfozc in that cafe be (a dꝛiuen to bis Formedon.

It huſband and Wife be both within age,and thep by Deed indented toyne in afeoffment
referuing a rent, the huſband dieth, the wife map entcr o2 haue a Dum fuit infra etatem. But
i£ the were of full age, fhe (hall not pauca Dum fuit infra etatem; fo the nenage of her huts


band, albcit thep be but one perfon tn La,
Sect.


€ Tia Ee Dit,que ſi deux

topntenants efteatsdeins
age, font bn keoffment en fee, et
lun Des enfants Deup , et lautet
fuructquift,entant que les ambi-
Deut enfants puiffont ent ioynt⸗
ment en lour bies,cel D20ít actu-
ift tout aluy que furucfquitt , et
purceo, cclup d furuefquitt poit
enter en lentiertic, ac, Ct aur»
lheire le baron que fifi Ic keoff⸗
ment deins age ne poit enter,
ac, pur ceo que nul deoit Difcen-
Dift a tícl beire en le cas auant-
Dit, pur ceo que Ie baron nauoit
Hnques riens forique en dzoit De
fafeme, at,


634.
Nd it hath beene faid that if


two Ioyntenants being with-
in age make a feoffment in fee and
one of the Infants die, and the o-
ther furuiueth inas much as both
the Infants might enter ioyntly in
their liues, this right accrueth all
to him which furuiueth,and there-
fore hee that füruiueth may enter
into the whole, &c. And alfo the
heire of the husband which made
the feoffment within age cannot
enter,&c.becaufe no right difceri-
deth to fuch heire in the cafe a-
forefaid, for that the husband had
neuer any thing but in right of his
wife, &c,


€ po^ enter en lentiertie, cc. And the reafon hereof (d implyed its
this ( &c.) fox that thep may topne tna wꝛit of right, and therefore the right (ail


ſuruiue. Wut thep cannot topne ina Dum fuit intra xtatem, becanfe the nonage of t


be
£049 one


6.2.3.4. 9. H. 6,


337


$4,E.3.Bre.283. 14.E.3.
"Dum fuit fra cdatem 63
F.B 192,


31, E.3.50.18.£. 1, Bre. 251
rA


19. H.6.6. 39.H.6.42,
349 H, 6.31. FN Bigs,


Lib.3. Cap.


Teyntenanti,


Balt. fol.14.
Bretton fo!.88. a.
Fleta lb. 3.6ap. 3e


Of Difcontinuance. — Seë.635.636. |


nf one is not the nonage of the other, Bn this cafe if one Fopntenant bab made a fcoffment (s
Due thisinshe Chapter fe and died, the right Could not auc furniucd , fos the 3lopnture was feneren foz atime, It


a feo
tatem, bnt fos the moitie,


tivo ——— be, and the one is of full age. and the other Within age, and both thep make
ent in fe, andhect full age dieth, tbe Anfant Hall enter o2 auc a Dum fuitinfia æ ·


Section 635.


Laur» quant bn enfant
er fait bn feotfment efteant
Deing age ceo ne lup ateeuera ne
1e52a, mes que il poít enter bien,
fc, car ceo ferroit encounter rea⸗
fon, que tiel fcoffment fait per
celuy quene fuit able De faire tiel
feoffment, greeuera ou ledera
auter de toller eux De lour entre,
ac, Ct pur ceux caufes il Cemble
a afcuns, que apzes la moat De
ticl baron (flint efteant Deíng age
altemps dele feoffment, ec, que
{a feme bien poitenter, aC,


€ M Es que il pott enter bien, dre.


Ndalfo whenan infant make

a feotiment being withia age,

this fhall neither grieue nor
hurt him, butthat hee may well
enter, &c. for it fhould be againft
reafonthat fuch feoffment made
by him that was not able to make
fuch a feoffment, fhall gricue or
hurt another to take them from
their entry,&c. And for thefe rea-
fons it feemeth to fome, that after
the death of fuch husband fo be-
ing within age at the timeof the
feoffment, &c. that his wife may
well enter, &c. |


Here is implped that he might


enter cither Within age, 0 at anp tine after full age, and IfkeSoife after big death
big hetremap enter. Mcliorem enim conditionem facere poteft minor deteiiorem


nequa uam.


q
Nota, 2 fpectall beire hail take abuantage of the tnfancie of tbe Anceftorx. As (£ Cenant
in taple ofan Acre of tbecuftome of Horo Englilh make a feoffmmmt tn fee Within age, and
víctb, the vongeft fonne Mall auopo tt, oz be (s pziute in bloud, and clapmeth bp diſcent from


the 3infant,


And ſo tt Cenantintapletohimandthe heires females of big hodie make a fcoffment ín
fecand bíctb Mithin age, haning (flue a fonne and a Danghter, the Dangbter (ball auopb the
fcoffment. And fo note that a caufe toenter bp reafon of Intancy (g not like to Conditions,
yoarranttes,and Eſtoppels, Which ener difcend to the heireat the Common Law.

he refiouc of this Section bpon that Sebich hath bene fatb ts euident.


Sechon 636.


€ S" rrender.


tio properipis a
peiloing bp of an eftate


. CT Cem Fi feme en-
Surfum reddi- heritrix prent ba⸗
ton, et ont iſſue band, and they haue iſ-


Lfo if a womanin-
heritrix taketh huf-


forlife or veares tobim fft. et E baton moꝛuſt, fue a fonne,andthe huf-


that hath an immediate


eftate in reucrfonozres E elpzent auter baton, band dieth,and fhe takes
maynder , herein the et le ſecond baron leſſa another husband, and
eftate for life c» peares qa terre que il ad en the fecond husband let-


may drowne bp mutuall
agreement
them.


betSweme droit fa feme a vn au⸗ teththe Land which he


tet


Lib.3.


ter put terme De fa
vie, ct puis la feme
moꝛuſt, et puis le te-
nant a terme De bie
furvendift fon eftate
ale fecond baron ac.
Quære file fits le fem
poit enter en ceſt cas
fur le fecond baron
Durant la ble le te-
nant a terme De bie,
fc, Mes il eſt cleere
ley, d apres la moat
le tenant à terme de
bie, ie fits la feme
poit enter, pur ceo
que E Dilcontinuance
que fuit tantfolemét
pur terme De bic, eft
Determine,zc, per la
mot De mefme le
tenant à terme De
bie,


Of Difcontinuance.


hath in right of his
wife to another for
terme of his life, and
after the wife dieth,
and after the tenant for
life furrendreth his e-
ftateto the fecond huf-
band,&c. sere if the
fonne ofthe wife may
enter in this cafe vpon
the fecond husband
during the life of te-
nant for life,&c. but it
is cleere Law,that after
the death of ihe Te-
nant for lifethe fon of
the wife may enter,
becaufe the. difconti-
nuance which was on-
ly forterme of life, is
determined , &c. by
the death of the fame
Tenantfor life.


Note there bc three kinde
9f Surrenders,viz.a Sars
tender properly taken at the
Common Law, Which íg
here before difcribed, and
bereof Littleton fpeaketh,
Secondlp, a Surrender bp
cuſtome of lands holden bp
Copie, oz of cuítomarp c=
fates whereof pou haue read
befoze, Scct.74. anda Bure
vender improperly taken (ag
appeare before, Sect, 550, of
& Ded, And fo of a Sur⸗
render of a 39atent, and of a
Rent newly created, and of
a fe Gmple tothe Ring.

A Surrender properip
taken ts of two foztg,viz. a
farrenbcr (i Ded, of bp etc
pacfTe words, ( Mhercof Lir-
tleton here putteth an carta
ple) and a farrender tn aso
Wrought by confequent by
operation of La, Littleton
here putteth bis cafe of a
Surrender of an cffate (n
pofleflien, Co? a a Right can-
not bee furrendzed. And it
{gto be noted that a furrens
Der (n Law (a in fome cafce
of greater force, then a furs
render (n Deed, Be tf a man


Se#.636.


make a Leafs fo: yeares to begin at Michaelmaffe next, this future tatereft cannot bee furren-
dzed, becaufe there is no 18 eucrGon wheretn it may dꝛowne, but by a Surrender in Las it
map be dietoned. Asif the Lefles before Michaelmatfe take a ne Leaſe fo? peares cither to
bein pzcfently, 0? at Michaelmaſſe, this is a Surrender in Law of the former cate, Forti-
or & xquior eft difpofitio legis quam hominis.

Bile terc ts afurrender without Deve, Whercof Littleton putteth here an example of an
eftate fo: life of lands, which map be farrend2ed Without Ded, and Without Linerp of ſeiſin,
becaufe itis but a peelding, or arcltoring of the ftate againe to bia in the immediate reucr=
fon ez remainder, which arcalwwapes fauouredin Law, And there is alfo a furrender bp
Ded, and that ig of things that lye in grant, Sobercof a particular eftate cannot commence
Soithout D xd, and by confcquent the eſtate cannot be ſurrendꝛed without Ded, Wut (1 the
example that Littleton here putteth, the cftate might commence without Ded, and therefore
might bc furrentacb Without Deed, Bnd albeit a particular cftate be mace oflands bp Dan,
pet map (t be ſarrendꝛed without 3D eb, in reſpect of the nature and qualtt» of the thing demt-
fed, becaufe the particular cfEate might aue bœnc mare Without Ded, and fo on tye other
fioc. BE aman be Cenant by the dLurtefic, o» Tenant tr Dower of an Pouowlon, Keat oz
other thing that lye ín avant, albeit there tbeeft ite begin Without Ded, pet tn refpec of the
nature and quality of the thing that ipesin grant, (t cannot befurrendaed Without Dad. Bnd
fo if a Leafe for life be made of lands, the Remainder fos life, albeit the rematnder foj life bez
gan Without Dep, pet becaufe rematnders and reuerfions though they be of lands are things
shat ipe in arant, they cannot be furrend2cd without Ded. Hein mp Reports plentítull
matter of furrenders-


Œ uere file fits la feme poet enter cc. Pere Littleton maketh à
«quare. So as grauc and learned mon map deubt Soítbout any (mputatíon to them, for the
moft icarncd doubteth moft, and the moze (quozant £o? the moft part arc the moze bold and pcz

emptozic,
3t ig bolten of fome, that after the furrender the {Que in tatle during the life of Tenant
fox life may enter, for that hauing regard to the {ue the fate fo itfe fe dꝛowned, and confe=
qnentip the tnheritance gained bp the Leale at the acceptance of the furrenver bises
q98 z


338


2. Elis Dier 176, 14. 1.9, 30
27. M37. 49. E.3.2,
I1. H. 4.2. 12H, 4.21,

13. H,4.15.


14 H.8.1 . 37. H.6. 17.
21.H.7.6. 40. E. 3. 24.
314-26. co. E, 3.6.
44.A9 3. 35.H.8. Dier 35.
8..4f- 20. 4..MaDier 141
11. El. Dier 280,


6.H.7.9. 35.H. 6.17,
21.H.7.6. 14.H.7.4.
Lib.6.fo.62. Sir Moyle
Finches cafe,


19. H.6. 33. 27.49, 46,
14. H.7.4. 1. H. 6. E.
DL. Com,5 4x.


Lib.3.


21.H.6.5 3.


45. E.3.13. J. H. 5.9.
9. 2.4.18.


49.Ë,3.13. 9.E. 4.18.
1,H.6.1. 34.E.3.97.


€. H. $.8. 26.4. 38.
. A.o.a. b,


48.6.3.16.


A diudge Mich 16.6 i7.
£ liq ins. Tormer Pl. d
Gray def. in seBione firme
15 Comrenni bance. Rot 945.
Sir Francis Flemmr: caft.
(a) 6.4.4.9.T1.( 0m418.


(b) 32.H.8.Br.farrender 5 2.


Vid SeR. 681.


Cap.


Of Difcontinuance. Seë.637.


gone, ag (f Œenant in taile make a Leafe fo, life, whereby he gaineth a neSo renerGon(as hath
bene fatd ) t£ Cenant fog life farrender tothe Cenant in taile, the eftate for tic being 030905
ned, the reuerfion gained bp Dzong is, vaniſhed and gone, and be is Tenant in taie agatne az
gaint the opinion Obiter of Portington, z r.H.6,53.

Wut herein are two diuerſities worthy of obferuation. Chefirkisthat having regard te
the partyes to thefurrender,the cftate is abfolutelp dzꝛowned, ag in this cafe betwẽene tbe & ef
fe and the fecond baron. But having regard to rangers, Who were not parties 92 prince
thereunto, leaſt by a voluntary furrender thep may recetue pꝛeludice touching attp right 02 t=
tereft tcp had befoze the furrender, the eftatefurrendzed hath (n confidcration ot £a a cons
tinuance, Bs if a Reuerſion be granted With Warranticand Œenant £02 life furrendir, che
Gꝛante ſhall not bauc Execution in value againſt the Grantoz bo is a (ranger during the
lise of Genant fog itfe, fox this furrender (ball woꝛke no preindice to the Grantes Who ig a

tanger,

So it Tenant for life, furrender to him in rcuerfion being within age, he ſhall not have bte
age, toz that ſhould be a pretndice toa ftrangor. Hho is to become Wemandant tna reall ation,

FE Tenant £oz hfegrant a Rent cherge, anb after ſurrender, pet the rent rematneth, toz ta
that purpofe be commeth in vnder the charge, Caufa qua fupra.

BE a Wikhop be fcifed of a Rent⸗chargẽ in fee, tbe Cenant of the land enfeoffc the Withop
and his Succeſſozs. the Lozd enter for tHe Moꝛtmaine, he hall bolo (t diſcharged of che rent,
foz the entrie Foz the Moꝛtmaine affirmett the altenation in Moztmaine, agb the Lozd claps
meth vnder bis cffate but (£ Œenant for iife granta rent in fer, and after (nfcoffc the Gzante,
and the LefToz enter £02 the Cozfetture, the rent ts reuiuen, for the Leſſoʒ doth claémo abonc the
Feotment, Wut (£ 3| grant the reucrfion of my Œenant fog life to another foz terme of hig
ltfe, and Tenant £o2 life attozne, now is th: Waſte of Œenant for life oifpunifhable, Aftere
ards 5 relcafe to the Drante foz life and his heires, 02 grant tbe rewerfion to him and hig
hetred, now albeit tbe Cenant fog life bea ranger to ít, pet becanfeheattozned tothe Gzan-
tee for life, tbe cftate Foz life which tbe Grantee bad, Hall aue no continuastce in the epe of che
La ag to him, but be Hall be puniſhed foz waſte done afterward.

Che feconb diuerfirp is, that for the benefit of an eftranger the eftate fo; life is abfoiutelp
determined. As if he inthe reuerſion make a Leaſe for peares 02 grant a ent=ch rge ac. and
then tbe Reiter fos life furrender,the Leaſe o2 vent Mall commence maintenant. 50 in the cafe
Of Littleton, ſitſt betweene the Reflee, and the fccono hufband, the Hate for life is determined,
and fecondip fos the benefit of the iſſue (t {baïlbe fo abtubaco in Lat, Were notea Diucrfity,
Shen tt {a to the pzetudice of a (ranger, and When tt is for his benefit.

Be a man maketba Leafe to A. fozitfe reſcruing arent of 4.0. thillings to himand bis hetres,
the remainder to B- fo? life; tbe Lefloz grant the reucrfion in fete B. A attorne, B.fhall nor bane
the rent, fo? thatalthongh the fee Gmpie doe dzowne tbe remainber oz itfe betweene them, pet
as to a ftrangerit is incile, andtherefozeB. fall not haue the rent,but hts betre (bati haue it

A Water of an Hoſpitail being a fole Lorpozation vy the confent of bis brethren make a
cafe fox peares of part of the pollefions of the hoſpitall, afterwards che Heller foz pearesig
made matter, the terme ig 02080160, fo? a man cannot haue a terme fo? peares in bis osong
right, anda frecholp in aurer droit to conſiſt together ( ag tf a man Leſſee for peares take a
feme Leffozto Wife.) (a) Wut a man map haue a freehold in his owne right and a terme (n
auter droit, and therefoze (£a man Leſſoz take the feme Leſſee to £oífc; the terme is mot dꝛow⸗
ned, but he (2 poffeffeb of the terme in ber right buring the Œonertnre. ( b ) £o tf the Relea
makc the cLeffo his Executoz, the terme ts not dꝛowned. Caufa qua füpra.

Wut i£ (t had bene a Lozpozation agaregate of many, the making of the Leſſee Watter had
not extinguiſhed theterme, no moze then tf the Lefle had bene made one of the bzethren of che


Hofpitall,
Sell. 637.


aN Ota que on e-


(V NX fois. Here
V {tate taíle ne


{tis to bee obſer⸗
wed that tt is not


NES an eftate


taile cannot bee


necellarp that the Œenant
intatie bcc ener fetfed of an
effatetaticat the ime ben
the Difcuntinuance of the
hole eſtate is bequn, ag (£F
&Eenant ín tatle make a icafe
£01 lífe, Soberebp be gaineth,


poit efte Difcontinue,
mesla ou ceſtuy que
fait le Difcontinuance
fuit bn foits feifie per
force de Ie tatle,finon


que


difcontinued,butthere
where hee that makes
the difcontinuáce was
oncefeifed by force
ofthe taile, vales it be


Lib.3.


que fait pet reafon Dc
garrantee,zc, Come
fi foit atel. pier, fits,
et lapel fort tenant en
taile, et eft diſſeiſie
per le pier que eft fon
fits, ct le pier fait bn
feoffinent à cco fans
gartantp a Dente, et
puislatel Dcute.E fits
bien poit enter fur te
feoffee, pur ceo que
ceo ne fuit pas Dif-
continuance, entant
que le pier ne fuit feí-
fie per force deletaile
al temps Del feoffinet
at.mes fuit ſeiſie eu
fee per E Diffeifin fait
al apel,


Of Difcontinaance.


by reafon of a.warraty,
&c.Asiftherebe grád-
father, fatherʒ& ſon, &
the grandfather is te-
nant intaile,& is diffei-
fed by the tather who
is his fon,& the father
maketh a feoffment of
this without warranty
& die, & afterwards the
grádfather dies,the fon
may welenter vpó the
feoffee, becaufe this
was no difcontinuace,
inafmuch as the father
was not feifed by force
of the entaile at the
time of the feoffment,
&c. but was feifed in
fee by the diffeifin of
the grandfather.


Seë.638.


ag bath bene fain, a fee fines ,


ple bp S»:ong, in this cafe
if he grant the Keuerſion in
fe, ano the ieflee dieth, the
Swhole eftate is difcontinucd,
and pet at the time of the
grant ( bp Which the Dit
continuance continucth ) he
ag not feifeo bp force of
the tatle, and thevefoze Lit-
tleton materially added thefe
Moods ( Vnfeits ) thatis,
that be Swag once feifed bp
fozce of theeftate taile : and
feeing that (as hath bens
fato )a Difcontinuance ts a
peination, the rule of Law
agretb Well With the rulcof
Pbilofophte that Omnis
priuatio præfupponit habi-
tum, and therefoze he cannot
difcontinue that eſtate which
benener bad,


€ Siren que il foit
per reafon del garran-
secre. 403 Man?
cafes a Warranty added toa


«Lonuepance is faldto make
a bifcontinuance Ab effectu,


although hee that made the connepance ag neuer ſetſed by force ofthe eftate taile, becanfe it


takcth away tbc entrte of bimthat right hath, as a Difcontinuance doth.


As t€ &enant tn


tatl^ be diffeifed and dieth, and the tue in tatte releafe to the Dilſetſor With Warranty ; in this
cafe the tine Was neuer foife bp force of the tatle, and pet thts hath the effet of a Difconti-
nuance by reafon of the warranty, and the reafon hereof appeareth befoze in this Chapter.


€ Le fits poet enter, Wut if the father that made the feottment
has Aruined the Grandfather be (boulb neuer haucentred agaín(E his owue fcoffment, but al»
beit the Father had furatucb, pet after his deceale the Sonne ſhould haue entred for the reas
fon bere petlded bp Littleton, But tf the fcoffment bad beene with Warranty, chen (t had
weought theeffec of a Difcontinuance, and therefoxe Littleton fafth Sauns Garrant without


warrantie.


€ | &em à Tenant en Taile


Seét, 6,8.


Lfoif Tenant in Taile make a


fait buleafeabn auter pur
terme de bic, et le Tenant € tait
ad Flue et Dente, et le reuerſion
diſcendiſt a fon Flue, et puis
liffue granta le reuerſion a lup
Difcenduc abn auterenfee, et le
tenant a terme De bie attourna #
deuie et Ic Grantee Del reuerſion
enter. ac, et eft ſeiſie en fee en la
bie del Iſſue, et puis iflue en 1e
taile ad iſſue fits et deuie, il fe
€


Leafe to another for terme
of life, and the Tenaunt in Tayle
hath Itfue and dieth , and theRe-
uerfion difcendeth to his Iffue,and
after the Iffue granteth the reuerfi-
on to him difcended, to another in
Fee, and the Tenant for life at:
torne and die, and the Grantee of
the Reuerfion enter, &c. and is fei-
fed in Fee inthe life of the Iffue,
and after the Iffue in Tayle bath


Q444 3


39 .


Vid. &8.552.596. ggg... f
691.649.658.


9. E.4.19. 13.E.4. M.
ATI.E.4.97.


15. E. 4. Diſcoxt. 30.

& entr.Cong.31.

21. E. 4 97. 9.E.4.19.

39. H.6.45. 11. H. 6. 2.
12,E. 4.11, 1.2207. Dier 98.


Of Difcontinuance. Seti. 639.


Iffüe a fon and dieth, it (cemes that,
this is no difcontinuance to the
fon,but that thefonmay enter, &c.
for that his father,to whom the re-


Lib.5. Cop.
ble que ceo nett pas difcontinu-
e ance ale fits, mes que le fits poit
entet,#c, pur ceo que fon pier a
que le reuerfion De fee imple


diſcendiſt, ac, nauoit onques
riens enlaterre , per fozce De le
Taitle,ze,


uerfion of the fee fimple difcéded,
had neuer any thing inthe land by
force of theentaile,&c.


15.E., 4. Difeont. 30, 45. Ed. 1.
6. 21. H,6,52.4.H.7.17.


€ Jf this opinion ig Littleton (ront Bokes. TM
OQ € Le Grantee del reuerfion enter,crc. Here it is to be vnder⸗

ftcod and obferucd, Chat inthis cafe of the grant of the iRenerfion , Littleton dot
notfap, Sans garrantie, becanfe tf a Warrantie had bene added, it had Wrought no difconting=
ance, £0? that (ag bath benc faib ) the Difconttnmance tn indgement of 3,axe was but for lifes
but when the addition of a toarranttc Doth wozkea 3Difcontinuance, then Littleton faith, Sans


81 A. 6.53, 41-


garrantie,ag pou may obferne often in this Chapter.


*


Sell. 639.


€ C3 i boite feifie en D20pt

fafeme, leffa mefme la
‘Certea bn auter pur terme de
bie, oze eft Ic reuerſion De fee ſim⸗
ple ale Baron, ac, Ct file Ba-
ton mo2utt, biuant fa feme et le
Œenant a terne de bie, et le re⸗
uerfion difcendift al Heire le Ba⸗
ton, fi le beive Le Baron grant ie
teuccfíon abn auterenfee, ctle
tenant atturna.ac, et puis Ie te=
naunt aterine De bie moruſt et le
Greuntec del Keuerſton en cel
Cale enter : Cn cett cate ceo nett
pas Difcontinuance ale Feme,
mcg là feme bien poit enter Cur le
@2antee,Ac, pur ceo que T qran-
to» nauoit viens al temps del
Gaunt. en le Droit la reme,
qu tl ttle graunt del Keuer⸗

on,


Fo ifa manfeifed in the right of

his Wife, letteth the fame land
to another for terme of life, now
isthe reuerfion of the Fee Smple
tothe Hufband, &c. And if the
Husband dyeth , liuing his Wife,
and the Tenant for life,and the Re-
uerfion difcend tothe heire of the
Husband, if the Heire of the Huf-
band grant the reuerfion to another
in Fee,and the Tenant attorne,&c.
and afterwards the Tenant for life
dieth,and the Grantee ofthe reuer-
fion in this cafe enter : Inthis cafe
this is no difcotinuance to the
wife, but fhe may well entervpon
the Grantee, &c. becaufe the gran-
tor had nothing at the time of the
Graunt, in the right of his Wife
when hee made the Graunt of the
Reuerfion.


$4. E. 3. Dices, g 18.af p.
ai REPE.
83. H. 6.34. 21. M. 6. 413. 33 -
1$, B, 4 Dom. je.


€ fibome feifie en droit fa feme, le[Tz, cc. Pere Littleton,putteth

is cafe where tbe Waron oncip makes a Leaſe for life, fo? ( heand hig Site topne in

a Leafebp Dead, therethe Bencrfon (e not dtſcontinued. Spe befoze, Sect.c20.

v Hed wot tobe fapd hereof, in refped the le cafe of Gi mant tn Cate bath bane erplatned
eloze.


Sel.


Lib.;.


Of Difcontinuance.


Se. 640.641.


Sethon 64.0. 644.


€ ET üfint il femble, coment

que homes queur font in⸗
beritables per force Dele Œaile,
et tis ne fueront onqueg feífíeg
per force De meſme Ie «m aile, que
tiel feoffements ou grants p cuc
fait fang claufe De Garrantie,né
pas Difcontinuance alour iflues
apres lour Deceafe, mes q lour
Flues poyent bien enter.ac, co-
ment que ceux queug fierent tíels
grants en lour dies fueront forꝛ⸗
barres dentrer perlour Fatt de⸗
mefne, tc.


Sect,


€ ET file tenant en (ail ad

tue Deux fits , et leigne
diſſeiſiſt fon pier, et ent fait feof:
ment en fee (ang claufede Barz
rantic,et Deuia fans Iſſue et put
le pier deuie, le puí(tt fits poit
bien enter fur le feoffee, pur ceo
quel Feoffment ſon cigne Frere
ne poít eftre Difcontinuance, pur
Ceo que tl ne fuit bnques feifie p
force deimefme le Catle, Car il
femble encounter reafon,que per
matter en fait,æc, fans claufe De
Garrantie, home poit Difconti-
nuer bn Fait,æc, que ne fuit vn⸗
ques ſeiſie per fozce De meſme le
Œaile,


€


fed of a TDífcontínuauce,


M foit feemeth, That men
which are inheritable by
force ofan Entaile, and neuer were
feifedby force of the fame entaile,
that fuch Feoffements or grants by
them made without claufe of war-
rantie, is no difcontinuance to
their Iffues after their deceafe ,
but that their Iffues may well
enter, &c. albeit they which
made fuch Graunts in their
liues were forebarred to enter
by theirowne a&t, &c.


641.


Nd if Tenant iri Taile hath If
fue two Sonnes, and the el.
deft diffeifeth his Father, & there-
of maketh a Feoffement in Fee,
without claufe of Warrantie , and
die without iffue, and afterthe fa-
ther die,the yongeft {on may well
enter vponthe Feoffee, for that the
Feoffement of his elder brother
cannot bea difcontinuáce, becaufe
hewas neuer feifed by force of the
fame Tayle. For it feemeth to be
againft reafon, that by matter in
fa&, &c. without claufe of War-
rantie, a manfhould difcontinue a
Deed,&c.that was neuer feifed by
force of the fame Taile,


£D te; here alfo (v thefetwo Sections appeareth, Chat (ag hath bane fapb before)
a Warrantie, though be Mere neuer feífeb, by kozce of the Gayle map $90?le the «fs


€ Home poet difcontinuer un fait, &c. This is mitaben, & fpoulb


be, Home poct difcontinuer vn taile, and fo (8 tbe Oꝛiginali.


See.


340


Vid. So, 593.596.597.602.
658.


(apu.


Of Difcontinuance. -


Se8#.642.643.


Set. 642:


CN[2ta fi foit Sfir.et tenát,
etic tenant Dona les te-
nements abn auter en taile, le
remainder a bn auter en fee, et
puis Le tenant en taile fait bn
lcag abn home purterme De bie,
ac.(tauant le reuerſion, ac.⁊ puis
granta le veuerfion à bn auter
en feet le tenant aterme De bie
atturna.ac. «t puis le grantee
Delreucrfion mogutt fans heire,
oze meme  cevuerfion Deuient al
ſeignior per bop Defcheate, St
en ceft cag, le tenant a terme De
bie deuiaſt, et le Setgnior per
force de ſon eſcheate enter en la
pie le tenant eu le taile ct puisle
tenant en letaile moruſt, il ſem⸗
bleen cco cas que ceo nef pas
Difcontinuance al iſſue en le taile
ncacelupenleremainDer, mes
que él poit bien enter pur ceo que
le Seignioz eff cíng pet boy
Defcheat, etnemp per lc tenant
enletaile, ac, Mes fecus effet,
(i le reuerſion vſt efte. execute en
le grauntee en Le bie le tenant
en le taple, cat abonque vſt le
grauntec efte eins en les tene⸗
ments perle tenant en 1e taple,
FC,


N°: if therebe Lord and Te-

- ^ nant and the Tenant giueth
lands to another in taile, the. re-
mainderto another in fee, and af-
terthe Tenant in taile makes a leafe
toaman for a terme of life,&c. fa-
uing the reuerfion,&c. and after
granteth the reuerfion to another
infee and the tenant for life at-
torne,&c.and after the Grantce of
the reuerfion die without heire,
now the fame reüerfion commeth
to the Lord by way of efcheate,
If inthis cafe the Tenant for life
dieth and the Lord by force of his
efcheat enterinthe life of Tenant
intaile, and after the Tenant in
taile dicth, it feemeth in this cafe
that this is no difcontinuance to
the iffuein taile, nor to him in the
remaynder, but that he may well
enter, .becaufe the Lord is inby
way of efcheate , and not by the
Tenant in tayle, but otherwife it
fhould bee, if the reuerfion had
beene executed in the Grantee, in
the life of Tenant in tayle , for
thenhad the Grantee beene in the

Tenements by the Tenant in taile,

&c.


Vide $:8.610. € Bereafon of this cafe {9 here rendꝛed (ag before tt Wag inthis Chapter) that als

| beit tbe reuertion be executed in the Loyd by efcheatein thelife of Grenant in taple,

petbecaufe he (s not in by the Cenant in tayle but bp efcheate, (t Swozketh ne Bu⸗

2 d. ae continuance. But tf it had beene executed in the like of Tenant in tayle (n tbe Grantee Svbicly
43,794, 92075*


ag tu bp Cenant tn taple, then the 3020 by efcheate ſhould haue taken aduantage of ít; but
of thistuffictent bath banc fato befoze tn hts Chapter,


Sell. 643.644. (7 645.


EP“! de fon Glebe ¶ JTem ff bn par- Lfo ifa Parfon of
oc. Jn whom  EfonduhEflife, 4 Xa Churchora Vi-
the fa Qmplo e£ the glebe (o, ou vn Vicar dun car of a Church alien


Elglile


Lib.3.
Ciglife, alien cer=
taíne terres ou tene-
ments parcel De fon
glebe, ac, à bn auter
en kee, et mozutt, ou
. vefigne, ac, fon fuc-
cefloz poit bien ent,
nient contrifteät tiel
alienation, come eft
dit en bu Nora 2. H.4
Terme Mich, quod


fic incipit.


Se.


Ota quod di-
€N m fuit pro
lege en bn beiefe de
accompt port per bn
mafter Dun colledge,
bers bn Chapleine,
que fi ou Parſon. ou
bn dicat, graunt
cerfaine terre, quel
eft De D20ít fon CL
alite a vn auter a De-
ute, ou permute, le
fuccefloz poit enter,
ec, Ct ico crop quela
caufe eft, put ceo que
le Parſon,ou dicar,
que eft feifie, ac,
come en Doit De for
Cfglife , nad pag
Droit De fee imple en
leg tenements , et ic
Droit De fee fimple de
ceo Deinurt en afcun
autet perfon , et pur
cel caufe fon fucceff,
poit bien enter, nient
tontví(tcant tiel alic-
nation, ac,


Of Difcontinaance.


certaine Lands or Te-
nements parcell of
his Glebe, &c, to
another in fee, and die
orrefigne, &c. his fuc-
ceffor may well enter
notwithftanding fuch
alienation,as is faid in
a Nota 2.H.4. Termino
Micb. which begin-
neth thus.


644.


N°: quod diclum

fuit pro lege, in
a Writ of Account
broughr by a Mafter
of a Colledge againft
a Chaplaine, thatif a
Parfon or Vicar grant
certaine Land, which
is of the right of his
Church to another
and die, or changeth,
the Succeffor may en-
ter,&ec. And Itake the
caufeto bee , for that
the Parfon ot Vicar
that is feifed, &c. asin
right of his Church
hath no right of the
fee imple in the tene-
ments,but the right of
the fee (imple abideth
in another perfon.
And for this caufe his
Succeffour may well
enter , notwithftan-
ding ſuch alienation,
&c.


Rrrr


Seũ. 644.


fe a quetkon in eur Bokes:
(a) fome hold that (t is in the
Patron, but that cannot bee
koꝛ tworeafons, fr, oz chat
in the beginning the Land
was giuen to the 39arfonanb
bis Succeflozs, and the Was
tron igno Succefloz, Der
Comblp, the wozdes of the
Hogit ef Iuris vtrum bee, fi (it
libera Eleemofina Eccleila: de
D. anb not of the 39atron,
Home ethers boe hold that
the fee (imple is in the patron
€ Dzdinary, but this cannot
bee fog the caufeg aboueſaid
Bnod therefore of necellitie the
fe Ginple ig in abepance ag
Littleton faith, And this wag
paeufoco bp the Wzoutdence


ano wildome of the LaW;foz


that the 39arfon + Wicar haue
Curam animarum, and ere
bound te celebzate Diuine
Seruice, and adminilter the
SHatraments , € therefore no
21d of the Pꝛedeceſſoꝛ (boul
make a difcontinuñce to take
alway P entry of the fuccefoz,
andtodzsiue him toarcallac-
tton Sobereby be fhould be dex
ſtitute of maintenance in the
mean time;bpon confideration
of all our Weokes 3| obferue
this diuerGtie, that a 39arfon
02 81 (cav foa tbe benefit of the
Church and of bis Succefoz
ig (n fome cafeg cleeined in
La to hauea fee (imple qua
lí&eb but to boe anptbing to
the pꝛeiudice of big Duccels
ſor in many cafes, the Law
adindgeth bim to haue in ef-
fect but an eftate fo2 life, Cau-
fee Ecclefiz publicis caufis z-
quiparantur, anb fumma ra-
tio eft quz pro religione fa-
cit. Bnd Ecclefia fungitur vice
minoris meliorem facere po-
teft conditionem fuam deteri-
orem mequaquam.  '

Bsa 3Barfon Qi (car, Arche
deacon, Pecbend, Chanterp
Price and the like map baue
an Aion of tbafte, anb in
the Wait tt thal be ſaid ad ex


hæredationem Ecclefiz, &c.


34!


(a) $.H,6,24, 13, A...


Wide Regifir.307.4.
45-E.3.188. E changes
12, H.8.g.


F.N.B.49.L,


"Brallen 15,4.f21.236.


Britt. fol. 143,


F.N.2.55.D.d- $7.€.F.
10. 4.7.5.


ipfius B. 03 Prebendx ipfius s
^W ;


And the Warfon, qc. that
maketh a Reale foz life oo
aus


Lib.;.


LN.B.49.l.m.0.10.E.5.
sit Juris vtrum. Tarps €. 3e
Lure vtruro 14.1.14. E. 2.
ébid.4. ENB go, yo.8.1.
26. 131. E. 3. 11.5). Entrée v
F.'N B.306.F, Regifr.337,
4. E. 4.2, B. P, 3.9, Entris 3.
78,3: $5 5$.


- (e) FAND Ag LG.


$e. E. 4.059. Aide 50,23 «. E. 3.

$4. 8. E.3.45. 8.46.34.

11, H.6.9. 6.E.3.4€.43.A4ff-
"P 33. FN, 138.


44.8.3: 19. 12. P. 4.68.
9. 2.4.26.19. 1,1 m. 6.2


d 11.32 4.3. 46d 39.
$5.0. 3. 1p. 14. K. 3. Jorn
VOUT 4.


Cap.n.


haue à Coaſimili cafs during
the life of the effee, and a
Mout ef entry ad communem
legem aftet big Death, oz a
10268. Ad terminum qui prz-
terijt, 03a quod permittat. in
the deber,and none can main⸗
taine an of thefe nozits, but
a Tenant (n fec (imple of fee
taple,

And a Parfon.cc.map ree
ceiue homage, Which Cenant
for life cannot bee, Temps
E.1.Incumbent 19.

(c) Rtheife a Parfon,
tc. (ball haue a 10 3it of meſut
anda Contra formam fcoffa-
menti,

But a Parſon cannot
make a difcontinuance ag Lit-
tleton here teacheth , Foz that
fhouid bee tothe pretuaice of
bis Succcffoz, to take away
bts entríc , and to dine him
toa reall action,

Allo if a 3S arfon, ec, make
a leaſe for peares refersinga
tent ¢ dicth the leaſe is deter⸗
mincd bp bis Death,aw if Tes
nant for life had made a leafe,
mo acceptance e£ the rent bp
the Succellor can make ff
good. Bifoin a tcall acton a
Parfon, Wicar, Brchdeacon,
Pꝛebend, ac, (bail have atde
of the Patron and D2dina=
ty ag tenant foz life al haut.
Ho ag it (s cuident that to
many purpofes a Parſon
hath but in effect an eltate for
itfe,and to manp a qualificd fee
Timple, but the entire fee and
tight ts notin him, ond that
is the rcafen that hee cannot


Of Difcontinuance.


Ses,


Ar bn Cuelq
€ e poit auct bte


De Daoit De tenemẽts
De D20ít De fon Cf
glife, pur ceo quele
Dioit cft en fon Cha⸗
piter, et le fec (imple
Demurrant en lup et
en 5 Chapiter. Et bn
Deane poit auer bie
de droit, put ceo que
le Dzoit Demurt € inp,
Ct bn Abbe poit a=
uet batefe De D20ít, p
ceo que It Droit Dc:
murt en Iup,ct en Con
coucnt, Ct bn Ma⸗
ftet Duss DDofpitall
poit auer baicfe De
b20ít , put ceo que le
droit Demurt en duy,
et eti fes confreres,
fc, Et fic de alijs
cafibus confimilibus.
Mes bn parfon ou
bn dicar ne poit a-
uet bzicfe De Dzoit,
&t,


Sel. 645.


645.
F9 a Bifhop may
haue a writ of right
of the tenemétsof the
right of his Church,
for that the right isin
his Chapiter , and the
fec fimple abideth in
him and in his Chapi-
ter, Anda Deane may
haue a writ of right,
becaufe the right re-
maynes in him. And
an Abbot may haue a
writ of right for that
the right remaynes in
him and in his Co-
uent. And a Mafter of
an Hofpitall may hauc
a Writ of Right be-
caufe the right remay-
neth in him and in his
Confreres, &c. And
fo of other like cafes.
But a Parfon or Vicar
cannot haue a Writ of
Right, &c.


diſcontinue the fee (imple tat he hath not, noz euer had, fox ad ithath beene faid, Omnis priua ·
tio præfippenit habitum. Bnd for the fame caufe he cannot hauea $vait of right right, ners
rit of right in bis nature, ag a waꝛit of Right Surdi(claimer of cuftomes arid fersices,, Ne
iniufte vexes,rationabilibus diuifis, quo inre, and the like. j

But here (t appeareth bp Littleton that {uch bedies politique a cospozate ag aut a fole fete
fit, and may baute a wꝛit of right Fos that the fec and right is in them (albeít thep cannot abe
foluteip conuep away their Lands, ec. without affent of ethers) may make a Difcontinnance,
ag a Biſhop, an Abbot, a Deane, a Walter of an hoſpitall and theitke. Wut thie (sto bes
vnderſteod, where a Deane ez a Watter of an Dofpítall, ac, are folp feifed of viftine poſſelli⸗
ons, fo2 (C the bodie that to feifed be aggregate of many, ag the Deane and Chapiter, Walker
and Œonfreres, tc, then thefeoffinent ef she Deane oz Walter ie fo farve from a Difcons


tínuanccag itis a diſſeiſin.


And ies that hane the fee and right tn them fbail got wane atoe in refpect of their high and
de 2 a . à
avi ipei 44 * albeit any of them be pꝛeſentable: but a Deane that (s. collatiue (hall baut atde of


Bnd it (s to be obferucd, that the remedy fg ener agreeable to the right, and. therefore ths
thhop, Deane, Maftcr of an Wofprtall, that hath Colledge anb common Beale, of the like,
fbatiauca wort of Wight Right, Whichia the highe remedies, for that thep have the


bighef etate.


bus


, ° 9$. AM E Uy d i 2
Lib. Of Difcontinuance.  Seil.646.
Here Littleton citeth the Woke Cafe, Mich,1.H 4. ag an authozitle Solerenpori be groun⸗
deth bis opinion, And it is to beobferuen, that the peares of H.4. Mere publifpeo before Lit.
tleton did Write, :
But at this vay, the Withop, Deane, Matter of an Bofpitall, oz thelike that hanethe fee
and right tn them, ag hath bene fato, cannot difcontinne , nepther can thep og any Parſon,
Uicar, Drchdeacon, Pzebend, o? anp other bauíng anp Eccleffatticall Living With affent of
Deane and Chapiter, Patron and Dzdinarp, 02 theconfent of anp others make anp Leafe,
Gift, Grant os Conucpance, ditate, Charge oz Incumberance to bind bis Huccefioz other
then £02 tearme of one and twentie peares, 01 three lines in polleflion, Swherebpon the accuz
Gomed Went 02 moze (hall be reſerued. Chete be excellent Laweg,andhane beene Sell expoun⸗
ded fo? the maintenance ok Religion; and the god of ods € butch, for otherMile tt ig to bee
feared that bolp Church would iofe moze then (t Would gaine in thefe baycg,
But Where Littleton fn this and other Sections make mention of Watters of Hofpitals,the
Reader mult know , that fince Littleton Wrote, there hath bene a great altevation made bp df=
mers Ads of Parliament concerning Hoſpitals.


QU Maffer del Hofpitall. Chele points concerning Dofpitalg were
refolued (c) bp the Juſtices.

Firſt, That no Hofpitall Mas ginento the Crowne by the Statute of 27-H.8. woz any
Dofpitall is within tbe Statute of 31.H.8. of Monaſtertes, but ontp religions and EccleGaa
flícatl Bofpitals, and that no Lay Bofpitall Was Within thoſe Statutes.

Hecondlp, 3t bpon the foundation of any lay Wofpital ozafter (t was ordained, Chat one op
Diners Prieſts fhouto be mapntained within the Dofpítall te celebzate Dinine Seruice to the
poore, and to pray £o? the foule of tbe Sounder, and ail Chꝛtſtian ſoules, orthelike, andthat
the poꝛe of fucb Dofpitatl Mould make thelike Daifons , pct fuch an Wolpttall is not Within
the fato Statutes, fo; the Hoſpitall is Lay, anb net Religious, anb all 02 che moft part of ans
ttent Lay Hoſpitalls Mere founded 9? oadained after thelike fot, and the makerg of tlyofc Rac
tutes neuer intended to eucrtbz0t0 workes of Charitic,but to take awap the abufe,

Thirdly, Chat no ofpitall wags aíuen to the king bp the Statute of 27.H.8, but in two
cafes, where tbe Donozs, Founders o2 Pattons, «c. had centred and cepulfeo the Wuielts,
Wardens, ac, betweene the fourth day of Febzuary, Anno 27.H.8 andthe fine and twentieth
of December, Anno 37.H.8. 03 Where Wing Henrie the eighth by Commillton accosding to
that Aa boul enter and feilethefame, butthat determined bp the Death of that king,

SFourthiy, Chat tbe Statute of 1.E.6. cetended not to any Wolpitall Sobatfoener epther
Lap oz Keltgtous,as bpthzfameappeareth, —

Bnd 3] was of Counfell with che 1010 Cheney (n this cafe , Which, Leing tt map doe gad
for mapntenance of Charitable bles , F thought god ſummarily to repost it, to this I wtil
adde Panis pauperum vita pauperum, qui defraudatcos vir fanguinis eft.

Nota, of Hoſpitals fome arc Coꝛpoꝛations aggregate of many as of Maſter o2 to arden, ec,
aud bis Confrercs : fome bere the Water 02 Warden hath onlp the eftate ot Inheritance
inbim, atio the Bzethren or Sitters power toconfent hauing Colledge anb Common Heaie,
Home Where the Matter o? warden hath the Kate (n him, but hath no Collenge and common

Seale, and fuch a Mafter op toarden ſhall haue a Iuris vtrum: anb of thele Wolpitals feme
be eligible, fome donatiue, anbfome pꝛeſentable.


Sed. 646.


EM lepluis haut betefe |
ils potent auct ett le bzíef
De Iuris vtrum, le quel eff graund
pzoofe que le droit De fee neſt en
eux ne en nul autecs,nc, Mes le
droit De fee (imple eft en abetance
&6, cto ett adive, que il cit tant»
folement enleremembzance, en⸗
tendement, ¢confideration dela
lep, «c, Car mop fanble que tíel

chote


B* the higheft Writthat they
can haue is the Writ of
luris trum , which is a great
proofe that the right of fee is
not in them, nor in any others,
&c. but the right of the fee
fimple is in abeiance,that is to fay,
that itis only in theremembrance,
intendement and confideration of
Rire 2


ja


Vide Se&. $39.49 3. erc.
1. Elis 4.18. 13. Eliz.ca. 10
V.Jacobictp.3,


Lib.2 f.l.46.

Lib. 4. fol.7 6.& 20,

Lil. s.fol.s.r .1 4.

Lib.6 fol. 37. L1b.7.fol. 8,
Libs fol. 67.

37.H.8. 31 H.8.. 32. H. 8.
37-H.8. 1.E. 6. ra.


(e) Paféh.24.Eli£. The
Lord (^ heneysea(e.

Lib.2 fol. 48.49. ^
Ewefaue de Canterburies cafa,


Lib. y fsl.34. Porters osf,


Porters cafe vbi Apra.
Lib. 4. 101, 1139 X14. t 16,
In Larerts cafe,


Erclefiafticusca, 3 a verfa. 22,


Uf, Turis Vtrum, 4,


Lib.3.


84.6.3.63. Ui. SeF,648,649
650.651.


Vid. SB, Is


Virg. 3. ned.


BraB, li. Y en, 2. Brit.fe.t49.


Cap.u.


chofe et tiel droit que eſt Dit en
Diuers Lieurs eftre en abepance,
eſt a tant adire en Latyne, (8.)
Talis res, vel tale re&’ que vel qd
non eft inhomine adtunc fuperfti-
te, fed tantummodo eft, & confiftit
in confideratione & intelligentia
Legis, & quod alij dixerunt, talem
rem aut tale rectum fore in nubibꝰ.
Wes ico tuppole que ils inten-
Deront per ceux parols , In nubi-
bus, &c. come ieo ape Dit ade=
uânt,


Of Difcontinuance.


Sed. 64.7.


the Law,&c. for it feemeth to me,
That fuchathing,and fucha Right
whichis faydin divers bookes to
be inabeyance,is as muchto fay in
Latine, (s.) Talis res, vel tale Rectum
que vel quod non ef} 12 bomine adiunc
fuper fie. fed tantummodo eſt, confi-
fist in confideratione & intelligentia
legis, & quod alij dixerunt, talem rem
aut tale rectum fore in nubibus. But 1
fuppofe, that thcy meane by thefe
words, (In subibus, exc.) asI haue
faid before.


€ BN abeiance. That is tn in ex pectatió, of the Fréch 10020 Bayer
to expect. Foꝛ When a Parlon vpeth we fay that the fræbel is in Dbetance, becaufe
a Syuccefíon (g in expectation to take tt, and here note the neceflitée of the true inter.


pretation of 100209.


FE Tenant Pur terme dauter vie ppetb, the freehold ig fatd to be in Abetance vntill the occus


pant entreth, It a man makea Lenfe fozlifethe remainder to the right beires of I.S. the fee
fimple ts in Abetance vntill I.S. dicth, And fo tn the cafe of the 39arfon, the fee and right (a
in Abeiance, that is inexpecation, tn renierabzance, entendment 07 confideration of Lawe
1.In confideratione fiue intelligentia legis, becanfe tt (& notin anp man then liuing, and the
right that is in Abetance is fain to be In nubibus th the Clouds, and therein bath a qualitte of
fame whereot the oct fpeabeth ;


Infequiturque folo, & caput inter nubila condit.


Setlton


«LI GE ſi vn parfon dun efglite

Deute, ore le franktenement
Del glebe Del perfonage etf en
nullup durant ie temps que Ie
parfonage eft botde,mes in abet=
ance, cett afcauoir, in confidera-
tion s en ie intelligent de le lev,
tanque bu auter foit fait parſon
De mefme leglife, et immediat
quant bn auter eft fait parton, le
franktenement en fait c(t en Tuy
come fuccefloz,


647.

Lfoif aParfon of a Church

dieth, now the freehold of
theglebe of the Parfonage is in
none during the time that the Par-
fonage is voide but in abefance,
viz.in confideration and in the vn-
derftanding of the Law vntill a-
nother be made Parfon of the fame
Church, and immediatly whena-
notheris made Parfon, the free-
Der inDeed isin him as Succef-
Of.


€ S! vn Parfon dus Efelife deuic dre. So it is of a Withop, Pbbot,
Deane, Prchdeacon, Prebend, Wiccar, anb o£ euery other fole Coxpozation o3 body
polttique prefentatine, electiue, 02 donatine, Which inherit ances put in abstance ate bp
ſome called Hereditates jacentes, and fonc fap, Que le fee eften balaunce,


Self,


Lib.3.


¶ ITẽ alcuns per-
aduenture boilẽt
arguer 3 dire que en⸗
tant que vn parſon
oue laſſent del patron
Æo2Dinarie poit grã⸗
ter bn vent charge
bois Del glebe Del
parfonage ey fee, et
(ffint charger? glebe
Del parfonage perpe-
tualmét creotls ont
fee (ímple;ou Deur,ou
bnbecup, auoít fcc
timple al meins, A
ceo poit eftre reſpon⸗
Due, que él eft princi⸗
pleen le ley, que de
chefcuns terres il p
ad fee fimple, ac, en
atcun Hort, ou antet-
ment Le fee ſimple cft
en abepance. Ce on
auter principle eft,
Que cbefcun terve de
Fee fimple pott eftre
charge de bn Kent⸗
charge en fee perbn
boy, ou per aute,
Ct quant ticl rent eft
graunt per le Faitle
Parfon.et P Patron,
et Lordinarie, ac, en
Fee, nul auera preiu-
Dice ou parde p force
Detiel Grant forfque
les Grantors enlour
bíes,ct les Poires le
Patron et les ſucceſ⸗
foas Del Oꝛdinarya⸗
pres lour Deccale, Ct
Apres tiel charae, fi le


Of Difcontinaance.


Sell. 648.


Lío fome perad-

uenture will ar eu
and fay, that inafmuch
asa Parfon with the
affent of the Patron
and Ordinary , may
granta rent charge out
of the Glebe of the
Parfonage in fee, and
fo chargethe glebe of
the Parfonage per-
petually , ergo they
hauea Fee fimple, or
two or one of them
haue a fee fimpleat the
leaft. Tothis may bee
anfwered, Thatitisa
Principle in Law, That
of euerie land there is
a Fee fimple, &c. in
fome bodie , orother-
wife the fée fimple is in
abeyance. And there is
another Principle,that
euery Land of Fee fim-
ple may bee charged
witha Rent charge in
Fee by one way or
other. And when fuch
Rentis granted by the
Deede of the Parfon,
andthe patron,and Or-
dinarie, &c. in Fee,
none fhall haue preiu-
dice or loffe by force
of fuch Grant, but the
Grantors in their liues,
and the Heires of the
Patron,and the fuccef-
fours of the Ordinarie
after their deceafe,
And after fuch charge


Brrr 3


Sect. 648.


€ Le eff vn Principle
* en la Ley, eye.
Principium , quod eft qua
primum caput, from Which
many cafes haue their ojíqís
nalloz beginning, whichis
fo (trong , as (t futtereth no
Contrabidion; and therefore
it to fapd in our Woks, that
atttient Principles of the law
(a) ought not to be dtfpnten,
Contra negantem principia
non eft difputandum, Œbat
Which out PButhoz here calleth
a Pzinctple, Se.3.& oo. hee
calleth a Maxime.
Bere Littleton ($5 anſwer
toanobícdíon alledgeth two
Principles, —Firk,


@ Que ae chefan


terre il y ad Fee fimple,
de. This ig Perfpi-


«uc verum,and needeth no ers
planation, Secondly,


€ Chefcun terre de
Fee fimple poet effres
charge em Fee per un


voy eu auter. Hereby
ttappeareth, Chat albeit the
tight of the Fee fimple bein
abepance, yet (t may be chars
ged bp one Swap oz another.
And foít map bee allened (a
He, albeit the right of the fo
be in abepance, o2 in confides
ration of Law, And bereíri
{8 a Dinerfitte worthie the
obferuation to be made, hat
Shen the right of Fee (imple
ts perpetuallp bp tudqement
of Law (n abepance, withont
any expectation tocomeineffe,
there hee that hath the quatifts
cb f& concurrentibus hijs quz
in iure requiruntur, ita
thargevz alten it, ag ín the
cafe of Parſon, Wicar, Pres
bend,€c, Wut where the fe
Ginpie (s inabeyance, and by
pofitbtlttte map enerte houre
caine in effe, there the Fes Ginx
ple cannot bee charged bntíll
tt commeth in effe. As {€ a
ALeafefoz itfe be made, the vc»
mainder to the right hetres of
LS. the fe Ginple cannot be
charged


343


(à) 11. H.4. 9;


508.3. 90,


Lib.


Vi.Sel.1, Bridçematers cafe.
€ 55.


yi.$e8 523.


31, L. t. fi), Grant 904
9.R. a. Annmit.53-


26, 3.3.99. Ansuit.34.
4e B.3:30.3 E. 3.17413


(Cara.


charged till I.S. be dead, And
fo is Littleton to bee vnder⸗
fteod, viz. that either tt map be
charged in præfcnti 0 in fu-
turo»


¶ cCbeſcun Terre de


Fee fimple. And fo it
ts of Lands entatled, fos they
map beecharged in fe alfo,
fo? tbt C (fate atic map bee
cut off by fine o2 Recovery,
fo the Eftate tatle map conz
tinue, and pet Tenant tn ta(le
map la&ofullp charge the land
and bind tbe 3(Ine (n Catic.
20g (£a Diſſeiſoꝛ make a gift
ín Œaile, and the Done in
conGiveratton of a Releaſe by
the Dilcifee of all his right
to the Done, grantetha rent
charge to tbe Dificifee and big
detres, propoztionabie to the
value of his right, this Hall
bind the Fine in Œailei Vide
Se&. 1. Bridgewaters Œafci
which Lands bp the rule of
Littleton may be charged: and
therofoze tf the owner of tbofo
thirteene acres grant a Rent
charge out of thofe thirteene
Acres qenerallp,iping in the
Meadow of cightie, without
mentioning Swbere they lie
particularly, there ag the ftate
ín the land remoues, the
charge (ball remoone alfo, ut
fince our Author Weete, all
Œcclefiafticall perfons are dif
abledto charge tn Fee anp of
their Ccclefialttcall poſſeſſi⸗
0115, a8 before hath beene {pos
ken of at large.


¶ Et quant tiel rent
ef grant, ee. Chis ts


an excellent interpretation and
limitatton of the favo 391(n-
tiple, viz Œbat none (ball
haue pastudice oz loſſe bp anp
fuch Oaant , but fuchag are
partie o2 priutethereunto, ag
the Patron and his Wepzes,


Of Difcontinuance.


Parſon deuie, 5 [uc-
ceflour ne pott hener
ale dit Eſgliſe d eftre
parfonde mefme te
Œfglife per la Ley,
fozfque per pactent-
ment Del qatron, et
admiffion et inftitu-
tion Del Dadinarie,
€t pur cel caufe il co-
uient que le Succel=
foz fop teígne con-
tent, et agree Decco,
que fon Patron et
Lozgdinary lopalmét
fefopent abcuant,at,
Mes ceo neft proofe
quele Fee fimple, ac,
eft en le Patron et
Lozdinarie, ou en
afcu De eur, 4, Mez
lacaufe que tiel grat
de Kent charge ett
bone, eft pur ceo que
ceux queug auccont
intereft,ac,en la Dit
Ciglife, 5, le Patron
folonque la Ley tem⸗
poral, et Lozdinarte
folonque là Ley ſpi⸗
rituall,fueront atfen-
tug, ou partiesa tíel
cpari ac, Ct ceo fem-
ble eftre la verie caute
que tiel Glebe poit
eftre charge en pet-
petuitic.éc,


Sed. 648.


if the Parfon die, his
fucceffor cannot come
tothe fayd Church to

be Parfon of the fame,

by the Law, but by

the prefentment of

the Patron, and ad-

miffion and inftitution

of the Ordinarie.And
for this caufe the Suc-
ccflour ought to hold

himfelfe Content , and

agree to that which his
Patron and the Ordi.
narie haue lawfully

done before, &c. But
thisis no proofe that

the Fee fimple, &c. is

in the Patron and the

Ordinarie, or in either

ofthem, &c. but the

caufe that fuch graunt

of rent charge is good,

is for that they who

haue the intereft , &c.
in the fayde Church,

viz. the Patronaccor-

ding to the Law Tem-

porall, and the Ordi-

dinarie , according to

thelaw fpiritual, were

affenting, or partiesto

fuch charge, &c. And

this feemeth to be the

true caufe why füch

Glebe may be charged

in perpetuitie, &c.


the Dadinarie andhis Huccelorg, and the Parſon and bis Succeſſoꝛs: Which Suctellors
of the 39arfon arete be preſented by the 39atron oz his heires, andadmitted and inftitated by
the Ordinarte or his Succellors, Che likeigstobelapdof an Archdeacon, Pꝛebend, Vicar,


Œbauntrie Pꝛieſt, and the like.


Perle Faitle Parſon, & Patron, & Lordinarie , crc. Pet if the
Parlon dic, and in tine of vacation, the Patron of the affent of tbc Oꝛdiuarie, 02 the Patron


and D2dinarie grant an annuitte o) Bent charge out of the Glebe, thts (ball ( as bath beng
fapb) binde the fuccæding 19 arfons for ener.


FE there be 39arfon, Patron,and Ozdinarie, ano the Parfon bp the Ozdinance and affent
0


Lib. Of Difcontinuance: Sec. 648.


of the Oꝛdinarte grant an Annuitie to another, hauiag quid pro quo fn conübrratíen thereof,
this ball bind tbe fucceiToz of the Parton, without the confont of the Patron,

# Church Parochial! may be donatiue and exempt Crocs all opdinarte (urifbíaion , and the
incumbent may ceigne to che Patron, and not tothe Drdinarte, neither can the Ordinarie
bit, bat the P tron by « ommilfioners to bc appoynted by him: And by Littl rule, the 35a-
tron and Incumbent may charge the Giebe,awd albeit itbe donatiue bp a Lap man, pet mere
laicus ís not capable of ít, but an able Œierie infra facros Ordinesig , fox albeit he come in bp
Aap donation, and not by admilſton op nfitation, pet bis Function isfpirituall, anb t€ fucha
Clerke donatiue be diſturbed, the Patron fhail bane a Quare impedirof this Church donatiue,
And the ait ball fay, Quod permittat ipfum præfentare ad Ecclefiam,&c. and declare the (pce
ciall matter tn bis Declaration, Bnd fot (e of a Pꝛebend, Chanterie, Chappell donatiuc,
andthe lile, and no Laps fbatl íncurre to the Dadinarte,cecept it be fo {pecially proutded (n tye
Foundation, But rf the Patren of fuch a Church, Chanterie, Chappell, &c. donatiue, doth
once prefent to the Dzdinarie,and his Cierke ig abmíttco and (nftitutén » itis now become
pacfentable, and neuer fall bedonatine after, ano then Laps fljall incurre to the Dibinarp,ag
it (ball of other Wenefices prefentable, But a prefentation to fuch x Donatiue bp a ftranger,
and admifion amo imítitutfon thereupon, ts meerely voyd. Bnd ail this was refolucd by the
Whole Court of Kings Wench, fo; the Wecorte Parochtall donatine of Saint Burian {n the
Œountie of Coꝛnewall.

Fe appearcth bp our Waokes,and bp divers Pets of Parliament,
Withopzickes in England were of the Kings Éonnsation, and bonatíuc per traditionem ba-
culi, (id eft) tbe Croficr; which Was the Pattozall Stake, & annuh, the Ring hereby bee
Was married tothe Church. And King Henric the firft beeing requelteo by the ASifbop of
Mometo make them elecine, refufed tt: but King lohn bp hts Charter bearing date quinto
Iunij,anno decimo feptimo, granted that the 25ilbopzickg (boutb be eligible. JE the King doth
found a Church, Hofpitall, o1 free Chappell bonatíuc, be may exempt the fame from ozdinarie
Zurifdicion, and then bic Chancellor Mall bifit tbe fame. fap, (f tie King doe found the fame
Sithout any fpcciail eremption, the 3Drofnaric is not, but che Kings Chanceiloz , to vifit the
fame, Sow ag the Ling map create Donatines exempt from the vifitation of the D2dinarie,
fo he may by his Charter licence amp fublec to found lucha Church o: Chappell , and to ore
daine that ít Mall be donatiue, and not prefentable, anb tobe btitc bp the Founder, and not bp
tbe Dzdinarie, Undthus began Donattues in England, whereof common Perfons were
Patrons,


€ Ordinarie. Ordinarius ig he that hath ogdinarie tuvifdiction in
caufes Eccleliaſticall, immediate to the Ling and bts Courts of Common Law, fo the better
erecatton of Jaſtice, as the Biſhop o: anp other that hath erempe and tanncdfate turifoicion in


Cauſes Ecclefiafticail, : i A

€ Ley temporcl. which confifteth of three parts, viz. Firſt, On
the Common Law, expꝛeſſed tn our Wokes of Law an indichatl Records. Secandly, On
Statutes contained in Bas and Kecords of Parliament, And thirdly, On Guftomcs
grourbcb bpon reafon, and bfco time out of mind, andthe Eonftruction and determination of
shefe doe belong to tbe Judges of the Realme,


€ Ley Spiritual, Hc. That is, the Eccletrafticall Lavies alloy:
ed by the Lawes of this 15 caline, viz. Which are not againt the Common Law CSobereof the
Tings 391erogatíueís a principall part ) moz agatnít the Statutes and Cuftomes of the
Realme, anb regularlp according to {ach Œcclefafticall Lawes, the Dadinaric anb other Gee
cieGafttcall Judges doc proceed in caufes Within thee Œonufance. And this Juriſdiction
vas fo bounded by the antient Common Lawes of the Reaime, and fo declared bp Ac of Pars


líament, Me
Ju proprictie of (peecb , Admiſſion


hac at che fir(T all the


C Admiſſion & Infiitutien.
1S, ben the Wiſhop bpon craminatton adinitteth him to beable, and faith, Admitto te habia
lem. (d) Inltitution is, whenthe 26((bop faith, Intitmote redtorem t:lis Eccle(iz cum cura
animarum, & accipe Curam tuam. & meam. (c) But ſometime in a moae large fence,admiffus
Doth include 1n fitucus aifo, Cuius przcfentatus (it admi (lus, (i,) inftitutus, And (t is to bec ob⸗
ftruto, That Inſtitution ts a ged plenartic agaínft a common perfon, ( but notagainft the
Hing, vnleſſe he be inducted) and that {9 the caufe that regularly plenartíe fball be tried by the
Withop, betauſe the Church (s full by 3inftitution, which tg a fpirítuall Be, but voydos not
Dopd (bail bc trícb bp the Commen Law.

Bethe Common Law (Fan cltranger hadpeefenten hig Clerks, and hee bab benc admitted
and inftituted to a Church, wheveof any Sublet had bore laspfall Patron, the Pa⸗
tron bab no other remedie to recouer big dyouospfon, but a wait of Bight of Somotofon, wheres

in


344


6 €. 3.4.55. 7.E,3.40.47.
EN-B.163.17.€. 3.32.
39. E. 3.15.0. t1,4,4,68.
$.H.5.33.

Vi.$e8, 133.53. 11. E. 5.
Inr.vtr. 3. 8.4 39.51.


13. f.2.


14- H. 3. Quarimp 183,
17.E.3.12:64 14. 4. 4. 11.
E.N.B 33-€.16,E, 3. be. 660


1348.4 3. 6, H.7.14.


Vs. Sc. 630.
42-44 6.26. F.N.B.3 5,0.


Hisl. v. lac. eoraro Ree ret. 604
1hter Wil Eairelnld PL op
VAL G ayer def.tn 1ve|]ua.


17.8.5.40. $,8.5.10.
3 5.E. 5.83, video ce Presirfor,
Math, Tar po. 10. & 64.


F.[.3. 35.£.42. 4.1,
17.5.3.84 dr 85. 8.4 ff 30.
8.£.3..4ff 150. IS. E. sere
Fae.11. 6.H.7. 14. 16,€.3.
Rreife 660. 5 1 E. 3.60.
Regifter 40. D yer Yo.Eli? f.
373 14. Elsa. 5.3. H. 5.6. 1.


The Statute o^ 2 c. H. 8. ea 19.
33-8.6.34. 33, H.6,38,


(d) HB. fe 751 & 79.
Lib. € fo. 49. L15.7.fo. Ad.
(€) W. 3.cap. 5.13. E.1.


22,H.6.97.. 38.8. 3.4,


G lasuill lib. 13 05.18.30, 80,
Mirrersap. 5.@ 5,

rell Lib. 4. fel. 338.240,
244.6. 291, Firt b, 59.177
36,19. 259. f9,232,234.324


Libj.  (ap.u. Of Difcontinuance. Sed. 648.


62E. 3.28.39 52. 39.E.3.34
4 1 E3354 5 E.3. Quar.
ims. 139.109.6.3. €99,13.
gr E t Quar.sr p.16.


F.N.B.36 R14 3.4.35. F. 3.
ca, 3,1 g Ro3.£4. Le 4. H. 4.
23.21, 1. H.fe.19.


* Li 6 fo.$Y.Li.7 fo.19.

3: H.6.Dam.17. 34. H. 6.
38. 12. E, 3. Champerty 9
18.E, 3.3. Tempi E, 1. Quar,
imp.181,

(a) ÀW.2,ea 5. 11 E. t.


(g) 45 £.3-3 5.38. E:3-4.
2 s. E. 3. 47. 13. EL Dy. 292.
Reg. 302.&e.18.£1. Dy.148.
14. E. 4.3.7. H. 4.33. 31. E. Y
Quar imp. 185. Ma. vb. ſup.
(h) 17-£. 3.64.


9. H.6. 3a. d» 5619. H.6. 68


18. E. 3. Prefentmert. 30.
5o. E. 3. Enoumbent 10.21.H.
7.8 a. dr b g.E iQ. Dyer.360
F.N.B.33.14. H. 8. 31.

tp E.3,Dar.''ref. 31.

16. E. 3. 19.9. H. 6.31.


16.£ 3. tif. uer inp. Stath,
45. E, 3.15.9, H. 5.33.5 6.
19, H. 6,68. L. g. E. 4.115.
9-£E.4. 30.


11:H. 4.80.


inthe Incumbent wag not to bc remcoued: andfo tt was at the Common La, (£ an vſurpa⸗
tion han benc had pon an Enfant oz Feme Convert, having an Aduowelon by vilcent,oz vp⸗
on Genant for lífc,zc. the Intant, Feme Coucrt, and be in the rencrfion were duuen to their
tait of Right of Aduowion ; for at the Common Law, if the Church Soere once tuii, tbe Ju⸗
cumbent could not be remcoued, and Wicnartie generati Was a God Plea (tt a Quare impedit,
02 Aflife of Darreine prefentment, and the rcafon of this vas, to theintent that the 3incumz
bent might quictip intend s applic bimfelfe to bis lpirituai Charge, And feconvip,the Law in⸗
tended, that the WB ithop that jab cure of foules Within bis Dicecle, Would admit and inftitute
an able man for the difcharge of hts Dutie and bis owne, and that the Wiſhop Would Doc right
to cueríc Patron Within his 3Dioceüe, Wut at the Common Law , ifanp had bfurpeo bpon
the Ling, and his Pꝛeſentee had beene admitted; inſtituted, and induced, (to without indus
dion the Church had notbeene full againfEtbe Ging) the King might baue remoucd him bp
Quare impedit, and Beene reftozed to his pzelentation, foa tberetn ye bath a 3o1trogatíue, Quod
nullum tempusoccurrit Regi, but he could not prefent, £o1 the plenattic barred bim of that, nets
ther could he remoue him any way but by Aaton, to the end the Church might bee the moze
quict inthe meane time: * either vid the King recoucr Dammages tn his Quare impedit a£
the Common Law. Wnt thefayd Statute (a)hath alterco the Common la$o in the cafes atoꝛe⸗
fapd,ag namely, Quoad hoc, quod fi pars rea accipiat de plenitudine Ecclefiae per fuam propriam
prafentationem,non propter illam plenitudinem remaneat loquela,dummodo breue infra tempus
femeftre impetretur,&c.. Andalſo hath prourded remedie in the othercafes, ag bp the fayd Act
appeareth,

(2) Bnd tEthe Hing doe prefent to a Church, and his Cierke tg admitted and inffituten,
pet before induction the ing may repeale and revoke bie pz efentation, Wut reguiarip no man
can be put out of potiellton of bis Aduowſon, but bp admiflton ani inftitution bpon a bíurpaz
tion by a prefentation to the Church, Cum aliquisius præfentandi non. habens prafcntauerir,
&c. and not bp collation of tbe Withop : Ch) And therefore it the WBiſhopcollate Swithout title,
and bts Clerke ig inducted, this fall not put the tígbtfull Patron out of pofletiion, fog ít ſhali
be taken to be onelp proutfionallp made fo? celebzation of diuine Deruice bntill the Patron bo
pacfent, and therefore bee ($ not dzinen to his Quare impedit, 02 Alliſe of Darreiue prefenc-
— ín that cafe, but an Gifurpation by collation ſhall take away the right of Collation that
8 in another.

Ft ts to beobferned, Chat an vſurpation vpon a 492efentation (bal not enlp put out of poflef=
fion bim that hath right of pacfentatton, but right of Collation alfo, Cherofoze at this bap the

ncumbent hall be remoued in Quare impedit, 03 Alife of Darreine prefentmenr, (f there be
not a Dienartie bp five moneths before the Teſte of the to1ít, but then the Incumbent mutt be
named inthe toztt, 02 elfe be Chall ncuer be remcoued: pet at the Common 1150, ikthe Dzdinarte
tcfufco to admit and inftitute the Clerke of the patron, 02 when any diſturbed him to prefent,
fo ag he could not prekerre his Cierke, be might haue his Quare impedir, 02 Bfltfe de Darreine
prefentment,and (£ the Church $oerc not full, havea wozit to the 1Bifbop to admit his Cierke:
but fo odiong was Symonie tn the eve of the Common Law, that before the Statute of W.z.
Herecoucredno dammages. Bt the Common Law, ff banging the Quare impedit agafnft the
Dadinaric forrefufing of bis Clerke, and before the Church were fuil, theatron brought a
Quare impediragatitt the 25tfbop, ehanging the Suit, the Wiſhop admit ¢ mftitute a Clerk
at the pzefentation of another, inthis cafe tf Judgement be gtuen fo; the Patron againſt the
25 ((bop, the 35 tron Chall baue a tait to the Withop, and remouethe Incumbent that came in
peodente lite bp bfurpatton, fo pendente lite nihil innouetur, anb tbcrfozeat the Common Law
ít was ged policte to baing the Quare impedit agaíntt the 1ithop as ſpeedily as might be, And
(t is to beobferued, That albert the Cierke that comes in pendente lite, by sfurpatton, (ball be
remate», pet (£ therightfull 35 atron, being a franger to the tait, pzefent pendente lite , anb
his Clerke ts admitted and tnftituted, be Mall not be remotieb, £01 elfe bp the bringing of luch
Quare impedit againſt the Dzdinarte, the rightful Patron might bec defeated of his Pꝛeſen⸗
tation : and therefore euer after the Statuteok Weftin 2, amonaft other things (t was inqut-
redex Officio, (£tbe Church ere full, and of swbofe prcfentation, qc. and 1€ tbe 39latntífe
fhould haue to2ít tothe WBiſhop, and his Cierke abmíttco( a5 (n moft cafes he ought pet map
the rightfull Incumbent haue his remedte by Law.

And as (t Was god polícic (as hath bene fapd) to bring a Quare impedit ag fpebily as
might be againſt tbe Biſhop, ſo itis god policie at this day to name the Bilhop in tbe Quare
impedir, fo: then he (ball not prefent by Laps, Wut fering the Withop fhall not prefent bp
Laps becaufe be tg named in tbe weit, tobat then, after that the time be deuolued tothe Metro⸗
politan, hall not he prefent bp Laps becaufe he is not named ? To this tt isanfwered, Chat
he thal not tn that cafe prefent by laps.fox the Metropolitan fbal neuer gacfent oꝛ collate by laps
after fire moreths, but when the tmmedtate D 2dinarte might have collatebbp Laps Swithin
the fre moneths, and han farceafeb his time, Bnd lo it is if the rime be deuolued to the -


Lib.3:


Of Difcontinaance.


SeË.649.650.


fi fitt ep où beginning fafleth, and in humane things Quod non habet principium , non
Cap te Saft ep Bnd all thefe points Were vefolnco (*) in a wrt of Etroz brought by
Richard Biſhop of London, and Iohn Lancafter againf Anthony Lowe bpon a Judgement
tn agaínft them ina Quarc impedit te the Common Place fox the Shurch of windithe.

nt noÿe let bs heare what our Butheur will faye onto vs,


€ [ Gom fi € ẽ taile

ad iue & foit

Difleifie, et puts
il releffa per fon fait
tout fon D20ít a E diſ⸗
fcíf02,en cett cate nul
droit De taíle poit e-
fite en le tenant en
taile, pur ceo que il
auoit releas tout fon
Droit, Ct nul Doit
poit eſtre en liſſue en
le taile Durant Le bie
fon pete, Ct tíci droit
Del enberitance en le
taile neft pas tout
oufterment expire p
fozce De tíel veleag,
fc, Ergo, tl coutent
que tiel Dzoit Demurt
enabeíante, vt fupra,
Durant la bie le te=
nant en tate, quere=
leffa, ac, a ap2es fon
Deceate Donque eft ti-
el Droit maintenant
en fon iffue en fait,
&c,


- Sellion 649.


Lfo if Tenant in
tayle hath iffue
and is diffeifed and af-
ter he releafeth by his
Deed all his right to
the Diffeifor. In this
cafe no right of taile
canbe in the tenant in
taile, becaufe hee hath
relcafed allhis right.
And no rightcan bee
in the iffue intaile du-
ringthe life of his fa-
ther. And fuch right
of the Inherirance in
thetaile is not altoge-
ther expired by force
of fuch releafe, &c.
Ergo, it muft needs be
that fuch right remain
inabeiance, vt fupra,
during the life of Te-
nant in taile that relea-
feth, &c. And after
hisdeceafe fuch right
prefently is in his if-
fucin deed, &c.


Sect. 650.


Cr? mefme le
maner eft, lou
tenant en taile gran-
ta tout [on eftate a
bn auter,é ceft cas le
ne nad eftate
Ostque pur terme de


IN the fame manner
itis where Tenant in
taile grant all hiseftate
to another. In this
cafe the Grantee hath
no eftate but fer terme
of life of the Tenant
Ste


«€ Ittletoh hauing des
clared where a fe ts
tnabetance, €tobere
afreshold anb fee (s in abet=
ancebp Satin Law, e where
a fæ that is tw abetance map
becharged, ere hee putteth
two cales where a right of an
eftate tatle map bee in abet=
anceby the act of the partie,
Sobich are fo clere and ente
Dent, as there neds nofure
ther prefe o? argument, ches
Littleton hath (uftip and ars
tifictally made,albeit fore obs
tections of no Sweight baue
bene mabe agaínft tt. It tes
nant (n tatle of Lands holden
of the ing hee attatnted of
felony, and the King after ofa
fice fetfeth tbe fame, the fate
tatle (s (n abeiance, there fato
to be in ſuſpence.


@ Grant fon eſtate
concedit. flatum. ſuum.
State oz eftate igni&etb fuch
Buberttance, Freehold, terme
fo? peares, Œenancie bp fas
tute Merchant, Staple, Ele-
git 0; the like, ag anp many
hath in Lande 0g tenements,
€c. Bnd by the grant of his
eftate, €c, as much ag becan
grant thall pate, ag hereby
Littletons cafeappeareth Te⸗
nant fozitfe the vemaynber in
taile, the remapnoer to the
tight beíreg of Œenant fog
life, @enant fe life grant
totum flatum fuum f6 à man
anb his beires , both cfateg
doe pate,

€ Right. lus, fiue
re&um (which Littleton ofz
ten vleth) fignifieth properip,
and {pecially tn wꝛits and
pleadings, ben aneftate (s
turned to a right, ag bp Diſ⸗
continuance, Difleifin , tc.
Sobere (t fall be fao, Quod
ius difcendit & non terra.


But (right) voth allo in⸗
Ande


345


(*) Mich 5. Licobin


PL fom fal. 552. 303.in
Walfinghams cafe.
14.E.3. "Difeont, Se


19 H.6.60. 29..4f.p.
Walfnghams.s4fe vhsfupré:


Vide $68.65. 624. 625.526;
44. E. 1. 10, 44.4f- 28.
430AG-8. 5.H.7.30.


Aff. 44. E.3.10.


20,H,6,9.


Lib.3.


Vide Set .46 y. "Pl, em.A8 4
Li5.8.fol. i65. Alibami cafe
39. H.6.38.


(a) YF. 2. (ap. 3.
PL (em.aA84. dr 487.6.


Vids Se. 429.059. dre.


6.H.7.8.4.
Alsbams cafe whi fupra


Pl. Com fol.374.inSeignior
Zouches cafe et fol. 487.4
448-08 Nichels capt.


23.H.8.Taile Br.3 2-
35-H.8.Grant Br.150.
Vide 16.Elix. Dier 315.5.
Titulum,


41M pri. 41. E. 3. im⸗
Waffe83, 11.H.4.67-
13.H.2.16.. Pl.Cem.483.
Ter Dier 37. 11.8. 20.


4i E: 3:15.


E.N.B.60.H.41.E,3.Waft
83. 42. E. 3.18.


Capa.


clade the eftate (tt effe in conz
ucpances ; and thercfoze if
Tenant in fee Gmple make a
Leaſe fea yeares, and releafe
all big riaht in the lanb to the
Lefle auo his beires , the
E eftate in fee (imple pat
ett


Andfocommonip tn fines,
the right of the Land inclu⸗
deth and paſſeth the fate of
the Land, ag A. cognouit te-
nementa predicta effe ius ip-
fius B. &c. Andthe Statute
(a) fatth, lus faum defendere,
(Sobich tg )tatum ſaum. And
note that therets Iusrecupe-
randi, ius intrandi, ius haben-
di, iusretinendi , ius percipi-
endi, & ius poffidendi.

Title, properly (as forme
fap) is Shen a man hatha
lawtull caufe of entrie (nto
Lands ‘whereof another ts
{cifed, fos the which hee can
bauc no Action , ag title of
condition,titic of Moꝛtmaine
qc. Wut legallp this Swo2d
( Title )inciudch a right alfo,
ag pou {hall perccíne in many
places in Lictleton: and title
(s the moze general Swezd,foz


Of Difcontinuance:


bie del tenant en le
taile ct le renerfiond
le tatie nef pas en
le tenant en tatie,pur
ceo à tl auoít graunt
tout fon eftate et fon
Dot, ac, Ct file tes
nant à que Ic graunt
fuit fait fit toaft , te
tenant en le tatle ne
bugs auera breife De
taft,put ceo que nul
reuerſion eft en luy.
Mes ie reucrfion ct
le enheritance De le
taile, Durant le bicle
tenant en le tatle, eft
en abetance,ceftatca=
uoit , tantfolement
en le remembzance,
confideration , ct in=
tellígence De lalep,


Seël.650:


in taile, and the reuer-
fion of the taile is not
inthe Tenant in taile,
becaufe he hath gran-
ted all his eftate and
his right, &c. And if
the Tenant to whom


the’ grant was made
‘make wafte , the Te.


nant in taile fhall nor
hawe a Writ of waſte,
for that no reuerfionis
inhim., but the reuer-
fion and inheritance of
the taile during the
life of the Tenant in
taile is in abeiance,
thatis to fay, only in
the remembrance, c6-
fideration, and intelli-
gence of the Law.


euery right toa title, buteuerp title ig not ſuch a right for $obích an Action Ipeth, and theres
foze Titulus eftiufta caufa poffidendi quod noftrum eft, and fignífieth the meanes whereby a
man commethtoland, as hig title is bp fine 02 by fcoffment, ac. And when the WDlaintifcin
Arle maketh bimfelfe a title, tbe Cenant map fap, Veniat AfKfa fuper titulum, Swhich (s af
much to fay, ag open the title which the Plaintike hath mabe by that particular Conucpance,
Et dicitur titulus à tuendo, becaufe bp it be holdeth anb defendeth bis Land,an ag bpa releale
of artghta títlc is releafed, fo by releafe of a title a right is releaſed aifo, See moze hereof tr
Fitzherbert and Brookes Abatogements inthe title of Title.


€ /terefi,Intercfle is pulgarlp taken foa a terme oꝛ chattlereal,
and moze particularly foz afuture tearme, in Sohich cafe it is fate in picading that hee is pote
ſeſſed De intereffe terimni. Wut Ex vi termini fn legall vnderſtanding tt extendeth to Eftates,
Rights and Cities, that aman hath of, in, to, oz ont of Lanbs, ac. fox be is truly fato to hans
an íntercft tn them: and by the grant o£ totum intereffe fuum fn fach Lands ag well reuer⸗
fions ag polleftions in fee Ginpie hall paſſe Bud ali thefe Swords fingularip ſpoken are nomina


colle&iua; fos by the grant of totum ftatum fuum in Landg all bis Eſtates therein paſſe. Et
fic de ceteris.


€ Ne vrques auera briefe dewafte, &c. Bott is if Tenant fog life
be, theremapnder in taple , and he in theremapnbder velcafe to tbe Œenant fo; life, all big right
and fate (n tbe Land. iereby tt is fato in our Bokes, that the eftate of the Leſſee is mot ins
larged, but the releafe feructh to this purpofe te put the eſtate tatle (nte abcíance , fo as after
that he in the remapnder cannot hance an Action of waſte; vet in that cafe( ſauing refezmation )
the Helles oz life hath an cftate for the lifeof Cenant in taple expectant bpon bis owne life.
But if Cenant in fcerelcafe to his Tenant £o? life all bts vight, pet he hall haue an Action of
r2 And ik Tenant tn tatle mabe a Lenfe foy his owne life, bee (bat haue an Paton of

a (^ '


Sef,


Lib.3. OfDifcontinuance. Se#.651.652.653.654..


Section 651.


¶ | Gon & vn Cuefque alien fas if a Bifhop alien lands
terres que font parcel De (on which are parcell of his Bi-
Eueſquery a Deup.ceo eft on Dif- fhopricke and dic, this is a difcon-
continuance a (on fucceffoz, pur tinuanceto his fucceffor, becaufe
ceo que tite poit enter, mes eff hecannot enter, but is put to his
mis afon beeife Dc Ingreffu fine writ of De Ingre[fu fine aſſenſu ca-
affenfu capituli. pisi.
Oẽ this fafficient hath bene ſaid( how tbe Law ſtandeth at this dap )bctogc in thi Chapter,


Seth. 652.


€ [Gem fon Dear alien terres
queux il ad en Droit De lup et

fon Chapiter, 3 mozuft, fon fuccct-
f02 poit enter, Mees (i le cane et
folc fcí(ic come € dzoit fon z2cans
tp Donque fon alienation eft Di(-
continuance a fon fucceffor come


ett Dit abcuant,


Lfoit a Deane alien lands

which he hath in right of
him and his Chapter and dieth,
his fucceffor may enter. But if
the Deane bec fole feifed as in
right of his Deanry,then his ali-
enation is a difcontinuance to
his fucceffor as is {aid before.


CH alfo that which was neccfTarp (g before faíb in this Chapter, and Littletons


one $0030g are plaine andeutdent.


Sed. 653.654.655 & 656.


C ean peraduenture afcung
boíilont arquer et Dire, que ff
$n Abbe ct fon Couent font fei-
fies en lour demeſne come De fee
De certaineterresa eux et alour
ſucceſſors 2c. ct Labbe fans af-
fent à (on Couent alien metes
leg terres a n auter et Deuie,
ceo eft bn Difcontinuance a fon
fucce itor, ac.


DE peraduenture fome will

argue and fay that if an Abbot
and his Couent bee feifed in their
demefne as of fee of certaine lands
to them and to their fucceffors,&c.
andthe Abbot without the affent
of his Couent alienthe fame lands
to another and die, this is a dif-
continuance to his fueceffor,
&c.


Seit. 654.


€ E Cr melme ie realon ils boi-
lent Dive, que lou bti Bean

et Chapter font feifies De certain
tettea cuc ct alour ſucceſſoꝛs,ſi
le Dean alien meſme la terre,#c,
ceo


B: the fame reafon they will

fay, that where a Deane and

Chapter are feifed of certaine

landsto them and their fucceffors,

if the Deane alien the fame lands,
S{ff 2


34.6


22.E.4 sit, Faoffment, &
ais 29,
a1, E, 4.85.06.


Lib,


(ap.
cco ferroit bn difcontinuance à
fon fucceffoz iffint i fon fuccel=
foz ne poítenter,ac, À ceo poit
eftre reſpondue que il p ad grand
— penter leg deux cas
es.


Of Difcontinuance.


$ed.655.656.


&c. this fhall be a difcontinuance
to his fucceffor,fo as his fucceflor
cannot enter,&c. To this it may be
anfwered, that there is a great
diuerfitie betweene thefe two
cafes.


Seit.655.


€( 3t quant bn Abbe & F Co-
uent font fetfies, becoze
fils font Diffetfie, Labbe aucta
aflite en fon nofih Demcfnoe, fang
nofiner Ic Couent.ac, Ct ſi aſcun
voile fuer Præcipe quod reddat,
&c.Demelines les terres quant
iis fueront en le maine Labbe et
Couent il couient que tiel action
real foit fue enucts Labbe fole-
ment fans nofme Ia Couent,pur
ceo q̃ touts font mozts perfoug
en la ley, fozfque Labbe que eft
lefoucraígneac, Et ceo eft per
caufe del foucraigntie; Car au-
terinent tl ferrott fozfque come
bu deles auters Moignes de le
Couent, zc,


Or when an Abbot,and the Co-

uent are feifed, yet if they bee
diffeifed, the Abbot fhall haue an
affife in bis owne name without
naming the Couent,&c. And ifa-
ny will fue a Pracépe quod reddat,
@c.of the fame lands when th
were in the hands of the Abbor
and Couent, it behoueth that fuch
action reall be fued againft the Ab-
bot only without naming the Co-
uent, becaufe they are all dead per-
fons in Law, butthe Abbot who
is the foucraigne,&c.and this is by
reafon of the foueraignty ; For o-
therwife he fhould bee butas one
of the other Monkes of the Co-
uent, &c.


Sect. 656.


€ Mé&s bn Dean etle Chap-
ternefont mozts pions
enlalep,ac. cae chefcun De eut
poít auer action per (op € Diuers
cafes. Et de tiels terres ou te-
neméts à le Beane ct Chapter
ont en common,ac, fils forent
Diffeifies, le Deane et Chapter
aueront bn alfífe, et nemp le
Deane fole,ec, Eth auter votle
auct action real De ticls terres
ou tenements enuersle Deane,
ſec. il couient De fuce enuers le
Deane et chapter, et nemp en-
uers le Deane (olc,ac. et iftint tl

appiert


BY: Deane and Chapterare not
dead perfons in Law,&c. for
euery of them may haue an action
by himfelfe in diuers cafes. And
of fuch lands or tenements as the
Deane and chapter haue in com-
mon,&c. if they bee diffeifed, the
Deane and Chapter fhall haue an
affife,and not the Deane alone, &c.
And if another will haue anaction
reall for fuch lands or tenements
againft che Deane,&c. hemuft fue
againft the Deane and Chapter,
and notagainft the Deane alone,
&c. and fo there appeareth a


Lib.3. Of Difcontinuance. — 568.657.658.


appiert grand Diuerfitie peren= great diuerfitie betweene the two
terles deux cales,rc, cafes, &c.


€ Helſe atc apparantanb nob nocrplanatíon, Sautngin the 655. Section mention
| ig made of the Pracine quod reddat Which inthis place (s intended of a reall actiow
Swherebpland{s demanded, and is fo called ofthe Words (n. euery fuch weit.

And the rcafon of this, diueruty betweene the cafe of the 29bbot and Couent, and Deane
and Chapter ts,for that (as hath beone fato ) the Monkes ave regular, and cíuillp dead, and
the Chapter are fecular, and perfong abieand capable in Law, Wut bp the poliicp of Law
the Pbbot himfclfe ( yeretcrmedthefoueraigne ) albeit be bea Monke and regular, pet hath
he capacity and ability to fue and befued, to enfcoffe, giue, demiſe and leaſe to others, and to
purchafe and take from others, £oz other ile they which right haue Mhouidnot haue thetr lao
fall remedp, noz the bonfe remedie again anp ether that dtd them $o20ng, neither conto the
boule without fuc) capaciticand ability tand, And the Couent haue no other ability 02 cas
pacítie, but enip toatfent to cltates made to the Abbot, anb to cltatcs made by bim, Sobich fos


neccilittes fake,though thep be ctutllp dead, they map doe.


Sed.


Tein file Matter Dur Dof-
pitall difcontinue certaine
terre De fon Dofpítall; fon
fuccefloz ne pott entrer, mes eft
mis a fon betefe de ingreffu fine
aflenfu confratrum & confororum
&c. €t touts tiels beiefes plein-
ment appearot en Kegiſter, tc,


€


657.


A Lfo ifthe Mafter of an Hofpi-
tall difcontinue certaine land
of his Hofpitall, his fucceflor can-
not enter, but is putto his writ of
De ingreffu. fine affenfu. confratrum
à d d n 7t fuch
writs fully appeare in the Regi-
fter, &c.


Dis mul alfo be vnderſtod Where the Maſter of the hoſpitall hath foleanb difting
policiions, and not wherehe and his bꝛethꝛen are ſeiſed as a bodp politique aggre⸗


gate ofmanp, And here Littleron (ag diners times befooe ) Doth cite the Regitter.


Sect. 658. -


«| &em ft terre foit leffe a bn
home pur terme De fa bie, le
remainder a bn auteren Ie taíle,
fauant le reuerfion al leffoz, et
puis celup en le remainder Dif-
{ciff le tenant à terme De bie, et
fait vn feoffmenta bn auter en
fec, ct puts mozutt fans iffue, et
le tenant a terme De bie mozuft,
il ſemble en cett cag;d celup en la
reuerſion bien puit enter fur le
fcoffce, nur ceo que celup en le
remainder que fift le feoffiment,
ne frit vnque lei fie en Ie taile per
force De meſme le remainder ac.


A Le if land bee lett to a man
4 3 forterme of his life, the re-
mainder to another in taile fauing
the reuerfion to the Leffor, and af-
terhe in the remainder diffeifeth
the Tenant for terme of life, and
maketh a feoffment to another in
fee, and after dyeth without iffue,
andthe Tenant for life dyeth. It
feemeth in this cafe that hee in
the reuerfion may well enter vpon
the Feoffee, becaufe hee in the re-
mainder which made the feoff-
ment was neuer feifed in taile by
force of the fame remainder,&c.
Sfff 5 Reve


34-7


Vid.Se®,290. ;
8.E.3.27. 11. H. 4. 84.
QE, 4.86. 11H.7.32,


Lib.3.


Vid. Sel. 637. $93. $96. $27.
401.640.641.
Vid.Set. 637,


(1225-Af B. 4 35 AF pl
11,36,E. 3.69.11. H. 4.50.4.
M. E, 3.17 E sot, Remmitter
63. 4.6.3. 1$.


(b)¥ 328.519. dr 659. t.
34-H.8. 000. Remitter Br, «9.
MAE. 3 d T4009, 32, 38.


py


Cap.n.


Of Difcontinuance.


Se. 659.


bpon an eftate £02 life, peshis Seokement Swosketh no Difcontinuance, wherein


€ H5 ít apptaretb, Ghat albeít the Feoſtoz hath an Cflate Taile in him expectant


Littleton doth adde a limitation to that which in thts Chapter he had generally fato,
viz. hat an Eftate Calle cannot be difcontinued, but Sohere he that maketh the Diſcontinu⸗
ance Sas once fcífcb bp Force of the Taile, Which is to be bnderfted when bee ts fctfcb of the
Jftebolb and Anberitance ofthe GHate in Catie,t not Sobere he is fcifco of a Remainver oꝛ a


RenerGon erpedant bpon à
tefpected in Law,


Freehold : Which Freehold (as often hath ben fapd is euer much


Cuar.i2.
€ H' ont Duthor


bauíng next bee
foe treated of a
Difcontinuance, berp aptip
begiineth this Chapter with
a defcription of a Remitter.
¶ Remitter eff vn
antient terme enla Ley,
andis derinedof tbc Latpne
Uerbe Remittere, Which hath
tio fignificattons, either, Co
reftoje and fct bp agatne, o1 to
ceafe. Gherefore a Remitter
is an opcratton in Law bpon
the meting of an anticnt
tight remediable, anda latter
ftate in onc pcrfon wherethere
ig no follie in bim, whereby
tbc antient right ts reftozed
anbfct bp againe,andthe new
defeafible eftate cealed and
banífbcb awap. Andthereg-
fon hereot ts, fox that the lao
preferreth a fure and conftant
right, though (t bee little, bes
fore a great Eftate by wꝛong
anb defeafible , and tberetoze
the firff and moze antient ig
the moft fare and moze worthy
title ; Quod pn’ eft,verius eft,
& quod prius eft tempore,po-
tius eftiure: (a) Therefore
ww níce Mokes in ſtead of
Kemitter, fap, Chat he ig En
fon primer eſtate, oꝛ en fon me-
lior droit, 02 En fon melior E-
ftate, o1 the like.


€ Lou home ad deux


Titles. Aeere this
$0010 ( Titles) (s taken tn the
laraeft fence, inciuding rights,
fos betug properip taken (b)
as in cafe of a condition mots
maine, aflentte a Bauiſher,


Of Kemitter.


Emitter ẽ bn
€ R antiét term
en la Lep, et eſt lou
home ad deux titles
aterres outents, 9.
bn pilus antient title,
et bn auter title plus
Darrein, et (fl bient a
la terre per le pluis
Datreine title, vncore
la Lepluy adludgera
eins per force dl plui
eigne title, purceog
le pluis cígne tite c(t
le pluíg fuce title, et
pluis dignetitle, Ct
Donque quant home
eft adiudge eins per
korce à fon eigne titt,
ceo efta Iup Dit bit re⸗
mitter,purces quela
le» luy mitter Deftre
cins en la terre per le
pluis eigne et fure
title, &»tcome tenát
ent taile Difcontinua
la taile et puis tl Dif=
ſeiſiſt $ Difcontinuce,
et iſſint moauft ſeiſſe.
per que les teneméts
Difcendont a fon iflue
ou cofine, inberitable


pet


Sed. 659.


Emitter is ananti-

ent terme in the
Law, and is where a
man hath two titles to
Lands or Tenements,
viz.one amore antient
title, and another a
more latter title, and
if he come tothe land
bya latter Title, yet
the Law will adiudge
him in by force of the
elder title, becaufe the
elder title is the more
fure and more worthie
Title. Andthen when
a man is adiudged in
by force of his elder
title, this is fayd a Re-
mitterin him, forthat
the Law doth admit
him tobein the Land
by the elderand furer
Title. As if Tenaunt
in Taile difcontinue
the Taile, and after
hee diffeifeth his Dif-
continuee and fo di-
eth feifed, whereby
the Tenements dif-
cend to his Iffue or co-
fine igheritable by


Lib.3.


pet force De 1e aif,
en cett cate, ceo eft a
lupaque les Tene⸗
ments DifcenDont q
ad Doit per fozce De
le Tale bn remitter
ale Œaile, pur cco q
le Ley lup mitte et
adiudge Defté cing p
force de E tatle que eſt
fon cígne title, cac Gil
ferroit eins per force
De Le Difcent,Donques
le Diſcontinuee puc
iffoit auer Briefe de
Entre fur diffeifin en le
Per, enucrs lup,et re⸗
coucrolt les tenemts
et fes Dammages, ac,
Des entar que tl eft
eins en for remitter
perforce Dele TŒaile,
letitle et leintereft le
diſcontinuee eſt tout
ouſterment anient et
defeat, at.


Of Remitter.
force of the Tayle : In
this cafe this is to him
to whom ‘the. Tene-
ments difcend , who
hath right by force of
the Tayle, a Remitter
tothe Tayle, becaufe
the Law fhall put and
adiudge him to bee in
by force of the Tayle,
which is his elder Ti-
tle: for if hee fhould
becin by force of the
difcent, thenthe Dif-
continuce might haue
a Writ of Entrie Sar
Diffeifia in the Per a-
gainft him, and fhould
recoucr the Teneméts
& his dammages, &c.
but in as muchas he is
in hisremitterby force
of the taile,the title &
intereft ofthe Difcon-
tinuee is quite taken a-
way and defeated, &c.


Set.660.


And thelike, there is no remíts
tet Wrought onto them, bez
«aufe thefe are but bare titles
of Entrie,foz the which ne Aa
tion to ginen,bat a Remittee
mutt besoa preccdent right:
And Lit. in this Chapter
onttetball hie cafes onelp of
emitters, to Rights reinez
Diable


€ Er un auter Title


pluis darreine, cc. Pere
ts to bee obferued, Chat an
Ettate mut Hoke a 1Remit-
ter to. an anttent right , Fo
albeít two rights doe difcend,
there can be no emitter, bez
caufeoneright cannot woꝛke
a Remitter to another : Éoz re=
gularip to eucríe remíttcr there
be two incidents, viz. an an⸗
tient right and a Defeafible
eftate of freehold comming
together,

€ Le pluis eigne title
eff le pluis fare Title , e


pluis digne title. So
as the eldeſt title (8 woꝛthily
(as bath bene fapd ) prefers
red, becanfe tt (8 the mozefure
and moze woꝛthis.

Œ Sicome Tenant en


Taile diféontinne le taile,


ov. Pere out Authog


accozding te bis accuftomed


manner, to flinftrate bis defcription puttethan example of a emitter, obere the Law picfer-
reth the antient cftate bp right, before a new Eſltate deke auble. Bud this Kemitter (8 wrought
bpan Œffatecaft bpon the Flue in Carte bp diſcent, Which is an Pc in Law,and the difcent
of theland in poffellton, and the right of Eſt te Catic difcend together.


€ Eff tout oufterment anient & defeat, cic. Here be too things im⸗


lieb and to be vnderſtood: Firſt, That this Remttter is Wrought in this cafe bp operation of


Haw bpon the Freehold tn Law difcended without any entrie Secondip, Chatthe Law fo
fanoureth a Remitter, (being a reftozing to right) that tf the Diſcontinuee bean Enfant 02 4
Feme covert, and Cenantin Œavie after a Diſcontinuance Dí'tctfe them and die fetled, the Iſ⸗
fue (ball be remitted Svithont any refpect of the pꝛiuiledge of Cnfancie oy Coucrture,and theres
fozcour Authoꝛ fapb, Letitle & intereft le Difcontinuee eft tout ouftcrmenr ament & defeat,


Œ Donques le Difcontinuee, crc. Heere is a veafon addedin this


2 particular Cafe, that ſitteth not other cafes of 1Remitter ; for inthis cafeanb many other , the
'  AXa$sotbat abbozreth Suits of brratíon, doth auopdcircuttte of Acton, foz the Rule te, Cir-


cuitus cít euitandus.


€ [Tem file tense
en Caple en-


Sec. 660.


Bite if Tenant in
Tayle infeoffe


feoffa on fits his Sonne in Fee,


€ Ur Buther having
pnt one example
Sobere both the
Rights diſcend together noſv


vuts anorber example we
ie


19.H.6.50.98.45. tit. Enire
Cong. 3. T1 (em 246.0.


19.H,6,61.62.


1I.E.4. 1.


11. E.3. tic. Mt 5.4-E. 4.35
11.R.2,Bar.243. 30.€.3.8,
6.5.3.7. 19.H.6,63.34.E.5
70. 14.H.4.27. 10, H.7.11,
F.N.2.Mefne & Weft.


Temps € .1. Rerndg. 13, 11. E.3
Age 5:38. E. 5.24 40 E. g^
4i AE 4-19.


Lib.5.


37. H.8.e. vo.of V/es.3 $.H.8
Dy.54.5.6.E.6.45.77.1.dr 2
P.dr M.116.3.cr 3, P. M,
329.191.38. H 8.23.6.

PL.Com. Amy Town|bend: cafe


fe.
34. H.8. Nt. Remit. Br.4o.


Th (em vb fep,


(ap-2.


the Iſſue in Capyle claimeth
bp pnrcljafe in the life of Ges
nant in Gatie,and the antient
right difcendeth after to the
fame 3 (Ine. |
€ Car coment que
tiel Heire fuit de pleine
age al temps del mort,


ec. The reaſon is,
Becaulſe no Follic can beg ad⸗
indged in the 3infant at the
time of the acceptance of the
Feoffement. Cherefoze the
La refpecteth the time of the
Feoffement, and not the time
of the death : and albeit beo
might haue Wained the efkate
Swhich bec had by the Feolfe⸗
ment at bis fullage, vct bere
it apbearctb, that thertght of
the Gate tatle diftending to
bimetther within age, 02 of
full age, fhail worke a Res
mitter in htm, Co? that the wat⸗
ucr of the (tate ſhould fauc bin
to bis loſſe and pꝛeiudice.
Since Littleton wꝛote,and
after the &»tatuteof 27. H 8.
cap.10. í£ Œenant in (Gayle
make a Feoffement in fee to
the fc ef bis Flue becing
within age, and bis Hepzes,
and dpeth,and the right of the
Cate Taple difcend to the
Flue being within age,pet he
{5 not remitted , becaufe the
Statute erecuteth the poſſeſ⸗
fion tn fuco plite manner and
forme ag the bfc Mag limited:
Et fic de fimilibus, fo ag there
isa great change of Remit⸗
terg fince Litticton wꝛotr.
Wut í£ tbe Flue in Gayle
in thatcafe &vatuc the Poſſeſ⸗
fion, and bring a Fozmedon
in tbe Difcender, and reconer
againtt the freoffees, hee fbail
thereby be remitted to the Œs
fate Œaile, otherwife the
ands may be fo incumb2ed,
as the Iſſue in Gayle ſhould
bc at a great inconuenience:
butifno fozmoon be brought,
tf that Fine dieth, his lue
fhail bec remitted, bccanfe a
ſtate infe fimplcat tbe Com⸗
mon Law dtf{cendeth bnto


€ Ejfeant de pleine
ace il charge per [on fait,


Of Remitter,


enfee, ou fon Cofine
inhevitable per force
be letaile;le quel fits
oucofinal temps de
feoffement eft deins
ageet puts le tenant
ent taile Deuia. et ce=
lup aque le feoffemẽt
fuit fait eft fon heyre
per force De le Œaile,
ceo eft bn vemitter al
heire en le tatlea que
le feoffment fuit fait,
Car coment que Du-
rant la biele Tenãt
en le tatle que fitt le
4reoffement,tíel heire
fetta adiudge eins p
force Dele feoffinent,
bucoze apres la mozt
le tenant enle taple,
Ibeite ferra adiudge
eins per force De le
tatle,et nemp p force
Dele Feoffment, Car
coment que tiel hetre
fuit De pleine age al
temps De le mozt De
le Tenaunt en le
Gaile que fit le
Feoffement, ceo ne
fait afcun matter, fi
Ibt fuit deins age al
téps Del fcoffimt fait
alup, Ct ſi tiel heire
eſteant deins age al
temps De tíel Feoffe⸗
ment, vient al pleine
age viuant le Tenãt
en le Taile, que itt E
Feoffement, et iſſint
eſteant de pleine age,
il charge per fon fait
mefme la Terre oue


bu


Setl.660.


or his Cofine inheri-
table by force of the
Taile, which Sonne or
Cofine at the time of
the Feoffment is wich-
in age , and after the
Tenantin Taile dieth,
and hee to whome
the Feoffement was
made is his heire by
force of the Taile,this
is a Remitter to the
heire in taile to whom
the Feoffement was
made : for albeit that
during the life of the
Tenant in Tayle who
made the Feoffement,
fuchheire fhallbeead-
iudged in by force of
the Feoffement, yet af-
ter the death of Tenant
in Taile,the heire fhall
beadiuged in by force
ofthe Taile, & not by
force of the feoffment.
For although fuch
heire were of full age
at the time of the
death of the Tenant in
Taile who made the
Feoffment, this makes
no matter, if the heire
were withinageat the

time ofthe feoffement

made vnto him. And

if {uch heire beeing

within age at the time

of fuch feoffmét, com-

meth to full age, living

thetenant in tayle that

made the feoffement,

& fo being of full age

he charges by his deed


Lib.3.
br common De pa-
Ture, ou oue on cent
charge, a puis lete-
nant en le tatle mos
rutt, oze il femble que
le terre eft diſcharge
Del common, et dele
rent, purceo quele
heire eſt eins De au-
ter eſtate en laterre,
que il fuit al temps
Dele charge fait, en=
tant quc ileften fon
remitter per force de
te tayle, & iftint le-
ftate , que tlauoit al
temps De Ie charge,
eft outterinet Defeat,
aC,


woꝛthy of obferuation, koꝛ ít op
PE the beíte of the Witleifes diſſeile the Dirteifor
Grantos fbali hold tt difchargeD ;


feifee dieth , the


Of Remitter.


the fame Land witha
common pafture or
with arent charge,and
after the Tenant in
tayle dieth,now it fee-
meth that the Land is
difcharged of the Co-
mon, and of therent
for that the heire isin
of another Eftate in
the Land then hee was
at the time of the
charge made , in as
much as hee isinhis
Remitter by force of
thetayle, and fo the
eftate which hee had
at the time of the
charge is vtterly de-
feated, &c.


| Setl.660.661,
de. Che ceafor ts


becaule the Grantoz had not
any right of the eſtate in tatle
inim atthe time of the grant
but only the eftate in tee ſim⸗
ple gained bp tbe fcoffment,
Shich(ag Littleton berefattb)
is wholy defeated. Bnd the
ffate of the land out of which
therent iſſued, being defeated
the vent is defeated alfo,

But (€ Tenant in taple
make a Leaſe £o) life where⸗
bp be gaineth a new reucrf=
on in fes , fo long as Œenant
fo; like lineth,and be granteth
a rent charge out of the Re⸗
uerſion, anb after Tenant
for life biet ; Soberebp the
Gzantoz becommeth Cenant
in tapis againe, andthe Res
uerfion in fee defeated,pet bez
caufe the Gꝛantoꝛ had a right
of the entapic in yim, clot hed
Sith a defeafible fee fimple,
Drent charge remapneth ged
againt him, but not agatnft
bigilue, Which btuerfittetg


encth the reafon of many Cafes.


tinto him, and therefore be ts remitted.
Spo tf the father diſleile the Szandfather and gtantetha Rent charge, and dieth, now is the


entry of the Grandfathet taken away,


and he ball auoid the charge. So as where our Authoz putteth his example of afa taple; it


holdech alfo tn cafe of a fee imple.


Vn common de paſtur


teth bts cafe of things granted out o
Dented, 02 Deed pollmake a Leaſe for veares of the Land.


and grant a rent charge,
fo; there a new right of entrte both dilcend


and then the Di&


if after tbe Grandfather dieth, the Sonne ts remitted,


e, ou vn rent charge, dre. Bere Littleton put=
f the Land. But Sobat (f the (uc at full age bp Deed in⸗
,amb after by the Death o£ Œenant in


taylcbe ts remitieb, Sohether (ball he auotde the Reale orno. And tt is holden be (ball not, bes


caufe {tie made of the Land itfeife ,
then it (c in thecafe of agrant of a


$0258 in anothcr place.


QT La terre eff difcharge del rent ec
matertalip becaufe the Whole grant is not thereb
Rent charge , fo? che Grantee fall haue noth


the perfon of the O2antoz.


€ att bn prin⸗
cipall caufe put
que ttel beite en
leg cates auandits &
auters cafes ſem⸗
blables (erra Dit en
fon remitter, eſt pur
ceo que np ad aſcũ
perfon enuers que il


Setlion 661.

‘ALP a principal]

caufe why fuch
hcire in the Cafes a-
forefaid , & other like
cales fhall bee faid in
his Remitter , is for
that there is not any
perfon againft whom
he may fue his writ of


andthe Landis become bp the Leaſe in another plight ,
Bent charge , Which 31 gather out sf ont Authors owne


.Litrleton Doth adde tbefe woꝛds
p auspded, but the Land difcharged of the
{thtanving a weit of Annuitte and charge


€ N — principali
V cauſe pur ico
dre. Bnd of this opi-
níon (g (d) Littleton (it ont
WBokes.


€ nad aſcun per fon
enners que, Orc. ficome
shanott loialment recover
me[me la terre vers UB
auter, dre. Were itis


poit fuer fon briefe B Fermedon. For — to bs vnd eraod that regulars
t ig


349


*


11 M. J. a1. Bdrichti caf.


33.4.8. Diet 51.6.


Vide Sc. a89-


Lib. 2. fel. 36.5. Wards cafes


(4) 12. E.4. 20.


A1, E. 3. 18. 11. H. 4. fo^


Lib


Bib.3 fol.3. the Marqueffeof
Wincheklers cafe,


$.H.7.55.


"Britton fel. 126.


(c) BraB. lib. a. fel. 243.4.


8.8.3. Qusre Imp.199.
— 14. M. 6.1 5.16.
8.H.6.17, 33.H.6.1 4.
F.XZ. 35.8. & 36. F.
34.E 3 "Diftent . 16,
33.H.8. Dier 48.6.


Capiz.


lp a man (bali not bee remtts
tedto a remebilelle, fog
the &obích be can banc no cs
tion fox Litilcton here faith,
that there ts no perfon as
gaint whom tbe (fue when
becommeth to the land with=
ont folly map bring bis Aci⸗
on anb ſayth alfo,that this ig
the paincipall caufe of the
Bemitter, for netther an Bcz
tion Without a right, noza
right without an Action can
make a Remitter. As t€ tea
nant (n taple fuffer a common


Of Remitter. >


Formedon, Car en=
uets lup mefine, fine
poit fuer, e (1 ne poít
fuer enuers nul au-
ter, cat nul auter eft
tenant Del frankte=
nement , et pur cel
caute la lep lup ad⸗
iudge eing en fon re=
Mitter, S, € tiel plite,
ficome il auoit loíal-
ment vecouet mefme
la terre enuers bn
auter,ac,


Se#.662.


himfelfe he caáor fi ue,
and hee caaror fue
againft any other , for
none otheriis Tenant
of the freehold; and
for this caufethe Law
doth adiudge him in
his Remitter, s. in
fuch plite; as if hee
had lawfully-tecoue-
red the fame Land a-
gainft another, &c.


FEB. purchafe an Aduowſon and fuffereth an tfurpatíon anh fite moneths to pafic, and


Æ enant íntaylc of a
Genant in Tapie dteth,


appenbant, oz appurtenant,
tinueth the Mannoz, ac,


principall.


(€) Item, excipi poteft , &c. quamuis ius habeat in tenemento &
cuperare debet tenementum ad quod pertinet aduocatio,


Ging to bímfelfe the


Mannoz With the appurtenances, A.
Aduowſon,
102 is conſequentiy remitted to the


anno? whereunto an Douowfon (s
nuance, the Difcontinuæ granteth the Aduowſon to Œ
the Flue (s not remitten

ad no Adion to reconer the
the Aduowſon Was appendant, Bnd fo it, {8 of


Aduowſon before


Cenant in tapledteth,


0 B. anb bts hetres,
$ remebíle(Iz, viz-a right Without an Brion,
appendant mabeit a Difcontis
tenant ín Œapie and hie betteg,
to the buosofon ,
hee recouered the anne $obertunto
all other 3inberítanceg , rega
a man fball newer becremittedto anp of
Spbercunto thep are tegatbant


Car nul ne poet claimer droit en les appurtenances ne


B Meth,


» appendant,
enles accefloricg que nul droit aden [e


rezinfeoffcth
bis (lue being remitten to the
2I ouotofen, althonah at that time it ag fenered From the


bis betre is not temits


becaule tbe Idu⸗


tbant,
them befoze hee reconz-
9? belonging,


Pertinentijs, primo[ree


& tunc poftea przfentet & non ante, &
> anno Regis Henrici tertio in comitatu


Manno. Hott ts in the fame cale tf Œenant in taple had bane difleifed , and the Defletfoz


fuffer an blurpation
uowſon.


t]
genres,
et le feme


file, & Difcontinua le
moꝛuſt feilie , oꝛele


Tem (t tette foit taile a bn
homme a a (a feme,
beires ð lour deux corps etis
les queux ont iſſue file,
deup, et le baron prent
auterfeme, et ad íffueon autet
täple,æpuis
diſſeiſie ie Difcontinuee et iffint
terre Difcen-


Sed. 662.


À


et ales


Dera


Lfo if Land bee entailed toa
manandto his wife, andto
the heires of their two bo-
dies begotten,
daughter, and the wife dieth, and
the husband taketh another wife,
and hath iffue
and difcontinue the taile,and after
he diffcifeth the Difcontinuee and


who haue ifluea


another daughter,


Lib.3.
Deraales deut files, Ct en ceti


cafe quant al cígne file, que eff


inheritable per force dele tapte,
ceo neſt bn remitter fortque Dele
Moity, €t quant al auter moitp.
el eft mis a fuer fon action de
Formedon enuers fa foer, Car
en ceſt cas les deux foers ne font
pas tenants en parcenary, meg
font tenants en common, pur ceo
que tis font cing per Diners ti=
ties, Cat lun focr eft eins en fon
remitter per force De le taile quát
Aceoquealuy aftiert, et Jauter
foer eft eins quant a ceo que a
lup affiert en fee imple per E Dif-
cent fon pier, ac,


Of Difeontindánci


Se8. 665;
fo die feifed, now the Land fhall


, difcend ‘to the two Daughters;


And in this cafe as to the eldeft
daughter , who is inheritable by
force of the tayle,this is no remit-
ter butof the moitie, Andasto
the other moitie fhee is put to fue
her action of Formedonagainft her
fifter. For in this cafe is two fi-
fters are not tenants in patcenarie,
butthey are Tenants in common,
forthat they arc inbydiuers titles.
Forthe onc fifteris ininher remit-
ter by force of the entaile, asto
that which to herbelongeth, and
the other fifter is in as to that to
her belongethin fee fimple by the
difcent of her father, &c.


EC Eo ne[l remitter forſque pur le moñtie,dre. eve Littleton putteth a
cafe where tbc iſſue in tatle fhal be remitted to a moitp,becanfe but a moitie of the Land
Difcended bnto ber,aud there cannot be anprensttter,bat £02 fo much as commeth tothe


{fue bp difcent, oz bp amp other meanes without his folly, and in this cafe bp atin Law the
Coparcenarte ts defeated fos the Daughters are in by feucrall Titles, viz the eideſt baugbterig
Æenant in taple per formam doni by the remttter of the one moitie, and the poungeft feifed (n


foe Gmple bp difcent of tbe other moitie, agatnft Sobor the other (itcr in taple map bauc her


Formedon,


cr? Meſme te


manner eft, fi
tenant en taile en-
feoffa fon beire ap-
parant en le taíle c-
fteant iheire Deing
age, et bn auter ioin⸗
tenant en fee,et le te⸗
nant & tayle mo2utt,
ore heire ett taile eft
enfon remitter quat
alun moítp,et quant
a lautet moítp tet
mis à fon beiefe De
Formedon, 8€,


tothe whole but to the halfe, for Gr hee taketh the fe imple,
by operation of Law, and therekore can remit him batto am
bene faid inthe Chaptcrof Jopntenants,


Set. 663.


[^ the fame manner
it is if tenant iritaile
enfeoffe his heire ap-
parant in tayle, (the
Heire beeing within
age)and another ioyn-
tenant in fee , and the
Tenant in tayle dieth,
now the heire eritayle
is in his Remitter as
to the one moitie, and
as tothe other moitie,
hee is putto his Writ
of Formedon , &c.


Œtttz


ET Ebire, &c. ef
en fon vemitter
quant a lun moitie, &c.


Hereby it appeareth, that
albeit topntenants bee feifen
pro indiuifo per my & p tout


350 |


44-E. 3.36. 13. N.6. 45.


Pet each of the batb in fubges pj, $e. 39$.


ment of Law but arightte
a mottie, & tbercfoze the iſſue
in taple in this cafe ig remite
ted but to a moítp ¢ (s tenant
ín Comon but With che other
Feoke. And fo tt is t£ the
3D(fcontinue after the death
of Genant in taple wake a
Charter of feoffment to the
iſſue in taple being Within age
bo bath right, and to a
Granger in fe,and make luce
tle to the 3infant (n rame of
both: tbc {lue (a not remitted


€ after the Remitrer ts wzought
oftie, But of this futficient heath


Sef.


Lib.


40.E.3.44. 18.€.4.25.


(opa.


Of Remitter.


Sed.664 665.


Seflion 664.


€ Jai tefien tale enfeotfa

fon beíte apparant, Ibeite
efteant De pleine age al temps De
feoffment, et puis le teft en taile
mozutt, ceo neft remitter al bett,
pur ceo que il fuit fa folly que tl
cfteant de pleine age boile pꝛen⸗
bac tiel feoffment.ac, Mes tiel
folly ne poit eftre adiudge en
Ibeire eftedt deins age al temps
del feoffment,æc,


Ale if Tenant in taile enfecffe
his heire apparant, the heire
being of full age at the time of
the feoffment, and after Tenant in
taile dieth,this is no remitter tothe
heire, becaufe it was his folly
that being of full age hee wou
takefuch feoffment,&c. but fuch
folly cannot bee adiudged in the
heire being within ageat the time
of the feoffment,&c.


ftoz, pests be thereby ( befides bis one ) fabíet during bis life to all charges and


€ B? this Feoſftment albeit the beire apparant bathfome bencfit in the life of his Ance⸗


incumbzances made 0? fufferco bp his Anceſtoꝛ. Bnd therefore our Buthoz faith
Swell, Que il fuit fun folly que il efteant de pleine age voile prender tiel feoffment, but foilp hali
not be tudged in one within age in refpect of big tender peares,an Swant of experience,


€ €re Littleton put=
teth a cafe Shere
the bufband Soítte
tn age bp the intermarriage
map bee remitted albett hee
gaineth but a freehold during
the Couerture cnauter droit.
Bifo here is to bee obferz
ned that the eftate Sobich
doth in this cafe Morte the
Remitter could not baue
centinuance after the dec
ceafe of the Wife, Andfoon
the other Goe,tf the bufband
makea Difcontinuanceand
take backe an eftate to bim
and bro Wife, during the life
of the hufband,thisis a Rec
miter tothe wite prefentip
aibaít the eftate is not bp the
limítatton to haue Continue
ance after the beceafe of the
bufbanb, which cafe is pros
ucdbpthe reafon o£ the cafe
Which our Authoz here put=
teth, And bere our. Author
obferueth the dinerfity when
the nufband is Within age,
and ben be (s of full age,
fon Swben hee ts Within age
nofollp can be adiudged in
hlun, as (a this Chapter bath
dene often fafo,


Sect. 665.


«I em fi tenant en

taile enfeoffa bn
feme en fee,et moruſt,
et fon iſſue deins age
prent mefme la feme
afeme,ceo eft bn re-
mitt al enfant deins
age, etla feme dongs
nadrien, put ceo que
le baron et fa feme
font foziquecome bn
perfonen ley. Ct en
ceft cas le baron ne
poit fuer betefe De
Formedon, finon que
ilbotloit fuer enuers
lup inefrit,le quel fec-
voit enconucntent, et
put cel caufc la lep
adiudgera ibeite en
fon remitter,pur ceo-
que nul folly poit eftt
adiudge en up, efteat


beíng


Lfo if Tenant ia

taille enfeoffe a
woman in fec, and dy-
eth,and his iffue with-
in age taketh the fame
womanto wife, this is
3 Remitter to the in-
fant within age,and the
wife then hath no-
thing, for that the huf-
band and his wife are
but as one perfon in
Law. Andinthis cafe
the husband cannot fue
awrit of Formedon,vn-
leffe he will fue againft
himfelfe,which frould
be inconuenient, and
for this caufe the Law
adiudgeth the heire in
his Remitter, for that
no folly can bee ad-
iudged in him being


Lib.3.


being age al temps
Defpoufels,æc, Ce (i
Ibeite foít en fon ve-
mitter per force Dele
taile, il enſuiſt per
reafon, q̃ la feme nad
riens,tc, Car entant
que le baron et fa fem
font come bn perton,
la terre ne poit eftre
feuere per moities, et
pur cel caufe le baron
eft en fon remitter De
lentiertie: Mes aus
terment eft ( tiel heit
fuit de plein age al
temps De ies efpou-
ſels cat Dongues le
heire nad viens forl-
que en Droit fa feme,
ac,


Of Remitter.
within age at the
time of the Efpoufells,
&c. And if the heire
bee in his remitter by
force of the entaile, it
followeth by reafon
that the wife hath no-
thing, &c. for inaf-
much as the husband
and wife be as one per-
fonthe land cannot be
parted by moities, and
for this caufe the huf-
band is in his remitter
of the whole, But o-
therwife it is if fuch

cire were of full age
at the time of efpow-
fells,for then the heire
hath nothing but in
right of hiswife,&c.


Sedl.665.


Here (d alfo to bee noted
that pefentip bp the matrís
age Within age, tye bufbanu
is remitted, andthe treehold
ano inheritance of the So(te
vaniſhed cleane awap.


€ Pri mefme la


feme al fers Bere itis


god tobe fene What things
are giuen to the huſband by
marriage. Firſt (t appeas
teth bere bp Littleton, that if
a tan taketh to Wife a a wo⸗
man fetfeo tn fee ( f£ ) be gat=
neth bp the intermarriage an
eftate of Freehold in ber right,
Which eftate te fufficient to
Swozke a iKemitter, and pet
the citate which tbe huſband
gaineth dcpendeth opon tins
certaintic, and confiffetl) (n
pꝛtuity, (2) for tf the wite
be attatnted of felony, the
1020 by cichcate Mail enter
and put out the hufband, o2
therwife ít (s if the felony
becommittcd after {Tue had.
Bilo t£ the bufbanb bee atz
tainted of felony, the ing


gatneth no Freeloid buta pernancie of the pzeffits during tbe Coucrture andthe Freehoio


temaineth inthe wife. Ch) Secondiy, t£ thee were poſſeſſed of a terme £02 pearcg,


pet be ts


351


(£) 13 .4.6.Staxf 15 7.6.
18.£.4.5. 11. H.7.19.
X0.H.6.11. 7.H.6.y b.


Vid.Se8. sS.


(8) 4. .4.
4E. 3.7 ff&fé 166,


(h) Pl. Com fs. 3 66.5;


voſſelled in her right, but he bath power to difpofethereof by Grant oz TDemífe, ano if bo be ‘Dar: Hales cars, $2. Aff. c.
Datlawed o? attainted, they are gifts tn Lak.

(*) Upon an Erecutton agaínft the bufband for his debt, tbe Shertfe map fell the terme
during her life: but tbe hufband can make no difpottton thereof by bts Laſt will. 2110 (f£ yee (*) ou. 16 dea Eh
make no difpofition o2 forfeiture of (t tn big itfe, pet ét taa gift tm Law vnto bim t€ hee Doe snfer tomer & FSC
furuiue his wife, but tf be make no difpofition and die befose bis wife, (be (ball haue tt againe, 777 ce erroradindge sx bork
And the fame Law is cf eltates bp Statute Merchant, Statute Staple, Elesic,zoardihips 2 /6.8./0.96. Mar:
and other chattels reallg in pofleflton.

But if the bufband charge the Chattell reall of his wike, (t (hallnotbinde the Soife sf ſhes 7-4-6. fua."


farutue him.


3€ a Feme fole be poſſeſſed of a Chattell reall, and be thereof vifpollefled,and then taketh


bufban®, and the wite dieth,and tbebufbanbfuratuctb, this right is not atucn to the bufbana Vi


by the intermarrtage, but the Executoꝛs o2 Adminiſtrat oꝛs of the wife ball jane tt, Lo (t is
{€ the wife hath but a polibilitp.


In the fame manner itis t£ tbe wifebe poſſeſſed of Chattells realls tn auter droit, ag Gree PLC» 0 is,
catriroz Pominiftratriz, oꝛ as Gardeine in £y ocagc,ec. and the tntermarrieth, the Hatw mas «er fo.1o.


38.H. 6.33. 31. E. 4.1 €.
7.E.4.6. E AM He
10.H.6,11.


Mas ning, cafe,


A Se. c.


Osborne; cafe
6


keth no gift of themto the bufband although befurutuethber. ‘in the fame manner tf a woe «af.
man grant a terme to her owne tfe, taketh hufband, and ofetb, the bufband ſuruiaing ſhall


not bane thig trult, but the Executors op Admtniſtratoꝛs of tbc wite, (1) for it confitteth (i) Pafth. 32.Eli¢.


in pꝛiuity, and fo hath (t bene refoluedby the Juſtices. Chattells realls conſiſting merely in
Bion the Bulband fbatl not have by the intermarriage, onle(Te be recouereth them tn the lite
of the wife, albeit he faruíuc th: Wits, ag a tait of Right of ward, a valore maritagij, a ^7. E —
fozfeiture of marrtage, and the like, whereunto the wife wag intitled before the marriage, j

Wut Chattells reallg befug of a mírt nature, viz- partlp inpofleffion , anb partlp ín Action, , 3.2.3. Quare IEmp.g7.
Sobich happen during the Conerture, the bufband (all hane by tbe intermarriage, tfhee fur 14/1412 38-£. 3.35.6.
situe his wife, albett he reduceth them not into poflefiton in her Life time: but ik the wike furuts 5°-2-3-13-


Heth bits, fhe (bali haue them. Bs it tbe bufban®d be ſeiſed of a Rent ferutce,


Charge, oꝛ Heck,


in the right of his wike, the rent become Due During the Coucrture,the wife dieth, the bufbanb
fhalihane the arrerageg ; but if the Wife ſuxuiue the bufbano, the ſhall age them, and notthe 12.%-s.briefe 639.
Executoꝛs of thehulband. Ho itis of an Aonowfon, tf the Church becomebopd during the 5-©.3-E+erur.og.


Œtte;


ſhall


in Can.
ellar, sn Witham cafe,
Hl. 38. EliC. m Cancel,


e floyt caf? vbsfapra,


10, H.6.11. F. M R. 131,
23.H.6.15. 39. E.3.40,
XI, A. 2. Mceeut 49.


Couerture, (k) he map hauc a Quarc impedit tn his ogone name , ag fome hold; but tbe tiotfe ar 3.132869,


Lib.5.


26.E.5.64. 10. H. 6.11.
F.N.2. 121. 22. H. 6. 2).


(1) Ls.4. fo. $1.5» Ognels cafe
EHil.17.El'Rot.4 57. 9n Com.
Banco Sbarpi cafe.

21. E.4. 4.31. H.7.39.

31. H.7,4.36.H.8.7.43.E.3
10. 3. H.6.13.37. 4. H.6. s.
14.2.2, Det.173.5.E.a.thid,
169,30.E.3.  48.E.3. 12.
12. R. 3. Bre. 638.639.
16. E. 4.8.16. H.6.Br0.939.
(m)43.6.3.8. 7. 10, H.6.11


35.£. 3.17.


Vi.SeH. 87.6.


d
*


31.E. 3.30. 29. E.3.43. 4T.
E 3 Xemit. Yr. 19. E. 3. Re-
wit 14.35. 4f 13.38. E.3.24
39.E.3.39.30 41.E.3.17.
46. E. 3.29.5. 16.E,3.69.
V5.$e8.47 6.

Y 1,R.3-Rermit.49.44.E.3-
17.


Cap.


Of Remitter. ’ Sch.666,


fhall hane (t (£ hefurnine him, andthe Huſband, (£ he ſuruiue her, Et (ic de fimilibus.

Wnt Ethearrerages had become due, onthe Church had fallen voyd before the marriage,
there they Swere meerelp in Action before the marrtage, and therefore the huſband foni not
banethem by the Common Law, although bt farniued her. Bnd fo ít (g of Weliefes, Muratis
mutandis: (1) Wut now bp the Statute of 32.H.8.cap.37. ifthe huſband ſuruiue tbe wife, he
hall auc the arrcrages ag Well incurred befoze the marttage,as after.

But the marriage (s an abfolnte gift ofall Chattels perfonalls in poſſeſſien (n her one
right, whither the hufband furuine the Swife o7 no ; but if thep bee tn Acion, as debts by Obii⸗
gation, Contract, o2 otbertotfe, thehulband fall not haue them bnielle be anb bis Soífe reco-
ucr them. And of gerfonall bods cn auter droir, ag Exccutrix o2 Ddminiltratric, ac,tbe mara


riage ig no qift of them te the bufban®, although bc furntue his Swife,

@ a Jean Eſtray happen Within tbe Wannozof the Wife , if the hulband dte before fei=
fure, the wife (ball baue it, fo2 that the pzopertic Was not in the wife befoze fetfure,

Mut ag to perfonall Gods there is a diuerfitte wortbieofobferuation, betweene a pꝛoper⸗
tle in perfonallgmds, (ag (g afogefapd) anda bare poflesiton; £02 (£ perfonali gods bee bayled
ton eme, o2 (£ fhe finde gods, 02 (f goods tome to her hands as Executrix toa Waiitfe, and
taketb abufband, this bare poffeffton is not ginen to the bufband,but the Action of Detinue


mufi be brought againt the bufband and wife,


But now let bg heare Littleton.


€ Le quel ferra inconuenient. Chis argument ab inconuenienti, our


Authoꝛ hath bled in many places,


Setfion


CT Tem à Feme feilie B cet-
taine terreen fee pzent ba-
ron, lequel aliena mefme

la terre abn autecen Fee, lalte=
nce leſſa meſme 1a terre al Baron
et fa Feme pur terme De lour
Deut vies, fauantle reuerfion al
Leflo; et a fes heires, enceft cas
la feme eft cing en fon Kemit⸗
ter, etel eft feí(ie en Faiten fon
demefne come De fee, ficome el
fuitadeuant, pur ceo quele repri⸗
fel Del Cftate ferra abíubge en
Lep.le Fait le Baronet nempe
Faitla Feme ,iſſint nul folly pott
eftre adiudge en la Feme.que ett
couert en ttel Cafe, et en cett cafe
le Leſſor nad rien en le Keuerſi⸗
on, put ceo que la Feme e(t feifie
en fee, tC,


666.


Lfo ifa woman feifed of cer-
taine Land in Fee, taketh
Husband, who alieneth the

fame Land to another in Fee , the
Alience letteth the fame Land to
the husband and wife for terme of
their two liues, fauing the reuerfi-
onto the Leíforandto his Heires:

Inthis cafe the wife is in in her Re-
mitter, and fhe is feifed in Deed in

her Demefne as of Fee, as fhe was
before, becaufe the taking back of
the Eftate fhall be adiudged in law

the fa& of the Husband, and not

the fact of the Wife ; fono follie

can be adiudged in the wife,which

is Couert in fuch Cafe. And in

this Cafe the Leffor hath nothing

in the R euerfion, for that the Wife

is feifed in Fee,&c.


€ LA of em fon Remitter. Bypthis it appeareth , Chatalbeit
therebe no motttes betweene huſband and Soife, pet this tea Remitter prefentip,
and flandeth net bpon tbe furuttioz of the wife, as fome haue thought, for tf the E⸗


fate gained bp intermarriage bo a ſuffictent Ettate to woake a emitter, à fortiori, an Eſtate
made to tbc bufbanb and Wife fhall Swozke a Kemitter in the Wife. And fo (tíg ik Cenant in
atte infeofe his Iſſue being Within age, and his Swifein Hee, and dieth, this (g a Wemttter
tothe Iſlue pꝛeſently, bp the death of Genant in G ayle, though fomes banetbongbt the con=
traríe, ier


Lib.3.


Of Remitter.


Setl.667.


352


Here alfo (t appeareth, Chat no follie in this cafe can be adiudged in a Feme Couert, forthe a ni id:
taking backe of the atc thail be Siudged fn Law the act of the dualband. Vb. fup,

. sAote ín tbe cafeof the eme Comert, he map be remitted in the life of the Wticontinnoz,
becanfe the hatha paefent right : but (n thecaſe ot Cenant in Œaile, the Iſſue cannot bee re⸗
mitted in the life of the Difcontinuoz, becauſe the Iſſue bath no víabt vntill his oeceate.


€ Cs encé cafe
E M file Leffour
boile fuer Action De
Daft vers le Baron
et fa reme, pur ceo
que le Maron auoit
fait Daft, le Baron
fe poit barrer ie Leſ⸗
fo» put monfire ceo
que Ie cepaítel dl eſtat
fait à lup et a fon
Feme fuit n Kemit⸗
ter à fa feme, pur ceo
que le Baron eft e-
ftoppc adire ceo que
eft encounters fcoff-
ment et fon repzifel
Demefne Del eftate f
terme de bie a luy et
ata fane, Ct bn-
coze le Leſſoꝛ nad bn
jicuerfíon, put ceo
quele fee (imple eff
en lafeme, Et iſſint
home poít beer bn
matter en ceo cafe, à
home ferra eftoppe
per bn matter en fait
coment que nul &-
{cripture foit fait per
Fat indent ou au-
terment,


Setlion 667.


BY: in this Cafe if
the Leffor wil fue
an Aion of Watt a-
gainft che husband and
his Wife , forthatthe
husband hath commit-
ted Waft,the husband
cannot barre the Lef-
for by fhewing this,
Thatthe taking backe
ofthe Eftate to him
andto his wife, wasa
Remitterto his wife,
becaufe the husband
is ftopped to fay that
which 1s dvainft his
owne Feoffement, and
taking backe of the E-
ftate for terme of life
to him and ro his
Wife. And yet the
Leffor hath no reuer-
fion, forthatthe Fee
fimple is inthe Wife.
Andfoa man may fee
onething inthis cafe,
That a man fhall bee
{topped by matter in
Fa& , though there
bee no Writing by
Deede indented, or
otherwife.


eft eflappe a dire,
€ E/'eppe commethy


of tye French $0029 Eftoupe,
from ‘whence the Œnglib
$0020 Stopped: and it ts
called an Gtoppel o? Cons
cluGon,bdecaufe a mang oxene
Ta og acceptance ſtoppeth 03
clofeth Up bis mouth to als
ledge oa plead thetrath: And
Littletons cafe beere prooucth
this defcription.

Œouching Eſtoppels, which
is an excellent and curtous
kind oflcarning) ít (& to obs
ferned that there be thace kin’
of Ciloppels, viz. Bp matter
of Becowd, Wy matter in
weiting, and By matter in
Paijs.

(a) yp matter of Record,
viz. 1b» Letters Patents,
Fine, Mecoucrie, Pleading
taking of Continuance, Con⸗
fellion, Ympariance, tars
tant of Btturnep, Admit⸗
tance,

(b) Wp matter in tris
tíng,15 by Deed indented, bp
making of an Dcquittance dp
Ded indented, oz 3Debpoli,
(c) bp Difealance bp Deed
indented o1 Deed Poll.

Wy matter in Prijs, ag bp
Liuer ie, bp Entry, by Accep⸗
tance of Kent, bp 39artítion,
anb by Acceptance of an =
ſtate as heire tn the cafe that
Littleton putteth, Soberco£
Littleton maketh a (pecíal obs
feruation, that a maa fpallbe
eftopped bp matter tn the
Countrie, Withontanp to2t=


€ p ceo que Baron
orc


ting. 1
Mo make the Keader moze capable of the learning of Ettoppels, tiefe few Kules, amongſt


others, areto be knowne.


(d) Firk, & bat cuerte Coppell onght to be rectpzocall, that (a to bind both parties ; and
this ts the rcafon, that regularip a Stranger hall neither tabe aduantage, noa be bound hyp the
Eoppeil, (¢)Printes in Bloud, as the Metre, Pꝛiuies in Gate, ag the Feoſte, elle, ac,
PBꝛiuies in Law, ag the Lords by Eſcheat: Cenant bp the Curtefie, Cenant in Dower, the


incumbent


Ls.2.f0.4.4. Goddards safe.
V.ðect. 4i. & 695.695.679.


(a) 41-4]f.19. 8.H.4.7.&
22/4: 54.1 5, E. 5. Effep.239
4E. 315,133.


(b)4.H. 41.8.H.7. 6.13. H.7
24.15.E. 4.28.41 E.3 E-
flop. 13.12. R. a ib. 212,


(c) 8.2.2. Ejfop.283. 35.
H.6.18.3.H 6.16.16. H.7.5
34. H.6,1 9. 14. 3,4. 29*


(d)33. H.6. 19.50.30. H.6.2
31.8. ;.Efhp.240.33. 4438.
39.aff. $1.14. .9. 18 E.4.X
1€) 8.4/2.3. "Br.Finet7 3e
8.H.6.19 21.E. 3535.38, E.3
31. 20. E. 3.€fop.187,


Lib.s.


(£) 31. E 4.4. 33.414.
17. H.6.Eflep.37 3. 18. E. 3.
39:7. H.7.6.dr 16.
G)46-€. 3-33. 29.48.38.
Pl. Com. 398.

Ch) 3 5. M. 6. 33. 46.€.3.12.
49-E.3.14.8.A9 3-45-45
3-€l.Dy.196. 11. El.ibid. 380
9.H.6.60.

(i) 5.£.4.7.8.E.4.19. 1e.
€.4.12.23 E.4.58.32.-4f. 9
35.5.6.20.

(Kk) 33. H.6.16. 4.E.3.22.
6. H 4.7. 31 E. 1. Gard.15 5.
FN. 8. 142.5.

(1) 12.H.7.4. 30. H.6.39.
3-H.4.9.41.£. 3.4 11. H4.


30.

(m) 2. R. 3. 14.2. R. a. Eflop-
pel. ao 40. E. 3. 2a1.12. E.ñ. 13
18. E. 3. 31. 35.44. E. 3. 45.
17..4ff-37- 45-£.3.2.
21.H.7.24.5.E. 4.7.7. E. 4.
19. 3.6.4. 11.4.E.3.5 4.

9. E.G. Br. Eſtop. 162. 11. H.4
39. 30. E.3. 2. 31 45. 14.
(n)37.4/:17.38.H.6.13.
g. El.Dy.323.

(9) 7-El.Dy.244.


(p) PraB fo. 410.26. 4] 64.
39. Mao. 11.H.4.84.

p. H.6.7. 33 Aff. 5 11.E.3.
Effep.239.21.E.3.39.19.R 2
E flop. 382. 3E. 3.15.23.
33-£.3.Efep.Stath. Leftat.
dt 9. H.6.ca 11.30. M. 6. 2.
"Boll. dr Sind.69. 34.H.6.39
18. E, 4.1. b; i0. E. 4.16.


19. C.i. Dofenfo imis,


(a) W. 3.08.3. :
(b) Braft.fo.393. Mir.li.3e
aep, Emophem,


Capiz. Of R emitter, $etl. 668.


Incumbent of a Wenefice, and others that come vnder by Ac in Las, o2 (n tbe Poft, fball bte
bound ane take aduantage of Œfloppels, anb that a Rebutter ts akindof Œftoppeil,

(f ) Secondip, Chat eneríe Eſtoppell, betauſt it concludeth a man to aliedge tbe trath,
mutt be certatneto cuerie intent and not tobe taken by argument o2 inference,

(g) Chirdlp, Œuerie Coppell ought to be à pactife affirmation of that which waketh the
GHoppeii, and not be fpoken tmperfonally, ag tf (t befapd, Vt dicitur,quia imperfonalitas non
concludit, nec ligat : imperfonalis dicitur, quia fine perfona, (h) S2etther doth a recítall cone
clude, becaufcit is no Biret affirmation.

Ci) Fourthip, # matter alledged that 18 meitber traucrfable noz matertall, fball not


eftoppe,

Ck) Fiftly, Regularip aman Mall not bee concinded bp acceptance 02 thelíbe , beforebhis
Title accrued,

(1) Sirtip, Eftoppell agaínft Eſtoppell doth put the matter at large:

(m, Senenthip, Watters alledged bp Wap of fuppofail in Counts, {ball not concinvde after
MNon⸗ſuit: otherwile tt te after tudgement given ; and after J2on<Lutt , albeit tbefuppofall in
the Count {bail not conclude, Pet tbe Warre, Title, Replication, ox other pleading of ctther par=
tie, Which is prectfelp alledged, fhail conciude after 4 on-fuít , and hecbp arc the Mokes re-
conctled.

Œigbtip, where the beritte is appatant in the fame Recoꝛd, there the aduerfe partie ſhal not
becttopped totake abuantage of the truth, for be cannot be efoppad to allcbge the truth, When
the truth appeareth of Recozd, (n) fa Fine beleuted without any oziginall, itis bopbable,
but not voyd, but (Can Dziginall be bzought,anda Rerraxit entred, andafter that, a Concor
{8 made, op a Sine lented, this ts boyd, tn refpec the beriticappeareth of Recoꝛd. (o) An Im⸗
propztation {5 made after the death of an Fncumbent, toa Wilhop and his Hucceffors , the
hop bp Judenture vemileth the Parſonage foz foztíe peares, to begin after the death of the
incumbent, the Deane and Chapiter confirmeth tt, the Jucumbent dieth , this Demife Mail
not conclude, for that it appeareth that ÿe had nothing in tbe Impꝛopꝛiation till after the death
ofthe Incumbent.

Cp) Minthip, where the Record of che Eſtoppell doth run to thedifabilitte op legitimation of
the perfon, there ail ftrangers fbali take benefit of that Recoꝛd, ag Outlawꝛie, Excommenges
ment, 43aofeffíon , Attainder of Pra munire of Selonte, ec, Baſtardie, Wultertic, and (ball
conclude the partie, though they be Strangers to the Recoꝛd, Vide in Littleton,cap. Villenage,
$c&.196,197. &c. Wut of a Kecoꝛd concerniug tbe name of the perfon, qualitte, oz addttion,no
eftranger ſhall take aduantage, becaufe be {ball not be bound by it. Wut nota Reader, Chat
in cafe ofthe Muliertie prima facie, an Eftranger thalitake benefit of (tc. Wut pet becaufe he
map be a Mulicr bp the Œcciefiatticall Law, and a Baſtard by the Common daw , therefore
again fuc) a Certificate pleaded,the abuerfe partie may allebgc the fpcciall matter,and confefle
the Certificate of the Withop accozding to the Eccleũaſticall Law, anb alledge further the {pes
ctall matter acco2bíng to the Common Law, ,whereunto theaduerfe party mul anfiwer, and
foare the Doks that treat of thig matter,to be reconciled, But now let be return to Littleton.


Sect. 668.


(CT 4 Femepria de-
L ffe refceine &
foit. refceine. Receipt,


Receptio commeth of the La⸗
tpne Werbe Recipere, ſo called
becaufe the wike bpon the Dez
faultof her huſband, ís recef=
wed as a Feme fole. alone,
ithuot ber hufband,to vefed
her right, and ttts alfo called
Defenfio iuris: and tn this
cafe the wike map bec recctued
bpthe (a) Statute, and pet
(b) antient Authors who
waote before tbe Statute,doe
fpeake of a kind of Receit at


€ Es ſi en acti⸗
M on De Waſt
le baron fait Default
ale graund Diftreffe,
ct la feme pꝛia Deftre
receiue et foít receiue
elmonftra bien tout
le matter, et coment
el eft en fon Kemit⸗
ter, et el barrera le
Lefloz de fon 3ictí-
Ott, FC,


Vt if in the A&i-
on of Wafte the
Husband make default
to the grand Diftreffe,
and the Wife pray to
be receiued, and is re-
ceiued, fhec may well
fhew the whole mat-
ter, and how fheeis in
her Remitter, and (hec
fhall barre the Leffor
of his A&ion,&c.


the Common Law, The Ciuilians call Reſceit, Admiffionem tertij pro fuo intereffe , Swhich
meꝛe properip ts refembleb to the receit of bim in the reuerſion oz rematnder, that is me partte


the ttojít,


$ed.


Lib.5.


€( 3t en cheſcun
cas lou feme
eff receiue put De-
fault fon baron, el
plebera & aucta m̃
laduantage en plee
pledant,come el fuít-
foit feme fole, ac, €t
coment que laltence
fif le leas al baron
æafafeme, per fait
endent, vncore ceo cft
temitter a la feme,
€t aury coment que
lalience rendiſt meſm̃
la terre al baron za
fa feme pec fine pur
terme De lour bies,
bncoze ceo ef ou re⸗
mitter al feme, put
ceo que feme couert
que pent eftate per
fine,ne ferra my exa⸗
mine pet les Juſti⸗
ces, 3€,


Of Remitter.


Sed. 669.
Fo in euery Cafe


where the wife is
receiued for default
of her husband , fhee
fhall plead and haue
the fame aduantage in
pleading, as fhee were
a woman fole,&c. and
albeit that the alienee
made the leafe to the
husband and wife by
deed indented, yet this
is a Remitter to the
wife. And alfoalbeit
the alienee- rendreth
the fame Land to the
husband and his wife
by fine for tearme of
their liues, yet thisis
aremitterto the wife,
becaufe a feme couert
which takes an eftate
by fine fhall not be ex-
amined by the Iufti-
ces, &c.


Sec. 669. 670.


€ PT el fuiffoit
feme fole, &c.

jn thts Section foure
things are to bec vnderſtod.

Sirk When a eme covert
is receined that (be hall plead
ag t£ the were ſole. And this
ts reguiarlp true, vct holdeth
notin all cafes, (c) fozifa
Heme coucrt bee received tn
an Adife and pleada a Recoꝛd
andfatle, therefore (bee ball
not bee adindgeda Difletfoz
as thee ſhould bec if thee were
folc, «t€, Bo tf a Feme co⸗
wert onlp leute a fine erecutos
tte, and a Scire facias tg
brought agaínít ber and her
bufbano, i£ bec bee recetued
bpon che defanit of her huſ⸗
band, thee fall barre the Cos
nufee, which iffhee had bene
foie, fhecould not doe, andin
fome other Cafes,

Hecondly, that though the
eſtate taken backe bee bp deed
indented, pet that fball not
binder the Kemitter in cafe
of a Feme concert, o2 an In⸗
fant. Thirdly, that though tt
be bp fine fur render, pet that
{ball not hinder the Remitter,
becaufe a Feme couert ts not
to be eramtned bpon any fine,
but ‘oben fice anb ber buf»


band pafTe fome eſtate o1 tutereſt, oa releaſe her right bp a fine of the Lands oz Cencmente,
Ne lerra my examine per les luflices, cc. The evamination of a


Feme Couert ought to be fecret, and the effect is to examine her Whether the be content to lente
a fine effuch Lands ( naming them particularip and diſtinctly, anb the ſtate that pafleth by the
finc) of ber owne toluntarte free Sill, anb not bp theeats, menaces, 02 any other compuifurte
meanes.

Fourthly, it the huſband leuie a fine of his Hines Lands , anb the Conuſee grant and reus
der the Lanb to the hufband and Wife, although the wife bee not partie tothe oztginall no; to
tbe Conufans , and therefore fhe ought net by the Law to take any pzefent eftate but bp wap
of Remainder onlp;pet here tt is proued bp Littleton, that the grant and render de fado tg the
Sife in prafenti ts mot botd, for then it could not wWozke a emitter , but Voidablebp Wzit of
Erroꝛ, and that auoidable eftate doth Wozke a emitter,


Se. 670.


T hic nota, que quant at- Nd here note, that when any

cuti chose paſſera De la fem thing fhall paffe from the wife

que eft couert De baron perforce which is couert ofa husband by
Dun Vuuu


353


(¢) 37-41.


17Af-17. 29.E.3.436
$.E.3.V encher i798. ,


Tris. 37, Elit, Inter Owen & |
Moran Rot.276. in Banco
Communt.

Lib. 3. fol. s. the Marguefe

ef Winches¥ers Cafe.
7.E.3.64.13.E,3. Vonchag
11g.


Lib.x.


(4) 15.E.4.38.

24.E. 3.31. 4a. E. 3. 6.
3. H. 6.42. 10. E. 5. it, Cus
I vila 1o.


(") 29-5. 3.43- 46.E,3.5.


(api.


dun finc, ficome le baron et ia
fci fefont bn conufance De Dapít
à bu auter, ac, ou fefopent bn
grant trender abu auter, ou te-
leffent per fine aauter,& fic de fi-
milibus,lou le Droit dl fein paſſe⸗
voit Del feme p fozce De meſme le
fine, en touts tíely cafes la feme
ferra eramine Deuaunt à la fine
foit accept put ceo que ticls fines
concluderont tiels fems couerts
atouts iours ac.Mes lou riens
eft mouc en le fine forfque tant-
folement que le baron, ala feme
pꝛeignont eftate per fogce De
mefinele fine, ceo ne concluder
la feme, pur ceo queen tiel cag
eliammes ne Cerra mp examine.
RC,


Of Remitter.


Sedl.671.


force of a fine. As if the husband
and wife make Conufance of right
toanother, &c. or make agrant
& render to another,or releafe by
finevnto another, ¢ fie de fimilibus,
where the right of the wife fhall
paífe from the wife by force of the
fame fine, in all fuch cafes the wife
fhall bee examined before that the
fine beetaken , becaufe that fuch
fines fhall conclude fuch femes co-
uertsfor euer. Butwhere nothing is
moued in the fine bur only that the
husband and wife do take an eftate
by force of the faid fine, this fhall
not conclude the wife, for that in
fuch cafe fhee fhall not bec at all
examined, &c.


co afcun chofe paffera de la feme couert, crc: per force dun fines,
oc. Andof this opinion ig (d) Littleton tn our Bookes.
Cherekoꝛe (E the hufband and wife be Cenanss tn fpectall taylejanb tbey leute a Ene at the
€onmon La, andafter the hufbandand wife take backe an cltate to them and their heires
in this cafe the eftate taple ts not barred, and pet agatnft a finc leuted bp her felfe the cannetbe
remitted, becaufe thereupon fhe ag cramined:but tn that cafe (f the Land vifceno to ber tue


Setlion 671.


be (bali be remitted,


[Cem ( tenant en taile diſ⸗
continua le taile a ad iffue
file,4 mozuft,æ la file efteant

de pleíne age prent baron, ale

Difcontinuee fait bn releas d ceo


al baron a a fa feme pur termed


lour bies, cco eft bn emitter al
feme, et la feme e(t eing per force
De letale, Caufa qua fupra.


At if tenant in tayle difcon-
tinue the taile, and hath iffue
a daughter & dieth, & the daugh-
ter being of full age taketh huf-
band and the Difcontinuee make a
releafe of this tothe husband &
wife for terme of their lives, this
isa Remitterto the wife, andthe
wife is in by force of the Tayle,
Cauſa qua fupra, &c.


CF’ la feme efteant de plein age prent baron, &c. Here ttappeareth
that ber fuil age When the toke Waronts not materiall, but yercoucrture at the ta⸗
king backe of theeftate. And fo note a diuerfitie bctiweene a emitter anda otf»


cent, Foz ta Woman be difletfed, and being of full age taketh bulband. and ther the Diflettoz
dieth fered, this Diſcent Malibtnde the wife, albeit ſhee Wag coucrt Shenthe Dticent Mag
€^ ft, becaufc (bec Was of full age when fce twke hufband, 1g appearerh before inthe Chapter
of Dilcents. But arbett tbe wife that hathan ancient right,and bet «g of full agetakerfya yale
band, anb tle Difcontinne: ietteth the Land te the bufbano and wife foz cheir liues, this (o a
Kewitter to the wite, For dBeuttterg to ancient rights arc fanourcd in Law. b
Se


Lib.3.


Of Remitter,


Se8.672.672


Setl. 672.


¶ I Cem fi terre foit Done à te

baron ct afafeme, à auer et
tener acug et ales heirs De lout
deux cozps engendres et puis le
baron aliena la terre en fee,et re⸗
pent etate a luy et a fa fem pur
terme De lour deux bies, en cett
cas il eſt remitter en fait ale ba⸗
ron et a fa feme maugre E baron,
Car il ne poít eft bn cemitter en
ceft cas ala feine, finon que foit
Du cemitter a le baron, pur ceo
que le baron et fa feme font
tout bn meſme perfor en lep, co-
ment quele baron ef effoppe de
clapmer. Ct purceo, ceo eft on
remitter ẽ luy enconter fon alte-
nation et ton repriſel Demefne,
come c(t Dit adeuant,


À Lfo if land be giuento the huf-
band and to his wife, to haue
& to holdto them & tothe heires
of their two bodies begotten, and
afterthe husbahd alien the land in
fee, and take backe an eftate to him
and to his wife for terme of their
two liues,inthis cafe this isa remit
terin deedtothe husband and to
his wife maugerthe husband. For
it cannot bee a remitter in this cafe
tothe wife, vnleffe it beea remit-
terto the husband, becaufe the
husband and wifeareall one fame
perfon in Law, though the huf-
band be {topped to claime it, and
therefore this isa remitter againft


his owne alienation and reptifel,as
is faid before.


€ Ere ttappeareth that the bufband againſt bis owne alienation (£ hee bad taken the
H eftateto him alone could not haue ben remitted, 2B uc When the eltate is made tothe

bufbanb + Wife, albett thep be but one perfon in La, and no moptics betwen them,
pet for that the Wife cannot be remitted tn thts cafe, vnleſſe the hufband be remitted alfo, and fog
thatremitters, ag hath bene often fato, are fauoured tn La becaufo therebp the moze antient
and better rights are reftozed agatne, therefoze inthis cafe in tnogement of Law both huſband
and wife atc remitted, Which is worthy of great obferuation,


Setl. 6 73.


LT Com terre foit Dore a bn
femeentaile, le remainder
abt auter en taile, le te=

mainder à le tierce en tatle, le re⸗

mainder al quart en kee et la fer
prent baron, et le baron Difcon-
tinua la terre en fee,p cel Difcon=
tinuance touts les rematnders
font difcontinues, Car fila fon
deuiaſt (ans iſſue ceures le re⸗
mainder naueront afcun reme⸗

Die fozfque De fuer lour briefes

De Formedon en le remainder

quant


AE if land bee giuen to a wo-
4 man intaile, the remainderto
another intaile, the remainder to
the third intaile, the remainder to
the fourth in fee, and the woman
taketh husband, and the husband
difcontinue the land in fee, by this
Difcontinuance allthe remainders
are difcontinued, for if the. wife
die without iffue, they in the re-
mainder fhallnot haue any reme-
die but to fue their writs of For-
medon in the remainder, when
Vuuu 2


Lib.5.


46.6.3. 17. 4L AKL.
36-A4[ p. 4


| 44, A [pe Y5- 44 E. 3.30.


30,E.3.Asd.29,


Vidt. Com. 489. Nichols
safa & 19.553. fn

Wal fingham: cafe.

v7. Eliz. Dier 3 44.
25.E.3.48.rir R efceit 28.
49.€. 3.16.

(a) &eignier Staffords cafe
Lib. 8.fe.76.b.


(b) Cholmleys cafe,lib.2. 53.


7. R2. Atde le Rey, 61.
21.E.3.7.


(0) M. 3,4p. 4.


(apa.
quant (| autent à lour temps,
Mes apres tiel Difcontinu-
ance, eftate foit fait ale baron et
fa feme pur terme De lour Deux
vies, ou pur terme Dauter vie, ou
autct eftate,tc, put ced que ceo
eft vn remitter al feme, ceo ett
aury bn vemitter a touts ceux
enleremainder, Carapies ceo
que la feme que eft en fon temit-
ter mo2utt fans tue, ceux en le
remainder popent enter, tc. fans
afcun action fuccac, Cn meſme
le maner eft De ceux que ount la
reuerſion apes tiel tailes.


Of Remitter.


Setl.67 4.


itcomestotheirtimes, But if af-
ter fuch difcontinuance, an eftate
be made to the husband and wite
for terme of their twoliues, orfor
terme of another mans life, or o.
ther eftate,&c. for that this is a re-
mitter to the wife,thisis alfo are-
mitter to all them in theremainder,
Forafter that that the wife which
isin her remitter be dead without
iffue, they in the remainder may
enter,&c. without any action fu-
ing,&c. Inthe fame manner is it of
thofe which haue thereuerfion af
ter fuch entailes.


€ j Ittleton baufng ſpoken of Kemitters to tbe iſſue tn tatle Who ig pꝛiuie in bind, andto
_/ the wike who ts patuie in perfon, now be fpeaketh of Remirters to them (n reucrfen
92 remainder expectant bpon an cfkate taile Whoare patuie in eftate, And this cale


proueth that the wife is remitted prefently for the equity o£ the Law requireth that as the diſ⸗
continuance of tbe eftate in tatle £a a difcontinuance of thereuerfion o2 rematnder, fo, that the
emitter tothe eftate tn tatle fhould be a Memitter to them in tbe reucrfion 02 rematnder.

Tenant foz life therematnder to A. in taile, the remainder to B.in fee, Tenant foz life to dif
fetfed, acollaterall Anceſtoꝛ of A. releafeth With Warrantie and dyeth, whereby the cffate tatle
ts barred, the Œenant fo; lifere-entreth, the Difletfor hath an eftate in Fes imple determinable
bpon the ftate taíle, and the remainoer of 3. (s reueftedin him, and fo note tn this cafe the
effate foz life and the remainder tn fee ate reueſted and remitted, and an cftate of inheritance Icfe
inthe Dilleifoz, JE a Hine be leuted (ur grant & renderto one foz itfe oz in taíle, therematns
der ín fer, ik Tenant fog life 02 in tatle execute the eftate £o? life o2 (n taile, this (e an execution
of theremainder.

A gift ín tatle is made to B.the remainder to C. (n fec; B.difcontinueth and taketh backe ars
eſtate in taile, the rematnder (n fec to tye ing bp ded tnrolicd, Tenant in tatle dieth, big iſſue
ig remitted, and confequentip the remainder ag Littleton here fatth, ano the dineritic is
(a) betweene an ad in Law, for that map devel an eftate out of the king, anda toztíoug ac,
02 entric, 02 a Falfeand a fepned recouerp againſt G enant fozitfe oz in tatle Which hall neuer
deueſt anp effate, remainder, oz reuerfion out ot the King. (b) Wut a recouerp by god title
againſt Cenant foz like oz in tatle where theremainder is to the ting by vefeañible title (ali
deueſt the rematnder out of the ing, and reſtore and remit the right vioners,


+ Seil.674.675.


CF o faux a-
&ion.1. A&io fi-
ta & falfa, Wut Hereot Lit-
tleron fpeaketh bimfcife tr
this Chapter.


€ Quod ci defor-
ceat, i8 a Wꝛit that


{8 gtuen bp (c) Htatute to
anp Œenant for life o2 in


taíle tpon a Reconerp bp :


default. again them fn a
Pracipe,andipeth aqaint the


€ [&em fi orit lef=
faba meafe abn
feme pur terme de fa
bie, fauant F reuerfi=
on al leffour, etpuis
bn fuift bn feint et
faur action enuers
la feme et recouctatt
le meafe enuecs Iup
per Mire
a


A Loifa man lett a


houfetoa woman
for terme of her life,
fauing the reuerfion to
the Leffor, and after
one fue a feyned and
falfe action againft the
woman,and recouereth
the houfe againft her
by default, fo as the


Lib.3.


la feme puit auer en-
uers lup vn Quod ei
deforceat, folonque le
Statute de Weſtm̃ :.
02e le reuerſion le Leſ⸗
ſor eft Difcontinue, t=
fint queil ne poit auet
afcun action de waft,
Mes enceft cafe fi la
feit peut baron et ce=
]uy que recoueraſt 1ef-
falemeafcal baron et
à fa feme pur terine De
lout deur byes , la
feme ett eins en fon re⸗
mutter per force Del
primer leate.


Of Remitter.


woman may haue a-
gainft him a Qwod ei de-
forceat according to the
Statute of Weftm. 2.
now the reuerfion of
the Leffor is difconti-
nued, fothat he cannot
haue any action of watt.
But in this cafe if the
woman take husband,
and hee which recoue-
reth lett the houfe to
the husband & his wife
forterme of their two
liuesthe wife is in her
Remitter by force of
the firft Leafe.


Sect. 675.


Cec Cle baron et

E là feme font
toatt, le primer leſſor
auera enuers eux bie
De waſt, pur ceo que
entant que la feme eft
en ton vemítter, tl eft
remife a fon reuerſion.
Pes femble en cett
cas (i celup que teco-
ueraft per E faug acti-
on, boile poster autet
bitcfe De waſt enuers
le baton a fa feme, le
baron nad auter ve-
medie enters Iup,mes
de faire Default a la
graund Difftes, ac, et
caufer la feme Deftre
receiue, et Depleder cel
matter enuers ie eco)
leffoz, ct monftrer co-
ment laction per que
il tecouccatt fuit faux
& feínt ẽ lep,æc.iflint E
fée poit Iup barrer ac,


Nd if the husband

and wife make
watt, the firft Leffor
fhall hauc a writ of waft
againft them, for that
inafmuch as the wife is
in her remitter, he is re-
mitted to his reuerfion.
But it fcemeth in this
cafe if hee that recoue-
reth by the falfe a&ion
willbring another writ
of wafte againft the
husband & his wife,the
husband hath no other
remedy againít him,
butto make default to
the grand diftreffe,8c.
and caufe the wifeto be
receiued, and to plead
this matter againft the
fecond Leffor,and (hew
how the action wherby
he recouered was falfe
& fained in law,&c. fo
the wifemaybarre him.

uuu 3


| Se8.675.


recoueror and bis beíres
in which cafe the particu⸗


355


lat Genant was Svitbont "Braten lib. 4. 367.


Fleta,libe5.ecp.22. dr Ib, 6.


remedp at tbe Common sap.14. 7, E.3.63.


Law , becanfe bec could 5,262 555.


not bane a W2tt of right,
And it ts called a Quod ci
defurceat, fox that thep
arc part of the words of
that Swpit,viz- Præcipe A.
quod, &c. reddat B. vnum
mefuagium, &c, quod cla-
mat effc jus & maritagi «
umfuum, & quod idem
A.ci iniufte deforceat,


¶ Reeonerafl &c.
per default. There


bath bene a queftion in
out bakes bpon thefe
woxoe Cp default ) ag
foz' trample, Swbether a
reconerp bao bp default in
an action of afte again


(E errant in Dower, OR by n.i.


the Curteſie, a Quod ci
deforceat 1 peth bp thefata
Htatute, Bnd dtuers
hold opinion, that (n that
cafeno Quod ei deforceac
ipeth, Éoz that tudgement
ig not given, foz not with⸗
fanding the defauit,there
gocth out a Szit to ene
quire De vafto fato, &
quod vaftum predictum
A. (le defendant) fecit.
Soas the Defendant
may give eutdence, and
the Furozs map finde fog
the Defendant, that ne
&vaffe Was done : As (m
the Alliſe albett ít bee as
Wardedby Default, pet
map tbe Cenant give cate
Dence, and the 1 ecognis
tors of the Bile map
findefozthe Cenant, and
therefeze in thofe cafes,the
Defendant oz Œenant
Non amittit per defaltam


asthe Statute and Lit- F.2UB.fe.15 s. E,


tleton fpeaketb, and thep
cite F.N.B.in tbe point,


Secondiy, they hold 2. H.4.3. 2166.56,
thata Quod ei deforceat 41.6. 5.8. 3.H6.39.


lyeth where the Œenant 22-5 7.12.


can haue no remedic bp
attatnt, bnt in this cafe
(fap they) an attaint

doth lye.
CThirdly, they holo,that
{nan Action of wafte als
thengh


Lib;. (Cap. Of Remitter. Sett.674..675,


(d) 3 4. H.6.7. 4o.E.3.37*
dr 38.£.3.


(e) ».H.5-15.
30.H.6.14,Bar, 59.


(“)1y.E.3.58. 39.E.3.42.
FN. B.98.b.13.H.4.4.
19.€ .2. Difceit 56.
W.2.64. 3. 3 H. «fo. 1,


W.2,ca. 3. 94. 4.16,


41. E. 5.8.5.3. H. 4.3.21. H.6
$6. 44.E. 3-42. br.tir. Quod
ei deforc. 4. Pafth.33.ELR ot.
1125. inter £d. Elmer & El.
fà feme teu. en Dower. deman-
dants Ur Wil. Thacker ten. 1n
Quod ei deſorceat.


(£) 33.8.3. 94. ei defore. Pl.
vlr. F.N.B.186.

V.Flet.li, $.ca.21.48.E. 3,19
46..4[[:33.33. H.6.2 5.

39. H.6.1.F.'N B.197.
(g) 17.€.2.-Attaint 69,
a1.H. 6.56. 34.4.6.12-


34 H.6.7. Waf.5o-


fh) 6.€.3.49 48.€.3.19.
l


though it be brought againft a Cenant in Dower o2 Tenant bp tbe Curteſie that auc a fre
bold, pet the Damunages are the paincipail, for they Swere reconerable agatnft Œenant in Doe
wer and by the Curtefic by the Common La, and the Statute of Glocefter gaue the place
Swafted but fo; a penaitic, foag the nature of the Actton (fay tbep ) remaineth Hill to bee per=
fonall, fo; thatthe Damages arc the patncípall ; (d ) and in pzoofe hercof thepcite diuers Aus
thozities in Law, And tf two bring an Action of walt, thereleafe of onc of them is a god bar
agaínft the ether, (c) and forcfoluco bp tbe $bole Court ; Which proucth (fap thep) that the
Dammages arc tbe principall, for if the Land Swercthepzincipall, the relcafe of one of therm
ſhould not barre the other, no moze then in an Aſſiſe, a to zit of Ward, an Eicétione firme, &c.

Lattlp, they fay, Chat in Actions where dammages areto be recouered, and the land ts the
Pꝛincipall, tbe Demandant newer counteth to dammages, and pet (ball recouer them: butin
an Acton of waſt the Plaintife countcth to hig dammage, and if the Dammages be the Prꝛin⸗
cípall, then clærelp no Quod ci deforceat lieth.

thers doe hold thecontrarie ; and ag to the firfl thep fap, Chat albett that tn the toit of
Walt tudgement ig not onely giuen bpon the default, pet the defanit ts the pꝛincipall, and the
caufe of awarding of the toit to enquire e£ the waſt as an incident thercunte: and the Law
alwapes bath refpect to the firft and principal caufe, andtherefoze bpon fuch a Wecoucrte(*)
a it of Decett líctb, and that wꝛit lieth not but Where the Kecouerie is bp defauit. Soin
an Action of Waſt againſt the hufband and wife, bpon the defanit of the bufband the wife (bal
be reeciued, and petthe Statute there fpcaketh aifo, per defaltam. So bpon fuch a recoucrie
in waft againſt the Waron and eme bp defanit,the totEe (ball haue a Cui in vita bp the Stas
tute, and tt{peaketh where the Kecouerte is per defaltam, Bnd albert the Defendant map
Glue in eutdence, tf he knoweth tt, pet When be makes default the Law paclumeth hee knowerh
not of ft, and it may be that he in truth knew not of it; and therefoze tt is rcafon, that feína the
Statute, that is a benefictall Statute, hath gtuen tt him, that he beadmitted to hig Quod ei
deforceat, in which wait the truth andright {ball betried. Ænofoit tg of a recouerie bp de=
fault inan Ailife, albeit the WR ecognitozs of tbe Wiife giue a verdict, a Quod ei dcforceat iteth,
And all this ag to this popnt was refolned bp the whole Court of Common Pleas, and fo the
Doubt ín 41.E.3.8. Mellrefolued. Nota, if Eenant fozltfe make default after default, and hein
thereucrfion ts recetucd and plead to Iſſue, and tt (5 found bp verdict fo; the Danandant, the
Md and the verdict are caufeg of the Judgement, and pet the Tenant (ball haue Quod ei

¢efrorceat,

As to the fecond obtecion, Chat the Defendant map hauean Attaint, Firſt it was vtterly
Dented of che other part, (f ) that an Attaint did lie inthis cafe, foꝛ though it be taken by the
Dath of twelve men, petit is but an Œnqueft of D fice, Whereupon no Actatne dtd lie on eí-
ther partie, ag vpon an enquirie of Collufton, although tt be bp one Furie, noz bpona Uerdic
tna Qualeius. Secondly, Pdmitting that an Attatut did lic tn that cafe, pet tt followeth not
ex Confequenti, thata Quod ei deforceat did not lie, (2 ) for i£ an Aſſiſe be taken by defauit,
a Quod ei deforceat Doth lie, and pet the partic map haue an Attatnt, forthisisno Enqueſt of
D fice, but a Recognition bp the Recognitoꝛs of an Aſſiſe, ho Were returned the firft dap,
and not returned bpon the awarding of the Aſſiſe bp default. And as te the fecond Dbtecion,
of this opinion Mag the whole Court in Edward Elmerscafc abeue mentioned, As tothe third
Mbtecon, Chat thedammages fboulo bec the principal, becaufc thep were at the Common
Haw, that (can argument (fap the other fioc ) that they atc moze antient, but not that they are
moze princtpall, and treble dammages Were not atthe Common Law, (fozthe Common Law
neuer giueth moze dammage than the loffe amounteth onte ) but areginen bp the Statute of
Gloceiter, but the place waſted is worthier being in the 38 caltie, than dammages that. be tn the
perfonaitie, Ft omne maius dignum trahit ad fe minus dignum, quamuis minus dignum fitan-


tiquius, & à digniori debet fieri denominatio. Bnd tt ts confefled, Chat tn an Aion of waſt


againft Œenant £02 life, 02 fos peares, the place Walked ts the pꝛincipall, bccaufe the Statute of
Glocefter doth atte the place waſted and treble oammages at onetime; £02 no prohibition oz A⸗
ction of toaft lap againft them at the Common Law, and in an Betton of walk, tf the Defers
dant confefte the Action, the 391aínt(fe map bauc tudgement fog the place waſted, and rcleafc the
daramages, Which proueth (and fo Fitzherbert collecteth) that the Dammages are not rhepzin=
cipall, £o? a man all neuer releafethe princtpall, and haue iudgement of the acceſſoꝛie: andar
Acton of soak againft Cenant for life, is as reall ag an Action againft Cenant in Dower.
And ag to the cafe of o.H. s.cítco on the other fide, tt Was anſwered that ít was an Acton in
the Tenuir, Which (& onelp tn the perfonaitie, and then the 1Relcafe of the one doth bar botb,ncis
ther could ſummons anb feucrance lie inthat cafe, Ch) butinan Action of Waſt (inthe Tenet )
eitheragainft Tenant for itfe o2 For pearce, the rcleafeof theone doth not barrethe other , anv
(n both thefe cafes fummonsg andfeuerance doth lie, and this popnt was alfe refolued accoz»
dingly tn Edward Elmers Cafe, Wut Whenthele three popnts werereſolued bp the Court fox
the Demandant, then the Councel of the Senant moued in arreft of tudgment another point,


viz,


Lib.3. OfRemicter. Seé#.674.675.


viz. That the imdgement Was giucn bpon a Nihil dicir, Which is alwapes after apparance,and
not per defalram,and thereupon iudgement Was (Haye.

Wut to returne to Lictleron. Here he opencth a fecret of Raiw,foz thecaufe of this remitter i2,
fo» that the Œenant fox life in this cafe might bauca Quod ci deforceat, fog fo Littleton f apth,
Iffint que il poct auer Quod ci deforceat : 20% (t appearcth by out Bookes, Chat the Cenane
fo; life at tbc Common Law was remebtlefle; becaufe he could not hauc (as hat bene fapd) a
Writ of hight, and confequentip the Femecouert in this cafe ceulo not bee remítteb by the taz
King of an Œftare to her bufband and her, becaule her right Wag ranedilede, anb conto haue no
Baion, Wut when an Ac of Parliament 02 a Cuftome doth alter the reafon and caufetheres
of, therebp the Common Lai (t fclfe ig altered, tf the Ac of Parliament and Cuftome be pur

£D, fo? Alterata caufa & ratione legis,alreratur & lex, & ceffante caufa feu ratione legis ceffat
& lex : agin this cafethe Statute of W.2 giuing remedteto this Feme Tenant fo? like, in this
it giuet h her abilitie to bee remitted, becanfe her right ts not now remedilelle, but the hathan
Baton to recoucr tt.

Bnd Littleron warily putteth bis cafe, Chat tbe reconerte Was hadagaink the Feme bite
Be was fole, fozthere as atime when it Wasa queftion , tobither a Kecouerte beeing bad
by default agaínft the bufbanb and wile, (the Wife being Œenant foz life) thefapd Statute
gaue a Quod ci deforceartothe hulband and Sife,foz that the Stature gaue tt again tenant
in Dower and Tenant for life,æc. and here the hulbandis not Cenant fo? tife;but Letfed ín the
right of his wife, and therefore ou: of the Statute : and of this opinion is one (g) Woke, but
(apices iuris non fantiura, & parum differunt que re concordant) the contrarte hath beene ad⸗
tudged, and fo that popnt is now in peace: andthe like (n cafe of receit £07 bim ín reuerfion.
Wut (£ the hufband anb wife lofe bp deFawit,¢ the hafband die, the Wife (ball not haue a Quod
ci deforceat, foz a Cui in vita tg gfuen to ber in that cafe bya former Statute, viz. W.2. cap.3.
Theſe things are woꝛthie of duc obferuation, and popnts of excellent learning ; and Littleton
in our Bokes {peakes ofancther kind of Quod ei deforceat at the Common Law, bpon a Dif-
feifin, which pou map read. Wut now ict bs heare him in his UWooke,


€ Lereuerfion eft diſtontinue, iſint que il ne poet auer Action de Waite.
Here it appeareth, Chat when tbe IB cuerfion ts deueſted, the Leifer cannot haue an Aion
of waft, becaulethe tozttis, Chat the Leflæ did waſt ad exharedationem of the Leſſor, and
that Inheritance muft continue at tbe time of the Acton brought: Andit ts to bee obſerued,
That ín an Action of toa ft brought by the Leſloz againſt the Helle, the ALefTec inrefpect of the
patuitie cannot plead generallp, Riensen le Reuerfion, viz. (h) Chat the defor hath nothing
' inthe Reucrfion, but he mut thew how and by What meanes the reucrfion (8 denclked out of
dim : anb this holdeth (ag hath bene fapd )berweenc the Leſſor andthe Lee ; but if the (5 lan=
te of a Reuerſion bringeth an Action of walk, the Leſſee may plead generally, Ciathee hath
nothing tn the rcuerfion, And pet in fome fpccíall cafes an A ction of watt balle, albert the
Xetfo? had nothing inthe IReucrüon at thetime of the Spaftoone, Ms if Œenant for life make
a feoffement in Fee bpon conditton,and Salt (s done, and after the Leflæ recenter fo; the cons
dition broken, In this cafe the Leſſoꝛ Mall aue am Aion of tbaft, Ana fotf a Withop make
a Lealſe toꝛ lite 02 peres,¢ the Biſhop die,the teller, the Sea being voyd, doth Svaff.tbe ſucceſſor
fall bane an Iction of walt. Sotf Leffe for lite be dicletled. and watt to done, the Lefte re-
enter, an Action of waſt (ball be maintained againft the Leſſee, and fo ínlíhec»fer : and pet in
none of thefe cafes the 391afntife tn the Action of walk hadanpthing inthe Renerfon at the
time of the Wal made, but tbefe eſpectall cafes aue their feucrall and efpectall reafonz, ag the
learned Beader Will cafilp find ont,
Here note, Chat albeit the Aion be Falfe and feigned, pet ts the reconeríe fe much reſpected


ín Law, ag ít worketh a Diſcontinuance. (1) Wut tf Tenant foz ltfefuffer a common Res


couerie, 02 anp other Kecouerie bp couine and confentbetween the Tenant for life and the iR c=
coucroz, this ts a forfeiture of big eftate,and be in the Reuerſion map prefentip enter for the kor⸗
fcitare, Since our Purhorwrote,the ſlatute of :4.El.ca.8. hath bin made concerning this matz
ter, Which is to be confidered, (k)and hath besne Well conffrueb and expounded , and needs not
bere to be repeated,

Bnd it is to be obferued, That although the Dilcontinuance groweth by matter of Record,
pet the emitter may be Wzought bp matter in Paijs : And ot tbe refdne of thefe two Seaia
ons fafficient bath besne {apd befoze,


Sed,


356


Vide fer the Cafes vpon this
grown’. 14 H.z. 11. p Finenx
27.H 3.4.6. Atd. 25. H.6.
Gad o 1.35.£.3. 5. pWalbie
Cuftome. 11.3 fo. 86. Tufisce
Windhams cafe, a. & b,


Cg) 4-E.3.38.33-E,3.4-
wowry 255.

$-E.3.4.33.E. 3. dnowr 355
F.N.B.155.a.

$E. 3.5.2. E. 4.13. F.N.2.
156.(.


33-H.6.46.2, £,4.11,
19. B. 4. 3,


sg.


45-E.3.21.44.E, 3.34,
tir, aft,


F.N./B.69.23.H.B,rit
"Br. i38.


(h) 45. 3. a0. 6. H.6. 15.
30.H.6.7.


(i) s- MP pl.3. s. E.3.Entre
Cong 43.1 5-F.3. Agi 95.
41-E.3.18.p Finebden.
22.€.3.2.5. Li 1 fo. 15. Si-
Wil Pelnams cafe.

14. El.ca.8.
(k)Li,3.fo.60. Ls. 1 fe. 54


Lib.3.


442.317. 44.492.


43. 4[f: 3. Vid.Scd.cóé.


2304-18. 7. H. 4.076


1.H.7.16.b. 39.E,3.30


37.H.$.2^.


Capiz.
Sed.


€ |n if baron difcontinua

le terre Defafeme, ct puis
reprift eftate a lup a a fa feme, a
al tierce perfon put terrh De lour
bícg, ouenfee,ceo neft bn remit=
terala feme, fozfque quant à là
moity, et pur lauter moity el co⸗
uient apes la mot fon baron de
fuer bu bziefe De Cui in vita.


Of Remitter.


$edl.67 6.677.
676.


AL if the husband difconti-
nue the land of his wife, and
after taketh backe an eftate to him
and to his wife,& to a third perfon
for terme of their liues, or in fee,
this isno remitter tothe wife, but
astothe moity, and for the other
moity fhe muft after the deathof
her husbäd fue a writ of Cui in vita


€(C onelt remitter for(que quant al moity, &c. Albeit there ig Bue
thozitpin our bakes to thecontrary, pet the Law ts taken, ag Lir:leron here holdeth
it; and ag befozett appearcth (n thelike cafe in this Chapter, anb fo? the reafon


therein expzefled,


CET puis le baron
*— reuient & agrea,


oc. In this cafetbe
eftateis inthe ffeme Couert
prefentip bp the liuery befoze
anp agreement by tbe jufbanb
anb ot this opinion ig Lictle-
ton ín cur Bokes.

€ 4/4 oufter le mere.
FE hee had beene Within the
—— it doth not alter the
cale,


€ Quare en ceft cafe
fi lebaron, cc. Here is


a queftion moued bp Littleton
whether the diſagteement of
the Dufbanb (ball oufte the
Sotfe of her Kemitter. Bnd it
feemeth that the diſagreement
hall not beucft the Remitter:
Firſt, becaufe the kate made
t9 the wife which Wrought
tbc Remtcter is banifhed and
Soholp defeated, and therefore
no difagreement of the buf-
bandcan deucft the ſtate gat>
hed by the leaſe, which bp the
Bemitter Wag dewelked be-
foze.

S»cconblp , fo? that the
Law bauing oncereftozed her
anglent and better right will
not fuffer the diſagreement of
the tufbanb to deneft (t ont
of ber, and to reutue the 3D (fe


Sellion 677.


€ | Cem file baton

Difcotinue la ter
fa fesne,et ala oufter
lemere, et le Difcon-
tinuee leffa mefine la
terre al ferm pur term
De fa vie, liner a lup
feilin.æ puis lebaron
reupent, & agreeaa
cel liuerie De feifin , c
eft bn remitter a la
feme, & bneoze fila
feme fuiffoit folc al
temps Deleleas fait
alup, ceo ne ferroit
à lup bn remitter,
Mes entant que cl
fuit covert Dc baron
altemps De laleas,
& De le liuery De fcí-
fin fait a Iup, coment
que el p2itt folement
Ie livery De feifin,ceo
fuit bn Bemitter a
luy, pur ceo que fene
couett ferra adiudge


ficome


Lfo if the huf-

band difcontinue
the land of his wife,
and goeth beyond fea,
and the Difcontinuee
let the fame Land to
the wife for tearme of
her life, and deliuer to
her feifin, and after
the husband commeth
backe , and agreeth to
this Liuery of feifin,
this is a Remitter to
the Wife , and yet, if
the Wife had beene
foleatthe time of the
leafe made to her, this
fhould not bee to her a
Remitter, but in as
muchas fhe was couert
baron at the time of
the Leafe , and liuery
of feifin made vnto
her, albeit fheetaketh
only the liuery of fei-
fin,this was a Remitter


Lib.3.


ficome enfant Deins
age eu ticicas, ac,
Quærc en cett cag GE
bató quant il teuíét,
boil Difagree a Fleas
æliuerp De ferlin fait
afonfeme en fon ab-
fence, (i ceoouftera
fon feme De fon 18¢=
mitter,ou nemp, ac,


Of Remitter.


to her becaufe a Feme
couert fhall bee adiud-
gedas an Infant with-
in age in fuch a cafe,
&c. Quare inthis cafe
ifthe Husband when
hee comes backe will
difagree to the leafe
and liuery of feifin
made to his wife in his


abfence, if this fhall oufte his wife of her


Remitter, or not, &c.


etl. 678.


continuance and reweff the
Sozongfuil eftate in the Difs
contínuce,

Chirdip , foy that Remit⸗
ters tending to the abuancez
tment of ancient Kights are
fauourco in Law.


357


41. E.3. 18.


18. Elit. Dier. 3510


JTem ( le baron

Difcontinua les te-
nements fon feme, a
le difcdtinuce eft Dit-
fei(ie, puts le diſſei⸗
four leffa mefmes Fs
tenements at baron
& a fon fem put term̃
De bie, ceo eft bn re⸗
mitter a la feme,
Mes file baron et
fon feine fueront De
couin a confent que P
diſſeiſin Dott c(1c fait
Dongues il nef* Ke⸗
mittera fon fei pur
ceo que el eft Diffeife-
reſſe:Mes GE baron
fuit Dc couin + con-
fent alediffcifin , et
nemp la feme, Dongs


Sed. 678.


A Lfo if the Huf-
band difcontinue
the Lands of his wife,
and thedifcontinuee is
diffeifed, and after the
Diffeifor letteth the
fame lands to the huf-
band and Wife for
tearme of life,this isa
Remitter to the wife,
But if the husband &
his Wife were of co-
uin and confent that
the diffeifin fhouldbe
made, thenit isno re-
mitter to his Wife
becaufe fhe is a Diffei-
fereffe, Butif the huf.
band were of couin&
confent to the Diffei-
fin , and not the Wife


Bree


€ Ez puis le diffeifor

leffa. mefeme les
tenements, &c. $3ote
fo much are remítterg fauous
red inlaw, that the ttate made
bp the Diſſeiſor (which come
methto the Land bp Song,
and bpon whom the entry o£
the Difcontinuce tg Tasvfull )
Doth remit the wife , anddec
neftetbatlont of the Difcon=
tinuce, albett bee hath a wars
rantie of the Xanp.


€ Mes fi le baron e
feme fuer! de couin &


confent , ec. Here it
appeareth that conín and cons
fent of the bufbanb anb Wife
Doth hinder the remitter of the
Wife, fo) coutne and confent
in manp cafes to doe a wrong
doth choakes mercright and
the (ll manner doth make a
go» matter vnlawtuli.


Œ Cowin. Couina
commeth of the French an
Convine, &($ a fecret alent

Dec


18. E. 4 2. b.


18.8.4, bi Aiprs,


ft) "PL Com.$46,
ts Wimbifoes cayo,


Lib.3.


44.E.3 46. 11. H.4.60,
44.Aff.2g. 19.H.8.12.
18.H.8.5. 1 E. 4.2.
7. H.7.11.


41 IT p.28. 25. Pt.


27.4[[.74. 15. E.4.4 a.
12. Aff. p. 20.


11.E.4.2. 15 E. 4. 23.
14.H.8.13. 33.H.6.5.
12, E.4. 21.6.


E.N.B.179.g.
12.€.4.9. 35..Aff §-

A4, E.3.9.33. 1144]: 1.
Temps E.x Wafle 128.
16. Mp. 7. 21.E.4.53.
21. M. 7.33 . 3-H.4.17.


Of Remitter. Seë.679


tielleas fait alfeme thenfuch Leafe made
eft bnremitter, pur tothe wifeisa Remir-

2 ceo que nul Default ter, for that no default
a en OF futeniafemt, vias in the wife.


one (bail diffetfe the Œenant of the Landagain& Whom thee map recoucr her lawfall Dower
all Which is done accozdinglp, the Cenant may lawfulip enter pon her , and auoi the recos
uerp inrelped of the couine. ut t£a Dilfeifor, Intrudoꝛ, o2 Abatoz Doc endow a Soman
that bath la&vfull title of Dower, this (c god, and fpall bind him that right hath, tf there Were
no fuch couine oz confent befoze the Diſſeilin, Abatement, o? 3 ntruson,

And fo tt ig in all cafes where a man hath a rightfulland tuft cauſe of Maio, pet (£ he of
couine and confent doc ratfc bp a Tenant bp wꝛong againk whom he map recover, the contne
doth fuffocate the right, foas the recoucrp though ithe pon a god title hall not bind, oꝛ re⸗
fore the demandant to bis right.

FEF Tenant in tayle and bts {lue difficile the difcontinuec to the ofe of the Father, ane tle
Father dieth, and the Land difcendeth tothe iſſue, bete not remitted agatnft the Difcontinuæ
in refpect he was prtup and partie tothe wzong, but tn refpec of all otters he is remitred,and
thal deraiqne the ft warrantie. And fo note a man may be remitted againſt one, andnot az
gatnft another. ,

A. and B. Jopntenants beintitled to areali Action againtt the beire of the Difleifoz, A.
caufe the heireto be diſſeiſed, againſt whom A. and P. recover and fue execution. b. tg remitte
fox that be $oag not particto the couine , and (ball holdin common Sith A, but A. is notre
mitted Fox the reafon that Littleton here ſheweth.


¶ Pur ceo que el eft diffeiforeffe. Nota, It is requiarly true thata
eme Conert cannot bea Diſſetſoꝛes by her commandement 02 procurement prccedent,no bp
her affent o? agreement {ubfequent, but bp ber actuall entrp 02 proper act fhe may bee a Dillet=
fozefle. And therefore fome doc hold that Littleton muft be intended that tbe hufband and Wife
ere prefent Shen the Difleifin Was done, and others doe hold that Littletoa is god Law
albeit (be Were abfent, foz that (£ ber procurement o2 agreement bec to Doe a wꝛong to canfca
Remttter onto her tn this fpccíall cafe the {hall Faite 0€ her end , andremitted fhe ſhall not bee,
but in this fpccíall cale (he Hail be holden ag a Diſſetſoꝛeſſe bp her conine and confent quate-
nus to hinder the Remitter. Andherett appeareth, that albeit the bufband bee of couineand
confent, &c. pet tf the Motte Were not of couine and confent aifo,the Mall be remitted, becaufe ag
Littleton fatth there Sas no default in the wife,


Set. 679.


€ I Tem fi tiel Difcontinuce fe-
foit eftate De franktenemeét


Capi.
Determined in the hearts of
two o» moze to the vefrau=


Ding and pretudice of another.
À woman is lawtully tne


Lfo if fuch difcontiñuee make
an eftate of freehold tothe


al baron a a fon feme per fait en=
Dent. fur condition, s, referuant
al Difcontinuce bn certaine rent,
& pur Default De payment bn re-
entrp, & pur ceo que le rent eft a-
derere, le Difcontinuee enter,don=
ques De cel entrie le fem aucca bn
Aſſiſe De Nouel diffeifin, apes la
moꝛt fon baron enuers Te Difcon-
tinuce, put ceo quele condition
fuit tout oufterment aniente, en⸗
tant quelafeme fuitens remit⸗
ter, vncore le baron — ſa

eme


husband and wife by Deed inden-
ted vpon condition, s.referuing to
the difcontinuee acertain rent and
for default of payment a re-entrie,
and for that the rent is behindthe ©
difcontinuce enter, then for this
entry the wife fhallhaue an Affife
of Nouel diffeifin,after the death of
her Husband againft the Difcon-
tinuee, becaufe the condition was
altogether taken away, inafmuch
as the Wife was in her Remitter,
yetthe husband with his wifecan-


à


Lib.
feme ne potent auer Alife, pur
ceo que Ic baron e(t eftoppe, at,


Of R emitter.


Seël.680.681.


not have an Affife becaufe the
husband is eftopped;&c.


C is hereby to be obſerued, that the wife ts prefentip remttted, sud that the conditions and
| fo bail af other things anneged to oz referueb bpon the Bate that ig baniſhed anb defeated


by tbe emitter) are defeated alfo,


Sed. 680. € 681.


Cl] Cem file baron difcontinua

les tenements fafeme, &re=
priſt eftatealuy pur terme De fa
bie, levemainder apzes tonnes
ceafe a fa feme pur terme De fa
bie, en ceft cas ceo nett on remit
ter ala feme Durant Ia bie le bas
ton, purceo quedurant la vie le
baton, la feine nad riens enle
franktenement, Des (i enceo
cas la feme ſurueſquiſt le baron,
ceo c(t bit remitter ala feme put
ceo que ou franktenement en ley
eft tect fur lup maugre le foen,Ct
entant que el ne poit auer action
enuerg nul auter perfon, æen-
uers lup mefme el ne poit aver
action, pur ceo el cft en 5 Remit⸗
ter, Car en ceft cas, coment que
ia feme ne entra pag ett les tene-
ments, bncoze bu eftrange que
ad caufe De aueraction, poit fuer
fon action enuers la feme De
meſmes les tenements, purceo
que el e(t tenant en ley, coment
que el ne foit tenant en fait,


Lfo if the Husband diícon-

tinue the tenements of his

wife, and take back an eftate
to him for life,the remaynder after
his deceafe to his wife fortearme
of her life, inthis cafe this isno
Remitter to the Wife during the
life ofthe husband, for that during
the life of the Husband the Wife
hath nothing in the freehold. But
if in this cafe thewife furuiueth the
Husband, this is a Remitterto the
Wife becaufe a freehold in Law is
caft vpon her againft her will. And
inas much as {hee cannot haue an
actionagainft any perfon, and a-
gainft her felfe (hee cannot haue
an Adtion, therefore fheeis in her
remitter.For in this cafe although
the Wife doth not enter intothe
tenements, yet a ftranger which
hath caufe to haue an Action, may
fue his A&ion againft the Wife
forthe fame tenements , becaufe
fheeis Tenant in Law , albeitthat
the bee not Tenant in Deed.


Sec. 68i.


€ Cz Ede franktenement en
fait eft celuy, d fil foit Dif-

feifie De franktenement, tl poít
auer Aile, Mes tenant de
franktenement en ley Deuant fon
entreen fait, nauera my affife,
Ct ((bome foít feifte De certeine
terre, et ad iſſue fits saps
eme


Or tenant of freehold in deed is
he, who, if hee bee diffeifedof
the freehold, may haue an Affife,
but tenant of freehold in Law be-
fore hisentrie in deed, fhall not
hauean Affife. And if aman bee
feifed of certaine Land , and hath
iffue a fonne who taketh wife, and
XXXX 2


Pi.


[as


12


358 |


(Comin Amy Towmefhends
fe


e,
AR. adit, Remister 12»


Lib.3.


53.4.8.36


Vid.Se8.44.7


"Braldon liba fil, 166.237.


Britton 8 3.6.
Flere lib. 3.cap.1 s.


(a) 12.£.4.16.
(b) 58,684.68 5,


Cap.
keme, arde pier deuie feifie,ct puis
le fits deuie beuant afcun entrie
fait per luy en la terre, le feme le
fits ſerra endowe en le terre, et
vncore il nauoit nul franktene-
ment en fait, mesil auoit bn fee
a franktenement en ley. Et iffint
nota, que Præcipe quod reddat
poitaurpbien eftre maintenus
enuers celuy que ad franktene-
ment en Icy, licome enters celup
que ad Ie franktenement en fait,


€


Of Remitter.


Sett.6 82.


the father dieth feifed,and after the
fonne dies before any entrie made
by him into the land, the wife of
thefonne fhall be endowed in the
land, and yet he had no frechold in
Deed, but he hada fee and freehold
in Lawe; And fo note, that a
Pracipe quod reddat may as well
bee maintained againft him that
hath the freehold in Law,as a-
gainft him that hath the freehold
in deed.


Ere fiuethings are to be obferueo ; JrírtE, that a remainder expectant bpon an eftate
£0? ltfe wozketh no Remitter, but when ít fall tn pollellion:foz beloze his time ke can


baue no actton,and no free bolo is in him. Sccondip, though the woman might Waine


the remainder, pet bccaufe ſhe is pꝛeſently bp the death ofthe hufband Cenancto the Præcipe,
(t (9 Within the rule of Remitter,and her power of waiuer is not materiall. Chirdlp,that a
freehold in Law being cat opor tbe Woman by act of Law without any thing done o2. alfenteb
to bp her, doth remit her,albcit the be then fole and offuil age. Jrourtblp, that a Precipe ipeth
agatnít onc that hath but a freehold in Law. Fittly, that oman (ball bee endowed Where


the hufband bath the inheritance anb but a freshold tn Law, ag hath bene fato in the Chapter


Se. 682.


of Dower,


€] ent ft tenant en taile ad if-

fue Deux fits De pleine age et
il leſſa la terre taie al eigne fits
pur terme De fa bie, le remainder
al fits puifne pur term̃ De fa bie,
et puis letenant en tatle moꝛuſt,
enceft cag leigne fits neft pas
eu fon Remitter, pur ceo que il
prent eftate De fon pier, Mes ſi
leigne fits moruſt ſauns iſſue De
fonco2ps, Donque cco eft bnre-
mitter al puifne frere,purceo que
il eft heire en le tatle et bn krank⸗
tenement en le ley eft efcheate, et
iecte furlup pet force De le te-
mainder, etílp ab nul enucrs
que il poit fuer fon action,


Are if Tenant in taile hath iffue

two fonnes of full age, and he
letteth the land tailed to the eldeft
fonne for terme of his life, the
remainder to the younger fonne
for terme of his life, and after the
Tenant intailedieth, in this cafe
the eldeft fonne is not in his remit-
ter, becaufe he tooke an eftate of
his father, but ifthe eldeft die
without iffue of his body, then
this isa remitter to the younger
brother, becaufe hee is heire in
taile, and a freehold inlawe is ef-
cheated & caft vpon him by force
of the remainder,and there isnone
againft who he may fue his action.


€ F this opinion (s (a) Littleton in our bokeg, and of this fafficient hath bene fab
O in the next Section before. Se hereafter (b) fomcerplanatton hereof.


Sed,


Lib.5.


Of Remitter:


Setlion 683.


€ E fa metme Te maner eft.lou

bone foit Diffeifie,æ Ie diſ⸗
feifoz moꝛuſt feítie, et leg tefits
Difcendont a fon beire, et Ibeíte
le Diffeifoz fait vn leas abn hoe
De mefmes les tenements pur
terme de bie, le remainder a le
Diffetfee p terme d bie,ou in taíle,
ou en fee le tenant a terme De bie
mozuff, ore ceo eft on remitter al


Diffeifee, ac, Caufa qua fupra,,
&c.


@ JN the fame manner it is;
where a manis diffeifed, and
the diffeifor dieth feifed, and

the tenements difcend to his heire;

and theheire of the diffeifor make
aleafe toaman of the fame tene-


ments for terme of life,the remain-


der to the diffeifee for terme of
life, or in taile,or in fee, the tenant
for life dieth, now this is a remit-
tertothe diffeifee,&c. Cauſa qua


868.683.684;


fopra dc.


€ A? tbig fandeth vpon thefame reafon that the cafes tn the two Sections precedent
doe. £»etbe next Sectton following,


Cc N Ota, fi tenant

en tatle cns
feoffafon fits et bn
auter per fon fait Dc
là terre tatle en fee,et
livery à feifin ef fait
alauter accozDant al
fait, x Ic fits rien co-
nufant De ceo a=
greeaale feoffment,
a puis celuy que pzift
le liuery De feifin de⸗
up, ale fits ne occu-
plalaterre, ne prent
afcun profit del terre
Durantlabiele pter,
& puts le pier mozutt,
02€ cco ef bn remit-
tet al fits,pur ceo que
le franktenement eft
tect fur luy per le ſur⸗
uiuo2: Ct nul default
fuit en lup, pur ceo
que il ne bnque a⸗


Self. 684.


Ote if Tenant in

taile infeoffe his
fonne and another by
his deed of the land in-
tailed, in fee, and liue-
ry of feifin is made to
the otheraccording to
the Deed, and the fon
not knowing of this a-
greeth to the feoff-
ment, and after hee
which tooke the liue-
ry of feifin dieth, and
the fonne doth not oc-
cupiethe land, nor ta-
kethany proffit of the
land during the life of
the father, and after
the father dieth,now
this is a remitter to
the fonne, becaufe the
freehold is caft vpon
him by the furuiuor.
And no default was in


Xxxx 3


€’ & theuid fem by this
marke that this wag
an addition ta Little-
ton, but (t ig of Lirtletons
oWne worke, and agrecth
With the oztqinall, faving the
Original begun this Secion
tbug,Itcfi renat en taile,&c.
€ Per fon fait, dre.
Were Littleton matertallp
abDetb bp big Ded, for tf a
inan intendeth to (b ) make a
feoffimentbp parol to A. and
B, anb be and B. come bpon
the land, A. being abfent and
make ALiucrp to B. in the
name both of B.¢ A,€to their
heirs this ſhall enure ontp to
B,foz neither can a man abs
fent take Liuery noz make
Liuery without Dep,

Œ Et linery de fei-
Jin ef fait a lauter. ac-
cordant al fait, dc.
Note Liuerp being made to
one according to the Dede,
enurcth to both, becauſe the
Desde Soberennto the Wines
ty referrcth is made to both,
fos the rule ig, Ghat Verba
relata hoc maxime operantur
perreferentiam vt in cis inefle


videntur.
€ x


359


(b) Temps H.8.Feoffments,
‘Br.73. 49.E.3.41.
10.E.4. 1.4, Y 5. E. 4.18.
18,E.4.12. 23.H. 6.12,


Lib.3.


Vide $e8.682.


Cap...


Of Remitter.


Sel. 685.


¶ Et de fits sini queen, ac, en la bie him, becaufe hee did
connfant de ceo,neagreea fon pier, et il ad neuer agree,&c.inthe
a le Feoffement. Here nul enuers que il life ofhis Father, and
itappeareth, Œbatifthefon ppit fuer Bzieke De hee hath none againft


be Conulant, andagreth to Formedon,@¢,


the feoftement.¢c, this ts no
MRemitter to him, And theres
fore 1€ the ffeoffement were


whom hee may fue a
Writ of Formdon, &c.


mavebp Ded indented, andthe fon With the other (calet?) the Counterpart, and then the feofa
fo) maketh Incrieto the other according to the Ded, anv the other dieth,the fonne ts not remite
te, becaufe he wag Conufant of the Feoflcment,andagradto the fame, and Littleton faith
(3 the Cafe that he putterh, Chat there was no vefauit inthefonne , becaufe hee agreed not te
the Feofkement tn the life of the Father: Bnd fott femeth, Chat (£ A. be ſeiſed in Caple, and
haue Flue two fonnes, and bp Ded indented betweene him of the one part, and the fonnes o£
the other part, maketh a Leaſe to the eloett for life, tbe remainver to the ſecond in Sree,
and dicth, and the elidel Sonne dieth Sithout Bue, the ſecond ſonne is notremitted , bee
caufehe agreed tothe remainder tn the like of the Father, oz it the like Eſtate had bene made bp
4) arol, (tn the itfe of the fathor the Cenant fos life had bene tmpleaded,and made detault, and
be (n the remainder had beene receiued, and thereby agreed to the remainder, after the death of
the father and the eldeft fonne without 3i flue, the fecondfonne ſhould not bee remitted, becaufe
Heagreed to the remainder tn the life of the father, all which is Swell Warranted by the rcafon


geelded by our Author in this Secton.


Sect. 685.


Mr i home foit Diffeitie de
€ C certaine terre ; et ie Diſ⸗
Ceifoz fait bn Fait be Feoffment,
per que il infeoffa B.C. et 22, et
ie liuerie De ſeiſin eft fait a B. ct
€, mes 32, nefuit al Liuerie de
feifin, ne vnq; agreca ale freoft-
ment, ne buque voile prender les
profits, ac, et puis B.et C, deut=
eront, ct 2. eur ſurueſquiſt,et le
Dilleifee poat fon Wetefe Sur dif-
{cifinenle Per, enuers D.il mon⸗
ſtra tout lematter, coment il ne
vnques agrees a le Feoffment, et
{flint il diſchargera luy de dama⸗
ges, iſſint que ſe Demandant ne
tecouera aſcuns dammages en⸗
uers lup, coment que il fort Te⸗
nant del franketenement Del Ere,
Et vncoꝛeleſtatute de Gloucefter
cap. 1. boit, que le Diſſeiſee reco⸗
Nera Damages en briefe De Entre,
foundue {ur Difletfin bers celup
que ett trouctenant.€t ceo eft bri
proofe en lauter cafe,que entant

que


Forif a man bee diffeifed of cer-
taine land , and the Diffeifour
make a Deed of Feoffement,wher-
by hee infeoffeth B. C. and D. and
Liuerie of feifin is made to B. and
C.but D. was not at the Liuerie of
Seifin, nor euer agreed to the feoff-
ment, nor euer would take the pro-
fits, &c. and after B. and C. die,
and D. furuiue them, and the Dif-
feifee bringeth his Writ vpon Dif-
feifin in the Per againft D. hee (hall
fhew all the matter , how he neuer
agreedtothe feoffement, and hee
fhall difcharge himfelfe of Dam-
mages, fo as the Demaundant (hall
recouer no dammagesagainft him,
although he be Tenant of thefree-
hold of the Land. And yet the
Statute of Gloucefter cap. 1. will,
That the Diffeifee fhall recouer
dammages in a Writ of Entric
founded vpon a Diffeifin againft
him which is found Tenant. And
this isa proofe in theother Cafe,


Lib.5.


que liffuc en Le Œaile anient à le
Franktenement, et nemp per fon
Fait, ne per fon agreement, mes
apes la mot fonpier, ceo ctt bu
Remitteraluy, entant que il ne
poit fuer Action 8 Formedon, en=
uers nulauter perfon,ac,


OfRemitter.


Setl. 686.687;


that for as much as the Iffue in taile
cameto the Freehold , and not by
his Aét, nor by his Agreement but


after thedeath of his father, there- -


fore thisis a Remitter to him, inas
much as he cannot füe an Actionof
Formedon againft any other perfon,
&c.


€ a Dis cafe ftandeth bpon the fame reafon that the next precedent cafe Doth;
Œ Mes celuy que eff trove Tenant crc. Pere tt appeareth,that


Ads of Parliament are to be foconttrncd, ag no man that is innocent 07 free from
inturte oz wzong, be bp a literall conftruction puniſhed oz inbammageo : and therefore in this
cafe albeit the letter of the Statute is gencrallp to gine Dammages again himthatis found
Œenant,and the Caf: that Littleton here putteth,D.being faruiuoz (o confequentip found tes


nant of tbe Land; pet becaufe he waiued tbe Eftate, and neucr agreed to the Feoftenent > 192
teoke any profits, he (bail nor be charged With che dainmages.


Setlion 686.687.


Cem fi bu Abbe aliena la fre
De fon mealon a br auter en
fee, et Lalience pet fon fait

eharge la terre oue bn rent charg
en fee, ct puis lalienee infeoffa
Labbe oue licence,a auet et teñ al
Abbe eta fes ſucceſſoꝛs a touts
tours, et puis Labbe moꝛuſt. et
bn auter e(t eflieu, et fait Albbe:
enceft cafe Labbe que ett le fuc-
ceſſor, et (ori Couent, font ẽ lour
Bemitter , et tienDzont la terre
bifcharge, pur ceo que meſme
Labbe ne poit auer aſcun Actis,
ne Bꝛiefe Dentre fine affenfu Ca-
pituli, De mefmela terre enuers
nul auter perfor,


Sed.


€ E $2, mefme le manet eft, lou


bn Cuefque,ou bn Bean,
ou auters tiels Perſons aliena,


of his houfe to another in

Fee, and the Alienee by his
Deed charge the land with a Rent-
charge in Fee,and after the Alienee
infeoffe the Abbot with Licence,
To haue and toholdto the Abbot
and to his fücceffors for euer, and
after the Abbot die, and another is
chofen and made Abbot: in this
cafe the abbot that is the fücceffor,
& his Couent,are in their remitter,
& fhal hold the lad difcharged, be-
caufe the fame Abbot cannot haue
an Action, nora writ of Entre fine
affenfu Capituli,of the {ame Land, a-
gainft any other perfon.


687.


A L{o if an Abbotalien the lid


IN the fame manner is it, where a
Bifhop or a Deane,or other fach
perfons alien, &c. without affent,


&c, fans a(fent, ac, et Lalienee &c. and the Alienee charge the
charge la terre,ac,ctpuis Leueſ⸗ land,&c.and after the Bifhop takes


que repriſt eftate De mefme la
terve per Licence, alup et ee
ts


backe an eftate of the fame land by
Licence, to him and his Succef-


360


Lib.3.


(ap.12.
Succeflors, et puis Leuefque
deuie, fon Succelloz eft en fon
emitter, come en Doit De fon
€ fglíte, et Defeatera le charg.ec,
Cautà qua fupra, &c.


Of Remitter.


$e8.686.687.688.


fours, and after the Bifhop dicth;
his Succcifouris in his Remitter as
inright of his Church, and fhall
defeat the Charge | &c. Caufa


qua fupra.


€ Ur Authoꝛ hautng fpoken of Remitters to fingular o2 naturall perfons,as Flues
in Gaile, and to Feme Conerts, ano to their Betres , andtothemin Weuerfion oz
Rematnder, and their Beires ; now he {peaketh of emitters to Wodtes politique
‘and incozpozate, ag to 2 bbete, Withops, Deanes, ec. And as Difcents doc remit che boire
Which comes in the Per, fe fucceffion doth remit the Succeiioz, albett he commeth in the Poft.
And fo in ether cafes where tbe Iſſue in Catle of fuil age hall beremitted,there in the {tke cafe
Hail the Succelloz be remitted aifo, and defeat all meane charges and incumbsances.


¶ Owe Licence,erc. That is, of the Ling andthe Lords immez


diate anb mebíate, tobífpence With tbe Statutes of Woztmaine, Whereot fe moze before,


Se&.142.


Set. 688.


€ [D fi home fuift faur ac⸗
tion enuers le Tenant en
«aile, ficome home voile

fuer enuers Iuy bn Bziefe Dentre
enle Poft, fuppofant pers bzicfe
quele tenant en taílenab pag en-
tre, finon per Al, De 25, que Diffei-
fi(t lapel le Demandant, et ceo ett
faux, et tl vecouer enuers le Te⸗
nant en le Œaile pet Default , et
ſuiſt erecution, et puis E p enant
entaile mozuft, fon Fue poit
auer Briefe De Formedonennerg
luy que recouera,et fil boile plea-
Dev le recouerie enuers Ie Tenãt
en tatle, liſſue poit Dire que Ie dit
A, de B. ne diffetit poynt lapel
celup que recoueraſt, en Ie manet
come fon Bricke fuppofa, et iſſint
tl faugera Ie tecouerte, Auxy po-
fito, que ceo fuit doper, que le dit
Al, de 25, Dilfei fit lapel le deman⸗
Dant que recoueraſt et que apres
Le Diffeifin Le demandant , ou fon
ier, ou fon apel per bn fait a-
uoient velelTe al tenant en Cait,
tout le droit que il auoít en la
‘Lerre, te, et ceo ntent contrifte-
ant


ALS if aman fueafalfe Action

againft Tenant in Taile, as if
one will fuc againft him a Writ of
Entrie in the Pos, fuppofing by his
Writ, That the Tenant in Tayle
had not his entrie, but by A. of B.
whodiffeifed the Graundfather of
the Demaundant, and this is falfe,
and.he recouereth againft the Te-
nanfin Taile by default, and fueth
Execution, and after che Tenant in
Tayle dieth, his Iffue may haue a
Writ of Formedon againft him
which recouereth, and if hee will
plead the Recouerie againft the te-
nant in taile,the Iffue may fay, That
the {aid A.of B. did not diffeife the
Grandfather of him which reco-
uered in máneras his writ fuppofe,
and fo he fhall falfefie his recouery.
And admit this were true, T hat the
fayd A. of B. did diffeife the
Graundfather of the Demaundant
which recouered and that after the
Diffeifin,the Demandant, or his fa-
ther, or his Grandfather bya deed
had releafed to the Tenant in Taile
allthe right which heehad in the


—


Lib.3. OfRemitter, — Sed.688.689.


ant il {uit bn Wetefe Dentreenle land, &c. and notwithftanding this


Poftenuerg Ic Cenant en Caik,
enle manner come eft auauntDit,
et le Tenaunt en Taile pleda a
celup, Que Le Dit A, De 25, ne Dif-
feifift pas fon apel, en le manner
come fon Bziefe ſuppoſa, et Cur
ceo font a Iſſue, et liſſue eſt troue
pur le Demandant.per que il ad
tudgement De reconer, et ſuiſt ex⸗
ecution, et puis le Tenant en le
Taile mozuft, (on X (Tuc poit aii
bn Briefe De Formedon enuers
celup que recoucra, et fil boíle
pleadle recoueric per laction trie
enuers fon pier, que fuit Cenant
en Taile, Donque il poit mon-
ſtrer et pleader le Keleaſe fait al
fon pier, et iſſint lactíon que fuit
{ue,feint en Ley.


hee fueth a Writ of Entrie in the
Pof,againft the Tenant in Taile, in
manner as is aforefayd, and the Tc-
nant in Taile pleadco him, That the
fayd A. of B. did not diffeife his
Grandfather, infuch manner as his
Writ fuppofe, and vponthis they
are at Iffue, and the Iffue is found
for the demandant,wherby he hath
iudgement to recouer,and{ueth ex-
ecution,& after the Tenant in Taile
dieth , his [fue may haue a Writ
of Formdon againft him that reco-
uered,and if he will plead the reco-
uery by che Action triedagainft his
father who was Tenantintaile,then
he may fhew and plead the Releafe
made to his father,& fothe Action
which was fued, feint in Law.


€ [£L reconeraenuers Le tenant em taile per default. Littleton addeth (bp
default) becaufc tf the (c) recouerp palled bpon an (Rue tried by berdit, bee (all neucr
falfific (n the point trped,becaufe an attatnt might bane beene had agatnft the Jurors and


albeit all the Jlurozs be dead, fe ag the attatmt voc fatie,pet the ifluc tn tatle fhall not falGiGe in
the potnt tried, Sbich,bnttll it be lawfully anopded, pro veritate accipitur. Be tf the Cenant
intaple be impleaded fn a Formedon, and he trauerfetb the gift,and it (e trped againſt bim and
thereupon the Demandant recoucr. Fn thts cafe the {lue intaple fhall not fale in the point
trped but he map faiGfic the recouery by any other mat-
ter: as that the Cenant (n tayle might aue pleaded acollaterall warrantie, o2 a Releale,as
Littleton here putteth the cafe, og to confette 3 auoid the point tried. And Littlecons cafe holdeth
not only in a recouerp by default, whereof he ſpeaketh, but alfo bpon a nihil dicir, 9? Confellien


02 Demurrer.
Seét.


€ E (qr i (emble que feint actí-

oneftautant abíte en Eng
liſh, a fained action, ceftafcauotr,
tiel action, que coment queleg
parole Dc le briefe font bopers,
bnco2c purcertaine cautes iL nad
caute ne title perla Iep De recouer
pur meſme laction, Ct faux acti-
onctt, lou les parole de beeife
fontfaur, Ct enles deur cafes
auantdits, file cas fuit tiel, que
apzeg ciel recouery & —

t


689.


Nd it feemeth that a faint ac-
tionis afmuch to fay in Eng-

lith, a fained aétien, that isto fay
fuch an Aétion as albeit the words
of the Writbeetrue, yet for cer-
tain caufes he hath no caufe nor ti-
tle by the Law to recouer by the
fameaction. Andafalfeaétionis,
where the wordes ofthe Writ bee
falfe. And in thefe two Cafes a-
forefaid, if thecafe were fuch chat
after fuch recouery,and execution


Yyyy


361


(e) ta. E. 4.19. 13.E. 4.5.
11. H.4.89. 7. H.4.15.
14.H.7.11.28.24/:32.53.
34:4[f.7. 10. H.6. 5.

21. H.6.13 b. "Brooke tif,
Fatexifier de Recenerie 55,


Lib.3.


28.4/f.:32.34. Af: Pl.7.
15-E.3.Age 9 5.11. H.4.f9
9. M.4.17.33. E. 3. Entree
song. 31.31. H.6.13.

16. H. 5.6. 12. E. 4.20.

X4. N.7. 11.33. Eli. Deer
376. lib. x. fal, SheRoyseafe.
7L. (m.55.


Mec bireafter SeB.709.
19.E.3.briefe 334.42. E. 3.
$3.44 E. 3. 31. 48. E. 3. 11.
T E.4. 5. 5 E.4. 2.


(d) 12-E.4.20.

"Bier 35.Eli(. 376. lib. 1o.
fol. 37.38. In JMary'Penting-
tous (Cafe.


(api.


ent fait, letenant en taile ft diſ⸗
ſeiſie celup que recoucra, et ent
moꝛuſt feifie, pev que là terre diſ⸗
cendift a fon iffue, ceo e(tbnte-
mittet al iſſue a liſſue eſt eins per
force De letaile, & put cel caufe
ico ape mis les Deux cales prece=
Dents, pur enfozmertop, mon
fits, que lifucentaile per force
Dun Difcent fait a lup apres bn
recouery a execution fait enuers
fon auncefter poit eftre aury bien
enfon remitter ſicome tl ferroit
per le Difcent fait a lup apecs on
Difcontinuance fait per fon aun⸗
cefter De les terres tailes, per
feoffement en pais , ou auter=


Of Remitter.


Seti. 689.690.


thereupondone the tenant in tayle


-had diffeifed him thatecoucred,


and thereof died feifed whereby


ithe Land defcended to his iffue,
this is a Remitter to the iffüe,
‘and the iffüe is inby force of the
taile , andfor this canfe I haue put
thefetwo cafes precedent, to en-
forme thee (my Sonne) thatthe


iffue in tayle by force of a di(cent
made vnto him after a recouerie
and Execution made againft his
Anceftor, may be afwell in his re-
mitter as he fhold be by the difcét
made to him after a Difcontinu-
ance made by his Anceftor of the
entayled lands by feoffment in the


ment, ac,


Countrie or otherwife, &c.


€ Gre Littleton ecplapneth What a faint action tg, and what a falfeaction is, which ig
Hire andperfpicuous, And hereit is to bee obferucd, that a Remttter may bee


Had after a recouerp bpon a faint ation bya diſſeiſin anb a bífcent


difcent after a difcontinuance bp a (eoffment, ac,
ü


€i ere ít. appeareth,
that if a tudgemét be

giuẽ againſt a tenãt
in tayle Spon a kaint o2 faife
ation , and Œenant in taple
atebefore execution, no execu⸗
tion can bee ſued againſt the
iſſue in taple. abut if in a
common recouerp tudgement
bee had again Œenant in
taple Where be voucheth, and
hath iudgement torccouer oz
uer ín balue, albeit the Te—
nant in Taple dict before
execution, pet the recoucros
alt erecute thetudqement a=
gaint the (inc in taple (n rec
ſpect of the intended recom-
pence, ond fo? that tt (s the
common aflurance of the
Bealme,and t5 Well warrau⸗
ranted ( d ) bp our Bokes,
and Yas not inuented bp
Juſtice Choke Who was a
grauc and icarned Judge (n
the time of E +. (as fone hold
by tradition) bot it map bee


Setlion 690.
€ | Lem les caſes

auantdits, file
cas fuit tícl, que a⸗
pres ceo que le De-
mandant auoit (ubg-
ment De tecouct en=
uerst tenant € taile,
æ mefine le tenant en
tatle moꝛuſt deuaunt
afcun erecution ewoe
enuers lup p queies
tenements Difcendôt
à foní([ue, et celuy q
recoulera futft bn Sci-
re facias boss De le
iudgement Dauct ex⸗


ecution De Ie iudge⸗


ment enuers liſſue en
taile, liſſue pledira le
matter


aſwell ag bys


" A Loimthecafes a⸗
forefaid,ifthe cafe
were fuch, that after
that the Demandant
haue iudgementtore-
couer againft the Te-
nant in tayle, andthe
fame Tenant in tayle
dieth before any exe-
cution had againft him
whereby the Tene-
ments difcéd to his if-
ſue, & he who recoue-
reth fueth a Scire facias
out of the iudgement
to haue execution of
the iudgement againft
the iffue in taile,the if-
fue fhal plead the mat-
teras aforefaid, and fo


Lib.5.

matter come auaunt
eft Dit : Ct ((Tínt p20-
uaque le Dit recoue=
tp fuit faux, ou feint
en lep , e tflint lup
barrera Dauct execu⸗


Of Remitter,
proue that the faid re-
couery was falfe or
faint in Law , and fo:
fhall barre him to haue :
execution of theiudg-
mente f


$e&.691;


that tt Was vpon founer Au⸗
thozities and opíniong of
Judges diſcouered by him;
aflented bute bp the relt of the
Judges.

FE a reconcrp bee had a-
gaint & enant £9? life with⸗
ont confent oz Couine, though
tt be without titie, and’ Exe⸗
cution bee bad, and Œenant


tion De le iudgement,
foz life dieth, the reucrfon oz


remainder ig difcontinued, fo ag he in the reuerſion 02 rematnber cannot enter, but ££ fuch a res
couerp be had bp agreement and Contne betwene the Demandant and the Cenant foz itfe,
then, as hath bene fai, it is a forfeiture of the eftate Foz life, and be inthe reucrfion 02 rematn=
ber may enter £o the fosfeiture. So it is (€ the Œenant Foz life ſuſfer common recoucrp at
this bay, it (s a Forfeiture of bis eftate, £o? a common reconerp ts a common conuepance 02 afz
favance, whercof the Law taketh knowledge, Since Littleton Swzote there were two Htas
tutes (e) madcfor pzeferustton of Remainders and Renerfions expectant don any manner
of eftate fog itfe, the one in 32. H.8. the other in 14.Eliz. but 32.H. 8, extended not to recoueries
Sohen Œenant £02 life came in as Wouchee,éc. and therefoze that act is repealed bp 14. Eliz.ann
fallremedie pꝛouided for pzeferuatíon of the entrie of them in reuerfion oz remainder. Wut the
Statute of 14,Eliz.ectendeth not toanp reconerp, bnlefle it bee by agreement 02 Coupne,
Syeconolp, (f) there be Cenant for! tfc, Remainder in tatle, the Reuerſion 02 rematuder in
fee € Œenant foz life be impleaded by agreement, and he bouche Cenant in tatic, and he vouch
oucr the common Torches, this {hall barre the 18 cucrfion o2 Remainder in fee, although bee in
the reucrGon oz rematnder did never aflent to the recouery, becaufe it was not the intent of the
acto crtendtofuch a vecouerie tn Which a Cenant tntaile was bouches, foz be hath power by
common recoucrp,t€ be were in po(Teff(omn, to cut off allrenerfions and remainders. And fo t£
(E cnant fez life had furrendzed to htm tn Kemainder in tafle, hee might haue barred the res
mainders anb reuerſions expectant bpon dis eftate. Thirdly, Where the proutfoof chat ac {peas
keth of an affent of 18 ccozd bp btm tn reuerſion 02 remainder, (t is to bee Onderfton, that fuch
affent mutt appeare bpon the fame 13 eco20 cítber bpona Goucher, Aid prier, recette, op thelrke,


fo2 itcannot appeare of Recoꝛd, vnleſſe tt be don
diciall entrie, 02 bp Memorandum.


Cem (i tenant

en taíle Difcon-

tinualetaile, et
mo2uft, et fon (fuc
oat fon bzicfe ð For-
medonenuers le Dif-
continuce (efteant te-
nant De franbtene-
ment Del tecte) et le
Bifcontinuce pleda à
fl neft tenant, meg
ouftermet diſclaima
De le tenancy en la
terre, en ceft cag 1e
tudgement ferra, que
le tenant alaf fang
four, et. apes tiel


‘Setlion 691.
Ae “Tf Tenant in


taille difcontinue
the taile, & dieth, and
his iffue bringeth his
writ of Formedon a-
gainftthe difcontinuee
(being tenant of the
freehold of the land )
and the Difcontinuee
plead that he is not te-
nant, but vtterly dif-
claymeth. from the
tenancy inthe land. In
this cafe the iudge-
ment fhall bee that the
Tenant goeth with-
out day, and after fuch


Yyyy 2


Pin courfe of aw, and not by any extrafu-


that Upon the plea
of non-tenure, op
ef a diſclaimer of the tenant
ina Formedon fn tfe Difcen=
ber, albeit tbe erpzelle tudge⸗
ment be thatthe tenant {bail
goe Without Dap, pet in
fubgement of Lai tbe De⸗
mandant map enter accoza
ding te the title of his wꝛit,
anb bee fetfed in tatle nots
Swithftanding the Difconti=
nuance. Bnd bere Littleton
faith tbe Demandant fhalbe
abiudged in his emitter,
where he taketh Remitter in
a large fence, foz in this cafe
the Demandant hath not
two rights, but bath onig
one ancient right, anb is re
ſtored to the fame by courte
of Law, and fo Kemittet
here is taken fox a: recontís
nuance of the right.
€ 0"


€ Hi: ít appeatetly


262


SA 3. 5E. 3. entre (^ n2.
42. ub 1.fo. 15.16.
Sir. Williams Pelhams cafa,


(€) 1*.H.8.ca.51.
14, Eli .ca.8,


(F) Lib.3 f.60.61.
Lincelne (olledze cafs,


.E,4.1. 36.H.6.29;
i 4.£.4.38. :


Non-tenupe Vid Bralon
Ib.fol.3 34.432. 67 414.
Brit;oncap.84.


Lib.3.


(E) 1 3- H.7.28. 36. H.6. a9.


23. H.6.44. 4.E.4.38.
5, E. 4.1, 6.€.3.8e


(8) 8-E.3.434. 24.E. 3.9.
11,H.4.16.07


$. E, 4.1.


7. H.6.17.


(ap.i2.
€ 04 le demandant


ne reconera damages.
Here is to bee obferned that
in {uch a Præcipe $obere the
Demandant íg to recouer
Damages, {€ the ÆŒenant
pleade non⸗tenure 02 Difs
Claime, (f) there the De⸗
mandant map aucrre him to
be tenant of the land, as bis
tozit ſuppoſe for tbe benefit
of his Damages, which others
wile hee ſhould iofe, 01 pꝛay
iubgement € enter, (g) Wut
Where no Damages arc to be
recoucred, ag in Formedon
in the Difcender, and the
like, there bee cannot auerre
him tenant, but prap bis
Judgement and enter , for
therebp hee hath the effect of
bis fuite Et fruftra fit. per
plura, quod ficri poteft. per
pauciora.


€ Aserrer. (0 a-
uerre os auouch, oz berifie,
verificarc, Sobereof commeth
verificatio Anawerment, and
is fofaíb as Soc in Engliſh
asin french. And tg twos
fold,viz. generall and partt=
cular. B generall auerment,
Which ts the concluGon of
every pleato the tzit, opin
barre of replications and o=
ther pleadings (£02 dLonntg
02 Auowries in nature of
Counts need not bee auer-
red.) containing mátter atc
firmatiue, ought to be auer⸗
red, & hoc paratus eft verifi-
care, &c. Particulat auer⸗
ments are, ag when the life
of Tenant for life, o? Te⸗
nant tn tatle are auerred, and
there, though thts word
( verificare ) be not bfed, but
the matter auouched and afs
firmed, {tig bpon the matter
anancrment. And an auer⸗
ment contatneth afSvell de
matter ag the Forme thereof,


Œ Que le tenant a-
laff fans iour. Quod


tenens cat fine die, Œbig ts
tbe entrie of the indgement
in that cafe,that tbe Gr enant
fall goe Mithout bap, that
istobedtichatged of further
attendance,and thig (a ſome⸗


Of Remitter.


iudgement liſſue en
ie taíle que eft demã⸗
pant, poit entrer en
la terre nyent conttt-
fteant le difcontinu=
ance,ct pertielentric
il terra adiudge eins
en fon Bemnitter, Ct
la cau(c eft, pur ceo
que fí afcun hoe fuift
Precipe quod reddat,
enuers afcun tenant
De franktenement.en
quel acto E. Deman=
bant ne recouera Da=
images, et le tenant
pledaſt nontenure,ou
auterment difclaima
en le tenancy, le Dc-
mandant ne poit a=
uerrer fon betefe, et
dirra Gil e(t tenat coe
lebatefetuppofe, Et
pur cel caute le demã⸗
bant apres ceo que
iudgement ef Done
& letenant ala(t fans
tour,poit entrer ẽ les
teneméts Demands,
le quel ferra auxy
graundaduantage a
lupenlep, ficome tl a=
uoitiudgement à te:
couerer enuers le te-
nant,et pet tiel entrie
theft eu fon remitter
per fozce Del taíle,
Mes lou le demand
recouecra Damages
enuers le tenant, la
le demandant poít a=
uerrer, que tl eft tenãt
come le biefe fupp, a
ceo pur labuantage


bel


Sci. 691.


iudgementthe iffue in
the tailethat is deman-
dant may enter into
the land notwithftan-
ding the difcontinu-
ance,and by fuch entry
hee fhall be adiudged
inhis Remitter. And
the reafon is for thatif
any man fue a Pracipe
quod reddat againft any
tenant of the freehold
in which ation the
demandant fhall not
recouer damages, and
the tenant pleads non-
tenure, or otherwife
difclaime inthetenan-
cie, the demandant
cannot auerre his writ,
and fay that hee is te-
nant as the writ fup-
pofeth. And for this
caufe the demandat af-
ter that that iudgemét
is giuenthat the tenant
fhall goe without day,
may enter into the tc-
nements demanded,
the which fhall bec as
great an aduantage to
him in law,as if he had

iudgement to recouer
againftthe tenant, and

by fuch entrie hee is in

his remitter by force

of the entaile, But

where the demandant

fhall recouer damages

againft the tenat, there

the demandant may a-

uerre chat he is tenant,

asthe writ fuppofeth

and that for the aduan-


Lib.3.


bel Demandant pur
reconetfes Dainags,
ou autermẽt tl ne re=
coueroit (eg Dama:
ges, queur font ou
fueront a Iup Dones
per la ley.


Of Remitter.


tage of the demandant
to recouer his dama-
ges, or otherwife hee
fhall not recouer his
damages , which are
or were giuen to him
by the law.


Se#.692.


tite finall for that action
swheres£ Littleton here puta
tech an example, € fomctime
semporaric, whero£ Littleton
alfo bath put an erample, ag
when excommengenient ts
pleaded in difability of the
39laíntife og Demanbant ;
there the award ig, that the
@enant oz Defendant (ball
got without dap, and pet


363


Vid.SeB sor.


Sohen the Demandant 0? Plaintife haue purchafcd his Letters of abfoiutton, bpon fbesoing
them to tbe Court,he may baue a refommons o? reattachementto recontinue the caufe againe.
Wut tt (gto be knowue, that When iudgement to given againſt tbe Cenant ox Defendant vp⸗
ona plea in barre, op to the tozit,Ec. the tudgement is all onc;viz. Quod tenens 9? defendens
eat inde fine die, and ſhali haue referencetethe nature and matter of the plea, anb fo bec taken
ether to gocin barre, o» tothe wait, Soon the other de When iudgement is giuen agaíntt
the Platntifeetther in barre of big action o? (n abatement of bts HMait,@c. the tudgement ts all
one, viz, Nihil capiat per breuc, anb (t appearcth bp the Record Whether the plea did goc tn barre
aztothetzit. And the caufe of the tudgement ts never entreo inthe Recoꝛd in any cafe, fos
that opon confioeratíon had of the Recoꝛd (t appearcth therein.


Seélion 692.


€ ] Gene home foit diffettie,
& le diſſeiſor deuy, fon beire
efteant eins nev Difcent, o2e len⸗
trie De le diſſeilee cit tolle, ct (i le
Diffeifee porta fon betefe Dentrie
fur diffeifin en le wer, enuers
ibeive, et lheite difclaime en E te-
nancp,æc, le DemanDant poit a=
ucrtct fon bziefe que il eft tenant
come le bziefe fuppofe fil boyt,
pur recoucrer fes Damages,mes
vncore fil voyt velinquifber le
auerment,zc, tl poit loialment
entrer enla terre per cauſe Del
Difclaimer,nient obftant que fon
entry adeuant fuit tolle, et cco
fuit adiudge Deuant mon mater
fir, Danbyiades Chief Au:
ftice dela common banke a feg
compagnons EC,


ALP if a man be diffeifed, and
the diffeifor die his heire be-
ing inby difcent, now the entrie of
the diffeifeeis taken away, and if
the diffeifee bring his Writ of en-
trie Sur diffeifin in the Per againft
the heire, and the heire difclaime
inthe tenancie, &c.the Demandant
may auerre his writthat hee is te-
nant as the writ fuppofe, if he will,
to recouer his damages, but yet if
he will relinquifh the auerment,
&c.he may lawfully enter into the
land becaufe of the difclaimer,
notwithftanding that his entrie be-
fore was taken away, and this was
adiudged before my Mafter Sir n.
Danby late chicfe Iuftice of the
Common place and his Compani-
ons,&c.


C7 [fi bome foit diſſeiſie, &c. Albeit in thig cate and in the cafe bes
foze the entric of the Temandant {9 bis owne act, anb the Demandant hath no expreſſe

iudgement to recouer, pet ſhall he be remitted, becaufe be in iudgement of the Law (hall
beinaccezding tothetiticof his wꝛit, and bp his entríc defecate the Difcontinuance, and cona


fcquentlp ts remitted to bis anctent cflate,


€ Sir Robert Danbye Knight was a Gentleman of an ancient
and faire diſcended kamily, and chiefe Aultice of the Court o£ Common pleag, a graue, reue⸗
rend


yr? 3


3 H.4. à. 11.


36.H.6 fo.294


5.8 441. 4E, 43;


Lib.3.


39..Aff. p.36. 43/0 3.
11H.7. 20.3. H.6.12.
4o-E.3.43.


$.R.2. wier.im.195.

1 9H.6.30.8. H.6.17.
21.H.6.2.3.H.4.9, 14.H.6,
15.16.37. H.6.18.
36.H.8.4. F-N.2.36.f. dx
350.


32.Affp. — enlecafe do
Th«obald Grinui le.


13-H.4.5.3.H.4.17.8.H.4.

$. 13.H. 4.19. 35-48.

17. Aff 3-39+AG.53-43-€-3
17.


7
Parkers caft.44 £.3.E flop. 1o
21.H.6.3. p "Pafen.8.H.6.


173 Cerfmre.


(Cap.


Of Remitter. Sel. 693.


rend t learned judge,of whom our author {peaketh here With berp great renerence,as pou map
percetue, And here ts to be noted how neceſſarie tt (9; after the example of our Aathoz, to ob-
ferus the tudgements,and refoluttong of the Sages of the Lak,


€ Eere appearéth a
H diuerfitic betxoeon

a ríqbt of entrie,
anb a right of Action ; for 1£
a man of full age haning but
arightof Acton, taketh an
Eſtate to him, bec is notres
mitted: but where hee hath a
rigbtof Œntrie, and raketh
an Eſtate, he by his entry ts
remitted, becaufe his entrp ts
lawfull, And tthe Dileiloz
ínfeoffe the WDifletfe and
others, the Dilletfee ts remit-
ted to the Swhole, for his entry
ts la&vfull: otherWilſe tt ts tf
hts entric Swerc taken away.


Lon lentrie est


congeable. A. íg Dif-
feifed of a Wannoz,whereuns
to an Aduowſon ts appen=
bant, an Œftranger vfurpe
to the Aducwfon,if the Dif-
fcifee entertnto the Aannoz,
the Aduowſon is recontinu-
edagaine, Which was ſeue⸗
red bp the dfurpation, And
fo itis if G cnant tn G aple be


Sed. 693.


€ [Cem lou lentry

Dun home eft
congeable , coment
que tl prent eftate a
lup quaunt tl eft De
pleine age pur terme
De bie, ou en taíle, ou
enfee, ceo eft on Ke⸗
mitter alup, fi ttel
prifel De eftate ne foit
per fait indent, ou
per matter De teco2D,
que concludera ou cz
ftoppera, Car fi hoe
foit diſſeiſie, et repꝛẽt
eftate De le Diſſeiſor
fans fait, ou per fait
polle.ceo eft vn remit
al Diffeifec.æc,


Lfo where the en-
trie of a man is
congeable , although
that he taksan eftate to
him when he is of full
age, for terme of life,
orin Taile, or in Fee,
this is a Remitter to
him, if {uch taking of
the Eftate be nor by
Deed indented, or by
matter of Record,
which fhal cóclude or
eftop him: for ifa man
be diffeifed, and takes
backe an Eftate from
the Diffeifor without
Deed, or by deed pol,
this is aremi:ter to the
Diffeifee,&c.


ofa Mannoz, Whereunto an Aduowſon is appendant, the Cenant in Caple difcontinneth
in Fee, the Diſcontinuee grauteth awap the Aduowſon in See, and dteth, the 3i ftue in Caple
recontinueth the Mannoꝛ bp reconerte,be is therbp remitted to tbe Aduowſon, and in both ca=
fes be that right hath (ball pzefent ben the Church becommeth voyd.

Che Patron of a Weneficets outlawed, andthe Church becommeth bopb , an Eftranger
bfurpeth, and fire moneths patte, the King doth reconer in Quare impedit , and remoouc the
jncumbent, ac. the Aduowſon ig recontinned to therightfull Patron. And fo note a btucrz
fitie between a Recontinuance and a Kemitter,foz a Wemitter cannot be properip vnleſſe there
be two tities, bnt a recontinuance map be &oberc there ts but one.


Œ Per fait iadent &c. Here it appeareth, Chat tf the Diſſeiſoꝛ by
Ded indented make a Leaſe for life, oz a giftin Œaile,oza Jrcoffemcnt in fee, whereunto
Liucricof Seilin (a requtfite, pct the Dæd invente fhall not fuffer the Linerie made accoz=
Ding tothe forme and effect of the Jndenture,te wozke any remitter tothe Dilleifæ, but (ball
eftoppe the Difletfe to claime his Former eftate : anb tf the Diftetfor bpon the Feoffinent doth
reſerue anp rent 02 condition, tc. the rent 02 condition ts go : andthe reafon berefoze a ded
indented fhall conclude the taker moze than the Deed polle, ts, for that the Deed poll is onelp
the Deed of the feoffoz, 300102, and Lefloz, but the Deed indented tg the Medof beth Par⸗
ttes, and therefore ag Well the taker as the giver is concluded,


" & Ou per Record. AS by Fine, eed indented, and inrolled, and
£,


Sed.


Lib.3.


Of Remitter. Se.694.695.696.


Sef. 694.


Œ [Lom ( home leffa terre
put terme De die a on aut,


le quel aliena à bn auter


en fee, et lalienee fait eftate a le
XLeffout , ceo cit vn Kemitter al
Leffor, pur ceo que fon entrie
fuit congeable,zc,


, Lfo if a man let land for terme

of life to another, who alie-
neth to another in Fee, and the A-
lienee make an Eftate to the Lef-
four, this isa Remitter tothe Lef-
four, becaufe his Entrie was con-
geable,&e.


his is culdent enongb spon that which hath bene fapo,


Section 695.


€ | Tem fi home lſoit diſſeiſie et

le Diſſeiſor lela la terre al
Diffetice per fait pol, ou fans fait
purterimedes ans.per que E dif=
fetive entra,ceft entre e(t bn Ke⸗
mitter ale Diffeifce, Caren tiel
cafe lou lentre Dun home eft con-
geable et bn Leale e(t fait a lup,
coment que il claima p parole en
pais, que il adeftate pet force De
ticlicale,ouDdDit ouertment que il
ne claima tiens en la terre finon
perforce De tielleate, bricosc cen
eft bn remitter a lup, cat tiel diſ⸗
claimer en le pats nett viens a
purpofe, Mes til diſclaimer en
court de Recoꝛd que il nad eftate
korſque per fozce De tiel leafe, et
nomp auterment,Dongs il ẽ con-
clude,zc,


Lifo ifa man be diffeifed, and
the Diffeifor let the Land to
the Diffeifee by deed pol, or with-
out Deed , for terme of yeares,by
which the Diffeifee entreth, this
entricis a Remitter to the diffeifee,
For in fuch cafe where the entrie
of aman is congeable, anda Leafe
ismade to him, albeitthat he clai-
meth by words in Pays , that hee
hath eftate by force of fuch Leafe,
or faith openly, That hee claimeth
nothing inthe Land but by force
of fuch leafe,yetthis is a Remitter
to him, for that fuch difclaimer
in Pays is nothingtothe purpofe.
But if he difclaime in court of Re-
cord,that hee hath no eftate but by
force of fuch Leafe, and not o-
therwife, thenis hee concluded,
&c.


€ Ere appeareth a Diuerũtie betweene a Claime in Paijsof an Eftate, anda Claim⸗
H of Recoꝛd, foy a. Œlaime in Paijs (hall not hinder a Remitter, DtherSife tt (g of
a clatme of Recoꝛd, becaufe that doth woꝛke a Concinfion.


Se#. 696.
Cl[Cem ( deur j- coi if two Ioyn- . € Ht note à Diners


Joyntenaunts


tenants ſeiſed of


fitie Sworthp the
obfernation , that


feitíe De certain tene= certaine Tenements in ‘where Jopntenants 0? Cos


ments en Fee, lun Fee,the one being o


f parcenes baue one and the
fame remebte ,t€ the onc *


264


Lib.3.


10 H.6. 19. 19. H.6.45.
31. H.6.tir, Entr.emg.


F.3 g Af PL ltimo,


V.4c8.388.3 38°


Capiz.


the other thail efter alfo: but
Swhere remedies bee feucrall,
there tt ts otherwife. As tf
two Joputenants 02 &opar-
ceners topne tn areall Beton,
Swbere their entries not law⸗
full, and the onc ta ſummoned
and feuered,and the other pur=
ſueth and recoucreth the mot=
tte, the other Jlopntenant 02
Coparcencr Mall enter and
take the profits with her, be⸗
caufethetr remedic Mag one
and the fame, Wut Where
two Œoparcenerg ba, and
thep are diſſelſed, anda Difs
cent is cat, and thep baueifs
fue and die, tf the Iſſue of
the one recover her moitie,
the other fhall net enter with
ber , becaufe their remedies
Soere fenerall, and pet When
both haue recoucred , thep are
Coparceners againe, So
herein thts Cafe that Little-
ton putteth , thetiwo Joine⸗
tenants haue not equal reme=
die, for the Jnfant hath a
right of entrie and the othcr a
right of Adion ; and therfore
the Infant becing remitted to
a moitie, the other ſhall not
enter and take the profits
Sith her.

FE A. and B. Jointenants
in fe, be diffeifed bp the faz,
ther of A, Soho dieth feifen
dis fonne and heire entreth,be
ig remitted tothe Whole, and
his Companton {ball take ad=


Of Remitter.


efteant de pleine age,
lauterDeins age font
Difleifies.ac, et diſ⸗
ſeiſor moꝛuſt feific.et
fon iſſue entra lun de
les Jointenants e⸗
ſteant adonq; deins
age, et aprzes que il
vient al pleine age,
Ibeite le Diffeifoz leſ⸗
fales @enements a
metmeg les Joynte⸗
nants pur terme de
lour deux vies, ceo
eſt vn remitter (quat
al moitie) a celuy que
fuit Deins age, pur
ceo que tl eft feifie De
ceft moitie que affi-
ert aluy en fee, put
ceo que fon entre fuit
congeable, Wes lau-


ter Jointenaunt nad _
en lautet moitp fo2t-


que eftate put terme
De fa bie, per force De
le leaſe pur ceo que 8
entre fuit tolle ac,


Setl.697.


full age, the other
withinage, bee diffei-
fed &c. and the Dif-
feifor die feifed, and
his Iffue enter, the
one of the Ioynte-
nants being then with.
in age,andafter that he
commeth to full age,
the heire of the Dif
feifor letteth the Te-
nements to the fame
Ioyntenantsfor terme
of their two liues,this
isa Remitter (as to the
moitie) to him that
was within age, be.
caufe hee is feifed of
the moitie which be-
longeth to him in fee,
forthat his entry was
congeable. Butthe o-
ther Tointenant hath
in the other moity but
an eftate for terme of
his life by force of the
leafe,becaufe his entry
was taken away, &c.


uantage thereof, OtherSvife heere in the Cafe of Littleton, fo; thatthe abtiantage ts giuen tc
the Infant moze ín refpect of bis perfon, than of hts réabt, whereof his Lompanton ſhal take
noaduantage, But if the Grandfather had dilleifed the 3lopntenantg , andthe Land bab dif=
cended to the father,and from bim to A.and then A. bad died,the entrte of the other fhonid be
taken a&vay bp the firft difcent, and therefore he (boutb not enter With the etre of A.

ut heretn the cafe of Litileton, té after the difcent the other Flopntenant had died, and the
Fnfantfarutucd,fome fay that he fboulo hauc entre into the whole, becauſe hets now in indge
ment of La, folely in bp che fir feoffement, and be claimeth not bnder the Difcent.


Cuar.t.


L efl commune-


ment dit. ere
by tbe opínton of Littleton,
Communis opinio fg of ate
thozitie, and Lande With the
rule of La, A communi ob-
ferpatia non cft recedendum :


Of Warrantie.


€ TX. cft commune-
ment dit, Que
trois Garran-
ties y font, 8, Gar⸗
tantie lineal, Gar⸗


rantie


Sect. 697.


Tis commonly ſaid
that there be three
Warranties, fcili-

cet, Warrantie Line-
all, Warrantie Co-


Lib.3.

tantíe collaterall, et
Garrantie que com-
mence per Differin,
Œteftafcauoit, que
Deuant leffatute De
Glout, touts Gar-
ranties queux Dif-
cendont a eux queux
ſont heires a eux que
fefopent les Garran⸗
ties, fucront batres
a mefmes les beires
a Demander afcuns
terres ou tenements
encounter les Gar⸗
cantícs.fo2epaite leg
gatranties que com⸗
mencerent per Dif-
feifin, cav tiel Gar⸗
rantie ne fuit onque
barre al beíre , put
ceo que le Garrantie
commence per to2t,
8, per Diffeifin,


Of Warrantie..


Jaterall,and Warrantie
that commence by


diffeifin. And it isto.


bee vnderftood, that
before the Statute of


Glouc’.all Warranties.


which difcended to
them which are heires
to thofe who made
the Warranties, were
barres to the fame
heires to demand any
Lands or Tenements
againft the warranties,
except the Warran-
ties which commence
by diffeifin. For fuch
warranty was no barre
tothe heire, fot that
the Warrantie com-
méced by wrong, viz.


by diffeifin.


Setl,697.


andagatne, Minime mutanda
funt quz certam habuerunt
interpretationem.

Here our Buthoz beginneth
this Chapter With an exact
Dinifion of Warranties. BW
Warrantic ty a Œouenant
Teall annexed to ands o)
Cenements Wherebp a man
and hts beiteg are bound to
Svarrant the fame, anb eptbcr
bpon boucher o; bp iudge⸗
ment in a ro2í(t c£ Warrantia
carta £0 petld other lands and
Tenements ( wbich tn olve
Bokes ts calledinexcambio)
te the value of tbofe that (ball
be euicted bp a former Citic,
ozeife map be vſed bp Swap of
Rebutter.

Rebeuter (8 à
French Mopd, and is tn La⸗
tine repellere,to tepell 02 bar,
that ts inthe bnderftanding
of the Cominon Law, the actt=
on of the betre by the war⸗
ranty of bis Anceftoz, anb
this is calich to Rebatte 07
tepell, (c) Britton faith, Gar-
ranter en vn fence fignifica de-
fender fon tenant en fa fei-
fin, & en auter fence fignis
fie que fiil ne defende que le
garrant luy foit tenue a ef


changes, & de faire fon gree a la vaillaunce. (d) Bra&ton fapth, Warrantizare nihil aliud
eft , quam defendere & acquictare tenentem. qui Warrantum vocauit in feifina fua.
(c) Fleta faith , Warrantizare nihil aliud eft quam pofRdentem vocantem defendere & ac-
quierare in fua feifina vel poffc(lione erga petentem , &c. & tenensde re Warranti excambium
habebit ad Valentiam.

It ts to be obferned that there be two Kind oftoarranties, that (d to fap Wartantia expreffa,
€tacita bulgarip faid $oarrantte in Deed, becauſe thep be erpzefled,¢ Warranties in law,becanfe
the la doth tacitelp tmplp them. Bnd this diuiGon of toarranties that Liti.bere fpeaketh of, he
intendeth of Marranties in Deed. Bnd of Warranties tn Law moze (ball bee fatd hereafter in
this Chapter. Bs for promifes o; Contracts annexed to Cyattels reall o2 perfonall thep are
notintended bp our Authoz tn bis fato diutfion, but only toarranties concerning Freeholds
and 3inberttances,


€ Denant le flatute de Glouc. Chis Statute twas made at a pars


Brat. lib. 2. fol.37.19. c. fol.
3t0.381.&c. g lamull. lib. 3.
ap. 1.2. 3. Lik.7.capa.3. lib.
9.cap.4. Britton cap. io $ fol.
249.150.drc. dr fal 88. 106.
5.196.197. Fleta lib. s .eug.
1 5. Lib.G.cap. 23. Mirror
ep. 2.S.17.


388.321, 4g. E. 3018.


(c) Britten, fal. 193.5.
(d) Grafen lib. 5. fol.380,
(€) Fleta lib. 5 cap. 1 Ge


Lib. 4-fel.81. Nokes Cafe.


Vide 98.733.


Gloc.enp.3.
Vide $68.3234.235. &
37. dr.


Hament bolben at Glocefter tm the ſixt peare of the raigne o£ thing E.1, andtherefoze tis called 5 mer


the Statute of Gloccíter.


€ Sont barres a mefines les heires a demander afcuns terres , oc. #0
the Statute, as bath beene ſaid, being made ín 6.E.r. (Wags befoze the Statute of Donis
conditionalibus which was enacted r s.E.1. ) Soben all ffateg of Inheritance were fes imple,
Wut afer the Statute of 13.E.1. the here in tayle is not barred bp the warrantie of bte
Anceſtoꝛ vnleſſe there be Aſſets, ag ſhall be fatd hereafter mozelargelp inthis Chapter,

By the Statute of Glocefterfouretbiugs are enacted.

Firſt, that if a Conant by tbe curtelie alten With nto attantít and dieth , that this (ball bes
no barrcto tbe heire in a Wꝛit of Mordancefter without Biets in fee imple, 20no t£ Mande où
Œenements difcend to the beíre from the Sather hee hall bee barved haning regard tothe bas


lue thereof.
$55 Se


BraBon' ib. 4. fol.33ibe
Flere lib. 6, rap. 34.
y. E. 3.Gerr.47.


Lib.


Ud pe alis Car. ts.

A.E, 5. Garr. 63.18. E. 3.51.
*Pl.Cwm.116, 7. E. 3.53-
Temps £1, Garr.87.


27.2. 3.89. 14. E.4.Garr.5.
"Dier quarto Mar.148.4.


21.4] 9. & 37.
Tempi E.1.Garr. 86.
(9) 11, H.7.cap.ao.


18.E,3.9.


21. R. 3. Iudgemunt 263.


gi. H.#.cap.10.

Vide C e Bee this Stas
tute of Y 1. H,7.64p. 30. well
expounded. Lib. 1. fol. 17 6. im
Sir Anth Mildmayes (afe.
3.dr 4. Ph. & Mar.Dier.146
sb. 3. fol. 60. 60.61.62.
Lincolse Colt. Cafe. T f. Com,
fal. 56. 20.€ if. Dser 362.
Dol. er Student. — B. Eliq.
Dier 248. vo Elit Dier 354
21. Elsx, sind. 363. lib. 3.

fal. «o.$ «dtr Ge rge Browne:
Cafe Lib. s f-79- eFit( b. Cafe.
27.H.8.25. :

té) Mish. 3. Ia« inter
Harley &r Weft in eseltione
firmes Comnmni "B anes.
Lincolo.


(g) T«f^.17. Elif,


(ep. Of VVarrantie. Seë.697.


Setondly, That tf the hetre,foz Want of Allets at that time difcended,voth reconer the lands
of his Mother by force of this Bc, anb afterSwards Alſets difcend to the betre from the Fa⸗
ther, then the Cenant fball reconer agatnft the beire the Inherttance of the Mother bp a
Orit of Judgement, Which Mall iflue out of the Recoꝛd, to rcformon him that ought to wars
rant, ag tt bath beene donc in other Cales , Sobere the heire beeing vcuched Cemmcthintothe
Court, aud plead ctb chat he hath nething by difcent.

Thirdly, That the iflue of the Sonne Mali secouer bp a Wait of Cofinage, Aicl and Be-
.faicl,

And laſtly, that the boire of the wife after the death cf the Sather and 9p other Mall bebar-
xed of bis Action to demand the Heritage of the Mother by toot of. Entrie, Mich his Fa-
ther alíenco in the time of bis Mother, whereof no fine Was leuted in the Rings Court.

€ ontemíng the firk, there be tio points in Lat to be obferned, 2

Firk, Aibett the Statute in this Articlename a it of Mordancefter, end after wꝛits of
Cofinage,Aiell anb Befaiel (e) pet a tait of Bight, a Formedon,a Wait of Entrp Ad Com-
munem Legem, and all other like Batons are Within thepurnic of this Statute, for thofe
Actions ate put bat fog examples.

Secondly, where ít is fato in thefaid Ad,( ifthe Cenant bp the curtefie alien) pet big vez
leafe With toarranty to a Ditletfoz, ac. is $ottbin the purniew of the Statute, foz that it (g
in cquall mifchtefe, anb t£ that enafion might take place, the Statute ſhould haue beene made
ín baínc,

It Tenant by the curtefie be ofa Seignioꝛie, and tbe Cenencte efcheatc onto him,¢ after he
alieneth with toarrantte, this fhall not bind the iſſue, vnleſſe Aſſets diſcend, foz tt is in equati
mifchiefe. Wut notwithftanding this Statute,if eme Œcnant in Dower had altened in fee
Sith Warranty and died, the warranty had boundthe heire bntili the Statute (o ) of ay.H.
7.fince our Buthoz wzote. Wy which Statute the hetre map enter norwithitanding fuch
fiparrantic,

But note there is a diuerfitte betweene a warranty on the part of the Mother,and am eſtop⸗
ell, Foꝛ an eftoppell of the partof the Mother ball not bindthe hetre, when bee claimeth
from the father. As if Lands bec giuen to che bufband and Wife; and to the betres of tho
bufband, the bufband make a gift in taple, and dicth, tbe wike recoucreth {na Cui in vitag-
gaínft the Done fuppofing that ſhe had fe fimple, and make a feoffment and dict), the Do⸗
nee dieth Without iſſuc, the ilue of the Huſband and Wife bzíng a Formedon in the Weuerter
againt the frcoftee, and notwitbftanding that he was heire tothe Eltoppell , and the Mother
as eftopped, pet foz that he clapme the Land as heire to his Sather, bee Wag not eftoppcb,
Nore, that toarranties are favoured in Law being part of a mans affurance, but eſtoppels
are odtous.

Fea fome betre o£ a Diſſeiſoz infeotketh me With wWacrantic, and marríctl) With the Dillet=
fee, it after the Diffeifee biinga Precipe again me, J Mall rebut htm,tn refpect of the toars
rantic of bis wife, and pet hee demandeth the Land in another right, And fo tf the Huſband
* wike demand tbe right of the wife, a $oarranty of the collaterall Ænceftoz of the uſband

all barre.

It a Woman had bene Tenant fog life, the remaynder 02 Keuerſion tober next heire, and
the Woman had altencd tn fee and died, this toarrantp had barred her heire in 1Remapnocr oz
Beuerfion, but this (8 partlp hoipen by tbe fato Act of 11.H.7. viz. where the Woman hath
anp eftate £0 life of the Inheritance o2 Purchaſe of her Hulband, o? giuen to ber bp anp of
the Anceftozs of the Bufband, op bp anp other perfon feifedto the fe of her Dulband o7 of
anp vis Anceſtoꝛs, there her Alienation, 18 eleafe,oz Confirmation Sith toarranty {bail not
bind the hetre.

To the Aathozities quotcb in the margent Which may ferncas Commentaries vpon the fato
SDtatute, 3 il onip adde two cafes, the onc Was. (f) A man feifeo of Lands in fee ieutcda
finc tothe bfe of himfelfe oz itfe, and after to the bic of his wife, and of the heires males of
her bodte bp him begotten £oz her Joynture, and had Iſſue male, andafter he and his Wife lex
uted a fine and fuffered a common recoucrp, the Huſband and Wifedied, and the Iſſue male
entred by force of the fao Statute of r:.H 7. And (t was holden bp the Juſtices of Alife
(the cafe comming done to be trped bp Nifi prius) that the entry of the Hane male was law⸗
full, and pet this cafcig out of the Letter of the Statute, for thee neither ented the fine, €c.
being ele, 07 with anp other afterstaken Dufbanb, but ts bp ber felfe With her Huſband that
made the 3| opnturc, Sed qui hærerinlittera hxretincortice, and thts cafe beeing (n tbefame
mifchiefe te therefore Withiatheremedy of the Statute bp the intendement of the makers of
the fame to auopd the dttherifon of heires Who Were prontded for by thefaio 3lepntare, and
efpectallp bp the Huſband himlelt that made the 3iopnture which(as tt was fate tsa (ironger
cafethen the examples fet downe in tbe Statute, Che other Was, (a) B man is pie

and


Lib.3. Of Wartantie. Seil.697.


Lande in the right of bis wolfe, andthep two leuy a fine, andthe Conuſee grant ard rendgeth
the Land tothe Bulbandand tffe infpectall taple, tbe remapnber to the right heires of the
wite, thep hane luc, the Huſband dieth, the wife taketh another don fbanb , andthep two 1e=
ute a fine in fee, andthe tue entrcth, this to Direclp Within the Letter of the Htatuce,and pet
it tg out of the meaning, becaufc the fate of the Land mouep from the wife, fo as ft was the
purchafe of the huſband inletter,and not in meaning. Wut Where the Homan (9 Cenant fog
life bp the gift oz connepance of any otber,ber alienation with toarrantyp (ball bind the heire at
this bap. So it a man bee Tenant fozitfe (otheriwife then ag Cenant bp thecurtefie) anbas
lien in fe With toarrantp and dicth, this thallat this dap bind the heire that hath the Reuer⸗
fion oz Remaypnder by the Common Law not holpen by anp Statute. Wut all this ts to be
vnderſtod, vnlefſe the heire chat hath the Xa eucron o? Remapnder doth auotoe the eftate fo as
liened in the lifeof the Anceſtoz, fos then the cftate being auopded, the toarrantp being annered
bnto the eftatets anopdedaifo, whereot moze fall be fato inthis Chapter tn his proper place,
And therefore tt is neceLarp forthe hetre in fuch cafes to make anentrpas fone as hee bath
notice ox probablefufpition of {uch an alienation,

e to the ſecond claufe of the Statute of Gloceíter, Chere are two points of Law te bee
obſerued.

Fix, That bp the expreſſe puruiew of the Statute , t€ Aſſets doe after diſcend from
the Father, then the Œcnant (ball baue recoucrp op reftitution of the Landg of the Mor
ther. But in a Formedon {fat the time of the Warranty pleaved no Aſſets be difcended, wheres
by the Demandant recoucreth, (£ after Aſſets bífcenb, there tbe Cenant {hail haue a Scire fa-
cias fox the Aſſets, and not foz the Land intayled. Bnd the reason hereof is , that (£ inthis
cafethe Tenant fhouid bereftozcd tothe Land intapied, then tf the Flue in Gayle altened
the Allets, bis Iſſue ſhould recouer tn a Formedon, andtherefoze the Sages o£ the Law to
prevent future occafions of {nits refoluedthefatd diuerhtte in the Cafes aboucfato vpon conz
bom and con(trudíon of the Statutcof Glocefter, and of the Statute De donis con-

itionalibus.

Secondly, Ft is to be obferued, that after Aſſets diſcended, the recouetíe fball bc by weit
of indgenlent Which fball (ffue out of the Rolle of the Juices, ec, And here twe things are
tobe declared anderplapnes. Firſt, bp What weit, tc. and that ts clere, viz. bp Scire facias,
Wut thefecond {3 moze dificult, and thatis opor What manner of indgement the Scire facias
is to be grounded: fo? erplanatton whereot (t is to be bnderftod, that if the Cenant willhaue
benefit of the Statute he mutt plead tbe toarranty, andacknoWledge the titte of the deman=
bant, and pzap that the abuantage of the Statutemay be faned vnto him. And then (£ after
Aſſets difcend , the Cenant bpon this Record fhall haue a Scire facias. Bnd tf Ailets difcend
but fo? part, he fbail haue a Scire facias for fo much. Wut tf the Cenant plead the tbarranty,
and plead further that Aſſets difcended, tc. anb tbe Demandanttaketh iflue that Adets ifs
Conded not, ac. Which {lue (a found fora the Demandant, whereupon hee recouercth , the Œe-
nant albeit Alſets poc after difcend, {hall neuer haue a Scire facias bpon the ſaid Judgement,
fo; that bp bis faife plea bc hath loft the benefit of thefato Statute,

Touching the third fufficient hath beene ſpoken before. Foꝛ tbe laff (t (8 to bee obferuer,
hat f£ the Hulband be ſeiſed of Lands inthe right of his wife,and maketh afcoffment tn fee
Sith Warranty, the tio (fc dieth and the Dufbanb bíctb, this warranty (ball not binde the beíre
of the wife Without Aflers,albett the Huſdand be not Cenanthy the curtefic. Wut of this por
fall reade moze hereafter.

In themeanctine know this thatthe learning of toarranties ts one of the moff curious
anb cunníng Learnings of the Law, and of great ofc and confequence,


€ Ademander afcuns terres ou tenements. À Warrantie nap not
onip be annexed to Freeholds oz 3 nberítanceg cozpozeall which pale bp Hinerp , ag Pontes
and Lands, but alfoto Fresholds o2 Fnheritances incoꝛpoꝛeall Which lie in avant ag Bos
uowſons, and to Rents, Commons, Eſtouers, and the like, Which (lue out of Lands 03
Tenements. 2) no not only to Jnheritances in effe , butalfo to Rents, Commons, Œito-
mero, c. newly created. As a mon (fomcfap ) map qranta tient, «c. out of Lana fez life,
in taple, 07 tn fee With toarranty, fog although there can bee no title pyccedent to the Rent,
pet there map be a title precedent to the Land,out of which it iſſueth befoze the grant of the
Bent , Which Went map be auopded bp the recoucrp of the Land, in fobích cafe the
@zantee map belpe b(mfelfc bp a Warrantia carte pon the efpecíall matter, Bnd ſo a war⸗
rantie in Law map extend toa Rent, ac. newiy created, and therefore (fa tent newiy
created bez granted in Œrchange foran Bere of Land, this Exchange ts god, and cuerp
Exchange implyeth a toarranty in Law. And fo a Rent newly created map bee granted fox
oweltie of partition,


3333 3 3


366
Com.Bance.Lattons Cafe


which I my fel[a heard vnd
obferusé, '


Sof. 738.


*PLOm.Fulme flons caf
110.4. Líb.8.fol.53.
Sym: Cafe,


Lib.8.fol. $3.54. Syres Cafe.
Ibid. 134. Mary Sh pleyi cafés


8.£. tit. Garr.Bi.19.E.3.
s


Vide $2.73 5 .


2.H,4.13.30. H 8. Dier 42


Temps E.1.ad mefurement 16.
3a. E. x .Vencher 394.39.E, 1,
Exchange 16.9.E.4. 1
15.E,4.g 2904-13,


Lib.s.


Vid. SeB par.

45.E. 3. Veucher 72.
9-E.3.78. 18.E. 3.55.
30.23.30. 21. H.7.9.
3 H.7.4. 7. 8.4.17.
10. E. 4 9. b. 31. E. 4.26.


14.H,8.6, 30.4.8. Dser 42,


7. E. 3. 410. 43.E.17.
50 E. 3.12. VidSel.641.


L1h.§.f0.790b-
Eit( herberts fe.


31, E. 3.tit. Garrantie 286


Cap.


Of VV arrantie.


Seël.698.


2 man feífeo of a Went fece tſſuiag out of tbe Mannoꝛ of Dale taketh a wife, thehufband
releafeth tothe Terre tenant & Warrantcth Tenementa prædiéta and dpeth, the wife bzingeth
a Writ of Dower of the rent, tbe Œerre tenant fall bouche, foz that albeit the veleafe enured
bp Swap of extinguiſhment, pet the warranty extended to tt, and by Swarranting of the land
all rentg,tc. (((raing ont of theland,that are infpended 02 difcharged at the time of the arran⸗


te created, are Warranted alfo,


€ G Arranty que


comence per asf-


feifingee. It is called
a Warranty that commenceth
by Difletfin,becaule regolare
ly the conucpance Swhereuns
tathe warranty is annexed
doth $oole a 3D ((Ici(irt,
jin this Secton Lirtle-
ton putteth fiue examples of
aibarrantp commencing bp
3D ((Teifin,viz, oF a feoffinent
made Sith warranty bp
KL cnantfo? peares, by Tez
nant at Will, bp Œenant bp
Elegit, bp Cenant bp Hta=
tute Merchant, and bp es
nant bp Statute Staple:
allthefe ano the other erame
ples that Littleton putteth
of tbig kinde of Warranties
ín the fucceding Sections
haue foure qualities.
Firk,that the Diflcifin ts
Done immediately to the heire
that ig to bc bound, and pet
ft the father bc Œcnant fog
life, the remainder to the fon
in fee, the father bp Coupn
€ confent makctha dleafe fuz
peares, tothe end that the
Leſſee (ball make a fcoffment
in fee.to whom the father Mal
teleafe With warranty, and
all (a executed accozdinaly,
the father oíctb, this tate
rantp (ball not binde, albett
the Difletfin was not done
immedtatelp tothe fonne, fos
the feoffment of the Leſſee is
a diſſeiſin to the father, who
isparticeps criminis. So it ig
f£ onc brother make a gift in
taíle to another, and the tris
cle Diffeife the one, and
ínfeoffeth another With
Warranty, the vncle dteth
and the warranty bifcendeth
bpon the Donoz, and then
the Done dieth without


Sect. 698.


CC 5 3ivanty q̃ cÔ-

mente p diſſei⸗
fin eft en tícl forme,
ficome lou il e(t pier
et fits,et le fits put-
chate terve,tc.et leſſa
mefmela terre a fon
pier purterme dans,
& pict per fon fait ent
enfeoffabn auter en
fee, € obligeluy a fes
heires a garrantp, et
le piet Deup, per que
P garrantp diſcendiſt
al fits, ceo gartanty
tic barrera mp le fits,
catnient obffant cel
garrantie,le fits poit
bien enterenla terre,
ou auct bu affife en=
uers lalience (il boit,
put ceo que? garran⸗
tp commence per Dif-
feifin, cat quant le
pier que nauoit eftate
foi(que pur terme
Des ans, fiſt bu keoff⸗
ment en fee, ceo fuit
bn diffeifin al fits del
franktenemét que a-


Dong kuiſt en le fits,


En mefme le manet
eft, file fits leffa a le
pier la terre a tener à
polunt, t puis le pier
fait bn fcoffiment oue

garrantiec,


VV Atrantie thar


commence by
diffeifinis in this man-
ner, As where thereis
father and fon, and the
fonne purchafeth land,
&c. and letteth the
fame land to his father
for terme of years,and
the father by his deed
thereof infeoffeth ano.
therin fee, and binde
him and his heires to
Warranty, and the fa-
ther dies, whereby the
warranty. difcendeth
tothe fon,this warran-
ty fhall not barre the
fon, for notwithftan-
ding this warranty the
fonne may well enter
into the land, or haue
an Affife againft the
Alienee if he will,be-
caufe the Warranty
commenced by diffei-
fin, for when the father
which had but an e-
ftate for term of yeares
made a feoffment in
fee, this was a diffeifin
tothe fon of the free-
hold which then was
in the fonne. In the


‘fame manner it is ifthe


fon letteth to the fa-


Lib.3.


garrantie,zc, Ct ſi⸗
come eft Dit De pier,
iſſint poit eftre Dit de
chefcun auter aunce-
fter,zc, Cn meſme le
maner e(t, & tenaunt
per Clegit, tenant
pec Statute Mer⸗
chant, ou tenant per
Statutede le Sta-
piefait fcoffinent en
fee ouefque garran⸗
ty, ceo ne barrera my
lbeire que Doit auct
laterre, put ceo que
tiels garvanties có-
mencerent per Diffei-


Of Warrantié.


ther the land to hold
at will, & afterthe fa-


ther makea feoffment
with warranty , &c.
Andasitis faid of the
father, fo it may be faid
ofeuery other ancefter
&c. Inthe fame máner
is it,iftenant by Elegit,
tenant by Statute Mer-
chant or tenant by Sta-
tute ftaple make a feoff-
ment in fee with war-
ranty,this fhall not bar
the heire which ought
tohaue the land, be-
caufe fuch warranties
cômence by diffeifin.


$ed.699.


Mune, albeit the diffeifin wag
bone to the Done and not
tothe Donoz, pet the war⸗
rantp (ball not binde bins.
KL. be father, thefonne anda
third perfon are topntenants
tn fee, the father taketh a
feoffment (t fee of the whole
With Warranty, and dperty,
the fonne dyeth, the third per=
fonfball not only anoide the
feofftnent £02 bis owne patr,
bnt alfo foz tbe part of the
fonne, and bec fhalitake ad⸗
uantagc that the toarranty
commenced bp Diſſeiſin,
though the Difeifin wag
done to another,

Tie fecond quality appeas
ting tn Litiletans eramples
18, that the warranty and
Dilleifin are fimul & femel
both at onc and the fame
time, (y) Bnd pet t€ a man
commtta Difleifin of intent


fin, to make a feoffinent tn fee
Sith warrantie, albeít hemake the fcoffment many peares after the dilleifin, not withſtanding
becaufc tbetbarrantp was donc to that intent and purpofe, the Law fall adiudge bpon the
whole matter, and bp the intent couple the Difleiin and the warranty together,

The third quality is that the toarrantp that commenceth by Diſſeiſin bp all theſe examples
Cif it ſhould binde ) fboulo binde ag a Collateral warranty, and therefore conuncncing by
Dilſſeiſin (ball not binde at all,


€ Ne barrera my le heire,cxc. For by the Authority of out Authoz
bímfelfea Leſſee for peares map make a feoffment,and by bis fcoffment a fee fimple fpail patie,
fo as albeit ag to the Lefloz (t wozketh bp diſſeiſin, yet bet ween the partics the tDatrantp an⸗
mered to fuch eftate ſtandeth god: pon Which the Feofe map bouche the jreoftoz o1 his
beires ag bp foace of a lineall warranty. Bndtherefore tf a Leſlee for peares 02 Cenant bp
Elegit,&c. 09 a Difleifoz incontinent make a Feofkment in fe With warranty, if the -frcoffeo
be tmpleaded, he (ball bouche the 4reoffoz, and after him bis etre alfo, becaufetbis is a Louez
nant reall, bich binde him and bts heires to recompence in balue, tf tbep haue allers bp bifz
cent to recompence, for there to a Feoſfment de facto,anda Feoffment de ime: (*) And a jfeoff-
ment de fa&to madeby them that haue fach tntereft oz pofleflion, as is atoꝛeſaid, te gad bez
tweane the parties, and agaínft all men, bnt onlp agatn(t him, that hath ríabt, Bnd therefore
i£ the Lozobe Gardeine of theland; oj (£tbc Cenant maketh a Leaſe tothe Loo foz peares,
oꝛ if the Lozdbe & enant by Statute Merchant or Staple, 02 by Elegit of the tenancte, and
make a Feoffment in fe, he herebp doth extinguilh his Scigniozp, althongh hauing regard to
the Lellozit is a Dilletin.

The fourth quality isa Diſſeiſin, but that is put £02 an erample, and the rather fo that it is
mot bfualland frequent, but a t arrantp that commenceth bp abatement o2 intrusion (that is
Soben the abatement 02 intruſion (g made of intent te makea jreoffmcnt in fe With toarrana
tie ) hall not binde the right hetre, ns moze then a Warrantie that commenceth bp Diſſeiſtn, be⸗
caufeall doc commenceby Wrong. And foít is ik the Genant dyeth withont beíre, and an
Ænceltoz of the Lozdenter before the entry of the Lozd, and make a Sfeofkment in fe With
toarranty,anb dpeth,this warrautp (ball notbinde tbe Lozd, becauſe (t commenceth by Svzong,
being in nature of an Abatement, Et fic de fimilibus. :


Set. 699.


€ | «ran 6 gardein en Chiual- Lfoif Gardeine in Chiualrie
ric,ougardein en Socage or Gardeine in Socage make
fai | Zzzz 3


367:


(y) 19. B.8.13. lib, c.
Je 79.4. Fit(b.cafe.


Vid. Se#.611.699.
Brabton fo.216.22 3.2246
Fleta lib. 4 ca. 13. 1. 2.
Britton cap. Diffeifin.

50 8.3.12 b. 8. H.7. s.
g.E.3. 11. 14. E. 3. Feoff-
ments on (atts 67,

18.€.3. [fhe 36.

4. E. 2. brieſe 790.
19.E.2..4f.40.

43-£. 3.9. 17.E.3. 41.
43-B.35Dif. 5. 3.€.4.17.
12.E.4.12. 10. E.4. 18.
F. N B. 201. Lib.3.fo,78.
in Fermors caſe.

(*) Temps E.1. Counterplea
deV sucher 136.
50.€.3.btdom 124.

Vid W.1.cap. 48. inthe
Seeond part of the Infiitutes,


Cap. Of Warrantie.. Seti. 700.


fait bu feoffement en fee, ou Efee 2 Feoffement in Fee,orin Fec taile,
taile,oupur terme De bie oueſq; orforlife, with Warrantie, Sc.
garranty,zc.tiels gattantíeg ne fuch Warranties are not barres
font pag barres ales beíteg, ag to the Heyres to whome the
qur les terres ferront difcenD?, Lands fhall bee difcended, be-
pur ceo que ílg commence per caufe they commence by Dif-


43-€.3.7.4nd the Books abone
d.


134.8. 13. E. 3. Gar. 34.
35.37. 32 H.6.51.8.H. 7.66


feifin.


anb Gardeine becaufe of Nurture is alo tn the fame cafe.


€ Hi Littleton addeth the Cafe of Gardeine in Chtuairie; and Gardein in Socage,


A Auer & tener a
eux iointmet e c.


AE big (o to be intended of a
fopnt purchafe in fee, Foz tf tbe
purchafe Swere to the father
and the fonne, and the hepreg
of the fonne, and the father
maketh a sfeofkement in Fee
with $oarrantíc, ifthe fonne
entreth in the life e£ the Fa⸗
ther, and the Feolfee re-enter,
the father dicth,thefonne ſhal
haue an Alſiſe of the whole,
and fo(g the Boke of 22 H.6.
tobe vnderſtod. Wut tf the
fonne had not entredin thelife
of the father, then for the faz
there mottie (t had benea bar
to tbefonne, for that therein
he had an eftate fog life, and
thirefoze the warrantie ag to
that mottte, had beene collate-
tall to the fonne, and bp Diſ⸗
feifin for the fonnes moitie,
anb foa warrantie defeated
in part, and ſtand good fn part.
And this appearetlh bp the
example that Littleton hath
put, Wut ifthe purchafehad
been to the father ¢ fonne,and


Sed, 700.


€ ITem fi lepier et

le fits purchate
certaine Cerves ou
tenements, à auct et
tenct à eur tointmt,
&c, et puis le pier a-
lienientier à bn au-
ter, et oblige lupet
fes beítes a gatran-
tíc;ac, et puis le pter
Deute, cel Garrantic
tie barrera mp Ie fits
Dele moitie qucalup
affiert De les Dits
terres ou teneméts,
put ceo que quaunt à
celmoitie que affiert
ale fits, le Garranty
commence per Diſ⸗
feifin,ac,


Lfoif Father and
Sonne purchafe
certaine Lands or Te-
nements, To haueand
to hold to them ioint-
ly, &c. and after the
Father alien the whole
to another , and binde
him and his Heyres to
Warrantie , &c. and
after the Father dieth,
this Warrantie fhall
not barre the fonne of
the moitie that be-
lógs tohim of the faid
Lands or Tenements,
becaufe as tothat moi-
tie which belongs to
the Sonne, the war-
rantie commences by
Diffeifin,&c.


Téps E.1.Voush,207.3 9.2.3.
36 Loken Londo 64/6. 4,H.6


to the beires of the father, then the entric of the fonne in the itfe of the father, ag to the anope
dance of the toarrantic, bab not anatled him, becaufe bis father lawfully conneped awwap bie
moitie, 1
It a man of fall age anb an Jnfant make a Feoffement in Fe With warrantie, this ware
rantícis not bopd in part, and god in part, but (t is god foa the whole agatnff the man of full
age, and bopd agaínft the Infant: foz albeit the Feoſfement of an 3infant. pafling by Liuerie
E — beebopoable, pet big warrantie Which taketh effect onclp by Ded, (d mareip


Sed,


Lib.5.


¶ T Cem i 31,525,
foit feifie Dun
mefe, et 4r, De

6G, que nul Dzoit ad

Dentrer en meſme le

meale , claimaunt

mefme le meafe, à te-
ner à qup et a (ce

Heires , entra en

mefme lemeafe, mes

le Dit A, De 25, adon-
que eff continualmeét

Demurrant en mefme

le meaſe: Cn cett cas

le pote ion 5 frank-
tenement ferra tout

temps adiudge en À

de B. et nemy en jr.

de (5, pur ceo que en
tielcafelou deux fót
en vn meaſe, ou au-
ters Tenements, et
lun claima per lun
title, etlauterp lau⸗
ter title, là Ley ad⸗
iudgera celup en pof-
feffion que ad Droit

Dauer le poffeffíon De

mefmes les Tenez

ments, Apes (i en
le cafe auantdit.P Dit

4. de (5, fait on

4rcoffment a certaine

Warrettors ct extoꝛ⸗

tioners en le pats, $

maintenance De eur
auer, De mefine le
meafe per bn fait de

Feoffement oue gar-

tautíc, per force De

quel le Dit A. De 2B,


Of Warranties


Setlion 701.


Lfoif A .of B.
bee feifed of a
Mefe, and F. of
G.that no right hath
toenter intothe fame
Mefe , claiming the
fayde Mefeto hold to
him and to hisheires,
entreth into the fayd
Mefe, but the fame
A. of B. isthencon-
tinually abiding in the
fame Meafe : In this
Cafe the poflefiion of
the Free-hold {hall
bee alwayes adiud-
ged in A. of B.and
not in F. of G. be.
caufe in fuch Cafe
where two bee in
one Houfe or other
Tenements, and the
one claimeth by one
Title, and the other
by another Title, the
Law fhal adiudge him
in poffeffion, that hath
right to haue the pof-
feffion of the fame te-
nements, But if inthe
Cafe aforefayd, the
faydeF. of G. make
a Feoffement to cer-
taine Barrettors and
Extortioners in the
Countrie , to haue
maintenance from thé
of the fayd houfe, by
a Deed of Feoffinent
with Warrantie , b
force whereofthe faid


Sect. o1;


CT On deux font es
L vn mefesd c. e
lun claima per lun title,
c lauter per auter title,


oc. Forthe ruleis,
Duo non poffunt in folido
ynam rem poflidere.

Ehele 300708 of our Au⸗
thoz be Rqnificant and matert=
all: Ch) foz if aman hath Que
tipo vangbters 1Baftaro eigne
and Mulier puifne, and bic
{ctfed, and thep both enter ge=
neralip,the folc poſſeſſton fhai
net bé adiudged onelp in the
Mulier, becaufe they both
Clatine bp one and the fame
title, and not cne bp one title,
and the other bp another title,
ag our Authoꝛ here faith.

(1) Bethe Cenaunt in an
aflife of an boufe defire the
Plaincife to dine With him in
the honfe, which the 39iatntt£
doth accordingip, anv fothep
beboth tn the honfe, and tn
truth one pzerendeth onc titic,
and the other another title, pet
the Law tn this cafe (ball not
adiudge the poffeíTíon in him
that right hath, becaufe our
Authoꝛ here faith, he claimed
not bis right, and it ſhould be
to bis pzetudtce (£ the Lato
ſhould adiudge bim tn poftcffie
on ; and a Erefpaller he can⸗
notbe,becaufe be Swag (nuíz
ted bp the Cenant in the
Allile.

4


¶ Barretors.
Warrette: ig a common mo-
uer anb exciter 02 matntainer
of faits, quarrelis, o2 parts,
either in Courts oz elfexobere
ín the Countrie, Jn Courts,
asin Courts of Record, 02
not of Record, ag tn the
Conntie, Banded, o2 other
infertour Courts. Fn the
Œountric in three manners ,
Fick, in diſturbance of the
Peace, Hecondip, in taking
02 kepíng of potefltons of
lanbg in controucrüc, not ons
lp bp force, but alfo bp ſubtil⸗
tíe


19 H6, fo. 38. b, p Neyten.


(b)17.E. 3:59.11. 4f.


(i) PL Cam.9x.sha Tarfen
of Hen) lanes cafe.


See the Indifesnentof a comram
"Barrettor. Wi1.ca 18. 32
40. E. 3. 33. Li.8.f036.b.
Cafe ds Barrosry,


Lib.3.


33 &.1-Stat.de Co fpiracie.
L3.8.wb.fap.


PLCem fo. 64.
Li.10 fe, 161.192. Beaufa-
ge: Cafe.


a) W.1.0.36.65 0. W.1.c. 10
42.Ë.3.5.27..Aff14.
Pl. (em.68.


25. H.6 24.10.33. H. 6.32-
21. M.5. 17. tanf. 49.
3. E.3. (7.373.


(n) Hil.i . l⸗. Reg.


*Pl.Com.in Dia⸗ Manning-
barns cafe. Mir.ca.5-§.1.


7.Z.4. 21.


(k ) t. E. 3.0.14.
29. €.3.c4.4. $.


(1) Mich.s.1a, $n the Starre-
Chamber.


43.8. 1 Stat, ie fine.
Regif.183.
6.E,5.33.23.H.6.7.
9. H,9.33*


Capi.
tie and a Deccít, and mot cem
monly infappzefion of truth
anb rígbt, Thirdly, by faife
inuentiong,and ſowing of caz
lumntations, rumois, and res
ports, whereby difcozd and
btfquiet map grow betwene
neighbours.
€ Barrettor is de⸗

tined of this word (Barret)
Sbich Ggnifieth not onelp a
Svaanaling futt; but alfo fuch
brawies and quarrels (n the
Countrie, ag are afozefapod.

€ Extortioneri Ex⸗


Of Warrantie:


ne ofatt pas demur⸗
tec en le gpeatemes
alat bos De le
meate,cetft gatrantp
commente per Diſ⸗
feifin, put ceo que tiel
Feokement fuit la
caute quele Dit A, de
25. relinquift le pof-
feffion De meſme le
Meale.


Sed. 701.
A. of B. dare not a-
bide inthe Houfe,but
goeth out of the fame,
this Warrantie com-
menceth by Diffeifin,
becaufe fuch Feoffe-
ment was the caufe
that the fayde A. of
B. relinquifhed the
pofleffion of the fame
Houfe.


tortion in his proper fence ts :

a great mifpzifion by wzeſting 02 onlaso(ullp taking by anp Dfficcr bp colour of his Dice
anp money 02 valuable thing of oz from anp man, ether that is not duc, op moze than ts due, oz
befoze it be duc, Quod non eft debitum, vel quod eft vltra debitum; vel ante tempus quod eft de-
bitum : Foꝛ this tt is to be Bnowne,that it is prouided bythe (1) Htatute of W.1. Chat no
Sherike noz any other Minifter of the Ring, (ball takcanp reward fo? doing of his D Fice,but
onelp that which the Ling alloMeth him, opon patnethat he ball render doubie to the partie,
and be punifbeb at the isings plcafurc, And this Wastheantient Common Law, and Wags
punítbable by fine and imp2ifonment, but the Statute added the aforefapd penalttc. Wut forme
latter Statutes having permitted them to take in fomecafes ; by colour thereot.the kings DE-
ficers and Winters, as Sbherifes, Coroners, Cfcheatozs, Feodaries, dbaolers, andthe itse,
doe offendin molt cafes ; and ſeeing this Act pet (Fanoctb in fozce, thep cannot take any thing
but Sobere,and fo farre as latter Statutes bane allowed bntothem. Wat yet ſuch reafonable
Fes as haue bene allowed by the Courts of Juftice of antient time to infertonr Miniſters
and Attendants of Courts fo? their labour audattendance , it tt bee afkeDandtaken of the
Subdtes, tg no extortion.

And all this Was refolued(n) by the whole Court of Kings Wench, betWweene Shurley
Platntife,and Packer Deputie of one of the Sberifes of London, in an Action bpon the Cafe
in the singe Wench.

Detbhe Statute of 21.H.8. cap. s. letting downethe Fes of Didinaries, Regifters, anb
other sD fficera, tn certaine Cafes, and many ether Statutes, ag for crample the Statute of
19-H.7.cap.8- again tabing sf Shewage(thatis, taking of anp thing foa ſhewing of toares
and Merchandifes that be trulp cuffemco to tbe King before) and the Lie.

DE this crime itis fayd, Chat tt ts no ther othan 1Robberte : And another fattb, Chat (t is
moze odtous than 18 obberie,foz Robberiets apparant, and hath tbe face of a crime ; but Ex⸗
toztionputs on the bifure of Vertue, for expedition of Juſtice, andthe tke, and it (9 ewer acc
companted with that grieuous (inne of perturte,

Wut largely Extortion is taken fo? anp oppꝛeſſion by extoꝛt power,oz by colour ez pretence
of right, and fo Littleton taketh tt in this place. Extortio (8 dertued from the Werbe Exterquea,
anb (t ig called Crimen expilationis 03 concuffionis: Bnd here Warrettorzs and Extoztioners
are por butfo2 examples, £o? t£ tbc Jreoffement bec made to anp other perfon oz perfong , the
La (o all onc.


© Pur maintenance de eux aver. PPaintenance , Manutenenria (8
beríueb of the Werbe Manutenere, anb fiqntfieth in Law, a taking in hand, bearing bp 02
holding of quarrels and Goes,to the difturbance oz hinderance of common right ; Culpa eit rei fe
immifcere ad fe non pertinenti ,and fo is two fold, One inthe Countrie, and Bnorher in the
Court. oz quarrelis and fdes in the Court (k) the Statutes haus inflicted gricusus pus
niſhments. Wut this kind of matntenance of quarrelis and fides (n the Countrie, (e puniſha⸗
bie onelp at the fuit of the Ring, (v) as tt hath bene refolued. And this Daintenance ts crlied
Manurenentia, 0? Manutentio ruralis, fo? example, as to take poſſeſſions, oz te keep poficiiiens,
Sohereof Littleton herefpeaketh, 02 the libe,

Che other is catleb Curialis, becaufe tt ig done pendente placito, inthe Courts of Fattice,
andthis Was an :D fence at the Common Law, and is threefold,

Firk, To matntaine,te banc part of the Land, oz any thing out of the Land, og part of
the Debt, 02 other thing in Plea 0? Suit, and this ts called Cambipartia, Champertie.

(& be feconbis, toben one matntatneth the onc doc, $oíthbent baning anp part of the or 2


Lib.5. Of Warrantie. Sel. 7o1;


351ca o? Hult, anb thts maintenanceig two-fold, generall maintenance ; and fpectatl main⸗


tenance, hereof pou fball reade at large in our Woks, which were to ong here to be (nferteb,

(& be third tg When (u ) one laboureth the Jurie, if (t bee bat toappeare, 02 (£ hee inftrac
thom, o2 put them in feare,og the like, he is a mapntainer, € hee ts fn Law calleb an Œmbraceoz,
andan Action of Dapntenance ipeth again him, and if heetake monte a decies tantum map
bebroughtagatnt him, Bnd hither the 3iurp patte for his Ade 02 mo, o2 Whither the Furie
gíuc any berdicat all, pet (ball he be punifbco ag a Mapntainer os Cmbzaceoz epther at the
fuite of the ing o2 party.

Were inthis cafe that Littleton patteth the feoffment is void by the Statute (a of 1.5.2. for
thereby itis enaced, that feoffmentg mabcfoy Wapntenance (ball bec holden for none, and of
HO balue, fo ag Littleton pattcth his cafe atthe Common Law, for bee fæmeth toaliow the
fcoffinent Shere he faith, ciel feoffment fuit lecaufe, &c. but fome have fat that the fcoffinent
tg not void bet Weene the Feoffor and fcoffæ, but to hits that right hath,

$050 fince Littleton $020te there (8 a notable Statute (b) made (n ſuppꝛeſſion of the cauſes
of bulainfnll mapntenance ( which ts the moft Dangerous enemte chat Juſtice hath) tbe cfFect
of Which (Fatute is.

Ftrſt, That no perfon fail bargatne, bup 0? feil, op obtaine any pactenfeb Rights o? Cities,

Secondip, Dz take,promife, grant oz couenant te haue anp Wight, oz Citle of anp per-
fon in o? toanp Hands , Genements, 02 Wereditaments, but tf {uch perfon $obích

^ fo thall bargatne , ac. thetr Ænceftors , oꝛ thep bp whom yee o2 they clapme the fame
haue bene in poſſeſſion of the ſame, oz of the Reuerfion o2 Remapnoer thereof, o1 taken the
Rents 02 3920fitg thereof bp the {pace of one whole peare, tc. bpon paine to forfeit the whole
balue of the Lands, ec. andthe buper 02 taker, ec. knowing the fame,to forfeit alfo the aluc.

Ehirdly, Pzoutded that tt (ball be lawtull for any perfon being in lawful pottefíon by taz
king of tbe pœrelp arme, Rents 02 Pꝛoſits to obtaineand ges the pretenled Bight, o2 Citie,
&c. of anp Lends whereof he o2 thep fball be in lawtull poſſeſſion. :

Foꝛthe better bnderftanding of which Statute, pou mu& obferne, that title op right map
be pretenfed tivo manner of wayes.

Fick, to ben tt is mesrely (n pzetence o2 {appofition, and nothing (n veritte.

Hccondip, when itis a god right oa títle inberítp , and made pzetenfed by the acof the
partic, and both tbefe are Within the fato Statute; for erample, FE A bee Taofull Downer of
Land and is (n pofleffion, B that hath no right rherenntograntcth to 02 contracteth foꝛ che lant
Sith another, the Grantoz andthe Gzantee (albett che arant bee meerelp boid) arc within the
Danger ofthe Statute, re; Bhathno right at ait but onlp tn pꝛetence. Be A bee difleifed (n
this cafe A. hatha god TaSvfull right, pet tf A being out of poſſeſſton aranteth to e? contradeth
forthe Land Sith another, hee hath noto made bis godright of entric petenfer within the
Statute, and both the Hzantoz and Grantee Within the Banger thercof. A fortiori of aright
in ation, Quod nota. x: :

Ft ts further to bee kmotone, that aright oz title map bee confidercd thee manner of wapes,

jrítft, Hs it is nakedand Without polleliion. Secondiy, toten the abloiute right commeth
by Keleaſe o? stherwife te a a wꝛongtull poſſeſſion, and no third perfon hath epther Ius proprie«
tatis, 09 lus poffeflionis. Cherhtrd, ben he hatha gwd right,anda wzongfulipofeffion. As
tothe fir, fomeSvbat hath bæne fatd,and moze Mail bee faid hereafter. Bs tothe fecens , ta-
King the fozmer erample, tf A bedifleifed, andthe Dilſeiſee releaſe onto bim, hee map vzcfentip
fell, grant, o1 contract foz the Land, and need not tarríc a peare,foz it (aa rule bpon this Stas
tute, that whoſoeuer hath the abfolute D Soncribip of anp Land, Cencements , 0? Wereditac
ments (as tntbig cafe the Diſſetſoꝛ hath) there fuc Dwncer map at big pleafure bargatne,
grant, oꝛ contract fo? the Land, foz no perfon can therebp be pactubíceb oz grieucd. Bnd fo ifa
nian mozgage his Land, anb aftcrredeeme the fame , 02 (£ a man recouer Land bpon a former
titie, oz be remttted to an ancient right, he map at any time bargaine, grant, o2 contrad for the
Land fos the reaſon atoꝛeſaid. 20s to thethird, tf inthe cafeafozelatd the 2 ifeifoz oteth fets
fed, and A the Diſſeilee entretb, and diflelfe tbe heive of the Dilletioz, aibett he hathan ancient
bight, pet fering the poſſeſſion is vnlawtuli, tf hee bargaine 02 contract foz the Land before hee
bath bene in poffellion by thefpace of a peare, bec ts within the danger of the Statute, bes
canfe the beite of the Diletfor hath right to the poflellion , and he is thereby griencd, & fic de
fimilibus, and albett be that hath a pactenfed right (and none tn beritic) getteth the goffe(Tíon
Sionafully, vet tbe Statute ertenteth bnto htm, aftoell as obere heis out of polleflion.,

Note the Words of the Statute be (any pretenfed right) thercfozea Deale for pearce ig
Within the Statute, for the Statute fatth not (theright) but anp right) and the offendos
thali forfeit the whole value of the Land, Bnd where the Htatate fpcaketh of rights tn the
plural number, yet anp one right ts Within tbe Statute, (a) But vet tf a man make aicafe fo?
reeres to another to the intent to try the title {nan cicétionc firme that (gant of the Statute,

Baasa becanfs


3044/5. 19.E.4.3.
20.H.6.12. 34. H.6.2.

11. H.6.11, 8, H. 5.8.

10. E.4.19. W'.1.ca. 25.48.
W.2.eap.49. Artic fhper
Cart.cap.1s. F.N-8.17%.
172. Mirror eap.1.$.5.
(u) 13.H.4.16,.6.F. NB.
171. 11.4.6,10.37.4,6.3a


(a) 1. R. 2. cap. 9.
Vid.27. H.8.fol.23.


(b) 22.H.8.5.9.


Pl. (em fol. 80.074,
Tartridges Cafe


Pl, Com, Partridges oafavbi
fupra. 6.E.6. Brook Tir.
Maintenanes,18,


23. Et. Dir 394.
Pl.Gm.Tartridees eafb f. 5
(a) Mich.30. dr 31. Eli(.
28 11. tater Finch dr Cok.
bara in Cos Banco,


Lib.5.


(b) Ltb.4.fol.a6. (epihold
Cafes.


6.E.6.tihimaimtenance
Brooke 38.


(e) 34.H.8.Dier 52,


Seebefereia the (bapter of
afi


Relaafes.


46.E.3.6.


(ap.13.


Of WVarrantie:


becaufe ít ig ina kind of courfe of La, but tf it be mad
02 countenance the caufe, that (g Within this Statate,


Sedl.702.


t toà great mano? anp other to {wap


Bilo the Statute fptakg (of any right op titieto any Land, ac. ) (b) 3 cuttomaric right oz
a pactence thereof to Lands bolben bp Copie ts fottbin this Statute,


Thelatd pzoutfo ( Which (s rather added fo
onip toapzetented right oz title, and to a ged
anp that bath a inf and lawtul eftate ma
fozthat cannot beeto the pretudice of an


2 explanation then of anp necefitie)
And clare right ; and therefore without queftion,
p obtaine anp pactenfen right bp relcafe oz other wile
y, nap, as hath bene fato,


extendeth


a Difleifoz that hath a


wꝛonglull eftate may obtaínca releale of the Difletfes , and that (s not Sottbtn the body of the
Ba, anb confequentip Kandeth not in need of any pzouife to protect bit,
And therefore (c) (£ there be Cenant Foz life, the Remapnder in fee bp lasoftill and inft title,


be inthe Remapnder may obtatne and get thop


actenfed right 02 title of any ftranger, not onip


fo? that the particular € ffateanb the Remapnder are all one, but for that itis a meane to crs


tinguifh the feeds of troubles and fuite
ſaid. And where the Statute fait
thofe Wozds arcbut explanatozie, and put fo? erample,

pofleflion, Keuerfon, o2 Remaynder, it fufficeth thoug
ter obferuable bpon this 3320nffo, Which ts worthy of
a Leaſe Foz liée, lines, os parcs,


the Ac,


8, and cannot beto the pzciudice of any,
b, betng tn lawful potfe(iton by taking the pearly Rent,ec, )

fo? howfoener hee be laxvfullp feifen in
h bec nener toe profit. Wut the mat-
obferuation,is, that if a Difleifoz make
the Kemapnder foz life, in taple,
cannot take a Pꝛomiſe oz Cousnant, that When the Difleife bath entre
recouered the fame,that then hee ſhould conus
by to auoid the particular eftate, op the int
Pꝛouiſo be, (buy, ebtatne, get 02 h
pꝛomiſe o2 coucnant toconuep the Land after entr
being agatntt the erpzefle puruteS of thebodic of
the pzetuntce of athtrd perfon. Wut tbe reafonable Sway oz
bp Keleaſe og Confirmation, 01 fuc) Conucpances ag
greth Sith the letter of the 1LaS, viz


P the Land to any of thom tn
ereft 02 eftate of any other,
aue bpanp reafonable way oz meane)


ag bath bene


oz in fee, bee te Remapnoer
bpon the Landoz ^
Kemaynder theres
foz the words of the
and that ts not bp


pozrecoucrp , for that is nepther lawful}
and not rcafonable; becaufe it íg to
teane intended bp the Statute ig
amount to ag much, and thig ax
the preteuled Right o» Title of anp other perfon,and


Rights and Cities are by WRelealeoz Confirmation, ag bp reafonable apes and meaneg


lawfallp tranfferred andertinc, and the 500208 of 3920mífe


bited by the body of the Ac, arc omitted in tbe Pꝛouiſo.


€ Relinguift le poffefion, dc: This muſt bee vnderſtood, that


befoze linerp offcifin bpon the fcoffment, A de B de
l(uerp andfeifin fhould be boid, becaufe A de B wa
Per vn fait de feoffment, foag albeit the Deed Were m
all; but the departuremutt be befoze the liuery of fcífi
pet that which Littleton faith ts true, that the feoffme


poffetlion, for other wife he Mould not hauc done tt,


Wut admit that A de B had de


0; Coucnant,tc, Which are polt


parted out of the houſe, fox otherswife the
8 th poffeíTion, And


Littleton here fatth,


ade befoze the departurett ig not materte
11 foz that Doth Swoske the dilleifin, And
nt was the caufe that he relinquifhed big


parted fo? any other caufe, pet ££ F de G enter and enfeoffe cer-


taíne Warretozs o2 Extogttoners , o? anp other with Svatrantíe,tbíg (g a Svarrantie that coms
menceth by diſſeilin, fo? that the feoffment Swozbeth a diffeitin,


€ Bis doth erplane

that ‘which bath

bene fatd before,
And albett Littleton vſeth
the words (and incontinent=
ip thereof mate a feoffment)
and that ín this cafe of Lit-
tleton the Dilletin€ eof:
ment ere made quafi vno
tempore ) pet (£ the Diffeifin
Sere made to the intent to
make a fcoffment Sith war⸗
tantp, albett the -frcoffment
belong after, this (ag bath
bene faío ) ig a warranty


Set, 702.


€ [Lem (i hort que
nul Deoit ad den-
trev en auters tene-
ments, entra en mete
meg legtenementg,a
incontinét ét fait on
feoffinent as auters
per fon fait oue gar⸗
tanty,a Deliver a eur
feifin, cel garranty
commence per v
n


Lfo if a man

which hath no

rightto enter in-
to other tenements en-
ter into the fame tene-
ments, & incontinent-
ly make a. feoffinent
therofto othets by his
deed with warranty &
deliuerto them feifin,
this warranty comence


Lib.3.


lin pur ceo que Te diſ⸗
feifin et le fcottment
fuctont faits quati v-
notempore. Ct (cco
eſt ley, poies veier en
br plce M.rr.Ed.5.en
$n briefe De Forme-
don en le reuerter,


Of Warrantie.


by diffeifin, becaufe
the diffeifin and feoff-
ment were made asit
were at one time. And
that this is lawe you
may fee ina plee M.1 1
E.3.ina writ of For-
medon in the reuerter.


$ed. 703.


that commenceth bp Did
fcitin. à
Mich.11. E.3.
Œbis ts miſtaken and ſhould
be (d) 31-E.3. and fo is the
orginal, which cafc pou (bafi
fe in Walker Fitzherberts
Abꝛid gement, for there (8 no
bake at large of that pearc;
Hereby por map perceiue
that iearned men lake nof
only to the cafes reposted,


but tto Recoꝛds, as pou map fee Littleton did, fo? Fitzherb, put this cafe im print long attér,ag


cifewbere bati) bene hhewed.


CC Arrant lineal
G eft, lou home
fetfiede terres en fee,
fait feoffment per fon
fait abn auter, a ob⸗
lige luy et fes heires
a gatrantie, et ad if-
fue et moruſt, et le
garrantie DifcenDift
à ſon iſſue ceo eft li⸗
neal garranty, Ct la
caufe pur ceo qe dit
lineal garrantie, net
pur ceo que le gar⸗
ranty DifcenDift de le
pier a (on beire, mes
la eaufe eft pur ceo
que fi nul tiel fait oue
garranty fuiffoit fait
perle pier, Donque Ie
Droit D les tenemẽts
Difcenderoit al heire
et lheire conuepcroit
le Difcent De fon pier,
&c.


Sed. 703.
Arranty lineall


V is where aman
feifed of lands in fee,
maketh afeoffment by
his Deed to another, &
bindes himfelfe & his
heiresto warranty,and
hath iffue and die, and
the Warranty difcend
to his iffue,thisis a li-
neal warranty. And the
caufe why this is cal-
led lineall warranty is
not becaufe the warra-
ty difcendeth from the
fatherto his heire, but
the caufe is for that if
no fuch deed with war-
ranty had beene made
by the father,then the
right ofthe tenements
fhould difcend to the
heire, and the heire
fhould conuey the dif-
cent fró his father, &c.


€(5 Arranty lineal,

oc. À War⸗
tanty lineall (2 a Couenant
reall annexed to tbe lan» bp
bim $0 ich either Was ow⸗
ner, 02 might haue fnberiten
the land and from whem bis
bare deal o2 cellaterall
might bp poflibilitp haue
Claimed the land ag beire
from him that made the toar=
tanty, Sherof Littleton him⸗
{elfe putteth diuers cafes,
which fball bee explained tn
their proper places. And in
this cafe put inthis Sccton
Littleton ( ence fo? all)
ſheweth, that tbe reafon of
the example bere put, is bes
taufe 1€ no {uch alenation
Sith Warranty ( for fo ts
Littleton tobe intended) had
bene made, the berp lands
had difcended tothe bete, fo
ag the cafe being put of
lands tn fee fimple, the alte-
nation Without the Warrans
tp bao barred the bette,
And notethat it is called a
lineal toarrantp, not be-
caufe ít matt diſcend vpon
the lineall hetre, for bee the
heire lineal 02 collateral, (£
by pollibility be might clatme
the land from bím that made


the Warranty, (t (6 lineal, hauing regard tothe Warrantie, and titie of the land, Andaifo ít
is called lincall, in refped thst the warranty made bp himthat had no right o2 pofltbilitp of
right tothe land is calied Collaterall, in regard that ít (s collateral to the title of the land,
And it is alfo te be obferued, that in all the cafes that Littleton hath pnt o2 fball put che lines
all oz col:terall warranty doth binde the hetre, and therefore the (ucce(To2 clapmíng tn another
tight, all not beboundby the warranty of anp naturall Mnceftor. Foꝛ which caufe Cc) (n
auris vtrum brought by a arfon of a Charch, the collateral tiparrantp of bis Anceſtoꝛ ts
mo barre, for that bec demandeth the lano in the right of his Church in bis polittque
Capacitic, and the warrantie aefcendeth on bim in big naturall capacítíe, (d ) Wut
Come baue holden that 1 a Parlon bang an Ail, that a Collaterall Warranty of


Aada aa 2


big


379


(4) 31.6.3,98.Garr-38,


35. E. 3.Garr.75


(c) 37. H.6.Gar.48.


(4) 34-4. 3.Gerr.go,


Lib.


(*) 4549-6. 6.E. 5. 6.
PLE. 2 34.67 553.554.


Vid.27.H.6.Garr. 48.
34 E.5. Garr.71.


Vid Se pr v1.7132,


Cap Of Warrantie. Se. 704.705.


bis Anceftoz (ball binde him, and their reafon ig, for that the AMife ts brought of his poſſeſſion
and ferfin, and be fpall recouer the meane profits to bis one efe, Wutleing be is ſeiſed of
the freehold, Mhereof the Allile is brought in jure Ecclefiz, Which ts in another right, then the
Warrancy, it feemctb that tt bond not be any barre inthe Aſſiſe. Che like Law ts of a Bi⸗
flop, Archdeacon, Deanc, Watter of an Polpitait, and the ithe, of their fole poſſeſſions, and
of the Pꝛebend, Vicar, and the like,


€ Et oblige buy & fes beires. * Hing H.5. gaue Dannoz to Ed-
mund Carle of. droinivall, and to the heires of bis body, fauing the polfibility of Reuerter,
anb Dpto, The Carle before the ſtatute of W.2.cap.1. De donis conditionalibus bp Dede
gaue the fato 99 annoz toanother (n fee With Swarrantp in exchange foz another Mannoz, and
after the fato Statute inthe 28. yearcof E. x, opctb Mithoutifluc, caning Affcts in fee fimz
ple, which warranty and Adlets oefcended bpon King E.1,ag Cofin germaine, and beire of
the fato Garie,viz. fonne and boire of Hing Henry the third, bzother of Richard &arle of
Com wall, father sf the fato Earle Edmund. Bnd it Wags adtudged.that the king ag heire to
the fato Earle Edmund, was bp thefatd Warranty and Aflets barred of the pollibility of
Beucrter, Which he had expectant bpon tbe fato gift, aibett the Warranty and Aſſets defcen=
Ded por the naturallbodp of Ring E.1, ag heire to a {ubtec, and Ring E. 1. clapmed thefatd
Mannoz, as in his Keuerter in jure Corona in the capacity of bis bodp politique, in which
right he was feted befoze the gift. In this cafe how bp the death of the fato Œerle Edmund
Swithout (ue, the Kings title bp Keuerter, and the $varrantp, and Aſſets came together, and
that the tDarrantp as collaterali, pet the Hing Mall not be barred Without Atlets ag a fub-
tect — and many other things aretobe oblerued in this cafe Which the learned reader.
will obferue. .


Seti. 704.. 705.
€( 3 {i foít pier a fits a le Forif there be father and fonne,


fits purchafe certa en fee, and the fonne purchafe lands
et le pier De € diſſeiſiſt fon fits.et in fee, and the father of this diffei-


alienaa bu auter en fee per fon
fait : ct pec meſme le fait oblige
lup et fes heives à garranter
mefines les tenements, ac, et le
pier mozuft, o2c eft le fits barre
Dauer les Dits tenements, car il
ne poit per alcun fuit, ne per aus
ter meane De lalep, auer mefmes
les terres per caufe Del Dit gat-
ranty, et ceo eft bn collateral
garranty, et bncoge le gatrantp
Difcendift Ipnealment De le pice
ale fits.


€ MES put ceo que f nul tiel
fait oue gart bf eftre

fait, le fits en nul maner puíffoít
conueper le titie que il ad a leg
tenements De fon pier alup, en-
tant que fon pier nauoít afcun
eſtate


feth his fonne and alieneth to
another in fee by his Deede, and
bythe fame deed binde him and
his heires to warrant the fame te-
nements,é&c. and the father dieth,
now isthe fonbarred to haue the
faid tenements, for hee cannot by
any fuite, norby other meane of
law haue the fame lands by caufe
ofthe faid warranty. And this is a
collaterall Warranty , and yet
the Warranty difcendeth line-
ally from the father to the fonne.


Seci.705.


Vt becaufe if no fuch Deed
with Warranty had beene
made , the fonne in no manner
could conuey the title which hee
hath to the tenements from his fa-
ther vnto him, inafmuch as his fa-


Lib.3.


eftate endroit en les tenements,
pur ceo tíel garrantie e(t appel
collateral garranty, entant que
celuy que fift le garranty eft col=
lateral ale title De les tenemétg,
et ceo elt atant adire que ceftup
a que le garranty Difcendift, ne
puiſſoit à lup conueter E title que
tiad De leg tenements per my
ceftup que Gt le garantie en
que nul tiel garrantie fuit
it,


Of Warrantie:


ther had no eftate in right in the
lands, wherefore fuch Warranty
is called Collaterall warranty, in-
afmuch,as he that maketh the war-
ranty is collateral to the title of the
tenements, and this is as much to
fay, as heeto whom the warranty
defcendeth, could not conuey to
him the title which hee hathin the
tenements. by him that made the
warranty , in cafe that no fuch
warranty were made.


$e8.,706.


€


Ere Littleton putteth an erample, prouing that it (d not called Rincall, becaufe (t
defcendeth linealip from the father to the fonne, foz inthis calethe warranty deſcen⸗


deth lineallp,and petis a collaterall warranty, Jn this example pou mutt intend that
the Diffeifin was not of intent to alien with warranty to barre the fonne, but here the Dil⸗
fein being done to the fonne, Withont anpfach intent, the alfenattonafterwards With war⸗
ranty doth barrethefonne, becaufetbat albeit the Warranty doth lincallp véfcend, pet ſeeing
the titicis Collateral, that ts, that the fonne clapmeth not the land as heire to big father,
therefozetn reſpect of tbetitlo ttis a Collaterall Warranty, Bnd thug doth Littleton agree
Ce) 5»itb the Duthozttp of our bokes. SHoas the diuerfities doc and thus. Firſt, where
the Difleifin and keoffment are vno tempore, and Where atfenerali times. Secondip where the
Difleifin is With intent to alien With Warranty, and where the Dileifin is made Without
facb intent, and the allenation with Warranty afterSoards made.


€ [Gem fifoit atel,

pler, et fits, etle
aiel foit diſſeilie, en
que poſſeſſion le pter
releas p fon fait oue
gattantie,ac, et mo⸗
rutt, et puts laiel mo⸗
rut, o2ze le fits eft
barre Dauer les tene=
ments per le garran⸗
tp bel pier, Ct cco eft
appel lineal garran⸗
tie, pur ceo que ſi nul
ticlgarrantpfuit, le
fits ne puifoit con-
ueper le Doit De les
tenements a lup, ne
monftre coment il eft
boire al Aiel fozf=


Sect. 706.


Lío if there bee

grandfather father
and {on,and the grand-
father is diffeifed, in
whofe poffeffion the
father releafeth by his
Deed with warranty,
&c. and dieth, and af-
ter the grand father di-
ethynowthe fon is bar-
red to haue the tene-
ments by the warranty
ofthe father. Andthis
is called a lineal war-
ranty, becaufe if no
fuch warranty were
the fon could not con-
uey the right ofthe te-
nements to him, nor


fgaaaa 3


CH Littleton pute


teth an example
So here the fon mutt
clapme the land ag betrete
big grandfather, and pet bes
caufe hee cannot make him⸗
felfe beire to bis grandfather


371


$E. 3.14; 46.E.3.6.
19. H.8.1a. 8. R. 2, err. 109,
Vid. Selt.7 16.


Ce) 46.E.3.6, 5.£.3.14,
19. M. 8.13.


158,4. 33. 35.8,3.G47.7 3.


butby bis fatbcr,tt is lineall.


And it is to bee obferned
that the warranty in this
cafe defcended bpon the fon,
befoze the dtfcent of the right,
Sobícb happened bp the death
of the grandfather tn Sobons
the eight ag, vide Littleton
cap.de Releafes, and after (tt
this Chapter, Sedt.707. &


741
€ Pier releafe per
fon fait oue garranty.
(t ) 3t is tobe knowne that
vpon eucrp connepance af
Lands, Cenements, o; Bea
tebítamentg;as bpon Sines,
Feoffments, Gifts,¢c, Rez
lcafeg and Confirmations
made to tb» Œenant of the
land,


(£) 14. E. 3-vos;ber 109,
16.€.3 614.87.
18.E. 3. ibid. c. 10. E.3.5 25
81.5. 3.27. 11, H. 4. 23.
44. E. 3. (Cent, de Vousk,33.
12.H 57.1,


Vid. $e80.733.738.745»


Lib.3.


35. ©.3.G 40.7 3.11.H.433-


y Baa 6. 38. F,3.31-
45. E. 2,36. 8/R 2, Gar. 101.


C4p.3.


Of Warrantie..


Set.707.


land, a warrantis may bee que per meane Del fhew how hee is heire


made,albetthe that makes the
Beieafe 02 Confirmation,
hath no right to the wand, ee,
but fome do hold, G bat bp re=


pier,


to the grandfather but
by means of the father.


leafe o) confirmation, where there ($ no eftate created, 02 tranfmutatíon of poftellion , a war⸗


tantíc cannot be made to the Aſſignee.


Sed. 707.


€ [Gem fi home ad iffue Deux

fits a cff diſſeiſie a leigne fits
releſſa al diſſeiſor per fon fait ouc
gatranty,ac, a mozuft fang iflue,
& apres ceo le pier mozutt, ccoeft
bu líncall Garrantie al puifne
fits, pur ceo que coment d leigne
fits moꝛuſt enlabicle pier, vn⸗
coze ptit ceo que per poflibilitic,
ipuiffoit etre Gil putffoít con-
ueter alup Ic títle di terre per fon
eigne frere, fi mul tícl Garrantie
fuí(foít, Car tl puiſſoit eftre que
ap2zes la moꝛt le pier leigne frere
entroit en les tenements æmo-
ruft fans ((fuc,a donque le puifne
fits conuepera a lup Ie title per
leigne fits, Mes en tiel cag fi le
puitne fits celeffe oue Garrantte
ale diſſeiſor, et mozutt fang iſſue
ceo eft bn collaterall Garrantte
aleigne fits, purceo que De tiel
terre que fuit al pier, leigne per
nul poffibilítp poit conueper a
Wy le title per meane Dele puifne

its.


Lfo if a man hath iſſue two

fonnes , and is diffeifed , and
the eldeft fonne releafe to the dif-
feifor by his deed with Warranty,
&c. and dies without iflue, and af-
terwardsthe father dieth, this isa
lineall warrantie to the younger
fonne, becaufe albeit the eldeft
fonne died in the life ofthe father,
yet by poffibility it might haue
beene , that hee might conuey to
him the Title of the Land by his
elder brother, ifno fuch Warranty
hadbeene. For it might bee that
after the death ofthe father the el-
der brother entred into the Tene-
ments and died without iflue, and
then the yonger fonne fhall con-
ucy to him the title by the elder
fon. But in this cafe if the yon-
ger fon releafeth with warr' to the
diffeifor,& dieth without iffue,this
isa collateral war.to theelder fon,
becaufe that of fuch lad as was the
fathers,the elder by no poffibility
can conuey to him the title by
meanes of the younger fonne.


{¢ not to make bis btfccnt bp him that made the toarrantte , ag tn the cafebefoze;


¢ Hi: Littl. patteth anerample, where the heire that is to be barred bp the toarrantp,


and pet becaufe bp pollibilitic he might have clatmed bp the elocft ſonne, ik hee had
ſuruiued the father, € died Without iſſue, ¢fo the vonger bzothcr might by pofltbilitie bane ber


betre to him, the toarrantte (o Tín call,


And here it is to be noted,that the Warrantie of the eldeſt ſonne diſcended before the right bis
cended, Sohereof moze {hall be fapd hereafter Se&.74.1. and the opinion of Littleton inthis Cale
ts holden for Law, againſt the opinions tn s s, E.5.Gar 73.


Mes en tiel café le puifne fits releafe oue Garrantie,cre. CThis War⸗
tantíc in this cafe (c collateral to the eldeſt fonne, and tothe Iſſues of his bodie: but it the el⸗
deft forme dicth without Iſſue of his bodie, then the toarrantie (S lineal to tbe Iſues of the
bobít of the poungeft: and fo the Warrantie that Wag cellaterall to fome perfons, map bec


come lineal to others,


Sef.


|


Lib.3.


€ [&Lem t Tenant

en le taile ad iſ⸗
{ue trois fits, et Dif-
continue le Taile en
fee, ctlemulucs fits
releffa per fonfait al
Dilcontinuce, et ob-
lige lup ct fes heirs a
Garrantic,tc.et puis
le tenant ent Carle
moꝛuſt, et le mulnes
fits mo2ut fans iſ⸗
fue, oze leigne fits ett
barre Dauer afcun re⸗
couette per Briefe de
Formedon, put tco
que le garrantie Del
mules frere ef col-
laterall alup, entant
que il ne poit per nul
manner conuever a
luy per fozce det taílc
afcun Difcent per le
mulnes,et pur ceo ce
bn colateral garran⸗
tie, Mes en cé Cas
ſi leigne fits Dente
fans (fue,orel puifft
frere poit bien auer
$n batefe De Formdon
en Ie DifcenDer, et re⸗
couers melme le fre,
pur ceo que le Gar⸗
rantie Del mulnes eft
lineal al fits puifne,
put ceo que il puiffoit
eſtre quep poſſibili⸗
tie le mulnes puiſſoit
eſtre feifiep force at
tatle apres la moot
ſon cígne frere, et


Of WWarrantie.


Sed. 708:


Líoif Tenaunt in
Taile hath iffue
three fonnes, and dif-
continue the Tayle in
fee,and the middle fon
releafe by his Deed to
the Difcontinuee, and
bind him and his heirs
to warrantie, &c. and
after the tenant in taile
dieth, and the middle
fonne dieth without
iffue, now the eldeft
Sonis barred to haue
any recouerie by writ
ot Formedon, becaufe
the Warrantie of the
middle brother is col-
laterall to him, in as
much as he canby no
meanes conuey to him
by force of the Tayle
any difcent by the
middle, and therefore
this is acollateral war-
rantie. But inthis cafe
if the eldeft fonne die
without ilfue,now the
yongeft brother may
well haue a writ of
Formdon inthe difcen-
der & fhal recouer the
fame land,becaufe the
Warrantie ofthe mid-
dle is lineall to the
yongeft fonne,for that
it might bee that by
poffibilitie the middle
might be feifed b
force of the taile after
the death of his eldeft


‘


€ Ereby (t alfo aps
H pearcth, Chat a

Warranty that is
collaterall in refpect of forc
perfons, map afterwards be=
come líncall in refpet of
others. whereupon ít follow=
eth,* G bata Collateral wars
rantíc doth not giue a Bight,
but bindetl onclp a Bight fo
long ag tbc fame continueth :
but t€ the Œollaterall war⸗
rantíc be determined, remoo⸗
tico, 02 Defeated, the Right is
tcufuco; (£) Bndpetin an
Aflife the Wlatntife hath
made bis titleby a Collateral
Toarrantíe.


€ Barre is à voord
common ag Well to tbe Ens
glíh as to the Jrrencb, of
Which cometh the nown,a bar
Bara. Jt Ggnifieth legalip
a deſtruction for cuer , or tas
king away £o? a time of the
Acion of him that right hath,
And Barra tg an Ftaltan
Sword, and fignifieth barre,
ag $e tfc ít, and tt is called a
Plea in Barre, wben fucb a
Warrets pleaded, Were Littl.
putteth anerample ofa barre
ofan eftate taile bp a Collate<
tall Warrantie, It {s to be ob=
ferucd, Chat in ſome Cafes
an Cffate taile map be barred
bpíome Acs of Parliament
made fince Littleton Szote,
and in fome cafes an Œffate
tatle cannot be barred, which
might Moher Littleton zote
haue beene barred. Jr? exam⸗
ple, JE Tenant in Capiele=
nica Sine With Pꝛoclamati⸗
ons according tothe atute,
this is a barre tothe (fate
tatle, but not to him in reuer-
fion ozrematnder, tf hee mas
keth bis clatme, op purfuc bíg
Acton within fine pearcg atc
ttt the (fate Gatlefpent,
(b)FEa atft be made to the
eldeftfonne, and tothe hetres
ofhis bobíe, the remainder to


Y the father and tothe hetres of


bis bodie, the father dieth, the
— ſonne oni a —
ons, Dict

(th proclamations » Suite


Sed.708,


372


8.X.5.Gar. 1er,


* 43.4/f.49.2 4. H. 8: fit. Tails
Br. 7.H.5.6.tit. Af] 359.
340E. 3. Drou 29.19.H.6. $9
31.H.7.40, $.H.7.29,

3. H.7.9.5.


(£)16 AM p.16. 27. Af
29. AJ. SAP EE
14. H. 4.1 3.19, H.6. 66,


4. H.7.04.34.€7 32. H 8.0.36


(byalifn a, El. ér 7. EL.
pal. 3f. 84. lecafé de Firms,


Lib.3.


(b) 26.H.8.04.1 3.
33. H.8.e4. 20. 5. E 664.110
dian; Pl. Coren. 18.


(€) 12.E, 4.19. Taliamm:


cafe.

(d) Vid.duant Sef.690.
Vid lib 3 fo. y. Cuppledssks
safe, dr fe. 94.97.106.
Lib, 1 fo 62. (apells cafe.
Lib.a fo.16.52.74 77.
Lib. 6. fo. 41.32. Itb 10. fo. 37.
Mary Partingtens cafe.
(e) 33.H.8.tasle Br. 41.
Ti. (Com.fo. 555.

32. H.8.D.er 51.

(£2 34.H.8 4.20.


(€) Trin.31. Flip eter —
ruely or Afhton refeleedio
the Court of Wards.
Lib.a.fol.t 5. dr 16.5»
Wifeamani caf.


Lib 8.fol.77.78. The Lend
Stafferds cafe.


Aib. a fol. v g v4. MA ferman:
vafe. Lib. a. fol. ga. (belraleis


Cf.


bib, a.fol.16,Wiferan! safe


Cap.3. Of Warrantie. | Setl.7 o8.


Sithout illue this (al barre douque le puifne fret brother, and then the


e a Be (or puí&oit conueper fon yoügeftbrother might


tlbeft, title De Difcent per le conucy histitle of dif-


aunt in ne muines. cent by the middle


on, and the Gcnant of the brother.
land lenp a fine with preclas
mations, and fiuc peares pale, the right of the eſtate tatle ts barred, ‘

(b) 3€ Tenant tr tatletn potlellion, oz that hath aight of entrle bec attainted of bigh
treafon, the cftate taíle ts barred, and the land is foꝛteited to the Hing ; ano none of thefe were
barres ben Litileron Mote, A lineall Warrantie and Adets was a barre to the eſtate tapie
wyen Littleton Wzote, whercof moze Hall be faid herentter,

(c) 20 common recouerp With a Boucher oner, anda Judgement to recouer tn balne Was a
barre of thecftatetatie ben Littleton wꝛote. (d) Awd of Common reconeries there be tio
fo;t9,viz, one with a Gngle Woucher, and another with a double Goucher, and that is moze
common and moze fafe : there map be moze Uouchers over. |

Ce) IE the King had made a alftintatle, andthe Done had fuffered a Common recouerp,
this fhould haue barred the eftate tatle in Littleronstime, but not the renerfiow oz rematnder (rg
the king. Bnd foif {uch a Done had leuted a fine With Pzoclamattons after the Statute of
4H, 7, this had barred the eftate tatle, although the reucrfion was in the iking.(f ) But ance
Littleton Syzote a Common recouerp had again® Œenantin tatie of the Bings gift, o2 fuck
a fine lentes by him, the reverfion continntng tn the Crowne, (g no barre to the eſtate taíle bp
the Dtatuteof 34. H, 2. And wWhere the worzds of the Statute bee ( Sobereof tbercuerüx
on 0? rematnbcr at the time of fuch recoucrp had (hall be in the King) chefe Ben things are to
be obſerued pon the conftructon of that ac.

Firſt, that the eſtate tatle muſt becreated by a Ming, and not bp anp ſubiec, albeit the
Hing be his here tothe reverfion, for the 392eamble {peakes of gifts mabe to fnbiets, anb
none can fauc fubiects but the king. Bnd alfoín the 191camble ít te ſaid (£02 ferutce done te
the things of the Realme and the body of tbe act referrethto the Paꝛeamble. (g) Bnd theres
fojc ifthe Duke of Lancafter had made a gift in tatle, and the reuerGon defcended to the King,
pet Was not that cffate taplereftrained bp that Statute, and fo of the like.

Secondly, HE the King grant ouertbe Reucrfien , thena recoucryp faffereo will barre the
fate tapie, becanfe the Hing had no Wewerfon at the time of the recoucrp,

Thirdly, Ikthe ring make a gift tn tapic, the remapnder in taple , 02 grant the 1RcuerGor
in taple, keeping the Reuerfion in the Crowne, a recovery again Cenant tn taple in polledt=
on hall nepther barre the eſtate taple in poſſeſſion by the expzeffe puruic® of the Statute , noz
by confequence the fate in Remaynder o? Reuerſien, fo; that the Keuerſion 01 Remapnder
cannet be barred, but bere tbe € (Fate taple tn poſſeſſion te barred,

Fourthly, It a fubtet make a gift in taple; tbc Remapnderto the King in fee, albeit tbe
Swords of the Statutebe, ( &obercof tbe Keuerſion o2 Remapnder of the fame, tc.) pct fetng
the eſtate tn taple was not created by a King, as hath bent fato, the effate taplemayp be barred
bp a common recouery.

Fitktly, Ff Prince Henry Honneof Henry the Seventh, had madea gift intaple, the Wes
mapnder to Henry the Seuenth in fe, which Kemaynder bp the death of Henry tbe Seuenth
had difcendedto Henry the Etghth, fo ag he hadthe TRemapnbet bp difcent , pet might Tenant
in taple, fo the canfe afogefaid,barre the cftate tapic by à common recouerp.

Sitlp, Che word (Remapnder) inthe Statute is no bafne Word, for the Words of the
preamblebe, © be king hath qtuen 02 granted 02 otberxoífe pronided to his Seruants and
Subiects. Che word (iW euerfion) in the bodp of the Ac hath reference ro thefe words (giuers
02 granted) and (1Remapnber ) hath reference tothele words( otheriwife pzoufocb, As (£ the
Hing (n confieration of Money, o2 of affurance of and, oꝛ oz other confiberation bp Wap
of prouifion, procure a Subiec bp Deed indented and (nrolleo to make a gift in taple toone of
bis Seruants and Subtees £01 recompence of feruice, o2 other confidcration,the 18 emapnder
to the King in fee, anb all this appeare of Mecosd , this is a god prouifien Within the Sta⸗
tute, and the Œcnant in taplecannot bp a commen recouerp barre the eftatetaple. So itis, tf
the Remapnder be limited tothe Kiug in taple: bnt tf the Remapnder be limited to the Ring
fo} veares, o1 For life, thatis no fuch Remaynder, as is intended by the Statute, becanfe tt te
ef no Remaynder of continuance, ag tought to be, as it appeareth bp tbe gacamble, and
ít ought te auc fomeainitte Sith a Renerfion, Wherewith ft (e topned.

Seuenthly, woherea common reconcrp cannot barre the fate taple by Fogce of thefald Stas
tute, there a fine leuted tn fee, in tayle, fo2 lines, o1 peares With Proclamations accozbing te
the Statutes, hall not barre tbe Gate saple, ofthe tine in tayle Where the Menerfon 02 Bee

E mapedes


Lib. Of Warrantie. Se8.709.


apner (d in tbe Ling, ag (9 afozefatd, by reafon of thefe 00209 in tbe faib A, (the fat res
ceuerp og anp other thing 02 things hereafter to be had, done, os ſuſfered bp op agatnft any ſuch
Tenant (n taple to the contravp norwithanding) Which Words include a fing ienied bp fuch
a Done, andreftrapnech the fame.

Cightip, Wut where a common rcconcrp all barre the chatetaple, notwithſtanding that
Statute, chere afine With Pꝛoclamations ſhall barre the fame alfo,

Pinthly, where tbefatolatter words of the Statute be (had, done, o2 ſuſtered by o? again
anpfuch & enant ín taple ) the fence and conftruction is,where Cenant in taple is partie op país
uis tothe Dc,be it bp doing o fuffcrina that Swbich ſhould worke the barre, and net bp mere
permtflion he being a ranger to tbe Ba.

As (£ Tenant in taple of the gift of the Wing, the reuerfionto the King expectant, ig diſſei⸗
fed, andthe Diſſetſoz lente a fine, and fiue peares pale, this Mall barre the eſtate tapic: and fo
t£ a collaterall Anceftos of the Donee releaſe With warrantie, andthe Done fuffcr the tars
tantp te Dífceno wit hout anp entry made in the life ofthe Wneelkoz, this fati bind the Cenant
tntaple, becaufe hee is not partic o2 pꝛiuie to anp Ba, either done 07 fuffered by oz again

im


Teuthly, Albeit the pꝛeamble of tbe Statute extend only to gifts in tayle made bp the Kiugs
of England beforethe Aa viz. hath given and granted, tc, and the bodie of the Actrekerreth to
the pzeamnble(viz.thit nofucb fetned recouerie hereafter to be bad againſt fuch Cenant in tayle)
fo as this Wozd ({uch) map feme to couple the bodie and the preamble together,pet in this cate
(tach) thall be taken 102 fuch in equall mtfchtefe, oꝛ (m like cafe,and bp Diners parts of tbe Ac (t


appeareth, that the makers of the Bc intended to extend it to future gifts, and ſo is the Law
taken attbís dap without queftion.


À receucry tn a watt of Right againſt Cenant (n taple Without a Meucher (d no barre of


any gift in taple,


FE Tenant (n taple the remapnder over in fee celle, and the Lord reconcr in a Ceffauit, this
fhali not barre the eftate taple, fos the {lue (ball recouer in a Formedon : neither were epther of
chefe barres when Littleton wꝛote. But let bs now beare Littleton.


€. | Cem & Tenant
en taile diſconti⸗
nualetaile, æaDif-
fue & Deup, a luncle
del iſſue releſſa al Dif-
continuee sue Gar⸗
vantíe , ac, a moautt
fang iſſue, ceo e(t col-
lateral Gacrantie al
iffue en taple, put ceo
que te Garrantie Dif-
cendift fur liffue, le
quel ne poít fop cou-
ueper a le tayle per
meane De fon oncle,


Setlion 709.


Lfo if tenant in

tayle difcontinue
the taile and hath iffue
and dieth, and the Vn-
cle of the itfue releafe
to the Difcontinuee
with Warrantie, &c.
and dieth without if-
fue,this is a collateral!
Warrantie to the iffue
in tayle, becaufe the
Warrantie difcendeth
vpon the iffue , that
cannot conuey him-
felfeto the entayleby
meanes of his vncle.


€T Us. teafon where⸗


fore the warrantie
et the Uncle having
no right to the Land entailed
fbati barre the flic in tayle ts
fo? that tbe Law pzeſumeth
that the Uncle would net bna
naturallp difberit his lawtull
beire being of bis own bioud,
of that right which tbe Cincle
neuer had, but came to the
beire bp another mean, vnleiſe
hee Would leaue him greater
aduancement,Nemo præſumi⸗
tur alienam pofteritatem fue
prztuliffe. And in thts cafe
the La ill admit no pzoof
again that which the Law
prolameth. And fo (ttg ofall
other Collaterall toarranttes
fo; no man (g pzefumep to doe
any thing agaínft nature,
(k) Bnd the tke holdeth (i


fowme other Cafes, ag if a Bent be behind for twenty peares, and the X0zb makean Acquit⸗
tance £o? the laſt that te Due, ali tbe teft are prefumed tobce pafo , and the Law Sotll abiit no
profe againkthis prefamptton, (1) So it aman bee wit hin the foure Seag , anb his wife
hath a chytid,the Law piefametb that itis thechild ofthe bufbaub, anb againtt this pꝛeſumpti⸗
on the Lat will admit no preofe,


(m) FE a wan that te tunocent bes acenfeb of Felony and fos feare Heth fos the fame, als
@Bbbbb belt


373


So reſolued Pafch.31 Eliz.
Rot.1645. 9m Nosleys cafe in


Communs Banco,


So holden Trin. 39. Eli( Rot.
1914. snter Stratford &
Douerin Conamuni Baneos


33-E. 3. Tudgement 352,

3. H.6. 55. 10. H.6 «.
14.E.4. 5.0. 15.8.4 8.
F.N.B.134,0.PL( om 237.
38. E. 3. S. FN. .28. &


Pl. Com. fel.307, 4. in She=
ringtons eae.


(k) 11.04. 990 vo. Elie
Dir 371, 85 N


(0) 7.4.4.9


(e) 36.3 Corene Staaf,


Lib.3.


Brain lb. 1. cap.9-


(n) Rot. Parliament.
fe, B. 3.50.77.


$.E.3.G arr.25.li5.8. fel. A1.
Syms Cale. j


Ses befereinthe Chapter of
Dyfaend, 4:0,393.


Cap.13.


Of WV arrantie.


Seti. 710.


bett be iudictally acquitteth bhnfelfe of the Feionte,pet (£ (t be found chat he fled fo the Felony,
bt {ball notwithſtanding bis tanocencte fozfett all his Dos anb Chattels , Debts and Du⸗
ties, foz as to the forfeiture of them the Law Will admit no pꝛote agaín& the pꝛeſumption in
La greunded pon bis flight: anvfoin many other Cafes. Wut pet the gentrall rule ts,
Quod ftabitur prefumptioni donec probetur in contrariam. Wut ag pou fe ít hath many ex⸗


ceptions.


(n ath beene attempted (n 39ari(ament, that a £xtatute mightbee made, that no man
iral * OM a Warrantie collateral, but where AUets diſcend from ¢ye fame Anceltoz:
but tt never tobs effect, for that tt fhonid xocaben common Aſſurances.


Diſſue deux
€A je. Sf


bufbanb amb wife Ges
nants ín efpecíall taple
have iſſue a Daughter,
and the wife die the huſ⸗
band by a ſecond wife
hath tfTuc another daugh
ter, and diſcontiuueth tn
fe anb dieth, a collateral
Ænceftoz of the Daugh=
ters releafeth to the otf-
continaee with warran⸗
tie and dteth, the Date
rantíc difcendeth bpon
both daughters, pet the
(fine in tatie fballbe bats
ted of the $obole, for in
iudgement of Law the
entire warrantie diſcen⸗
deth vpon both of them.


€ Et leigne en-
ter en lentiertie &


ent fait vn feoffe.
ment, &c. ere tt
ts to bee vnderſtod, that
ben one Coparcener
doth generally enter (mz
tothe whole , this doth
mot deueſt the eftate
Sohich difcended by the
Law tothe other, bnicfle
fe that doth enter claps
meth the bole, an? tar
keth the profits of the
whole, for that ſhall bez
ne(t the freehold in Law
of the other Parcener.
D ther wife it is after
the arceners be cual⸗
Ipfeifed, the taking of
the hole profits o; any
Clapme mabe bp the one
Cannot pnt the other out
9f goflelion Without an


Sel. 710.


€ [En file tenant

entaile ad tue
deux files a mosutt, et
leigne entra en le enti⸗
erty a ent fait on keolf⸗
ment € fee oue garran⸗
tie, &c, et puis leigne
file moauft fans iflue,
enceftcas le puifne file
eft barre quant albn
moitp, ct quant alau-
ter moitp el neft pas
barre, Cat quant ala
moítp que affiert a le
puitne file, el eft barre,
pur ceo que quant a
cel part el ne poít con⸗
ueper le Dilcent per my
le maine de fon eigne
foer et pur ceo quanta
cel moitp , ceo eft bn
collaterall Garranty,
Mes quant al auter
moíty que affiert a fon
eigne foer , le Garran=
tp neft pas barre a le
puifne foer, pur ceo q
el pott conueper 5 Dif-
cent, quant a cel moítp
que affiert a fon eígue
foer per mefine le cigne
foer, (flint quant a ceft
moítp que affiert al
eight foer, le Garran⸗

tp


Lfo ifthe Tenant in
tayle hath iffue two
daughters and dieth,and
the elder entreth into
the whole, and thereof
maketh a feotfment in
fee with warrantie , &c.
and after the elder
daughter dieth without
iffuc. In this cafe the
yonger daughter is bar-
red asto the one moitie
andasto the other moi-
tie fhe is not barred. For
asto the moitie which
belógeth to the yonger
daughter, fhee is barred,
becaufe as to this part
fhee cannot conuey the
difcent by means of her
elder fitter, andthere-
fore as to this moitie,
this isa collaterall War-
rantie. But as to theo-
ther moitie, whichbe-
longeth to her elder ff:
fter, the Warrantie isno
barto the younger fifter
becaufe fhe may conuey
her difcent as to that
moitie which belongeth
to her elderfifter by the
fame elder fifter , So as
to this moitie which be-


\


Lib.3.


ty eft lineal! al puifne
foer,


Sed.


€ ET nota à quant

à celup que De-
manda fee (imple per
afcun dfes auncefters,
fl ferva barre per Gar=
ranty lineall que Di:
cendift fur lup, (non
que foít reftraine per
atcuu eftatute,


Sect.


€s tl que De=
M fee taile
per betefe De Formedon
€Difcender.ne ferra inp
barre pet lineall Gar⸗
rantie , finon que il an
aſſets per Difcent & fee
fimple per meſm̃ laun⸗
cefter que fift le Gar⸗
ranty, Wes collateral
Garranty eft barre a
celu» que Demanpafee,
et auxy à celup que De-
maunda fee taple fang
afcun auter difcent De
fee fimple, finon en ca=
fes queut font te-
ftratnes per leg efta=
tutes, a auters cales
pur certaine caules,
come ferra Dit en a-


pacs,


Of Warrantie:


longeth to the elder fi-
{ter the Warrantie is li-
nealto the yonger fifter.


711.


AN note, thatas to
him that deman-
deth fee fimple by any
of his Anceftors he fhall
be barred by Warrantie
lineall which difcendeth
vponhim, vnleffe hebe
reftrained by fome Sta-
tute.


711.


Vt hee that deman-
deth Fee tayleby
Writ of Formedon

in di(cender, (hall not bee
barred by lineall War-
rantie, vnleffe hee hath
affets by difcent in fee
fimple by the fame An-
ceftor that made the
Warrantie, But collate-
rall Warrantie is a barre
to him that demandeth
fee, and alfo to him that
demandeth fee Tayle
without any other dif-
cent of fee fimple , ex-
ceptin cafes which are
reftrained by the Sta-
tutes, and, in otherca-
fes for certaine caufes,as
fhalbe faid hereafter.


Se8 711,512.


atual putting ont 02
bíffeíá. And in this
caſe o£ Littleton, Shen
bne Coparcener entrctl)
tito tbe whole, and maz
het) a fcoffment of the
Whole.this deueſteth che
freehold in Law ont of
the other Coparcener.
SLOW feing P entrp in
this cafe of Lit. beuefteo
not tbe eftate of the other
Parcener, tino further
piccæding had bene,
then tt ig to bee deman⸗
deb, that ſeeing the fcoff-
ment doth Swozke the
Swrong, € bee the wzong
either a difleifin o2 in nac
tare of an abatement,
how can the toarrantte
annexed to that feoffiment
that wꝛought the Wrong
becollateral{ 0? bind the
poungelt Sitter fos her
part? To this it is arts
fwered, that when the
one Sifter entreth into
she Whole, the poflefion
being botd, and maketh a
feofiment in fee,this Ma
fubfequent doth fo ers
plaine the entric pzecez
Dent into tbe whole
that now by conftructs
on of Law, (bec wag
only feifed of the Sbhole,
and thig feoffment can
bee no dffcifin, becaufe
the other Gfter wag nes
uer leiſed, mop anp ae
batement , becanfe thep
both made but one betre
tothe Bnceftoz, anb one
Freehold and Fnbert=
tance diſcended to ther.
So ag in fnogement of
Lak the roarrantp voth
not commence bp ot(fete
firi e? bp abatement, and
Without queftion her ens
trie as no tntrafion.
@enant (n taple hath
{Tue two vaugbters,and
difcontinncth tn fee the
poungett diffetfeth the
diſcontinuee to the bfe of


ber felfe and berGlter, tbe Dt(continuce oufteth her, again tors the recoucretb in an BE
fife, the eme agreeth tothe Difleiin, as the map agatn& her (fer, anb become Jopntenant
With ber, Bnd thus (a the Wobointhe 21. 2Tt[e (n) to betntended , thecale betng no other
ineffec , but A Diffeifeth the oneto the ble of himfsife and B,B agrerth,bp this he la Joputes


nant With A.


Bbbbb 2


@ 2:


374


FlCom,$43:


(0) atAL p.75.


Lib.


38.3.31. 4.F.3.28.50.
6.E.3. 56. 7. E.3. 54 57-
pF +6 10. E.3. 14.
15.6.3: Gaeren.37.

20.E.3 Juid 19. 35. £.3. go.
37, E. 3,8 3. 41 E. 3.Garr.16.
ich 38 E.3 Coram Kege
Abbat de (olchetters €« fe.
45 Af €. Pl.( 0.554.
19.E. 4.10.

V td, $68.503.747-


Fleta !ib.2.ea 63.
Beuren 1850

4 £. 3-Garr.6 3.'
16, E. 3 jets 4.
di E.3.9. 7. H. 6.5.
11 H.4 20.


34. E.3.47*


(a) 31. s. 4ffets s.

32E x Recouery 1» value vy.
€ b.:.fo 31 Durrler Cr
Takers cafe


cif ers 293.

¶ )Fleta Iib. 1.ca 65.
Brivton,fo.155.Exrent.
wast. y. 9.37.
32. H. at. 33 E. 5. Gar. 103


Capi.


Of V Vartantie; Sed. 713.


Et nota que quant a celuy que demanda fce ſimple, &c. In tbefe two
Heaions there are txpꝛeũed fourelegall concinfiong :

Firk, Chat a lineal warrantie doth bind the right of a Fee (imple.

Hecondlp, That a lir eall warrantte doth not bind the right ofan Eſtate tattle, for that tt iz
reftrained by the Statute of Donis conditionalibus.

Thirdlp, Chat a limeall toarrantie and affetg (& a barre of therightin Catle, andig mot re-
frained (ag hath benefapd) bp the fapo A.

Fourthly, Chat a Collateral warrantte made by a Cellaterall Ancefkog of the Done,
doth bind the right of an cate tatle,albett there be no Allets, and the reaſon thereof ts pon the
Statute of Donisconditionalibus, fe; that tt (g not made bp the Cenant in taile, ac. ag the li⸗
neail Warranty ts,

Eo this map beadded, that the warranty of the Done tn tafle which (s collaterali to the
Dono}, 02 tohim inremainder, betng hetre to him doth bindethem without anp affets. oz
though the alienation of the 3Done after tine Doth not barre tbe Donoz, hich was tbt mifz
chicfe pzontoco Fo by the Ac, vet the warranty being collateral Doth barre both of them,foz the
Ad reftratneth not that warranty, but it remaineth atthe Common aw ag Litelcton after
fatth : and in like manner the Warranty of the one doth barrebím tn the remainder.

QD Affets. (ideft) quod tantundem valet, fufficient bp Difcent,

Hote Diets requifiteto make a lineal Warranty a barre muſt haue ſixe qualities, Firit, it
tft be ailets (that ts) of equall balus,o2 mozeat tbe time of the Diſcent. Secondip, (t musk
be of difcent, and not bp purchafe oz gift, Thirdly, ag Littleton here fatth, (t muft be affets ín
fee ſimple and not ín taíle, 02 £02 another mang life, Jrourttjlp, tt muſt defcendto him ag heire
to th: fame Anceftor that made tbc tWarrantp ag Lircletonalfo here faith. Jriftlp, (t muſt be of
lands 02 tenements, o» rents o2 ferutces baluable, of other profits iſſuing ont of lands oz tenc-
ments and not perfonall inberttances ag Annuities, andtheltke. Sixtly, it mni be in fate
02 (ntcreff, and not tn bfe o2 right of actions oz tights of entrie,fez thep areno aflets vntill thep
be bzought into polfeffion. (a) Wut tf arent ín £o fimple iſſuing ont of the land of the beíre
Defcend nto him whereby it ig extinc yet tbig (e acts, andto this purpole bath ín twogement
of Law acontinuance. r

(b) B Hetgqutozy in free Almoigne (a no affetg, becaufe it tg not valnable, and therefoze not
to be extended, and fo ít feemeth ofa Seignioꝛy of Womageandfealtp Wut an Adus Wſon is
Biiets Whereof (c) Fleta faith; Item de Ecclefiis que ad donationem domini pertinent quot
funt, & qua, &vbi, & quantum valeatquzlibet Ecclefia per annum fecundum veram ip.
fius xftimationem, & pro marca folidus extendatur, vt (i Ecclefia centum marcas valeat per an-
num,ad centum folidosextendatur aduocatio perannum. And herewith agresth Britton,anb o-
therg haucreckoncd a ſhilling tn tbe pound, anb Britton addeth further, Mes fi la aduowfan
duift eftre vendue, adonques ferr? lereafonable price folonque le value en vn an a ccl extent.


toberein (t tg to be obferucd, that Antiquity dtd euer rechon bp markes.


Sed. 713.


€. | Cem fiterre foít bone à n

home et ales beires de fon
corps engendres le quel prent
feme, ct ont i(Iuc fits enter eur,
ele baton Difcontinua le taile en
fee.et deuy, ct puis la feme velet-
fa al difcontinuee en fee oue gat»
rantie ac.et mozutt,¢ le garran⸗
tie diſcendiſt ale fits,c eft bn col-
lateral garvantte,


*I


Lfo ifland bee giuento aman

and tothe heires of his body
begotten, who taketh wife, and
haue iffue a fonne betweene them,
and the husband difcontinues the
taile in fee and dieth, and after the
wife releafeth tothe Difcontinuee
in fee with warranty,&c. & dyeth,
and the warrantie difcends to the
{on, this is a collaterall warranty. -


Dis cafe ftandeth bpon tbe fame rcafon that diuers other fozmerip pnt by eur Bue
thoa, doe, viz. that becanfe the heire clapmeth onip from the father Per formam do-
ni, and nothing from the wike, that therefore the Soarrantie of the Swife is collates


tall, and the toarrantie made bp anp Anceftoz male os female of the Life bindeth, and bere the
warrantie defcended after the diſcent of the right, e
Sect,


Lib.3.


E Setlion


€ MS ft teneinents fopent

boncg a le baron ct a fa
keme et a les beires De lour deux
co2ps engendes, queux ont if=
fue fits, et le baron dilcontinua
le tatle ct mogzutt,et puis Ia feme
releſſa oue garrantie et mozuft,
cett garranty neſt fo? (que bn li-
neal garranty a le fits : Car le
fits ne ferrabarre en cco cas De
fuer fon bte De Formedon, finon
que il ad affets per diſcent en fee
fimple perfa mere, pur ceo que
lout liffueen bzíefe De Formedon
coutent conucpet a Tuy le droit
come beire à fon pere et a (a mere
Delour deux co2ps engendzes,
per fozme Del Done, et tint en
tielcafe,le garantie De le pere,
et le gatrantie de la metene font
korſque lyneal gart al beire,ac.


Of Warrantie.


714.
But lands be giuento the huf-
band & wife,and to the heires
of their two bodies begotten,
who haue iffue a fon, and the huf-
band difcontinue the taile atid dy-
eth, and after the wife releafe with
warranty and dieth, this warranty
is buta lineall warranty to the fon:
For the fonne fhall not be barred in
this cafe to fue his writ of Forme-
doa, vnleffe that he hath Affets by
difcent in fee fimple by his mo-
ther,becaufe theiriffüe inthe writ
of Formd, ought to conuey to him
the rightas heire to his father and
mother of their two bodies be-
gotten Per formam doni, and fo in
this cafe the warranty of the fa-
therand the warrantie of the mo-
ther arebut lineall warranty to the
heire, &c.


clatme ag hetre of both their bodyes, pet the toarranty of eit er of them ts lineall to


€ H Ere ig a point woꝛthy of obfernatien, that albeit (n this cafethe (Tue (n tafle mutt


the iſſue, and pet the tiluc cannot clatme ag hetreto etther of them alone, but of both,

FE lands begiuen toa man and to a Woman bamarried, aub. che hetres of thetr tio bobpeg,
and they enteraiarrp,and are diſſeiſed, and the huſband releaſe With Warranty, the wite dieth
tbc huſband btetb, albett the ones did take bp mopties, vet che Warranty ts Hncall Fos the
whole, becaufe ag eur Buthoz here fateh, the iffue mult in a Formedon conuey tohimthe right
as heire to bis father and big mother of their two bobpes engendzed, and cherefore tt ts colla⸗


terall 02 no part,


Sed.


€ ET nota que en chefcun
E^ *— cas ou home demanda te-
nements en fee taile per bziefe
De Formedon, ff aſcun del iſſue en
Ietaile que auoit poſſeſſion ou
que nauoit afcun poſſeſſion fait
bn garranty,zc.fi celuy que ſuiſt
lebziefe ð Formedon puiffoit pet
afcun poflibility pet matter que
puiffoit eſtre en fait, conueper a
lu? per mp celup que fit le gar⸗

canty


715.


AN note that in euery cafe
wherea man demandeth lands
infeetaile by Writ of Formedon if
any of theiffue in taile that hath
poffeffion,or that hath not poffeffi-
on make a warranty, &c. if hee
which fueththe writ of Formedon
might by any poffibility by matter
which might bee in fait, conueye
to him,by him that made the war:
ranty Per formam doni, this is a lis
Bbbbb 3


Set, 714.715.


375


35.8.3. nit. Garr 7.


Lib, 3.


gp E 4, gerr.g1.


Cap.


Of WVarrantie.


Set. 716.


ranty perfoꝛme bel Done, cco eft neall warranty and not collate-
n líincalgatt, a nép collateral, rall.


(a tis dicitur, foa it is a point of great tit and confequence.


€ O F this faficient hath bane {aid befor, Scd nunquam nimis dicitur quod nunquàm


Sell. 716,717.


© Tem fi home ad iffue trois
fits, ettl Dona Terre al

eigne fits, à auct et tener

a luy et ales heites De fon coꝛps
engenb2eg, et pur Default De tiel
lue, le remainder al mulnes
fits alup, etales heives De fon
cozps engend2e3, et pur Default
& ttel tue Del mulneg,t remain=
der al putine fits etleg beires De
fon corps engendzes, en cett cag
fi leigne Difcontinuale Caple en
fee, etobligelup et {es heyres à
garrantie etmozutt fans Tue,
ceo e(t vn collaterall Garrantie
al mulnes fits, etferra barre a
Demaunder meine la Cerre per
fozce Del remainder, pur ceo que
le remainder eft fon title , et for
eigne frere eft collaterall a cel
title,que commence per force Del
reinainder, Cnmefmele manet
eft, file mulnes fits auoit meſme
laterre perv force Del remainder,
pur ceo que fon eigne frere ne itt
atcun difcontinuance , meg mo-
tutt fang iſſue de fon coꝛps ct put
Emuines fait bn Dí(contínuance
oue gatrantie,æc, et moꝛuſt fang
iſſue, ceo eft bri collaterall Gar⸗
tantie ale puiſne fits, Ct aurp
en cett cafe fi afcun de les dits
fits ott Diffeifie,et le pere que fitt
le bote, ac, relefaale Diſſeiſoꝛ
tout fon Doit oue Garrantic,ceo

eſt vñ collateral! gatrantie à ce

lup fits Qut quele Warranty Dif-

tendiſt, Caufa qua fupra.


AL if a man hath Iffue three
fonnes,and giueth land to the
eldeft fonne,to haue and to hold to
him and to the beires of his bodie
begotten, and for default of fuch
iffue, the remainder to the middle
fonne,to him and to the Heires of
his bodie begotten,and for default
of fuch iffue ofthe middle fonne,
the remainder to the yongeft Son
and tothe heires of his bodie be-
gotten; In this cafe if the eldeft
difcontinue the taile in fec, & bind
him & his heiresto Warrantie,and
dieth without iffue, this is a colla-
terall warrantie to the middle fon,
& fhal be a bar to demand thc fame
land by force of the Rem’, for that
the remainder is his title, and his
elder brother is collaterallto this
title, which commenceth by force
ofthe remainder.In the fame man-
ner it isif themiddle fon hath the
fame land by force of the Remain-
der, becaufe his eldeft brother
made no difcontinuance , but died
without Iffue of his bodie , andaf-
terthe middle make a difcontinu-
ance with warrantiej&c.and dicth

withoutiffue, thisis a collaterall

warrantie to the youngeft fon. And

alfointhis cafe ifany of the fayd

fonnes be diffeifed, and the Father

that made the gift, &c. releafeth to

the diffeiforall his right with war,

this is acollaterall warranty tothat

Son vpon whom the warranty dif-

cendeth, Caw/a qua fupra.


Se,


<=


Lib.3.
CE


tantic,


Tficnota, Que lou home
que e(t collateral ale Ti⸗
tle, et cco releate oue Garrantie,
fc. ceo eft en Collaterall Gar=


Set, 717.


the


Of Warrantie. $e8.716.717.718.


Nd fo note, That where a
Man that is collateral! to


Title, and releafeththis


with Warrantie,&c. this is a colla-


terall Warrantie.


Cc Ere (t appearctb, That it is not adiuaged in Lawa Collaterall Soarrantíe, tnree
H {pect of the blend, fo; the Warrantismap be collateral , albett the blond be lineall,

and the Warrantie map be lineal, albeit the bloud be collaterall, as hath bene faíb,
Wut tt is in Law deemed a Coilatcrall Warrantie, in reſpect that he that maketh the War⸗
rantie is collaterall to the titie of him Dpon whom the toarrantte deth fall, as bp the crample
Which Littleton here putteth, and bp that which hath beams foameripfapd, tg manties.


€ je (í Pier
bona Cerre a

fon eígne fits, aauer
ateñalup sats hts
Males de fon cozps
engendres, le 18e-
mainder a le fecond
fits ac. (C leigne fits
altenatt en fee ouergs
Garrantie, ac, ct ad
iffue female, et mo-
tu(t fans ((Tuc male,
ceo neſt pas collates
tall Garrantie al fez
{ cond fits, car tl ne
ferra barre De 8 acti-
on De Formedon enle
remainder, put ceo
que le Garranty Dif-
eendift al file bl eigñ
fits, et nempal tc-
tond fits, Carchel=
cun darrantie que
Difcendift. diſcendiſt
aceluy que eft heire
aluy que fift le Gar-
Lo per le Commo


pe


Sell. 718.


A o if a father gi-

ucth land to his
eldeftfonne, to haue
and to hold to him
and tothe Heirs males
of his bodie begot-
ten,the remainder to
the fecond fonne,&c.
if the eldeft fonne ali-
eneth infee with war-
ranty,&c.& hath iffue
female, & dieth with-
out Iffue male, this is
no collaterall warran-
tieto the fecond Son,
for he fhall not be bar.
red of his Action of
Formeden in the Re-
mainder , becaufe the
wart difcended to the
daughter of the elder
fon,& not tothe fecód
fon:for euery warraty
which difcends,difcé-
deth to him that is
heir to him who made
the Warrantie by the
Common Law.


€ Qre ts rehearſed a

H Maxime of the

Common law that

eueríc Warranties doth difcend

"pou him that ts heise te bins

thas made the Warranty, bp the

Common Law, ag by tbíg ege
"€ gira

LA cei) que ef

heire a luy que fift le Gar-


rantie per le Common ley,


oc. Hereupon manp
things wozthie to bee imosone
ateto be vnderſtod. (a) Firft,
Chat aman infeoketh ano⸗
therefan acre of ground With
warrantie, and hath Zine two
fonnes, and dieth feifed of anos
ther acreofland, o£ tbe nature
of Burrough Cngitth,the keol⸗
fee is impleabed,albett the wage
rantie difcendeth onelp bpon the
eldeſt fonne, pct map bet bouch
them both ; the one as Bepze to
tbe Warrantie, t tbe other ag
hetre totbelano:foo i£ be Sonia
vouch the eldeſt fonne onelp;
then Heuld bee not bane tbe
fratt of hig warrantie, viz. g
recouerie in balue, the

eſt fonns only ke ae or 4
becauſe hee is not betre at the
Common Law, bpon whom ths
toarrantíe difcendeth,

(b) So it ts of heres (5
Gancikind,the eldeſt map be
bonched ag betre tothe narrans
tte, andthe other fonnes in Fes
(pra of the Anbsritancs —


376


8.2. 3.Ger. i01. Sl 08


V.$48.3.60353$.53643$*


(a) 46. 8.5.15.


228,4. 3 le
Seen, : lo


Lib. 3.
(c)49.4f 4. 38-E. 3,22


(4)32.E.3.Veush.94.
3 5-H. 6.33.


PC 15,


(e)17.€.2,0i8. Reconer.in va-
due 33. 1. E.3.12. 33 Edw.5.
Tudgrn.222, 14. £.3.15. 160.
Io. E. 3.52. 1£.E.5 51.
Li. fo.96. Sbelleyseafe, o
(0) 32 LE Vench.94.

g Grerm.


(g)9.2).€m fo. 514.


(h)17.2.3.59.20.8. 3.
Vouch.129.33.E.3.V euw.94
§-H.7.2.

(1) r1. H.7. 12. 11. E;3.fif,
Det Dy. 5.61238.


(LVII.H.J.12.


C+) 24.6.3. 36. 27.2.3.6¢¢
108. 38.F.3.26.40,6.3.9.
37. H.8. Br.Nefinet.& 40.
© nn Doer Few 61.


Caps Of Warrantie. Sc: 719.


beb bntotben, (c) And in like fort, the beírc at the Common Law, and the heire of the part
of the mother fhail be vouched. Wut the heiveatthe Common Lak map bee bouche alone {re ^
both tbefe cafes, at the election of the Cenant, & fic de (imilibus.(d ) In the fame manner if &
man Ddieth feifed of certatne lands in fe, hauing iſſue a ſonne and a daughter bp one enter, ann
a fonne bp anetber, the eldeſt fonne entreth anddieth , the land diſcends tothe After, Jn this
cafe the Warrantie diſcendeth on the fonne, and he may be bouched as Heire, awd tbe iter ag
hetre of the Land: Jn Which and tbe other cafe of Wurrough Engliſh, thefoune andhepre by
the Common Law hantng nothing bp difcent, the whole loſſe of the recouertetn value lieth apa
on the heires of the jand,albett they be no beires to the toarrantic. Chen put the caie that tyere
ig a WWarrantic paramount, toho fball beratgne that toarrantie ; and to Whom (bali the re
compence in value goe? Home haue ſayd, Chat as thep are vouched together, fo fball thep a=
uouch eucr, and that the recompence tn balue thal enure according to the loſſe, and that the effect
mutt purfuc the canfe , ag arecoucrie in baluebpa Warrantie of the part of the mother (hall
troc to the betre of the part of the mother, tc.

Some others hold, That (t ts againk the Marie of Law, that thep that are not hepzes to
the toarrantie boul topne in Voucher, o2 to take benefit of the warrantie which bifcenben
stot to them, bnt that the hetre at the Common Law, to $obom the wo arrantte diſcended (hall bez
ratgne the tDarrantío, anb receuer ín balue, and that this doth (Fano with the rule of the
€ orumnon Law,

Others hold tbe contraric,and that thie ſhould be both againit the rule of Law,and again
reafon alfo ; £oz bp the rule of Law (c) the Wouchee fball neuer fue to aue erecutton in baine,
vntill erection befucd againg him, Wut in thts cafe Execution can nener be (aco agaínff the
beire atthe Common Lato, therefoze he cannot fue to haue execution ouer inbaluc. Seconbiy,
Bt Honid beagatnft reaſon, thas the heire at the Common Law fhould have tocum lucrum, any
the fpeciail hetreg totum damnum. J find (n our Bokes, (f ) that this reafon ts peeldcd, tat
the fpccíall heire ſhould not be vouched onclp ; Foꝛ ( fap tbep) tEthe ſpeciall heites fhonia beg
vouched onely, tben conto not they Deratgne the toarrantie ouer, Which fhouid bee miſchieuous,
that thep ſhauid lofe tye benefit of the wp arrantte,tEthep ſhould be bouched onely. Wut tf the
Peireat the Common law were bouched With them, (as bp the law he ought) all might bee faz
Hed ; and thercfoze ſtudie Weil thts popnt how it map be done,

(g) BE Tenant in generall Œaplebe, anda common reconerte {9 had again him and big
Wife, Where his Wife hath nothing, andthep bouch,and bauc tudgement to recoucr in value, te⸗
nant ín Œatle dteth, and tbe wite ſuruiueth; for that the Five tn Caple bad the Whole lolie;the
recempence fhal egurc wholly to him, and the wike, albeit (be was partie to the (udgement, (ball
baut nothing in the recompence, foz that (ye loſeth nothing,

Ch) Ff the Waftard eígne enter ano tae the profits be (ball be bouched oncip , and not the
bafard € the Mulier, becauſe the Waſtard ts tn apparance heire, and fhall not dtfable himfelfe,

Ci) FE aman be fetfed of lands in Gauclkind, and hath iſſue three fonncs, and bp Dbligas
tion bindeth bimfeife and bis heires,and bíetb.an Action of Debt fall be maintainable againtk
all the thzeefonnes, fo? the hetre (a not chargeable vnleſſe be hath lands bp diſcent.

(k) Sotf a man be fcífco of Land onthe part of hts mother,and bind hinfelfe and bis heirs
bp Obligation, and oteth, an Baion of Debt ſhall lie again the beire on the part of the mo=
ther, Without naming of the heire at the Common law. And ſo note a vínerfitic betxoene
a perfonall lien ofa Bond, and a reall lien of a warrantie.


Se. 719.


€ N71 Ora, fi fre foit
N Done a bn


Ore, if Land bee
giuen to a man


€ Eere it appeareth,
Æbat (1) whens
foencr the Ance-


ftoz taketh any cftate of free=
hold, a limitation after inthe
fame Lonucyance to any of
bis beires , are wo2ds of It
mitation, and net of purchafe,
albett in 300205 it be limitted
bp Wap of remainder : and
therefore heere the remainder
tethehettes Females b ſteth
ín tbe Tenant in Capi him⸗
Seite, And (f is gad to bee


home, et ales heires
males De fon corps
engendres et pur Dez
fauit de tiel Iſſue, te
rein ent a fes heyres
females de fon cozps
engenbacg,et puts le

Donee


+


andto the heirs males
of his bodie begotten,
and for default of fuch
Iffue the Remainder
thereof to his Heires
femals ofhis body be-
gotten, andafier the


Lib.3.


Donee en Ie taile fait
fcoffment en fee oueſ⸗
que garrantic accor⸗
dant, & adiflue fits
ec file ct mozuft,
cel Garrantie net
fozíque lineall Gar⸗
tautie à ie fits à De-
maunDer pet bzicfe
à Formedon en le dif-
cender, etaugp td nett
forſque lineall a E fit,
a Demaunder mefme
laterre per briefe De
Formedon en le re-
maynder, finon frere
Deuíatt (às (Tue mar,
pur ceo que el claime
come heire female de
la cozps fon pere en-
genres, Des € cett
cas, ft ſon frere en fa
bie releafaft al Dif-
continuce , dc, oue
garranty, ac, puis
moꝛuſt fauns tflue, €
eftbncollateral gat-
tantíc à le file, putt
Q el nc puit conueyer
a lup le Doit que el
ad pet force Dele re⸗
marnder per afcun
meane De Difcent per
fonfrere, pur ceo que
' 1e frere eft collaterall
ale title fa foer,z put
ceo fon Garrantie eft
collaterall, ac,


Of Warrantie.


donee in tayle maketh
a teoftment in fee,with
warrantie accordingly
and hath iffue a fonne
and a daughter and di-
eth, this warrantie is
but a lineall warrantie
tothe Son to demand
by a Writ of Formedon
inthe difcender, and
alfoit is but lineall to
the Daughter to de-
mand the fame Land
by Writ of Fermeden,
inthe remaynder, vn-
leffe the brother dieth
without iffue male,be-
caufe fheeclaymeth as
heire female of the
bodie of her father in-
gendred. But in this
cafe, if her brother in
his life releafe to the
difcontinuee,&c.with
warrantie, 8c, and af-
tcr dieth without iffue
this is acollateral war-
rantie to the daughter,
becaufe fhee cannot
couey to her the right


which fhee hath by


force of the remayn-
der by any meanes of
difcent by her bro-
ther, for that the bro-
ther is collateral to the
title of his fifter , and
therefore his warranty
is collaterall, &c.


Cecec


Seil,719,


knowne, that foz Learning
fake, and to find out the reafon
of the aw, tbefc limitations
to the heires males of the boz
de, and after to the heires
females of the bodie map bee
put, but tris dangerous to
bfc chem in Œonucpances,fez
Great inconuentences may az
tile thercupon, foz if fucha
tenant tn taple hath (luc di⸗


uers Sonnes, and thep auc


tine Diners Daughters, and
like wiſe if Œenant in taple
hath iſſue diuers Daughters;
and each of them bath ifluc
Sonnes, none of the Daugh⸗
terg of the Sonnes, nozthe
Sonnes of the Daughters
Shall eucr inberit to either of
the ſaid eſtatss tayle : anb fo
ít a oftbe Iſſues ot the FG
fues , for that (ag hath beene
fato) the Iſſues inheritabie
mutt make their clapme either
onip bp Wales, o2 onip by fes
males, fo ag the Females of
the Wales, oz Males of the
Females are Wholp excluded
to bee tnberttabie to epther of
the f.to Gates taple: but
Sobere tbc firlt limitation ts to
theheives Males, let the lt=
imitation be,foz Default of ſuch
{ue to the heires of the bodie
of the Done, and then all the
Flues, bee they Feniales of
Wales, o; Wales of Fe⸗
males ate inberitable,

difa man‘gine Landstoa
man, to haue and to Dolo to
him and the hetres Males of
big bodie, and to bim an ta
the betreg Females of bis boz
diz, the eftate to the hetres
Femaics is in vomapnber,
andthe Daughters fhall not
inberit any part, fo long ag
thereto Flue Wale, forthe
efbate to the hetres Wales ie
firft limited, and hall bee Gr
ferned, and itis ag much te
fap, and after to the heires fes
males, and Wales tn cons
fraction of Raxo are to bos
preferred,


Sed.


'


377


1.H.6.411.H.6.13:14 ,
28. H.6.«enife 18. Statham,
Deuife. "P l.Com.414. 30. H.
6.43. Vide Litt.cop.tasle.
Se. 34.37. HB. Br, «one dr
rem G1. c tit. nofme x dr
40.


(4p-13-
- Secl.


€ [Gem ico ap ove Dire que en

temps le op Richard le fe-

cond, il p fuit bn Juſtice Del
Common Banke, demurrant en
Kent, appel Richel, à auoít iſſue
Divers fits, a (on entent fuit,que
fon eigne fits aueroit cettaine
terres a tenements alup, et ales
heires De fon corps engenD2es,et
pur Default Diffue,le remainder a
ie fecond fits, ac.a iſſint af tierce
fits, ac, pur ceo que tl boile que
nul De fes fits alieneroit, on fer=
toit Garrantie puc batter ou le⸗
Der les auters , queug ferront en
leremainder, ac, tl fitt faire tiel
Budenture, a tiel effect ceftafca-
uoit, que les terres a tenements
fueront Dones a fon eigne fits fur
tiel condition que {i leigne fits a=


liena enfee, ou enfectaple, ac,


ou fi afcun de fes fits alienaft ac,
que adonque lour eftate ceflera, a
ferroit boíD,et G adonque meſm̃s
les terres a tenements imme-
Diate remaindront a le fecond
fits, etales heives De fon coꝛps
engendres & fic vitralerematnd
ag auters de (es fits, etlinerp De
feifin fuit fait accozDant,


Of Warrantie.


Seël.720,
720.


Lfo I haue heard fay, that in

the time of King Richard the

fecond , there was alufticc
of the Common Place dwellin
in Kent,called Richel,who had iffue
diuers fonnes, and his intent was
that his eldeft fonne fhould haue
certaine Lands and Tenements to
him and to the heires of his bodie
begotten , and for default of iffue,
the remainder to the fecond fonne,
&c.and fo tothe third fonne, &c.
and becaufe hee would that none
of his fonnes fhould alien or make
Warrantie to barre or hurt theo-.
thers that fhould be inthe remain-
der,&c. he caufeth an Indenture to
be made tothis effect,o#%. That the
Lands & Tenements were giuen to
his eldeft Son vpon fuch condition
that if the eldeft fonne alien in fee
or infeetayle, &c. or if any of his
fonnes alien &c. that then their e-
{tate fhould ceafe and be void, and
that thenthe fame Lands and Te-
nements immediately fhould re-
mayne to the fecond fonne, and to
the heires of his bodie begotten,
& fic vltra , the remaynder to his
other fonnes , and liuerie of feifin
was made accordingly.


CIN [Eoo dire, orc. Thole things that one hath bp credible heare


21.H.6, fol. 33-1.6.fo.42.b.


fap, by the ecample of our Authoꝛ are $»02tbp ef ebfernatíon, Chis (mention veaífe by
Sir Anthany Mildmeyes «c fe,


Juſtice Richel {n tbe Waigne of Wing Richard the Second, She was an 3irífbnan
bone, and the like bp Thirning Chiefe Juſtice tn the Raigne of H.4. Sere both uil of tmpers
fecttons fox Nihil fimulinuentum eft & perfectum, and {æpe viatorem noua non vetus orbita
fallit: And therefore new inventions in Diurances arc dangerous. And herebp it may ap⸗
peare, that ít is not fate fox any man (be be newer fo learned) to bee of councell Sottb himfelfe
in big owne cafe, but te take aduice of other great and learned men.

Non profunt Dominisquæ profunt omnibus, artes.
And tbe rcafon hereof tg, in fu quifque negotio hebetior eft,quam in alieno,

(m) Bnd the fame Judge in bis owne name, c. brought an Action bpon hig cafeagainü
ethers anb obtained a berdit , fo ag che right of tbecaufe Was tricd on bis fide, pet foz that
bpon bts one ſhewing tn bis Count the Action did notite, Ex affentu omnium lufticiariorum
preter querentem Richel indgement Was ginen again him, but let s nok leans this Fudge
fot example to others, and let bg returne to onr Authoz,


(m) 2. H. 4.fo 11.50 Alim
fer le cafe.


Se,
— oVLTr ore baf


Lib.3. Of Warrantie. Seël, 723,


fon in fee take Wife, now by ad in Law io the Soife (ntitleb tothe third prefentation, (f tbe huſ⸗
band Bye befo1c:toc bufbanb grant tbc thtrd prefentation to another, the huſband die, rhe betre
hall pzefent twice, the Wife ſhall haue the third pzefentation, andthe Grantee the fourth, fog
in this cafe it fhalibe taken the third pzeſentation, which be might lawfully grant, and fo note
à Dinerfitie betweene a title bp ac in Law, and bpact of the party, for the ac in Law (ball
woꝛke no pretudice to the Grantee.


€ tui fi tiel remainder ferroit bone dc. The force of this argu⸗
ment 1s, that feing the eftate of the Pitene (albeit the woꝛds of the Condition be, that the
ftatc ſhould ccafe and be boide ) being an Rate of inheritancein lands 9» tenements cannot
ccafe ag be boide before the ftate be defcated bp entrie,thentf this remainder fhould bec gawd,
then muft it gine an entrte opon tc Alienee to Dim that bao no right before, Swbich fhould bee
againſt rhe expze(Te rule of Haw,viz. that anentrie cannot be ginen to a franger to auoide a
voydable ad, as before bath beene faid inthe Chapter of Conditions.


€ Le quel ferr! enconuenent. Were note theee things, Fir. that
Sobatfocurr ts againit tue rule of Haw ts tnconuentent. Secondly, that an argument Ab in-
conucment ts ftrong to prous it is againtt Law, ag often bats benc obferned. Thirdly, that
new imuentions (though of a learned Judge in his osone pzofeflion) are Cail of tneonuentence


Periculofumeft res noues & inufitaras inducere,
Eventus varios res noua femper habet.


«(T 3 tierce caute
L eft, quant la
condition eft tíel, que
ſi leigne fits alienaſt,
æc, que fon eſtate cef-
fera, ou ferrott botde,
ac, DONGS ap2es ticl
altenatton,ac, poitle
donor enter per force
De ttel condition, cori
tl femble, a iffint le
bono? ou fes heires
en tiel cafe Doient
pluis toft auct la fre
que le ſecond fits.que
nauoit afcun Dzoit
Deuant tiel alienati=
on, & iffint tl femble
queticitremainders
en le cas auantbit
font voides.


Sett.723.
TE third caufe is,


when the condi-
tionis fuch, thatifthe
elder fonne alien,&c.
that his eftate {hall
ceafe or be voide,&c.
then after fuch aliena-
tion,&c, may the Do-
nor enter by force of
fuch condition as it
feemeth, and fo the
Donor or his heires in
fuch cafe ought foener
to haue the land then
the fecond fonne, that
had not any right
before fuch alienati-
on, and fo it feemeth
that fuch remainders
in the cafe aforefaid
are voide.


€ Sre (tig tobee oba

ferueb that part of

the condition that
prohibiteth the altenatton
matebp Œenant tn tatle ts
rob ín law With fuch di⸗
ſtinction as hath bene before
fato (n the Chapter of Cone
Ditions. And tbe confequent
of the Wonattion,viz. that
thelands fbonib remaine to
another, tc, (a bofbe in Lan,
anb by the opinion of Little-
ton the Donoz may re-enter
for the Condition bzohen.toz
vtile per inutile non vitiatur.
which being in cafe of a
Condition for the defeating
of an eftatc, ts wozthy of obs
feruatton,

And tt ts te be notes, that
after the death of the 3Donoz,
the Condition defcendeth to
the cideft fonne, and confc-
quentip big alichation doth
extinguiſh the fame foz ener,
wherein the weakeneſſe of
this tnuention appeareth,and
therefore Littleton here faith,
that ít fæmath that the Des
hoz map recenter, and fpeaz


Beth nothing of bis hetres. A man hath (Tuc two fonnes, and maketh a Gift intaile to the


eldeft, the Kemainder tn fee to tbe puifne, tpon condttion,
D (fcontínuance With Harrantp to b


that the eldeft (ball not take anp
arre him tn the remainder, anb (£ he doth, that then tbe


puifne fonne and bis hetres {ball re-enter, the eldeſt make a Feoffment tn feo With Warranty,
the father dyeth, the eldeſt foune dyeth Without lue, the puifne map enter, but (£ the Difcons
tinuance had bene after the death of the father, the puifne could not hane entren. In this
cafcfonre points ate to be obferucd. Firſt, ag Littleron bere fatty, the entrie for the breach o£
the Condition (s giuento the father, and not ~ the puífne fonne, Secondly, that by the 2
COLE 3 0


379


Vid StB 87.676.


Lib.2. Capa: Of Warrantie.  Seé#.724..725.


4u.E. 3.fo. o£ the father the condition diftends to the elder fort (6 but falpended,¢ (s reuiued by thedeath

of the eldeft fonne without Iſtue, and diſcendeth totbc poungettfonne. Chirdip, Chat the

—— Feolfement made inthe ifo et che father cannot gine away a Condition that is Collatcrall,ag
5.064.446.


itmap doc aright. Fourthlp, € bat a Warrantic cannot bind a title of entric fora Condition
bzoken, (ag hath bene fan) but if the difcontinuance had beene made after the Death of the fas
ther, tt hadertinc the Condition: which Cafe is put to open the reafon of our Authors
opinton.

Er chele laſt thie Sections our Authoz hath taught bs an excellent popnt of iearning,
That When any tknovation o new inuention {tarts dp, to trie tt Sith the Rules of tbe Com⸗
mon daw, (ag our Authoz here hath done) fos tbefe be true Touchſtones to feucr the pure
gold from the dzoſſe « fopbifticattong of noucities € new inventions. Bnd bp this crample pow
map perceiue, Chat the rule of the olo Common Law being foundip (as our Buthour hath
Done) applied to fuch nouelties, tt Doth vtterly cruf them and bzíng them to nothing ; and
commonly a new inucntion doth offend agatnft many rules and reafons (as here tt appeareth ) |
of the Common La ; andtheantient Judges and Sages of the dao Dane ener (as ít aps |

|


* 31.E.3.Garerdelinerance 5.


22 4f. 13:38.E. 3.1. peareth* in our Wokes) ſuppzeſſed innouationg and noueities inthe beginning, as fone ag
2.H.4.18. dre. thep patie offered to creepe bp, left the quíct of the Common Law might bee difturbcd: and fo
( 2r ^d DRE 3. bauc(a)Acts of Parliament done theltke , Whereot bp the authorities quoted inthe Margent,
19. E. 3.ca. 1. & 6.


pou map tn fiead of many others, vpon this occalion take a little taſte. Wut our excellent Dus


ne thoz tn all hts thee Bokes bath fapo nothing but Ex veterum fapientium ore & more.


1a. E. 4.ca. 8, e.


Section


€ | m a le Commonlep De-
uant leftatute de Glouce⸗
fer, fitenant ple Curte=
fie bit alien en fee oucfque Gar⸗
tantíc, apres fon Deccafe ceo fuit
bn barre al beíte, ficome apptert
per les pacolg demeſme leſtatut,
mes ti eſt remedy p mefme leſta⸗
tute, quele Garrantie Dele Te⸗
nant per E Curtelie.ne 6C mp bat
al hẽe, ſinon que il p ad affets per
Difcent per le tenant pec Ie curte=
fie, cac Deuant le Dit eftatute, ceo
fuit bn coilatcrall Garrantie al
bte. put ceo que il ne puifloit con-
ueyer atcun title De Difcent a lcg
tenements per le tenant p E Cut-
tefie, mes tantfolement per fa
mere ou auters De ſes anceftors,
et ceo eftle caute pur que il fuit
collaterall Garrantie,


Secr.


€ MESES (ibome enherit prêt
^ feme,les queur ont fits
enter cette, eticpiecdeuic, et le


fits


714.725.


Líoat the Common Law be-
forethe Statute of Glouce-
fter, if Tenant by the Curtefie had
aliened in fee with Warrantie;after
his deceafe this was a barre to the
heire, as it appeareth by the words
of the fame Statute : but itis re-
medied by the fame Statute, That
the Warrantie of Tenant by the
Curtefie fhall beeno barre to the
heire, vnleffe that hee hath Affets
by difcent by the Tenaunt by the
Curtefie , for before the fayd Sta-
tute this was a Collateral! warran-
tie to the heire, for that hee could
not conuey any title of Difcent to
the tenements by the tenant by the
Curtefie, but onely by his mother,
or other of his Anceftors,and this
is the caufe why it wasa collateral
Warrantie.


225.


B" ifa man Inheritor taketh

wife, who haueiffue a fonne

betweene them, and the father di-
A

f in por tne CEA


4


Lib.3.


Cj 3 it femble

p reafon, que
touts tielt remain⸗
bets en. la fozme a=
uantDit font potdes
et De nul balue, et ceo
put trots cauſes. Vn
cauſe eſt, pur ceo que
chefcun remainder q
comence per bn fait,
tl coutent que Ie re⸗
mainder foit en lupa
que Ic remainder eft
taile per fozce De
mefinelefait auant
linerie De feí(i eft
fait a lup que aucta
ie franktenemét, car
en tíei cafe le neffance
etle eftre De le ve-
mainder eft per le li⸗
uerp De feifin a celuy
que aucta le frankte-
nement, et tiel re-
mainder ue fuit al ſe⸗
cond fits, al temps
De líuerp De feifin
en le cas auantDdit,
atc,


Of WVarrantie.


Sed, 721.


BY it feemeth by
reafon, that all
fuch remainders in the
forme aforefaid are
voide and of no value,
and that for three cau-
fes. One caufe is, for
that euery remainder
which beginneth by a
Deed, it behooueth
that the remainder be
in him to whom the
remainder is entailed
by force of the fame
deed before the liuery
of feifin is made to
him which fhall haue
the freehold, for in
fuch cafe the grow-
ing and the being of
the remainder is by
the liuery of feifin to
him that (hall haue the
freehold, arid fuch re-
mainder was not to
the fecond fonneatthe
time of theliuerie of
feifin in the cafe afore-
faid, &c.


Se 721:


of opinion , that

thefe remainders
tn the fozme afozelaid, are
void and of no value foz thee
cautes.


€ Va cane eft cc.
Here befetteth downe a rule
concerning remainders,viz,
Euery remainder $obícb come
menceth bp a Ded ought to
beft in him to Whom itis li⸗
mitted, ben Linerp of feíz
fin tg mabe to him that hath
the particular eftate.

Firſt Littleton faith bp
Ded, (n)becaufc if lands beg
granted and rendzcd bp Fine
fo; life, the remainder in
tatle, the remainder in fee,
none of theleremainderg ate
ín them ín the rematnder
batilithe particular eftate be
executed.

Secondlp, that the res
matnder be fn him, ac. at the
time of the Lincrp. This is
regulari true, but pet it hath
diuers exceptions. Fir, vn⸗
leffe the perfon that ts to
take the remainder be not in
rerum natura, (0) ag tf a
Lealſe fo2 life be made the re=
mainder to the right hetres
of 1,5, I.S, betng then aliue,
it fafficeth that the tnheric
tance paſſeth pzelentip out of
the Leffoz, but cannot belt in
the beire of I.S, for that its
uing bis father bc te not in

rerum natura, fo? noncft


CH* eur Author is


hares viuentis, fo ag the remainder te go bpon this Œontingent,viz. if 1.S. ope during the


life of the Leſſee.


Cp) Bnd foítíe(£ a man make a Leak forlifeto A.B andC. and{f B.furuiue C. then the


remainder to B.and bis heires. Berets another ecception ont of the fato rule, for albeit the
perfon be certaine, pet tnafmuch ag ft depends vpon the dying of B.befoze C. the remainder can
not deft m C. prefentip. And the reafon of both thefe cafes ín effec (d, becanfe the remainder
is tocommence bpon limitation of time,viz. bponthe poiibility of the death of one man ber

fore another, which ts a common poflibility.
À man letteth lands foz life bpon condition to haue fee, and Soarranteth the land ia forma
pradiGa,aftcriward the Leſſee perfoimett the Condition, wherebp the Lele hath fee, the Ware
ranty fballertenb and tneecafeaccuzding to tbe (tate. And ſo it is in that cafe t£ the Lefloz had
dyed before the performance of the Condition, the warranty Hall rife and tncreafe accozding
totheeftate; and pet the Lefloz himfelfe Wag neuer bound to tbc Warranty, but it hath relation
from the firft Liuery. Bnd by this tt appeareth that a warranty being a Couenant reall execu⸗
toric may extend to an eftate (n futuro, hauing aneftate, Mherenpon it map Wozke in the bes
ginning, But it aman grant a Detgnioay for peares bpon Condition to bauc fe With &
Eccce 2 Wearrantg


(0)7 R3 Scire fa.


Co) 32. H,6.tir, Fe ffimente ]
& fairi,99.

27.E.3,87.
11.R.2.Desinue, 46.

2.H 7.13. 12.H.7.27.

12. E.4.2. 21.H, 7.11.

7. H.4.23. 11. H. 4.74:

18. H.8.3. 27. H.8. 42.
38.E,3.26. 30. Aff.47-
6.R.2, qu. Tur. dam. 20.


(p ) Pl. Coms.in Coltbirfts
cafo,fo.2 5.29.


Lib.3.


(3) 231. H 7.11. 27. H. 8. 24


(r6. R 3.quidinrss
den. 20.


Argunentan ex abfurde.


(fF) 38. 8. Prefentments
al Egt/er Br.52.

3: H.R 1511.55.
39.4.8. Dier 35.
11,£5(,282,28 3."


(t) 15.H.7.7.
19.5.3.guar, Imp.1$ 4.


Cap.


Of Warrantie.


$ed.722.


Warrantp in forma pra di&a, and after the Condition (s performed, this (ball not extend to the
fer, becaufe the firft eftate was but foi peares $obíct was notcapable of a Warranty. Andfo
it is, (£ aman make a Leafe fox peares the remainder in fee, and Swarrant the land in forma
prædiéta,be in the remainder cannot take benefit of the tarrantp, becanfe be (9 not partic to
the Ded, and immediately he cannot take, tf be were partie to the Des, becaufe he ts named
after the Habendum, andthe eftate for peares ta not capable of a warranty. Bnd fo it is (€
Land be giuen to A and D. folong ag thep topntip together luc, the remainder to the right
beireg of Him chat Dpeth rit, and Warrant the land in forma prædiéta. A. dpethhig bere {ball
haue the warranty, anb pet the remainder befted not during the life of A,foz the veath of A.
matt paccede the remainder, and pet {hallthe beire of A. baucthe land bp diſcent.


as! le primer fits a-
lienaft, &c. BY
the alienation of the Done
two things are Sought.
Firſt, the Franktenement
and (e is inthe Alienes.
econdiy, the Keuerſion
is deueſted out of the Donoz-
(a) Bnd therefoze bp the alt=
enation that tranfferretl the
freehold efe finple tothe B=
lien there can no remainder
beratfed and beled tn the fes
cond fonne. (r) Asifa man
make a ileafe fo» life bpon
conditton that if the ilcfloz
grant ouer the reucrfion, that
then the Leſſee fball haue fee,
ik the Lefloz grant the reuer=
fon bp Fine, tbc Hele (bail
not baue fee, for Swben the
Fine tranfferrsth the fee to
the connfee,it Hould be abſurd,
and repugnant to reafon, that
thefame fine fhould wozke
an eftite tn the Leſſes, fos one
altenation cannot oft an ex
ſtate of oncand the fame land
totwo fcucrall perfons at onc
time.
Ana mans owne grant,
hich (g euer taken moft fo?-
cibly agatnft himfelfe,the rea⸗
Ion of Littleton Doth bolo; fog
it hath benc refolucd bp the
juftíceg (f£) thartf a man
fetfed of an Aduowſon in fee
by big Ded granteth the noct
prcfentationto A.and before


the Church becommeth boide -


bp another Dede grant the
nett pzefentation of the fame
Church to B.the fecond grant
tg voide, fo? A had the fame


Setlion 722.


€ LS fecond caufe

eft, ft le pzimer
fits alienaft les te-
nements en fee, a=
Donques eft le frãk⸗
tenement, ct le fee
fimple enlalienee, et
ennulauter, et file
Donour auoit afcun
reuerſion, per tiel a=
lienation E reverfion
eft difcontinue, Dons
ques coment per af-
cun reafon poit cco
eftre, q tielremain-
Der commencera fon
eftre, a fon neffance
immebíat apres tiel
alienation fait a bti
eftrange, que ad per
mefme alienation
franktenement,¢ fee
finpleac, Ct auxy
fi tcl remainder fers
toít bone, adonques
purtoít tl enter fur
lalienee.lou tl nauoit
afcun maner ð D20ít
auant lalienatíon ,
que ferra inconue⸗
nient,


He fecond caufe

is, if the firft fon
alien the tenements in
fee, then is the free-
hold and the fee fim-
ple inthe Alienee, and
in none other, and if
the Donor had any re-
uerfion, by fuch alie-
nation the reuerfion
is difcontinued, then
how by any reafon
may it be,that fuch re-
mainder fhall com-
mence his being and
his growing immedi-
atly after fuch aliena-
tion made to a ftran-
ger, that hath by the
fame alienationa free-
hold and fee fimple,
&c. And alfo if fuch
remainder fhould bee
good, then might hee
enter vpon the Alie-
nee, where hee had no
manner of right be-
fore the alienation,
which fhould bee in-
conuenient.


granted to him before, and tbe Grantee fball not bauc the feconb auopbance bp conſtruction,
te haue the next auopdance, which tbe Grantoz might iawfullp grant, £o; tbe arant ef the
Wert auopbance Doc not (mpgot the fecond paefentation , (t) Wut (£a man feifco of an Bouow-

fou


Lib.3.


fits entra en la terec, et enbotoa
fa mere, ct puis le mere alien ceo
que clad en fa Dower, abn au⸗
teren fee oue Garrantie accoa-
dant, et puis mozutt , etle Gar⸗
tautic Difcendift ale fits , oae Le
fits ferra barre à Demaunder
mefine ia terre per caute Dela Dit
Sarrantie pur ceo que tiel colla-
tecall Garrantie de Cenaunt en
ower nc(t pas remedie per af-
cun C(tatute, Meſme la Lepett
lou Tenaunt a terme De bie fait
bu Alienation ouefque Garran⸗
tíc.ac, et moꝛuſt, et lc Garrantie
Difcendift a celup que auoit le ve-
uerfíon ou le remainder, tls fer-
tont barres pertiel Garrantie,


Of Warrantie.


508.725.726.
eth, and the fonne entreth into the
land,and endow his mother and af.
ter themotheralieneth that which
fhee hath in Dower to another in
Fee with Warrantie accordant, and
after dieth, and the Warrantie dif-
cendeth to the fonne , now the fon
fhall be barred to demand the fame
Land by caufe of the fayd Warran-
tie, becaufe that fuch Collaterall
Warrantie of Tenaunt in Dower
is not remedied by any Statute.
The {ame Law is it where Tenant
for life maketh an Alienation with
Warrantie, &c. and dieth, and the
warranty difcendeth to him which
hath the reuerfion or rhe rem,they
fhall be barred by fuch Warrantie.


€ O F this and the fubfequent. Section fu&icient hath bene fapd befezein this Chapter


Se&.697.


€ Neff pas remedie per afcun Statute. But bp a Statute made
(nte; this Cafe ts remedied, ag pou fee betoꝛe Se.697.


380


¶ [Cem en le Dit

Cate, ſi iſſint

fuit que quant
le tenant en 320toet
alienaft,zc, fon heire
fuit Deins age, et
aury altemps que le
garrantie diſcendiſt
ſur luy, il fuit deins
age.en ceſt cas lheire
poit apzes enter fur
lalienee, tient con-
trifteant le garranty
diſcẽdiſt, ac. ÿ € q nul
lache fe ferva adtudg
en Ibeite Deins age
que il nentra pas fur
lalienee en ta bie le
tenat en Dower, Wes


Section 726.
At inthe Cafea-


forefaid , if ic
were fo that when the
Tenant in Doweralie-
ned,&c. his heire was
withinage, and alfo at
thetimethat the war-
rantie difcended vpon
him hee was within
age, In this Cafe the
heire may after enter
vpon the Alienee,not-
withftanding the war-
rantie difcended, &c.
becaufe no Lacheffe
fhal be adiudged inthe
heire within age , that
he did not enter vpon
the Alienecinthe life


€ Gere note this diz
H uerfitie , {€ the

bette bee Within
age at the time of the diſcent
ofthe Warrantfe, be map en
ter and auoyd the Eſtate et=
ther Sithin age, o? at anp
time after bis fullage: And
Littleton faith well, Chat the
Enfant (n this Cale may en-
ter bpon the Altence, for i€ be
bring bis Acton againft him,
be thalbe barred bp this war⸗
rantie, fo long ag the fate
Sobercunto the warrantie is
annexed continue, and be not
defeated by entrieof the hetre:
but ik be be Within age at the
timeof the Bitenatton with
Toarrantíé, ano become of full
age before the otfcent of the
tarrantie,the Warranty (bal
barre him fozener. Dur Dus
thezputteth bis cafes Where
the entrie of tbe Infant is
laSofull, (a )fo? where the en=


(0) 18.E.4.13.35.H.6.63;
28.49.28. 33.203 Gar. 39;


3$.H.6.6;


(8) 3.4.9.9. 15, H.6.65.. -
‘Br.tit War.540 33. H.8. Tf.
War Br, 84. Li. 1,f0.67.a.


trie ofthe Infant is not gd $n Archers oft, Sr 1 49, Cid


igi on?


Cap.
full when the warrantie dif-
cenderh, the tioarrantie doth
bind the Œnfant, as Mell ag
a man of full age, and the veaz
fon thereof tg, becaufe the
fate whereunto the warran⸗
tle Wags annexed, continucth
and cannot beavopded but bp
Action, in Which Action the
Warrantio is a barre: and foz
the fame reafon likewile tt (d
ofa eme Couert, if her ens
trie be notiawlul, a warran=
tic difcenving en her During
the Couerture, doth bind her,
(Cw) And albett the huſband
be Within age at the diſcent of
the voarrantte,peet (€ the entry
of the Wife bc take away, the
Warrantte (al bind thewtfe,
(q) Andherein a dtucrfic


Of VVarrantie.


fi Ite fuit Deins age
al temps Del altena-
tion, ac, et puis tl Dc-
uient al pleine age en
labie Dele tenant en
Dower,et ilſint eſte⸗
ant de pleine age, il
nentra pas ſur lalie⸗
nee en la vie Dele te⸗
nant en Dower, et
puis le Œenaunt en
Dower moruft, ac,
la peraduenture Ibte
ferra barre per ticl
@arrantie, pur cca


Seti. 726.


of Tenant in Dower.
But if the Heire were
withinage atthe time
of thealienation, &c.
and after he commeth
to full age in the life
of Tenant in Dower,
and fo being of ful age
he doth notenter vpon
the Alieneein the life
of Tenant in Dower,
and after the tenant in
Dower .dieth , &c.
there peraduenture the
heir fhal be barred by


tic íg to bee obferuco be=
tweene matters of Record
done 07 fufferco by an enfant,


(5 )30.€.3.udst.quar.27.
F.N.B.104.K. 6.E. 3-39.
17.£.3.76. 17.4/]. 53.17.
31. €, 34.3 3.E. 3. Aud. quar.


fuch Warranty, be-
caufe it fhall bee ac-


que i ferta tecte fa
follie, que tl efteant


EAM radiis ipd bs fur c» De plein age ne entta counted his folly, that
L1G E 445. $-H.6. 30. matters tn Fait he fbal ago ; i -

d DE À either Swithin age, opat ful PAS en la bie De le hec beeing of full age
age, as hath bene fapo T but Œenaunt en Pow: did notenterinthelife
matters of iRecozd, as Sta⸗ ? 2 ae :
entes merchants, ettet er, ac. of tenat indower,&c.


ple, 18 ecognifances knowled⸗

ged bp him, o2 a Fine ieuted by him, reconerteagaint him bp default in a reall Action ( fauina

in Dower ) mult be auopded by him, viz. Statutes, tc. bp Audita quarela,and the fincand

recoucricby wꝛit of Erroz during hts minoꝛitie and the like. And the reafon t^ercof t9 , bee

caufe thep are tudiciall Ads, andtaken bp a Court oz a Judge, therefore the nonage of the

partte to auopo thefame (ball be tried by infpedton of Judges, and not by the Countrie, And
.. fon that bis nonage muſt be tried by inſpection, this cannot be done after bis full age: and fo is
the La clerelp holden at this sap, though there be fomeDifferenc: in our 250509, Wut ik the
age be in ſpected by the Judges, and recozded that he (8 Within age, albcithee come of full age
befeae the reverfall, pet may tt bereuerfedafret bis full age, * Ano fo was it refolued bp the
whole Court of Kings Wench inthe cafeof Kekewiche.

It lands bab bene giuento the huſband and wife and their heires , and the hufband had
made a Feoffement to another, to whom a Collatirall Anceltoz of the wife had releafed and
Died, and the bufband died, Candthis bad benc befozc the Statute of 22.H.8.) this warrants
tie had fo bound her $vaitieable right, ag (bee conto not watue her eſtate, ano clatme Dower,
MD therwite tt ts of an Eftate determined : for (£ a Difietfoz make a Leaſe to the hufbandand
wite during the life of the hufband, and thehufband dicth, the map Difagree te this Eſtate pez
termined, tofaue her fclfe from dammages. Andlo note a dinerAtie betweene an eftate deters
mined, aro andan eftatebound by toarrantíe,


Nul laches ferra adiudge en le heiredeins age. Laches 92 Lafches ¢8 ati
old French $9010 for flackenefle, oz negligence. ez not doing. And the WR ule (Chat no negit=
gence ſhall be adindged in an Enfant) ts true, Where he £8 thereby to be barred of hie entry ín
telpect of a former right, asbyadifcent,os cf his fozmer right, (ag Littleton doth heers
putan example) bya Warrantie Where bis entric is congcable. Wut otber&otfe tt is of Con=
bitions, charges and penalties going out of,o2 depending bpon the oz(gínall Conuepance, for
the Laches oz negligence ſhall be adiudged in thole caſes as Sel tn the infant ag ín anp other.
Cy)Vide Pl.Com, Stowels Cafe per totum. And fee further there, where an Fnfant being tenant
fo? 1tfe or peares, fhail be punifbeb for doing ez fuffering of toatt ; and Where be clatmeth bp
purchafe, a Ceflauir ſhall ite againſt him, it be pap not bis Rent bp two veares. And forme hane
fayb, It bt haue the Cenancte bp bífcent, and he bimfelfe cello, a Ceflauic petblíc, and be that
not baue bis agebecaufe tt is of bis one effer, 31.E.3-Age 54. Wut other Baokes(asfome

" concetue them) beagaind that: Vide 9.Edw.3.s0. 28. E.5.99. 14 E.3.Agc 88.2.E.2.Age.1 s
a


d. H.8.$ uev de default Br. 55
3. 8. 6.10. 1. Mar, Dy. 104.


V "Pefch.t 3.Ia. Rim the Kong:


euch.


(y) TL. Corn, Stowels cafe.
355,06.


Lib.5.


Of VVarrantie.


anb others, Which Beokes doe not prone that the CefTauit doth not licín that cafe , but the
contrarie, that he ſhall bauc bis agete the end, be map at bts full age certainly knew Mat to
plead, 62 What arrerages to tender, fos the Land was oꝛiginallyx charged with the Seignio⸗


rie and Seruices,


Sed.


Lil M 02€ pct Ic(tatute fait

r11.H.7.cap. ro. th eft 02s:
Deine, (i atcun feme Difcontinue,
aliens, velcate, ou confirme oue
Garrantie afcun terres ou tene=
ments que el ticnt en Dotoct put
terme De Die, ou en tapte Del Done
fa primer baron, ou de les Ance⸗
fiers, ou del done dalcunauter
feifie al bte le primer baron.ou de
fes Ancefters, que touts ticis
gatranties, ac. (erront VoiDes, &
£j bit lirroit a ceftuy d auoit ceux
terres ou tenements apres la -
most De m̃ ià Cem Deutret,


ji.


T now by the Statute made


11.A,cap.10. it is ordained if
any woman difcontinue , alien,re-


;leafe or confirmé with warrantie
any Lands or Tenements which


fhee holdeth in Dower for tearme
of life , or in tayle of the gift
of her firft husband,or of his An-
ceftors, or of the gift of any other
feifed to the vfe of the firft Huf-


508.527.718.


381


band or of his Anceftors, that . 5


all füch warranties, &c. fhall bee
void, and that it flall be lawtull for
him which hath thefe Lands or
Tenements after the death of the
fame woman to enter.


€ His is mavddition to Litleton, and therefore to bee paffed oner, And hereof fuffts
cient hath bænciain before Scét.67.


C€[ an il cff parle
en le finie De E Dit
eftatute de Glouceft.
que parle delaliena-
tion oucfque garran=
tie fait per le tenant
per le curtefic en cet
forme, Cotanent, en
mefmele manner ne
foít lheire la feme a=
presiamozt le pere 3
le mere barre Dacti-
on, (i! Demanda the-
ritage.ou f mariage,
fa mere per bricfe
Dentre, que fon pere
aliena en temps fa
mere Dont nul fine cft
leup en la Court le


Sec. 728.
At’ itis fpoken in


the end of the

faid Statute of Gloceff.
which fpeaketh ofthe
alienation with War-
rantie made by the te-
nant by the curtefie in
this forme. Alfo, in
the fame manner, the
heire of the woman
after the death of the
fatherand mother fhall
not bee barred of agti-
on, if hee demandeth
the heritage or the
marriage of his Mo-
ther by Writ of Entry,
that his father aliened
in his mothers time,
Dèovs


€ [95 nul fine eff


leuie en le Court


: ?
le Roy, crc. Pere are
three things worthp of obferz
vation concerning the conſtru⸗
tion of Statutes, Firll, chat
(a) tt is the moſt saturait
and qenutae expoftion of a
Statutetoconfirue one part
of the Statute by another
part of the ſame Statüte,
fox that heft crpzeiietl the
meaning of the makers, Ag
here the queltion bpon the
generall words of the Stã⸗
tute is, Mobtiber a fine leuted
only bp a hufbandfeifes in the
right ot bts wwtfe Sith wars
tantie hall barre che heire
without Acts, Bnd ít is
Weil expounded bp the kormer
partiof the Wa, whereby it (&
enacted, that aliomattonmade
by Œenant bp the courtefe
with warrantie ali not bae
she heire, vnlelle Allets dite

tano,


(3) RI. Com. fol.9 .
7. E. 3485.


Vide Pratfon lib. 4. fol. 3215.
Fleta lib. $ cap. 34,


(4p.13.
ceno. 2inbtberefoge it (bouto
bt inconaenícat to iatend tho
Statute in fud) manner, as
that be shat bath nothing bus
in the right of bis tits
fhould by big fine leuted oth
warrantie barre the heire
Sotthous Biets. And this
erpoüt(os íg cx vifceribus
actus,

Secondip, The woades of
an Ba of Parliament mot
bee taken (n a laofull and
sightfull fence, as here the
fords being( whereol no fine
t9 leuied in the Rings Court)


Of Warrantie.


Bop : & iſſint p force
be mleftatute, ff bas
von Del feme aliena
Iberitage, ou matiag
fa feme en fee ouc
gatranty, ac, pet fon
faiten pais, ceoett
clevelep,que ceft gar⸗
tantp ne barrera mp
Their, Anon que il nad
alſets per difcent,


Seé.729.
whereof no fine is le-
uied inthe kings court
And fo by force of
the fame Statute, if
the Husband of the
wife alien the heritage
or mariage of his wife
infee with warrantie,
&c.by his Deed in the
Countrey , itiscleere
Law, that this warran-


aretobe baverttood, whereof tie {ball not barre the heire, vnleffe heehath
no fing t$ lawtully oj right=


aífets by Difcent.
fulip leuteo in the Rings


Court, Bnd therefoze (b ) a ine leuted by the huſband atone (s not Within the meaning of the
Statute, fo; that fine ſhould Werke a Waongto the wife, but a fine leuted by the bufband and
Swife (s intended by the Statute, Fo that finc (s lawtull and $00; bctf no . Cc) Soths
Statute of W.2.cap. 5. faptb (Ita quod Epifcopus Ecclefiam conferat) tg B Ita quod
Epifcopus Ecclefiam legitime conferat, anb tbe like ina number of other Cafes tn our Wakes,
Bnd generally the rule(g Quod non præftat impedimentum quod de iure non fortitur effe&im.

Zhirdip, Chat contruction muſt be madeof a Statute tn ſuppꝛeſſion of the mifchiefe , and
fn abuancement of the remedies, as bp this Cale (t appeareth. Foꝛ a fineleuiedbp the Hulbans
enip (s within theiceter of tbe Law, but tbe mifchiefe Was, the heire Mas barred of the ne
beritance of bis Mother bp the Warrantisof bis Father Withous 29 ets, and thés Ae inten⸗
ded to applp a remedic, viz. shat (t Henld not barre tnielle there Sere 2 etg, and therefore the
mifchtefe ts to be fuppzeíTeb, andthe remsdie Admanced, Et qui hætet in littera, kæret in cortices
ag often befoze hath b ene fafo,


(b) "Pl.Cóm. 246.6.
d. sgnisr Barkloye: (afd. bb. 9.
Sal. 56. inaafa del /AVbb de
Strata mereelo.
(8) 11. H. 4.80.9. R. 4.19.
31.94.0.38. 4. E.4. 31.
13, N, 4. Perevdon 15.


Sell. 719. 730. & 751.


€ Es le Doubt eff, file ba⸗

ton alienaft iheritage

fa feme, per fine leup en
la Court F Roy ouclque Garran-
tie, ac, (ceo barrera Ibeire fans
afcun Difcent en balue, Ct quant
aceo, (eo boile icy Dire certaine
reafong que feo ap ope Dit en cett
matter, Jeo ap opemon Matter
Sit Richard Newton tades chief
Auftice be Common Banke dire
bn foits en mefine le Banke, que
tiel Garrantie que Ie baron fait
pet fine leuie en Ie Court le 130p,
barrera lbeire, coment que il ad
viens per Difcent, pur ceo que le
ftatute Dit bont nul fifi eft leupen
le Courtle op) ct ifint pet fon


opinion


Vtthe doubt is, if the husbad
alien the heritage of his wife
by fine leuied in the Kings
Court with warrantie, &c. if this
fhall barre the heire without any
difcent invalue, And as to thisT
will here tell certaine reafons,
Which I haue heard faid in this
matter.I haue heard my Mafter Sir -
Richard Newton late Chiefe Iuftice
of the Common Pleas once fay in
the fame Court,thatfuch Warran-
tieasthe husband maketh by fine
leuied in the Kings Court fhall
barre theheire, albeit hee hathno-
thing by difcent, becaufethe Sta-
tute faith(whereofno fine is levied
inthe Kings Court) and fo by his


Lib.5.


opinion cel garrantie per fine Dc-
murt 6nco2c bn collaterall Gar⸗
vantíe, come il fuit ale common
ley, lent remedy perle Dit efta-
tute.pur ceo que E Dit eftatute ex⸗
cept alienations per fine one gat-
tantic,


" Sed,


€ Fe afcuns auters ont dit,

et bucoze Diont le contra-
rie, etceo elt lour proofe, q come
per mie chapiter De Dit eftatute
il e(t ozDeine , quele garrantte le
tenant per le curtefte ne ferra mp
barre al eite , finon que tl ad
affets per Difcent,æc, coment que
letenant per le curtefie leuy on
finede meſmes le tenements os
uelque garranty, ac, aury fort=
ment come il poit faire, bncoze
cel Garranty ne barca my Ibeire
finon.que il ad aflets per Difcent,
ac, x (co crop que ceo eft Iep,a pur
ceo ils Díont , que ferroit incon=
uenient dentender leftatute € tiel
fone, que n Home quenad rigs
fozfque en droit fa femme purrott
per fineleute plupDe mefmeg fs
tenements queug il ad korſq; en
droit fa feme oue Garrantie, ac,
barre 1beire De mefmes letene-
^ment$ fang afcun Difcent de fee
"imple, ac, lou le tenant per le
Cetefie ceo ne puit faire,


Sed.


€ As ils ont nit; quele fta-
M: ferra entend folongs
cel fo2Me. » ion le Statute dit,
Dont nul fine leuie en Court E
Roy, ceo eh Are pont nut otal
ne


Of Warrantie:


$e8.730.751.
opinionthis Warrantie by fine re-
mayneth yeta collaterall warran-
tie as it was at the Common Law
not remedied by the faid Statute,
becaufe the faid Statute excepteth
alienations by fine with warranty,


739:


AN fome others haue faid,and
yet doe fay the contrarie, and
this istheir proofe, that as by the
fame Chapter of the faid Scatute
it is ordained that the warrantie of
the tenant by the curtefie fhall bee
no barto the heire, vnleffe that he
hath affets by difcét,&c. although
that the tenant by the curtefie leuy
a fine of the fame tenements with
warrantie, &c. as ftrongly as hee
can,yet this warrantie fhall not bar
the heir, vnleffe that he hath affets
by difcent,&c. And Ibeleeue that
this is Law, and therefore they
fay, that it fhould be inconuenient
to intend the Statute in fuch man-
ner, asa man that hath nothing but
inright of his wife might by fine,
leuiedby him of the fame Tene-
ments which hee hath but in right
of his wife with warranty , &c.
barre the heire of the fame tene-
ments without any difcent of fee
fimple , &c. where the Tenant by
the curtefie cannot doe this.


731.


Vet they haue faid that the fta-
tute fhal be intended after this
manner, s. where the Statute
faith, whereof no fine isleuied in
the Kings Court, that is to fay,
Ddddd 2


382


Lib.s.


Cap.
fine cfi dzoiturelment leuy en là
Court le 150y.cco eft adite, Dont
nulloial fin eft Dzoiturelmt leuy
en la court le Bop: Ct € eft dont
nul fine Dc E bacon et fa feme foit
leuie en le Court le 150p, cac al
temps de le fefang Del Dit efta-
tute, chefcun eftate De terres ou
tenements que afcun home ou
feme auoít, que Difcenderoit a
fon beire, fuit fee (imple fans
condition, ou fur certaine condi⸗
tions cn fait ou en Iep, Ct put
ceo que adongues tiel fine poit
Droiturelment eftre leute per 1e
baronet fa feme etles heires le
baron garronteront,tc.tiel gars
ranty bartcea Ibeíce, et iffint ils
Diont que ceſt lentendement De
leffatute,cat {ile baron et fa ferit
ficront bu fcofiment en fee per
faitenpais, fon beire apres le
Deceale le baron et fa feme auera
briefe Dentre fur Cui in vita,&c.
nient ob(tant le garrantie De le
baron, donque fi nul tiel erceptt=
ott fuit fait en leſtatute de le fine
leute; ac, donque lheire aueroit le
baiefe Dentre,&c. nient obſtant
le fine lente per le baron a (a fem̃.
put ceo Giles pacolx de leftatute
deuant lexception de fine Icute,
&c, (ont generals, ac.ceftalcauotr
que Ibetre la feme apres le mot
lepereet la mere ne foít bart
Daction, fil Demaund Iberitage,
ou le mariage fa mere, per briefe
Dentre, que ſon pere aliena en
temps famere, a iſſint coment
que lebazon etla feme alienent
per fine. bncoze ceo eft voier, que
k baron aliena ẽ temps iamcte,
et iſſint tl ferroit en cafe De lefta-
tute, (non que tielx parolx fae
toti


Of Warrantie.


Set]. 731.


wherof no lawful fine is rightfully
leuied in the Kings Court,and that
is, whereof no fine of the huf-
band and his wife is leuied in the
Kings Court, for at the time of
the making of the faid Statute, c.
uery eftate of lands or tenements
that any man or woman had which
fhould defcéd to his heire,was fee
fimple without condition, or vpon
certaine conditions in Deed or in
law.Andbecaufethatthen füchfine
mightrightfully bee leuied by the
husband and his wife, & the heires
of the husband fhould warrant,&c
fuch warranty fball barre the heire,
& fo they fay that this is the mea-
ning of the ftatute, for if the huf-
bad & his wife fhould make a feoff.
ment infee by Deede in the coun-
tric, his heire after the deceafe of
the husband and wife thall haue a
Writ of entrie fur Cui in vita eye.
notwithftanding the warranty of
the husband, then if no fuch ex-
ception were made in the ftatute
of the fine leuied, &c. then the
heire fhould haue the Writ of en-
trie,&c. notwithftanding the fine
leuicd bythe husband and his
wife, becaufe the words of the fta-
tute before the exception of the
fine leuied, &c. are generall,viz.
that the heire of the wife after the
death of the father and mothe
is not barred of action, if KE
demand the heritage or the patri-
age of his mother by writ2f en-
trie, that his father aliene in the
time of his mother, an! albeit
the husband and witliened by
fine, yet thisis true‘ the huf-
band aliened in r¢ time of the
mother,and fo ;4ould be in that


Lib.3.


ront,s.dont nul fine eft leuie en
là Court le Boy, iſſint tis diont
que ceo eſt entender, Dont nul
fine per le baron ct fa teme eft le-
up en la Court le Roy, 1e quel eft
loialment Leute en ttel cate, cat ſi
les 3uttíceg ont conufang, que
home que nad viens forfque en
Doit fa feme voile leuier bn fine
enfonnofine foleinent, ils ne
boplont.ne vnque Deuoient paeti-
Der tiel fine Deftre leuie per le
baron folement fans fa feme,
El Ideo Quzre De ceft matter, ze,


Of Warrantie.


Sel. 731:
cafe of the ftatute, vnleffe chat {uch
words were,viz. whercof no fine
isleuied inthe Kings Court, and
fothey fay that this is to be vnder-
ftood, whereof no fineby the huf-
bandand his wife is leuied in the
Kings Court, the which is lawful-
ly leuied in fuch cafe, for if the Iu-
{tices haue knowledge that a man
that hath nothing but in the right
of his wife willleuie a fine in his
name only, they will not, nei-
ther oughtthey to take fuch fine to
bee leuied by the husband alone


without his wife, &c./deo quere of this matter,&c.


€ I Eoay oye mon maifter Sir R.Newton,erc. Mho toas aGentleman
ofananctent famtip ; (t Latyn de noua villa, in french de neufe ville, and a renerend
learned Jadge, and worthily aduanced tobe chiefe Juſtice of the Court of Common
pleas, whom our Author remembers With great reucrence,as bp bis Words pon map perceiue,
calling him bis matter, and citett his opinion deltuered onec in the Court of Common pleag


Which our Author heard and obſerued ( $pbofe example therein, tt (s ncceffarp kor our ftadent
to follow) but the latter option (as bath beene befoze obferucd ) being Litrletons one, ts az
gatn& the opinion of the 1020 Newton (d) andthe Law (s holden clerelp Sith onr Authoz
at this day, and our Author ( as in all other cales) hath go Authority (n Law to warrant


bis opinion, Nullius hominis authoutas tantum apud nos valere debet, vt meliora non fequerc-


mur íi quis attulerit.


€ Car files Iuſtices ount conxſance, &Ac. Hereby ttappeareth (et
tbc Judge, i£ he knoweth tt,ought not totale — ofa F po —— al à


thiro perfon.


(L Que ferroit inconnenient. Argumentumab inconuenienti ig ÿe-
tp forctbiein Law, as often hath beene obfcrue>.
DE the ref of theſe thꝛee Scctons fafficient hath beene {aid befeze,


Sell. 732.


6

«T Cem eft afcauoir, que en
ceux parolr, ou iheire De-
mande lheritage ou le ma⸗
riage fa mere, ceft parol (ou) eft
bo diſiunctiue, ct cf autant a=
Dire, (t Ibeite Demande le heri⸗
tage fa mere, g. les tenements
que fa mere auoit en fre (mte
perdifcent, ou per purct)ate, ou
Alheire demaund le mariage fa
mere, ceſt aſcauoir, les tenemẽts
que


AL o it is to bee vnderftood,
that inthefe words where the
heire demands the heritage, orthe
marriage of his mother,this werd
(or) is a difiunétiue, and is afmuch
to fay, if the heire demand the
heritage of his mother,viz.the te-
nements that his mother had in
fee fimple by difcent or by pur-
chafe, or if the heire demand
the mariage of his mother, that is
Ddddd 3


383


(4) Braffen 311,
Fleta,lib.5 cap. 34»

8. E. 2. Garr.8 1. 18.E,3. $1.
7-€ 3.84. Pl. ('em.57.


625.711.

(e) 33. H. 6. 52. 5. E. 3. 56.
2 Éli(. Dier.178. 1.H. 7.9,
1..Mar 83 4.E.3.41.

7. E. Dier 246.
Vid.$«d.37.ér«.


Lib.5.


V. s.


€2)4.E.2.Vouch.258.12,6,2
6.262. 14.44.15,


(5b)38. 5. 3.14.


(6) Brall.fe.357.338. dr li. 5,
380,381. Bris.fo.106.b. Fler.
lj.5.ca. Y 5.05 ll 6.02.23. 35.
41.8.8. Gar.90.F.N.B.134,6


Brie.vb fap. Flet.vb. fup.
Vi M648. €, E.2,Gar. 362,


Cap.


Of Warrantie.


Sc 752.733.


que fuecont Denes à fa mere en tofay,the tenementsthat weregi-
uen to his mother in frankmariage,


frankimariage,


€ Dmedoc erpound heritage of the mother to bethelands which the mother hath by dif-
S cent. And that conftructon tstruc, butthe Statute by the Buthostty of Littleton

extendetl alfo where the mother hath it by purchafein ies imple, Coz fo faith Littleton
himfelfe, that this word ( Fnberitance) ts mot oni intended Xobere a man hathiands dp bifz
cent, but Dbere a man hath a fee limple bp purchatc, becaufe bis heires map inberite him, Bnd
albeit ít be true, that the Statute extendeth toam eftate in ffrankmartage acquired bp pure
chafe, pet Doth tt extend alfo to ail eſtates (n tapic;ag well by diſcent as bp purchale, foz that
SFrankmartage ts put but £02 an example,


€ Foe & heredes

mei warranti-
zabim* & imperpetuü
defendemus. tiobete-
ín Che things areto be obfer-
uen : Hiri, Chat Hæredes mei
are Swozds of neceflitic, foa
otherSife the hepzeg are not
bound, a) Hecondip, Though
in the claufe of the woarrantte
Ít be not menttoncd to borne,
€c. pet {bail it bee intended to
the feoffee. (b) Thirdly, hat
the jreoffo; map by crpzefle


: Goods Warrant the land fo?


the life of the Feoftee, o2 of the
Feoftor, ac. but the reconerte
in balue (bail bee in Fee. (c)
ME this Pra&on wꝛiteth (n
this manner, Et ego & hæred
mei warratizabim’tali et here.
dibus fuis tantum vel tali &
haredibus & affignatis, & hæ-
redibusaffignatorum,vel affig-
natisaffignatorum, & eorum
bæredibus, & acquictabimus
& defendemus eos totam ter-
ram illam cum pertinentijs,
contra omnes gentes, &c. per
hoc autem quod dicit(cgo &
hæredes mei) obligatfe & hæ-
redes ad warrantiam propin-
quos,& temotos, praefenres &
futuros, & fuccedenres in 1nfi-
nitum. Per hoc autem quod
dicit(Warrantizabimus) fufci-
pitin fe obligationem ad de-
fendendum fuum tenementum
in poffeffione rei date & affig-
natos fuos & eorum hæredes &
omnesalios,&c.Per hoc autem
quod dicit(acquietabimus)ob-
ligat fe & hæredes (uos ad ac-
quictandum fi quis plus petie-


Sec. 733.


€ [Gom come ef

moue en diũs

Faits , ceux
parolt en Latpne,
Ego x Haredes mei,
warrantizabimus, &
imperpetuum | defen-
demus, il eft à bet-
et Gi effect ab cel pa⸗
tol, Detendemus, ett
tíelg faits, et il Cem-
ble que il nad pas
leffect De Garrantie,
ne empaent en lup ia
caute De Garrantie,
cat fil iſſint ferrott,
que tl prent effect ou
caufe be Garrantie,
Donque tl froit mitte
en afcuns fines le⸗
bies en la Court le
op: Ct home ne
betet ceo bnque, que
ceft parol Defende-


Lfo where it is
contained in di-

uers Deedes thefe
wordes in Latyne,
Ego & Haredes mei
marrantizabimes — edv
imperpetunm — defenae-
mit it isto be feene
what effe& this word
( Defendemus) hath in
fuch Deedes : And it
feemeth that it hath
not the effect of War-
rantie, nor compre-
hendeth in it the
caufe of warrantie,for
if it fhould be fo that
it tookethe cffe& or
caufe of warrantie,
then it fhould bee put
into fome Fines leui-
edin fhe Kings court,
and aman neuer faw,
that this word ( De-


mus, fuit en afcun feademus) was in any


fine, mes tanfole-
ment cctt parol War-
rantizabimus, pet que
femble que ceft parol
et Werbe Warranti-
zo, fait la Garran⸗
tie, a effla caufc be


Gar⸗


Fine, but onely this
word (Warrantizabi-
mus.) By whichit fee-
meth, That this word
and Verbe (Warranti-
20) maketh the war-
rantic, and is the


Lib.3. Of Warrantie. Sef. 733.
Garrantie st mul caufe of warrantie, rit fecuitij vel aliud feruitium
, tinetar. Per hoc autem quod
ftre Lep, in our Law. dicit (Defendemus) obligat fe
dum fi quis velit féruiturem po-
nere rei datæ contra formam fuz donationis. (d) Berebp (t appcaretb, Chat netter Dc-
& hzredes mei warrantizabimus, &c. in Matpne boe create a wWarrantie, fo, 3i anb mp
hetres thall Soarrant, ec. in Engtiſh, roth create a Warrantie alſo.
ifgoz bab infeoffed him for 12. peares,ec. in this cafe tf he be oufteb by a (ranger Without bes
ing impleaded, the Dbligation is fosfett :bat {€ hee bee bound to warrant the land , €c. the
to warrant, ec.
€ Dongues il ferra mit en aſtuns fines, dre. Hetre Littleton dꝛaweth
is the higheſt anb ſureſt kind of alurance tn Law, if Defendemus had the foꝛcs of a Warranty
it wouid bant beeuc containedin Fines : aub on the other ioc feing this woz® Warrantizo ig
anb not the other,
€ Etnsl uter Verbe em noffre Ley. Peere tt appeareth , Chat no
pꝛiated to createa tioarrantíc.

Wns, Qui benc diftinguit, bene docet, and here, ot neceſſitie pou mus disinguith, * tribe:
anb & tDarrantíc annexed to a ward, Which (aa Chattell reall, foz tbere, Gant, Demife , anb
thelike, boc makes Warrantie. Bnd of Warranties annexed to Fræbelds and Jnberitances,
expꝛeſſe Warrantie, (obertof Littleton here {peaketh te created onclp bp this Word Warran-
tizo, bnt warranties in La are created bp many other Words ; thep be therefore called toar-
Warrantizo. (t) #8 Dedi is a tparrantíein Law tothe Seokee and bis betres during the
life of tbe coor, but Conceffi ina Feoement o2 Hine fmplieth no warrantiec, Wut before
and to bolb to him and hig beires,of the Toon o? anbbís heires, bp certaine feruices , then nof
onelp the Dono? but bis beíreg allo had bene bound to toarrantíe, Wut tf before that flatute
€bícfe 11030, there the Feoſtoꝛ had not benc bound to warrautie, but during bis life, ag attbíg
tay be ts.
conceffi, &c.) Pet it Dedi be contained alone, tt Doth tmpozt a Warrantie, fo; the Stature doth
concigde, Tpíc tamen feoffator in vita fua ratione propnij doni fui tenetur warrantizare. 6 ag
Statute be further, (inc claufula quz continet Warrantiam, the meaning of the Statute tg,
Thast Dedi doth import a Warrautie in Law, albeit there bee an expꝛeſſe Warrantie tn the

Fozif a man make a Feoftment bp Dedi,and in the Ded doth Warrant the land agatnG I.S.
and his beíreg, pet Dedi (g a generall Warrantie During the life of tbe Feoſtoꝛ, anb fo was the
snp felfe hears anb obferueb, (h) Ænbifamanmake a Leafe fos life referuing a rent,and adde
an erviefle toarrantie, here the exprefle Swarrautie Doth not take away the Warrantic in Law,
tWerne a HOnrranticehat (aa Coucnant reall,anda Warrantie concerning a Œhattell,(i) Dito
this $0910 Excambium Doth tmplie a Warrantie,

Bnd Homage aunceftrell doth bra to (t fele Warrantie, ag hath bene fapd in tbe Chapter
9f Domage Anceftrell.

rantie, and ertendethto the heires of che Feoffe during thelife ot tbe Donoꝛ onelp. Wut ops
9n the exchange and homage anceftre'l the Warrantie ertendeth recipaocallp to the heires, and


auter Werbe en n0» and no other word namin carts donationis conc
& hæredes fuos ad defendca-
fendere meg Acquictare Doth create a Swarranty, bot Warrantizare onelp, Bnd as Feo
(e) Fé aman be bound to A-inan Obitgatton,to scfend fuch lands to A-Sohereof the Ob⸗
IBond (9 not forfeited, vnleſſe the Obitge be impiended, andthenthe Obligor mufi bee reabte
an Argument from the fozme ¢ $0008 of a Fine, bis reaſon ie this, Chat leing that a Fine
contained in Fines to create a Warrantie, thattherefoze that $09; Doth implte a Warrantic,
other Serbe in our Law doth make a Wartantie, but Warrantizo onelp, whichis oneip apprec
tweens a Wartantie anneredto a Freehold o; Inheritance, (Swhereof Littleton here ſpeaketh)
fome be wartanties in Ded, anb fome be toarranties in Law. A warrantie in Ded, o1 cti
ranties in Law, becaufe intudgement of Lak thep amount to a t0 crrantíe without this berb
tho Statute of Quia emptores terrarum, (f a man had gtueniands bp this $9070 Dedi, to bane
a man bad gínen lands by this $0020 Dedi, toa man andtobis heircs oz entr , tobolb of the
Bnd aibett the words of the Statute of Bigamis be,In cartis autem vbi continentur(Dedi &
Dedi (s the $0020 that tmplieth toarsantie,andnot Concefli. Bifo where the 120105 of the
Dede.
@Pitatute ecpounded (n both poputs (2) H.l. 14. El fn the Court of Common Pleas, Which J
fo; be bath election to beuch by force of either of them, Bndin Nokes Cafe note a otuerütp bez
Allo a Partition implieth a Warrantiein Law, as inthe Chapter of 39arcenerg appeareth.
Bnd tt ts to beobferned, Chat the toarrantte wꝛought by thts $0020 Dedi fg a fpectal Mare
againt the beíres of both partics : and in none of the Cafes the igna Wall bench by fozcs


384


(4) 46.E.3.38. 11. H.4.41.
6. E. a. V eich, 262.3, 4.15.6


(€) 2.2.4.1 5.808, Bet.os,


46.E.3.39.
Vi «R1,


S08 657.
© 32 © 3 Vonch, 24 13. Richa
sie Coat.deVewsh 35.39 EF.
48.,0.Edw. 3.6.0 Sym sn =
men: cafe $.£.5.61, qa.Ed 3.
Vouch 29.Temps E t V onab,,
393. 3.4 6.15,


(£) Lefar. de games) 6.
3.H.5.7.5.H 7.3 48.E 3 2,
13. E. 1 Fir Vowch. 390 FirC.
'N, 3.13 4,5,0. £3, V 00.358


ee


— Coi Rate,
(h) Lt.4 fo.80.0n Nokes café.
3.£.3 69.9.£.3.1 5.10. E4.3
11.20.E.3,(ont.de Gar.7:
31. E. 3.V onsb. 3$9.33.€£ 4.3, -
3b 102. 43.E,3.3.7. €, 3. T$,
(Cw imvira v7. 3.4.5. Forst.
den 44.
(04.8.3. "Urb 245 22. E.3
2.14.H 6.2 20. 6,14.
Li.4 fy. 122.9 Eaferd, aft.
15. E.3 Bares 5.43 Bd 1580
lit — fol.17 Spes
cerscafs. Ls, rtf
Fan 07 5° êr. Sr


Lie. G ape


(38.413 3.14. Hen. 4. 5
38. E. 3.15. 4. E.3 ever. 201
@ 201.19 E. 3. ^ Wowr. 201,
$03.11. E, 5. 2wnwr. 100.
30.H.6.7. 3 . H. 8. Dyer 51.
10. H,7.11.4, F,N.B.163.€
(0 6.£ 2, Cont de V oush 105.
S.E.z67. 4.€ a tbid, 103.
6. E. 1.11, $0.7. E. 3.6.
39.E.3.8.22.6d 3.3.3. H7.
13.6, H.7.2. 1 4E. 3. far 32.
FIN 8.1345. 5 E.3:87-
20.E.3. tit. (emite: plea de
dr.7.
(m)4-E. 3-36.33 Fd 3. ttt.
(ont.de Vonch.1 12.43.4].32
50-£.3.9.F.N.B.149 m.
(m) 14.H.6.2.15.E.3.
Bar.3555


(0) 38 €.3.33-23-34-
13-E,3.Garr.35-


(p) 16.E.3.- At^ 45.
18. €. 5.8. 31.8.3,Garr.25.


Wide lib. 4. fol.131.
Bujtards ( «fe,


(3) 45. E. 3.20.6.


(» EAS


13. E. 1.Garr.93.


Lib. e. fol. 17. b in Spencers
cafe. 38. E. 5.21.


(0)12.€.2.Vouch. 263.
19.8.2 gar.85.13.E.1.16,93
Li.s.f. v9 Spencers cafe.
7.€£.3.34.10-€. 3.9. 14. E. 3
Gar.33. Bratt wb. fup.g. Ed.a
Gar de (hart. 30. 36. Eaw. 3.
Gar.t.4.H.8.Dy.1.
F.N.'B.135.


(t) 43. E:3.23.36.E4 3 68.
40. E. 3.14.24.E, 3.36.
11 H.4.94.30.E.3.17.
V. E. 3 ge 19. T1. Gm.418


(4) 43. E. 3.6, p Finchdes.


Of. VVarrantie;


Se. 733.
of nnp of tbrfe toarrantics, but in the cafe of the xchange and Dedi the Allignee ſhall reburtt,
but not inthe cafe of Homage ancefirell, LU ^

(k) Andð fo no man Mail baut a wꝛit of Contra formam collationi: . but Onelp the Seoftee
and bis tetres which be pꝛiuie to tbe Ded, bnt an Aſſignee map rebutt bp force of the Dede,

(D) FE amanmakea giftin Gapleoz a Leale foz lite of land, bp Deed 02 Without Ded, rec
ferntug a Rent, o7 ofa Went feruiceby Ded, this ts a Warrantie in Law, andthe Done og
Keflee beeing impicaded fhall bouch and recouer in value, And this Warrantie in Law ertens
Deth not oncip againt the Donoz o1 Aefioz, and hts hepzes, but aife again his Allignes of
the x Row ano fo likc wile tbe Aſſignes of Heller toz itfe fpailtake benefit ot this Warran-
tic in La.

(m) t0ben Dower tg a(Tíaneb there is a Hoarrantic in Law inciaved, that the Cenant in
D oWer being impleadcv, ſhall vouch and recoucr in baluc à third part of tbe two parts wheres
of fhe is dowable. :

And ít ts to bc vnderſtood, Chat a warrantic in Law anb Alſets (s (n (ome cafes a god bar,
(n) In a Formedon tn the dvifcender tbe Cenant may picad, Chat tbe Aunceftoz of tbe x: ez
manbant exchanged the Hand with the Tenant fo? other Lands taken in exchange, which diſ⸗
cendedto the Demandant, Whereunto be hath entred and agreed: 02 t£ he hath notentred and
agvesd onte the Lands takeninexchange, then the Cenant map pleadthe Harvantiein Law,
and other Aleta difcended, ,

(o) JE Genan: in Œaile of Lands make a gift (n Œafle or a Leaſe for life, rendzing a
Kent and dieth, and the Iſſue bringech a Foꝛmedon in tbe difcender, the Reucrfion and Kent
fall not barrethe Demandant, becaufe by his ozmedon be ts to befeat the Keuerſion and
I ent, Et non poteftadduci exceptio eiufdem rei,cnius petitur diff lutio. ,

(p) But it other a(fetg in fra imple Doe difcend, then this toarrantic in Law andaflets
íg a geod barre intie Formedon. t

Herc foure tbínga are to be abferueo : Hirt, Chat no warrantic (rt Law doth barre anp
Œollaterall title, but i8 (n nature of a dineall Warrautie : Wherein theequitie of the Lawig
to be obſerued. «6

Secondly. Chat an exprefe tibarrantíe fball never binde the heires of han that maketh the
Warrantie, vilcife (ag hath been fapd ) thep be nained: ag foz example Littleron here faptb(Ego
& hxredes mei) but fn cafe of toarranites in Law, in manp cafes the heyzes fhali be bound to
Warrantie, albeit they be net rained, ii

Œhiroly, That in fomecafes woarrantics in Law boc extend to execution in balue , of ſpe⸗
ciall Lands, and not gencrallp of Lands dilcended tn fe Gmple, as pou may fe at large in
mp iKepezts.

(q) Foarthip, Chat toarranties tn Law map be ín fome cafes created without Dev, ag
bpon aífte in tarie, Leaſes fo; life, Eſchanges, and thelike.

And fatng ſome what hath bene {apd out of Br. &on and other antient Buthozs concerning
Afliquees, ít is neceſſarie to fhe Who thal take aBuantage of a toarranticag AAigne by wap
of Voucher tohauc recompence in value,

(r) Sifa man tnfcoffe A. and B, tohane and te hold tothemand their heires, With a Clauſe
of Warrantie, Prediétis A. & B. & corumhæredibus & aflignatis: Jn this cafe tf A. ptetb,
anb B. furuiueth anb dieth, andthe hetreef R. infeofeth C. hee thali vouch as Aſſignee, and
pet he is but the Aſſignee ot the heyze of one af them, Co in iudgement of Law the Allignæ
of the herze (e the Witgnee of the Aunceftoa, and ſo tbe 2 (Tigres of the Aſlignee fball touch
in infinitum, within thele Words. (His Dilignes. )

(f) GE a man infcoffeth A. To haue andto hoid to him, big hepzes and Aflignes ; A tn=
fcoffet B and bis bepzes, B dteth. the hepze ot B. fball bonch as AAiqne ta A. So as
hepreg of Aflignes, and Aflignes of Allignes, and Allignees sf Heyes ave Within this
Sword (Aigues which feemed to be a queftton in Biactons time, And che Allignes thall not
onclp touch, but alfohaue a Wariantia Carte.

BE aman doth Warrant Land to another Without this word (epics, ) hts hepres that
not bouch: and regularly tf he Warrant Land to a man and bis bepaes . Without naming fx
fignes, his Alliqne fhainctbouch. (t) Wut tf the Cather bee tnfcoffed With Warrantic te
bimano bts bepres, thefacher tafcoffctb his eldeſt fon Sith $oarrantíc anb dieth, the Law
glueth to thefonne advantage of the toarrantic made to his father, becaufc bp ad in Law the
Warrantic bet&oeenc the father and the fonne is extinct.

Wut note there ie a diuerſitie hetweene a tarrantie that (a a Conenant reall, which bine
deth the partic to yeeld lang 02 Cenements in recempence, and a Coucnant annexed tothe
Land, Which (c to yeeld but dammages, foꝛ thata Coucnant (5 in manp Cafes extended futher
than the toarrantte. Bg for example :

Cu) Ft hath beene adiudged, Chat Where two Coparceners made partittonof Land, and
the one made a Concnant withthe other, to acquite herand hee beíteg ot a Suit that dr -


Lib. Of Warrantie.


out of theland, the couenantee aliened, In that cafe the aflignee fhall aue an action of
—— > anb pet he was a ſtranger to the couenant, becauſe the acquitall did runne Sith
the land.

Cw) A leiſed of tbe Mannoz of D Wwhereot a Chappell Wag parcell, a 3920» With the af
fent of his Wonent coucnanteth bp deed tndented With A. and bis Heires to celebzate Dinine
Seruice in bis {aid Chappell weakip foz the Loꝛd of the ſaid Mannoz, and bis Socruantg,
c. In this cafe the aflignecs (ball aue an ation of Conenant , albett tbcp Were not named,
to; chat the remedie by couenaut doth runne With tbelanb to giuc Dammages. to the partic
grieuco, and Was ina manner appurtenant to the Wannoz. (y) Wut if tbe ceuenant jan
bene With a ftranger to cclebzate Divine Syeruice in the Chappell of A. and His hewes, there
the allignee ſhall not haue an action ef couenant, £02. the couenant cannot bee annexed tothe
Mannoꝛ bccaufe the couenantes Was not fciíco of the SIDannoz, SeeinSpenceis Cafe before
remembzed Divers other diucrfities betweene Warrantics, and Coucnants, which petld but
dammages

And here it is to be obſerued, that anafligne of part of the land fall bouche ag alſſignec.
(C) 3s ifa manmake a fcotfment in fee of too Acres to one Witl warranticto him bis heires
and aflignes, fhe make a fcoffimcnt of one Acre, that fcoffæ fhall bouch as Bllignee, fo? there
is a diuerũtie bet weene the whole effatc tn part, and part of theeltate in the wbole , 02 of anp
part, Bs (Fa man hath a $oarrantíeto him his hetres and allignes, and he make a leafe foz life,
Oza gift in tapie,the Leſſee 02 Donee (ball not bouch as aſſiguee becaufe he hath mot the citate
ín fccfinple $obercunto the warrantie was annexed, but the Leſſee £02 itfe map pray in apde,
02 the Leſſee op Donec may bouche the Leſſoꝛ op 3D0n02, and bp this mcancg hee (hall talie
aduantage ofthe warranty. Wut tf aleale fos life, 02 a gift tn taplebe made, the Remapnder
Duet ín Fee, fuch a Leflec o2 Donee hall bouche as allignee, becaufe the Whole cffateís out of
the Leſſoz, and the particular eftate, and the Remaynder doe in iudgement of Law tetbío pur=
pofemake but one eftate. .

(a) FE a man infeoffe three With Warrante to them and their heires, and one of them veleafe
to the other tia, thep ſhall bouche, but tf he had releafen to onc of the other, the tibarrantie had
beene extinct foz that part, foz be is an atffgnee. ~ - Hs»

(b) It a man doth Warrant Land to tivo men ano their hetres, and the one make a fcoffz
ment ín fee, yet tbc other (ball bouchfoz his mottie. It amanat this day bee ínfcoffeo With
warrantie to him, his heires.and aflignes, and hemakea gikt in tayle, the Kemaynder in fee,
the 3Doncé make a feoffment in fee, that fcoffec Hall wot bouche as affignee, becauſe no man
Hall bouche as aſſignee, but heethat commeth inin priuiticof eftate, but hee mul bouche
Dis feoffez, and be to bouche ag aſſignee, but ſuch an aſſignee map rebutte. It the wWatrantie
be madeto a man and bis bcíres withoutthis werd (allignes ) pet the alltgnec,ez anp tenant
of the Land tap rcbutre, And albeit no man thal, bouche or bane a Warrantia carce either ag
partic, heire, oꝛ aſſignee, but in prfuity of eftate, pet any, thatis in of another cftate, becithy
Dffletfin, abatement, intrufion, bfurpation oz orherwife,fhall rebutte bp force of the warrantie
as a thing anncred to the Land Which fometiine wag doubted (c) in our Bokes. Wat herein
ts a diuerũtie to be obfcrucd When in the Cafes aforefatd , hee that vebutteth claymeth vnder
the Warranty. Bnd when hee that would rebutte clapmeth aboucthe Warrantp, for there hee
fbatl not rebutte. And therefore tf ands bee gluen to two Wecthren in fe (imple With a
Uoarranty tothe eldeft and his hetres, the eldeſt victi) without (üge,tbe Surviuoz albett he bee
Deire to him, pet hail he nepther bouche noz rebutt, 102 auc a Warranua carte, becaufe bis
title tothe Land is by relation cboue the fall ofthetoarrantie, anti hee commeth not onder the
eſtate of bim,to whom the to artanty is made, as the Diſſeiſoz, «c. doth.

Cd) Ita man make a gift intapleat this bap,.anb warrant tye Land to him his heres and
aflignes, ant after the Done make afeoffmcnt dnd dieth without iſſue, the Wwarrantte is ex⸗
Pitedasto any Woucher 02 Rebutter, for that the eſtate intaple Wherenntott Wags knit is
fpent: otheriwife it ts,tfthe giftand keolkment had bene made befoze the Statute of Donis
conditionalibus, foz then both the Done and cafe had afe (imple , and fo are our Bokes
to beintendedin this and the like Cafes.

(e) HEA. e fcifeb of Lands in fee, anb P. relcafeth onto him o2 confirmeth hts eſtate in fee
Sith Marrantic to hin his heires and aflignes ; allmen aatectbte toarrantietobe god: but
fore haucholven, that no tDarrantp can be rayſed bpona bare Releaſe os Confirmation with⸗
out paſing ſome eftate o2 tranfmutation of poſſeſſton. (f) ut the Law ag (t appearcth bp
Littleton hisnfelfe tg to the contrarte,and that both the partie,and(as fome do hold bis affignce
Gaï vouche, but he that is vouched in that cafe mutt be pzefent in Court,andreadp to enter in⸗
tothe warrantie andto anfwerc, and the Tenant mul thew foit the Den of Keleaſe 03
Loafrtnation With Warrantie, to theintentthe Demaundant map haue an anfsvere tbercunto

and epther Dente the Deed 02 audid tf, for that at the time of the Confirmation made, be to whom


ftoag made pad nothing in the Land, te, fog otherwile the Demaundant may conterpiead the
€ ccce Toucher


Seël. 732.


385.


(w ) 42.E:3.3.8, Laur,

"T'akexhams cac. 2. H4, 6. *

6: H.4.Y.dr 2. Ranfe Brabe

fons (afe. c

L35.5.fol. V0 448, Spencers *
fe. si


^


(y) 2. H. 4.6. Henry Harnés


Caf? 6.H. 4. X. Lib. e,
ol. 1 AB. Spencers Cafe.


(9) 18.7.3. 52.10.E. 5.58,
5. E.3.49. 124 E.3. Ceunter-
pleadeVoush.4> 14.6.2.
Voucher vog. 5. E. 5 ibid. 178.
Y3-£.3.16;d. 119, 40.E. 3.23,
ATE. 3. Vouch. 63. gr 190.
3a. E.3.101/.96.

And this dsuerfitie was agreed
Hill. 14. € ls( . en ( ormmuni
Banco, which I beard and ob-
ſerued.


(a) 40.E.3.14.40. 4f. s.
3i. H.6.4. 37. H.B.alsena-
tion fans licence 31.8. H. 4.8.
(b) 1 1/R.2. Drm 46.
7-E.3: 35. 46. E, 3.4.


(c) 38. E.5.11.36.8.3. 56.
Lib.10. fo, 96.5. Seymors café
7.E. 3-343578 0E. 3.50,
46.E.3.4.10.E. 3-42:
45.E.3.18,
10.4[.5.35--4/f:9.22. 4]:
39. 88.31.41 3.


(4) Lib. 3 fol.61.63.
Lincolne ("olledge (af.


(€) 14.2. 3.Gerr.108.


12. M. J. 1


() 11. H.4.22. 10.E. 3. 520
21.£.3.27. Vide $48.306,
738.6745.


*


Lib.3.


W.i.cap.40.


Vide ꝛo. E. 1 Statute de vocat.


ad warant.


(Cg) 32.H. 6.15.19. H.6.22.


36. H.6.73. 2. H.4.13.


41. E.3.Gerr.15.43.E.3.17.


43-4 4112. Af: 7.


12. E. 3.tayle 3.23. E. 4.16.5.
44 E.310.44..4 f. Bafftne-


born: AG. Lib. io. fel 97.
Seymars (efe.

(h) Lib. 3. fel. 63. Lincolne
Colledge (afe.

(D 29.E.3.70.17.€.2.


Ieinder in a@ionet, x1, E.4.8.


A) L4, H4. 3-


Cap. i3.


Of Warrantie.


Sel. 734.


Aoucher bp the Statute of W.1.viz. that neither Aouchee nozany of bis Anceltors had anp
ſeilin whereof be might make a feofment.And this ts grounded bpon the fais Statute of W.:
the words hereof be, Sil neit fon garrantieen præfenr, que lun voile garranter de fon gree, &
maintenantenteren refpons. £Dtbersife the Cenant mutt be daiuen tots Warrantia cartz.
Cg) Wut a warrantte of it felfe cannot enlarge aneftate, ag (€ the Refloz bp Ded relcafe to
bis Le» £o? itfe, and warranc the Land to the Leflæ and his hetres, pet doth not this enlarge


bis eftate.


Ch) 3i£ a man make a feoffment in fe Sith warrantie to him his beires and Baignes by
Deed (ag it muſt bec) and the Seofke enfeotteth another bp paroll, the fecond -feoffæ fbaii
bouche, 02 hane a Warrantia carta (ag hath bene farb ag aflignee , albeit hee bath nodes of
the aflignemont, becanfe the deed compzehending the Warrantie doth extend to the Atiqnes
of the Land, and be is a fufftcient ailignes albeit he hath no Deed.

(1) FE a man infeoffe two,thete heires andalligues, and oneof them make a feoffarent in fa,


that Sreofte (ball not vouch as Aſſignee.


Ff a man make a feoffment in fee to A. bis beíres andallignes, A. tnfeoketh B. (n fee, Sho
re-enfeoffeth, A 15e 02 bis a(fignes fhalinener bouche, for A. cannot be bis one Ailignee But
i€B. had (nfcoffeb the hetre of A. he map bouche as allignee, fo the heivcof A. map be aflignee


to À ,in ag muchag be clapmeth not ag heire.


Ck) 3if a man mabea feoffment bp derd ot Lands to A. To haue anb to hold to him and his
beíreg, and bind him and bis hetres to warrant the Land in forma predicta, this Warrantie
thall extcnd to tbcfcoffee anb bis heires. Wut tf he had Warranted the Land tothe écoffæ , the
Warranty had not extended to his heires except the Words had beene to him and bis beíreg,

It a man letteth Lands fos tifethe Remaynder intapie, the Wemapnder cadem forma, this
is a good efbatetaple, quia idem femper refertur proximo præcedenti.


Setfion


€ T Cem fitenant en tate Coit
feifie s terres deuifables

per teftament folonque le
cuftome, tc. et letenant en taple
alien mefines les tenements a
fon frere en fee, et adiffue, et de⸗
uie, æ puis fon frere Deuifa per
fon teftament mefmes les tene=
ments a bn auter en fee, ct oblig
lup et fes beíreg a garrantp, ac,
et moautt fans ifue,il femble que
ceft Garrantie ne barrera my
liffueen taple, fil boit fues fon
bzicfe De Formedon, pur ceo que
ceft Garrantie ne difcend mp al
iſſue en le tayle, entant d le oncle
Del íffue ne fuit mp oblige ale
Garrantte en fa biesne que tl ne
puiffoit Garranter les tenemẽts
en {a bie, entant que le Deuife ne
puilfoit pzender afcun execution
ou effect , fostque apzes fon de-
ceaſe. Ct entant quele bnele en
fon bie ne fuit tenus De Gartan⸗
ter, tiel Garrantie ne poit by.
er


72+:

Lfo, if tenant in taile be fei-

fed of Lands deuifable by
. Teftament after the cuftome
&c. and the tenant in the tailea-
alicheth thefame tenements to his
brother in fee, and hath iffue and
dieth, and after his brother deui-
feth by his Teftament the fame te-
nements to another in fee,and bin-
deth him and his heiresto warran-
tie , &c.and dieth without iffue,
it feemeth that this Warrantie
fhall not barre the iffue in the taile,
if he will fue his Writ of Forme.
don, becaufe that this Warrantie
fhall not defcend to the iffue in
taile , infomuch as the Vncle of
the iffüe was not bound to
the fame warrantie in his life
time : neither could hee war-
rant the tenements in his life, in-
fomuch as the Deuife could not
takeany execution or effe& vntill
after his deceafe. And infomuch
as the Vncle in his life was not


Lib.3. Of Warräntie: $8.35,


Der be lup al iſſue en letaple, ec, heldto warrantie, füch warrantie

cat nul choſe poít Difcendecdel may not difcend from himtothe

auncelter a fon beíte, finon que iffueinthetaile, &c. fornothing

racine ceo fuit en launcefter, can difcend from the Anceftor to
his heire, vnleffe the fame were in
the Anceftor;


€ Sre onr Authoꝛ declareth one of the Maximes of the Common Law, that the hetre
fbail never be bound to anp expzefle Warranty, but where the Ancefto; was bound
by thefame toarranty, £o ££ the Mnceltoz Were not bound, (t cannot defcend vpon
Che hetre, which is the reafon here pælded bp Littleton, (1) JE aman make a feoffment ín
fet, and binde big heires to warranty, thés is bopdebp the toarrant of this Maxime, as to the
deire, becaufe the Anceſtez bimfelfe was not bound. Bifo if aman binde bis hetres to pay a
fumme of monsp, thts is botde, Bnd of the other fide (£ a man binde bimfcife to Warranty,
and bindenot bts betres, chep be not bound, fog he mufk fap, as (t appeareth befoge, Ego &
hzredes mei warrantizabimus,&c. (m) Bnd Fleta fatth, Nota quod hares non tenetur in Ane
lia ad debita anteccfforis reddenda, nifiperantecefforem adhoc fuerit obligatus, præterquam
Ébira regis tantum : A fortiori in cafe of toarranty, which ts inthe realty,

Wauta Warranty in Law map binde the hetre, althougb tt neucr bound the Anceſtor, and
map becreatedbp a Laſt Will and tefbiment. (n ) As (£ a man denife lands toa man £02 itfe og
tn taíle referuing a rent, the Deuiſee Foz itfe oz in tatle ſhall take aouantage of this noarrantte
tn La, albeit the Bucetkoz was not bounden, and (ball binde big betres alfo to warrantte alz
though thep be not named. Alſo an expꝛeſſe warrantic cannot bee created without Dede,
and a will in writing ts no Desde, and therefore dn expzeſſe warrantie cannot bec create
by wall,


Sell. 735.726.


€ Wp bn gartantie ne
poit alet folonquela na=

ture des tenements pet

le cu(tome,ac, ines tantfolement
folonque ie fozme Del Common
lep. Cat (t letenant en taile foit
feific Des tenements en Burgh
Cnugli(b,iou ie cuitome eft, que
touts les tenemcts deins meſm̃
le Bozough, deuopent Dilcender
ale fits puifne, et il Difcontinua
letaple oue gatrantie #c, et ad
iſſue deur fits, et mozutt ſeiſie
Des auters terres ou tenements
enmefine le burgh en fee dimple
ale balue, oupluis De les tene-
ments tailes ac.vncoꝛe le puifit
fits auera on Formedon De ies
terres tailes,et ne Cerca my bart
per le garranty fon pere.coment
que affets alup diſcendiſt en fee
(imple De metum le pere, uds
e


Lío a Warranty cannot goe

according to the nature of

the tenements by the cu-
ftome,&c. but only according to
the forme of the Common Law.
For ifthe tenant intaile bee feifed
of tenements in Borough Englifh,
where the cuftome is, that all the
tenements within the fame Bo-
rough ought to difcend to the
youngeft fonne, and hee difconti-
nueth the taile with warranty,&c.
and hath iffue two fonnes, and dy-
eth feifed of other lands or tene-
ments inthe fame Borough in fee
fimpleto the value or more of the
lands entailed,&c. yet the youn-
geftfonne fhall hauea Formedon of
thelandstailed, and fhall not bee
barred by the warranty of his fa-
ther,albeit affets difcended to him
in fee fimple from his faid father

Eccee 2


(D) 38.8.1. Grane 85.


BraPon lib. 2.fe.37.338.
Britton, fa.106.b,

(m) F leta,leb. 3.09. 45:
"Button, fo 65.6,

a1. H6. 48,


Co) 18.2. 3.8,


Lib.3.


rid 5e8.403.518.67 727-


(n) 11. E.3.Det.7.
it. H. 7.12.

Co ) 17. E. 3 .Ieint. 41.
16.H.7.33.. 29. E. 3. 46.
12. H.7. 3. 22. E. 3. t.
17.€.3.8, 39. E. 3. 40.
19.H.6.55. 1ib-3.fo.14
Mathew Herbertt cafe.


(4p -3-
le cu(tome,ac, put ceo que le gat-
rantie diſcendiſt a fon eigne fret
que eft en pleine bie, ct nemp fur
lepuifne, Ct en meſme le maner
eft De collateral! gacrantie fait
Deticls tenements,lou le gatta-
tie diſcendiſt fur leigne fitg, at,
ceo ne barrera mp le puifne
fitt,


Of Warrantie. 568.736.737. |


according to thecuftome,&c, be-
caufe the wartanty difcendeth vp-
on his elder brother whois in full
life, and not vpon the:youngeft.
And inthe fame manner is it of
collaterall warrantie made of fuch
tenements where the warranty dif-
cendeth vpó the eldeftfon,&c.this
fhal net barre the younger fon, &c.


Sec?.736.


€ E N mefine Ic manet eft De

tenements en le Countie
Dc ent, queux font appelies
Gaucikind,les queur teneméts
font departibles enter les frets,
ac, folonquela cuftome, ff afcun
tiel garrantie foit fait per fon


. auncefter, tiel garrantie Difcen-


Deratantfolement al heire que
eſt heire al common Iep , ceftat-
cauoit al eigne frere (olonque la
conufans Del common lep, et nc-
imp atouts les heifs queux font
heires Dc tiels tenements folon-
que le cuftome,


(L| N the fame manner is it of

lands in the County of Kent,
that are called Gauelkinde, which
lands are deuidable betweene the
brothers, &c. according to the cu-
ftome, if any fuch warranty bee
made by his Anceftor, fuch war-
ranty fhall defcend only to the
heire which is heire at the Com-
mon law, that is to fay, tothe elder
brother, according to the conu-
fance of the Common Law, and
not toallthe heires thatare heires
of fuch tenements according to
the cuftome.


€ Ereupon a dtuerfitte is to be obſerued betweene the Lien reall, and the Lien perfos
H nall, Foꝛ the Lien rcatl;ag the toarranty,voth ener diſcend to the heire at the Come
mon Law, (a) but the Lien perfonall poti) binde thefpectall heires, ag all the beireg

ín Daucikinde, and the heire on the part of the motber,as hath beene fate.
(0) It two men makea Feoffment in fee With a tbarranty, and the one die, the Feotke
cannot bouche thefurutuoz only, but the etre of bim that ts dead alfo, bat otherwife {€ twa
tepntlp bínbetbemfclueg (n an Dbligation, and the one die, the furnínog onip hall be charged,


- etl. 737-


Cy Cem. tenant en lc taíle ad
iffuc Deux files per Divers
benters.et mozutt.zles files en=
tront, ct br eftrange eux diffet=
fit be mefmesles tenements, et
lun de eur celeffa pet fon fait ale
Diffeifoz tout fon Doit, et oblige
lupetfes beites a garranty, et
moꝛuſt fang i(Tue, en ceft # la
Oct


AL if Tenant in taile hath if

fue two daughters by diuers
venters and dieth,& the daughters
enter, & a ftranger diffeifeth chem
of the fame tenements, and one ef
them releafeth by her Deedtothe
diffeifor all her right, and binde
her and her heires to warranty and
die without iffue. In this cafe the


Lib...


ter ct oufter le Diffeifoz De touts
lestenements, put ceo quetiel
garrantp nett pas Difcontinu-
ance, ne collateral garrantie a la
foer que ſurueſquiſt, pur ceo que
ils font de Denty fanke, et lun ne
poit eftre beire a lauter,folonque
le cours del Commonler, Ades
auterment eft, loup font files
Deltenanten taile per bn mefme


Of Warrantie:


foer que Curnefquift poit bien en⸗


enter, and ouft the diffeifor of all
thetenements, becauíe {uch war-
rantie is no ‘difcontinuance nor
collarerall warrantie to the fifter
that furuiueth, for that they are of
halfe blood,andthe one cannotbee
heire to the other according to the
courfe ofthe Common Lawe. But
otherwife it -is where there bee
daughters of tenantintaile by one


Setl. 738,


/fifter which furuiueth may well


venter.


venter.


€ Bercafon of this is tn refpec of the baïfe blod, £obereof (nfictent hath bene ſaid (n
i the fir boke in the Chapter of fe (imple,


Ewo brothers bee bp bemp benterg, the eldeſt releafeth Sith warranty to the
Difletfor of the Untle, and dpeth Witheut iſſue, the Ancle dpeth, the tparrantp ts remoued,
andthe younger bother map enter intothe land,


«LI Cem (( tenant
en taile leffa leg
tenements a on

home pur terme De

bie,le remainder a bti
auter en fee, et bn
collaterall auncefter
confirma le (tate Del
tenant aterm de bie,

& oblige lup a fes

beires à garranty

put terme De bie Del
tenant a terme De bte

&imo2u(t, a le tenant

en taile ad iffue, & De-

uie,o2e liſſue eft barre

a demander leg tenc-

ments per bzicfe De

Formedon, Durant le

bícletenant a terme

Debie, per caufe del

collateral garantie

Difcendu fur le iffue

en le taile. Mes a=

pres le Deceale De le


Sedion 738.
Lfo if tenant in
taile lerteth the

Lands to a man for
terme of life, the re-
mainder to . another
in fee, and.a colla-
terall Anceftor con-
firmeth ithe ftate of
the tenant forlife, and
bindeth him.;and his


heiresto warranty for.
terme of the life of the :


tenant for life, and dy-
eth, and the tenant in
taile hath iffue & dies,
now the iffue is barred
to demand the tene-
ments by writ of For-
medon during the life
of tenant for life, be-
caufe of the collaterall
warranty — difcended
vpontheiffue in taile.
But after the deceafe
of the tenant for life,
Œecee 3


€ Cre tf appeareth
that a Warrantie
may be rayſed bya
Confirmation Which tranf-
ferreth neither eftate noz
right, whereot fufficient hath


: beenc fata before.
on € CA garvanty pur


terme de vie, ec.
Cp) Chis paonetb that a
Warranty map bee itmitted,
arb that aman map warrant


dianos aſwell fog terme of


life, oz intatle,ag in feo.

FE Tenant in fe Gmple
that bath a warrantie foz
life either bp an expaefic
Toatrantp, 02 by Dcdi, be im⸗
pleaded and Douche, hee thall
recouer a fo fimple in value
albeit his warranty were
but fo? termeof like, becaufe
the Warranty ertended in
that cafe to the whole eftare
of the Felker tn Fee Gimple;bat
íntbe cafethat Littleton bere
puttety, tbe Tenant foz life
fball reconer in value but ari
eflate for life, becsufe the
fipartanty doth ectend ta that
eftate onip. :


€ Yn bricfe de For-


medon, &Ic. Pere tS
implyed that a Œoliaterail
Warrants


387


Vid,Se 213.6 7


(p) 38. £.3. i4.
16 E. 5. Voush, 87


Lib.5.


(Cap .13.


Of VVarrantie.


Sei. 739:


Warrantle gintth norisht, tenant ater De bie, the iflue fhall haue
bnt ha barre encly fo Me, Vire auera tn baicfe a Writ of Fermedon,


anb after the partic is ccfloz
red to bis 2 dion.
It is allo to bes obferueb,


bt Formedon,&c. &c.


bat a warrautis map dilcendto the hepzea of bun that mane (t baring she life of another,


Setlion 739.


€ ET fur ceo (to ape ope bn

tcaton, que cel cafe pꝛo⸗
pera bn auter cafe, 5, ibn home
leſſa ſes terres abnauter, A a=
uer et tener a Iupet a fes beiteg
purterme Dauter vie, et le Leſſee
mozutt biuant celup a que bie,
ac, et bn Citrange enter en la
Terre quele beire te Leſſee lup
poit oufter, ac, purceoque ern le
cate procheine auantdit , entant
que home poit obliger Iup et fes
heyres a Garranty al Tenant a
terme De bie tantfolement Dus
rant la bie le Œenant aterme de
bie, a cel Garrantie DifcenDift al
heyze celuy, que fi le Garran⸗
tie, le quel Garvantie nett pas
Garrantie Denberitance, mes
tantfolement pur terme Dauter
bie, per meſme le reafon lou Œe-
nements font leſſes bn Home,
A auer et tener a lup et a fes
heyzes purterme Dauter bie, fi
le Leflee mozutt, biuant celup à
que bie, fon beire aucrales Te⸗
nements, biuant celuy a que bie,
ac, cat ont Dit, Que ſi home grat
bnannuitiea vn auter, A aucr
et perceiuer a lup eta fes bepres
pur terme dauter bie, file Gran⸗
tee mozuit, ac, que apres fon
mozt fon Heyre aucta lannuitie
Durant la bie celuya que bie, ac,
Quare de ifta materia.


AN vponthis I haue heard a
reafon, That this Cafe will
prooue another Cafe,wiz. Ifa man
letteth his Lands to another, To
haue and to hold to him and to his
heires for terme of anothers
life,and the Leffee dieth,liuing Ce-
lay 4 que vie dre. anda ftranger en-
treth into the land, That the Heyre
of the Leffee may put him our, &c.
becaufe in the cafe next aforefayd,
in as much asa man may bind him
and his heires to warrantie to Te-
nant for life onely , during the life
ofthe Tenant for life,and this war-
rantie difcendeth to the Heire of
him which made the warranty,the
which Warrantic is no Warrantie
of Inheritance, but only for terme
of anothers life. By the fame
reafon where Lands are let to a
man, Tohaueandtoholdtohim
and his Heires for terme of ano-
thers life, if the Leffee die, li-
uing Celwy a que vie, his Heyres
fhall haue the Lands, living Ce-
[uy aquevie, &c. For they haue
fayd, That if a mangrant an An-
nuitie to another, To haue and
to take to him and his Heyres
for terme of anothers life, if
the Grantee die, &c. That after his
death his heyre fhall haue the An-
nuitie during the life of Celuy aque
vie Ge. Quart dc ifa maieris.


le⸗


Lib.3. Of Warrantie. Se. 740.741.
€ [£04 oye vnreaſon. Hereour Student is taught after the ex⸗


ample of our Duthoz,to obferue eucrp thing that (g worth the nosing,


€ Siva home leffa terres a un auter dre. This cateis without que:
fion , (q) Cit the bepac of the Leſſee thatl haue the land to pocacntan Decupant, And fo (t
ts (ag Littleton herefapth) incafe of an Annuitie, 02 of any other thing that lieth in ant,
Swhercof there can beno Dccupant, Andot this fomcsobat hath bene fapd tn the Chapter of


Diſcents.


€ Es lou tícl
M Leaſe ou
é»ant eft fait a on
home et ates heires
purterme dang, cti
ceft Cale Ibcire le
Lefice ou le Grantee
naucra bnques aps
là mont le Leſſee, ou
le Grantee ceo que
eft iint leffe ou
gtant, pur ceo que eft
chattelreal, et chax
teur realx per F com-
mon Lep bicndza al
Crecutogs del gran:
tee, ou del Leſſee, et
nemp al heyze.


Sed. 74.0.


Vt where fuch
Leafe or Grant is
made to a man and to
his heyrsfortermeof
yeares ; In this cafe
the heire of the Leffee
or the Grauntee fhall
not after the death of
the Leffee or the gran-
tee haue that which is
fo let or granted , be-
caufe it is a Chattel re-
all,and Chattels realls
by the Common Law
fhall come to the Exe-
cutors of the grantee,
or of the Leflee, and
notto the Heire.


€ Gre is a generall
HH tate eha-
i tels realls ag Del
as Chattels perfonalig (bail
motto the Executoꝛs o2 Ads
miniftratozs ef the Mette,
anb not to bis heyzes. Foꝛ
as @ftates e£ Inheritance of
Frechoid diſcendible fpall gos
tothe hepze, fo Chattelis, ag
Swell reall ag perfonail , (ball
goe to tbe Crecutors oz Ad⸗
mintftratozs, — .

(r) But tl the Kugs Ges
nant by iknights ſeruice in
Capite be feifco ofa Mannoꝛ,
hereunto an Bouoswfon ts
appenbant;ano the charch bee
come bopb, tbe Tenant dieth,
bis hepae Mithin age.the king
Hall pꝛeſent to ehe Church,
anb notthe Œrecutw oz Ad⸗
minifératoz: but (£ tbe land
be holden ok Œormmon Per⸗
fon, in that Cafe the Execu⸗
to? (ball prefent, and not the
@ardetn.


(C) FE a Withop hath a tard faine and bíctb, the King Hall not bane the toard voz the
Duccefloz, but the Executor, and the toard {ball be Pets in bis hands. Do it is of Heriot,
Reltefe, and theltke. (t) But (fa Church become topo tn thelife of a Withep, and forematn
bntill after bis deceafe, the ting fball prefent thereunto, and not the Crecutos oz Damtutftras
$02, fo? nothingcan be taken fo; à pzefentment, and terefoge (t is no aſſets.


€ 7 Cemenafcungs

cafes il poit

eftte, que co-
ment que bn collate-
tall Garrantte Coít
fait en fee, ac, bn-
ce tiel Garvan:
tte poit c(tt Defeat, et
anient, Sicome te-


Set, 741.


Ate in fome cafes

itmay be, That
albeit acollateral war-
rantie be made in Fee,
&c. yet fucha War-
ranty may be defeated
and taken away: As
if Tenant in Tayle
difcontinue the Tayle


€ ET merui fans If-
Jue, &c. Pere

(as before in this Chapter
hath beene noted) the Colla⸗
terall warrantie doth difcend
bpon the Iſſue in Cayle, bez
foie anp right doth diſcend
bnto him. Soberetn this Dt-
terfitie tg to bee obferucd:
where the vight ts in cf
in anp of the Bneeftoze of the
bepze, at the time of the vif
cent


388


(q)17.B.3.48.18.64. 3.12.
I1. H. 4.42.7. H.4. 46.
$.H.4.1 5. Dy.8.El.2ç3.
18. H,8.3.37.H.8, 21. H. 8.
tit Eflates Br, 59.19.E4.3-
Wt. Account 56.33.48. p.17»
22.H.6,33. 33.8.3. 37.
Vid. Sek. 387.


15.E.3.f. AG-88. 11.6. a8
1e El. D5.27 €.


)24. E. 3. 26.
F.N.B.3 3-6. F.N.2.34.0.


(Lf) 40 Ed 3.14.
(05. 6.8. 11,3.4.7,


V.Se8.7c7.


Lib.


(6) 7.E.3.48. 30.H.8,42.


(vr) Lt. Y for.
Arebers cafe.


(y) Temp: E.1. ‘Dencher 296.
3104013. 23.4736.
41..4[ 6. 33. E.3. tit.
Gur. 94. (sb. 16.0.07.

E. Seymeri eafs.


(93 45.8.3. 51: 21. 9.7.11.


Vrd.Sef,698.


(a) 21.84.26. 21.H.7.9.
3.H,7.4. 7. H. 4.17.

16. H.8.Dier 43.

3o. E.3.3o. 9.£.3.78.
4g. E.3. Veucher72-
F.N.B.135. 14.H.8.6,


Cap.
cent of the Collateral
$oarrentíc there albeit the
Warranty difcend fir, €
after the right doth dif:
cond. the € ollatcral war⸗
rantte (fall binde, as bere
inthis cafe of our Buthoz
€rpielp appeareih. ut
Sberetbe rightis not in
effc tn the hetre, oz any of
bis Anccozs, at the time
of the fall of the Swarrans
tte,there tt thal] not binde,
(u) Agif Lord and Ce=
nantbe; and the Genant
make a fcoffment in fe
with toarrantíe, andafs
ter the feofte purchafe
the Seigntozp, and after
the Œenant cefle,the 3020
ſhall haue a Ceflauit, for
a Warrantie Doth extend
to Rights pzecedent, and
heuer to anp right that
cCOmenceth after the tar:
rantp, whereot moze fhall
be fatd ín tbíg: Section.
Milo à toarranty ‘hail
neuer barre any cftate
that is in poffeffion, rec
uerlion o» remainder; that
tS net deueſted, vifplaced,
92 turned to a right be
fore, oz atthe time of the
fall of the tDarrantíc.
Cw) Fie a Leaſe fo? life
be made to the Father, the
remainder to bis next
hetre,the Father (s diſſei⸗
fco and releafeth Sith


Of V Varrantie.


nant en taíle Difconti-
nucle tatle en fee, et le
Difcontinuee eft Diflei-
fie,et le frere Del tenãt
en le taile releffa pet
fon fait a le diſſeiſor
tout fon dzoit, ac. oue
gatrantie en fce a mo-
rutt fans (fue, a le te=
nant en E tate ad iſſue
et Denice, o2e liſſue eft
bart De fon action per
fo1ce à collateral gar⸗
tantie difcendue fur
lup, mes ff ap2cs ceo
le Difcontinuec enter
fur le diffeifoz, Donque
poít lheire en te taile
auer bien fon action
De Formedon, ae, put
ceo que f garvantíc eft
aniente et Defeat, car
quát garranty eft fait
abn home fur eftate
que adonques il auoít,
fi leftate foít Ddefeate
le dacrantie et Dc-
feate.


Se. 7 41.
in fec, and the Difcon-
tinuee is diffeifed, and
the brother ofthe te-
nant in taille releafeth
by his Deed tothe Dif-
feifor all his right,é&c.
with warranty in fee,
and dyeth without if-
fue, and the tenant. in
taile hath iffue and die,
now the iffue is barred


of his action by force


ofthe collaterall war-
rantie defcended vpon
him. But if afterwards
the Difcontinuee en-
treth vpon the Diffei-
for, then may the heire
in taile haue well his
action of Formeden ee.
becaufe the warranty is
taken away and defea-
ted, for whena warran-
tie ismade to a man vp-
on an eftate which hee
thenhad,ifthe eftate be
defeated the Warranty
is defeated.


Warranty and dyeth, tbíg ſhall barre the heire, although the Warranty poti) fall, and the re⸗
mainder commeth tn effe atone time,


(Cy) FE there be Father anb Sonne, andthe Sonnohatha Rent fernice,fuitetoa Milt,
18 crit charge, Rent Sccke, Common of palture, oz other profit appzender ont of the land of
the Father, and the father maketh a Feoſfment in fee With Warranty, and dyeth, this ſhall
not barrethe Sonne of the 15 ent,common, 92 other profit appzender, quamuis clanfula fpecia-
lis warrantie vel acquictancie in cartis tenentinm,inferatur quia in rali cafu tranfit terra cum
onere: and be that ts in ſeiſin o poffellton need not to make anp Œntricoz Clatme: and albeit
the Sonneafter the Feoſfment with warranty, andbefore the death of the father had beene
diffetfed, and fo being out of poſſeſſion the Warrantic difccnded bpon Him, pet the Soarrantp
ſhould not binde him, becaule at the time of the Warrantic made, tbe Sonne Was in poſſeſſi⸗
on, (*). Syotf mp Collateral Anceftoz releafe to mp Cenant fer life, this fball nof binds
mp dB euerGon 02 Remainder, becaufc that the Reuerfion o? Remainder continued in me. Wat
if be that hath a Rent Common, oz any profit out of the Landin tafle,viMetfe the Cenant ofthe
land, and maketha feoffnent of the land, and warrant the land tothe Jrcoffec and bis beires,
(a ) regulatly the arrantp doth extend to all things iſſuing out of the land, that ts to fap,
to warrant the land tnfuch plight and manner,ag (t Wag at in the hand of the Feoſtor, at the
time of the Feoffment Sith warranty, and the Feoſtee hall bouche, ag of lands bífcbargeb of
the rent ac. at the time of the Feoſfment made. ;

. Bowman that hatha Bent charge in fee entermarieth With the Œenant of tbe anb, az
eftrauger releafeth to the Œenant of the Land with warrantte, be fball not take abuantage of
this fearrantic eyther by Goucher 02 Warrantia carte, foz the Wife, ik her hufband bfe, sz the
beíre of the Wife ituing the bafband,cannot hane an action foz the Rent bpona Title “a


Lib.3. Of Warrantie.


the warrantie mabe, oz tithe hetre of the wite bꝛing an Aſſiſe of Mordancefter, thig ation
ig grounded after the tarrantie, whereunto as hath beenc fatd,the Warrantie (ball not extend,

So it is t£ tbc Diantec of the Went grant it to the Œenant of the Land bpon condition,
which maketh a fcoffiment of the Land With marrantic , this Warrantie cannot extend totbs
Rent, albeit the feoffment Mas made of the Land difchargco of the Ment , foz tf the condition
bebgoken, and the @zantoz be íntítulco to an Acton, this muft of neceſſitie bee grounded after
the warrantie made,

Wat in the Cafe afozclaid, When the Woman Grantee of tbe Rent marricth With the Ces
nant, and the Œcnant maketh a feoffinent in fee with tDattantícanb dieth, (ti a Cui in vita
brought by the wife (as bp Law fhe map ) (b) the £coffee (ball bouche as of Lands difcharged
at the time of the warranty made fo? that ber title (s 39aramont;fo it tenant in taple of a Rent
charge purcbafe the Land, and makea feoffment with warrantie, tf the {lue bing a Formedon
of the Rent, the Cenant (ball bouche Caufa qua fupra.

5 *) Bat lome doc hold, that a man {hall not bouche, ec. ag of Land difcharged of a Kent
erutce,

(c) Bifo no toarrantte Doth extend bnto meere and naked Titles, ag bp force of a condit{on
With claufe of re-entrie, Exchange, Mortmaine, confent to the rauifbez and the like , becaufe
that £0 theſe no action Doth ite, and (£ no action can bee bꝛought, there can bec nettber Goucher,
ait of Warrantia cartz, noz Rebutter, and thep contínuc ín fuch plight and eflence ag they
were by their originail creation,and bp no Act can be bífplace oz deueſted out of thetr oztgtnall
c(Tence, and therefore cannot be bound bp any tDarrantíe, }

(d) And albeit a Woman map hane a tto2ít of Dower to recover her Mower, pet becaufe her
titicof Dower cannot be deueſted ont of the oztginalleflence , acollaterall toarranite of the
Buceltoz ofthe Homan Mall not barre her. Hott isof a fcoffment Caufa matrimonij prælo-
cuti.

(c) B warranty doth not extendto any Leaſe though (tbe foz many thoufand peares, o2 to
effates of Cenantbp Statute Staple, o2 Werchant,oz Elegit, oz anp other Chattic, but on⸗
ip to Freehold o2 Inheritances, ag ttappeareth in all Licrletons Wales Which hee puttech in
this Chapter. Bnd tbís is thereafon, that inall Actions Which Leſſee for peares may haue,
a Warranty cannot be pleadod in barre, ag ín an Action of Crefpafle, o1 bpon the Statute of
5.R.2. andtheltke. Wnt in thoſe Aatons When the Freehold oz 3inberitanceg doc come in
queftíon, there the toarrantp map be pleaded. Wut in ſuch Actions which none but a Genont
of the Freehold can haue, as opor the Statute of 8.H.6. Alife. o2 the like, there a Warrantie
map bepicaded in barre.


€ Quant Garantie esi fait aun home fur eflate, que adonques il auoit , fi


leflate (oit defeat , le Garrantie ef} defeat. Bere itappeareth, that al-
though a collaterali toarrantie bedifcended, (f) pet t£ the tate sobereunto the toarranty Was
aunered be defeated, albett it be by a mecre ftranger, (as inthis cafe that Littleton bere put by
the difcontinucc) the Warranty ig Defeated, and although the Difcontinuanceremame and no
remittcr Wrought to the hetre, pet the warrantie is defeated, and barre remoued, fo ag the iſſue
in taple may baue bis Formedon and veconer the Hand, Sublato Principali tollitur adiuncta.


Sedi. 742.


Setl.742.


€ E $3 mefine le manner eft, ſi

le Difcontinuee fait feof-
fement en fee, referuant a lup on
certaine rent, & pur Default de
payment bn re-entry, ac, a bn
collaterall Garrantp de ancetter
eft fait a celup feoffee Gad eftate
fur condition, ac, a mo2uft fang
iffue, coment que cel Garrantic
Difcender furliflue € taile vncore
ft apzeg le rent foit aberet id :


d the fame manner. itis if thé
difcontinuee make a feoffmét in
fee refetuing to him a certain rent,
and for default of payment a re-
entrie,&c.anda collateral warran-
tie of the Anceftoris madeto the
feoffee that hath the eftate vpon
condition, &c. and dieth without
iffue,albeit thatthis warranty fhall
difcend vpontheiffue intayle, yet
if after the rent be behind,and the
Fffff


389


(b) 7.H.4.15.


(*) 10.E.4.9.6. 18.E.3. 66
44. £.3.19.

(€) Lib. 10.fv.95.
E.Stymores cafe.

22.49 pl. 33. 31.4 ff: p.15.
41. Aff p. 6. 33-E. 3, garr.7 4.


(d) 34.E.3.fit.dreig 73.
21. E, 4.82.


(e) 31. E.418.82.
1.H.7.12.33. 11.H.7.18.16
126. H.7.3.5. 14.H.7.23,

43 E.3.25.per Finch.in
quar. Imp. 5. Hg. g.

Lib. 10.f5.97. 1


(E) 3.H.7.9.5. 16.8.3.
tit, Continuall (lame 16;
9.1.4.8, PI, Com.158.


Lib... Cap-.


Dilcontinuee entra ev la terre, a-
Donque auera liflue en taple fon
teconerp per bzícfe De Formedon,
pur ceo que le collaterall gattan-
tie eft defeat, Ct fffint (i afcun
tiel collateral gatvantp foít pled
enuers liffue en le taple, en fon
action De Formedon, il poit mter
le matter come eff auantdit , co-
nunt le garrantie eft Defeat, ac,
a iſſint il poit bien maintener fon
action, ac,


Of Warrantie.


Seti. 743.
difcontinuee enter into the Land,
then fhall the iffue in taile haue his
recouery by Writ of Fermedon,
becaufe the collaterall warranty is
defeated. And foifany fuch col-
lateral warranty be pleaded againft
the iffue in tayle in his action of
Formedon he may fhew the matter
as isaforefaid, how the warrantie
is defeated, 8cc. and fo he may wel
mayntaine his action, &c.


Gre Littleton pneteth another cafe bpon the fame ground and reafon, viz. £obere the
fate &obercunto the Warranty is annereb, (g defeated, there tbe Warranty te felfe
is Defeated alfo, hich ta onc of the marimes of the Common daw.


Sell. 743.


Cj Ten fé toi en taile fait bn
feoffment à fon oncle, a puis
luncle fait bti feoffment en fee o⸗
ueſq; garranty, ac, a bn autet, ct
puis le feoffee Del oncle enfeofta
averemaine luncleenfce, a puis
luncle enfcoffa bn eſtrange € fet
fans gatrantp a moꝛuſt ſauns iſ⸗
fue, tletenant vn caple mozutt, fi
iſſue en le tayle bople post fon bt
de Formedon, enuers leftrange à
fuitle Darrein feoffee , & ceo per
luncle,liffue ne ferra brique barre
per legarranty que fuit fait per
le oncle al Dit primer feoffee de
fon oncle , pur ceo quele Dit gar⸗
tantiefuit Defeat a anient, p ceo
queluncle à lup tepzift cygrand
eftatedefon primer feoffee a que
le garranty fuit fait, (ícome m̃ le
feotfce auoit Dc lup, €t la cauſe pᷣ
quele garranty eft aníent en ceo
cas.eft ceo, s. que (Ele gatrantp
eftoicrott en fa force, Dongs lunc£
open à lup meſm̃, Q ne poit
eftre,


A Lfoif Tenant intayle make a
fcoffmentto his vncle,and af-
ter the vncle make a feoffment in
fee with warrantie, &c. to another,
and after the feoffee of the Vncle
doth re-enfeoffe againe the Vncle
in fce, and after the Vncle enfeof-
fetha ftranger in fee without war-
rantie, and dieth without iffue,and
the Tenant in tayle dieth, ifthe if-
fue in tayle willbring his Writ of
Formedon 2gainít the ftranger that
was the laft feoffee, and that by the
Vncle,the iffue (hall not be barred
by the warranty that was made by
the Vncle to the firft feoffee of his
Vncle , for thatthe faid warranfie
was defeated and taken away be-
caufe the Vncle tooke backe to
him as great an eftate from his firft
feoffee to whom the Warranty

was made, as thefame feoffee had

from him. Andthe caufe why the

warrantie is defeated, is this, viz.

that if the Warrantie fhould ftand

inhis force,then the Vncle fhould


warrant to himfelfe whichcannot bee.


Bas


Lib.


Of Warrantie.


Sei. 744.


€ Ere Littleton putteth another cafe, Where a warranty map be defeated, as when the

Uncle taketh backe ag large an effate, ag he bad made, the warrantic (e defeated be=

canfe he cannot warrant land to himfeife, (g) Bnd fo ít ig (tbe Uncle bad made
the Warrantie tothe coffee bis heires and aflignes, and taken backe an effatc in fee, and after
ínfeoffco another, pet the warrantiets defeated foz that he cannot be alligneete bimicife, anda
man ali not regulary bouche bimfelfc as aſſignee of a fee umple, andthe Law Swill not fuffer
things inattle and bnpzofitable, Ch) And pet (£tbe father be infeoffed with warrantie to
Bin and his heires,the father tnfeofketh his heire apparant in fee ano dieth,he (ag tt hath been


faid) Hall bouch himfelfe, and the beire in bozow Engliſh bp reafon the act in Law determined


the Warrantie betweenc the Father and the Sonne,

(1) Mut ifa man maketha feoffment in fee With Warranty to the fcoffec his heires and af-
Rgnes, and the fcoffce re⸗enteoffeth the feoftor and hte wifc, o2 tbe fcoffoz and enp other ſtran⸗
aet, the Warrantte remapneth ſtill, oꝛ (£ tio Doe make a fcoffinent Sith warrantic to one arid
big heires and aflignes, anb the feoffec re-enfcoffe one of the feoffozs. the warrantie doth difa


Temapas,


CALA CEs ile feotfee

LV keloit eftate al
bnce pur terme De
bie,ou en tail, fauant
le reuerſion, ac, on
que tl fait Done en
taile al oncle, ou bn
leas pur term̃ De bie,
le remainder outer,
RC, enceftcasle gar⸗
vantíe net pas tout
oufterment  autent ,
meft eff mis en fut-
pence Durant leffate
que iuncle ad. Cat
apzes ceo que luncle
eft mot fang tflue,
&c, Donques celup en
lereuerffon, ou celuy
en le remainder bar=
reroit liffue en tatle
en fon beiefe De For-
medon per le collate-
tal gatrantp en tiel
cas,4c, Mes auter=
ment eft lou !uncle a=
uoit aurp graund e=
flare en laterre De le
keollee, a quele gar⸗


Seélion 744:


Vt if the feoffee

had made an eftate
to his vncle for terme
of life, or in taile, fa-
uing the reuerfion,&c.
ora gift in Tayle to
the vncle, ora leafe for
terme of life, the re-
mainder ouer,&c. In
this cafe the warranty
is not altogether taken
away, but 1s putin fuf-
pence during the eftate
that the vncle hath.
For after that, that the
vncle is dead without
iffue,&c.then he inthe
Reuerfion, or he inthe
Remainder fhall barre
the iffue in taile in his
writ of Formedon by
the collateral! warran-
tiein fuch cafe, &c.But
otherwife it is where
the vncle hathas great
eftate in the land of
the Feoffee to whom
the Warrantie was
made, as the Feoffee


FEECE 2


cp Vr terme de vie,


ou en taile. Bere
ít appeareth (k) that bp taz
king a (1) cafe fo2 life, 02a
gift in tatie, the Warranty ts
fufpended.

A man enfeofeth a wo⸗
man with warranty ; thep
íntermarrp and are (mplcaz
ded, bpor the default of the
bufban® the wife is recetued,
fhee thall bouche her hufband
fc. notwithitanding tbe
Warranty was put in fafs
pence. (m) Bnd foon the
other fide, f£ a Swoman in=
feoffe a man With warranty,
and thep tntermarrp and are
impleaded, the hufband fbail
bouch bimflelfe and bts Wife
by fozce of the fafo war⸗
tantp,

(n) An infant en ventre
fa mere map bee bouchen (f
od gine hina birth, and (£
tiot, fuch a one bette to the
tOarrantp, but be cannot be
bouche alone Without the
keireat the Common Law,
foz Proces (hall be pzefentip
awarded agatufé him.


€. ues eft mife en
Sufpence. (0) Œenant
in tatle maketh a feoffment
ín fee with Warranty, and
diſſetſeth the Wifcontinue,
and dpethfetfed, leautng afs
{ets to his (Tue, Some bolo
shat in reſpect of this ſuſpen⸗
ded Hparranty and es Es
ne


390


(g) Temps E, v. Voucher 266,
40:E,3.14. 44-€.3.38.
25-E.3.43.6. 16.E.3.68.
14.E.3.Vouch.106.
16.5.3, Voucher 87.
19.E.3.Vouchee 122.
17.E.3.73,74. 30. H.6,29.
(f) 4o. E. 3.14.4.


, 41,6,3.2 5.4.


(i) 11. H, 4.20.42.
17.E.3.47. 59. 18.€.3.56,
22.8. 3.46. 39. E. 5:9.


(Kk) 16. E.5. Voueh. 37.
44-E.3.38. 26.E. 3,56.

17 E. 3.47. 10.8.3.30.
12, E. 3. Counterple de veach 43
14.€,3.lbid.12

(1) 6.E.2.veush.2 57 .
3.£.3. Ibid. 101.

5. E. 3. ibid. 178. 18.2.3. 53.
14.E.3.vouch.109.
35.€.3.tbid.25. 43.8.3.7;
— ——
32. E. 3. Voucher 102.


(m) 4.E. 2. V etieber 34 3.546


(n) Temps E, v Gard. 153:
31, E-1.briefe 873.

B.E. 2,vétich. 237.
11.€.3.1bid.1 3.

ILE. 3.guarimp i88.
38.E.3.7-c 29.

41. E, 3.in dower,’

9.H.6,34. "Pl. (Com. Stewelli
cafe per.Saunders dr Browse


(0) 31.E.3.36.4.€7 P.
38.E.3.31. 44.€. 3:35
45.E.3.tifle 32.

44.E. 3 Mid. 3 1.

33° E. 3.fbid.4;


Lib.3.


Scl 713.708.


8. E, a Vouchor 337.


f e) 39. E. 3. Frfeitwe 30.


38.E.3.3 I. 3-E.4.25.
19. E, 4,2, T1. Com. 48 8. b.


(p) 8.€.2. Vencher 237.


Vid. 38.E. 3.39 b Simile,


(*) "Dare Hales cafe in
?Pl.(Cera.fo. 362.


(9) 8.E.3. Indiement 235.


(©) xg. E. Petition 3.


(ap-5.

iſſue tn tatle fall not bee ves
mitted, but that the Difcon-
tinne fball recoucr againtt
thciffucintaile, and he cake
abuantage of hig toarranty,


Of Warrantie.


Sed. 745.


tanty fuit fait, come hath himfelfe. Caufa
lefeoffee aucit D lup, petet. — —


Cauta patet.


{€ anp bebath, and after ín à Formedon bzonabtby the iſſue, the Difcontinnæ (hail barre his
ín refpect of the toarrantp and Alſets, avd fo eaery mans right ſaued.


€ O P releafe fait per


lay oue. garran-


ty. faote a Warran⸗
tp grounded open a Releale.
Hereot pon fball rcabc before
in this chapter,

¶ Sort attaint de fe-
lony, ow vilage, dre.
Note accogding to Littleton
bere, there be two manner ef
Attainders, the onc tg after
apparance, andthat in thre
manners, bp Confellion, bp
Battell, o? bp Qicrotd, the
other vpon Hꝛoces to be
Outlawed, whichigan Drs
tainderin Law, ut (ag
bath bene fato ) there is a
great ptuerfitíc, ag tothe toꝛ⸗
fetture of and, bet weene an


Seël.745.


Cyan à luncle
TE feoff-
ment fait oue gat-
rantie, ou releaſe fait
per luy oue gatranty
foít attaint de felony,
ou btlage De felony,
tiel collateral qat-
rantie ne barreẽ my,
ne greeuera liffue en
le taile, put ceo que
per le attainder De fe-
lonie, le fanke eft coz=
tupt enter cup, ac,


Lfo if the vncle

after fuch feoff-
ment made with war-
rantie, or a releafe
made by him with
warrantie , be attaint
of felony, or outlaw-
ed of felony,fuch col-
laterall warranty fhall
not barre nor grieue
the iffue in the taile,
forthis that by theat-
tainder of felony, the
blood iscorrupted be-
tweene tbem,&c.


Attainder of felony bp Outlawꝛy bpon an Dppeale, and bpon an 3inbítement : £oz (m the
cafeof an Appeale, tbe Defendant hall forteit nolands, but fuch ag he had at the t(me of the
Dutlawzp pronounced, but in cafe of Inditement, ſuch as he had at the time of the felonp
commitced, and the reafon of thie dinerfity is euident, foz that in the cafe of Bppeaie there i¢
no time alledaed in the tiD2tt Loken the felonp I 19 done, and therefoze of neceflitie te muſt relate
ín that cafe onlp to the iudgement of the Datiawzp: butin the cafe of 3Inbitement. there tea
certaine time alledged, and therefoze in that cafe (t (ball relate to the tte alledged in the In⸗
ditement when the felonp was committed, Wut in the cale ofthe Inditement there tg alfo a
bíucrfitie tobe obſerued, (o) for ag hath bæncfain, it halt relate to the time alledged in che
Inditement £02 ayopding of citates, charges, and incambzances, made by the Felon after the
telonp committed, but forthe meane profits of the landit Mall relate onip to tie tadgement,
afWeil in this cafe of 3Dutlatozp ag in otber cafes. And wbere Littleton faith, ( Attaint de
felony )tfa man be conwiced of felonp bv berdia, and deltuercd to the Mzdtnary to make
aDurgation ( p) ye cannot be boucher, £o2 that thettme of bts pargation ( it any fbonib be )
ts bncertoínc, and the Demandant canet be delayed bpon fucl an bncertaíntíie, but the Gee
nant és not without remedy, for bc map baue his Wairantia carte.


¶ Attaint. DE this word hath beene fpoben tn the fecond baoke
tu tbecbapterof. Willenage.

Upon feucrall Attainders of Felonpes, there lye three fencrati wꝛits of Œfcheate,viz:
(*) ic, Mben he bath tudgement ro be hanged. S econblp , When bec tg ontlawed, Chirdlp,
Shen he abíurctl) the Kealme.

(a) Ghe Defendant in an appeale of death did Wage battatle, and Wag flaine th the field,
pet Judgement as giuen that he ſhould be hanged, and tbe Juſtices ſaid, that it (c altoges
thernecellarp, that {uch a Judgement be giuen, fo otbertotfe the 3,020 could not haue a matt
9f Eſcheate. (Cr) Andin irc it hath bene fene, that a man hath beene attaínteb after
big death by prefentinent,te. The difference betweene man Attainted and Conuided (9,
tbata man is laid Conute befeze hee hath iudgenent, ag if a man bee connie bp Confeflion,
eric, 02 Recreancy, And When be hath his iudgement bpon che Verdi, —— 03

ecreancp,


Lib.3. Of Warrantie. Seë.74s.


Kecreancp; or bpon the Outlawꝛp, o2 Pbinration, thenis be falo to be Attaint, And thas
ig the Law taken at this dap, not withſtanding (1 ) fome dtuerficie of opinions in our bokes.
It à Felon beconuiced by Verdict, Confeilion, of Recreancy, be dorh forfett his gods and
chattelis,tc, paclentig, (t) Foꝛ where a reafon hath beens yeelded in our bokes, that the pꝛay⸗
ing of bts Clergie, Was a refulall of the iudgement of the Lawe, anda flight tn Law, and toz
- that caufa he Cozfeiteo bis gods and chattelis, that doth not hold, for tf a tan bee Conuict of
pettic treafen, of murder, 02 anp other Crime £o» Which he cannot hauchis Clergte, pet by the
bery Conuicton he fozfeiteth his qavs and cbattellg before Bttainder, Bnd (u) Stanford
( fpeahing of a Felon conute bp Werdict) fatth,that he ſhall foztcit his gods, which he bad at
thctime of tbe Werdiet given, which ts the conuiction in that cafe,and by the Statute of 1,R 3,
cap-3. no Sherite, Wayplife,zc. (ball {etfe the gods ofa felon before he bec conutaed of the
fclonp, hereby it appeareth, that the gods map befetfedas forfeit after conuiction. Bnd the
(x) oto Htatute ts Worthp of noting, Prouifum eftin curia noflra coram Iufticiarijs noftris
quod decetero nullus homo captus pro morte hominis vel alia felonia pro qua debet imprifona-
ri, diffeifictur de terris & tenementis vel catallis fuis quoufque conui&us fuerit. So ag bp a
conuiction of a Felon, bis gods and cbattells ave fosfeíteo , but bp Ættainber, that ts bg
{udgement giuen, his Lands and Tenements arefozferted, andbts blob coꝛrupted and not
before.

Cy) Bethe partie bpon his Brraignement refule to anfiver according te La, ox fap noz
thing, be ſhall not be adiudged to be hanged,but £o? big contempt;to patne tort & duic, Which
Sworke no Attainder foz the felony, noz forfeiture o£ bis lands oz cozrupttor of blood. But in
cafe of high treafon t£ the party refufe to anſwer accozding to Law, o? fap nothing, hee {hall
baue fuch tudgement bp attainder, ag ££ he bad bene conutdeo by Verdict o2 confefiton.


€ Felony. (*) Ex vi termini fignificat quodlibet capitale crimen fel-
leo animo perpetratum, (n hich fence murder ts fafo to be done per feloniam, and is fo appzo-
puated bp La, ag felunice cannot be ecpzefled bp anp other woꝛd. (a) And in ancient chines
this $0610 (felonice) was of fo large an crtent ag ít incinded High treafon ; and therefore fn our
ancient bœkes, bp the pardon of all felontes, high treafon, o2 counterfeiting of tye great
Seale, andof the tings cone, ec. Was pardoned. (b) Wut afterwards tt Was refolucd, that
th the Kings Pardon 0? Charter, this 50020 ( felony ) fhouid onlp extend to common fc»
lonpes, and that high treafon ſhould not be comprehended buder the fame, and therefore ought
to be fpecíallp named, And pet that a pardon of all felonpes ſhould ertend to petite treafon,
Swherefore bp the Law at this dap vnder the woꝛd (Felony) in comméflons.ec. íg included
Petite treafon, Murder, Homicide, burning of boules, Wurglary, Robbery, Rape.ac,
Chancesmedly, (e defendendo, and petite Larcenp, (c) Foꝛ fucb of tbefe crimes fox the htch
anp (ball bauc this tudgement to be hanged bp the necke till be be dead, bee ſhall fozfett all hig
lands ín fe fimple,and bis gos and chattells: fer Felony by chance⸗ meddly 02 fe defendendo,
or petite Larceny, be (bali fosfcít bis gods and chattelis, and no lands of any eftate of frebolp
92 ínberítance. Bnd all kelonyes punifhable according to tbe courte of the Common Law, are
either by the Common Law, 0: bp Htatute, Œbercisalloa Felony puntlhable bp che Cte
nill Law, becaufe it (s done bpon the high Sea, as 39 pzacte, Wobberp, o2 Murder, Swbercof
the Common Law dtd take no notice, becaufeit could net be tried bp twelue men, FF this
39 pzacp betrped befoze the Loyd Admirall in the Court of tbe Aomiraltte accogding tothe Ci⸗
till Law, andthe Deltnquents there attainted, pet (ball (t wozke no cozruption of biwd, nos
forfetture of his lands, otherwiſe tt ig tf be be attatuted before Commiſſioners bp fozce of the
Statute of (d) 28.H.8. Wy theerprelle puruieu of that Statute about thé end of the ratgne
of Dune Elizabeth certaine Englith Dprate that had robbed on the Sea, Merchants of Ve-


(0) 40.E.3.12, 3 E. 3.
Corone 365. 8.£.3,1bid,293s
21.4.7.


(t) Dame Hales cafe,
Vbs fnpra. 8.4.4.2, \


(4) Sranf.Pleor.fo.192,
Lib. 5 fo. Y vo Foxleys caf.
Vid.z.H.4 41.

14,3. Edge


(x) Statute de casalis fla.
nS ver Magna Carta,
£0.66. 3.part.


(y) Stanf.Pl.C@.13.9.185.


(") Glaenill, lib. 1 4 4.05,
Merlbr. ca.25.W. 1.58 15.
(a) 3-E 4.14. 18,E.4.10;
23.49 49. 1. . 3.13,
Stanf.'Pl.Cor.193.E.

Stonf Pl.Cor. i02. B,

8 H.4.a.

(b)2aAfiag,


(c) Stanf prar.45-b,
16.E,3.Coron. 116.4"
3E,3 Corea. 302.


(a) 38.48.6815.


niccin amity With tbe 3D mene being not knowne, obtained a Coponation pardon, Wherebp -


amongt other things the Thing pardoned them all felonies. It Wag (c) refeluco bp all the
Fudges of England bpon conference and aduifement that this vid not pardon the 39 pzacp, foz
fring it was no felony wbercof the Common Law twke Conufance, and the Statute of
28.H.8, did not alter the offence, but oxdaine a rrpall and fnfita punt(bment, therefore tt onght
to be pardoned fpccíallp, oz by woꝛds Swbich tant amount, and not bp the general name of
Felony, and according to this rcfolutíon the deltriquents Were attatnted and erecuted,

Pirata cOmeth of the $9020 «gw: Which ignífieth at over at (ea, Attainder of berefie 02 Prx-
munireMozket h nocozruption of blod;noz hereſie foꝛteiture of lands, but in cafe of Premunire
fozfeiture of lands in fee fimple, but not of lands in tatleag formerly hath bene fat. (f ) Bp
fome Statutes it ig faid, Sur forfeiture de corps & deauoire, 02 Sub forifla@ura omnium qux
in potcftate fua obtinet, 02 to beat the Rings Will, bedp, lands and gods, and the like, thefe
are not extended tothe loffe of life oy member, but toímpzífonment;lanbg and gods. (2) But
i£ an Act of Parliament faith, Ecit iudgement de vie & member, 02 fubeat iudicium vitz vel
membrorurr, in that cafe iudgement of death fhall beatuenag in cafe e£ felony,viz, that be be

. jr tft£ 3 hanged


(€) Hill.2.Ie/R egts«


Wid. Michin.& SEZ. —
Dier 141.
14.Elig /Dier 308.


(€) Statuto de Afagna mes ^
acta tempere £y,

35. E.1. de Carisfle

20. F.3 «4.4.

(g)W.2.Ca. 34. Ror. Parka,
15.6.1. 1.2.2.defrang,
priienam., 14.E, 3.045. 10e
Stanf.Pt. Coren.30.31.
3-8.3.( ovow.1 53.
Breoke ste. ('oren.303,

9: 8.4.26.


ar b

Lib.
(h) Braft.li.4,fo.248.
48.E.3,3. 13. R. 3.04.2. Ror
Parl. 31. Ric. 3.08.19.1.H.4-
914.13. H.4. 4. & $:37. H.6
21. Rorul. Parl. 8. R. 2. nm. 31.
Fortefe ca, 33.Ret. Par. 2. H«4
74-11. H. 4.24.30. Hem.6.6.
Staaf Tl. Cor. 65. Stat de
vAffignas. 4. B. y. Br. ( 0r. 196.
Ret. Par, 3.H.6. nM 9. Rot.
"Tur, 5H. 4. nu. 39. "Ret-V aft,
9. H. 4,nu. t 4.8, N.6. nu. 38.
31. E, 4.17.5. Catojby. 1o. Hy
D Vanafor. 18. E, 3. Quar imp.
175 6.E. 3.41. afe. 14. E. 3.
in Scac.te Cunt. de Kents safe.
P:39.Ed,3.cor.Reg. Ret.49.le
Count.de Lane.caf:,Rot. arl.
28. E. 3. me 8.) Mortimers caf^.
Rer.Parl.18.E.3.nu.13. Le
Contes de Arundels cafe.
© Sranf.li. 3, Pl. (Cor. 19 6.5.
27. E.3.77- 13. H.4.8.
P.Lir.b,1.inthe (bap, of
Dover.


Ma7.€.3.77.1.E.3:4.6.Ë.3,
55:9.H,5.9.31.E.1.Difronr,
17. 46. E. 5. Petit. 20.36.4/7 2
49. ff. 4« 39. 4f. 11.13. H. 4.
8. 11. H.7.17. Pl Com jn.
Walfiagbams cafe o 3.€« 2. Dif
vent. Br.64. Stanf. Pl.Cor.19 §
196.See inthe (Chapter of Te-
gant by the (urtefie , tenching
this matter


(Caps.


Of V Varrantie;


Set. 7 46.


hanged by tbe neche till he be Dead, andcenfequentlp bis blond ts coꝛrupted, Cas our Authout
here faith) and fail forfeit as (n cafe of Felonie.

Ch) herets alfoa Court of the Conftabic and MW arfhall, Whe baue C onufarccot Con-
tratts, of Dedes of Brmes, andof Warre out of the Wealme, and allo of things touching
Sarre Within the Reaime, whtch map not be determined 02 diſcuſſed by the Common Law,


and alfo all 2 ppeales of offences done out of the Ke


€, and thep proced accogding to the


Ciuile Lac : but tbefe things moze pꝛoperly pertaine fo another kind of Œreatile, and therg=
fore 3 (wall fpeake no moze thereof (n this place, but onelp forthe ſatiſtacion of the ſtudious
reader, to quotefome Anthozities of La touching the turifdicion of that Court,that je map


haucfome taff thereof,


In the ſame manner (t ig {€ aman be attaínteo of High Creafon,the toarrantie is alfodes


feated,


¶ Le fanke eff corrupt enter eux cc. *Aptiy (8 aman fapD to be ats
tainted, attinus, fo that bp big attatnder of Œreafon oz Felonichis blond is fo ftaincd and
cozrupted, as fir, bis Cbhildzen cannot be bepzes te him noz to anp other Aunceltoz, and
therefoze the tDarranttecannot bind, £oz therebp hepzes oncly ate to be bound,
Secondly, FE be Were noble 02 gentle befoze, he and all big chtlozen and pofkeritic are bp
thia Attainder made bale and ignobie, tn refpect of any Nobilitie o2 Gentric Which they hav


b» their birth,


Chirdly, This corruption of bloud ts fo high, thatrequiarlp it cannot bee abfolutelp falte
but bp authozitie of Darltament ; Bil which iz (mplieo in thefame ( &c.)


€ [LE iffae in Tayle

poet enter And
thereafon is, Foꝛ that by the
attaínber of the father, ítíg
now tn iudgment of Law bnt
& releafe without toarrantic,
£oz albett the toarrantp at the
time o£ the ieleafe Swag cfz
fectuall, pet itwozketh no dif:
continuance vnleſſe it diſcen⸗
deth vpon the 3 (fuc in Gayle,
fo ag (f ít be defeated, extinct,
92 Determined (n tbe life of tbe
tenant ín Caple, then no diſ⸗
continuance ts wꝛought: ano
foit is (£ Cenant in Cayle
hath Iſſue, and releafeth to
the Difllcifoz with toarrans
tic,and after (g attainted of fe-
loníe, and after obtatneth big
Pardon and dteth, the Iſſue
in Catle map enter ; * foꝛ the
Pardon doth not refkoze the
Wloude, ag to the tare
rantpnoz maketh tbe Iſſue
th that cafe inheritable te the
warrantie. Wut if the Iſſue
ín Tatle tn that cafe had ben
attainted of Felonie tn the
life of big father, and obtat=
ned his Charter of pardon,
and then bis father bad died,
the iſſue cannot enter into the


Setl.746.747.


¶ T Gem ( Tenãt

en Œaile fort

Diffeifie , et pus
fait veleafe al Diſſei⸗
fo4 oue Garrantie en
fee, et puis le Tenãt
en taile eft attaínt,
ou btlage De felonie,
et adiffue ct moautt,
en ceft cafe liflue en
taíle poct enter fur le
Diſſeiſoꝛ.Et Ia caufe
eft, put cco que rien
fait Difcontinuance €
ceft cafe fosfque le
®arvantie, et at:
rantie ne poit Difcen-
bet al Iſſue en taple,
pur ceo que le fanke
eft cozrupt perenter
celup que fift le Gar⸗
rantie et Flue en


Taille,


A if Tenant in

Tayle bee diffei-
fed, and after makea
Releafe to the Diffei-
for with Warranty in
Fee, and after the Te-
fant in Taile is attaint
or outlawed of felony,
and hath iflue & dieth;
Inthis cafethe Itſue in
Taile may enter vpon
the Diffeifor : and the
caufe is,for this, That
nothing maketh Dif-
continuance in this
cafe butthe warranty,
and warranty may not
difcend tothe Iffue in
Taile,for this, that the
bloud is corrupt. be
tweenc him that made
the Warrantie,and the
Iſſue in Tayle.


Sect.


Lib.5.


Of Warrantie.


Sect.747.


« (CAT Gartátp

* touts foits
demurt a E Common
Ley, etiaCommon
Ley ek, Que quant
home ef attaint ou
btlage De Felonte,
quel btlagarie eft bn
attainder en Ley,
quele fanke perenter
iup et fon fits, et
touts auters queur
ferra Dits fes hetres
ctt cozrupt, tint que
tieng per difcent poit
diſcender a aſcun q


pott eftre Dit fon bte


per le Common Ley,
Œt la Feme De tiel
home que í(fínt eft
attaint de felonie, ne
ferra iammes endow
de les Tenements
fa Baron iflint at⸗
taint, Et la cauſe eft
pur ceo que homes
pluis eſchuerent de
fait aſcuns felonies.
Mes liffue en Caile
quant ales @ene-
ments taples nef
pag en tiel cag bar,
put ceo que eft enbe-
tit per fozce De le
Statute, et nemp p
le courte de Common
Ley, et pur ceo tiel
attainder De fon pier
ou De fon anceftor en
le apie, ne lup
oufter bc fon Droit p
fozce De lc taile ac,


Or the Warrantie
alwayes abideth
at the Common Law,
and the Common law
is fuch, That when a
manis attaint or out-
law'd of felony,which
Outlawrie is an At-
tainder in Law , that
the bloud betweene
him and his fonne, and
all others which íball
be fayd his heyres, is
corrupt , fo that no-
thing by difcent may
difcéd to any that may
bee faid his heyre by
the Common Law:
And the wife of {uch
a man that is fo attaint
fhal neuer be indowed
of the Tenements of
her husband fo attain-
ted. And the caufe
is, For that men
fhould more efchew
to commit Felonics.
But the Iffue in Taile
as to the Tenements
tayled is not in fuch
Cafe barred, becaufe
he is inheritable by
force of the Statute,
and not by the courfe
of the Common law:
Andtherefore fuch at-
tainder of his Father
or of his Aunceftor in
the Taile, fhall not put
him out of his Right
by force of the Taile,
&c.


Se2.746 747.


Land in refpec of thecozraps
tion of bloud bpon the Bre
tainder of bimfeife, (h) Bud
it ig a generall rule, Chat
hauing refpet to ail thofe
Whoſe blond was coꝛrupted
at the tine o£ che attatnder,
the Pardon pott) not remoue
thecorruptionof Wloud neis
ther bpward noz Downward,


As (£ therebce Grandfather, <


father, € fon, t tbe. drandfas
ther and father baue diners
other fonnc$, tf the father bee
attatnted of Felonte and pars
doned, pet Doth tbe bloud rez
maine coprupted not onclp
aboue him and about him,
but alfo to all bis chilozes
bomne at the time of his attatn=
ber, 25ut (n the cafe of Lit-
tleton, (€ Cenant in Gaíle at
the time of bis attainder had
no Iſſue,e after the obtaining
of his pardon had tue, thar
Iſſue ſhould bane bin bound
bp the warrantie, fox bp the
pardon be was ag a new creas
ture, Tanquam filius terre,
Sbofe blond bpwards vez
maine coꝛrupted, but for the
FJ iuchad after the Pardon,
bets inberitable to bis Fa⸗
ther,and (£518 father bad Iſ⸗
fue befoze the 35arbon, and
bao iſſue alfo after and dicth,
nothing can difcend to the
poungelt , fo? that the cibcft
{8 lining and Difabled. But (f
the elocft fonne bad died tn
theitfe of the father Without
Fue, then tbc pongeft ſhouid
inherit.

@ Le Garrantie de-
murt al Common Ley,
“he Collateral toarrantte
ts not reſtrained bp the Sta=
tute of Donis Conditionali-
bus, buta lineal toarrantic
tg reltratned bp the Statute,
vnleſſe there be 2 etg as Fo:
merlp at large path beene layd.

€ Zt la Feme de
tiel home que ißint eff at-
taint, Orc. ne ferra iam-


mes endow, cre. It is
to be obferued, Chat the tudg⸗
ment againft a man foz felos
nie; i8, Chat becbee hanged
bp the necke vntil be be bead,
bnt implicatiue, (ag hath bin

fapo)


392


(h) Braf li, s.a. 13? 133.
276 & li. 5.354. Brit. f. 216.
6, Eler.li, 1.08.28,


y ave el RE


Vi.SeH-711.715.


Lib.5.


(i) $E. 3.14. 9. E. 3.22.
(K )7.H. 4.33.19. H.6.71.
Sec Lit li. 1.ea  Dow.d edd. 55


(1)26.H.8.ca. 13.33. H.8.
ca. 30. $E, 6.c&. 11.


(m)Sresf. Pl. Cor.195.


(m) LE, 6.ca. 13. 5. E.G. 11
S.El.ca 1.47 v1. 18.Eb. 66, 16
12 H3. V. Sell.s 5.

(0) 6. H. 4.1.45. £. 3. V owob.
73. Pl. 9m.2 92. 16. Edw. 3.
Age 46.18 H. 3 V ench. 281.
23.6.3 Garr.77. ;

See inthe Chapter of Villenag
544,109.


*


Vid Lth.8 fa.t € 3.054.
Althams Cafe. 46.E.3.2.
45.E.3.23. Vid. beforein the
Chapter of Releafer.$e8. 508


(4 ) M pl. *
3 EliQ, Dyer. 188.9. F4. $275


Cap. Of Warrantie. Scl. 748.


fapd) he is puntthed fitt in bis Life, Chat the ſhall loſe her Dower. Secondly, An his chil⸗
bcn, Chat thep (ball become bafe and ignoble, ag hath bene fapo, Chirdly, Chat hee (all
lofc his pofteritic, fox his blond is ftained and cozrupted, that they cannot inherit onto binroz
anpotber Auncettor. Fourthly, Chat he ſhall foztcít all his lands andtcnements Which hee
hath in Fes, and which he hath tn Œaple, foz terms of biglife. Bnodfiftip, Pil his Gods anb
Chattels. And thus fenerc it was at the Common Law, and the reafon bercof was , That
men fhouid feare to commit Felonie,Vt poena ad paucos,metus ad omnes perucniat. Bud tt tg
trulp fapd, Etfi meliores fent quos ducit amor,tamen plures funt quos corrisittimor. Bnd fo ft
tg à fortiori (t cafe of igh Creafon, Wut fomc Acts of Paritament bauealtereb the Com⸗
mon Law in fome of thefe popnts: Sivit, Wy the Statute of Donisconditionalibus, Landg
intatied were not fozfeited neither foz Felonie noꝛ fcr Ereafon , but forrheltfeof Œenant tn
Taple: This Ac was nade bp ting Edw. the firfk, Who (ag our Bokes (i) fpeake) Wag the
moft fage sing that euer was : (k)and the caufe Wherefore thie Stat.Wag made, Was to pre-
ſerue the Inheritance tn the bloud ofthemto Whom the gift Mags made, notiwith{tanding any
attatnder of Felonte or Creaſon. And this Ac in Hiſtoꝛte ts called Gentilium municipale,
Sor that bp this Ac the families of many Noblemen € Gentlemen Were continucd g pzeferuco
to thetr pofterítícs. Bnd this Law continued in force fromthe thirteenth pere of Ling Edward
the firft, vnttll the CL) twentte Girth peare of Ring Henric tbe eighth, when bp Act of 33arlia-
ment Œftates in Œatle are forfeited by attainder of high Œrcafon. Wut ag to Felonies
Cbercof our Authoz hevefpcaketh) the Statutesf Donis Conditionalibus both pet remaine
tn foace, fo ag foz attainder of Felonte Lands 02 Tenements entatled are not forfeited, but on⸗
Ip (as hath bœnc fapb ) during the life of Cenant in Gayle, butths Fnheritance ts paeferucb
foy the Flues.

(m) The wife of a man attaintedof high Creafon o2 petit Creafon, (hall not bee recetucd
todemand Dower pnilefle (t be in certatne cafes fpecíallp proutded for. Wut the Wife of a per-
fon attaínteo of MifpziGonof & reafon, Murther, 02 Felonie, is dowable Fnceout Buthoz
Wrote, (n ) bp the Statute in that cafe made and pꝛouided, Which ts moze fauourable to the
Woman than the Common Law was.

(^) FE a Detgniorie be granted With Warrantie, and the Œcnancie efcheate, the Seig⸗
ntozle hereunto the warrantie Was anneredts extinc,and confequentip the toarranty defea=
ted, and it ſhall not extend to the Land, & ficin fimilibus.

Fea Collateral 29unceftoz releafe With Warrantie, an enterínto Religion, now the war⸗
ranty doth bind ; but (£ after he be deraigned, now tt (8 defeated.


Setl. 748.


€ Ï Ittleton Dating fpos
.4 ken in what Œafeg
Warranties map be
defeated and extinguiſhed by
matter in Law; now fe ſhew⸗
eth how a to arrantíe map bee
difcharged 02 defeated bp mat=
ter (11 Deed: and bereupon he
putteth an example of a Re⸗
leafe in 2 fenerall manners:
Firſt, Wy a releafc of ail
yO arranties.
Hecondlp, Wy a Weleale of
all Couenants reall.
And thirdly, Wy a Releale
of ail Demands,
Ca) 3f aman makea gift
in Tatle with Warranty,tiis
tWarrantte is alfo intaplen,


» andtherefosea 1B cleafe mane


bp Genant in Gayle of the
toatrantie,fhal not bar the tf
fue,no moze than his TR cleafe
thal bar the iſſue to bzing an at
taint pon a faille verdict,o7 a
Gozit of ertoz bpd an crontoug


«LT Cem Cenant
enic @aile en-
feoffa fon Wins

cle,t quel enfeoffa bn

auter en fee oue garẽ
ac, (Lapse fecoffeep8
fait releſſa a Uincle
touts manners Des
garranties,ou touts
manners De Œouc-
nants real, ou touts
manners dedbes, p
tiel Keleaſe le Gar⸗
rantie eft ectinct, Ct
fi le Garrantie en cel
cafe foit pleade en-
versie heire entaile,
que porta fon Bꝛiefe


de


Alt if Tenant in
Taile infeoffe his
Vncle, which infeofs
another in fee with
wart, ifafterthe feof-
fee by his Deed releas
to his Vncle all man-
ner of Warranties, or
all manner of Coue-
nants realls, or all
manner of Demaunds,
by fuch Releafe the
Warrantie is extinct,
And if the Warranty
in this cafe bee plea-
ded againft the heire
in Tayle that bring-
eth his writ of Forme-


Lib.


De Formeds f barrer
ie heire De (on action,
fi lheire auoit Ic Dit
tcicag 3 ceo pheDaft, il
Defetera le plee en
barre,zc, Ct mults
auters cafes et mat-
ters y font,p qux hoe
poít Defeater gar=


Of Warrantie.


don, to barrethe heire
of his action, if the
heire haue and plead
the faid releafe,&c. he
fhall defeat the plee in
barre, &c. and many o-
ther cafes and mat-
ters there be whereby
a man may defeate a
warrantie , &c.


508.748.


tnogement giuen againſt the
Father,noz vis gift can barre
the tilue of the Deve that
create the eſtate tatle, nop of
anp other Deede necellarp £02
Defence of the title,

€ Apres Le feoffee
releffa. Littleton here
puttethhi¢ cafe Xobere one ts
bound teWarrant : pat the
cafe (r) then that tio make
a Feoftment infer, and war⸗
rantthe land to the jreoffe


rantie, ac. and bis heires, and the Feot⸗
fee releafe to one of the Feoſtoꝛs the warranty, pet bee fbail touche the other £oz the moptte,
no fo tt fd if onctnfcoffe tino With warranty, and theone releaſe the warrantp, pet the o⸗
ther {hall bouch fo» his moptíe,


€ Sileheire anoit le dit releafe cc. Pere tt appeareth that the ve-
leafe being made to the oncle being his Anceftog, the Deed doth after the deceale of the bncle
belong to him, and therefore he cannot plead it, vnleſſe he ſheweth (t forth,


d Et mults auters cafes & matters y font per queux home poet defeater


garranty, &c. AS namely bp aDefealance, ag other things execu⸗
tojpmay. Bifoa Warranty may lofe his fozcc op taking benefit of the fame. In à Pracipe
the Œenant toucheth, and at the Sequaturfub fuo periculo, tbe Cenant and the Ui ouchee make
default, Whereupon the Demandant bath tudgement againt tbe Cenant. Bnd atterwards the
Wemandant brings a Scire facias agatnft the & enant to haue Execution tn this cate the Cee
nant map bauea Warrantia Carte Ano tl inthatcafea franger bad brought a Pracipe as
gaint the Cenant,he míabt have vouehed againe, forbp the iudgement giuen againtt the Œe-
nant the warranty loft not bis force, but tf the Cenant had Judgement to recouce im balue
agaínft the Mouche, be (boulb neucr bouche agatne by reafon of that Warranty, becaufe bee
had taken aduantage of the Warranty, Andit to to be obferucd that vpon the proces of Som-
moneas ad warrantizandum, if the Sbertfe returne tbe Gouchee fusnmoned and he make De⸗
fanit, the Œenant ſhallhaue a Capias ad valentiam, but (f hereturne that the Touche had nos
thing, then after the (icuc alias & plures a fequatur fub fuo periculo fhall iſſue, and there if the
Touche make defanit, tbe & enant (ball not haue Judgement to reconer (n value, foꝛ hee Was
nener ſummoned, an tt appearctl) of 18 ecoz0 that he bath nothing, but tn the Capias ad valen-
tiam (ta; peareth that be had Bilets, and be had bene fummoned befozc, Wut (n fome fpectail
cafes there (ball be two recoucries tn value bpon one Warrantie. As (£a Difleifoz gine lands
tothe bufbandand Wife, and to tye heires of the hufband , the bufband alieneth in fee with
Warranty anb dieth, the Wife bringetha Cui in vita, the Cenant vouche and recoucteth (n bas
lue (£ after the death of the wife, the 3DilTcifee baing a Precipe againft the Aitenes, bec ſhall
bouch anb recouer tn balue agaíne,

(f) Soit is where the wife bringeth a ait of Dower againft the Pitenee hee fball reco⸗
uet in value, and after her death be (all recoucr in baluc againe, opon the fame roarrantte,

Bu the fame manner it ig t£a man beterfed of a rent by a deteaũble titie,and releafeth tothe
Tenant of the land all hig right inthe land, and Wwarranteth the land to him and bis heireg, (E
he be impleaded for the rent,be (ball bouch + recouer in baluefoz the rent, and it after De be im=
pleaded for the land, be (ball bouche and recover in balue againe Coz the lano: but inthefeand
the lite cafes, thereafon is in refpect of the feuerall eſtates recouercd, but for one and the fame
eftate he ſhall neuer recouer but once (m baluc, and though the land recouercb in bafue be ents
ted, pet fhalihe newer take benefit ofthat warranty after. And ag Warranties map bee
defeated in the Whole, fo thep may be defeated ag to part of the benefit that map be taken of the
fame, (029 hethat bath a toarranty map make a Defcafance net to take any benefit bp Wap
of Q1oncber: Bu the like manner that he hall take no abuantageby Swap of Warrantia Cartæ
8) b» wap of Rebutter. ‘


Gegsgg $ed.


393,


(1) 45.E.3.23


43-2.3.17. Pl. Comta
Brownings cafe,


(f) 45.€.3.Kouchergs.


(t) 7:46.43. 334 fT.
13.E.3.. Gars. 24.35.37.
33. H.6, $1. 8.8.7.6.


Lib,


Temps E.x.Garr 89.
34. E. t. 1601.98.
11,€.2.504d.93.. 4. E. 3. 24.
5-€.3.14. 40.E. 3.9.
14H.4.39. 24.H.8.taile
Br.33. 4. Mar. Dier 1 39.
Lik.10 f0.37. 38. in Mary
Pertingtou: cafe.


€ Gre Littlerd fhews
He that in tbt fame
manner that a cola
laterall $varrantíe map be Bes
feated bp matter (n Desde, 02
bp matter in Law, fo map to
all intents and purpoſes a liz
neall $oarrantte, Mbereof bec
putteth an cramplo of aline=
ali Marrantp and aſſets.
€ Et va lineal gar-


ranty, CC. oueſque ceo
que affets a luy difcen-


diſt &c. Here it ap-
Pearcth by Littleton, that a
lineall $oarrantp and aflets
íga good plea {n a Formedon
inthe Difcender ; wherein it
fg to be knowne that 1f Ces
nant in taíle alicneth Sith
doarrantp , anb icane afz
Tete to difcend, t£ the (Tue tn
tatlc Doth alien the affets, and
Dic, the t(Tue of that tue (ball
recouer the land, becaufe the
lineall warranty diſcendeth
only to bim Without alfcts,
fo; neither the pleading of the
Warranty without the afters,
noz the aflets ‘without the
warranty is any barre tn the
Formedon tn the Diſcender.
But t£ tbe (ffe to whom the
toarrantp and Bets diſcen⸗
ded had bzought a Formedon,
and bp Judgement had bene
barred bp reafon of the toar=
rantp and Afiets. Jn that
cafe albett he alfeneth the Aſ⸗
fete, pet the eftate Tayle is
barred foz cucr: foz a barre ín
a Formedon tn the 3Dífcenz
der, Whith ts a tozit of the


Of WV arrantie.


Sei. 749.


CEC ci alcauotr,
E que en meſme
le maner come gat-
ranty collateral pott
eftre Defeate pur mat=
ter en fait, ou en Icy,
en mefine le maner
poit lineal garranty
eftce Defcat,ac, Car ſi
theire en tatle porta
betefe De Formedon, &
bn lineal gatranty,
Defon ancefter enbe-
ritable per force De 1e
tatle , foit plebe en-
uctg lup, oueced que
affets alup diſcendiſt
De fee fimple.que il ad
per mefme launcefter
que fift le garranty,
fi Ihetve que ef Dc-
manDdant poit adnul=
lev, &Defeater Ie gat-
raty, ceo ſuffiſt à lup,
Cat le Di(cent Des
auters tenements De
fee fimple nc fait
tiens p barreribeire
fans le garranty,
RC,


. Jeël.749


Nd itis to be vn-

derftood, that in
the fame manner as
the collaterall War-
ranty may bee defea-
ted, by matter in
Deed, or in Law; In
the fame manner may
a Lineall warranty be
defeated, &c. For if
the heire in taile brin-
getha writ of Forme-
don, and a lineall war-
ranty ofhis Anceftor
inheritable by force
ofthe Tayle,be plea-
dedagainft him,with
this that Affers dif-
cended to him of fce
fimple,which he hath
by the fame Anceftor
that made the warran-
tie, if the heire that
is demandant may ad-
null and defeate the
warranty, that fuffi-
ceth him; Forthe dif-
cent of other tenc-
ments of fee (imple
maketh nothing to


barre the heire without the warranty, &c.


btabeft naturethat an iſſue in taple can haue, (s a god barre tn anp other Formedon (n the
Diſcender, brought afterwards bpon thefame gift.


€A Toy mon fitz ,

ec. Pere our
Buthor calleth Cag many
times in thelebokes hee hath


€ Oy Be teo ap fait
(5 mon fits


trois liures.


Ow I haue made
tothee my fonne


three bookes,


bone ) not only bis fonnc Richard,but euery ſtudient of the Law to beaccounted his fonne,and
woꝛthilp, for that ſeeing our Burhoz bad the honour to be in bis time the Father of the Law,
and all go» ftabtentg tn the Law iufllp account themfeines the fonncs of the LaSv,(Foz other⸗
ifetheparc not worthy of the profeflion ) onr authoꝛ,as acarefall and pzoutbent Father,ag


- t bath mantfettlp appearcd, gane excellent inſtrucions in thele his bakes both to his owne


fon, and to hig adopted fons, to make them from ageto age the moze apt and ableto vnderſtand
the arguments and reafong of the Saw. As


—


Tabula. | : 294.
¶ Leprimer Liureett DeG= | The fit Booke is of Eftates


ftates que homes ounten terres whichmen haue in Lands and Te-
pu tenementa : ceftafcauoire, nements : That is ro fay,


De Tenant enf imple _ Cap.
Joe Cenant en Fee taile | 2
De Cenanten Fee tatle apres polibilitte


diſſue extinct 3
De Tenant p le Curtelle Dengleterre 4
De Cenant en Bower — 5
We Cenant a terme de bie 6
ge Tenant pur terme des ans 7


De Tenant a bolunt per lc Common Ley 8
De tenant a bolunt per cuftome del mannose 2


De Œenant per le Uerge, ; 10
Lefecond Liure.
De Homage | Cap. 1
De Fealtie 2.
De Eſcuage À 3
De feruice be Chiualer 4
De Socage 5
De Frankalmoigne 6
De Homage aunceftrel 7
De Grand Serjeantic 8
De Petit Scricantie 9
De Cenure en Burgage 10
De Cenure en Uillenage II
Jot Rents 12


¶ Et ceux deur petits lieurs And thefe two little Bookes 1
teo ap fait atop pur le melioꝛ en⸗ haue madeto thee forthe better vn-
tender De certaine Chapters De derftanding of certain Chapters of
les antiẽt Liures de Tenures, theantient Booke of Tenures.


(L Meliour entender, &c. Andthele Inſtitutes aue F collected
and publí(beb to tbe eno that thele thzer Beokes of our Æuthoz map be the better vnderſtood of
the ſtudious Reader. |


© Antient Linre des Tenwres. This Booke map well be accoun-
ted antíent, for tt was compofed tu theratane of ing Edward b itz- gy. . DIS NI
herbert fatti) bp a graue anb diſcreet ite giewirdtbe tub, Cas Ife Fitz sit Juba Prese bi NAR


Le tierce Liure.
Be LE folonque E courte del Common
ep


Cap...


Gogg : De


Eyes |


De parceners folonque le —— Cap.2
Joe Fointenants T l
De Tenants en Common :
12€ pe bcterteg et x. $ comis
tton X
De Dilcent que tollente ies, 6
De continual Claime = =. 7
De Keleaſes 8
Joe Confirmations : 9
DWeAttoznements — 10
De Zaifcontinuances 11
De Kemitters 12
We Garranties, — 13
Epilogus.
Eone voile enprender Œ laches mon Ndknow my fon,
l nt —— Cre. cE fits, Que teo A That I would
Hercoblerue the great modes ge RO quetucvotes, not hauethee beleeue,


ſtie and mtidenefle of eur Aus
thoz, which ig Swozthie o£ imi⸗
tation , foz nulla virtus, nulla
"E th locum fuum & digni-

tatem conferuare poteft fine
modeftia And herein out
Duthoz followed the example
of Moles, Who Was a Judge,
and the fivlt wziter of Law,


foz he was Minffimus omni- '


um hominum qui fuit in ter-
ris, ag the holp Hiſtoꝛie teſtis
ficth of him.

Les arguments d


les reafons del Ley , oe.

Ratio cft. anima Legis, fo
then are we fapd to Kuo the
Raw, when We appzcbeno thc
reafon of the Law, that fg,
en Se bring the reafon of
the aw fo to our owne rea⸗
fon, that ine perfedip vnder⸗
ſtand tt as eureiwn, and then
and neuer befor”, We haue ſuch
an excellent and tnfeperabie
paopertteanb ownerſhip therz
ín, as we can neither Tofe tt,
80? any mantake it from ds,
and &ot!ll direct bs ( thelears
ning of the 1.5» tefo chapned
together) in many other Caz
fex. Wut tf by pour ſtudie
and indulſtrie pon make not
the reafon of the Law ponr
one, it is not 7 fo? pon


que tout cco q̃ ieo ay
Dit enles dits liures
foit Hep, car (co ne
ceo boile enpeender
ne pzefumer ß Mop,
Mes de tiels chotes
que ne font pag Lep
enquires, et appzen=
Dees De mes (ages
pgs appriſes €

la Ley, Mient meins
coment que certaines
chofes, queux font
motes et ſpecifies en
les dits Liures, ne
font pas lep , vncore
tielt chofes ferva top
plus apt et able Dc
entender et appren⸗
ber les arquinentg,
eties reafons dllep,
ac. Carp tes argu-


ments et les realõs


en la ep home pint
toft auienDza a ie


that all which I haue


fayd in thefe Bookes


is Law, for I will not


prefume to take this
'vponme,butofthofe -


things that. are not
Law,enquire & learne
of my wife mafters
learned in the law;
notwithftanding albe-
it that certaine things
which are mooued 8
{pecified inthe fayde
Bookes, are not alto-
gether Law, yet fuch
things fhall make thee
more apt, and able to.
vnderftand and appre⸗
hend the Arguments
and the reafons of the
Law,&c. Forby the
Arguments and Rea-
fons inthe Law,a man
more fooner fhall
come to the certain-


i Epilogas. ^ — * AX


certaintie x à la coz tie and kuowledge of sto —— ts pout
he Law. _memoyie, ne Beli doth our

nufans dela ler, the . Authoꝛ couple arguments
ano reafong togecher, Quia
argumepta iguota. & obfcu-
ra ad lucem rationis profe-
runt & reddunt fplendida :
and therefoze argumentari & ratiocinari ate many times taken for one, Bnd that out Anthos
map not {peake anp thing Without Authority ( Which in theſe Inſtitutes we hauc as we take
ít manifefted ) bis opinton herein allo agreeth with that of the learned and reucrend chiete Ju⸗
ſtite ofthe Court of Common pleas Dir Richard Hankford, (y) Homene fcaucia de quel
mettal vn campane cft , fine foit bien bate, ne le ley bien conus fans difputation. Bnd another
faith, (*) leo aye difputekeft matter pur la apprender laley. So ag ont Authoꝛ bath made a
moft excellent Epilogue op Conciufion With a grane aduice and councell, together With the
reafen thereof, which all god ſtudents arc toknow and folle, an’ Withicire and fequi J
will conclude our Pathos Epilogue, |


Lex plus laudatur quando ratione probatur.


+


€ Lex pluslaudatur quando ratione probatur.


hig ts the fourth time that our Author bath cited verſes.


when 31 had finithed this wozke of the firlk part of the Inſtitutes, and joked backe and
confidered the multitude of the concinflong in Law,the manifold diuerfities bet ween cafes and
points of learninga,the barietp almoft infinite of Authoꝛities, Ancient, Conftant'and Modern,
and With all their antiable,and admirable confent in (o many fuccellions of ages,the many chans
ges and alterations of the Common Law € additions to the fame,enen Gnce our Authoz wzote,
bp many Ads of Darliament,and chat the like worke ot infit ntes had not bin attempted bp
anp of our profeilton $obom 3| might imitate, 31 thought tt fate fo? mec to follow the graue and
pradent eraiuple of our worthy Butijoz. not to take bpon me, o2 pꝛeſume that the reader ſhould


think,that alithat À baue fato heretn to be Law:yet this 3). map fatelp affirm,that there ts nos .


thing herein, but map either open fome windowes of the Law, to let in more light to the ſtudent
bp Diligentfearch to fee the fecrets of the 1.569,02 to mouc him to Doubt; Softball to inable hin
to inquire? iearne of the Sages, what the Law together With the true reafon thercof in thefe
cafeg is: D2 laffiy epon conũderation bad of our oid Wrobes, Lawes, and Kecords, (Which
are full of benerabic Dignity and Antiqattte ) to finde ont Where anp alteratton hath bene,
bpon What groundthe Law hath dene Once changed ; knowing for certaine, that the Law ie
baknowne to him that knoweth not the r.afon thereof, and that the &noSone certaintie of the
Law ig the faferpof ail. BF bad once intended foz the cafe of onr Studient to hawe made a
Cable to tbefe Inſtitutes, but oben 3| confidered that Cabies and Abridgements are |
mot profitable to tbem that make them, F bane lett that woꝛke to euerp ſtudi⸗
pus Reader. Andfoz a farewell to our Furifpzudent JWiſh onto
him the gladfome light of Flurifpzudence the louelineſſe
of Cemperance, the ability of Foꝛtitude.
and the foltditic of '
Auftice. — |


FINIS. -


j.


395


(9) 31,8. 4. 37


(©) 41.2. 3.22, Kyrten,
Via. Se 3577.


Vid, Sef, 384.44 3-5 5%


Ed


Errata.


Olioz.a. Linea 43-For Gratinta, read Gras
tuita. fo.3.b. lin.2. for no hcire; "cad no
heire burofhis body. 1.18.omit, Baftards.


| Lg. after cofens, dde, Mes. 1:5 8.for brugam, t-


brigam. 1.62. cauiat, r. caueat. f.4.a-lg2.after
Lammas adde to her, and to the notes in the
marg,there,add Vilis. f.87.per walmfl. £a-b.1.8
quarum, v. quare. 1.49. for of higher, read or
higher. f.5-b-1.3 5. meticbantyremetebant: \.41-
Birqualia,t. Berquarinme\44- after Dome[day,
adde, It fignifieth al@,Semorelegally,a Sheep-
coat,of the French word Bergerie. 1.50. 4rpeu,r.
Arpene\.63. Ing.7.Ing. f:6.a. l.29.fór where;r.
wherech f7.b.1.6. Audigauie,r. Andiganie. f.9.
b.1.58. in writ, 7,in the writ. f.10.a.l. 1. owee-
tic,r-oweltie. fol.13.a.1.3 4. ftall, 7. fhall. 1.16.in
marg.t9.Et.r. 19.E.1. f43.b.l.10. feucrfl, r.fe-
uerall. 1.23. witb, z;which. fis.a.l.s. as. or.
firs-be.16. in marg. 23.E.3.r.25.E.8, f.16.b.
1.44. for the degree, r. vndorthe degree. fry.a.
Y. 43-feitus, rfeifitus. £o.18.a;l.4 1.two fimples,r.
two fce fimples. f.20 a ly 1.77 the text,their, 7
her. fo.z1.a.1.6.afler for euer,adde It hath been
holden that. l.10.4fter expe€tant, adde but Vid.
lib, fo. 154. b. otherwife refolucd, v? patet ibi.
f.21-b.).23-for not the/.not of the.fo.22.b.l.6.5#


' the text, Donors, r.Donees.. f-23.b. 1.18. in the


text, for 1füesr.TMfucs. 1.3 4.ib.2 1.E.3-T.3 1.E.3-
fo.z4.3. 1.49 and to exclude , 7, and nottocx-
clude. £.26-b.1.40. Matilda, t. matildæ. l4 v.pro-
eveata,r. precrcate f.20.2.1.44.But, r.By.l.13.in
marg.to 29.E.3-addef.27. fia t.a.l.3 1 .tallegys, r,
tallagys. £31 b.l 30, Northampt./.Northumb,


. L48.generall,rfpecial. f.32.0,1.5 somit, during


the couerture, lin.2z, inmarg. Hilliagfions, v.
Lillingflows,. £3 3.a.l-46. iux yc inaior. premi,
r.promerere, vicium ſuſtin v. virum ſuſtinere. 1.37
vis.r-yiri, 1.7.in marg. 1 4.E.1.Dower.t.3.E.Y,
Dowtr X22, f. 5 4.b. l. 25. habitatirn,r. habitation,
1.29 riuen,r.driuen. fol.35.a.1. 1, this pani-
ons, 7 his companions es * 14s. to ends, 7,
tonoend. f30.a.l.50.hér.fhe. f.42.a.1,6.of, i.
or.1.8.foreiture,7.forfeiture. f.44,2.l.4, in marg,
3.14 r1,1e. f£ 44 b.l.35.owne,r.one.l.36.tenant
v. tenants, f.46.a L.3.for, ».of. | 25. Thraing, t.
Thiraiag. f.46.b.1.G60.cafe, r. leafe. f.47.a.l.v1.
chattell,z.cattell. 47 b.l.37.if chey diftreyned,
T. if they be diftreyocd. f.48 al.30.deuife,r.de.
mife.f.48,b.1,45.46 for make writing of leafe,r,
make a writingof aleafe f.49.a- 1.15. 0mit,in,
1.55. livery the , » liuery tothe. f.49.b. l4. re-
mainder, remainders. 1.5 0.omit,as. f. $0, b.l.9.
pariphrafs,r. peripbrafis. £ $3.b 1.20. fell, ». fell.
f.54.3. 145. and term, r,and the terme. £.58.b.

]. 1 3.difleifors, 7. diffeifees. | £.59.b.1.33. concu?
lufion, r.conclufion. fo.61.balivlt.in marg. to

cap.67.adde g» 69. f 62.a.l.3.appruatore plegia-

ttr. appetere cognitus plegiatus.|.4.forelectus,r,

Clericus, moribus er legibus,r. communioribus le-

gibus. l 7 puer, rpiger. fol. 63. a. lin. 3 s.lióvinr.li-


a


bri. £.65.a.1.26.faith,7. faith. £.66.4,1.23.rcords,
records. f.67.2. Lvlt for they within,r. they be
within, 67.b. the latter part of the Text of the
ot.Se@t.is to be added. l.a.fedum,r. feodum. f,68.
1.37.fiue, t. ſue. £.69.2,1.59.thele,r.this, £.71.a.
1.20.diuinet v dimicet. ] 41. omit that. fo.7 1.b.
147.but,r.and. f.73-b.1.2.i7 the text were by y.
were giuenby. £74 b.l.18.4 s fadum, feodum.
£.75.b. 1.29.34. $6. fadi, r. feodi. f 77.b. La4.
faid office. fayd offices. £78, b.L6. in marg.
to 27.H.8.add fo.10 f.80.adin.28 inthe texrma-
trimonium, t. matrimonio. £.81.a.l.1. in mzrg.
£A. 3.7.2. 1. f.8 3.b.1.6. fadi. feedem. 139 by, r.
of. £.84,a.1.31.0f, r. to. £.85.b.1.11.Sxe,7 Six,
lin.27. Sheep-men, r.Sheepe men. f 88.b.1.16.
fecusr.tacus 1043. fora, of. f.go.a.lin. vlt. in
marg to Sect.adde 740. figi.b. 1.5. as prefently
as conueniently may, 7.as prefently and ascon-
uenicntly as he may. fo.93.b.l.vlc. voluntaries,
r.votaries. f.94.a. 1.39. Diocefle,”. diocefles.and
| vIt for fadum, r. feodum. fol.o5.a. 1.38. take
fucceffion,r. take in fucceffion. fic,r. fi. f.97.a,
l.z. in marg to 33-H.6. addc, fo.6.1.30. put out
the *befere Stephezt,and placeit;l.28. before And
of them. &rooa. 1.4.for medios. , medÿ, fuoo.
b.1.9.tothedifherifon,r.orthedifherifon.f. « 07.
a l4 a. Seriantiæ, r.Seriantiam. fx 10.2.1.39. Co-
mities, r.Counties. f.111.a.] $2. of deuifor,r, of
the deuifor. f 114.b.1.30 ceffor,r.ceffer. 1.44 fuf-
penfation,r. fufpenfion. f,11 5.2.1 9.tobe a forme
don, 7, to a formdon. fo.116.2.1.43.47.beund,
Y.bond. 119.b. L1 s. for may claimo,r, may not
claime, f£.126,b.1.58.coppe,r.cep. firzral.ss,
tenure, . tenancy. f,122,b. 41.46. vtlegat, v.
vtlagat'. £23 a.l.29.domintusyr. dominum. f. 28
b.l.35 vntill and a good, .vntiil a good. f. 1 29.
a.] 58. indelibilitie, 7. indebilitie. 1.59.Priors,»,
Priorcffe, f. x3o,b.l.2. for earnifhy, garnifhee,
f.131 b.l 413.10 13.R.2adde,c2.16. £15 3.8 l1 1.
afferi,tidemyrafferitidem, £133.b,l.40. quazda-
que r. quandogue. fol.13 $.a.l.17. difcouenables,
rcouenables.l.48, avt, rem. f£138.b.144, ber.
is, £141.b.1.27./5 re. £142.22, liberas, t.
libras, 1.33 .Cometi v. Comiti, 146.417. in mar.
in H.3. r. in Y1.H.8, f146.b.1,3 $.fer grantec;r,
grantor. f.148.b.1.50. is wholly apportioned,7,
is to beapportioned. fol.t §0.2.1.47.0mit,and fo
itis. f.150.b.1.13,0f the grantee,r. of the gran=
tor. f.155:a. 1.50. bound , v, bond. fo.155.b.
1.27.23. andthis,r.and how this, fol, 157,2,
1, $3 tnot, », itis not, f157,b, 1,21, change,
7, charge, 1,38, pincipal,, principal, 1,39, one,
rowne, frs8a.l.vlitier.trie, fol,150,a.1,44.
Cambr, Cambridge, f.159, b, 1,19, Ciareden,
r,Claredon. 1.15.in the text, auoit, r,zamoir, fol,
160, b,13.as the poynt,r.astothe poynt, f.164
als. offullage,r.within age, f.164.b,!.13, in
mar,to 2,H.6,add fv. 11, £,165.b,l.9, ia the text,
Aunt,r, Aunts, fol, 172,2,], 36, fhal beallowed,r,
fhal not be allowed, fa76,^,l.3,remant,7. rem-
nant,


ye


Errata.


nant. Folio 178.a lin, uit, for,is,reade it. fol.179
b.l. so.for his, r.her. fi180,a.1,24.for,if 1 7.ifit.
£186 b.l. 5. Saile,r.Sale. ],47.48.Cetitrabitio, r.
vatibabitio. £.181-b.1,39.tenants,”.ioyntenants.
£.86.a.1.40.32 tbe text, for her, r.him. fol.187.
b.lin.59. Feoffee or Deuifee, ;«Feoffor, or De-
uifor. line r1,in marg. 11.H.7« r. 10.H.7.20.
£.1$8.2.],25.for deuifeth >. demifeth. £.189.a.
l.i.inheritance, reftate f.192..1.26. a leafe,r,
a leaf for life.f.1 94.b.l.23.after Feoffcesaddeis
for that the Feoffees. f199.a.l2.in mar. 17.8 r.
Yit.aide. f.300.a.1.36 37.right lands, r.right of
lads.f.20r.a.l.3.omit(fo itis ) & after parfonals
adde virtute cuins fuit inde poſſe ſionatus. lin.21.
22, for an equalitie, 7.a quality. fo.202.a.L42.
poffibility, 7. impoffibilitie. f202 b.6. after
efcheate, omit (be) f.206.a.l.2 for morgagor,
r.morgageor.f.206 b.l. à 3.whereof,7.wherfore.
f,207.2.I. .2.for morgage,r morgagee. and lin,
2.morgagee, ”.morgageor. f.a12.b.1.28.before
Littleton, place (d) £.214.b l.40.the leafe, r.the
gift or leafe, f.220.b.1.42 omit,fo, f221.b, in
marg.to Julius Winningtoas cafe, adde, Lib.2,fo.
$9.60, f.233.b.1,9. for diretto, v.ex directe. tol.
£226.2.l.30,morgagce,r,morgageor, f,230.a.
1.38, r, Pauentum eft, & perfectum, fol/33o.b,l.
36.cucry, r.any, f,232.b.l32.isref, f.234 a,
Lar, then, r. thc. 1.38.0/ficio, r, officia, 1.46, for
example, . certainely. f238,b.1,2.in marg.for
15. HA. 0. 13. H.a. fol,zava.l.11, Coment,r.
Commentarie, f.247.a,1.26, (hall take,r.fhall
nottake, f,250,b,1,26, doe, ,enter, fi2z52,a,
I,1,and 2, a&ually, 7, adtiuely, f,253.0,1.38,
tenures, ?, view, f,258.a,1,38. limitation, 7. li-
mitations. f.261.b.l29, 33-H.8.r.3 $-H.8 e fic
iz mag. £,264,b.l, 49.debt,r.a&tion, £268, b.l. 16
Jands,”.hands, fo,272.a,l.33.0r,7,3nd. f.275.
a.14,if the Diffeifor,r. ifthe Diffeifee, £75.
b.lz1.thea&ions,ralla&ions, f,276.a,l9,for
Leffee,r,Donce, lin,44, after Companion, adde
out. £o.285,b,20, in marg.13.E.4. . 13. H.à .


£190.8.1.33.t0 2 3-H.8.adde, cap.6.and lint in
- marg. to 44-E.3-adde,/o.10. f,292.a.1,38. for
derinantur, t. deriuatur. fol,293,2,1.2.in marg.
to ca.adde,3. f.295.a.]. t 1. for, without? with.
lin.36.for debt rent, . debe fora rent. and for
Indowment, r.Indenture. fol297.a.l.:5. for,
forty, r.forty acres. lin. 47.to fee, r. to the fec.
f297.b.1.3 6.fhall haue, . (hall not hauc. fol.


298.a-againft the 1o-11.lines place inthe marg.


reported by Sir Iob Popham chiefe Iuftice. f.298
b.to the note in the hy» cae Ap PLxs.
f,199.b.l. t4.in marg.to Caryes cafe, adde.lib. 5.
fo76.b. £,300-b.1, 58. far, Prior Couent,r.Pri-
or and Couent. f.307.2-1-o/t.in marg, 3.£.13.
A[[.7.1. 3-E.3.12. 6 3, 4[[.7- £.307.b, in the.
margent to 34.H.6.addc, fo.41. ' £.309.b,1.47-
after, attorne, r .to the Grantee by Deede, and
lin.st. omit, jn a barre. £310 1,13. after,
Grantee, adde, the Leffee attorne to the huf-
band.And in the margentagainft the/ame line,
adde to the note there, Lib. 4.f0.61. Hemlings
cafe. £,310,b,l.2.in marg. adde, Femlings café
vbifupra. £312.b.17. for rent charge, 7. rent
charge in fee. £343 b.l.16. adde in marg.
44 E.3.21.32.. f.349.a. 1.30. hei'e".heire appa-
rant. £.352.a-45.heire,r-here f.3 55.2.1 3r.af-
ter giuen, adde, by default, é361a.l s. in the
margent, for, 14.H.7.11,/ 14 H 7-TO-1t- lin.5.
ibid.fory21.H,6. 13. r. 19/46 39. and adde to


the notes there,22.H.6.27. 36.H.6.32. 36.H.6.


fauxer de recouery a7. foa 61.b. 1.54n marg for,
19. H.$.".10.H,6. lín.4to fol.adde 106, f,3&z.
a.l, 1 1.in marg.noptfape,7. pom tenure ]12.5.
to lib.adde sand fer 314.431. fol.363.a.l.14.
for, againft, v. for, line 17,0mif, on the other
fide. f.363,b.12/n marg. to 33, 4-9. adde 33,
£364.b,l.z.in mirg.to Exir.comg.adde $4- fol.
36 s.b.l.2 1, is/marg, to ftudent, adde. 55. fol.

368.2.l.a ir marg.to Afadde,p.23. fol.368.b.
39. for, nether othan; 7, no ether than. lin, 51.
for, fo, wade, it.


on


whys
oe bn 4
Nen

Y


*


f
ux x El
“4
^
"ver
TS ev
H
+
D DL. > *
& t i C
E P
À
J 1
ee. i À
a LE
= - jg
i 3 i
—


J


ee, ————


ns sd p a MM
