REPORTS
8
Sir EDWARD COKE,


IN ENGLISH,


Ent.


IN THIRTEEN PARTS COMPLETE;
WITH
REFERENCES to all the ANCIENT and MoptrN
. BOOKS OF THE "LAW. i


Exattly TRANSLATED 5 COMPARED with the Firſt and Laſt Edition
in FRENCH, and LOTS Page for Page with the ſame,


— So =
1 *


_ ER . TO WHICH ARE Now ADDED,


*


THE RESPECTIVE PLEADINGS,
IN ENGLISH.


VO L. VII.


The Whole newly REVISED, and carefully CORRECTED and TRANSLATED,
with many additional NOTES and REFERENCES,


By GEORGE WILSON, SERJEANT AT Law.


\


LON DO N,


Printed for ]. Rivinoron and Sons, St, Paul's Church-yard; W. Own
Fleet-ſtreet; T. Loncman and G. Robinson, Pater-noſter Row; G.
KrarsLy, Fleet-ftreet; W. FLEXN EY and W. CaTzs, Holborn; E. Brooke,
Sell-yard, kms and T. WAIT pon and Co. nen. 1777.


.


T H E


TWELFTH PART
FA
Aue eee.


x hb» fo Had of
, 36.


R K P OO R 'T 8


OF T H E


Sir EDWAR D COKE, Kat.


Of divers Reſolutions and Judgments given upon ſolemn Arguments, and with

- great Deliberation and Conference of the reverend Judges and Sages of the
aw, in Caſes. of Law, the moſt of them very famous, being of the King's eſ-
pecial Reference from the Council-Table, concerning the Prerogative : as for
the digging of Salt-Petre, Forfeitures, Foreſts, Proclamations, &c. And the
Juriſdictions of the Admiralty, Common Pleas, Star-Chamber, High Com-
miſſion, Court of Wards, Chancery, &c. And Expoſitions, and Reſolutions
concerning Authorities, both Eccleſiaſtical and Civil, within this Realm.
Alſo the Forms and Proceedings of Parliaments, both in * and Ireland:
with an Ex poſition of 3 s Law, &.


The FIF T H EDIT O N carefully corrected; with an
Rayonances to all the later REPORTS. |


\


| With two exact TABLES, the one of the 3 of the CAs Es, and the other
of the PRINCIPAL MATTERS therein contained.


By GEORGE WILSON, serjeant at Law,


Non 1 Leges condendi lt, ubi non of obediendi neceftar, & e —


.


HAVE peruſed this Treatiſe, intitled,
The Twelfth Part of the Reports of
Sir Edward Coke, Knight, and I do, upon
my reading thereof, conceive the ſame to
be his Collections, and that the printing
of the fame (containing very much good
and uſeful learning) will be for the good
of this nation, and of the profeſſors 425
the common law.


The ſecond of February,
| I 55 5 .


ha N
Hh, ret bw 09 N. 585


4 3


22
4 —


88 >> N * 2


Part XII.


\ OF THE


/ 1


/


SEVERAL CASES


*


Contained in this


A.


AWE (Lord)
bis Caſe, fol. 70


Acceſſory, none in trea-
fon, petit larceny, and
treſpaſs, 81

Admiralty, 777 79

Admiralty, no court of


teterd, 104
Affidavits falſe, 128
Ap-Evan, and Barker, 23
Aſhley's Caſe, 90
Aurum Reginæ, 21


B.

Aker and Hall's Caſe,
Bank's Caſe, | 62
Bedles and Beard's Caſe,

4
Bellingham" s Caſe, 71
Benevolence, the Caſe,
thereof, 119


Biſhops, their Caſe, 7
Bossen,


A TABLE of the Caſes.


C.
Apias utlagatum ; award-
CH, by Juſtices of
Peace, 103
Chancey's Caſe, 82


Chancellor and Regiſter,


| 78

Chute's Caſe, 116
Commiſſions, 31
Conſpiracy, 23
Convocation, 72
Corven's Caſe, 105


Counteſs of Shrewſbury's
Caſe,


94
Crimes andSmith's Caſe, 4


Crown,
Cuſtom,


17
Collums: ſubſidies, and
impoſitions, 33


100


Cuſtoms of London, 113


P.


ERBY (Earl) | his
% Der. 114


Dignity, Prerogative. See


_ Honours, 112
Dungannon's Caſe, 120
Dureſſe per Gaoler, 127
E.
ARL of Shrewſbury's
Caſe, 106


Earl of Derby's Caſe, 114
Earl of Northampton 5
Caſe, 132
Edwards (Dr.) v. Woot-


ton, 35
Eſtrays, 101


' Part XII.
Empringham's Caſe, 84


Eſtwick's Caſe, 1 35.
Evan and Barker, 23


a F,


ELONS goods, 121
F irſt- fruits & Tenths
h '45
Fiſk


| 353
Floyd and Barker, 23


Ford and Sheldon's Caſe, 1


Forfeitures by treaſon, 6


41


Foreſts, 22
Fuller's Caſe,
G. |
Gr. Caſe, 71
W
Abeas Corpus, 129
Habeas Corpus, re-


turn and diſcharge, 47


Hawkeridge's Caſe, 129
Haye's Caſe, 102
Haynes's Caſe, I13
Hereſy, 56
Herſey's Caſe, , 103
High Commiſſion, 49, 834,

88


High Commiſſioners, 69
High Commiſſioners, if


they have power to im-

priſon, | . 19

Honours, 70, 81, 96, 108,
112


Hungate's Caſe, 122


Hutchinſon (Dr.) uu


CES.
Huſſey and Leighton, oo”


.


Part XII. A TaLz of the Caſes.


K 5 P. ;
IU riſdiction of the Court ARD ON, 29
of Common Pleas, 109 Parliament in Ire-
TATTOOS Eccleſiaſtical, land, 109
112 Parliament forms and or-
Juſtice | in Wales not but ders, | 115
by Commiſſion, 48 Piracy, 73
| l Pramunire, 37
3 Prerogative of the King
ag in Salt-petre, 12
Angdale's caſe, 58 Privilege of Prieſts, 100
Leake (George) his Proclamations, 74
Caſe, 15 Proctor's Caſe, 118
Libels, ---. 25 Prohibition, 5


9

Lord St. John, and Dean Prohibitions del Roy, 63
of Glouceſter's Caſe, 3 Prohibition, court eccle-
Lord Abergaveny's Caſe, fiaſtical, 65
| 70 Prohibition, none after

Lord Vaux's Caſe, 93 the writ De excommuni-


cato habendo, TIS.
M. |
| : | R. oh:
Anney's Caſe, 101
Mansfield's Caſe, Eſervation, 36
123 Robert's Caſe, 66
Manſlaughter, 87 Roper's Caſe, 45
Mouſe's. Caſe, 63 Roper (Anthony) his
WT . Caſe, 47
N. .
Naber (Earl) Alt-petre,: 18
| his Cale, 132 Scarlet's Caſe, 99
Seats in churches, 1o5
O. Shrewſbury (Counteſs)
5 ber Caſe,
ATH ex officio, 27 Shrewſbury (Earl) bs
Oath before Juſtices, Caſe, e
130 Shulter's Caſe, 90
Ogle (Lord) his Caſe, 107 Simony, 74, 101
Oldfield's Cale, 7 Stanneries,


| 9
Stock-


|
|


A ace of the Cafes. Part XII.
Stockdale's Caſe, =;


Stray. 101 W.
WD | ALES, the Lord
Preſident's Caſe,
HOMLINSON's 5, 51
Outs, 104 Warcombe and Carrel's
Throgmorton (Lady,) 6g Caſe, 124
Treaſon, 15 Women ſtolen, 20, 100
Trevor (Dr.) his Caſe, Wootton and Edwin's
78 Caſe, 5 "FO
Writ De haretico combu-
V. rendo, _ 20, 93
V (Lord) his *
Caſe, 93


ORK, the Lord Pre-
ſident's Caſe, 50, 31


oh


*
— — i. 1 4 *


Part XII.


FORD and SHELDON's Caſe. Page [1]
Paſcb. 4 Jacobi Regin.
In the Exchequer- chamber.


N an information in the Exchequer- chamber for the King, Information on
againſt Thomas Ford, Eſq. Ralph Sheldon, Eſq. and di- forfeiture for

vers others; the caſe was thus. 2 A en
Thomas Ford was before the ſtatute of 23 Eliz. a recu- St. a; El. c. 1.

ſant; and for money lent to Sbeldon, ſome before 23 Eliz. 10 Co. 54.

and ſome after, took a recognizance in the names of the other 33 |

defendants, and took alſo a grant of a rent-charge to them in Pog. 131.

fee, with condition of redemption by deed indented : and the

recognizance was conditioned for performance of covenants in ;

the ſaid indenture, and afterward the flatute of the 29 Eliz. St. 29 El. e. .

was made, by which it was enacted, that if default of pay- Hob. 405.

ment was made in any part of n of 201. for

every month, &c. That then and ſo often the Queen's Ma-

jeſty by proceſs out of the Exchequer may take, ſeize, and

enjoy all the goods, and two parts, &c. And after the faid

act, and before the 34th year of the reign ef the late Queen,

Ford lent divers other great ſums of money toSheldon, and for

aſſurance of it, took a rent-charge by deed indented, with

condition of redemption : and took alſo ſeveral recognizances

in the names of ſome of the other defendants, for performance

of covenants, &c. as is aforeſaid ; which recognizances did

amount in all to the ſum of 210001. all which were to the

uſe of the ſaid Ford, and to be at his diſpoſition, and they

were forfeited; and.. afterward, viz. 41 El. Ford was con- 8

vict of recuſancy, and did not pay 201. per menſem, according |

to the ſtatute. And, if upon all this caſe the King ſhould 5

have the benefit of theſe recognizances, was the queſtion. Yi

And this caſe was debated by counſel - learned on both

ſides in court. And it was objected by the counſel of

Ford, that if the recognizance had been acknowledged to

Ford himſelf, they ſhould not be forfeited to the King, for

the ſtatute ſpeaks only of goods, And debts are not in- 8Co. 34.


cluded Plow, 229


—


rage [2]


Sr. 29 EL c. 6.


11 C. 22. b.
0 8 Co. 33


Foxp and SntLDon's Caſe. Part XII.


cluded within the word (goads.) And therefore, if the Kin

grant all the goods which came to him by the attainder of J.
S. the patentee ihall not have debts due to him, for that the
grant only extends to goods in poſſeſſion, and not to things in
action. And this act is a penal law, and ſhall not be ex-


tended by equity.


2. It was objected that theſe recognizances were acknow-
ledged, to abe covenants in an indenture concerning a
a rent charge: and therefore ſavours of the realty, and are
not within the intention of the ſaid act, which ſpeaks only of
oods. |

f 3. No ſraud or covin appears in the caſe; and then ſoraſ-
much as no act of Parliament extends to this caſe, it was
ſaid, that the common law doth not give any benefit to the
King: for at the common Jaw, in a far ſtronger caſe, if Ce/-
tuy que uſe had been attaint of treaſon ; this uſe foraſmuch * as
it was but a truſt and confidence, of which the law did not
take notice, it was not forſeited to the King, and could not
be granted: and if an uſe ſhall not be forfeited, of which
there ſhall be a pſſeſſio fratris, Sc and which ſhall deſcend
to the heir, a muito fortiori a mere truſt and confidence ſhall
not be forfeited. | IS Td

4 it was objected, that if the forfeiture in this caſe at the
bar accrues to the King, by the ſtatute of 29 Eliz. it ought to
be by force of this word (* goods : ) but that ſhall not be with-
out queſtion in this caſe. For Ford hath not any goods, but
only a mere truſt and confidence, which is nothing in conſi-
deration of law. |
And the court cannot adjudge that theſe recognizances be-
long to, the King by equity of the ſaid ſtatute, becauſe it is
penal : alſo one recognizance was taken in the names of
ſome of the other defendants, before the ſtatute of the 29 El.
which gave the forfeiture. |

Aud ſor that reaſon, it cannot be imagined that it was to
deſeat the King of a forfeiture, which then was not, in eſſe,
but given afterwards, 8 |

As to the firſt objeCtion, it was anſwered and reſolved by
all the Barons, and by Popham Chief Juſtice of England,


and divers others of the Juſtices, with whom they confer-


red, that if the recognizances had been acknowledged to the
paity himſelf, that they were given to the King without
queltionz for perſonal actions, are as well included with-
in this word, goods, in an act of Parliament, as goods
in poſſcſhon. But inaſmuch as by the law things in ac-


tion c.nnot be granted over, for that cauſe by his general


grant, things in aQtion (which only he may grant by his
prorogative) without ſpecial words paſs not; for what he


{ can grant only by his prerogative, can never paſs by general


words.


4 * (
= *


Part XII. FoxD and SHELDON's Caſe.


words. And it was affirmed, that ſo it had been reſolved be-
fore, that is to ſay, that debts were forfeited to the King by
the ſaid act of the 29 Eliz. And where the ſtatute ſaith,
„ ſhall take, ſeize, and enjoy all the goods, and two parts,”
&c. Although a debt due to a recuſant cannot be taken and
ſeiſed, yet inaſmuch as there is another word, viz. enjoy, the
King may well enjoy the debt; and by proceſs out of the Ex-
chequer levy it, and fo © take and ſeiſe refers to two parts
of lands in poſſeſhon, and envy relates to goods. |


— Geert lie gee ee rea He tre WAVE. A


As to the ſecond objection. Anſwer, that it was originally


for the loan and forbearance of money. And as well the re-
cognizance as the annuity were made for the ſecurity of the
payment of the ſaid money : alſo when the recognizances are
forfeited, they are but chattels perſonal.

As to the third objection. Anſwer, there was covin appa-
rent: for when he was a recuſant continually after that ſta-
tute of the 23 Eliz. and for that chargeable to the King, fer
the forfeiture given by the ſame act, it ſhall be intended that
he took theſe recognizances in the name of others, with an
intent to prevent the King of levying of the forfeiture : and
all the recognizances, which were taken in other men's
names after the ſaid act, ſhall be preſumed in law to be ſo
taken, to the intent to defeat the King of his forfeiture : true
it is, that an uſe or truſt ſhall not be forfeited for treaſon or
other offence by the common law, becauſe it is not a thing of


1 Inſt. 172. b.


which the common law taketh any notice, for that Cęſluy que


1e, hath neither jus in re, nor jus ad rem; but by the com-
mon law, when any act is done with an intent and purpoſe
to defraud the King of his lawful duty, or forfeiture by the
common law, or act of Parliament, the King ſhall not be
barred of his lawful duty and forfeiture per obliguum, which

belongs to him by the law, if the act was done de directo.
And therefore if a man outlawed buy goods in the names
of others, the King ſhall have the goods in the ſame manner,
as if he had taken them directly in his own name: ſo if any
accountant to the King purchaſe lands in the names of others,
the King ſhall ſeize thoſe lands for money due unto him.
And this appears by the caſe of Walter Chirton, Trin. 24 Ed.
3. Rot. 4. in Scaccario, where the caſe was, that Walter de Chir-
ton was indebted to the King 18001. which he had received of
the King's treaſure, and did purchaſe certain lands with the
King's money ; and by covin had cauſed the vendor to en-
feoff his friends in fee to defraud the King, and notwithſtand-
ing took the profits himſelf: and afterwards Walter Chir-
| | | ton


Page [31


\


Ford and SHzLDoN's Caſe, Part XII.


ton was committed to the Fleet for the faid debt. And all

the matter was found by inquiſition, and by judgment the

land was feifed into the King's hands quasſque; for in the caſe

3 Co. 12. b. of the King, an act done by covin, per obliguum, ſhall be
"wa ee equal to an act done de directo, to the party himſelf; for Rex
10 Co. 114. b. Fallere non vult, falli autem non poteft + fee another precedent,
11 Co. 90. . Trin. 24 Ed. 3, Rot. 11. extractum Regis, where one Tho-


| pd 93 121. mas Favell was Collector of tithes and fifteenths, and was ſeiſ-


wy ed of certain lands in fee-fimple, and having divers goods


' Hardr. 25, 26. and chattels, Die intromiſſfonis de colleftione & levatione of
x Veut. 132. tenths and fiſteenths, languidus in extremis alienavit tenementa
ſua & lena & catalla diverſis perfonts,, and died without heir
or executor. In this caſe by the prerogative of the King,
proceſs was made as well againſt the terre-tenants, as againſt
the poſſeſſors of the goods and chattels, although they were


not executors, &c. Ad computandum pro collections prædidta +
ad reſpondendum & ſatisfactendum inde Regi, & c. Et hoc per


Cancellarium Angliæ et capitales juſticiariss Angliæ, et aliorum
juſticiariorum utriuſque Banci; quod nota bene.

As to the fourth objection, non refert, whether the duty to
accrue to the-King by the common law, or by ſtatute ; but
be it the one way or the other, no fubterfuge that the party
can uſe, can defeat or defraud the King : and although one
of the recognizances was taken before the ſtat. of 29 El. yet
that was to his uſe, and for that it is in the nature of a chat-

tel in him, and was taken in the names of others to prevent
the Queen of her forfeiture, which ſhe might have by the act
of 23 El. and although Ford was not convict until 41 El.
that is not material, for at all times before that, he was ſub-
ject to a forfeiture for his recufſane ß.


5 "Tad


Part XII.


— 4 1
—


= „ —
a :


Lord St. OHN verſus Dean, &c. of
Glouceſter, Paſch. 4 Fac. 1.


In the Chancery, 27 Jun. 29 Eliz. inter Jo-
. hannem Dominum S. John de Bletſo querentem,


& Decanum & Capitalem Gloceſtriæ Defen-


denies.


HE caſe was, that the plaintiff brought a Quare impedit Appropriation.
in the Common Pleas, againſt the defendant for the — 4
church of Penmark in the county of Glamorgan ; which ſuit cery.
was ſtaid by aid prayer, and the record was removed into the See Watſon's |
Chancery; upon which the plaintiff moved for a Procedends, SIS þ
and upon Oyer of cauſe, before Sir Thomas Bromley Lord 397, *
Chancellor, in the preſence of Sir Gilbert Gerrard Maſter of Cotton's Re-
the Rolls, and Shute and Wyndham Juſtices, and Popham 2
Attorney, and Egerton Solicitor of the Queen, the Plaintiff 3, Ac.
ſhewed a gift in tail of the ſaid advowſon made to his ante-
ceftor, in the 18 R. 2. and a verdict for his anteceſſor in the
12 H. 8. and a preſentation by his grandfather to the ſaid
church, of a Clerk who was admitted, inſtituted, and induct-
ed, with poſſeſſion for certain years, and divers other mat-
ters to prove the title of the plaintiff ; and yet for this, that
the defendant and thoſe from whom he claims, time out of a
mind, had had the poſſeſſion of the parſonage as improptiate,
(ſaving interruption for ſome ſmall time;) and for this, that
it ſhall be a dangerous precedent to the Queen and others,
owners of impropriations, being able to maintain “ the appro- Page [4]
Priations to be perfect in all points and circumſtances, which
are requiſite to the making of an abſolute and complete impro-
priation, the appropriations being made of ancient time :
It was reſolved by this court of Chancery, by the advice of
the Juſtices and Counſel learned of the Queen, that no Pro-
cedendo in loquela ſhould be granted. |


Vide Ridley, vol. 153, 154. „the beginning of appropria-
| ** ations and of annuities to be diſcharged of tithes ; it was
© after Benedict who was the inſtitutor of Monks, &c.


* And note there the reaſon of prayer being preferred be- pang wh gp
fore preaching. | Fritory of
Vide 155, ibid. hat the Saxon Kings appropriated eight Tithes, chap.
* churches to the monaſtery of Croyland, as appears by 137 Kr.
„ Ingulphus who was Abbot there.“


See alſo Mr. Selden on this head. .
THOMAS


Endowment is
precumeqd when
a'vicarage hath
long continned,
See Watſon's
Clergyman's
Law, 194, 391,
392, Ko

2 Co. 47.
Bunbury 92, $7,
169, 170.


Watſon 195,
2 Cro. 252,
PoR. .


THOMAS CRIMES & al. Plaintiffs,
and HENRY SMITH Defendant.


Trin. 30 Eliz.
In the Exchequer- chamber.


HE caſe was ſuch; the Abbot of Sulby held the par-
ſonage of Bulbenham in the county of Leiceſter appro-
priate, which as a parſonage impropriate came to King H. 8.
by diffolution of monaſteries, anno 31 H. 8. who in the 37th
year of his reign granted it in fee - farm; under which grant
the plaintiff claimeth; the defendant had obtained a preſen-
tation of the Queen, and to deſtroy the ſaid impropriation did
ſhew the original inſtrument of it, anno 22 Ed. 4. with con-
dition, that a vicarage ſhould be competently endowed, and
alleged that the ſaid vicarage was never endowed. And
far that very cauſe the impropriation was void, and in truth
there was no inſtrument, nor direct proof of any endowment
of the vicarage. |
But for this, that the ſaid rectory was, during all the
time of the impropriation, ſuppoſed, reputed, and taken to
be appropriate, and by all that time a Vicar preſented, ad-
mitted, inſtituted, and inducted as a Vicar rightfully endow-
ed, and paid his firſt-fruits, and tenths : | |
It was reſolved by all the court, that it ſhall be preſumed
that the vicarage in reſpect of continuance was lawfully en-
dowed, for that omnia preſumuntur ſolemniter eſſe acta. And


it ſhall be a dangerous precedent to examine the originals of


impropriations of any parſonages, and the endowments of vi-
carages, for that the originals of them in time will periſh,


And fo it was decreed for the plaintiff. 15


W1LLIELM.


WiLLIizLM. BEDIE Gen Quer & Tno-
MAS BearD Clericus, JacosBus Wi Na-
FEILD, Milit' & Marta WINGFEILD


Defend”.
Hil. 4 Fac. I,


HE caſe was thus: anno 31 Ed. 1. the King being Chancery.
ſeiſed of the manor of Kimbolton, to which the advow- Labs. nod
ſon of the church of Kimbolton was appendant, by his letters fan fate, all
patent granted the ſaid manor, with the appurtenances, to in the patron,
Humphrey de Bohun Earl of Hereford in tail general. Hum- Nantor, &c.
phrey de Bohun, the iſſue in tail by his deed, in the 40 of
Ed. 3. granted the “ ſaid advowſon then full of an Incumbent Page [5]
to the Prior of Stoneley, and his ſucceflors : and at the next :
* avoidance they held it, in proprios uſus ; and upon this ap- * 8 Co. 144,
propriation made, concurrentibus 11s que in jure requiruntur ; 745 —
after the death of the Incumbent, the faid Prior and his ſu f-
ceſſors held the ſaid church appropriate, until the diſſolution
of themonaſtery, in 27 H. 8. the ſaid manor deſcended to Edw.
D. of Buckingham, as iſſue to the ſaid eſtate-tail. And the
reverſion deſcended to K. H. 8. The Duke in 13 H. 8. was
attaint of high treaſon, 14 H. 8. the King granted the. ſaid
manor, &c. with all advowſons appendant, &c. to Rich.
Wingfield, and the heirs male of his body, 16 H. 8. It was
enacted by Parliament, that the ſaid Duke fhall forfeit all ma-
nors, &c. advowſons, &c. which he had, &c. in 4 H. 8.
The King, anno 37 H. 8. granted and ſold for money the ſaid
rectory of Kimbolton, as impropriate in fee, which by meſne
conveyance came to the plaintiff for 1200 l. 37 El. Beard the
defendant did obtain a preſentation of the Queen by lapſe,
pretending that the ſaid church was not lawfully appropriate
to the ſaid Prior of Stoneley. | ;

1. For this, that Humphrey, who did grant it to the Prior, 4 Co. 31, 33»
had nothing in it, for that it did not paſs to his anceſtor by 3%; 3 *g
theſe words (manerium cum pertinentibus.) See Watſon 89, 92. 2 Co. 32

2. Or for this, that he had no more thay an eſtate in tail, 10 Co. 64.


and then by his deach his grant was void, 10 Co. 95, 7
Vor. VII. g B F But \ Co. Bhs aZg


*
«


66.
7 Co. 19.
Antea 4.


28 2 Co
37 6 Co


Fitagib. gi.


Bz DIE verſus BrAR D- Part XII.


But it was reſolved by the Lord Elleſmere, Lord Chancel-
lor, with the principal Judges, and upon conſideration of pre-
cedents, that the plaintiff ſhall enjoy the ſaid rectory. For
although that by any thing which can now be ſhewn, the im-
propriation is defeCtive (for by nothing which now appears,
the iſſue in tail had any thing in the advowſon at the time of
his grant to the ſaid Prior, for that the advowſon did not paſs
by the grant of the King, by thoſe words (cum pertinentibus)
yet it ſhall now be intended in reſpect of the ancient and con-
tinual poſſeſſion, that there was a lawful grant of the King to
the ſaid Humphrey, who granted in fee, ſo that he might
lawfully grant it to the faid priory, (Omnia preſumuntur ſo-
lempniter eſſe acta.) And all ſhall be preſumed to be done,
which might make the ancient appropriation good : for tempus
eft adax rerum; and records and letters patent, and other
writings, either conſume or are loſt, or embezzled: and God
forbid that ancient grants and acts ſhould be drawn in queſ-
tion, although they cannot be ſhewn, which at firſt was ne-


ceſſary to the perfection of the thing: and if the appropriation


impeached or impugned,


had been drawn in queſtion in the life-time of any of the par-
ties to it, they might have ſhewn the truth of the matter: but
after the death of all the parties, and after ſo many ſucceſſions
of ages, (in all which the ſaid church was eſteemed and al-
lowed to be rightfully appropriate. If any objection or excep-
tion ſhould now prevail, the ancient and long poſſeſſion of
the owners of the ſaid rectory ſhould hurt them. For if theſe


objections or exceptions had been made in the lives of the


parties, without any queftion they had been anſwered, or
otherwiſe in ſo many ſucceſhons of ages, it would have been


"alc


Part XII. 5


Mich. 4 Jac. Regis. £75


tenant in tail before the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. made a
oftment in fee, tothe uſe of himſelf and his wife in tail: and
after the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. is made, the huſband was attaint
of high treaſon, 31 H. 8. and died, the wife continued in
poſſeſſion and died, their ifſue enter and die, and this deſcends
to his iſfue: and all this eſpecial matter is found by an office.
The queſtion was, if the iſſue in tail, or the King, ſhall have
the land; and it was objeCted, that the right of the ancient
eſtate tail cannot be forfeited for divers cauſes ; viz.
1. For this, that the ancient eſtate was diſcontinued, and 4


ſuch right of action cannot be forfeited ; as it is agreed 1 in the
Marquis of Wincheſter's caſe.


Caſe of Forfeiture by TREASON. nn


.


IH. 43 Eliz. A caſe was moved to all the Tolle:
' te


. 1
Treaſon.
2 Hawks c. 30.
ſect. 19.

See Cotton's
Records 53,


597 32% 325» ( 2 "y
333» 338, 345 2 *
369, 277, &c. 4


400, 662, 670, u
699.


.
e,
. 2, 3s CALI


2. The feoffor himſelf, as this caſe is, had not any right


to the ancient eſtate- tail (for by his feoffment his right was
utterly gone) when he was attaint, and he cannot forfeit what
he hath not.

The iſſue in tail is remitted to that ancient right which can-
not be forfeited : and the new eſtate tail which was derived
under the diſcontinuance, and which may be forfeited by the
ſtatute of the 26 H. 8. cap. 13. is continued; and by act in
law, v1z. the deſcent and remitter avoided : and the eſtate of
the King may be diveſted out of the King by remitter, which
is an act in law. As if diſcontinuee of tenant in tail grant
the land to the King, his heirs, and ſucceffors: and the King
grant the land to tenant in tail for life, the remainder to his
ſon and heir apparent for life, tenant for life dies, the iſſue by
act in law is remitted : and by this all the eſtate of the Kin
which he hath under the diſcontinuance, is diveſted out 4


him, and with this accords Plow Com. 489 in Nicol's caſe:


ſo in the caſe at bar, the new eſtate under the continuance
which was forfeitable is now purged by the remitter of that
ancient right; and the title which the King hath, is by that
defeated and avoided.


9


| B 2 © Reſolved


Caſe of Forfeiture by Treaſon. Part XII.


| Reſolved that in this caſe the iſſue in tail was barred : and
that which had been ſaid, anſwered, confeſſed, and avoided.
For truth it is, that right of action cannot be given to the
King, by the ſtatute of the 26 H. 8. But when tenant in
tail diſcontinues his eſtate to the uſe of himſelf in tail, and
after is attaint of treaſon, now by the ſtatute of 26 H. 8. he
doth not forfeit only the new eſtate in tail, but by this the
right of the ancient eſtate is barred for ever : for the words of
the ſtatute are, that every offender being lawfully convict of
high treaſon, &c. ſhall forfeit to the King, his heirs, and
ſucceſſors, all ſuch lands, tenements, and hereditaments,
which any ſuch offender ſhall have of eftate of inheritance :
by which words, if there was not any faving, the right of the
ancient eſtate- tail was bound, then the ſaving is, faving to
« every perſon, &c. (other than the offenders, their heirs,
* and ſucceſſors, and ſuch perſons as claim to any of their
& uſes)” all ſuch rights, ſo 4 the offender and his heirs are
excluded out of the ſaving: for heirs includes all manner of
heirs, and for this they are bound by the body of the at.
And ſo note a diverſity between a naked right of action
which is not forfeitable, and an eſtate of inheritance which is
forfeitable, coupled with an ancient right, for which the for-
feiture of the poſſeſſion is barred® bythe ſaid act. And when all
this appears by office, then is the jiſſue in tail notwithſtanding
the remitter barred by force of the ſaid act of Parliament, to
which all are parties or privies : and it is not like to the caſe


in Plowden's Com. of Remitter, for this is no bar of an an-
cient right,


Part XII.


A Caſe at a Committee concernin
BISHO PES. haps


|
Paſch, 4 fac. 1.


T this Parliament held, Paſch. 4 Fac. Regis, it was Biſhops whether
moved and ſtrongly urged at a grand committee of donstive or

rds and Commons in the Painted Chamber, 1. That ſuch 0
Biſhops as were made and created after the firſt day of this ſeſ- gyman's Law,
ſion of Parliament were not lawful Biſhops. 7

2. Admitting that they were Biſhops, yet the manner and 122
form concerning their ſeals, ſtyles, proceſs, and proceedings
in their eccleſiaſtical courts were not conſonant to law: and
their reaſon was for this, that it is provided by the ſtatute of
1 Ed. 6. cap. 2 that from thence ſorward Biſhops ſhould not Stat. x E. 6. c.2.
be elective, but donative by the letters patent of the King: .
and that foraſmuch as at this day all Biſhops are made by elec- - . 13.
tion, and not by donation of the King, according to the act; Note che ſaid
for this reaſon, if the ſaid act of 1 Ed 6. be in force from the — 2
time that it took its effect, the Biſhops ſo elected are not lawful. :

3. By the faid act of 1 Ed. 6. it is further enacted, that all
ſummons, citations, and proceſs in eccleſiaſtical courts, ſhall
be made in the name and ſtyle of the King, and that their
ſeals ſhall be engraven with the King's arms, and that certi-
ficate ſhall be made in the name of the King. And whereas Stat. 1 E. 6. c.2.
the ſaid act of 1 Ed. 6. was repealed by a ſpecial act. 1 Marie * , tel
Parliam. 1. cap. 2. ſe, 2. And the faid act 1 Mar. is now © 9.
repealed by a branch of an act, 1 Fac. cap. 25. verſus finem ; |
for by the ſaid act it is enacted, that the ſaid act of 1 Mar.
ſhall be expreſsly repealed : ſo that the ſaid act of 1 Ed. 6. is
now in force. |

For when an act of repeal is repealed, the farſt act repealed
is revived, &c. as appears in Spencer's caſe, 15 Ed. 3. title
Petition 2.

And for this it was concluded that the ſaid ſtat. 1 Ed. 6.
c. 2. being in force, by conſequence all Biſhops made after
the act 1 Fac. were not lawful Biſhops : and for that their ſtyle
and proceedings after the ſame act were in the name of the |
Biſhops, and not in the name and under the ſeal of the King; Note.]
for this cauſe the proceedings were unlawful, Quia non obſer-
vata forma, infertur adnullatio actus. And theſe were matters
of great import and conſequence.


B 3 „


Negatur,


Page [8]


Vide Cod. 35,
36, 132, 967.
This cannot be


by implication.


Caſe at a Committee Part XII.


As to theſe objections, upon conſideration had of them by
commandment of the King, it was anſwered and reſolved by
Popham Chief Juſtice of England, and Coke Attorney of the
King, and afterwards affirmed by the Chief Baron and the
other Juſtices then attendant to the Parliament, upon good
advice and conſideration, that although the ſaid act 1 Mar. be
repealed, that yet the ſaid act 1 Ed. 6. cap. 2. for other cauſes
is not now in force, but remains repealed : yet true it is,
that when an act of repeal is repealed, the firſt act, as hath
been ſaid, ſtands in force, and is implicitè revived. But it is
to be obſerved, that the ſaid act 1 Ed. 6. was repealed, ad-
nulled, and annihilated by three ſeveral acts of Parliament:
and as a man which is bound by three ſeveral bonds, although
he break one or two of them, yet the third which remains
whole will bind him: ſo when “ the words of three ſeveral
acts repeal or annul an act, although that one or two of the
acts of repeal or annullation are repealed, yet the other which
remains in force, annuls the firſt act: firſt of all, the act of
1 Ma. expreſsly repealed the act of 1 Ed. 6. c. 2. and the act
of 1 & 2 Ph. & Ma. hath likewiſe ſufficient words to repeal
and annul the faid act of 1 Ed. 6. as to the ſtyle, ſeal, and
223 in courts- chriſtian, although that the act of 1 Mar.


Parlia. 1. had never been made, the words of which act are;


and the eccleſiaſtical juriſdictions of the Archbiſhops, Biſhops,
and Ordinaries to be in the ſame eſtate for proceſs of ſuits,
puniſhment of crimes, and execution of cenſures of the
church, with knowlege of cauſes belonging to the ſame ; and
as large in theſe points as the ſaid juriſdiction was, anno 20
H. 8. And although the ſaid act of 1 Mar. bath by expreſs


words repealed the faid act of 1 Ed. 6. and for that it may be


This argument
ſeems a poſſe ad
eſſe, and ſmells
of court flattery,


ſaid, that the ſaid act of 1 & 2 Ph. & Ma. could not repeal
that which was repealed before: and yet it was reſolved that
now, inaſmuch as the repeal on which the act of 1 Mar. ope-
rates, 1s now annulled and repealed, it follows, that if now
the act of 1 & 2 Ph. & Ma. be in force, or if the ſaid act of
the 1 Eliz, cap. 1. operate only as to the ſaid act of the 1 & 2


Ph. & Ma. it makes that the ſaid act of 1 Ed. 6. cannot alſo


ſtand, Quia leges poſteriores priores contrarias abrogant. But it
was objeCted that the ſaid act of the firſt and ſecond of Ph. &
Ma. is repealed by the ſtatute of 1 El. 1. And it was an-
ſwered and reſolved, that it was enaCted by the act of the
1 Eliz. that the ſaid act of 1 & 2 Ph. & Ma. and every
branch and article of it (other than for ſuch branches as be
hereafter expreſſed) ſhall be repealed: and after by the
other branch of 1 El. it is enacted, that all other laws,
ſtatutes, and every branch thereof repealed and made void


by


hed CT CHI" _— bk AG LEH yw__ vWF bi. Ak...


Part XII. concerning Brsnors. |


by the ſaid act of 1 & 2 of Ph. & Ma. and not in this act eſpe-
cially mentioned and revived, ſhall remain and be repealed
and void, as the ſame were before the making of the act:
but the act of 1 Fd. 6. was, as hath been ſaid, repealed by
the act of 1 & 2 Ph. & Ma. and the act of 1 Ed. 6. is not
revived ſpecially by the act of 1 El. yet the act of 1 Ed. 6.
remains repealed as it was before the ſecond act, which hath


ſufficient words to repeal and annu! the act of 1 Ed. 6. to anſwer Quzre de hoe?


both the objeCtions ; the ſtatute of 1 Eliz. cap. 1. revives the


act of 25 H. 8. c. 20. and further enaQts, that it ſhall ſtand in Cod. 125, 871.


full force and effect, to all intents, conſtructions, and pur-
poſes. And by the ſaid act of the ſaid 25 H. 8. c. 20. it is
provided, that at every avoidance of any Archbiſhop or Biſhop,


the King, his heirs, and ſucceſſors, may grant to the Prior
and Covent, and the Dean and Chapter, &c. a licence under Conge de Eflire,


the great ſeal, as of old time hath been accuſtomed, to. pro-
ceed to the election of an Archbiſhop or Biſhop, with a letter
miſſive, containing the name of the perſon which they ſhall
elect and chuſe, &c. And further, by another branch in the
ſame act, it is enacted, that every perſon choſen, elected,
and inveſted, and conſecrated Archbiſhop or Biſhop, acccord-
ing to the form and effect of this act, ſhall do and execute
every the thing and things, as any Archbiſhop or Biſhop of
this realm, without the offending of the prerogative royal of
the crown, and the laws and cuſtoms of the realm, might at
any time heretofore do : and theſe two branches anſwer to
both the objeQtions. viz. for the manner of eſection and con-
ſecration of Archbiſhops and 1 N on and alſo for the making

and execution of all things which belong to their authority, as
any Archbiſhop or Biſhop might have done before the mak-
ing of the ſaid act of 25 H. 8. within which words the ſtyle
and ſeal of their court, and the manner of their proceedings
are incloſed. And now the act of 1 Eliz, cap. 1. having re-
vived the act of 25 H. 8. and enacted that the ſame ſhall ſtand


and be in full force and * ſtrength. to all intents, conſtructions, Page [q]


and purpoſes; from hence it follows, that the act of 1 El.


reviving the 25 H. 8. hath repealed “ the act of 1 Ed.“ This is not


6. for in an act which was repealed, the repeal is void and — by is


; can never make
reſolution, for both the points upon which the ſaid doubts void a poſitive


were conceived. And it is to be obſerved, that the inten- l.


annulled : and this was the principal cauſe of the ſaid


tion of the ſaid repeal by the act of 1 Jac. was to repeal
the ſaid act of 1 Mar. —As to an act made 5 Ed. 6. by
which it is enacted, That the matrimony of all and every
& Prieſt, and other eccleſiaſtical and ſpiritual perſons, ſhall
« be adjudged, deemed, and taken, for juſt, true and lawful

| B 4 matrimony


® But after all
that is here ſaid,
it is ſtill held a
2
ny; tally,
For hat a Bid,
here in Englan
Is a mere tempo-
ral officer, and
may be confti-
tuted by letters
tent, as in
reland, &c,


Vide 8 Co. 68,
bg.


Caſe at a Committee, &c. | Part XII.


& matrimony, to all intents, conſtructions, and purpoſes :
& and that all children born in ſuch matrimony ſhall be
& deemed and adjudged, to all intents, conſtruCtions, and
& purpoſes, to be born in lawful matrimony, and be legiti-
«© mate and inheritable, to lands, tenements, and heredita-
& ments; and that they ſhall be tenants by the curteſy and
© tenants in dower, &c.” ſo that now the ſaid act of 1 Ma.
being repealed, the ſaid act of 1 6. cap. 10. is now in
force, and the matrimony of all eccleſiaſtical perſons and
their iſſue, lawful and legitimate, to all intents, conſtruc-
tions, and purpoſes, by which the doubt amongſt the vulgar
is well explained. | |

But the repeal of all the act of 1 Mar. by which divers
other ſtatutes were repealed, being repealed generally with-
out any reference as to the ſaid act of 5 Ed. 6. according to
the intention of the Parliament ſub filentio, made the ſaid
ſcruple. And yet as it appears by this reſolution upon mani-
feſt and direct matter, no inconvenience of the general repeal
of the ſaid act 1 Mar. doth enſue *. ' |


* And note, by our books it appears, that if a Deacon or
„ Prieſt take a wife, the marriage was voidable by divorce,
„ and not void, for they had not vowed chaſtity : and for
“e that, if they had iſſue, and one of them dies, the iſſue
«© ſhould be inheritable. But if a monk or nun, or other
< religious perſon which had made a vow of chaſtity, had
&© married, this marriage is void: and this doth appear


Ed. 2. tit. Nonability 26. 19 H. 7. tit. Baſtardy 33. 2 H.
7. 39. b.


Part XII.


The Caſe of the Sr ANNARIES.


Mich. 4 Fac. 1.
In the Star-Chamber.


T was reſolved in the Star-chamber in the ſame term, that
the King had not the pre-emption of tin in Cornwall by
any prerogative, For Stanni fodina, nec plumbi fodina, &c. or
other ſuch baſe mines, do not belong to the King by his pre-
rogative, but to the ſubject which is owner of the land. But
the pre-emption of tin in Cornwall belongs to the King as an
ancient rent and inheritance due to the King, as well of tin in


Pre-emption of
tin in Cornwall,
See Cotton's


Records 56,
142, 197, 346,


355- 4 Inſt,
229, 238, &c.


the land of the ſubject as in his proper demeſnes: and al-


though That now a Treaſon cannot eaſily be rendered of things
done before time of memory, yet it may well be, that all the
land of the county was the demeſne of the King ; and upon


grant of the land the King reſerved the mines to himſelf; for


theſe mines of tin are of great autiquity, as appears after, ex


Diodoro Siculs, Et certo certius et, that all the land in Eng-


Und is derived mediately or immediately from the crown, for
all land is held mediately or immediately of the King; and
for this reaſon ſuch a profit apprender may have a reaſonable
commencement: and where uſage hath allowed it to the
King, it doth belong to him. True it is, that all the county
of Cornwall was within the foreſt of the King ; and that * it
was diſafforeſted by King John, as appears by Camden, And
what conſideration the county gave for it to the King concern-
ing tin cannot now appear; but this appears plainly, that be-
fore the 33 Ed. 1. all the tin in Cornwall and Devon alſo, to
whomſoever the land belonged, appertained to the King: and
this is proved by divers expreſs records, and by an ancient
charter of King John amongſt the records of the Biſhop of
Exeter in hec verbd. Johannes Dei gratia Rex Angl, &c.
Omnibus Balivis ſalutem : ſciatis quod intuitu Dei & pro
falute anime noſiræ, &c. dedimus, conceſſimus ac præſenti
charta noflra confirmavimus Deo & eccleſis beati Petri Exon'.
& venerabili patri Simoni Exon” Epriſcopa & ſutceſſoribus
ſuis Exon Epiſcopis, decimam de antiqud firmd flanni -


Ancient de.
meſne.


Page [10]
Q


In Regiſtr.


Co. 4.Inſt. 2 3 20


|


%
*


Paten. 1 H. 3 Rex Roberto de Courtney ſalutem. Mandamus vobis quod |
Memb. 4 dilatione & ny aliqua, habere facietis Iſabell' Regine
ia


ane,
3 . HEL,


Caſe of the STAwnaries. Part XII.
com Devon & Cornub' : habendum fibi & ſucceſſoribus ſuis cum


emnibus libertatibus & liberis conſuetudinibus ad eam pertinentibus,
per manus illius vel illorum qui Stannaria habuerint in cuſlo-
did, Oc, |


hana :
matri noftr's


Teſte Com? Mareſcallo, &c.


annarig com Devon cum Cuneo & omnibus per-


REN nd Wn


4H. 3. in: Rex conceſſit Fohanni, filig Richardi, Stannaria in Cornubi4


5 H. 3- reddendo 1000 marks.


10 H. 3. Memb. Nx, c. Sciatis quod conceſſimus Ricardo dilefto fratri neſtro
Stannariam noflram Cornub', cum omnibus pertinentibus, with
prohibition that none tranſport any tin without licence of the
ſaid Richard, R |


10 Kd. 2. Inqui. For this that decima Stannarie no/#r* in com* Cornul? & De-


2 Numero 29. von do belong to the Biſhop of Exeter; it was therefore com-
manded to the ſaid Sheriff to value the ſaid Stannary, ſo that
the Biſhop may have that which to him doth belong, viz.
vera decima Stannarie ; in which note Stannariæ ng/ire,

233 Ed. 1. Note, there are two ſeveral charters, both bearing date
Grant all tin- |


ent. Vide pl. 10 Aprilis anno 33 Ed. 1. The one ad emendationem Stanna-
Com. 3575-— riarum noflrarum in com Devon : and the other ad emendatio-


> + Stannatoribus quod fodere poſſunt flaunum et turbys ad flannum


ris, et aliorum


debitas & uſitatas niſi nos vel heredes noſtri ſtaunum illum emere
Voluerimus, OI I Oe ITT oa re 7


33 Ed. 1. inthe The liberty granted to tinners by the ſaid charter, 33 Ed.
. I. is by charter 35 E. 1. granted to all tinners, which char-
ter 33 Ed. 1. mate to the tinners of Devonſhire, was con-
firmed de verbo in verbo, anno 4 Ed. 2. and was allo con-
firmed anno 1 & 17 Ed. 3.


Ds


Part XII. Caſe of the STANNARIES


De adviſamento concilii noſtri ordinavimus quad ſtannum in Rot. Ancient,
com” Cornu & Devon ad opus noſtrum capiatur pro defenſione An. 12 E. 3.
regni noſtri, &c. Et ad partes marinas celeriter mittatur, in *. Nom. y.
auxilium & ſupportationem * honorum noſtrorum, &c. Ita quod Page [11]
hominibus quibus ſtannum illud capi contigerit, de pretio ejuſdem
ſtanni ad certos terminos ſolvend ſufficiens ſecuritas per nos fiat, 5
aſhgnavimus vos conjundtim et diviſim ad capiendum, ad opus noſ-
trum, totum ſtannum in comitatu prædicto cunitum et etiam cuni-
end cum cunitum fuerunt, And there is alſo authority given
to take carriages tam per naves et batellos in portibus com” præ-
F dic exiſtent” quam carretta et alia carriagia quecunque pro ſtanno

ilo uſque ad Portum Southampton carriandum : and command-

ment given to the Sheriffs, quod ipſi F pow, pro carriagits & |
aliis neceſſarits in hac parte inveniendis de exitibus Ballivarum ſu- | '- ol
arum ſolvant., ; | \


=


Edward the Black Prince being deceaſed, the King (under 2: Ed. 3. ex
the great ſeal) confirmed (the ſame year) to Tydman of Lim- Rot. ae
berge, cunageum Stannat totius ducatus Cornut” pro tribus annis. Noi e, the Prince


. 0 a 4 h 2 .
Necnon emptronem Totrus Stanni, tam infra diftum ducatum Cor- hit — during


nub” quam com wires 6, het fodendi, quod vendi debeat pro fine
mille marcarum, et reddendo tria mille et quingentas marcas.


The faid charter was confirmed at the ſuit of the tinners, 3 R. 2.
8 Rich. 2, to the tinners in Cornwall.


The Raid Quarter of 33 Ed. 1. to the tinners of Devon, 2 Ed. 4.
was confirmed at the ſuttof the tinners, anno 1 Ed. 4. |


It was alſo at their ſuit confirmed, 3 H. 7. to the tinners 3 H. 7.
of Devon. .


- Vide the ſtatute of the 11 of H. 7. by which it is ordained, 11 H. 7. cap. 4- |
that a certain weight and meaſure ſhall be uſed throughout all
England; provided always, that this act extend not, nor be
in any wiſe hurtful or prejudicial to the Prince within the

duchy of Cornwall, or any weights belonging to the coinage |
of tin within the counties of Cornwall and Devon, but that =
| ſuch weighas ſhall be uſed, &c. as hath been accuſtomed.


The


|


0


. X ad i
—


W rr . y eg rr I  r
:


- 26 Apr. 7 E. 6.
le Roy Moruſt
in lan. enſuant.
&c.


Camden in
Cornw. f. 13.
Diod. Siculus
floruit ſub Au-
tuſto.


Page [12]


Caſe of the STANNARIESõ. Part XII.


The King gave Commiſſion and power to Gilbert Broc-
houſe, to have pre-emption for and in the name of the ſaid
King of all white tin within Cornwall and Devon, for one
and twenty years, yielding three thouſand marks rent.
Note, the ſtyle of the ſaid courts of Stannaries in Cornwall
and Devon, at all times, and during all the reign of Queen


Elizabeth, Mar. Ed. 6. H. 8. H. 7. Ed. 4. H. 6. H. 5.


H. 4, &c. Magna curia domini Regis ducatus ſui Cornub' apud
Crokerenton. in com Devon coram —— Comite Bedford cuſiode
Stannar* dicti domiui Regis et Reginæ in dicto comitatu Devon:
by which it may appear, that at the firſt all the tin in the
county of Cornwall and Devon belonged to the King : and
by, and after the ſaid charters of 33 Ed. 1. the King (or
Prince) may buy all if he will.


And note the antiquity of tin-mines in Cornwall. Vid.
Camden in Cornwall, 121. extremum promontorium quod or gam
vergivio incumbit, Diodoro Siculo dicitur Balerium : et vide Dio-
doro Siculo, lib. 5 c. 8. fol. 142. b. Britanni qui juxta Bale-
rium promentorium incolunt mercatorum uſu qui eo ſtanni, &c.

And as for that which was objeCted, that the charter of
33 E. 1. extends only to tin within the land of the King him-

elf: it was reſolved, that by the ſaid clauſe (fodere & fun-
dere flannum terris noſtris & vaſtis noſtris & ahtorum *® quorum-
cunque, &c. Sicut antiquitas conſuevit, &c.) It is manifeſt
that the King (or Prince) hath all the tin, as well in the land
of the ſubject as in his own proper land.

2. It ſhall be abſurd that the King ſhall reſerve the emp-
tion of his own tin. |


| 4 Inft, 229, &. 3. The King grants Stannatoribus noſtris divers liberties


and immunities which are all enjoyed as well by the tin-
ners in the lands of the ſubject, as by thoſe in the land of the
King, &c.


Part XII.


The Caſe of the King's Preroga-
tive in SALT-PETRE.


In the Seſſion of Parliament held in De-
cember anno 4 fac. Regis.


LL the Juſtices, viz. Popham, Chief Juſtice of Eng-

land, Coke Chief Juſtice of the Common Pleas, Flem-
ing Chief Baron, Fenner, Searl, Yelverton, Williams,
and Tanfield, Juſtices, were aſſembled at Serjeants-Inn, to
conſult what prerogative the King had in digging and taking
of ſalt · petre to make gunpowder by the law of the realm; and
upon conference. between them, theſe points were reſolved
by them all, una voce.

That although the invention of gunpowder was deviſed 8
within time of memory, viz. in the time of R. 2. yet in- —— Re-
aſmuch as this concerns the neceſſary defence of the realm, cords 24. That
he ſhall not be driven to buy it in foreign parts; and foreign Ponger or mw
princes may reſtrain it at their pleaſure, in their own domi- mp _—
nions: and ſo the realm ſhall not have ſufficient for the de- 14 E. z.
fence of it, to the peril and hazard of it: and therefore inſo-
much as ſalt · petre is within the realm, the King may take it
according to the limitations following for the neceſſary de-
fence of the kingdom. | 8

Although the King cannot take the trees of the ſubject Second point.
growing upon his freehold and inheritance, as it was now
lately reſolved by us the Juſtices of England: and although
he cannot take gravel in the inheritance of the ſubject, for re-
paration of his houſes, as the book is in 11 H. 4. 28. Let it
was reſolved, that he may dig for ſalt - petre, for this that the
miniſters of the King who dig for ſalt-petre, are bound to
leave the inheritance of the ſubje& in ſo good plight as they
found it, which they cannot do if they might cut the timber
growing, which would tend to the diſinheritance of the ſub- See Plond. 246,
ject, which the King by prerogative cannot do; for the King 247.

(as it is ſaid in our books) cannot do any wrong. l
| And


|
|
|


Page [13]


Third point.


Jon Z. u 2
MAE


Caſe of the Prerogative Part XII.

And as to the caſe of gravel, for reparation of the houſes
of the King, it is not to be compared to this caſe; for the
caſe of ſalt · petre extends to the defence of the whole realm,
in which every ſubject hath benefit; but ſo it is not in the
caſe of the reparation of the King's houſes : and therefore it
is agreed in 13 Hf. 4. and other books, that the King may
charge the ſubject for murage of a town, to which the ſub-
jects were charged in the time of inſurrection or war, for
ſafety : and ſo for pontage, for this that he which is charged
hath benefit by it, bur the King cannot charge the ſubject for
the making of a wall about his own houſe, or for to make a
bridge to come to his houſe; for that doth not extend to pub-
lic benefit : but when enemies come againſt the realm to the
ſca-coaſt, it is lawful to come upon my land adjoining to the
ſame coaſt, to make trenches or bulwarks for the defence of
the realm, for every ſubjeQt hath benefit by it. And there-
fore by the common law, every man may come upon * my
land for the defence of the realm, as appears 8 Ed. 4. 23.
And in ſueh caſe on ſuch extremity they may dig for gravel,


for the making of bulwarks ; for this is for the public, and


every one hath benefit by it ; but after the danger is over, the
trenches and bulwarks ought to be removed, ſo that the owner
ſhall not have prejudice in his inheritance : and for the com-
monwealth, a man ſhall ſuffer damage; as, for ſaving of a
city or town, a houſe ſhall be plucked down if the next be on
fire : and the ſuburbs of a city in time of war for the com-
mon ſafety ſhall be plucked down; and a thing for the com-
monwealth every man may do without being liable to an ac-
tion, as it is ſaid in 3 H. 8. fol. 15. And in this caſe the
rule is true, Princeps et reſpublica ex juſta cauſa poſſunt rem
«-meam auferre,


It was reſolved, that this taking of falt-petre is a purvey-
ance of it for the making of gunpowder for the neceſſary de-
fence and ſafety of the realm. And for this cauſe, as in
other purveyances, it is an incident infeparable to the crown,
and cannot be granted, demiſed, or transferred to = other,
but ought to be taken only by the miniſters of the King (as
other purveyances ought, and cannot be converted to any
other uſe than for the defence of the realm, for which pur-
poſe only the law gave to the King this prerogative, And it


5 0 not like to the mines of gold and filver, for there
2


the King hath intereſt in the metal; and therefore then
:


*


gs = oo CD w CS CO .


,


—


Part XII. of the King in SALT-PETRE.


he may dig for it, quia quando lex aliquid alicui concedit, conce-j |
dere videtur id, ſine quo res ipſa efſe non poteſt, Vide Plow. ill 314, 3255
| te caſe de Mines. So the King may dig in the land of the ſub- 326.


ject for treaſure-trove, for he hath property: and if the pow-


der which is ſo made by the miniſters of the King, begin to
decay (as it will in two years) then it ought to be changed
for other, or the money coming. of it ought to be employed


for powder for the defence of the realm; or the miniſters of


the King ought to make proviſion of ſalt-petre which will


endure a long time, and when need is, to make it into gun-


power, which may be made before the navy can be put in
readinels,


The miniſters of the King cannot undermine, weaken, or
impair any of the walls or foundation of any houſes, be they
manſion-houſes, or out-houſes, or barns, ſtables, dove-
houſes, mills, or any other buildings : and they cannot dig
in the floor of my manſion-houſe which ſerves for the habita-
tion of man ; for this, that my houſe is the ſafeſt place for
my refuge, ſafety and comfort, and of all my family ; as well
in ſickneſs as in health, and it is my defence in the night and
in the day, againſt felons, miſdoers, and harmful animals;
and it is very neceſſary for the weal public, that the habita-
tion of ſubjects be preſerved and maintained.

And there are two notable precedents, by which it ap-
pears, that the King by his prerogative had power to prohibit
depopulation, and provide for habitation,

The one in the 43 Ed. 3. Rot. clauſ. in Turri numero 23.
pro villa de Southampton.

The other, anno 21 R. 2. in dorſo clauſe, par. 1 N. 15. by
which the King prohibits that inco/” villarum prædictarum non
proſternant domus ſuas in villis prædictis in alias migraturi re-
giones, fc. 2585

Alſo the miniſters of the King cannot dig the floor of any
barn employed for the ſafe cuſtody of any corn, hay, &c. of
the owner, for that the floor of a barn cannot be made dry


and ſerviceable again in a long time: but they may dig in


the floors of ſtables and ox-houſes. ſo that there “ be ſuffici-
ent room left for the horſes and other cattle of the owner :
and ſo that they repair it in convenient time, in. ſo good
plight as it was babies; alſo they may dig in the floors
of cellars and vaults, ſo that there be {uficient rootn
for the neceſſaries of the owner; and ſo that the wine,
beer, and other neceſſary | proviſion of the owner be

| - not


Fourth points


Page [14]
Q


|
;


Re ee OS COPE OT SOS i EY WO ne TEES?


V


caſe of the Prerogative Part XII.


not removed, or in any ſort impaired. And they may dig


any mud - walls which are not the walls of any manſion-houſe,
ſo that order be taken that the manſion-houſe be well defend-
ed, as it was before; and ſo they may dig in the ruins and de-
cays of any houſe or buildings, which are not preſerved for
the neceſſary habitation of men.


Fifth points ſ They ought to make the places, in which they dig, ſo
w


Sixth point,


Seventh point,


Righth points


Ninth point,


ell and commodious to the owner as they were before.


They ought to work in the poſſeſſion of the ſubject, but be-
twixt ſun- riſing and ſetting ; ſo that the owner may make faſt
the doors of his houſe, and put it in defence againſt miſdoers,


They ought not to place or fix any furnace, veſſels, or
other neceſſaries in any houſe or building of the ſubject with-
out his conſent, or ſo near any manſion-houſe, as by it it
may receive prejudice or diſquiet.


They ought not to continue in one place over a conve-
nient time, nor to return again into the ſame place before
convenient. time, (which is long time) be paſſed,


It was reſolved, that the owner of the land cannot be re-
ſtrained from digging and taking ſalt-petre, for the King
hath not intereſt in it as he hath in gold and filver in the
land of the ſubject, for the King in the caſe of ſalt-petre hath
but purveyance ; ſo that the property of it is in the owner,
and for that he cannot be excluded of the commodity in his
own land., ; 1

And it is to be obſerved, that before 31 Eliz. which was
the next year after the Spaniſh invaſion, there was not any li-
cence or commiſſion of any King or Queen of this realm, for
for the taking of ſalt- petre: but in the ſaid 3 iſt year there
were two licences granted. |

The one particular to George Conſtable, Eſquire, and
the other general to George Evelin, Richard' Hills, and


John Evelin : the firſt gives Conſtable power and au-
thority for eleven years to dig, open, and work for falt-
petre within the counties of York, Nottingham, Lan-
caſter, Northumberland, Cumberland, and the biſhop-

ric


Part XII. of the King in SaTLT-PRTRE.
ric of Dureſme, as well within our lands, grounds, and poſ-
ſeſſions, as alſo within the lands, grounds, and poſſeſſions of
any of our loving ſubjects within the counties aforeſaid : and :
the conſideration of the patent was for a great quantity of ſalt-
petre yearly, by the ſaid George Conſtable, to be made and
provided for the ſtore of the Queen, at a lower rate than be-
fore was paid,
And further, our will and pleaſure is, that the ſaid George
Conſtable, &c. ſhall at his own proper coſts and charges,
eret, make up, and raiſe all, mud-walls, ſtables, and
grounds whatſoever ſo digged up, &c. In which licence it
was obſerved, that no power is given to dig in any manſion-
houſe, barns, dove-houſes, &c. but, as appears in the laſt
clauſe, in mud-walls, ftables, and grounds; for the clauſe
of reparation ought without queſtion to extend to all the
places to which the power to dig extends, &c.
The other commiſhon to Evelin, &c. extends to all the
realm of England * and Ireland, and all other dominions of Page [15]
the King, as well within our own lands, grounds, and poſ-
ſeſſions, as alſo within the lands, grounds, and poſſeſſions of
any of our ſubjects,


— LS


—_—— —


Note, the licence begins with lands, &c. ſo that houſes or
buildings are not named in it. For the learned counſel of
the Queen, as it ſhould ſeem, who drew the licence, thought
not that the licence ought to extend to the manſion-houſe, or
other neceſſary houſes ; for otherwiſe it would have been ex-
preſſed in the licence. And after, fcilicet 18 October 2 Jaco-
bi, commiſhon was granted to Evelin and othets, to take falt- EN
petre in the lands, poſſeſſions, and other convenient places,
and in convenient times, ſo that there were but three licences
or com miſſions ever made. And in none of them any power
by expreſs words 1s given to dig in any manſion-houſe, &c.

And in none of them is any prohibition to the ſubject to dig
in his own land: and it is obſerved, that in the ſaid laſt com-
miſſion is a clauſe, that for carriage none ought to go above
nine miles from his own houſe, and that he ſhall have 4d.
for every mile laden and empty, viz. eundo & redeunds.

And the reaſon was, that the owner may return again to his |
own houſe in the ſame day : and note, reader, here is a good | -
reſolution of the Juſtices for the true prerogative of the King
in taking purveyance of ſalt petre.


vor. VII. C GEORGE


3 Inſt. 16.
Treaſon in pro-
curing the great


ſeal to a blank,


and then writing
a patent, &c. on
r


See 1: Hawk,
ch. 17. ſect. 47,


48, 49, &c.


Patt XII.


GEORGE LEAK's Caſe.


Hil. 4 Jacobi


N this very term, one George Leak, a Clerk in Chan-

cery, had upon an ordinary piece of parchment, by great
deceit, fixed with a kind of glue, another parchment ſo thin
as art could make it, ſo that it did appear but one piece of
parchment; and upon the thin piece which was as it were the
ſuperficies of the other, he writ by good warrant a licence,
which was brought to the Lord Chancellor and ſealed with
the great ſeal: and after, the ſaid George took the thin piece
upon which the writing was, from the other parchment to
which, the great ſeal was affixed, and then all was a blank
with the great ſeal annexed : and” after the ſaid George writ
upon the blank, a grant of the King of certain lands: and
what offence this was, was this term debated amongſt the Juſ-
tices 3 and it was a great queſtion amongſt them, whether
this was high treaſon or no: and it ſeemed to me, that this
cannot be adjudged high treaſon, until it was ſo declared by
Parliament : for true it is, that the (tatute of 25 Ed. 3. de-
clares that if a man do counterfeit the great ſeal, or privy ſeal,
that-this is high treaſon : and true it is, that the Judges in
times paſt, viz. 2 H. 4.25. have adjudged that the taking of
the wax which was printed with the great ſeal, from one pa-


tent, and fixing it to another writing made in the name


of the King is a counterlciting of the great ſeal, for this, that
he abuſeth the ancient ſeal, in removing it from the patent,
and fixing it on another without warrant : and ſo Stam-
ford, lib. 1. fol. 3. proves that it was adjudged in his time:
and yet 40 Aff. pla. 33. that it was petit treaſon after the ſta-
tute : and 37 H. 8. title Treaſon, Brook, by the Juſtices
that this was nor treaſon : and I have ſeen a record of 2 H. 4.
the 25. where the party was indicted generally for counter-
feiting the great ſeal: andthe jury found him not guilty of coun-
terfeiting the great ſeal, as it was ſuppoſed by the indictment:
and found over the eſpecial matter, that he took the great
ſeal from one patent, and fixed it to another, and put this in
execution: and judgment is given againſt the party. 0
wit


Part XII. | Caſe of Ta EASOx.


without queſtion againſt the law, foraſmuch as they found
him not guilty of counterfeiting, for this is a full verdict,
and all the reſt is ſurpluſage; but this caſe in queſtion much
differs from it, for in * this caſe George Leak hath not any Page [16]
meddling with the great ſeal, but this remains now annexed
as it did before: and for this reaſon it ſeems to me, if the
ſeal be fixed to a blank patent, and one writes a grant in it,
contrary to his direction and truſt; or if one hath letters pa-
tent with good warrant made, and them raſe in a place mate-
rial, and puts in other words, to the great prejudice of the
King: in none of theſe caſes can it be adjudged a counter-
feiting of the great ſeal. For the ſtatute 25 Ed. 3. doth not
ſpeak of counterfeiting writings, but only of the great ſeal,
and the delinquent in this caſe doth not meddle with the ſeal,
but only with the writing. And I ſhewed a notable prece-
dent in Clauſ. 42 Ed. 3. memb. 8. in dorſo, where the caſe
was, that King R. 1. by his charter granted divers lands and
liberties Abbati de Bruera, in which the Abbot raſed out this
word Fittetrida, and inſtead of it writ Eſtleigh. 1 And, upon
ſhewing it, obtained a confirmation of it from King Edw. 3.
and an allowance of it in Banco Regis. And for this offence
| the ſaid Abbot was called before the King and his council,
viz. in the Star- chamber; where the Abbot charged one Ro-
| bert Rigg his Com- Monk, with the raſure: and the Abbot
was convict, (which could not be but in- court.) And it
| was part of the ſentence, that the ſaid charter, confirmation,
and allowance of it ſhould be brought in by the Abbot to be
cancelled. Out of which record, I do obſerve five things,
1. The antiquity of the Star-chamber, and this then was a gee 4 Inft. x0,
ö court in whis the Abbot was convict, and ſentence given.
2. That the ſaid raſure was not any counterfeit of the great
ſeal ; for if the offence had been high treaſon, it ſhould not


. C 2 5. That


have been determined before the council of the King in the

f Star- chamber. | |

— 3. That ſpiritual perſons were then puniſhable for offences |

. before temporal Judges. | 2 |
t 4. That if there be raſure of a deed between ſubje& and 1
| ſubject, in a place material, all the deed becomes naught : |
: and the party may plead to it non eff fafum. So, if the pa- |
tentee raſe his letters patent in any place material, all the pa- |
: tent becomes of no force by the law, as appears by the ſaid |
8 ſentence; and all the patent and all the dependance upon it,

N viz. the confirmation and allowance of it ſhould be all cancel- |
. led and defaced. | 4 |


. , CC CEE SS. > cole” A


Caſe of Tx IASOx. Part XII.


5. That although chat it is commonly ſaid, that an Abbot
can do nothing in prejudice of his houſe, yet in this caſe he
I may do it, for the King ought not to be in worſe cafe than a
> ſubject: and if the Abbot had raſed a charter made to him
by a ſubject, in ſuch a manner as he had raſed the charter of
the King, the deed of the ſubject had become of no force:
and ſo in caſe of the King. And then I concluded, that if
the raſing of a word in the patent of the King be not treaſon,
the raſing of two or three, or all the words of the patent,
and writing a new grant, is not treaſon : and I recited another
precedent in anno R. 2. in Parliament, where the caſe was,
that the Ambaſſador of the Duke and State of Genoa being
here under the ſafe- conduct of the King, for the buſineſs of
See 3 Inſt, 3. hs King and the realm, was murdered by certain ſubjects
John Imperial's : . . .
8 of the King: and this matter was debated in Parliament, and
To kill an Am- there reſolved, declared, and decreed, that this was treaſon.
— tre- Note it well, this cafe was not referred to the Judges, but
3 Inſt. 8. declared in and by Parliament: for it is provided by the ſaid
act of 25 E. 3. that for this that many other caſes of like trea-
ſon might happen in time to come, which men cannot think
nor declare at preſent, that if another caſe, ſuppoſed treaſon,
and which is not ſpecified in the aCt, ſhall come before any
of the Juſtices, the ſaid Juſtices ſhall ſtay without going to
Page [17] judgment of treaſon, until the caſe be“ ſhewn before the
| King in Parliament, who ought to adjudge it treaſon or other
felony 3 in which branch two things are to be obſerved.
1. That although a caſe happen like to the caſes of trea-
ſons mentioned in the ſaid act, that the Judges ought not
(as they do in other caſes by equal and like reaſon) adjudge
iv to be treaſon, for that branch reſtrains them: but this ought
to be declared in Parliament, for the words of the act are,
& foraſmuch as many other caſes of treaſon,” like, &c. The
ſecond thing is, that when a particular caſe (as the ſaid caſe
Vide Grotum of an Ambaſſador of a King) was adjudged high treaſon,
de Jure Bell of legatos violare contra jus gentium eft : and it appears 2 Reg.
OI Tis cap. 10. Hamon Rex Amonitarum legatos Davidis contumelits,
| Sc. ſuper quo accerimum bellum movetur, &c. By which it ap-
| * pears the conſequence of an abuſe of an Ambaſſador, &c.
Duod talis injuria eft juſli belli cauſa. Note, that legatus ejus
vice fungitur, a quo deſtinatur; et honorandus ęſt, ſicut ille cujus
vicem gerit. And afterwards George Leak, upon exami-
nation before the Chief Juſtice of England, made a clear
confeſſion of all the manner and circumſtances of the fact:
and upon examination, the caſe (as it was delivered to
the Juſtices to conſider of it, and to give their opinions)
1 Was


—— — —— —


Part XII. Caſe of TREASON.


was ſuch ; George Leak joined two blank parchments fit ſor
letters patent, ſo cloſe together with mouth glue as they were
taken for one, and did put one label through them both ; then
upon the uppermoſt he writ a true patent and got the great
ſeal put to the label, ſo the label and ſeal were annexed to
both the parchments, the one written, and the other blank,
then he cut off the glewed ſkirts round about, and took off
the uppermoſt thin parchment (which was written, and was a
perfect patent) from the label which with the great ſeal did
ſtill hang to the blank parchment ; and then he writ another
patent within the blank parchment, and did publiſh it as a 2
good patent: hereupon two queſtions were moved.

1. Whether this offence be high treaſon or no ?

2. If it be high treaſon, then whether he may be indicted
generally for the counterfeiting of the great ſeal, or elſe the
ſpecial fact muſt be expreſſed ? and the Juſtices were divided
in opinion in the firſt point of the caſe: and myſelf and divers
others held that this act was neither high treaſon nor petit
treaſon, becauſe it is not within either of the branches of the
ſaid ſtatute of 25 Ed. 3. But it is a very great miſpriſion; and
the party delinquent liveth at this day. But the Chief Juſtice
and divers others were againſt us ; and by reaſon of the diver-
ſity of opinions, reſpectuatur. Vide Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 22. Item
crimen falſi dicitur, cum quis illicitus cui non fuerit hæc data au-
thoritas de ſigillo Regis rapto vel invents & brevia cartaſiæ conſig-
naverit. As to the ſecond point it was reſolved, that if the 25 H. 8. c. x2.
ſpecial matter had amounted to counterfeiting the great ſeal
in law within the ſaid ſtatute, then he might have been gener-
ally indicted of high treaſon for counterfeiting the great ſeal :
as if a man in an affray kills a conſtable that comes to keep the
King's peace without any expreſs malice prepenſed, this is
murder in law; and the delinquent may be generally indicted
of murder by malice prepenſed.


Cuſtoms, Poſt,

33» 34. See the
caſe of Reniger,
c. Plow. 5, 6,
7, &c.


Page [18]


Qr. 20 R. 2. c. 4.


Prerogative of
diſpenſing


$ Co. 38.
Vaugh. 333,
347+
Cumberb, 22,
23.

11 Co. 82.
Plow. 457, 508.
1 Salk. 168.
See Skin. 157.


1 Q de hoc.


Part XII.


0 — — —_— A ”


— n


— —


A Caſe of CUSTOM.
Hil. 24 Eliz. In the Exchequer.


A Merchant brought eighty weights of bay-ſalt by ſea, to
a haven in England, and out of the ſhip ſold twenty
weights, and diſcharged them to another ſhip in which they
were tranſported : but the ſaid twenty weights were never
actually put on ſhore: and for the reſidue, vix. 60, he agreed
for the cuſtom, and put them upon land: and now the doubt
was, upon the words of the ſtatute of 1 El. cap. 11. * concern-
ing exportation, viz. ſent from the wharf, key, or other place
on the land, and concerning importation, take up diſcharge, and
lay on land: if in this caſe the ſaid twenty weights which
always were water- borne, and never touched the land, ought
to pay cuſtom as well inwards as outwards,

And it was reſolved, that in both the caſes cuſtom ought to
be paid ; for the diſcharging out of the ſhip upon the ſale
aforeſaid, amounts in law to a putting them upon the land,
for in the law this is znfra corpus comitatus: and if the law ſhall
not be ſo taken, the King may be defrauded of all his cuſtom,
and in this. caſe, foraſmuch as no cuſtom was paid, it was re-
ſolved that the goods were forſeited, &c.


\


—


Caſe of Non OBST ANTE, or
Diſpenſing Power.
OTE; a good diverſity when the King ſhall be bound


by act of Parliament, ſo that he cannot diſpenſe with
it by any clauſe of Non o/tante No act can bind the King


from any prerogative which is ſole and inſeparable to his per-


ſon, but that he may diſpenſe with it by a Non ob/tante ; as a
ſovereign power to command any of his ſubjects to“ ſerve
him for the public weal : and this ſolely and inſeparably
is annexed to his perſon: and this royal power cannot be
reſtrained by any act of Parliament, t neither in zhe/7, nor
in hypothe/i, but that the King by his royal prerogative
may diſpenſe with it; for upon commandment Say

ings


Part XII. Cale of Nox OßsTANTE.


King and obedience of the ſubject, doth his government con-
ſiſt: as it is provided by the ſtatute of 23 H. 6. cap. 8 that
all patents made or to be made of any office of a Sheriff, &c.
for term of years, for life, in ſee ſimple, or in tail, are void
and of no effect, any clauſe or parol De non ob/iante, put, or
to be put into ſuch patents to be made, notwithſtanding And
further, whoſoever ſhall take upon him or them to accept or
occupy ſuch office of Sheriff by virtue of ſuch grants or pa-
tents, ſhall ſtand perpetually diſabled to be or bear the office


3 Inſt, 239.


of Sheriff within any county of England by the ſame autho-


rity : and notwithſtanding that by this act. 1. The patent is
made void. 2. The King is reſtrained to grant Non ob/lante.
3: The grantee diſabled to take the office, yet the King by


is royal ſovereign power of commanding, may command by


his patent, (for ſuch cauſes as he in his wiſdom doth think


meet and profitable for himſelf and the commonwealth, of Note; this


which he himſelf is ſolely Judge) to ſerve him and the weal
public, as Sheriff of ſuch a county for year, or for life, &r.
And ſo was it reſolved by all the Juſtices of England, in the
Exchequer-chamber, 2 H. 7. 66. And ſo the royal power
to pardon treaſons, murders, rapes, &c. is a prerogative in-
cident ſolely and inſepatably to the perſon of the King: and
for this Non obſlante an act of Parliament to make the pardon of
the K. void, and reſtrain the K to diſpenſe with this by Nox
ob/lante, and to diſable him to whom the pardon is made, to
take or plead it, ſhall not bind the King but that he may diſ-
penſe with it: and this is well proved by the act of 13 R. 2.
Parliament 2. cap. 1. For by this it was enacted, that no
charter of pardon, from henceforth be allowed by whatſoever
Juſtices, for murders, treaſon, rape of a woman, not ſpect-


fied in the ſaid charter; and if it be otherwiſe, be the charter


diſallowed.


Note; this was the ſureſt way that the Parliament could
take to reſtrain the King to pardon murder, unleſs that he
pardon it by expreſs terms, which they thought the King
would not, for they knew that the King could not be
reſtrained by any act to make a pardon; for mercy and
power to pardon is a prerogative incident, ſolely and inſe-
parably to the perſon of the King: and it hath oftentimes
been adjudged that the King can pardon murder by gene-
ral words without any expreſs mention, with Non 9b/lante
the ſaid ſtatute : ſee 4 H. 4. cap. 31. In which it is ordain-
ed that no Welſhman be Juſtice, Chamberlain, "Treaſurer,
Sheriff, Steward, Conſtable of a caſtle, Eſcheator, Coro-
ner, or chief Foreſter, nor other officer whatſoever, nor

C4 ; Keeper


miſchievous re-
ſolution was the
ground of K.

J. 2. parents to
popiſh officers ? |


>
Vid. Poſt. 30.
& Quere.


Pardons.


Page [19]


Stat. 8 R. 2 c. 2.
& 33H. 8. C. 24


Caſe of Now OBsTANTE. Part XII.


Keeper of Records, &c. in any part of Wales, notwithſtand-
ing any patent made to the contrary, with clauſe of Non ob-
Sante licet fit Wallicus natus : and yet without queſtion, the
King may grant this with a Non obſtante. So purveyance for
the King and his houſhold is incident ſolely and inſeparably
to the perſon of the King: and for this cauſe the act of Par-
liament held in time of H. 3. De tallagio non concedendo, tit.
Purveyance, in Raſtall, which bars the King of pur-
veyance, is void, as it appears in Co. lib. fol. 69. But in all
ſuch caſes, although that the King may diſpenſe with ſtatutee,
yet a general difpenſation or grant without Non obflante is void:
but in things which are not incident ſolely and inſeparably to
the perſon of the King, but belong to every ſubject, and may
be ſevered, there an act of Parliament may abſolutely bind
the King : as if an act of Parliament do difable any ſubjects
of the King, to take any land of his grant, or any of his ſubC-
jects (as Biſhops) (as it is done by the ſtatute 1 Jac. c. 3.) to
grant to the King, this is good; for to grant or take lands or
tenements, is common to every ſubject: and for this it is not
proprium quarto modo, to Kings, ſcilicet omni ſoli & ſemper.
Vide the caſe of Deans and Chapters upon the ſtatute of 1
Eliz. vide 8 R. 2. cap. 2. & 33 H. 6. that none ſhall be Jul:
tice of aſſiſe, &c. in the county where he was born or did in-
habit, and yet the King with ſpecial Non obſlante may diſ-
penſe with this, for this belongs to the inſeparable prerogative
of the King, viz. his power of commandment to ſerve, &c.


Note; theſe opinions may juſtify any King's actiag againſt
law, and are a proper ground to erect arbitrary power, &c. J


Q. If


— i. 2 * mY — —


«


Q. If High Commiſſioners have


Power to impriſon.
Hil. 4 Tac. Regis.


OTE; Mich. 4. Fac. poſt prandium, there was moved High Commiſh.
a queſtion amongſt the Judges and Serjeants at Ser- 92ers, if they
jeant's Inn, if the High Commiſhoners inecclefiaſtical cauſes, imprilon
may by forcc of their commiſſion impriſon any man or no?

Firſt of all it was reſolved, by all, that before the ſtatute of Poſt. 47, 76,
1 El. cap. 1. the King might have granted a commiſſion to 8 Bias 6600
hear and determine eccleſiaſtical cauſes : but then notwith- New. * ©
ſtanding any clauſe in their commiſſion, the Commiſſioners Poſt. 74, 75.
ought to proceed according to the ecclefiaſtical law allowed
within this realm, for he cannot alter neither his temporal“ * Ergo, Q. the
nor his eccleſiaſtical laws within this Realm by his grant or din e on
commiſſion : vide Caudrey's caſe, Fifth Report. And they * 3
could not in any caſe have puniſhed any delinquent by fine
or impriſonment unleſs they had authority ſo to do by act of
Parliament, Then all the queſtion reſts upon the aQ of 1 El.
which as to this purpoſe reſts upon three branches. |

1. Such Commiſſioners have power to exerciſe, ufe, occupy,
execute all juriſdiction ſpiritual and eccleſiaſtical.

2. Such Commiſſioners by force of letters patent have
power to vifit, reform, &c. all hereſies, &c. which by any
manner of ſpiritual or eccleſiaſtical power, &c. can, or law-
fully may be reformed, &c. ſo that theſe branches limit the
juriſdiction, and what offences ſhall be within the juriſdiction
of ſuch Commiſſioners, by force of letters patent of the King:
and this is all, and only ſuch offences may lawfully be re-
formed by the eccleſiaſtical law.

3. The third branch is, that ſuch Commiſſioners after ſuch
Commiſſion delivered to them ſo authoriſed, ſhall have power
and lawful authority by“ virtue of this act, and the ſaid letters Page [20]
patent, to exerciſe, uſe, and execute all the premiſes acccordingto |
the tenor and effect of the ſaid letters pat. This branch gives them
| Power to execute their commiſſion. But it was objected, 8

ranc


/


— 1 , —


If High Commiſſioners have Power, &c. Part XII.


branch doth not give the Queen power, by her letters patent,
to alter the proceedings of the eccleſiaſtical law, or gave to the
Queen abſolute power by her letters patent, to preſcribe what
manner of proceedings, or puniſhment concerning the lands,
goods, or bodies of the ſubject; and this appears by the title
of the act reſtoring to the crown the ancient juriſdiction, ſo
that the intent was to make reſtitution, and not any innova-
tion in the proceeding or puniſhment: and it was obſerved
that this laſt branch gave to them power to execute all the pre-
miſes, according to the tenor and effect of the ſaid letters
patent, ſo that theſe words, * ſo authoriſed ” in the ſaid letters
patent, have relation only to the authority of the letters patent,
before ſpecified ; viz. ſuch as gave to them power to viſit. re-
form, redreſs, order, correct, and amend all errors, hereſies,
ſchiſms, abuſes, contempts, and enormities whatſoever ;
which by any manner of ſpiritual or eccleſiaſtical power, can
or may lawfully be reformed, &c. Theſe are the tenor
and effect of the letters patent before remembered: and if
any other conſtruction ſhall be made; 3

1. It ſhall be againſt the exprels letters, ſcilicet, ſaid letters

atent.

2. It ſhall be full of great peril and inconvenience, for
then not only impriſonment of body, but confiſcation of lands,
goods, &c. And ſome corporal puniſhment may be impoſed,
for hereſy, ſchiſm, incontinence, &c. Alſo power may be
given to them to burn any man for hereſy; which would be
againſt the common law of the land.


See Simpſon's caſe in Hil. the forty-ſecond of Eliz now
reported by my Lord Coke in 4 Inſt. 333. See Dyer


389.


ide poſt, 56, 58, and 93. of the writ De heretico combu-
rendo, ] |


Of


Of Stealing Women.


TOTE ; the ſtatute of 3 H 7. cap. 12. ſtands upon a pre-
amble and a purview ; the preamble is, where women,

as well maids as widows, and wives having ſubſtance, &c.
and ſome being heirs apparent, &c. for the lucre of ſuch ſub-
ſtance, be oftentimes taken by miſdoers, contrary to their
wills, and after married, &c. or defiled : ſo note theſe three
words in the preamble : vix. |

I. Be taken.

2. Be married,
23. Be defiled.

The purview is, that what perſon or perſong from hence-
forth that taketh any woman ſo againſt her will unlawfully,
viz. maid, wife, or widow, that ſuch taking, procuring, and
abetting to the ſame, and alſo receiving the ſaid woman ſo
taken againſt her will, and knowing the ſame be felony. And
that ſuch miſdoers, takers, and procurers to the ſame, and
receivers, knowing the ſaid offence in form aforeſaid, be
henceforth reput:d and judged as principal felons, ſo that it
is not ſaid in the purview ſo taken, married, or defiled, but
only fo taken againſt their will: and upon this, great queſ-
tion was moved 4 & 5 Ph. & Mar. in the Star-chamber, if the
eloinment againſt her will, without marriage, or carnal copu-
lation (which is intended by this word defiled) be felony or
no? And the opinion of Brook and ſome other of the juſtices
was, that it was “ felony ; but Sanders Chief Juſtice was
againſt it ; and afterwards, as Periam Chief Baron did report,
it was reſolved by the Juſtices in the 26 Eliz. that ſuch eloin-
men: only is not felony by the intent of the ſtatute, without
marriage or carnal copulation, for the miſchief was not only
the taking, but the marriage, or the defiling, which was (as
it was faid in the preamble) to the diſparagement of the ſaid
woman, and utter heavineſs and diſcomfort of her friends:
and the purview ought to purſue the miſchief.

Secondly, I his word /, hath reference to the preamble,
and all the miſchief contained in it. $a
Note; by the expreſs purview of the act, the acceſſary both
beſore and after is made principal, &c. but by a conſtruction
of the common law they that receive the miſdoers, and not
the women are acceſſaries; for this act makes even the re-
ceivers of the women principals,


Aurum


Stealing women,
felony.

Poft. 100.

Vide State
Trials, vol. 8.
2 Inſt. 434, 435.
1 Hawk. 109,
I 10.

2 Hawk. 313.
Fares', 101,102
133» |


Page [21]


Po l. 1c0.


;
;
4


Part XII.


Aurum Regine, Quid? Sc.
Paſch. 4 Fac. Regis. |


1 nm JS: Nee by the commandment of the King, it was re-
| 2 Maddox's Fire ferred to Popham, Chief Baron, and myſelf, what
{ PL ma Burgi pa, Tight the Queen which now 75; Rath, and in what cafes, to
| A N me Each a right claimed by her, called Aurum Regine, that is to ſay,
L / Z pro centum marcis argenti una marca auri ſolvend* per illum qui
*ͤfſponte ſe obligat: and upon conſideration had of it by a long

Eur, , time and view of all the records and precedents, viz. Librum
e e E. , Rubrum in Scaccario, fol. 56. de Auro Regine, where it is ſaid,
A, ave that this is to be taken de iis qui ſponte ſe obligant Regi, &c.
{ which is the foundation of this claim; and of a record in the


x Tower, 52 Hf. 3. and of a Record in the Exchequer, 4 E. 1.
e Ht; e u., and of a record in the Exchequer, Hil. 12 Ed. 3. and of the


' Tower in the ſame year, in Rot. Clauſ. and the acts of Parlia-
Wha ment 15 Ed. 3. cap. 6. & 31 Ed. 3. cap. 13. and the 13R. 2.
— in Turri, and divers other precedents and proceſs out of the


., Exchequer in the time of R. 2. H. 4. and other Kings, until


e 1 bo the time of H. 7.
72 Reſolution. It was reſolved that the Queen hath right to it, but with—-


— theſe limitations. .
. K 1. That it ought to be /ponte by the ſubject fine coactione, fo
| fo that this ought — be at 7 of the ſubject, whether he
will offer, or give, or no: and for this all fines upon judg-
ment, or by offer or fine for alienation, or in any other caſe
where the ſubject doth not do it Mente fine aliqua coattione, vis.
that the King of right ought to have it, there the Queen ſhall
have nothing.

2. It ought to be hoe fine conſideratione alicujus reventionts
ſeu intereſſe, that the King hath in eſe, in jure coronæ and for


!
1


*
t


*

.
4

.


— —— — — —— SS
* .
WU
wy.


. this upon ſale or demiſe of his lands, or wards, or goods of
felons, outlaws, et ſimili caſu; for theſe are contracts and bargains
concerning the revenues and intereſts of the K. and it cannot be

faid in ſuch caſe that the ſubjects ſponte ſe obligant, as to purchaſe

| or


Part XII. Aurum Reginæ.


or buying any the revenues or intereſts which the King
hath. | |

3. It ought to be Freon ſuper couſiderationem, et non ex
mera gratia & benevolentia ſubditi, for that which is of mere
grace is not properly ſaid of obligation or duty, and the
words of the records are, to have de iis qui ſponte ſe obligant ;
and ſo was it ordained by the King and his Council, as ap-
pears by the record of Hil. 4 E. 1. in Scaccario, &c.

4. It ought to be ſponte ſuper conſiderationem que non attin-
gat reventionem ſeu pot corone, \n any thing which the
King hath : as if the“ ſubject give to the King /ponte a ſum
of money for licence in mortmain, or for to create a tenure
of himſelf, to have a fair, market, park, chaſe, or warren,
within his manor, there the Queen ſhall have it: for the
ſubject did this ſponte, and was not conſtrained to it: and this
doth not concern any revenue or intereſt of the King : but if
the King hath a fair or market, or park, or warren, and


grant it for a ſum of money, there the Queen ſhall have no-


thing; for this was a thing in e/ſe ; and parcel of the re-
venue of the crown : and by that it appears, that foraſmuch
as little or nothing is given in ſuch caſe, where this of right
is due, this is not now of any ſuch value as was pretended :
and this reſolution was reported to our ſovereign lord the King
by Popham, in the gallery at Whitehall, d


Caſe


Page [22]


Foreſts, chaſes,
3 Inſt. 76, 77.
4 Inſt. 289,


313» to 319.


4 Iuſt. 299, 300.


Part XII.


*


il


Cale of FORESTS.
Paſch. 5 Jacobi Regis.


N this ſame term it was informed to the King, that great

wrongs were done in his foreſt of Leiceſter in the county
of Leiceſter: and in his foreſt of Bowland in the county of
Warwick, &c. parcel of his duchy of Lancaſter : and upon
this, by warrant of the King under his ſignet, all the Juf:
tices were aſſembled to reſolve certain queſtions, to be moved
concerning the foreſts by the Attorney cf the duchy, and the
counſel of the other part, which were foreſts, and which
were chaſes; the which being matter in fact, the Judges
could not give their reſolutions but by way of direction: and
it was reſolved by them, that if theſe are foreſts, it will
appear by matter of record, as by Eyres of Juſtices of fo-
reſts, ſwannymotes, officers of foreſts, as Regardors, Agiſters,
Verderors, &c. But the appellation of it by the name of a
foreſt in grants, offices, and conveyances, is not any proof
that this is a foreſt in law.

2. It was reſolved by all the Juſtices, that if theſe are not
other than free chaſes, and no foreſts in law, then he who
hath any freehold within them, may cut his timber and wood
growing upon it, without any view or licence of any: but
if he cut ſo much, that there 1s not ſufficient for covert, and
to maintain the game of the King, he ſhall be puniſhed at the
ſuit of the King. And ſo if a common perſon hath chaſe
in another's ſoil, the owner of the ſoil cannot deſtroy all the
covert, but ought to leave ſufficient covert and ſufficient
brouſe-wood, as hath been accuſtomed. |

3. It was reſolved, that within ſuch a chaſe the
owner of the ſoil by . preſcription may have common
for his ſheep, and warren for his conies, by grant or


preſcription; but he cannot ſur-charge with more than


. hath


Part XII. Caſe of For ESTS. |


hath been uſed, time from which, &c. nor make burrows in
other places than hath been uſed from the time of which, &c.
unleſs he hath warren by grant, and then be may uſe it ac-
cording to his grant; but he cannot erect a new warren with-
out charter. |

4. It was reſolved, that he who hath ſuch a warren may
lawfully build upon his inheritance, within his warren, a
convenient lodge for preſervation of his game.

5. It was faid by Popham Chief Juſtice, that it was ad-
judged in the time of the Chief Baron Brett, in the Exche-
quer, that a man may preſcribe to cut his wood upon his own
inheritance within a foreſt, although it was againſt the act in
the 43 Ed. 1. which is in the Abridgment, title“ Foreſt 21.
And this was the caſe of Sellenger, for cutting wood in the
foreſt of Hay in the county of Hereford: and their reaſon
was for that this was but a declaration of the common law,
and it may be tolled by cuſtom, as Littleton ſaid ; vide 2 Ed.
2. title Treſpaſs, fol. 9. in the time of Ed. 1. Treſpaſs 239.

Plowd. Com. Dyer 72. 332. 2 Ed. 4. cap. 7. that the ſub-
jet may have a foreſt : but this is intended if he hath power


to have ſwannymotes and Juſtices in Eyre and Foreſters ap-
pendant to his foreſts. '

Conſuetudo ex rationabili cauſa uſitata privat communem legem :
and it was held by ſome that this was but an ordinance, and
not any act of Parliament. Q.


FLOYD


Page [23]


4 Ioft. 31, 43,15.
Ib. 289, 290.


r
—


_ Conſpiracy doth
not lie againſt a
1 or indictor,
ut againſt a
witneſs.
Vide Poſt. 32,
91, 92, 99, &c.
1 Hawk. ch. 72.
per totum.


Caſe of Conſpiracy. Part XII,


|


FLOYD and BARKER,
Paſeh. 5 Jacobi Regis.


In the Star-Chamber.


N this very term, between Rice ap Evan ap Floyd, and

Richard Barker, one of the Juſtices of the grand ſeſſions
in the county of Angleſey, and other defendants : it was re-
ſolved by Popham and Coke Chief Juſtices, the Chief Baron,
and Egerton Lord Chancellor, and all the Court of Star-
chamber, that when a grand inqueſt indicts one of murder
or felony, and aſter the party is acquitted, yet no conſpiracy
lies for him who is acquitted, againſt the indictors, for this
that they are returned by the Sheriff by proceſs of law to
make inquiry of offences upon their oath, and it is for the
ſervice of the King and the commonwealth. And as it is
ſaid in the 10 El. 265. they are compellable to ſerve the law,


and the court: and their indictment or verdict is matter of


record, and called Verdictum, and ſhall not be avoided by
ſurmiſe or ſuppoſal, and no attaint lies. And for this reaſon
they ſhall not be impeached, for any conſpiracy or practice,
before the indictment : for the law will not ſuppcſe any un-


indifferent, when he is ſworn to ſerve the King: and with


his conſpiracy before; for he is a private perſon, produced by |


this agrees the books in 22 Aft, 77. Aſſiſe p. 12. 21 Ed. 3.
17. 16 H. 6. 19. 47 Ed. 3.17. 27 H. 8. 2. F. N. B. 115. a.
But it is otherwiſe of a witneſs; for if he conſpire out of the
court, and after ſwear in the court, his oath ſhall not excuſe


the party, and not returned by the Sheriff, who is an officer


ſworn, and the jurors are ſworn in court as indifferent per-


1 Salk,


ſons : and the law preſumes, that every juror will be indif-
ferent when he is ſworn; nor will the law admit proof againſt
this preſumption.

2. It was reſolved, that when the party indicted is convict


of felony by another jury, upon * not guilty pleaded,”


there he never ſhall have a writ of conſpiracy, but when
the party upon his arraignment is egitim modo acguieta-
tus but in the caſe at the bar, the grand jury who in-
dicted one William Price for the murder of Hugh ap
William, the jury, who, upon not guilty pleaded, *

Im,


a« as nn t as ee


„ ee ,


2 . ﬆ$<3


Part XII. Caſe of Conſpiracy.


him, were charged in the Star-chamber for conſpiracy againſt
him, and indicted and convicted, which manner of complaint
was never ſeen before: for if the party ſhall not have a con-
ſpicacy againſt the indictors, when the priſoner is acquitted
upon his indictment, a multo fortiori when he is lawfully con-
vict, he ſhall not charge neither the grand inqueſt by whom he
was indicted, nor the jury who found him guilty : for the
law in ſuch caſe doth not give any attaint, for this that he was
indicted by the oath of twelve men at the leaſt, and found
guilty by twelve: and in theſe caſes, the King is the ſole
party to the proceedings againſt the priſoner : but on the other
fide, when a jury hath acquitted a felon or traitor againſt ma-
nifeſt proof, there they“ may be charged in the Star-chamber,
for their partiality in finding a manifeſt offender not guilty,
ne maleficia remanerent impunita. And it will be a cauſe of in-
finite vexation and occaſion of perjury and ſmothering of great
offences, if ſuch averments and ſuppoſals ſhall be admitted
after ordinary and judicial proceeding : and it will be a means
ad deterrendos & detrabendos juratores a ſervitio Regis.

. It was reſolved that the ſaid Barker who was Judge of
Ale and gave judgment upon the verdict of death, againſt
the ſaid W. P. and the Sheriff who did execute, him according
to the ſaid judgment, nor the Juſtices of peace who did ex-
amine the offender, and the witneſſes for proof of the murder
before the judgment, were not to be drawn in queſtion in the
Star-chamber, for any conſpiracy, nor any witneſs, nor any
other perſon ought to be charged with any conſpiracy in the
dtar-chamber, or elſewhere, when the party indicted is con-
victed or attaint of murder or felony : and although the offen-
der upon the indictment be acquitted, yet the Judge, be he
Judge of aſſiſe, or a Juſtice of Peace, or any other Judge,
being Judge by commiſſion and of record, and ſworn to do


Page [24]


juſtice, cannot be charged for conſpiracy, for that which he


did openly in court as Judge or Juſtice of Peace : and the law


will not admit any proof againſt this vehement and violent


preſumption of law, that a Juſtice ſworn to do juſtice will do
mjuſtice ; but if he hath conſpired before out of court, this is
extrajudicial; but due examination of cauſes out of court, and
inquiring by teſtimony, & /imilia, is not any conſpiracy, for
this he ought to do; but ſubornation of witneſſes, and falſe
and malicious proſecutions, out of court, to ſuch whom he
knows will be indictors, to find any guilty, &c. amounts to
an unlawful conſpiracy. |


Vor. Vil, © 5 „


%


$


2
Averments.


Note.


Page [25]


Caſe of Conſpiracy. Part XII.


And records are of ſo high a nature, that for their ſubli-
mity they import verity in themſelves; and none ſhall be re-
ceived to aver any thing againſt the record itſelf; and in this
point the law is founded upon great reaſon, for if the judicial


matters of record ſhould be drawn in queltion, by partial and


ſiniſter ſuppoſals and averments of offenders, or any on their
behalf, there will never be an end of cauſes : but controver-
ſies will be infinite; et infinitum in jure reprobatur : and for
this it is adjudged in the 47 Ed. 3. 15. that a Judge who hath
a commiſſion, vz. that is of record, {hall not be charged in
conſpiracy ; which is to be underſtood of what he did in
court, for the reaſons and cauſes aforefaid : and with this
agree the books, 21 Ed. 4. 67. & 27 Aſſ. pl. 12. and the rea-
ſon is for this, that though the party is acquitted, yet the ac-
cuſing ſtands with the record: and accordingly was the law
taken in this cafe. But in an hundred-court, or other court
which is not of record, there averment may be taken againſt
their proceedings, for that it is no other than matter in pairs,
and not of record; as it appears in the 47 Ed. 3. 15. Alſo
one ſhall never aſſign for error, againft that which the court
doth as Judges; as to ſay, that the jury gave verdict for the
defendant, and the court did enter it for the plaintiff, or to
ſay that the party who levied the fine was dead before the fine
was levied, or ſuch like. Lide 1 H. 6. 4. 39 H. 6. 52. 7 .
7.11 H. 7. 4. 28. 1 Mar. Dyer 89. Byt in a writ of falſe.
judgment, the plaintiff ſhall! have a direct averment againſt


that which the Judges in the inferior court, have done as


Judges, quia recordum non habent, and with this accords 21
H. 6. 34. And asa Judge ſhall not be drawn in queſtion in
the caſes aforefaid, at the ſuit of the parties, no more ſhall he
be 1 in the ſaid caſes before any other Judge at the ſuit
of the King. And for this in the 27 Aſſ. pl. 18. one was
indicted and arraigned at the ſuit of the King, that as he was
a Juſtice of yer and lerminer, where certain perſons were in—
dicted * of treſpaſs before him, he made an entry of record, that
they were indicted of fclony : and it was adjudged that this
indictment was againſt the law, for this that he was a Juſtice
by commiſſion; and that is of record; and this preſent act


| ſhall be to defeat the record, hoc et, to aver againſt that which


he did as Judge of record, which cannot be by the law. Vide 27
Al. pl. 23. 2 R. 3. 9.28 Aſſ. pl. 21. 9 H. 6. 60. And it was
ſaid, that it was the caſe of one Nudigate, whoas a Juſt. of Peace
had recorded a force upon a view, which he did as Judge up-


Part XII. Caſe of Conſpiracy,


on record ; and a bill was exhibited againſt him in this court,
for this, that he had falſly made a record, where indeed there
was not any force: and by the opinion of Catlyn and Dyer,
Chief Juſtices, it was reſolved, that that thing, that a Judge
doth as Judge of record, ought not to be drawn in queſtion
in this court.

Note well, that the ſaid matters done at the bar were not
examinable in the Star-chamber ; and for this it was ordered


and decreed by all the court, that the ſaid bill without any


anſwer to it, by the ſaid R. Barker, ſhall be taken off the file and
cancelled, and utterly defaced: and it was agreed, that inſomuch
as the Judges of the realm have the adminiſtration of juſtice,
under the King, to all his ſubjects, they ought not to be
drawn into queſtion for any ſuppoſed corruption, which ex-
tends to the annihilating of a record, or of any judicial pro-
ceedings before them, or tending to the ſlander of the juſtice
of the King, which will trench to-the ſcandal of the King
himſelf, except it be before the King himſelf; for they are |
only to make an account to God and the King, “ and not to * Q the Par-
anſwer to any ſuggeſtion in the Star- chamber; for this would Hament.
tend to the ſcandal and ſubverfion of all juſtice. And thoſe
who are the moſt ſincere, would not be free from continual
calumniations, for which reaſon the orator ſaid well, invigi-
landum eſi ſemper, multæ inſidiæ ſunt bonis. 1
And the reaſon and cauſe why a Judge, for any thing done
by him as Judge, by the authority which the King hath
committed to him, and as fitting in the ſeat of the King (con-
cerning his juſtice) ſhall not be drawn in queſtion before any
other Judge, for any ſurmiſe of corruption, except before the
King himſelf, is for this ; the King himſelf is de jure to de-
liver Juſtice to all his ſubjects; and for this, that he himſelf Judges have
cannot do it to all perſons, he delegates his power to his Sep — wy
Judges, who have the cyſtody and guard of the King's oath. 5
And foraſmuch as this concerns the honour and conſcience See 4 Inſt. 47,
of the King, there is great reaſon that the King himfelt ſhall 43 71.
take account of it, and no other. | |
And Thorp's judgment, who was drawn in queſtion for See Cotton's
corruption before commiſſioners, was held againſt the law, Ar T
and upon that he was pardoned ; and it is contained in the judgment was by
lame record, quod non trahitur in exemplum. Vide the conclu- Parliament ad-


ſion of the oath of a Judge. Vide the Chronicle of Stow, 18 judged juſt and


legal, but in
Edw. 3. 312. 15 truth the whole


Note; Thomas Weyland Chief Juſtice of the Common ſecof Judges


Bench, Sir Ralph Hengham Juſtice of the King's Bench; drs L


a : 3 corrupt that the
and the other Juſtices were accuſed of bribery and cor- K. was forced tg


 # | ruption, I com:


Oath Ex OrrIcio. Part XII.


ruption, and their cauſes were determined in Parliament,


| NN ſome were baniſhed, and ſome were fined and impri-
ſoned.


Page [26]


The Ordinary
cannot enforce

a man to anſwer
genera! articles
Ex officio.


Note, this Ex
Officio oath is
fince abrogated
by ſtat. 16 Car.
1. c. 2. ſect. 4.
& 13 Car. 2.
c. I2. ſet, 4.
See Gibſon's
Codex 56, 58,
$072 999, 1053.


Vide 2 Ed. 3. fol. 27. That the Juſtices of Trayl-baſton (fo
called for their ſummary proceeding) were in a manner Juſ-
tices in Eyre; and their authority was founded upon the {tat,
of Ragman, which you may ſee in the old Magna Charta.
Vide the form of the commiſſion of the“ Trayl-baſton, Hol-
lingſhead, Chron. fol. 312. And note, it appears by the
ſaid precedent and Chronicle, that the King did examine the
corruption of his Judges, before himſelf in the Parliament,
and not by force of any commiſſion,


Abſurdum ęſi affirmare, (re judicata) credendum eſſe non jadici,


Of Oaths before an Eccleſiaſtical Judge


Ex Orpp1cio.


OTE; Paſch. 4 Jacobi, in the time of the Parliament,
the Lords of the Council of Whitehall demanded of
Popham Chief Juſtice and myſelf, upon motion made by the
Commons in Parliament, in what caſes the Ordinary may
examine any perſon ex officio upon oath ; and upon good con-
fideration and view of our books, we anſwered to the Lords of
the Council at another day in the Council- chamber.
© . That the Ordinary cannot conſtrain any man eccleſi-
cc aftical or temporal, to ſwear generally to anſwer to ſuch in-
ce terrogatories as ſnall be adminiſtered unto him; but ought
c to deliver to him the articles upon which he is to be ex-
& amined, to the intent that he may know whether he ought
by the law to anſwer to them: and fo is the courſe of the
© Star- chamber and Chancery; the defendant hath the cody of
ce the bill delivered unto him, or otherwiſe he need ndt to
« anſwer to it. i 4968
« 2, No man eccleſiaſtical or temporal ſhall be examined


& upon ſecret thoughts of his heart, or of his ſecret opi-


% nion: but ſomething ought. to be objected againſt him
« what he hath ſpoken or done: no lay-man may be exa-
« mined ex officio, except in two cauſes, and that was
grounded upon great reaſon ; for lay-men for the moſt
« part are not lettered, wherefore they may eaſily be in-
s veigled and entrapped, and principally in hereſy and er-
© Toſh +


Part XII. Oath Ex Orx1ci1o,


« rors of faith: and this appears by an ordinance made in
« the time of Ed. 1. tit. Prohibition in Raſtal.”

The words of which ordinance are, and guod non permit-
tant quod alioqui laici in balliva ſub in aliguibus locis conveniantur,
ad aliquas recognitiones per juramenta ſua e niſi in cauſis
matrimonialibus et teſlamentarits. And the reaſon that the ec-
cleſiaſtical Judge ſhall examine them in theſe two caſes, is for
this, that contracts of matrimony, and the eſtates of the
dead are many times ſecret ; and they do not concern the
ſhame and infamy of the party, as adultery, incontinency,
uſury, ſimony, hearing of maſs, hereſy, &c. |

And for this cauſe in theſe caſes, and ſuch like, the eccle-
ſiaſtical Judge ought not to examine partem ream, upon their
oath ; for as a civilian ſaid, that this was inventio diaboli ad de-
trudendas miſerorum animas ad infernum : and in the Regiſter,
fol. 36. 6. there is a prohibition in this form, Præcipimus tibi
quod non permittas quod aliqui laici ad citationem talis Apiſc' ali-
quo loco conventant de cælero ad aliquas recognitiones fattas vel ſa-
cramenta preflanda, (the one 1s the expoſition of the other)
niſi in caſibus matrimonialibus et teſtamentariis : and there is an
attachment upon it, pone per vad” talem Epiſe : quod fit coram
Juſticiariis noftris, &c. oftenſurum quare fecit ſummoniri, et
per cenſuras eccleſ” diſtringi laicas perſonas vel laicos h:mines &


faeminas ad comparendum coram eo ad præſtandum juramentum


dignitatis no/lr& Regie, necnon contra conſuetudinem regni noſtris
et habeas ibi nomina plegiorum, Sc, teſle, &c. by which it
doth appear, that this was not only againſt the ſaid ordinance,
but alſo againſt the cuſtom of the realm, which had been
time out of mind, and alſo in prejudice of the crown and
dignity of the King: and with this agrees F. N. B fol. 41.
And vide the caſe reported by the Lord Dyer (but the caſe is
not printed) rin. 10 Eliz. one Leigh an attorney of the
Commoni” Pleas, was committed to the Fleet by the high


pro voluntate ſua ipſis invitis in grave coronæ præjudicium * Page [27]


Leigh's caſe,


Commiſſioners in a cauſe eccleſiaſtical, for this, that he had


been at maſs, and retuſed to ſwear to certain articles to be
propoſed to him. And held, that although in ſuch caſe, ec-
cleſiaſtical juriſdiction is ſaved by the ſtatute of 10 Eliz yet
they ought not in ſuch caſe to examine upon his oath : and
hereupon he was delivered by all the court of Common Picas
upon the return of the matter upon a Habeas corpus.

And in Mich. 18 El. Dyer, fol. 175. in Hind's caſe, who
would not {wear coram Commiſſionariis Eccleſ”* ſuper articu-


3 los


Hind's caſe,


-
|
|
.


Oath Ex Orriceiro. Part XII.
Note, the deli- Jos pro uſura, & ea de cauſd commiſſus ef! gaolæ de le Fleet. He


93 was delivered by Habeas corpus per totam cus iam. This was


the high com. alſo becauſe they could not impriſon. |
miſſion had no ide le flatute 25 H 8. cap. 14. which is declaratory as to


power to im-


priſon. sec tbis point: it ſtandeth not with the right order of juſtice nor
2 Iaſt. 333. good equity, that any perſon ſhould be convict, and put to
Gibſon's Codex, the loſs of his life, good name, or goods, unlels it were by.
* due acculation, and witneſſes, or by preſentment, verdict,
confeſſion, or proceſs of outlawry, &c. And it is not rea-

ſonable that any ordinary upon ſuſpicion conceived of his own

fancy, without due accuſation or preſentment, ſhould put any

ſubject of this realm in infamy and flander of hereſy, to the

peril of life, loſs of good name, or goods; [et paulo ante)

the moſt expert and learned man of this realm, diligently lay-

ing guard upon himſelf, cannot 'eſchew and avoid pe-

nalty and danger, &c. if he ſhould be examined upon ſuch

captious interrogatories, as 1s and hath been accuſtomed to

be miniſtered by the Ordinaries of this realm, in cafe where

they will ſuſpect any man of hereſy : and this was the judg-

ment of all the ſaid Parliament. See F. N. B. Juſtice of

Peace 72. Lamb. in his Juſtice of Peace 338. Crompt. in

Juſtice of Peace 36. 6. In all which it appears, that if any

be compelled to anſwer upon his oath, where he ought not by

the law, that this is opened anTPuniſhable before a Juſtice

of Peace, a Juſtice of Aſſiſe, &c. for this is an article of

charge, to enquire of all oppreſſions: and as to that which

was objected, that for a very long time, divers had been ex-

amined upon oath in eccleſiaſtical courts ; as to this it was

anſwered, that it might very well be, and not againſt law,

for the words of the treatiſe or ordinance, and of the re-

gilter, are, contra valuntatem eorum, c. 80 that if any aſ-

ſent to it, and take it without exception, that is not contra
voluntatem eorum, but to inforce any to take it, who ought
not to take it by the law, is a great oppreſſion: but if any
perſon eccleſiaſtical be charged with any thing which is pu-
niſhable by our law, as for uſury, &c. there he ſhall not
be examined upon oath, for this, that his oath is evi-
dence againſt him at the common law, and to do it in-
curs the penalty of the ſtatute; but witneſſes may be cit-
ed to teſtify. Regiſter, tit. Conſult. F. N. B. 53. d. Allo
by the ſtatute 2 H. 4. cap. 15. it is provided, that dirs
Dioeceſanus per ſe vel per Commiſſarios ſuos contra hujuſ-
modi perſonas, &c. Et ad omne juris effeflum, publice &
Judicialiter procedat & negitium hujuſmadi, &c. terminet
| Juxta


Gibſon's Codex
400 4


Part XII. Oath Ex Or riero.


juxta canonicas ſanctiones, which words, juxta canonicas ſandti-
ones, give them power to proceed according to their Canons,
and exclude the common law, ag by pretext of this in the
caſes mentioned in the ſaid act, they examined as well lay-
people as“ Clerks, upon their oaths concerning hereſy, er-
roneous opinions, &c. mentioned in the ſaid act in the reigns
of HI. 4. H. 5. H 6. Ed. 4. R. 3. H. 7. unto the time of
the ſaid act of 25 H. 8. Kod for this in the reign of H. 8.

nor in the reign of Ed. 6. no lay man was examined upon his
oath, except in the ſaid two caſes of matrimony and wills:

but in the reign of Queen Mary, this act of 2 H. 4 was re-
vived, and then all the martyrs who were burnt were ex-
amined upon their oaths : and afterwards by the 10th Eliz.


Page [28


Poſt. 57, 387 93.


the faid act of 2 H. 4. is repealed, by which the common


law is in full force and effect: and for this cauſe all the pre-
tence of poſſeſſion and practice which the eccleſiaſticaLcourts
have had is ſtrongly anſwered by this which hath been ſaid,

that the words of the ſaid treatiſe and regiſter are, contra vo-
luntatem eerum, &c. And thoſe who have ſo taken it, have
aſſented to it, and that ſtands with law.

Note, that King John after he had murdered his nephew
Arthur, and niece Ellenor; the iſſue of his elder brother
Geoffery, after he had loſt Normandy, Aquitain, and Anjou,
after that his Commons for unjuſt vexation diſobeyed him,
his nobles revolted from him, the clergy oppreſſed by him,
and that he ſtood excommunicated by the Pope, and his king-
dom interdicted, he for his protection, granted by his charter
of 13 Mai anno regnt 14. ſubmitted himſelf to the obedience
of the Pope: and after in the fourteenth year of his reign, as
one deſtitute of all ſuccour and ſafety, and from day to day in
ſear to loſe his crown, by another charter he reſigned his
crown and realm to the Pope Innocent and his ſucetlors, by
the hands of Pandolph his legate, and took it of him again to
hold of the Pope, which was utterly void, for this, that
the kingly dignity 1s an inherent inſeparable to the royal
blood of the King, and deſcendable to the next of blood of the
King, and cannot be transferred to another, no more than a
Duke, or Earl, or Baron, or other dignity may transter over
their dignity, for theſe are incidents inſeparable ; alſo the
Pope was an alien born, and therefore was not capable of
inheritance within England : by colour of which ſubmiſſion
and reſignation, the Pope and his ſucceſſors exacted gr-at
lums of the clergy and Jaity of England, pro commutan dis


4 pœni-


Matth. Paris,
225, 225, 227,
&.


Parliament
Ca tes, 1, 2, & c.


Oath Ex Orricio. Part X11,


pœnitentiis, to maintain the height and dignity of the Pope.
And for the better inriching of the coffers of the Pope, Pope
Gregory the Ninth, ſent Ortho Cardinalis de Carcere Tulliano
into this realm, when there was indignation betwixt H. 2.
and his nobles, to collect money for the Pope, who did at.
lect infinite ſums of money, ſo that it was ſaid of him, gued
legatus ſaginatur bonis Angliæ, which legate held his council at.
London, anno Domini 1237, & 22 Hf. 3. And for the better
| finding out offences which ſhould be redeemed with money,
1 he, with the aſſent of the Biſhops of England there afſem=
| bled, made divers canons, amongſt which one was, Jus Ju-
| | randi calumniæ in cauſis eccleſiaſticis cujuſlibet, et de veritate di-
1 cendi in ſpiritualibus quoque, ut veritas facilius aperiatur & caus
i fe celerius determinentur, flatuimus de cetero priſtari in regno
 % Angliæ ſecundum canonicas & legitimas ſandtiones, obtenta in con-
trarium conſuetudine non obſlante, &c.
By which canon it appears, that the law and cuſtom of
England was againſt this examination of the party defendant
upon his oath, for it is ſaid fatuimus de cætero preflari in reg-
no Anglie, ſo that this was a new law, and took its effect de
| Cetero.
| | 2. Obtenta in rontrarium conſuetudine non obſlante. And this
| very well agrees with the regiſter and the ſaid treatiſe D-
Regia Prohibitione, and the other authorities, that the law and
Page 29] cuſtom of England * was, that lay people in criminal cauſes,
be they eccleſiaſtical or temporal, ſhall not be examined upon
| their oath (only in cauſes matrimonial and teſtamentary;)
otherwiſe it is of Clerks, as is aforeſaid : and for this, that it
appears by the ſaid canon itſelf, that this was againſt the law
and cuſtom of England; whence it follows that this canon
ſhall not bind, for that the law and cuſtoms of England can-
not be changed without an act of Parliament, for this, that
the law and cuſtom of England is the inheritance of the ſub-
ject, which he cannot be deprived of without his affent in
arliament: and it appears in Linwood, cap. Jure jurandi,
Fol. 8. 6. That Boniface Biſhop of Canterbury, anno 1272.
See Gibſon's & 57 H. 3. a little before the death of that King made this
Codex 999- canon, Statuimus quod laici de ſubditorum peccatis et exceſſibus cor»
— 4% rigendis per prælutos et judices eccleflaſticos inquiratur ad pr @ſtan-
i 2 dum de veritate dicenda ſacramentum per excommunicationts ſenten-
0 tias. Si opus ſuerit compellantur impedientes, vero ne hujuſmedi ju-
ramentum præſtetur per interdict eſt excommunicatio ſententia ar-
| ceautur. In which canon it is to be obſerved, that this 20
| | tends


= = - — —ßê—ͤddê —————2f2⁊ , — —


Part XII. Oath Ex Orricto.


tends to lay people; for, as appears, the eccleſiaſtical Judge
may examine thoſe of the clergy upon their oaths, and note,
Linwood, cap. Jure jurando, fol. 6. litera E. ſaith fo. Hic di-
citur cauſa editionis bujus ſtatuti, viz. prælati ecclefiaſtici proce-
debant ad inguirendum de criminibus & exceſſibus ſubditorum ſuo-
rum et laici (nota hic) ſuffulti poteſtate domi norum temporalium in
hujuſmodi inguiſitionibus noluerunt jurare de veritate dicenda.
Note well what the cauſe was, why lay people refuſed to
be examined for crimes and exceſs. | NDS
2. It appears, that the Judges of the common law, by their
prohibition d1d interdiQ, &c. as it appears by the regiſter
and the other authorities; in the time of Ed. 1. and other
Kings, incroachments were made upon the ſubjects, which
are here called impedimentes, but now the canon faith impellat.
3. That where by the law they may examine lay people
upon their oath, in cauſis matrimonialibus et teſtamentariis, here
Boniſace makes this canon to extend to peccata et exceſſus,
which canon was utterly againſt the law and cuſtom of Eng-
land. In like manner another was made by him at the ſame
time Linwood, cap. De benef. fol. 231. which canon being made
directly againſt the Judges, who did award proceſs againſt
them, if they did impoſe any pecuniary pain : and prohibits
them the Judges with fear of excommunication, the canon
being againſt law, the Judges prohibited them notwithſtand-
ing this thundering of excommunication in all ages. And
the ſcope and purpoſe of the ſaid canon was to perplex the
ſubjects, and to inrich themſelves by puniſhment pecuniary :
and this is declared by act of Parliament made 9g Ed. 2. call-
ed Articuli Cleri. Si prælati imponant pœnam pecumariam alicui Note.


pro peccato, Sc. Regia probibitio locum habet. Note this,


* = =:


—_———— — ——


— ey 3
—— — — — —
-


n- — — 2
— — — ſ— —̃ — —— ꝗ q —
- *
-


Action popular.
Bonum publi-
cum.

Poſt. 63.

1 Salk. 32.

1 Inſt. 56. a.


Page [ 30]
Nota.
Bridges.

See 13 Co. 33.
&c. ib.

Antea 18, 19.


Part XII.


*


Of PAR D ONS.
Trin. 5 Jac. 1.


NT. A, the law ſo regards the weal public, that although

in actions popular the King ſhall have the ſuit ſolely in
his own name for the redreſs of it, yet by his pardon he can-
not diſcharge the offender, for this, that it is not only in pre-
Judice of the King but in damage of the ſubjects: though for
the avoiding of infinite ſuits, they cannot have private ac-
tions, and for that reaſon the ſuit is given to the King, not
only for himſelf, but alſo for all his ſubjects, * as if a man
ought to repair a bridge, and for default of reparation it falls
into decay: in this caſe the ſuit ought to be in the name of
the King, and the King is ſole party to the ſuit, but for the
benefit of all his ſubjects. And for this, if the King pardon
it, yet the offence remains; and in any ſuit in the name of
the King, for redreſs of it, the offender ought (notwithſtand-
ing the pardon) to make and repair the bridge for the benefit
of the weal public; but peradventure the pardon ſhall diſ-
charge the fine for the time paſt ; and with this agrees 37 H.
6. 4. 6. Plow. Com. in Nicol's caſe, 487. where the words
of the law are ; if a bridge or a highway is repairable by the
ſubject, and is in decay, the pardon of the King ſhall not ex-
cuſe him which ought to dg it, for this, that the other ſub-
jects of the King have intereſt in it : but note, the pardon in
ſuch caſe ſhall diſcharge the fine, but only for the time before
the pardon : but for the time after the pardon, without quel-
tion the offender for his default ſhall be fined and impriſon-
ed; the ſame law, and @ mults fortiori in caſe of depopula-
tion ; for this is not only an offence againſt the King, but
againſt all the realm; for by this the realm is enfecbled;
idle and diſſolute people, which are enemies to the common-


| wealth, abound: and for this cauſe depopulation and dim


Antea 8. 49.


nution of ſubjects is a greater nuiſance and offence to the
weal public, than the hindrance of the ſubjects in their good
and eaſy paſſage by any bridge or highway: and for this,
notwithſtanding the pardon of the King, he ſhall be bound
to re-edify the houſes of huſbandry which he hath depo-


pulate!;


i 3


— —


r T


Sw


8
>
_
-


part XII. PanDONSs.


pulated ; but peradventure for the time before the pardon he
ſhall not be fined, but for the time after without doubt he
ſhall be fined and impriſoned, for the offence itſelf cannot be
pardoned, as in the caſe of a bridge or highway; quia eſt ma-
lum in ſe : but this continues as to the fine and impriſonment.
at all times after the pardon : but the penalty inflicted by the
ſtatute that may be diſcharged, quia frohibitum. Vide 3 Ed. 3.
tit. Aſſ. 443. where an Abbot was bound to repair a bridge
by preſeription, and after the King by his charter diſcharged
him, which charter was allowed in a ge warranto And
after the Abbot was indicted at the ſuit of the King, for de-
fault of reparation of the ſaid bridge, and he pleaded the ſaid
charter and allowance : and notwithſtanding it was adjudged
that he ſhould repair the ſaid bridge, for this, that it ſhall be
to the prejudice and damage of his ſubjects: but when the
King chargeth his ſubjects for the making of a bridge, or
cauſey, or wall, &c. there the King may diſcharge of the
pontage, murage, &c. But when one is bound by preſcrip-
tion or tenure, &c. to repair a bridge, &c. there the Kin
cannot diſcharge it. And all this appears in the ſaid book.


And note, if one be bound to the King in a recognizance viae 45 H. 6.
for to keep the peace againſt one, and other the liege people 29. per Forteſ- -
of the King; in this caſe the King, before the peace cannot


pardon or. releaſe the recognizance, as it is agreed in 11 H.
4. 43. 37 H. 6.4. 1 H. 7. 0. And the reaſon is, although
the recognizance be made to the King ſolely, yet inaſmuch
2s this is made for the benefit and ſafety of the ſubjects of
the King, in ſuch cafe it cannot be diſcharged.


Note, no licence can be made to do any thing that is ma- See Vaug. 337,
lum in ſe, but maln provibitum may. 11 H. 7. 11. 3. H. 7. 344. 67


39 H. 6. 39.


cue & 16 Ed.
3 Grant 53


— ———F. —
— —
— —


|


SD em


. - Ph
— — — - =
— — — —
— ——— œ g—— —— —— TH—H—
— — —
*


CLIC, Io ory ————
{


= — . TA
—— . — — —


Page [31]


Commiſſions in
Engliſh illegal.


8 Quere if not 2


trealure-trove
and felons goods,
Original of aſ-
ſizes and Ni ſi
prius.

1 Inſt, 153. b.
2 Co. 80.

4 Co. 43.

5 Co 12.


103.
11 Co. 69,


Part XII.


— — [WY IT GC


_ Commiſſions of Enquiry.
Trin. 5 Jac. 1.


„ by commiſſions in Engliſh under the great ſeal were
directed to divers Commiſſioners within the counties of
Bedford, Bucks, Huntingdon, Northampton, Leiceſter, and
Warwick, to enquire of divers articles annexed to it : and the
articles were alſo in Engliſh, to enquire of depopulation of
houſes, converting of arable land into paſture, &c. But the
Commiſſioners ſhould not have any power to hear and deter-
mine the ſaid offences, but only to enquire of them: and
by colour of the ſaid commiſhons, the ſaid Commiſſioners
took many preſentments in Engliſh, and did return them
into the Chancery, and after, ſcil. Trin. 5 Fac. it was re-
ſolved by the two Chief Juſtices, and by Walmſley, Fenner,
Yelverton, Williams, Snigg, Altham, and Foſter, that the
ſaid commiſhons were againſt law for three cauſes :

1. For this, that they were in Engliſh.

2. For that the offences enquirable were not certain within
the commiſſion itſelf, but in a ſchedule annexed to it.

7 For this, that it was only to enquire, which is againſt
law, ſor by this a man may be unjuſtly accuſed by perjury,
and he ſhall not have any remedy. |

4. For this, that it is not within the ſtatute of 5 Eliz. &c.

Alſo the party may be defamed, and ſhall not have any
traverſe to it. 8 8

Such a commiſſion may be only to enquire of * treaſon,
felony committed, &c. And no ſuch commiſſion ever was
ſeen, to enquire only, (i. e. of crimes.) _

At the common law, aſſiſes were not taken but before
Juſtices in Eyre (who fat virtute brevis, every ſeventh year.
Vide Britton, fo. 1. and Bracton, lib. 5 &,11.) or in the
Common Pleas: and this being a great moleſtation and
trouble to the recognitors of aſſiſe, which writ for the molt
part was in uſe, for the eaſe of the country, and expedition
of Juſtice; it was provided by Magna Charta, cap. 12,
Quod recognitiones de nova diſſeiſina, & de morte anceſicr
non capiuntur niſi in ſuis comitatibus, et hoc modo: nds, vel
(5 extra regnum fuerimus) Capitales Juſticiarii noſtri mit-
tent Fuſticiarios noſiros per unumquemgue comitatum ſemel in
anne, qui, &fc. cat iant in comitatibus illis aſſi as wor:

| | n


1


—


part XII. CoMMIsSIONS.


and after was the ſtatute of Weſtminſter 2. c. 30. made, and Judges, their
by this it is provided, guod aſſignentur duo Juſticiarii jurati, co- authority, &c.


ram quibus et non aliis 3 afſiſe, &c. ad plus per annum.
By which act Juſtices of Ni prius were conſtituted of other


pleas, as well of one Bench as the other, Coram quibus Juſli-


ciarits & ſoctetate (viz) coram duobus Fuſticiarits vel coram uno
& uno Milite, & c, And by the ſame act the Juſtices of Vi
prius have power to give judgment, &c. in aſliſes of darrein

reſentment, and Quare impedit; then came the ſtatute of 21

d. 3. De finibus, cap, 4. and provided quod ingquiſitiones & re-
cognitiones capiantur tempore vacations generally before aliquo

uflictario de utroque banco, coram quibus placitum dedut? fuerit
afſociat' ſibi, &c, And after by the ſtatute of York, cap. 3.
it is provided, that in pleas of land the Ni, prius ſhall be
taken before one of the Juſtices, where the plea, &c. and
chapter 4. that no other pleas moved by attachment or diſ-
treſs ſhall be taken before any Juſtice, either of the one Bench
or the other generally, be the plea before them or not, &c.
by the ſtatute of 14 Ed. 3. cap. 15. Nis prius may be taken in
any plea, real or-perſonal before two, ſo that the one be a Juſ-
tice of the one Bench, or a Chief Juſtice, or a Serjeant ſworn.

By the ſtatute De fintbus, cap. 3. Juſticiarii ad aſſiſas capi-
endas aſſignati deliber ant gaolas in comitatibus illis five infra liber-
tates quam extra de (omnibus) priſonariis quibuſcunque, vide le
recital del ſtat. of 28 Ed. 1. De appellatts, which recites the
ſtatute De felonia, &c. but note, that felony included treſpaſs
in ancient time. Vide Stamf. 57. The ſtatute of 3 H. 3. cap.
7. gives power to Juſt. of Aſſiſe to hear and determine treaſon,
concerning falſe money: the ſtat. of 14 H. 6. c. 1. provides
that Juſtices of Ns buy have power in all the caſes of felony
and treaſon to give their Judgment as well where the party 1s
acquitted of the felony or treaſon, as where he is attaint, and
to award execution, &c,

The ſtatute of 28 Ed. 1. De appellatis gives power to Juſtices
of Aſſiſe to try the appeals of approvers.

Juſtices of Aſſiſe by the ſtatute of 34 & 35 H. 8. cap. 14.
may write to the Clerk of the Crown De Banco Regis, to cer-
tify the firſt conviction in their own nanu; but where Juſ-
tices of one county or circuit write to other to certify the
attainder of a principal, the beſt form is in the name of the
King. 2 & 3 Ed. 6. cap. 24.

By the ſtatute De articulis ſuper chartas, c. 10. & 4 Ed. 3.
cap. 11. & 7 R. 2. Juſtices of Aſſiſe may hear and deter-
mine conſpiracies, falſe informations, and male-procurers


7 of


Page [ 32]


5 Co. 2 Part 36.
8 Co 118.
Antea 23, 24.


Q. ſtat. 4 E. 3.
cap. 2

See 7. Co. 12.
9 Co. 118.

10 Co. 4.

11 Co. 62.


Juſtices of oyer
and terminer,
and gaol deli-
very. Sce 4 Co.
406, 47-
6 Co. 20.
0 Co. 12.
Co. 56, 118.


age [ 33]


CoMM18SIONS, Part XII


of inqueſts and juries to any plaint, without writ, and without
delay, and of confederacies, and champerties, and maintain.
ers, bearers, and alliances by bond, &c.

By the ſtatute of Northampton, 2 Ed. 3. cap. 3. Juſtice,
of Aſſiſe have power to hear and determine the ſtatute con.
cerning armour ; alſo to puniſh the Juſtices of Peace, and
others, who have not done their office in ſuch like caſes, &c.

Juſtices of Aſſiſe ought twice in the year to proclaim the
ſtatute of 32 H. 8. and other itatutes againſt unlawful main.
tenance, champerty, imbracery, and unlawful retainers,

By the 3 H. 7. cap. 1. Juſtices of Aſſiſe take bail of
him who is acquit of murder within the year, to anſwer the
appeal of the party.

By 33 Hen. 8. Juſtices of Aſſiſe cauſe the ſtatute againſ
unlawful games, to be proclaimed in their circuit.

Juſtices of Aſſiſe to make execution of the ſtatute 13 H. y,
cap 7. of riots made in their preſence, upon pain of a hun.
dred pounds, and by 2 H. 5. cap. 8. commiſſion ſhall be
awarded to enquire of a default of Jultices of Aſſiſe and of
the Peace. |

By the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 37. & 2 Ed. 3. cap. 5
Juſtices of Aſſiſe ought to enquire of return, or not return of
dheriſts,

Juſtices of Aſſiſe to enquire of all points of the ſtatute of
23 H. 6 cap. 10. concerning Sheriffs, Under-ſheriffs, and
their Clerks, Coroners, Stewards of franchiſes, Bailiffs, and
Guardians of priſons, for their extortion, and for delivering
of them who are not bailable, and for detaining thoſe who
ought to be bailed, 2 Marie Dyer 99. Juſtices of Aſſiſe may
hold plea in appeal of murder, by W. 2 & 3 H. 7. and of
robbery by commiſſion for gaol delivery.

23 Ed. 3 cap. Juſtices of Aſſiſe may enquire of default,
(of Juſtices of Peace, &c.) of puniſhment of victuallers, &c.
who ſell at unreaſonable prices. |


Note; Juſtices of oyer and terminer cannot by this authority
enquire but of ſuch, who are indifted before themſelves, for
their commiſſion is, Ad inguirendum, atdiendum, & terminan-
dum : but Juſtices of gaol-delivery may atrrain a priſoner in-
dicted before others, the words of their commiſſion are, Ad
gaolas, gaolam de B. de priſanaribus in ed exiſtentibus hac vice delibe-
randum, ſecundum leges, &c. Brook, tit. Commiſhon, * 3 Mar,
24. 4£d. 3. c. 2. that Juſt. of gaol-delivery deliver ang"

icte


722277 Ns


Part XII. Cuſtoms, Subſidies, and Impoſitions,


dicted before the guardians of the peace. And by the ſtatute
of 3 Ed. 6. cap. 7. new commiſſioners of gaol-delivery ; but
this doth not extend to indictments or conviction before the
Commiſſioners of yer and ter miner: and the reaſon of this, is
for this, that the indictments and proceedings before Jultices
of oyer and ter miner, after the oyer determined, onght to re-
main in the King's Bench : and the records before Juſtices
of gaol- delivery remain with the Cuſſos rotulorum. Vide Brook,
tit, Commiſſion 12. 38 Ed. 3. tit, Oyer and Terminer, 44 Ed.
2. 31. .


Cuſtoms, Subſidies, and Impoſitions.


tice, and myſelf, upon a judgment given lately in the dies, and impo-


NT upon conference between Popham, Chief Juſ- coſtoms, ſubſi-
*


chequer, concerning the : poſition of currant7: and upon


tions. —— 3


- See Cotton's % |
conſideration of our books, and of the ſtatutes to this purpoſe, Records 91, ZK.


it appeared to us, that the rule of the common law 1s in the
regiſter, title Ad quod dampnum, and F. N. B. 222. a Quod
patria magts ſolito non oneretur ſeu gravetur. Alſo there is an-
other rule, that the King may charge his people of this realm
without ſpecial aſſent of the Commons, to (do) a thing which
may be of profit to the common people, but not to their
charge; as it is held in the 13 of H. 4. 16. Et flatutum de
tallagio non concedendo, nullum tallagium, ſeu auxillium per nos,
ſeu hæredes noſtros ponatur ſou levetur abſque voluntate et aſſenſu


138, 152. and
ib. tit. Toxes,
&c. in Tabula,


*


Parliamenti, Et Magna Charta cap. 30. Omnes mercatores (ii


publice antea prohibiti fuerint) habeant ſalvum & ſecurum conduc-
tum abire de Anglia & venire in Angliam, & morari & ire per
Angliam, tam per terram quam per aquam, ad emendum & ven=
dendum fine omnibus malis tolnetis per antiquas & Nrectas conſuetu-
dines, præterguam in tempore guerræ; which ſtatute hath been
confirmed more than thirty times by ſeveral acts of Parlia-
ment. Vide le ſtatute 25 Ed. 1. 3 Ed. 1. in Turri. g Ed. 3.


Cap. 1. & 2. 14 Ed. 3. 2. 25 Ed. 3. cap. 2. &c. The effect


of which is, that every merchant of this realm, or other,


may freely buy, ſell, and paſs the ſea with all their mer-
chandizes, paying the cuſtoms of ancient time uſed, Queen


Mary put an impoſition upon cloaths, which 1 El. Dy.
165. was moved and not reſolved. Vide 31 H. 8. Dyer fol.


43


Page [34]


1 Eliz.


4


Cuſtoms, Subſidies, and Impoſitions. Part XII.


43. & 1 El. 165. Magna cuſtuma & parva cuſtuma. Vide 9 H.
6. 12 & 35: And note there the ſaying of Babington. Note the
yer 165. there was antiqua five magna cuſiuma at the
common law, fait for wools, wool-fells, and leather, and
this was equal to ſtrangers as well as denizens; and in the
time of Ed. 1. on merchant ſtrangers, a grant is over the ſaid
cuſtoms, 3s. 4d. which is called nova ſeu parva cuſtuma.


Upon all which and divers records which we had ſeen, it
appeared to us, that the King cannot at his peaſyr* put any
impoſition upon any merchandize to be imp hinto this
kingdom, or exported, unleſs it be for advancemttnt of trade
and traffic, which is the life of every ifland, pro bono publico.
As if in foreign parts any impoſition is put upon the merchan-
dizes of our merchants, non pro bono publico; and for to make
equality for the purpoſe to advance trade and traffic, the King
may put an impoſition upon their merchandizes, for this is
not againſt, any of the ſtatutes which were made for advance-
ment of merchandize, or of the ſtatutes of Magna Charta, c.
30. which is, Si aliqui mercatores de ter rd contra nos guerrina
inveniantur in terrd noſird in principis guerre attachientur, Ec.
Duo modo mercatores terre naſiræ tratlantur qui tunc inveniantur
in terid illd contra nos guerrina : et fi noſtra ſalui ſunt ibi, illi
ſalvi ſunt in terrg noſtra; for the end of all ſuch reſtraints is


ſalus populi : and ſo in the cafe of  currants, which was now


lately adjudged in “ the Exchequer: alſo in the caſe” of Cuſ-
tomer Smith, which was adjudged in the Exchequer, in the
reign of Queen Elizabeth, both the impoſitions were impoſed,
upon the ſaid reaſon to make equality; for this was the truth
of both caſes {/c:l.) the advancement of trade and traffic, and
for this cauſe ſuch impoſitions were lawful.

And it was clearly reſolved by us, that ſuch impoſitions fo
put, cannot be demiſed or, granted to any ſubject, for this,
that it is to augment and decreaſe, or be quite taken away upon
juſt occaſion for advancement of merchandize. And this
was one of the reaſons in Cuſtomer Smith's caſe, that it could
not be demiſed ; alſo it was aſſeſſed after the demiſe or graut.

And although that the King may prohihit any perſon in
ſome caſes with ſome commodities to paſs out of the. realm,
yet this cannot be where the end is private, but where the end
is public, vz. to reſtrain the perſon, for this, that quam plu-
ima nobis & corong noſtræ pra judicialia in partibus exteris pro-


ſequi intendit, and to reſtrain any merchandizes either in time


of dearth, or in time of war, for neceſſitas eſt lex temports.


yy


mw a — „ = norte. Ng AS


TS ,%


8 a** 4%


nn
=


—— —
*


me — 5H CD


-


Part XII. Cuſtoms, Subſidies, and Impoſitions.


It appeared unto us alſo, that at the common law no cuſ-
tom was paid, but only for wools, wool-fells, and, lea-
ther, which is called in Magna Charta, recta conſuetuds, and
all others are there called mala tolneta, which in the ſtatute
De tallagio non concedendo is called mala tolneta. And at the be-
ginning of the reigns of Kings, it hath for a long time been
uſed, by authority and conſent of Parliament, to grant to the
King certain ſubſidies of tonnage and poundage, for term of
his life, which began in ſuch form, 2 & 3 H. 5. in the 31H.
6. c. 8. & 12 Ed. 4 c. 3. For the defence of the realm, and
maintenance of certain wars, by act of Parliament, which
proves, that the King by his own power canuot impoſe it,
but by conſent of Parliament; but ſuch ſubſidy of tonnage
and poundage might be granted by the King ſo long as he
lived ; for this, that this is limited and given to the King in
certain : but an impoſition put for equality, as hath been
ſaid, hath not any certain continuance, but is to be augment-
ed, diminiſhed, or taken away, for the benefit of the com-
monwealth : and for that cauſe it cannot be demiſed. Vide
31 H. 1. Dyer 43. 1 Mar. D. 92. 1 El. D. 165. 2 & 3P. &


Tonnage and
pouncage,

See Selden's
Mare Clauſum,
193, IC4, 195»
33 H. 6. 17. by
4 Inſt, 32, 33+


M. D. 128. 12 El. D. 296. 23 El. D. 375. 45 Ed. 3. c. 4.


27 Aſſ. pl. 44. Regiſter 192, &c. |

Vide M. Ch. cap. 30. they are called Conſuetudines, & per
vacabulum artis they are called Cuſfuma. Vide le ſtat. 51 H.
3. title Exchequer in Raſtall: it appears that there were an-
cient cuſtoms, and thoſe were for wools, wool- fells, and lea-
ther. Vide le ſtatute g Ed. 3. c. 2. that all charters and lets
ters _ againſt free trade and traffic made, or to be made,
are void.

Vide Forteſcue in his Comment of the Laws of England,
cap. 3. 6. fol. 43. Neque Rex fer ſe vel per miniſtres ſues
tallagia, ſubſidia, aut quevis alia onera imponit legeis ſuis, aut
leges eorum mutat, vel novas condit, ſine conceſſione et aſſenſu totius
regni ſui in Parliamento ſuo expreſſo, c. Vide fel. 3 cap. 9.

And note, for the benefit of the ſubject, the King may
make an impoſition or toll within the realm, to repair high-
ways, bridges, and to make walls for defence: but then the
ſum impoſed ought to be proportionable to the benefit : and
this appears the 13 H. 4. 16. So the impoſition for equality
ought to be for the public good; ſee the charter 31 Ed. 1.
which is called Charta mercatoria, ex rot. mercator' an. 31 Ed.
I. u. 42. Patents 3 Ed. 1. n. 1 & 9. de ſacco lane dimidium
marce" laſia coriorum, 1 Mark, &c. Fines 3 Ed. 1. u. 24. intus
et non in dorſo, Vide rot. Parliament. an. 13 Ed. 3. No new in-
hanſement of cuſtomz to be without common * copſent: and in

Vor. VII. E 2 .


Z


Toll : pen if
11 may be


ſuch to


general, or only
on ſome p>rticu=-


lar townſhips ?
48 ancient de»
meine Ow ns,
&c.


Page [35]


LIiIBELS. Part XII.


22 Ed. 3. n. 8. againſt, new cuſtoms and impoſitions, and
that merchants may freely paſs, &c. And in the Parliament
an. 8 H. 6. n. 29. Againſt the new impoſitions granted by
H. 5. upon merchandizes coming to Bourdeaux : and Parlia.
ment 28 H. 6. n. 35. the Duke of Somerſet accuſed for cauſ.
ing the King to grant unto Sir Pierce Bracy an impoſition of
wines.

Par. gR. 2. n. 30 againſt a patent made to the Lieutenant
of the Tower, by colour of which he took cuſtom ef wine,
oyſters, and other victuals. to be void.

29 Ed. 3. 11. n. Ex Rot. Parliament, ſubſidy of wools
granted for fix years, fo as during the ſame time no other aid
or impoſition be laid upon the Commons.

Parliament 5 Ed. 3. n 17, 18, 19. againſt new impoſitions
upon ſtaple commodities, Parl. 22 Ed. 3. n. 31. againſt al-


nage of worſteds, 5 Ed. 3 n. 163. againſt all new impoſitions,


and 5 Ed. 3 n 191. 38 Ed. 3. n. 26. rot. Parl. againſt un-
Teaſonable impolitions. |

Parl. 7 R. 2. n. 35, 26. 9 R. 2. n. 30. No impoſitions or
taxes without conſent of Parliament.


Note 2 R. 2. Parl. apud Gloceſtriam, act 25. Subſidy on-


ly for defenſive wars, not for invaſive, 1 R. 2. Parl. Accord.


Libels.

Star- chamber.
Poſt. 103.

3 Inſt. 174.
Cumberb. 36,
355,359.


2 Salk. 417,418.


1 Hawk. c 73.
2 Hawk. vide
Tabula.

5 Co. 2 Part
124, 5.


9 Co. 59.
10 Co. 75.


1 R. 3. againſt benevolence. Vide Clauſ. 4 Ed. 3. n. 22. bis.


Dr. Epwaßps ver/us Dr. Wootow.


N the caſe in the Star- chamber, between Edwards a Ply—

fician plaintiff, and Wooton a Doctor in Phyſic deſen-
dant.

The caſe was, that Dr. Wooton writ to Edwards an in-
& famous, malicious, ſcandalous, obſeene letter, to which he
& ſubſcribed his name; and this he ſealed and directed, To
„ his loving friend Mr. Edward Speed this: and after the
* ſaid Doctor publiſhed and difperſed to others a great num-
© ber of copies of the ſaid letter.” |
And itwas reſolved by the Lord Chancellor Egerton, the two
Ch. Juſt. et per totam curiam, that this was a ſubtle and danger-


cous kind of libel: for inaſmuch as the writing of a private let-


ter to another, without any other publication, the party to
whom it is directed cannot have an action ſur le caſe, for


this, that no action lies; but when it is publiſhed to cthers
to


part XII. LI1BEL S.


to the ſcandal of the plaintiff, as it hath been oftentimes ad-
judged, an action lieth, |


The Doctor thought that this could not be puniſhed in any
manner; but it was reſolved, that the ſaid infamous letter,
which in law 1s a libel, ſhall be puniſhed (although it was
ſolely writ to the plaintiff without any other publication) in
the Star-chamber, for that it is an offence to the King, and
is a great motive to revenge, and tends to the breaking of
the peace and great miſchief: and for that reaſon it was ne-
ceſſary, that it ſhould be puniſhed either by indictment, or
in the Star-chamber, to prevent ſuch occaſions of miſchief.
But in the caſe at the bar, the diſperſing of copies of it, or the
publication of the effect of it, aggravates the offence, and
makes 1t a new offence : for, for that alſo the party may have
an action ſur le caſe. |

Note, that by the civil law, if any perſon hath (to diſable
himſelf to bear any office, or for any other purpoſe) made a
libel againſt himſelf, he ſhall be puniſhed for it. And fo it
ſeems to me, he ſhould be in the Star- chamber; ſor this is an
offence to the King and the commonwealth : and without
queſtion, although that the Doctor ſubſcribed his name to the
ſaid letter, yet the ſaid letter importing the ſcandalous matter
of a libel, is in the law a libel.

Nota, the law of the Lydians was, that he who flanders
another ſhall be let blood in the tongue, and he, who hears it
and aſſents to it, in the ear, &c.


— —


—— — — —


WOOTON ver EDWIN.
Mich. 5 Jacobi.
Reſervation.


7 NTER Tchannem Moolon quer, et Jobannem Edu, in de-
fendentem. In replevin the defendant avowed, and the

plaintiff demurred; and the caſe was thus, |
William Hawes was ſeiſed in fee of a meſſuage, and fif-


e ty-five acres of land, five acres of meadow, and fix acres


* of paſture in Fromanton in the county of Hereſord:“ and
27 Junii 28 H. 8. by indenture demiſed the tenement
aforeſaid to Nicholas Traheren, for ſeventy-nine years,
reddends inde annuatim prefato Gulielms Hawes, & afſiz-
nalis ſuis 265, 8 d. at the feaſts of the Annunciation _

| E 2 t.


Page [36]


This caſe will
fcrrecly be al-
low -d tor law at
this day.


Owen 9.


Corone, Bug-
gary.


I Hawk. ch. 4.
1 Iaſt. 88. /
1 Hale P. C.
628.


RESERVATION, ” Part XII.


St. Michael by even and equal portions: and after the leſſor
died, and the reverſion deſcended to William his ſon, under
whom the ſaid John Edwin claimed. :

And the ſole point in this caſe was, if the rent reſerved
in this caſe ſhall go to the heir, or ſhall be determined by the
death of the leſſor, for if the leſſor had reſerved the rent to
him without more, this ſhall determine by the death of the
leflor ; and the addition of theſe words (“ and his aſſignees“)
ſhall not enlarge the reſervation, for if the leſſor had aſſigned
the reverſion over, yet the rent ſhall determine by his death,
for the aſſignees cannot have the rent longer than the leſſor
himſelf ſhould have it; and the leſſor himſelf hath it but for
term of his own life. Vide 11 Ed. 3. tit. Aſſiſe 86. 10 Ed.
4. 18. 27 H. 8. 19. per Audley, et vide Hil. 33 Eliz. rot.
1341. In this court in a replevin, inter Richmond and
Butcher, where the caſe was, that Butcher avowed ſor a rent
as heir to his father, upon a demiſe made by his father of cer-
tain lands for 21 years, by theſe wotds, reddendo et ſolven!s
proinde durante prædicto termins 21. annorum prefats (patri)
executoribus & aſſignatis ſuis 10 l. legalis monet@ Anglia, Sc.
ad feſia, &c. And it was adjudged, that by this reſerva-
tion the heir ſhould not have the rent for that the reſervation


was made to the father, his executors and aſſignees, and not
to his heirs, &c.


Corone, *BUGGARY.
Mich. 5 Jacobi.


Nota, Buggrone, Ttalice, is a Buggarer, and


Buggerare is to buggar, ſo Buggary cometh
of the Italian Word.


HE letter of the ftatute of the 25 H. 8. cap. 6. If any
perſon ſhall commit the deteſtable fin of buggary with
mankind or beaſt, &c. it is felony, which act being repealed
by the ſtatute 1 Mar. is revived and, made perpetuał by
5 Eliz. cap. 7. and he ſhall Joſe his clergy.
It appears by the ancient authorities of law, that this
was felony; but they vary in the puniſhment, for Brit-
cap:


* — moat — *


part XII. B USGGAR x.


cap. 9. ſaith, that * ſorcerers, ſodomers, and heretics” ſhall
be burnt, F. N. B. 269. a. agrees with it: but Flet. /b.
I. cap. 35. Pecorantes & ſodomite terra vivi ſuffodiantur,
But in the ancient book “ called the Mirror of Juſtice vouch- Page [37] -
ed in Plow. Com. in Fogoſle's caſe, the crime is more high, |
for there it is called, Crimen læſæ Majeſlatis, a ſin horrible,
committed againſt the King of heaven: and this is either“
againſt the King celeſtial or terreſtial in three manners ; b
hereſy, by buggary, by ſodomy. Note, that ſodomy is wit
mankind, and it is felony by the ſtatute of 25 H. 8. and
therefore the judgment for felony doth now belong to this of-
fence, viz. to be hanged by the neck till he be dead. To
make that offence, oportet rem penetrare, et ſemen nature emit -
tere, et effundere, for the indictment is contra ordinationem
Creatoris et naturæ ordinem rem habuit veneream, diflumgque pue-
rum carnaliter cognodit. Every of which (rem habuit, et car-
naliter cognovit) imply penetration and emiſſion of ſeed : and
ſo it was held in the caſe of Stafford, who was attaint in the
King's Bench and executed. Pæderaſtes, amator puerorum,
whereof the Greek word is, IIa egi , buggary with boys.
Vide Rot. Parliament. 50 Ed. 3. num. 58. complained in
Parliament, that a Lumbard did commit the fin that was not
to be named: ſo in rape, there ought to be penetration and
emiſſion of ſeed. Vide Stamford, fol. 44. Which ſtatute
makes it felony; he who procures, &c. or receives the of-
fender, &c. is acceſſary. |

The words of the ſtatute of Weſt. x. cap. 34. If a man ra-
viſh a woman, 11 H. 4. 18. If one aid another to commit
rape, and if he be preſent, he is principal in the buggary,
&c. Vide Leviticus 18, 22. & cap. 10, 13. 1 Cor. 6. v. 9, &c.


P R E MU NI R E.


| OTE, in the book of Doctor Coſines, intitled, an An-


ſwer, &c. to the Abſtract, and publiſhed 1584. And 5 7.


a pamphlet now lately publiſhed by Doctor Ridley, they 9. Premunire


would obtrude upon the world, that foraſmuch as that now Jens og *


by the act of 10 Eliz. cap. 1. all ſpiritual and egcleſiaſtical pag. $4, 85.
power within this realm is annexed to the crown, and the Co. Lit. 129,
law, by which they determine cauſes which belong to 33%: 4 Init. 139.


l ; : . : H — ©. 1
their cognizance, is the eceleſiaſtical law of the King: ri Ip


| 79. ſect. 12. &
21. 5 Co. 5, 12. 16 to 26. 7 Co. 12, 14, 16. 9 Co. 74. 11 Co. 34, 63. Vid, Prafa to 6 Ce.


3 that


—


Page [38]


the reign of the Kings Ed.


Part XII.


PREMUN IRE.


that for that cauſe no Premunire lies againſt any ſpiritual
judge for any cauſe whatſoever. And tome other of their pto-
teſhons have ſome other reaſons to confirm it.

1. That when the ſtatute of Premunire was made, viz. in
3. and R. 2. then the Pope


uſurped eceleſiaſtical juriſdiction, although that de jure it be-


longed to the King. And therefore foralmuch as the King


is as well de facto, as de jure, ſupreme head of all, as well
eccleſiaſtical as temporal; now the cauſe being changed, the
law is changed alſo. |

2. The concluſion of the writ of Premunire is in domini
Regis contemplum et præjudicium, & dictæ coreng dignitatum


ſuarum læſionem et exharedationem manifeſtam, et contra formam


ſtatuti, &c, Which proves that the juriſdictions ſhall be now
ſevered, and united to the crown; for that which is united


to, and derived from the crown, cannot be ſaid contra coro-


nam et dignitatem Regis.

3. The. Court of High Commiſſion is the court of the
King, and is by force of an act of Parliament and letters pa-
tent of the King: and for this, although it may be ſaid, that
the conſiſtory courts are curiæ Epiſcoporum, yet the court by
ſorce of high commiſſion is the court of the King: and for
that reaſon their proceedings ſhall not be ſubject to Pre-
munire, |

4. This new court is erected by act of Parliament, and
Jetters patent of the King : and for this, where the ſtatute of
R. 2. ſpeaks de curia Romana jeu alibi, c. This (alibi)
_ extend to a court erected by Parliament, anno 10 Reg,

UZ. . |

But to theſe objections it was anſwered and reſolved by di-
vers Juſtices ® in this very term, that without queſlion the
ſtatutes 37 Ed. 3. 16 R. 2, &. De Premunire, are yet in


force: and all ſuch proceedings, by colour of eccleſiaſtical


law before any eccleſiallical Judges, who were in danger of
Premunire, before the ſaid act 1 El. are now in caſe of Pre-
munire after the ſaid act; be it before the Commiſſioners by
force of a high commiſhon, or before Biſhops or other ec-
cleſiaſtical Judges: for the ſaid acts of Premunire are not te-

pealed by the ſaid act 1 Eliz. „
And as to the firſt and ſecond objections, it was anſwer—
ed, that true it is, that the crown of England hath as well
eccleſiaſtical as temporal juriſdiction, de jure annexed to
it, as appears by the reſolution in Cawdrey's caſe, from
age to age: and although this was de jure, yet when
the Pope became ſo potent and powerful, he did uſurp
| upon


—


oo LIES LS. > a Ce wa ws, © www — 2


Part XII. | Parioniny;


upon the King's eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction within this realm:
but this was but mere uſurpation, (for the King cannot be
put out of the poſſeſſion of any thing which belongs to his
crown.) And for this reaſon, all the Kings of this realm
totis viribus providere for the eſtabliſhment of their temporal
law, by which they inherit the crown, and by which they
govern their ſubjects in peace, and puniſh thoſe who are re-
bellious, or who commit great offences againſt them and
their crown : and they were always jealous leſt any part or
point of their temporal law ſhould be incroached upon : and
for this, if the eccleſiaſtical law uſurp any thing upon the
temporal law, this was ſeverely pvniſhed, and the offender
eſteemed and adjudged an enemy to the King by the ancient
ſtatutes ; and every one might have killed him before the
ſtatute 5 Eliz. and this is the reaſon for why ; although both
juriſdictions belong to the crown, yet inaſmuch as the crown
itſelf is directed and defcendible by the common law, and all
treaſon againſt the crown puniſhed by this law; for this
cauſe, when the eccleſiaſtical Judge uſurps upon the common
law, it is ſaid contra coronam et dipmitatem, &c. And all the
prohibitions directed to the high com miſſioners from year to
year, from the time of the making of the ſaid ſtatute 1 Eliz.
do conclude, cont! a coronam et dignitatem regiam.

For, as it was reſolved by all the Juſtices, Paſe. 4 Fac. Regis
eſt contra coronam & dignitutem regiam, when any ecclehaſtical
Judge doth uſurp upon the temporal law, becauſe as in all
thoſe writs it appeareth, the intereſt or cauſe of the ſubject is
drawn ad aliud examen, that is, when the ſubject ought to
have his cauſe ended by the common law, whereunto by
birth-right he is inheritable, he is drawn in ald examen,
(viz.) to be decided and determined by the eccleſiaſtical
law: and this is truly ſaid contra coronam & dignitatem regiam.
And this appears by all the prohibitions (which are infinite)
which have been directed to the high Commilhoners and
others after the faid act 1 Eliz. 4 fortiors, he who ef.
fends in Premunire fhall be ſaid to offend contra coronam et
dipnitatem regiam and this in effect anſwers to all the afore-
faid objections; but yet, other particular anſwers ſhall be gi-
ven to every of them *

As to the third, although the court by force of
high Commiſſion is the court of the King, yet their
proceedings ate ecclehattical: and for this, if they
uſurp upon the temporal law, this is the ſame ot-

| 4 ſence


130.


- Regula prima.


Premunire
Sce 1 Inſt. 129, hat not.


PREMUN IRE. Part XII.


fence which was before the ſaid act of 10 Eliz. for this was
the end of all the ancient acts, that the temporal law ſhall
not in any manner be emblemiſhed by any eccleſiaſtical pro-
ceedings.

As to the fourth, although it be a new court, yet the an-
cient ſtatutes extend to it within this word alibi, and divers
new biſhoprics were erected in the time of H. 8. and yet
there was never any queſtion, but that * the ancient aCts of
Premunire extended to them.

But to anſwer to all the objections aforeſaid, founded upon
the ſaid ſtatute of 1 Eliz. out of the words and meaning.of
the ſame act; for whereas the act 1 Eliz. repealed the ſta.
tute of 1 & 2 P. M. c. 8. there is an expreſs proviſo in the
ſaid act i Eliz. that that ſhall not extend to repeal any clauſe,
matter, or ſentence contained or ſpecified in the 1 & 2 P. M.
which in any ſort toucheth or concerneth any matter or cauſe


of Premunire : but that all of that, which doth touch or con-


cern any matter of'Premunire, ſhall ſtand in force and effect:
and the clauſe of 1 & 2 P. M. which concerns matter of Pre-
munire, is ſuch ; every perſon who by any proceſs out of any
eccleſiaſtical court of the realm, or out of it, or by pretence
of any ſpiritual juriſdiction, or otherwiſe, contrary to the
laws of the land, ſhall unquiet or moleſt any man for any
thing, parcel of the poſſeſſion of any religious houſe, ſhall in-
cur the danger of the act of Premunire, anno 16 R. 2. which
proves that as well the act 1 & 2 P. & M. as the act 1 Eli.
which creates the high -· commiſſion court, which refers to the
act of 1 & 2 P. & M. intends by expreſs words, that the act of
16 R. 2. of Premunire ſhall ſtand in force. Aifo the act of
1 Eliz. revives the aCt of 25 H. 8. cap. 10. which makes a
Premunire in a Dean and Chapter, &c. for not electing,


" nor certifying, or not admitting of any Biſhop elected; by


which it is directly proved, that the act 1 Eliz. never intend-
ed to take away the offence of Premunire, but expreſly pro-
vided for it, as appears by that which hath been ſaid.

But then we are to note in what caſes a Premunire lies, in


And for this that it is ſo penal, it is neceſſary that it ſhould
be explained and made known.


In all caſes, when the cauſe originally belongs to the
cognizance of the eccleſiaſtical court, and ſuit is pro-
ſecuted thete, in the ſame nature as the cognizance


belongs


J. part XII. PREMVUN IRE.


ag belongs to them, although in truth the cauſe, all circum-
ll ſtances being diſcloſed, belongs to the court of the K. and to
0. be determined by the common law,) yet no Premunire lies iu
that caſe, but a prohibition. As if tithes are ſevered from the see Waron's
1 nine parts, and are carried away : if the Parſon ſue for the Clergrman,
18 ſubtraction of theſe tithes in the ſpiritual court, this is not Chap. 54
et within the cafe of Premunire ; for it may be that the plaintiff - :
of did not know that they were ſevered from the nine parts, nor ;
that they were carried away ; nor may the eccleſiaſtical Judge
n know any thing of it: and although that the defendant pleads
of this, yet the Eccleſiaſtical Court may proceed to try the truth


of it without danger. Vide 10 H. 4. 2. according with this

opinion: ſo if a Parſon ſue for tithes of wood, ſurmiſing that

they were fylve cæduæ, under the age of twenty years, whereas

in truth they were above the age of twenty years (in which caſe

by the ſtatute of 45 Ed. 3. tithe ought not to be paid) yet a

prohibition lieth and no Premunire.

But although the cauſe originally may appertain to the cog- Regula ſecunda.

nizance of the eccleſiaſtical Judge, yet if he ſue for it in the


U nature of a ſuit, which doth not belong to the Eccleſiaſtical
e Court, but to the common law, there a Premunire lieth ; as
e in the caſe put before: if the Parſon, after the ſevering of
y tithes, will in any Eccleſiaſtical Court within this realm ſue
|= for carrying away his tithes ſevered from the nine parts, which
h action by matter apparent to the Eccleſiaſtical Court apper-
. tains to the common law; in ſuch caſe both the actor and the
e Judge incur the danger of a Premunire: and ſo it was ad-
f judged in 17 H. 8. as Spilman reports it: one Turbervile ſued
f a Premunire againſt a Parſon, who by citation convened him
a into the Eccleſiaſtical court within this realm, * and there li- Page [40]
'y belled againſt him for taking oftithes, which were ſevered from
y the nine parts, and the Parſon was condemned and had judg-
. ment that he ſhould be out of the protection of the King, and
* forfeit all his lands, goods, and chattels, and his body

to perpetual impriſonment, and damages to the party. S0
n if a mortuary be delivered to a Parſon, and after the party

retake it, if the Parſon ſue for this as for a mortuary to
d him delivered and carried away, he is in caſe of a Premu-

nire ; but aſter the repriſal, if he ſue for it as mortuary
c not executed, in nature of a ſuit, which belongs to Court-
. Chriſtian, upon the truth of the cafe there is cauſe of ,
e | Prohi-
$


4


— ns te my men
—— —
— —
— — — — —
— — — —Hſ—


— — —ͤ—ẽ A— *
— — — — - —


R2gula tertia,


Antea 27, 39.


PnEMONIRE. Part XII.


prohibition, and no Premunire lies. Jide 10 H. 4. 2. So the
caſe which hath been put of ſuit for tithes of wood, if the Par-
ſon ſue for tithes of wood above twenty years growth, ſo that
it appears by the libel, that the cognizance of this caſe doth
not belong to Court-Chriſtian (viz ) to the court of the Arch-
biſhop of Canterbury, the Premunire lies, as you may ſee in
the book of Entries, tit. Difmes, fol. 221. But in the tit.
Prohibition, fol. 449, Diviſiane diſines, pl. 2, 3, 4, 5, & 6. if
the ſuit be pro /ylva cedua, Cc. So that, as the ſuit is framed,
the cognizance belongs to Court Chriſtian, although that the
truth be otherwiſe, there a prohibition lies, and no Premu-
nite. For when the cauſe originally belongs to the cognizance
of the Eecleſiaſtical court, although they hold plea of any in-
cident toit, which belongs to the common law, there prohi-
bition lies, and not Premunire,

When the cauſe originally belongs to the cognizance of the
common law, and not to the Eccleſiaſtical Court, there although
they libel for it according to the courſe of the eccleſiaſtical
law, yet the Premunſre lieth, for this, that this draws the
cauſe, which is determinable at the common law, ad aliud
examen, viz. to be decided by the civil or eccleſiaſtical law;
and ſo deprives the ſubject of the benefit of the common law,
which is his birthright : and with this agrees the book of
Entries, tit. Premunire, fol. 229. b. & 430. a. where it is
put for a rule, Quod cum placita, querel', et poſſeſſiones terrarum .
et tenementorum tranſgr” debitorum & aliorum conſimilium infra
regnum Angl' illat' ad dominum Regem ad regalem caronam & dig-
ritates ſuas ſpecialiter, & non ad forum eccleſiaſticum, pertinent.
Duidem, J. R. Cc. machinans dominum Regem & coronam &
dignitates ſuas exheredare, & copnitionem que ad curiam domini
Regs pertinent, ad aliud examen infra regnum ſuum Avg! in Cu-
riam Chriſtianitatis coram A. IV. offial', &c. trabere, &c. quen-
dam articulum ad proſequendum ipjum R. in eadem Curia Chrij-
tianitatis coram prefato Official: pro debito 201. & ipſum R. in ta-
dem cur ia prefato I. A. inde reſponſum citari, &c. So that if the
original cauſe be temporal, although that they proceed by cita-
tion, libel, &c in eccleſiaſtical manner, yet this is in danger of
Premunire : and the reaſon of this offence is expreſſed in the
writ, for this, that he endeavours to draw cagnitionem (cauſe,) que
ad curiam domini Regis pertinet, ad aliud examen, which is as much


as to ſay, that the debt, the cognizance whereof belongs to the


court


E


0 „„ r Tn WY r eo


part XII. PRE MU NIR xE.


court of the King, and to be determined by the common law.
he intends by the original ſuit to draw it to be determined by
the eccleſiaſtical law. |

And note, in the indictment of Premunire againſt Cardinal
Wolſey, Mich. 21 H. 8. it is ſaid, Quod prediftus, Cardinalis c.


intend finaliter antiquiſſumas Ang} leges penitus ſubvertere & ener-


vare, univerſumque hoc regnum AngP & euſdem Ang populum
legibus imperialibus vulgo dictis legibus civilibus & eorum legum
canonibus in per petuum ſubjugare * & ſubjicere, &c. and this is
included within theſe words, ad aliud examen trahere, viz.
to decide that by the civil and eccleſiaſtical laws, which is de-
terminable by the common law: and upon this was a notable
caſe in Hil. an 25 H.8 the caſe of Nich. Biſhop of Norwich,
againſt whom, he then being in the cuſtody of the Marſhal.
ſea, the King's Attorney preferred a bill of Premunire : and
the matter of the Premunire was ſuch : within Thetford in


the county of Norfolk hath been de tempore cujus, &c. ſuch
cuſtom, that all eccleſiaſtical cauſes ariſing within that town


ſhould be determined before the Dean of the ſame town, who
hath within it peculiar juriſdiction ; and that none in the fame
town ſhall be drawn in plea in any other Court-Chriſtian for
eccleſiaſtical cauſes, unleſs before the ſame Dean: and if any
be againſt the ſaid cuſtom drawn in ſuit before any other eccle-
haftical Judge, and this be preſented before the Mayor of the
{me town. that ſuch party ſtall forfeit 6s. 8d. And that an
inhabitant of Thetford ſued in the conſiſtory Court of the ſaid
Biſhop, at Norwich for an eccleſiaſtical cauſe ariſing within the
ſaid town of Thetford, and this was pretented before the
Mayor of I hetford according to the cuſtom, for which he for-
feited 6 s. 8d. the ſaid Biſhop cited the ſaid Mayor to appear
before him at his houſe in toxin in Suffolk, generally pro /a-
lute anime, and upon appearance libelled per parole, upon all
the matter, and enjoined him upon pain of excommunication


to annul the ſaid preſentment before a day: and upon a Pre-


munire brought for this matter the ſaid Biſhop had counſel
learned aſſigned him; and they objected, that as well the ſaid
preſentment as the ſaid cuſtom were for divers cauſes void,
and therefore it cannot be ſaid contra coronam & dignitatem re-
giam; nor hath the Bithop drawn the party ad aliud examen,

for it ought not to be examine d in any court.
2. They objected, that the Court of the Biſhop was
not intended within the act of 16 R. 2. 32. but in Cu-
Fes ria


Page (41]


Eccleſisſtical
commiffion.


See ant. 19, 20,
21. Poſt, 45. 49,
to 56, 15, &c,


Page [42]
See the Intto-
duQtory Diſ-
courſe to Gib-
ſon's Cotex, p.
20, 21. that the
ſpiritual Judge
has a right to
interpret all ſta-
tutes relating to


ſpiritual matters,


But the Biſhop


NicuoLas FulLEtR's Caſe. Part XII.


ria Romana aut alibi ; and this alibi ought to be intended out of
the realm; but it was reſolved by Fitz-James Chief Juſtice,
et per totam curiam, that be the cuſtom and preſentment good
or not, this is a temporal thing and determinable by the com-
mon law, and not examinable in the ſpiritual court; and for
this the Biſhop in this caſe hath incurred a Premunire.


3. That alibi extends as well to the courts of the Biſhops,


and other eccleſiaſtical courts within this realm, as elſewhere:
and fo the court ſaid, that it had been oftentimes adjudged,
upon which the ſaid Biſhop, (the matter of the indictment
being true) confeſſed the ſaid indiftment: and upon this ap-
pearing the ſecondary Juſtice gave judgment againſt him, that
the ſaid Biſhop ſhall be out of the protection of the King, and
that his lands, goods, and chattels ſhould be forfeited to the
King, and his body to be impriſoned ad voluntatem Regis, Es.


as th.
— —


NICHOLAS FULL ERs Caſe.


N the great caſe of Nicholas Fuller of Gray's-Inn, theſe
points were reſolved upon conference had with all th
Juſtices and Barons of the Exchequer, ,
I. That no conſultation can be granted out of the term, for
this, that it is an award of the court, and is final, and cannot
be granted by all the Judges out of the term, nor by any of
them within the term out of court: and the name of the
writ, viz a writ of conſultation, imports this, that the court
upon conſultation amongſt them ought to award it.


* 2. That the conſtruction of the ſtatute 1 Eliz cap. 1. and


of the letters patent of high commiſhon in eccleſiaſtical cauſes
founded upon the ſaid act, belongs to the Judges of the com-
mon law ; for although that the cauſes, the cognizance of
which belongs to them, are merely ſpiritual, and the law by
which they proceed is merely ſpiritual, yet their authority and
power is given to them by act of Parliament, and letters pa-
tent, the conſtruction of which belongs to temporal Judges: _=

| of


is notoriouſly miſtaken, and throughout the book appears too partial to his own order.


—


* wa v5 = tc e Fo


Ry VW r tr $£. _ oc a2 a


bl


Part XII. Nicnoras FurtLtr's Caſe,


for this, the conſultation which was granted is with this re-
ſtraint. Duatenus non agat de authoritate et validitate literarum
patentium pi o cauſis ecclgſiaſticis vobis vel aliguibus veſtrum direct
aut de expoſitione & interpretatione flatuti de anno primo nuper
Reginæ, &c. In the ſame manner as if the King hath a be-
nefice donative by letters patent, although that the function
and office of the incumbent be ſpiritual ; yet inaſmuch as he
comes to it merely by letters patent of the Ling: he ſhall not
be viſitable, not deprivable by any eccleſiaſtical authority,


but by the Chancellor of the King, or by Commiſſioners


under the great ſeal.

3. It was reſolved when there is any queſtion concerning
what power or juriſdiction belongs to eccleſiaſtical Judges, in
any particular caſe, the determination of this belongs to the
Judges of the common law, in what caſes they have cogni-
zance, and in what not; for if the eccleſiaſtical Judges ſhall
have the determination of what things they ſhall have cogni-
zance; and that all that appertains to their juriſdiction, which
they ſhall allow to themſelves, they will make no difficulty
ampliare j uriſdictionem ſuam : and according to this reſolution,
Bract. lib. 5. Traci. de except. cap. 15. fol. 412. Cum judex eccle-
fiaſticus prohibittonem a Rege ſuſcepit, ſuper ſedere debet in omni
caſug ſaltem donec confliterit in curia Regia ad quam pertinet ju-


riſdictionem; quia fr judex ecclefraflicus a@ftimare debet an ſua «ſet |


juriſdictio, in omni caſu indifferenter procederet, non ob/lante Re-
gia prohibitione. Vide Entries fol. 445. There was a queſtion
whether the Court-Chriſtian ſhould have cognizance of a
lamp. And a prohibition was granted, Qued non procedant in
Curid Chriſlianitatis, quouſque in curid noſtra diſcuſſum fuerit,
utrum cegnitio placiti illius ad curiam noſtram vel ad frum eccleſj-
aſticum pertintat. And fo the determination of a thing,
whether it belongs to Court-Chriſtian, doth appertain to the
Judges of the common law, and the Judges of the common
law have power to grant a prohibition. And all this appears
in our books, that the Judges of the common law ſhall de-
termine in what caſes the eccleſiaſtical Judges have power to
puniſh any f lEſione fidei, 2 H. 4. fol. 10. 11H. 4. 88. 22 Ed.
4 20. So of the bounds of pariſhes in 5 f. 5. 10. 39 Ed. 3. 23.
So it belongs to the Judges of the common law, to decide who
ought to certify excommunication, and to reject the certificate,


when the Ordinary or Commiſſary is party, 5 Ed. 3. 8. 8 Ed. 3.
69, 70. 18 Ed. 3. 58. 12 Ed. 4. 9 H. 7. 1. 10H. 7.9. For this it


was reſolved clearly, that if any perſon ſlander the authority or
power


Page [43]


Nicnotas Fvuirter's Caſe, Part XII.


power of the High Commiſſioners, this is to be puniſhed be-
fore the Judges of the common law, for that the determina-
tion of their authority and power which is given to them b
the ſtatute, and the letters patent of the King belong to them,
and not to Court-Chriſtian : and for this, that the many arti-
cles objected againſt Fuller concerning the flander of their
authority and power, was ſolely determinabſe and puniſhable
before the Judges of the common law. One other reſtraint
was added in the conſultation : et quatenus non agat de aliquibus


feandalis, contemptibus, ſeu allis rebus, que ad communem legem


aut per flatuta regni uri Angl ſunt punienda & determinanda,
4. It was reſolved, that it a Counſellor at law, in his argu-
ment ſhall * ſcandal the King or his government, temporal or
ecclehaſtical, this is a mifdemeanor and contempt to the court;
for this he is to be indicted, fined, and impriſoned, and not
in Court-Chriſtian : but if he publiſh any hereſy, ſchiſm, or
erroneous opinion 1n religion, he may be for this convened
before the eceleſiaſtical Judges, and there corrected according
to the eccleſiaſtical law : for the rule is, quod non e juri con-
ſonum quod quis pro alits que in curiis neſtris adta ſunt, quorum
cognitio ad nos pertinet, trahatur in placitum in Curia Chr iſtiani-
tatis, as it appears in the Book of Entries, fol. 448. So that
the intent is, that hereſy, ſchiſm, or ſuch enormous opinions
in religion, do not appertain to the cognizance of temporal
courts: for this cauſe a conſultation was granted, guoad ſchij-
mata, hereſes, et inormiam impiam, vel pernitioſam opinionem in
religione, fide, ſeu doctrina chriſtiana pie & ſalubriter ſtabilita
infra regnum noſtrum Angl', quorum cognitio ad forum eccleſtaſt'-
cum ſpectat, c. Vide Mich. 18 H. 8. Rot. 78. in Banco Regis.
The cafe was, that a Leet was held die Jovis poſt feſtum Sancli
Hich. Arch. 17 H. 8. of the Prior of the houſe of dt. John de
Bethlehem de Sheine, of his manor of Leviſham in the county
of Surry, before John Beare the Steward there, a grand jury
was Charged to enquire for the King of all offences inquirable
within the ſaid Jeet, where one Philip Aldwin, who was refi-
dent within the ſaid leet, appeared at the ſaid leet, Idemque
Philippus ſciens quandam Margaretam, uxorem TJobannis Ald-
twin apud Eaſt Greenwich, infra juriſdictionem letæ predic,
pluries per antea corpus ſuum in adulterio vitioſe exercuiſſe, at
volens ipſam Margaretam pro republica in exemplum taliter of-


fendere volentium legitime punire, ad dictam magnam juratam ſe


per fonaliter exhibuit, et eiſuem fic juratis de dicid maid 4
vitioſa


Part XII. Nicnortas FuilLlEx's Caſe.


vitioſa vita praefate Margaret” inſtructionem et informationem de-
raciter didit. pon which the ſaid Margaret did draw the
ſaid Philip into the court of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury,


and there did libel againſt him for defamation of adultery ;


and that the ſaid Philip ſaid in hiſce Auglicanis verbis; Marga—
ret Aldwin is a whore and a bawd, and it is not yet three
weeks agone ſiuse a man might take a Prieſt betwixt her legs;
which Engliſh words were parcel' of the words by which he
informed the grand inquelt at the ſaid leet : and upon this he
had by award ot the court a prohibition, by which writ it ap-
pears, Quod per leges hujus regni Angl omnes & ſinguli quicungue
domini Regis ſubditi coram quibuſcunque ipſius domini Regis Ju/li-


ciariis ſeu quocungue alio vi10 judiciali officiv ſeculari ſungente in
*


aliquam juratam patriæ jurati, vel ad aliquas inſlructiones ſeu in-


formationes alicui hujuſmod! jurat” in evidentias dandas comparentes


& ewvidentias dantes, ab omni impeiitione & calumnia in aliqua
Curid Chriſtianitatis propterea fienda, quieti & liberi eſſe debent,
& in perpetuum penitus irrepreben'. And by this record it ap-
pears, and by the ſtatute of 10 Ed 3. c. 11. by which it is
provided, that indiCtors of lay people, or Clerks in turns, and
after delivering them before Juſtices, ſhall not be ſued for
defamation in Court-Chriſtian, but that the plaintiff who
finds himſelf grieved ſhall have a prohibition formed in the
Chancery upon his caſe, which was but an aſtirmance of the
common law, for that the ſtatute provides only for indictòͤrs in
the turn only: and yet as well all indictors in other courts, and
all witneſſes, and all others who have affairs in the temporal
courts, ſhall not be ſued or moleſted in Court-Chriſtian. Vide
Paſch. 6 Eliz. in the Reports of the Lord Dyer, (which caſe
is not printed) John Halles in the caſe of marriage between
the Earl of Hereford and the Lady Catherine Gray, declared
his opinion againſt the ſentence given by Commilhoners dele-
gates of the Queen, in a cauſe eccleſiaſtical under the great
ſeal : * and that the ſaid ſentence in diſaſhrmance of the ſaid
marriage was unjuſt, wicked, and void, and that he thought
that the ſaid Judges delegates had done againſt their conſcience,
and could not render any reaſon for the ſaid ſentence; and


what offence this was, was referred to divers Judges to confi-


der; by whom upon great deliberation it was reſolved, that this


olfence was a contempt as well againſt the Q. as to the Judges;


and every of them were puniſhable by the common law,
by


E 12 —— ——_— yy ——— —
- —— —— —


Page [44]


Articuli Cleri,
c. 8.

Entries 444,
447 · :


Circumſpecte
agatis, &c.


Weſt. 2. cap.
43+


Ibidem.


* Note, |


NichoLAs Furrer's Caſe. Part XII.
by fine and impriſonment: and that the Queen may upon


that ſue for it in what court ſhe ſhall pleaſe ; for the flander


of a Judge in point of his judgment, be it true or falſe, is
not juſtifiable, &c. And all this appears by the report of the
Lord Dyer, ſo that in the ſaid conſultation it was well pro-
vided, that the High Commiſſioners ſhould not intermeddle
with any ſcandal by the common law.

5. It was reſolved, that when any libel in Eccleſiaſtical
Court contains many articles, if any of them do not belong to
the cognizance of Court-Chriſtrian, a prohibition may be ge-
nerally granted ; and upon motion made, conſultation may be
made as to things which do belong to the ſpiritual juriſdiction;
for the writ of conſultation with a quoad, is frequent and uſual,
but a prohibition with a guoad, is rara avis in terrg nigroque
fimillima cygno. And for theſe reaſons it was reſolved by all,
that the prohibition in the caſe at bar was well granted, which
in truth was granted by Fenner and Croke Juſtices, in the
time of the vacation.

Note theſe general rules concerning prohibitions, gue ſpar-
im inveniantur in libris noſtris.

Non debet dici tendere in præjudicium ecclefiaſtice libertatis quod


pro Rege & repub' neceſſarium videtur.


Non eſt juri conſonum, quod quis ſuper its quorum cognitio ad
nos pertinet in Curia Chriſcianitati trahatur in placitum.

Epiſcopus teneat placitum in Curia Chriſtianitatis de its que
mere ſunt ſpiritualia. |

Prohibeatur de catero Hoſpitalarits & Templariis ne de cater
trahant aliguem in placitum coram Conſervatoribus privilegiorum
ſuorum de aliqud re cujus cognitio ad forum ſpectat Regium.

Non concedantur citationes priuſquam exprimatur. ſuper qua re
fieri debet citatio,

The knowlege of cafes teftamentary, matrimony, &c. by
the goodneſs of the Princes, and by the laws and cuſtoms of
the realm, appertain to ſpiritual juriſdiction.

6. It was reſolved, that this eſpecial conſultation, being only
for hereſy, ſchiſm, and erroneous opinions, &c. that if they
convict Fuller of hereſy, ſchiſm, or erroneous opinion, that he


ſhall never be puniſhed ® by eccleſiaſtical law: and aſter the.


ſaid conſultation granted, the ſaid Commiſ. proceeded and
convicted Fuller of ſchiſm and erroneous opinions, and im-
| priſoned


— 1 | * a -


Part XII. Firſt Fruits and Tenths. ä
priſoned him and fined him two hundred pounds: and after
in the ſame term, 1 N his counſel moved the Court of
King's Bench to have a Habeas corpus, et ei conceditur, upon
which writ the goaler did return the cauſe of his detention,


—_— F'- + S* S "SS 6 2 :


—_—


Of Firſt Fruits and Tenths. Pu: t45)


Mich. 5 Tacobi Regis,


OTE; annates, primitiæ, and firſt fruits, are all one; Firſt fruits, Ade
it was the value of every ſpiritual living by the pos CNY
year, which the Pope, claiming the diſpoſition of all eccleſi- ae Cler-
aſtical livings within Chriſtendom, reſerved out of every liv- gyman 175,
ing; and thoſe and impropriations began about the time that 777 &c. 744,
Polydore Virgil, lib. 8. cap. 2. ſaith Nullum inventum majores Gibſon's Cad,
| Romano Pantifici cumulavit opes quam id quod Annates vocant, 870 to 9134.

qui uſus omnino multa antiquior gf ax recentiores ſcriptores ſuſ-

picantur, & annates more ſuo appellant primos fructus unius anni:

vide Concilium Viennenſe quod Clemens Quintus indixit pro anna-

libut. LS |
Theſe firſt fruits were given to the crown by 26 H. 8.
cap. 3. | | | |
Note; Hil 34 Ed. 1. an. 1307. At a Parliament held at Car-
lille, great complaint was made of intolerable oppreſſions of
churches and monaſteries by William Teſta (called Mala
Teſta) the Legate of the Pope, and principally concerning
firſt fruits, at which Parliament the King by aſſent of his Da-
rons denied the pavment of firſt fruits of ſpiritual promotions
within England, which were founded by his progenitors and
the nobles, and others of the realm, for the ſervice of God,
alms, and hoſpitality ; and to this effect he writ to the Pope,
| | and thereupon the Pope relinquiſhed his demand of firſt fruits

of abbies, in which Parliament the firſt fruits for two years
vere granted to the King. | | |

Decimæ, id eſt, the tenths of ſpiritualties were perpetual, Tenths perpe⸗ | 14

which in ancient times were paid to the Pope, until Pope ©
Urban gave them to R. 2. to aid him againſt Charles King


of France, and others who ſupported Clement the 7th again{t'
im. | | /


. —
5 th EY — „
6 -
— —— — — ———— — =


D— — „ 1 16>
923 OI —— 1mwꝛi eI—


Ver. VII, F And


Acts and Mo-
numonts 335,
336. an. dom.
1266.


Peter - pence.


High com miſ-
ſion.

Antea 19.
Poſtea 47, 49,


58, 59.
13 Co. 10, 47+


Hab. Corpus.
Poſtea 47, 69.


Page [46]


Sir Ad THONY Royrr's Caſe. Part XII.


And 5 H. 3. by the bulls of the Pope, the church of Eng.
land began to pay the tenths of all their revenue, as well ſpi-
ritual as temporal to H. 3. for years; theſe were given to the
King by the ſaid act of 26 H. 8. cap. 6.

Vide Lambert de Priſt. Leg. Anglorum, &c. f. 128. 10.
omnes qui habuerint 30 denariat. Vive pecuniæ in domo ſud, d
ſuo proprio, Anglorum lege dabit denarium Sando Petro, Vit
1bid. inter leges Inæ, fol 78. cap. 4.

Lambert ib. expoſitione verbi, monies and Peter- pence; Ina


King of the Welt Saxons granted it to the Pope when he was


in pilgrimage at Rome. Camb. Brit. p. 306. ſaith, that it was
Offa the Weſt Saxon King that did grant it: guære {but
neither King could grant it but for himſelf only, and bis
grant could not bind the ſubject withcait their conſent.


*


Sir ANTHONY ROPER's Caſe.


N the caſe of Sir Anthony Roper, who was drawn before
1 the High Commiſſioners at the ſuit of one Bulbrook the
Vicar of Bentley, for a penſion out of a rectory impropriate,
of which Sir Anthony was ſeiſed in fee: and the High Com-
miſſioners ſentenced the ſaid Sir Anthony to pay that, which
he refuſed ; and upon this they committed him to priſon,


who in this term by Flabeas corpus appeared in court, upon


the return of which writ the matter did appear : and it was
well debated by the Juſtices, and was reſolved, that the ſaid
Commiſlioners had not authority or“ commiſſion in the ſaid
caſe, for when the acts of the 27 H. 8. & 31 H. 8. of mo-
naſteries had made parſonages impropriate, and other religious
poſſeſſions lay fee, although that penſions were ſaved, yet,
as it appears by the preamble of the act of 34 H. 8. cap. 16.
thoſe to whom the penſions appertain, had not remedy for
the ſaid penſions, &c. And for this there it is provided,
that if the farmer or occupier of ſuch poſſeſſions ſhall wilfully
deny the payment of any ſuch penſions, portions, corrodies,
indemnities, ſynod proxies, or any other profits, whereof any
Archbiſhop, Biſhop, Archdeacon, or any other ecclefiaſti-


cal perſon were in poſſeſſion at, or within ten years next be-


fore the time of ſuch diflolution of any ſuch monaſtery,


&c, that then it ſhall be lawful for the ſaid et Bi-
«


Part XII. Sir Avituoxr RopER's Caſe.


ſhop, or other eccleſiaſtical perſon aforeſaid, being ſo denicd
to be ſatisfied and paid thereof, and having right to the thing
in demand, to have ſuch proceſs, as well againſt every ſuch
perſon and perſons, as ſo ſhall deny payment, &c. as againſt the
church and churches charged with the ſame, as heretofore
they have lawfully done, and as by and according to the laws
of this realm they may now lawfully do, &c. And if the
King hath covenanted to diſcharge the patentee, &c. of pen-
ſions, and then ſuit ſhall be made for the ſame in the Court
of Augmentations, and not elſewhere: then if the High
Commiſſioners will determine of penſions, they ought to do
it by the act 34 H. 8. and the ſaid act gives this expreſsly to
Ordinaries, and their officials, and the High Commiſſioners
have their authority by the act 1 El. made a long time after.

But it was objected, that the ſaid act 1 El. gave to the
Queen, her heirs, and ſucceſſors, power to aſſign commiſ-
ſioners to exerciſe and execute all manner of juriſdiction ſpi-
ritual, to viſit, reform, &c. all ſchiſm and hereſy, &c. and
enormities, which by any manner of ſpiritual juriſdiction can,
or lawfully may be reformed. And it was faid, that ſuch
ſpiritual juriſdiction, which the Biſhop ſhould have, is tranſ-
ferred to the High Commiſſioners. |

But it was unanimouſly reſolved by Coke, Walmſley, War-
burton, Daniel, and Foſter, Juſtices, that the act 1 El. doth
not extend to this caſe for divers cauſes, viz. | ;

1. For that the ſaid clauſe of reſignation is not more large
than the clauſe of reſtitution ; and that the act of x Eliz. doth
not take away nor alter any act of Parliament, unleſs thoſe
only which are expreſsly named in the act: and it was reſolved
that the High Commiſſioners cannot hold plea for the double


value of tithes carried away before ſeverance, for two cauſes,


(I.) For this, that the ſtatute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. gave the
cognizance of it to ſpiritual Judges, which is to be intended
of ſuch ſpiritual Judges who then were.

(2.) Subſtraction of tithes is injury and no crime, but con-
cerns intereſt and property: and for this the High Commiſ-
ſioners cannot meddle with it.


2. For that the words of the act 1 El. are (which by any


manner of ſpiritual juriſdiction can or lawfully may be re-


formed.) And it appears that theſe words extend to the
crime only, and not to caſes of intereſt betwixt party and
party; for the words are: all ſuch errors, hereſies, &c. which
by any manner, &c, ſo that (ſuch) and (which) are relatives.


F 2 3- This


. *
* , - *
= *


Tithes ſub-
ſtrated, Vidg
ante.


_ —
4+, 11 "4 =
3


—— — — — . — —


Pg -


Sir ANTHONY Ror Ex's. Caſe. Part XII,


23 This jurifdiftion was given to the Biſhops by act of
Parliament, viz. by 34 H. 8. which is more temporal than
ſpiritual : and for this out of the precedent words 1 Eliz,
viz. ſpiritual.or eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction, which is to be in-
tended of juriſdictions merely or purely ſpiritual, * but acts
* of Parliament are more temporal than ſpiritual.
"= 4.᷑. It was not the intent of the act 1 El. which revived the
1 ſtatute 23 H. 8. cap. 9. by which act it is enacted, that none
ſhall be Ped out of his dioceſe, &c. that the High Commil-
Wo 8 ſioners for private cauſes ſhall ſend for ſubjects out of any part
Wo of the realm, and fo in effect confound the juriſdiction of the
Ordinary, who is an officer and miniſter fo neceſſary, that in
divers caſes the courts of the King cannot adminiſter Juſtice
| to ſubjects without him, &c.
73 Co. 9, 47. 5. If the act of 1 Eliz. had extended to give to High Com-
miſſioners power to determine meum & tuum, as penſions,
1 tithes, legacies, matrimonies, divorces, adminiſtrations, pro-
| | bates of teſtaments, &c. the act would alſo give the party
N grieved benefit of appeal, and not give abſolute authority to
the High Commiſſioners finally to determine meum & tuum,
and to baſlardiſe iſſue, &c. without any controlment, for this
ſhould be to diſſolve the court of the Ordinary, which is fo
ancient and inevitably neceſſary in many caſes to the admi-
a niſtration of juſtice, in divers points of it, that without this
Juſtice cannot be executed. |
6. The High Commiſſioners cannot extend themſelves -
but only to crimes, for the clauſe which gives to them power
to impriſon, &c. and to puniſh, &c. and impriſon ſuch offen-
der, &c. And (offender) is only to be intended of him who
* commits any crime, and not of him who detains penſions,
legacy, tithes, &c. | . |


Sir ANTHONY ROPE R's Caſe.
| Mich. 5 Jacobi Rot. 2254.


— Habeas corpus 8

{| r- RACEPTUM fuit guardians priſinæ demini Regis de l.
ill ſcharged by ( guardians priſonæ domini Regis de

| | Td of the Fleet, quad haberet hic, wiz. apud Wiſimonaſterium


27, 45. Poſt, 69,
La, 104, 219.


Court, Ant. 19, immediats poſt receptionem hujut brevis corpus 1


Part XII. Sir AnTnony Royzn's Caſe,


Roper Militis in priſond prædictd ſub cuſtodid ſud detenti guocun-
que nomine cenſeretur, una cum die et cauſa captionts & detentionis
ejuſdem Antonut : et tidem Fuſticiarii hic, viſa cauſa illa, ulterius
fiert fecerint quid de jure & ſecundum legem & conſuetudinem
regni domint Regis. Anglia fuerit faciendim et modo hic ad hunc
diem, ſcilicet diem Sabbati proximum poſt oftabis Sancti Mich. iſta
eodem termino venit prædidtus Antonius in propria perſond ſus ſub
cuſſtodid prædicti guardiani ad barram, hic prædic & idem guar-
dianus, tunc hic mand. Quod ante adventum brevis pradidti,
viz, nono die Ottob. ultimo præterito prædidlus Antonius Roper
Miles reducit ſe priſanæ prædictæ preantea commiſſus virtute cujuſ-
dam warrantt, data 30 die Funi ultimo preterit', guad ſeguitur
in hæc verba, viz. ;

Theſe are in his Majeſty's name to require and charge
you, by vitue of his high commiſhon for cauſes eccle-
ſiaſtical, under the great ſeal of England, to us and others
directed, that herewith you receive and take into your cuſ-
tody the body of Sir Anthony Roper, Knt. and him ſafely de-
tain priſoner at this our commandment, until we ſball give
order for his enlargement, ſignifying unto you, that the cauſe


of his commitment is, for that there being a certain cavſe .


referred unto us hy his Majeſty's ſpecial direction, betwixt
him the ſaid Sir Anthony Roper and John Bulbrook, Vicar
of Bentley, for that he detained wrongfully from him the ſaid
Vicar, a certain yearly penſion due unto him from the ſaid
Sir Anthony; and being thereupon called before us, and
aſter full hearing of * the cauſe in the preſence of Sir An-
thony and his counſel at three or four ſeveral times, he was
at the laſt adjudged by us to pay the ſaid penſion, and he hav-
ing ſome time of deliberation given unto him by us to con-
ſider thereof, hath notwithſtanding obſtinately diſobeyed the
ſaid order, and doth fo ſtill perſiſt: and this ſhall be your
warrant in that behalf ; given at Lambeth this thirtieth of
June 1607. Et guod'hec fuit cauſa captions et detentionis, pred”
Antonit in priſond prædictã, corpus tamen prædicti Antonii modo
hic paratus habet prout per breve prædictum ſibi præceptum fuit,
&c. ſuper quo, viſis pramiſſes et per Fuſticiarios hic plenius exami-
natis et intelleftis,videtur iiſdem Juſiic hic quod prædicta cauſa com-
miſſionis prædicti Antonii priſonæ de Fleet prædicd in retorno præ-
dict, ſuperius ſpecificata minus ſuſficiens in lege eriſtit ad detinen-
dum prædictum Antonium in priſond præd'. Ides prædictus Anto-
nius a priſona præd per curiam hic dimittitur, ac idem guardianus


F 3 de


F


Page [48]


|
|


Juſtice of Wales
cannot be by
commiſſion but
by patent.

4 Inſt, 240.
Poſtea 52.

1 H. H. P. .


707.


Juſtice in War zs, &c. Part XII.
de hujuſmodia cuſlodia per eandem curiam hic plene exomeretur, &c,
And this was reſolved una voce by Coke Chief Juſtice,
Walmſly, Warburton, Daniel, and Foſter Juſtices, for the
cauſes and reaſons afore expreſſed. |
And in the very ſame term in Lane's caſe, a Parſon in
Norfolk, who ſued one of his pariſhioners before the High
Commiſſioners, for ſcandaling of him, ſaying in the church
on the Sabbath before all his pariſhioners, 4* That he was a
& wicked man, and an arrant knave :” pohibition lies, for
this, that it was not ſo enormous as the ſtatute intended:
note, that by expreſs Proviſo, the High Commiſſioners can-
not intermeddle with all herefies, but with exorbitant here-


ſies, &c. and the other ſhall be determined before the Ordi-
nary.


*
K ** — 8 8 8 PREY
— * — — 1 — „


7


Juſtice in Wars not to be by Com-
miſſion.


Hil. 5 Jacobi.


OTE); it was moved to the Juſtices this very term,
upon conſideration of the acts of 34 H. 8. c. 28. and
the 18 Eliz. if the Juſtices in Wales may be conſtituted by
commilhon ; and upon conference it was conceived they could
not, but that it ought to be by patent, as it hath been uſed
ever*lince the act 34 H. 8. Then it was moved, if the King
which now is, may by force of a clauſe of 34 H. 8. do it,
which clauſe is, that the King's moſt royal Majeſty ſhall and
may at all times hereafter from time to time, change, add,
order, alter, miniſh, and reform all manner of things before
rehearſed, as to his moſt excellent wiſdom and diſcretion ſhall
feem meet : and alſo to make laws and ordinances for the
commonwealth, and good quiet of the ſaid dominion of
Wales, and his ſubjects of the fame, from time to time, at
his Majeſty's pleaſure : and it ſeemed to divers of the Juſtices,


that this power given to the King determined by his death,


for divers cauſes.


I. It wants theſe words, © his ſucceſſors,” and for this it


ought not to be drawn in ſucceſſion by conſtruction, and that
ſhould be againſt the intention of the makers of the act,
for they gave this. high power of alteration, &c. of the
laws to the King's —_ excellent Majeſty, as to his molt
| excellent


. nid a SIS hd


1


Part XII. Juſt. in Wal zs not to be by Commiſſion.


excellent wiſdom and diſcretion ſhall be thought moſt meet;
which words want “his ſucceſſors:“ for as his wiſdom and
diſcretion, which they well knew, did not go in ſucceſlion ;
ſo the power and great confidence which was annexed to
them did not go in ſucceſſion ; and for this, that eorum pro-
greſſus oſtendunt multa que ab initio provideri non poſſunt : and
what enſues upon this act of the 34 H. 8. concerning this
uniting of“ Wales and England, and the ſubjection of them
to the laws of England, none could divine: for this cauſe it
was thought reaſonable that King H. 8. during his time,
might alter them ; that he ſecing the obedience of thoſe of
Wales, and the good fruit which proceeded out of the ſaid
act, never altered any part of it; but it was never the inten-


Page [49]


tion of the ſaid act to give power to the King and his ſucceſ- /


ſors for ever, to alter, &c. the Jaws, ſo that none of that
country could be certain of his life, lands, goods, or


liberty, or any thing which he hath, and that would be of


great ſervitude, miſera ſervitus eſt, ubi jus eſt vagum : allo the
words are for the commonwealth, &c. if his Majeſty's ſub-
jects of Wales, at his Majeſty's pleaſure, &c. by which it ap-
pears that the intention of the makers of the act, was to give
this power to King H. 8. for his pleaſure did dete;mine by


his death. |


2. Power of alteration of laws, &c. is a point of high con-
fidence concerning the adminiſtration of juſtice ; and the act
by omitting (of his ſucceſſors) intended to unite this confi-


dence to the perſon of H. 8. and not to extend it without


limitation of time to his ſucceſſors : and this ſtands with the
conſtruction of law in other caſes; for all commiſhons, con-
cerning the adminiſtration of juſtice determine by the death
of the King, yea he conſtitutes them Juſticiarias ſuos, which


authority being in caſe of adminiſtration of juſtice, determines


by the death of the King, or reſignation, 1 Ed. 5. 1. 1 H. 7.
1. 14 Ed. 4. 44. yet if the King make a leaſe durante benepla-
cito, or prefent one to a church, theſe are not” void by his
death, until they are controlled or revoked by his ſucceflor :
but the office of a Sheriff which is granted, durante beneplacito,
determines by the death of the King, for this concerns the
adminiſtration of juſtice: and upon certificate of the opinion
of the Juſtices, that the Juſtices of Wales cannot be conſti-
tuted by commiſhon to the Lord Chancellor, Baron Snigg


had a patent for the circuit of Wales, as others had before.


F 4 HIGH


hy


Purſaivant,
Antea 19, 45,


Part XII.


2 Kod 5 + 2 IT *


—


4 1 — Sd n th.
—


HIGH COMMISSION,
EL... Fac. 1.


HIS term it was reſolved per totam iuriam in Communi
Banco, viz. Coke Chief Juſtice, Walmſley, Warbur.


Pan. 76, $2, 34, ton, Daniel, and Foſter, in the caſe of Allan Ball, that the


0


Simpſon's caſe
before the
Judges of Aſſiſe
in Northamp-
tonſhire.

42 Elis.


Page [ 50]


See Dent's caſe,


Rep. QA.


High Commiſſioners cannot by force of the act 1 El. cap. 1.
ſend a Purſuivant to arreſt any perſon ſubject to their juriſ-


diction, to anſwer to any matter before them: but they ought


to proceed according to eccleſiaſtical law, by citation; for the
ſtatute of 1 El. did not give them any ſuch authority to arreſt

the body of any ſubject upon ſurmiſe: and although that it

be compriſed within their commiſſion, that they may ſend

for any by Purſuivant, &c. yet inaſmuch as this hath no

foundation upon the act of 1 El. the King by his commiſſion

cannot alter the eccleſiaſtical law, nor the proceedings of it;

for the act ſays, that the commiſſoners ſhall, exerciſe, uſe,

and execute all the premiſes (according to the privileges of

the act) according to the ſaid letters patent, id e/t, the letters
patent which are mentioned, and authority before, for this is

implied within this word (ſaid) and for this, without queſtion,
the commiſſion only without the act cannot alter the proceed-
ings of the eccleſiaſtical law? And in the circuit of North-
ampton, when the Lord Anderſon and Glanvile were Juſtices
of aſſiſe, a Purſuivant was ſent by the Commilboners to arreſt
the body of a man to appear before them, and“ in reſiſtance
of the arreſt, and ſtriving amongſt them, the Purſuivant was
killed : and if this was murder or. not, was doubted, and this
depended upon the validity of the power and authority of the
Purſuivant; ſor if his authority was lawful, then in killing an
officer of juſtice in execution of his office, is murder : and
adviſement was taken till the next aſſiſes; and upon confer-
ence at the next aſſiſes it was reſolved that the arreſt was tor-
tious, and by conſequence that this was not murder : but they
may ſend citation by a Purſuivant, and proceed, if the party
make default, to excommunication, and then to have a Capias
excommunicat*, and to imprifon-him by the writ of the K. which
5, writ


- * — — "IS "I batt y— — gy_ TY e * - -


en Lanes Cob


writ de excommunicato capiends is preſcribed and returnable by
the ſtatute of 5 El, which ſhall be in vain, if they may arre

him by a purſuiyant before any anſwer or default made : and
this will be againſt the ſtatute of Magna Charta, and all the
ancient ſtatutes, which ſee Raſtall, title Accuſation, if a free-
man ſhall be arreſted upon a bare ſurmiſe or accuſation :


| which ſtatutes, if good and profitable for the weal public,


never were intended to be repealed by the ſaid ſtatute of 1 Eliz,


Note, that neither the Star-chamber nor Chancery
award any meſſenger to arreſt the body until a con-
tempt made; but firſt a ſubpœna, &c. goes.


MarMADUKE LanGDalts Caſe,


__ Vide Poſtea 58,


N the caſe of Marmaduke Langdale of Leaventhorp in the


county of York, being ſued by Joan his wife, for main-
tenance before the Biſhop of Canterbury, and other High
Commiſhoners: it was reſolved per tolam curiam, præter
Walmſley, who doubted of it, that a prohibition, which be-
fore was granted, was well maintainable, for this, that it was
not any enormity, nor any offence within the ſtatute, but a
neglect of his duty, and a breach of his vow of maintenance;
alſo the party ſhall be defeated of his -appeat; and for that
reaſon it belongs to the court of the Ordinary: and the rule
of the court was, that the plaintiff ſhall count againft the
High Commiſſioners (for againſt his wife, being one perſon in
law with him, he could not count) and upon demurrer join-
ed, the caſe is to be argued and adjudged, upon which the
party grieved may have a writ of error, /i ſibi viderit expedire,
&c, See more, fol. 58. | |


— — 2 * 8 n *
* * * 2 — — —


of WAL Es and YoRK.


O * Sunday laſt, my Lord Chief Juſtice and myſelf, at
LH verjeant's Inn in the afternoon, received by the hands
ol the King's Attorney by commandment, as he lignified to

: Us,


The Caſe of the Lords Preſidents


High Com-
miſſion.


Poſt, 58, &c. B.


The Caſe of the Lords Preſidents Part XII.


us, by your lordſhips, the ſaid complaints, exhibited to his
| Majeſty by the Lord Preſident of Wales, and the Lord Preſi-
See 4 Inſt. 242, dent of York, againſt the Judges of the realm, with a ſigni-
3 ph es fication of your Lordſhips pleaſure, that we two ſhould im-
een pert the ſame to the reſt of our brethren, which we did on
onday in the afternoon, the forenoon being ſpent in the
public ſervice of the realm, at Weſtminſter : and upon con-
ſideration had of the parts of the complaint, we have, as this
ſhort time will give us leave, (being daily employed, as well
in the courts at Weſtminſter, as ſome of us for trials of writs
of Niſi prius,) reſolved upon theſe anſwers, which we know.
ing to be warranted by the laws of this realm, doubt not but
will be allowed by your Lordſhips; and do hope that where
Page [51] the Judges of this realm have been more often called before
" your Lordſhips, than in former times they have “ been,
which is much obſerved, and gives much emboldening to
the vulgar, that after this day we ſhall not be ſo often upon
ſuch complaints, (your Lordſhips being truly informed of
our proceedings) hereafter called before you.

And ſeeing that my Lord Preſident of York hath now ore
tenus firſt opened the cauſe of his grief more amply and in
ſome caſes more particularly, I will begin with thote objec-
tions that have been made on the behalf of that council,
wherein for method, and for avoiding of confuſion, I will
firſt ſpeak to the true cauſe of the inſtitution of that court,
2. That our proceedings in granting of prohibitions, is
for the matter juſtiſiable by law. |

13 Co. 30, 31. 3. That the manner of our proceedings was reſpectful and
compliant towards the Lord Preſident of York, and the
Council there.

4. Give auſwers to all objections both particular and ge-
neral,

5. Propoſe remedies for the time paſt, if there be u
cauſe, |

6. And laſtly, remedies for the future, to take away al!
the cauſes of oppoſition between the Judges and both the tai
councils : SN” |

4 1:2. 245. And firſt as to the cauſe of inſtituting the ſaid court, viz. |

After the ſuppreſſion of all religious houſes to the value of
two hundred pounds, or under, anno 27 H. 8. in the begin- |
ning of Octob. anno 28 H. 8. there was a great inſurrection |

|
{
|


of the Lord Huſſey, and twenty thouſand perſons in Lin-
colnſhire, about the cauſe of religion, againſt! whom Charles

Brandon Duke of Suffolk went, and appcaſed them.
As ſoon as they were appealed, a great commotion be-
gan of forty thouſand men of that county, Sir 8 Aſke
| þ being


*


/


. Part XII. of Warts and Yours,


wiſperſed them. Soon after in Lancaſhire began a great re-
bellion of men of that county, and of Cumberland, Weſtmor-
land, and Northumberland; againſt whom the Earl of Derby


s being chief, againſt whom the Duke of Norfolk went and


4 Inſt. 245.


4 was employed, and quieted them : and after that Muſgrave,
e Tilby, and others, began to raiſe a great number, and aſ-
4 faulted Carliſle caſtle, whom the Duke of Norfolk overthrew.
is ' Preſently after Sir Francis Bigot with a multitude of people,
1 made an inſurrection at Ketrington, Leigh, Pickering and
1 Scarborough in Yorkſhire z whom the Duke of Norfolk paci-
Fe fied; and ſoon after the Lord Darcy, Aſk, Conſtable, Bul-
ne mer, &c. began a new commotion about Hull in Yorkſhire,
bY whom the Duke of Norfolk appeaſed. And all theſe rebel -
0 lions were between the beginnings of 28 and 3o H. 8. within
Ny which time many of the rebels were executed in furore belli,
ke and in flagranti crimine, by martial law, and ſome attainted


| by the common law. 'The King intending the ſuppreſſion of
8 the greater houſes of religion, which ann 31 H. 8. he ef-
ſected, he eſtabliſhed a council there for the quiet of the
counties of Yorkſhire, Northumberland, Weſtmorland, Cum-


1 berland, Dureſme, the counties of the city of Vork, King-
4 ſton upon Hull, and Newcaſtle upon "Tyne, for preventions
Ln of riots, tumults, and inſurrections, in thoſe counties and


places : in this time of neceſſity and danger, the King did


commiſſion ;| the one a commiſſion of oper and terminer, de
by quibuſcunque congregationibus et conventiculi; illicitis, coagjutoribus
h Lolardiis, impriſionibus falſis allegatis, tranſgreſſionibus, riotis,
. routis, retentionibus, contemptibus, falſulatibus, | manutenentiis,
preſſionibus, violentiis, extortionibus et aliis malefactis, of-
enſu, et injuriis quibuſcunque, per que pax & tranquilitas
ſubditorum noſirorum comitatibus, civitatibus, et villis prædictis
gravat', fc. ſecundum legem et conſuetudinem regni nofiri
Anglie vel aliter ſecundim ſanas diſcretiones veſtras audiendum
et terminandum. | | |
The other authority was, nee non quaſcungue attiones

realen, ſeu de libero tenemento, et perſonales, cauſaſque de-
bitorum et demandorum quorumcunque * in com', &c. præ-
did“ quando ambæ partes vel altera pars fic gravata gen
pertate gravata fuerit, quod commode jus ſuum * egem
regri naſiri aliter proſequi non poſſit, ſimiliter ſecundim
leges et con ſuetudines regni noſtri Angliæ vel aliter ſecun—
dum ſanas diſcretiones veftras, And this is all the autho-
tity that the Preſident and Council had firſt * in
| | | their


\


arm the Preſident and Council with two authorities in one


Page [52]


The Caſe of the Lords Preſidents Part XII.


their patents, without any private inſtructions: and this ap.
ears by the commiſhon under the great ſeal, 31 H. 8. 6
Pars. Roberto Landavenſi Epiſcopo Preſident Caneili » & als;
out of which charter theſe things were obſerved, viz.
1. That the final intention of the commiſſion was, quod pay
et tranquilitas ſubditorum preſerventur.
2. That they hear and determine riots, routs, &c. accord.
ing to law, or their diſcretions, which authority by diſcretion


was added, ad faciendum populum for it was reſolved without


- queſtion, that in ſuch cales they had not power but to proceed


according to law, for that is ſumma diſcretio, and not accord.
ing to their private conceits and affeCtions, quia talis diſcrais
diſcretianem confundit; ſo the other clauſe concerning real and
E actions in all the counties of York, Northumber-
and, Cumberland, Weſtmorland, Dureſme, and the towns:


aforeſaid was only ad faciendum populum, for this was utterly


void in law. For,


1. No ſuch general authority granted, may be made by the
commiſſion of the King, to hear and determine all real ac-


tions within ſuch a county according to law, as he may by


charter within a certain county or particular place, for the
King by commiſhon may give power to determine criminal
cauſes between the King and the party /ecundim legem et con-


ſuetudinem Angliæ; but he cannot give power by. commiſſion to


determine cauſes between party and party : as it was reſolved
in Scrogg eg anno 2, Eliz. fol. 175. in Dyer. Vide Dyer
236. But the King by his letters patent may grant to ſuch a
corporation in ſuch a town tenere. placita realia, perſonalia, &
mixta; and none by this can have any prejudice, for the pro-
cegding ought to be according to law ; and if they err, the


party grieved may have his writ of error; but the crown can»


Antea 48.

2 Inſt. 24 422,
423

4 Inſt. 158.


not grant to them a court of equity for the cauſe aſoreſaid;
and for this eauſe, that ſuch a Judge ſhould be without con-
trolment: and it was ſaid, that if ſuch commiſſioners cannot
determine felonies, or other criminal cauſes by writ, but by
commiſſion ; ſo cannot any determine private cauſes betwixt
party and party by commiſſion, but by writ, by the ſtatute of
r 2 cap. 12. & IWeht. 2. cap. 30. Jau de
nova diſſeiſina, c. non capiantur niſi in proprits comitatibus:
which act gives 1 to ſn K alle in their
proper counties, by which it appears, that without an act


-of Parliament, the King by his letters patent cannot put


and authoriſe Juſtices de ii capiendis, to take them with.
in another county : and for this the ancient precedents and
proceedings of law ought not to be altered, As a 1
| 0


Part XII. of Watts and Yorx. |
of the one bench, or of the other, ought to be made by commiſ<


—


fon, and not by writ, and yet he may be diſcharged by writ,
5 Ed. 4. 32. But Juſtices in Eyre are by writ, as it appears
by Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 11. and Britton, fol. 1, Alſo by the


ſtatute of Weſt. 2. cap. 30. and of York, cap. 4. Juſtices of


Q


Nift prius give judgment in aſſiſes of Darrein preſentment, and


Qvare impedit in ſuch a county, which cannot be done with-
out patent. ' Et fic de ceteris,


Alſo it was obſerved, that at the firſt the ſaid commiſſion


concerning actions between party and party, extended only


when both the parties, or one of them, were ſo poor, as they
were not able to proſecute at law : alſo by the firft inſtitution
they had no power to grant injunctions. And laſtly, “their
commiſhon was patent under the great ſeal, and inrolled in
Chancery : and thus much was faid for the firſt, concerning
the true cauſe of the inſtitution of the court, viz. For pre-
renting of tumults and rebellions, and when it began.


2. As to the ſecond point, the granting of writs.of Habeas -


Page [53]


corpus, and prohibitions, is juſtifiable by law; for whereas at


the firſt their authority was patent, it is now private ; for the
letters patent do refer unto certain inſtructions which are no
where of record, but _ in private, and as it was feared,
for private reſpects, et de non apparentibus et non exiſtentibus
eadem eft ratio; beſides the danger to the ſnbject is great, for
if they loſe their inſtructions (as it hath happened heretofore)
all is coram non judice : and this firſt reaſon is drawn from the
inſtructions themſelves: the ſecond reaſon is drawn from the
contumacy of the party that ſuppoſeth himſelf to be grieved
by the prohibition, and againſt whom it is granted; if the au-
thority of the Council be never ſo good, yet being a late and
particular juriſdiction, the party mult of neceſlity plead it, fo
as it may appear unto us judicially; for as we are Judges of
record, fo muſt we be informed of record, and never yet hath


any party prohibited moved in court to have a conſultation, by


which might be ſet forth the juriſdiction of that court and
council, ſo as the granting of prohibitions hath been juſt ;
and the fault (if any be) in the parties themſelves, that never
hitherto made their cauſe known, as it ought to be by law, to
the court. |
The third reaſon is drawn from the great injury offer-
ed to the defendants, for it is a true rule, miſera ſervi-
tus ubi jus eſt vagum aut incertnm: the defendants,
law, may in all courts plead to the juriſdiction of the


Court;


2 Salk. 12.
Plea to the juriſ-
diction, See


Inftic. Leg, 484+
to 488.


w


Page [54]


The Caſe of the Lords Preſidents Part XII.


court; but how can they do ſo when no man can poſſibly
know what juriſdiction they have: concerning matters of
ſtate, which are arcana imperii, it is meet they ſhould be kept
ſub ſagillo concilii, and in ſecret ; but ſor juriſdiction between
party and party, for deciding of meum & tuum, God forbid
they ſhould not be known to them, who are to be judged by
them ; but the keeping them in ſuch ſecrecy bewrayeth, that
the council are afraid that they would not be juſtified if they
were known: and it was concluded again, miſera ſervitus uli
Jus aut vagum aut incertum. |

3. But our proceedings herein have been reſpectful; for x
jury of officers and attornies of our court, being according to


an ancient cuſtom, time out of mind of man uſed, ſworn to


prevent amongſt other things and articles, all defaults of off.
cers and miniſters in not executing the writs and proceſs out
of this court, and all impediments and hinderances whatſo-
ever of the due proceedings of this court, whereby juſtice
cannot be adminiſtered ; and finding upon their oaths divers
unjuſt and undue impediments of the proceedings of this
court, by the ſaid council in particular: and thereupon a mo-
tion being made in open court in Michaelmas term laſt, by
the King's Serjeant Philips, of many intolerable grievances
of the ſubjects offered by the ſaid Council, to many of his Ma.
jeſty's ſubjects, in derogation of the King's laws, in prejudice
of the King's profits, in hinderance of the due proceedings of
this court, prayed the court, according to law and juſtice, to
grant ſeveral prohibitions in all thoſe ſeveral cauſes, which we
could not deny ; but yet thought fit before we granted the
ſame, that there might be a good correſpondence —
both courts; we ſhould confer with Sir Cuthbert Pepper, At.
terney of the Wards, and one of that Council, to let him un-
derſtand the particular grievances and oppreſſions, and to hear
what he could ſay in the juſtification thereof; who according-
ly upon motion came to us to Serjeant's Inn, with“ whom we
conferred, and ſignified to him the particulars of the ſaid griev-
ances, who would not take upon him to juſtify the ſame in
no ſort, but ſaid, he would acquaint the Preſident and Coun-
cil therewith, and return their anſwer ; which for that it was
neglected, we upon further motion in court granted prohi-


| bitions, as in juſtice we ought, which courſe and order of


proceedings we hold to be reſpectful and comely toward the
Lord Prefident and Council. | |
4. It was objected, that more prohibitions have been grant
ed of late than in many years before, whereunto a ſixfold au-
{wer was made,
1. That


Part XII. Of Wares and Yors:


1. That they had exceedingly multiplied the number of
cauſess ſo as they have above two thouſand depending at one
time, and having but five counties and three towns ; at one
fitting there were about 450 cauſes at hearing; whereas the
Chancery that extends into 41 counties Engliſh, and 12 in
Wales, in all 53, had in Eaſter term but 95 to be heard, and
in Trinity term but 72 ; ſo as if they multiply their cauſes ſo
infinitely above what were at the firſt, it is no wonder if the
number of prohibitions be increaſed. : |

2. Beſides the multiplication they have 1nnovated and taken
upon them to deal in cauſes which we know never any Pre-
ſident could, and we think never any Preſident and Council
did uſurp : as firſt, ſuits upon penal laws, and many of them
limited to the courts at Weſtminſter, but all of them without
queſtion out of their juriſdiction ; as for example, between
Harriſon and Thurſtone in Engliſh bill, upon the ſtatute 39
Eliz. of tillage; whereas the very ſtatute giveth juriſdiction
to certain ſpecial courts : the defendant pleaded to the juriſ-
diction, whereupon an attachment was awarded againſt him,
and fined. |

And in the caſe of Hartley after indictment of forcible entry
and reſtitution, according to the ſtatute, he was upon an Eng-
liſh bill diſpoſſeſſed by the Preſident. |

And after a recovery in an Zjectione firme, and execu-
tion by Habere facias poſſefſionem out of our court, they upon
an Engliſh bill diſpoſſeſſed the plaintiff, and this was Hart's
caſe. — Jackſon and Philips, after judgment in our
court, ſuit there by Engliſh bill. Between Stanton and
Child, after execution in debt by proceſs out of our court they
commit the plaintiff, an old man and lame. So between
Binns and Collet, after the defendant was outlawed in an ac-
tion of batrery.

4. They admit Engliſh bills in the nature of writs of error,
and of Formedons, and other real actions.


5. They will admit of no plea of outlawry in diſability of the

plaintiff. | | |
6. They uſually granted injunctions to ſtay the common
law, which is utterly againſt law, and ſometimes to ſtay ſuits in
Chancery, and in the Exchequer-chamber; and many other
proceedings which are againſt law and reaſon, to the great op-
preſſion and grievance of the ſubject: and fo in reſpect as well
of the multiplication of ſuits, as innovations of others, it may
very well be, that more prohibitions and Habeas corpus have
been granted of late than were in times paſt; and yet there
have been more granted, and more ancient than is W
| or


The Caſe of the Lords Preſidents Part XII.


for Mich. 7 Eliz. Rot. 31. upon a motion made by Carus,
the King's Serjeant, 'a © Habeas corpus was granted out of the
King's Bench, for the body of John Lamburn, alias Lambert,
which writ being returned, that he went to the caſtle of
York, where John Lambert was a priſoner, and that one Of.
wald Wilkinfon the Gaoler refuſed to deliver him, without


the leave of the Archbiſhop of York, Preſident of the Coun. /


cil there; whereupon he went to the“ Archbiſhop, and ſhew.
ed unto him the Queen's writ of Habeas Corpus, whereunta
the Archbiſhop anſwered, that John Lambert was not the
Sheriff's priſoner, but was committed by him and the Coun-
Cil to the Gaoler's cuſtody, and therefore he ſhould not be
delivered; and therefore he ſent one Morgan his Secretary to


the Gaoler, that he ſhould not be delivered; and thereupon,


as well for the contempt in the Archbiſhop and the Gaoler, as
for the inſufficient return in not having the body, Carus, the
King's Serjeant moved for an attachment againſt the Arch-
biſhop of York and Wilkinſon the Gaoler, for the contempt
returned by the Sheriff; and it was granted; and the Sheriff


was amerced, for that he ſhewed no lawful cauſe, Mich. 7 &


8 Eliz. in libro de Habeas Corpus. John Dawſon in priſon
for a riot, by Engliſh bill, before the Preſident and Council
of York, removed by Habras Corpus and delivered; for no
man ought to be convicted for a riot, but by indictment, trial,
or other due proceſs at law, and there are many other like
writs of later time, Paſch. 12 Eli. in libro de Habeas Corpus,
Thomas ap Morgan committed by the Council and Preſident
of Wales, &c. and this court finding the cauſe unjuſt, bailed
him, &c. And in Trin. 20 El. ibid. the like writ for the
body of John Rowland, committed by the Preſident and
Corncil of Wales, and finding by the return that the com-
mitment of him was againſt law, he was diſcharged by the
court, and many more of that nature. ;

23. The Judges never grant either prohibitions or Habeas
Corpus, but upon motion or complaint by the party grieved,
ſo as if the parties have greater cauſe of complaint than they
had in times paſt, there muſt of neceſſity be more writs of
prohibition and Habeas Corpus granted than was heretofore.

4. The proceedings before the Preſident and Council are
by abſolute power, their decrees uncontrolable and final, and
more final than a judgment in a writ of right ; for thereupon
a writ of error lieth; but theſe ſentences. are irreverſible,
which makes them adventure, and preſume too much upon
their authority, and which tends to the great oppreſſion and
grievance of the ſubject. |

| 5. Thels


———


- *
®


"ms Vw.


w tt „ © 8 }_ $# 2+


 -: +4 » * 0 ©


—


0
,


of Warts and Foxx.


5. Theſe ſuits grow to be more prejudical to the King than
erer they have been, for by the multiplication and innovation
of ſuits, as well real as perſonal, the King loſeth his fines,


Part XII.


e. :
6. Remedy for the time paſt, if we haveerred in judgment,
z writ of error lieth in the King's Bench; if the King's Bench
doch err, a writ of error lieth in the upper houſe of Parlia-
ment, where the King and the Lords are only judges,

y, For the time to come, firſt, that the inſtructions be
in the Chancery, whereunto the ſubject may have
acceſs, and know their juriſdiction.
and councils have ſome counſel learned in the court, who may
inform us judicially of their true juriſdiction, and we will
give a day to them before we grant any writ, to ſhew cauſe
to the contrary ; ſo as juſtice upon hearing of both ſides ſhall
be done; and if we err, the law hath provided a remedy by a
writ of error, and no other courſe can be taken: and we are
ſworn both to maintain the King's prerogative, and to do
juſtice to all men, according to the laws and cuſtoms of
England: ſo, as command, my Lords | whatſoever it ſhall
pleaſe you that lieth in our power, and which by our oath
we may perform, and we will moſt willingly obey it : and
that which a great divine faid to God Almighty, we ſay unto
your Lordſhips, who fit in God's ſeat, da Domine
& jube quod vis, fc.

* The particular ca


2. That the Preſidents


ſes ſet down in the petition are anſwer- Page
ed in the ſecond part of our proceedings juſtifiable until they
lead their juriſdiction, and make it appear to the court to
lawful. Concerning the jury of attornies, it hath been
anſwered before; and for the motion to have a rule ſet dow
&c. it was moved by the King's Serjeant, and we adviſe
thereupon. When this had been thus delivered, by way of
anſwer, Bacon, the King's Solicitor offered to reply ; but af-
ter the Judge had ſpoken in the name of all his brethren, the
Lords would not ſuffer. him to ſpeak after the Judge: but all
others being deſired to retire into the next chamber, the Lor
had long and prudent conference amongſt themſelves; an
after, we were called in again, and then the Farl of Saliſbury,
Lord Treaſurer, by the conſent of that honourable table, gave
this reſolution ; | NN 5


1. That the inſtructions ſhould be recorded for fo much
* as concerned either criminal cauſes, or cauſes between
( arty and party: as for Matter of ſtate, if any be, the

me not to be 4


publiſhed.
Vox. VII. |


# 2. That


Hereſy, upon
conference with
Sir John Pop-
ham and others,
anno 43 Eliz.
Vide Poſt, 93.
I Hawk. C. 2.
Sect. 1, 2, 3, &c.
ch. Jo ſe, 2.


HEZ ARS TW. Part XII


2 „ That it was neceſſary that both councils ſhould be
& within the ſurvey of Weltminſter-hall, viz. the courts d
« Weſtminſter,

3. * The motion was well allowed, that the Preſidents and
© councils ſhould have counſel learned in every court; and
* that upon motion made in open court, upon any prohihi.
e tion, to either of them, day ſhould be given to ſhew eau,
= Kc. | 1

4. The Lord Treaſurer repeated the ſentence, and ſaid,
© that true it is, i lex aut vaga aut incerta, miſerrima i
s ſervitus, where men's eſtates and fortunes ſhould be decided
« by diſcretion, |
« And concerning the remoteneſs of the place, what reaſon
ſhould there be at this time more for thoſe parts than for
ce the counties of Cornwal and Devon, which are more re-
„ mote than York? And, this was the end of this dart
« work.” *


Lag


The Caſe of Hereſy.


| a

HE Archbiſhop and other Biſhops, and other the clergy,

at a general ſynod or convocation might convict an he-

retic by the common law. But for this, that it was trouble-
ſome to call a convocation of the whole province, it was or-
dained by the ſtatute of 2 H. 4. cap. 15. that every Biſhoy
in his dioceſe might convict heretics ; and note, 2 Mary,
Brook, title Hereſy, per omnes Fu/tic, and Baker Chancellor
of the Exchequer, and Hare Maſter of the Rolls, by that ſta-
tute. And if the Sheriff was preſent, he might deliver the
party convict to be burnt, without any writ De heretico combu-
rendo ; but if the Sheriff be abſent, or if he be to be burnt in
another county, then there ought to be a writ De heretic com-
burendo : and that the common law was ſuch, vide lib. intra,
title Indictment, p. 11. ſuch who there are taken for heretics,
ſome of them, are conſonant to true religion. Vide 11 h.
. Book of Entries, fol. 3. 19. See Doctor and Student,
ſib. 2. cap. 29. Colin 48. 2. See the ſtatute of 1&2
P. & M. cap. 6. That Ordinaries wanting authority to pro-
ceed againſt heretics, 3 F. N. B. 8. fol. 269. And the


writ in the Regiſter, which in the new book is omittes
proves


*


XII


Id he
ts of


'$ and
and
hibi.
cauſe,

ſaid,


ma tf


cided


eaſon
1 for
e re-


part XII. Hennsy


proves this directly. 4. Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 2. folio 123,
124. Concilio Oxonienſi quidam Diaconus convictus fuit de apoſ-
taſia, ſed primo degradatus fuit per Ordinarium : and true it is,
that every Ordinary may“ convent any heretic or ſchiſmatic
before him, pro ſalute anime, and may degrade him, as Brac-
ton ſaith, and may enjoin him penance according to the cen-
ſure of eccleſiaſtical law ; but upon ſuch conviction at com-
mon law, the party convict ſhall not be burnt, nor any writ
De beretico comburendo lieth upon it; for the common law
will not commit the deciſion of a hereſy, for the life of a
Chriſtian man, to any ſole Judge. |

The Mäkers of the act of 1 Eliz. were in doubt what ſhall
be adjudged hereſy; and therefore if any perſon be charged
with hereſy before the High Commiſhoners, they have no au-
thority to judge on matter or cauſe to be hereſy, but only
ſuch as hath been
ſcripture, and by the four firſt general councils, or by an
other general council, wherein the ſame was declared hereſy
by the expreſs and plain words of canonical ſcripture, or ſuch
as ſhall hereafter be determined to be hereſy by Parliament,
with the aſſent of the convocation ; for fo it is expreſly pro-
vided by the ſaid act of 1 Eliz. And although this proviſo
extends only to the high Commiſſioners, yet ſecing in the
high commiſhon there be ſo many Biſhops, and other divines


and learned men, it may ſerve for a good direction to others,


eſpecially to the dioceſan, being a ſole Judge in ſo weighty a
cauſe.

At this day the dioceſan hath juriſdiction of hereſy, and ſo
it hath been put in ure in all Queen Elizabeth's reign, but
without the aid of the act of 2 H. 4. cap. 15. the dioceſan
could impriſon no perſon accuſed of bereſy, but was to pro-
ceed againſt bim by the cenſures of the church; ſor the Biſho
of every dioceſe might convict any for hereſy before the ſta-
tute 2 H. 4. as appears by the preamble of it. But could not
impriſon, &c. and now ſeeing that not only the ſaid act of
2 H. 4. but 25 H. 8. cap. 14. are repealed, the dioceſan can-
not impriſon any man accuſed of hereſy, but muſt proceed
againſt them as he might have done before thoſe ſtatutes
” the cenſures of the coeds as it 2 * ſaid
act of 2 H. 4. cap. 15. Likewiſe the ſuppoſed ſtatute of
5 R. 2. cap. 5. Aud the ſtatutes of 2 H. 5. cap. 7. 25 H. 8.
cap. 14. 1 & 2 P. & M. cap. 6. are all repealed, ſo as no
ſtatute made againſt heretics ſtands now in force; and at
this day no perſon can be indiftzd or impeached for te eſy


G 2 before


Page [57]


"oe


o adjudged by the authority of canonical *


*


—


See Cotton's Re-
V cords 285, That
this ſtatute was


Hr RAZSV. Part XII.
before any temporal judge, or other that hath temporal juriſ.
diction, as upon peruſal of the ſaid ſtatute appeareth.


There was a ſtatute ſuppoſed to be made in 5 R. 2. that
commiſſions ſhould be by the Lord Chancellor made and di-


never aſſented to rected to Sheriffs, and others, to arreſt ſuch as ſhould be cer.


by the Com-
mons, and there -
fore the King at
their prayer re-


tified into the Chancery by the Biſhops and prelates, maſters
of divinity, to be preachers of hereſies and notorious ertors,
their factors, maintainers, and abettors, and to hold them in


vokes it by a ſta- ſtrong priſon, until they will jnſtify themſelves to the law of


tute 6 R. 2, But
yet the power of
the Prelates was
ſuch (as Mr.
Rymer obſerves”
in his MS. of
Parliamentary


the holy church. By colour of the ſuppoſed act, certain per-
ſons that held that images were not to be worſhipped, &c,
were holden in ſtrong priſon, until they (to redeem their
vexation) miſerably yielded before theſe maſters of divinity to
take an oath, and did ſwear to worſhip images, which was


proceedings (pe- againſt the moral and eternal law of Almighty God. Wo


nes W. Bohun)
p. 140) That
the Statute of
Repeal was ne-
ver formed into
an act, or pub-
liſhed, ſo as the


have ſaid by colour of the ſaid ſuppoſed ſtatute, &c. not on-
ly in reſpect of the ſaid opinion, but in reſpect alſo, that the
ſaid ſuppoſed act, was in truth never any act of Parliament,
though it was entered in the Rolls of the Parliament, for that
the Commons never gave their conſent thereunto. And


former ordinance therefore in the next Parliament, (though it was entered in


continued to be
enforced by the
clergy (whereby


the Rolls of the Parliament) for that the Commons never
gave their conſent thereunto, therefore in the next Parlia-


many godly men ment, the Commons preferred a bill, reciting the ſaid ſup-


were cruelly
burnt) till it was
repealcd by a
ſpecial act of


Page [58]


+ Note, this


poſed act, and conſtantly affirmed, that they never aſſented
thereunto, and therefore deſited that the ſaidTuppoſed ſtatute
might be aniented and declared to be void ; for they proteſt.
ed, that it was never their intent to be juſtified by, and to
bind themſelves and ſucceſſors * to the prelates, more than
their anceſtors had done in times paſt; and hereunto the
King gave his royal aſſent in theſe words, Pleiſl au Rey.
And mark well the manner of the penning of the act, for
ſeeing the Commons did not affent thereunto, the words of
the act be, „it is ordained and aſſented in this preſent Par-
“ lament, that,” &c. And fo it was, being but by the

ing and the Lords. {Or rather, by the craft of the Biſhops
and the then Chancellor. | |

It is to be known, that of ancient time, when any acts
of Parliament were made to the end the ſame might be
publiſhed and underſtood, and eſpecially before the uſe of
printing came into England, [after the Parliament was
ended] the acts of Parliament were ingroſſed into parch-
. m&at and bundled + up together with a writ in the King's


method gave op- na , under the great ſeal, to the Sheriff of every
portunity to the


Chancellors and
and Biſhops to
Inſert in the ſaid |
bundles ſeveral things as acts of Parliament, which never paſigd in Parliament. W. B.


county, ſometimes in Latin, and ſometimes in French, to
command the Sheriff to proclaim the ſaid ſtatutes within


his


1 e — —


os >. ©


—


—


er WW >


WP". ” - "Wy  - WP *


part XII. Henresy.


his bailiwick, as well within liberties as without, And this
was the courſe of parliamentary proceedings, before printing
eame in uſe in England, and it continued after we had the


print till the reign of H. 7.


Note, at the Parliament holden in 5 R. 2. John “ Brai
brooke, Biſhop of London, being Lord Chancellor of Eng-
land, cauſed the ſaid ordinance of the King and Lords to be
inſerted into the parliamentary writ of proclamation to be

roclaimed amongſt the acts of parliament, which writ !
658 ſeen, the purcloſe of which writ, after the recital of the
acts directed to the Sheriff of N. is in theſe words.
lentes diftas concordias, ſiue ordinationes in omnibus & ſingulis
ſuis articulis inviolabiliter obſervari, tibi precipimus quod præ-
dictas concordias five ordinationes in locis infra balivam tuam,
ubi melius exfedire volueris, tam infra libertates, quam extra,
publics proclamari & tenert facias juxta fermam prænotatam.
Tefle Rege apud Wijlm. 26 Maii anno regni Regis, R. 2. 5.

But in the parliamentary proclamation of the acts paſſed in
anno 6 R. 2. the ſaid act of 6 R. 2. whereby the ſaid ſup-
poſed act of 5 R 2. was declared to be void, is omitted, and
afterwards the ſaid ſuppoſed act of 5 R. 2. was continually
printed, and the ſaid act of 6 R. 2. hath by the craft of the
prelates been ever from time to time kept from the print.


Certain men called Lollards were indicted for. hereſy upon
Quad non eft me-
rifhrium ad Sandtum Thomam nec ad Sandtam Mariam de Wal-
mmgham preregrinari. . 2. Nec imagines crucifixi et aliorum
fanflorum advrare. 3. Nulli ſacerdoti confitert nifi ſali Des,
Oc. Which opinions were ſo far from hereſy, as the makers
of the ſtatute of 1 Eliz. had great cauſe to limit what hereſy
Was. |


the ſtatute 2 H. 4. for theſe opinions, viz


[Vide Poſt, 93. of the writ De heæretico ceniburendo.


Nos vo-


He was made
Chancellor in
Sept. ſexto R. 2.
But Sir Richard
Scroop, Knight,
the preceding
Chancell- r being
e xuucte rated in
July: the King
y Delapool and
Braibrook's ad-
vice took the
ſeal into his own
hands. Vide
Hall, 440. Ca-
tol. Canc. 51.


Nota, Sir Mi-
chael Dela pool
ſucceeded Brai-
brook being
made Chancellor
in March ſexto
R. 2. See Cot-


ton 194. 198
290. Hollinch.


457, 422, &c.


LANGDALE's


— —c —  — — CC


-


High commiſ-
11 vns


Vid. poſt. 96,77,
4 inſt. 99, 100.


Page [59]


| I la. 99.


Part XII.


*
n hs 4 * * " won Ly
, a — — — —
— ati. ut. Ao rs a — —_— — —_ — VO I I * * —


LANGDALE's Caſe.
Antea, p. 50.
Mich. 6 Jac. Regis.


\


Prohibition,


N the caſe of Langdale in this very term, in a prohibition
to the High Commiſſioners, two points were moved, the

one, if a feme-covert may ſue for alimony before the High
Commiſhoners ; the other, if the court of Common Pleas
may grant a prohibition, when no plea is pendent in the
Common Pleas: as in this caſe no plea can there depend be-
twixt huſband and wife. And foraſmuch as this concerns the
juriſdiction of the court, this was firſt of all debated and di-
vers objections were made againſt it.

1. I hat this court hath not juriſdiction to hold, plea with-
out an * original, unleſs it be by privilege of an attorney, of-
ficer, or clerk of the court, unleſs that it be in an .
caſe, viz. when there is an action there depending for the


ſame cauſe; then it was agreed that a prohibition ſhall be


awarded out of the Common Pleas, in reſpect that the court
hath an action there depending for the ſame cauſe, and fo
being poſſeſſed of the cauſe, it gave the court juriſdiction to
award prohibition out of the fame court: and for that the pro-
Hibition ought to recite, gued cum tale placitum pendet, Ec. and
the defendant, pendente placito prædicto, hath purſued in court-
chriſtian : and with this accords F. N. B. 43. g. where it
is ſaid, that if a man be ſued in the Common Pleas for a treſ-
paſs, if the plaintiff alſo ſue in court-chriſtian for the ſame
cauſe,* the defendant may ſue for this in the Common Pleas,
and ſhall have a prohibition then directed to the Judges: and
ſo always when the matter is pendent in the Common Pleas,
if ſuit be for the ſame cauſe in court-chriſtian, he ſhall have
a prohibition : but a man ſhall have a prohibition out of the
Chancery or King's Bench upon his ſurmiſe, ſurmiſing that
he is ſued in court-chriſtian ſor a temporal cauſe: and 2 Ed.
4. 11. 6. was cited, where it is held that ne admittas, which
is a prohibition, doth not lie unleſs that the Quare impedit be
pendent, —
on | ut


Part XII. ProOntB1TION.


But it was anſwered and reſolved by Coke Chief. Juſtice, 4 Inſt. 99, 100.
Warburton, Daniel, and Foſter, Juſtices, that the Common
Pleas may award a prohibition, although that no ſuit be there
pendent, for this, that the Common Pleas is the principal
court of common law for eommon pleas : for it belongs to the
juriſdiction of the Common Pleas to determine all common
leas.
5 Communia placita non ſequantur curiam nſtram, as it is en- 2 Inſt. 21, $50,
acted by Magna Charta, which hath thirty-two times been Proeme 10
confirmed by other acts of Parliament: then if the eccleſiaſ- 2% aft. P. 4.
tical judges incroach upon the juriſdiction of the Common
Pleas to hold plea of any thing againſt the common law of the
land, or of any thing triable by the law, there the principal
court of common law hall grant a prohibition, and that with-
out original writ, for divers cauſes. | cn? (obs:
1. For that no original writ of prohibition which iſſues out Writ ef probi-
of the Chancery is returnable either into the King's Bench or n
Common Pleas, but is directed to the Judge or party, or both, e
and is not returnable at all: but it appears in the Regiſter,
that if the prohibition be contemned, then the Chancellor may
award an attachment to puniſh this contempt, returnable
either in the Common Pleas, or in the King's Bench: but an
attachment in ſuch caſe is but as a judicial writ ; and this
appears by the Regiſter, fol. 33. And if the attachment in
ſuch caſe be returnable into the Common Pleas, &c. the
plaintiff in the declaration ſhall make mention of an original
writ in the Chancery, and of the contempt, &c.
2. There was great reaſon that no original writ of prohibi- The common
tion ſhall be returnable, for the common Jaw was a prohibi- ag a prohide-
tion in itſelf, and he who did incroach upon the juriſdiftion
of it incurred a contempt : and with this agree our books, as
9 H.6. 56. inattachment upon a prohibition in the Common
Pleas, before William Babington then Chief Juſtice of the
Bench, concerning a ſuit in court-chriſtian of tithes of groſs
trees: and there Fulthorp the Serjeant took exception to the
count, for this, that the plaintiff in his count did not declare
upon any ſtatute, nor that any probibition, il. original writ,
was directed unto him: and there it is held that the ſtatute of
45 E. 3. and the common law alſo was a prohibition in itſelf ;
and thys the rule of the book, 19 H. 6. 54. prohibition for
this, that one had ſued in a court-baron againſt the com-
mon law; * and there Aſcue ſaid, the ſtatute is a prohi- Page [60]
bition in itſelf, ſo it is held in 8 R. 2. title Attachnat
fur Prohibition, 15. Note by Clopton in the Common Pl * 5
903. 0 way


— .


Wbo then was a Serjeant, that if a plea be held in court-chriſ:


Several kinds of Note, there are ſeveral writs of expreſs pfohibitions, ſcil.


prohibitions,


*


Pendency of
plea, &c, not
neceſſary.


ſolvendi, habet juriſdictionem ligandi; and one writ is as origi-


when a plea is pendent. Prohibitions founded upon record,


"Pleas, unleſs a Quare impedit be depending; for this ought


juriſdiction of court, for a plea pendent may give privilege


Phomnrfttrod. Part XII.


tian, which belongs to the court of the King, without any
prohibition in Vale, the plaintiff ſhall have an attachment
upon a prohibition, for this, that the law is a prohibition in
itſelf ; for by the law they ought to hold no plea, but that
which doth belong to their juriſdiction, quod fuit conceſſum, -
c Regifler 77. Efirepment. Præcipimus quod inhibeas, &c,
Fitz, N. B 259. Regifter 112. Super ſedeas to a court - ba-
ron, for holding plea vi et armis, ſor above forty ſhillings:
and F. N. B. a writ of conſultation is as much an original ag
a prohibition, yet the Common Pleas hath granted infinite
conſultations ; ergo prohibitions, gui habet juriſdictionem al.


nal as the other.


prohibitions with this word, prohibemus vobis, and letters in
nature of prohibitions, as Superſedeas, by which it is com-
manded, quod ſuper ſed” in placito prædict'. And an injunction
is a prohibition alſo in its nature, for the words are an in-
junction to the party, not to the Judge; and a Super/edeas is
to an officer or judge, not to the party. EP

Expreſs prohibitions are in two manners, the one founded
upon a ſuggeſtion, the other upon record; upon ſuggeſtion
where no plea is pendent, but the ſuggeſtion is the founda-
tion, for it is not ſo when a plea is pendent z upon record


as ne admittas, &c. ought to recite the plea pendent, for all
thoſe which are founded upon record ought to recite a plea
pendent. . So a writ to the Biſhop to admit a clerk, is a ju-
dicial /atitat, as Dyer deſines it: and as to the book of 2 Ed.
4. it is well agreed, that this doth not lie in the Common


to recite a writ to be depending ; and it ſhould be againſt rea-
ſon to reſtrain any to preſent, or to make waſte by E/trep-
ment, unleſs that a writ be pendent : and as to the opinion of
Fitzherbert, it was affirmed for good law, for every one agrees
it, that if a plea be pendent in the Common Pleas, then a pro-
hibition there lies, and the pendency or not pendency of 2
plea 1s not material for divers cauſes. ;

1. The pendency of a plea may give a privilege to the
party, but no juriſdiftion to the court in collateral ſuit :
and there is a diverſity betwixt privilege to the party, and


to the party, eunde, redeundo, et morands, but doth not
give juriſdiction to the court to hold plea by bill by
| . col-


Part XII. P R 0 n 18111 o v.


collateral ſuit againſt any other, as an officer, attorney, of
clerk may. Bi | |

2. The prohibition in ſuch a caſe where plea is pendefit is
no proceſs judicial upon the record, for it is a collateral ſuit,

2. If the Common Pleas, which is the proper court for
common pleas, cannot grant a prohibition without a plea pen-
dent; certainly the King's Bench, which holds plea of com-
mon pleas, by ſecondary means, cannot do it: and fo the
Archbiſhop of Canterbury in his articles concerning prohibi-
tions, holds that neither the one court nor the other may
grant prohibitions in ſuch a caſe : but inaſmuch as the com-
mon law is inſtead of an original, as hath been ſaid, both“ e See Vaugh,
courts may grant it. 157, 20.

4. Infinite precedents may be ſhewn of prohibitions out of
the Common Pleas, without recital of any plea pendent, as is
agreed on the other part: and true it is, that it ought not to
be ſo, if the court hath not juriſdiftion * to grant any with- Page [61]
out plea pendent. *Every petty clerk of the common law ſhall
have by his privilege a prohibition without plea pendent ; a
fortiori the common law itfelf may prohibit any one, who
againſt the common law ſhall incroach upon its juriſdiction,
and enquire of things done againſt the juriſdiftion of 18
court, Plea pendent is cauſe of privilege and not of juriſtrc-
tion, 4 Ed. 4. 37. 37 H. 8. 4. Action or informatiqn upon
the ſtatute of 2 H. 5. c 5. is but an information to the court
of wrong done to the common law, for this, that no original
writ lies, as upon penal law, upon malum prohibitum, this is, vaugh. 333,
malum in ſe, de quo curia intelligi & informari voluit. 342, Kc.

5. A precedent is in 22 Ed. 4. where a prohibition was Antes 30.
granted out of the Common Pleas, for that the plaintiff might
have a writ of falſe judgment at the common law : the record
itſelf agrees with the report. |

6. Officers and clerks, as well in the Common Pleas as in
the Exchequer, and farmers of the King in the Exchequer,
may have by privilege of court a prohibition without original;

a fortiori the law itſelf ſhall have greater privilege than an of-

ficer or clerk, and certainly to enforce the party to bring an

action, will be a means to multiply ſuits to no end, ſor the

law itſelf in 4 Ed. 4. fol. 37. if any man upon the ſtatute of

2 H. 5. for not delivering of a libel, he brought into the stat 2 H. g.c.4.
Common Pleas ; and if he cannot have a prohibition without See 13 Co. 42.
ſuch ſuit this ſhall be a cauſe, as hath been ſaid, to multiply dry 75 be
ſuits, and is againſt the public weal : for he will bring his ac- &. 1 :
Uon upon the ſtatute before that he will be deprived of his 338.


this Moor 756,
prohibi Regr. 58. 6


Page [62]


\


PROHIBITION. Part XII.


prohibition, and by that he gives himſelf cauſe of prohibition ,
every prohibition 1s as well at the ſuit of the King as of the
party, as is held in 28 Ed. 3. 97. falſe Latin ſhall not abate,
nor excommunication in the plaintifF is no plea : for this is
the ſuit of the King, as well for his juriſdiction as for the
party, who by law may chuſe his court, 15 Ed. 3. title Cor-
rody 4. The King may ſue for this contempt where he
pleaſeth.


Note, that although the original cauſe was in the King's


Bench for corody, excommunication 1s no plea in — .
to


the plaintiff, becauſe it is the ſuit of the King for contempt
his law, Vide 21 H. 7.71. Kelway 6. in Quare nm admi-
fit, 4 Ed. 4. 37. for not delivery of a libel, in the Common
Pleas, and then he ſhall have a prohibition by all the Juſtices:
ſo upon the ſtatute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. for ſuing for tithes
where there is a preſcription, &c. and this ſhall be to intro-
duce multiplication of ſuits, when himſelf gives cauſe of pro-
hibition, 38 H. 6. 14. 22 Ed. 4. 20. 13 Ed. 3. title Prohi-
bition 11. |} EG Whoa in the Common Pleas, after
which the patron ſues the recoveror in Chancery, ſur-
miſing equity, attachment upon a prohibition out of the Com-
mon Pleas, yet no plea pendent.

Note, the reporter reporteth this attachment to ifſue out of
the Common Pleas, for the Chancellor would not prohibit
him. |

32 H. 6. 34. An attorney in the palace aſſaulted and me-
naced, the court ſhall take a bill and enquire of it, 4 Ed. 4.
36, 37. there a prohibition without view of libel, for this,
that action was pendent. Statham, Prohibition 3.

Rrobibition ſuper articulos, title Prohibition, plea 5. gives
a prohibition before, ſcil. coram Fuſticiariis naſtris apud Weſt.


Vide F. N. B. fol. 69. b. in a writ of Pone, Regiſter Judic


coram Fuſliciariis naſtris apud Weſt. is the Common Pleas, F.
N. B. 64. d. 38 Ed. 3. 14. ſtat. 2 Ed. 6, cap, 13. ſuch courts

rant prohibition who have uſed to grant them : Hale's caſe
in * my Reports. Note, the reaſon that many prohibitions


were granted in the King's Bench, for that nowrit of error
lies but in plaints,


BANES's


Ii
|
|
11


B A N K S's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Fac. I.


Mich 6 Fac. Ret. 639. Robert Banks, Gent. brought
an action upon the ſtatute of Winton, 13 Ed. 1. againſt


Sur ftatute Win-


ton. Hue and


the inhabitants of the hundred of Burnham in the county of 6, * Show.


Bucks, and counted, that certain miſdoers to the plaintiff un-
known, at Hitcham in the county aforeſaid, which town 1s in
the hundred of Burnham, the 22 Nov. anno regni Regis Ja-
cobi 5, aſſaulted the plaintiff, and robbed him of 251. 3s. 2d
0b. and that the plaintiff immediately after the robbery, ſc.
the 22d of Nov. at Joplow and Manlow, in the county afore-
ſaid, which were towns next the ſaid town of Hitcham, with-
in the ſaid hundred, made hue and cry of the ſaid robbery,
and gave notice of the ſaid robbery to the inhabitants of the ſaid
towns of Joplow and Manlow, and after the ſaid robbery,
and within twenty days before the purchaſe of the writ, /cil.
19 day of Feb. anno 5, at Dorney in the county aforeſaid, the
plaintiff, before Sir Wm, Gerrard, Knt. then Juſtice of
Peace within the ſame county, an inhabitant next to the ſaid
hundred, being examined upon his oath, according to the ſta-
tute of 27 El. the plaintiff upon his oath ſaid, that he did not
know the parties who did rob him, nor any of them: and ſince
the ſaid robbery are forty days paſt, and the inhabitants of the
ſaid hundred of Burnham have not made amends of the ſaid
robbery to the plaintiff, nor the body of the felons and miſ-
doers aforeſaid, nor any of them have taken, nor anſwered
their bodies, nor the bodies of any of them, but have ſuffered
the felons to eſcape. To which the defendants plead (not
guilty) and a Venire facias was awarded to the Sheriff, de vici-
neto of the hundred of Stoke, which is the hundred next ad-
Jacent to the ſaid hundred of Burnham : and the jury gave a
ſpecial verdict ; they found that the plaintiff was robbed, and
that he made hue and cry in manner and form, as he hath
counted, and found over, that the plaintiff was ſworn be-
fore the ſaid Sir William Gerrard, then being a Juſtice of
eace within the ſame county, and an inhabitant next un-
to


o.

1 Show. 150.
7 Co. 6, 7.
Farr 153, 160.
Cro, Car, 267.


+ 1 Hawk. ch. 76.


Sect. 3. 26.
2 Ha vk. c. 12.
Sect. 5, 6.

2 Sand. 379,
380, 423-

2 Salk. 614.
Farr 157, &c,
Rep, QA. 8,
9, TO, &c,


o


Page [63]


Injuria, pro bo-
no publico.


See 1 Danv. 13.
Molloy 246,
247-

2 Bulft.

Allen 93» x

I Sal. 35.


a great tempeſt happened, and a


M o USE's Caſe | Part XII.


to the hundred of Burnham, and ſaid upon his oath in theſe
Engliſh words, © that he, on Thurſday being the two and
« twentieth day of November 1608, riding under Hitcham
* Wood, in the pariſh of Hitcham, within the hundred of
© Burnham, was then and there ſet upon by two horſemen,
ce which then, nor at this preſent he did, nor doth know, and
te by them robbed and ſpoiled of the juſt ſum of 251. 3s. 24,
% 0b. not without great danger of his life :” but whether the
ſaid oath ſo taken is true, according to the form and effect of
the ſaid act of 27 El. and according to the count, the jurors
pray the direCtion of the court.


M OU S$S E's Caf.
Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


N an action of treſpaſs brought by Mouſe, for a caſket,
and a hundred and thirteen pounds, taken and carried
away, the caſe was, the ferryman of Graveſend took forty-
ſeven paſſengers into his barge, to paſs to London, and
Mouſe was one of them, and the barge being upon the water,
| pas wind, ſo that the

barge and all the paſſengers were in danger to be drowned,
if a hogſhead of wine and other ponderous things were not
caſt out, for the ſafeguard of the lives of the men: it was
reſolved per totam curiam, that in caſe of neceſſity, for the
ſaving of the lives of the paſſengers, it was lawful to the de-
fendant, being a paſſenger, to caſt the caſket of the plaintiff
out of the barge, with the other things in it; for quod quis ob
tmtelam corporis ſui fecerit, jure id feciſſe videtur, to which the
defendant pleads all this ſpecial matter ; and the plaintiff re-


plies, de injuria ſua propria abſque tali cauſa : and the firſt day


of this term, this iſſue was tried, and it was proved direQly,
that if the things bad not been caſt out of the barge, the pal-
ſengers had been drowned ; and that /evand: cauſa they were
ejected, ſome by one paſſenger, and ſome by another; and
upon this the plaintiff was nonſuit. | |

It was alſo reſolved, that although the ferryman ſur-
charge the barge, yet for ſafety of the lives of paſſengers
in ſuch a time and accident of. neceſſity, it is lawful for 1
Cf pa en-


» : l 9


Part XII. Prohibitions DEL Rov.
flenger to caſt the things out of the barge : and the owners


{hall have their remedy upon the ſurcharge. againſt the ferry+


man; for the fault was in him upon the ſurcharge; but if no
ſurcharge was, but the danger accrued, only by the act of
God, as by tempeſt, no default being in the ferryman, every
one ought to bear his loſs for the ſafeguard and life of a man;


for intereſt reipublice quod homines canſerventur, 8 Ed. 4. 23,


&c. 12 H. 8. 7 28 H. 8. Dyer 36. plucking down of a
houſe, in time of fire, &c. and this pro bono publics; et
conſervatio vite hominis oft bonum publicum. So if a tempeſt


ariſe in the ſea, /evandi nauis cauſa, and for ſalvation of the


lives of men, it may be lawful for paſſengers to caſt over the
merchandizes, &c. |


Prohibitions del Roy,
Mich. 5 Jacobi 1,


A T OTE, upon Sunday the 10th of Ngvember in this ſame
N term, the King, upon complaint made to him by
ancroft, Archbiſhop of Canterbury, concerning prohibi-
tions, the King was informed, that when the queſtion was
made of what matters the eccleſiaſtical Judges have cogni-
zance, either upon the expolition of the ſtatutes concerning
tithes, or any other thing eeccleſiaſtical, or upon the ſtatute
1 El. concerning the high commiſſion, or in any other caſe
in which there is not expreſs authority in law, the King him-
ſelf may decide it in his royal perſon ; and that the Judges are
but the delegates of the King, and that the King may take
what cauſes he ſhall pleaſe.to determine, from the determi-
nation of the Judges, and may determine them himſelf,
And the Archbiſhop ſaid, that this was clear in divinity, that
ſuch authority belongs to the King by the word of God in the
ſcripture. To which it was anſwered by me, in the preſence,
and with the clear conſent of all the Judges of England, and
Barons of the Exchequer, that the King in his own * perſon
cannot adjudge any caſe, either criminal, as treaſon, fe-


Judges to d-ter=
mine eccleſiaſti-
cal matters.
Vide 13 Co. 4.
I}, 11, &c ;

2 Co. 44z 45

5 Co. 9. 16, 20.
11 Co. 25.

See and note the
JatroduRtion to
Gibſon's Codex,
p. 20, 21.
Carthew 215.


En Sycophon-


tem,


Page [64]


lony, &c. or betwixt party and party, concerning his inhe.


itance, chattels, or goods, &c. but this ought to be deter-
mined and adjudged in ſome court of juſtice, according to the


law


17 H. 6.14. 339.
Ed. 3. 14.


Sta“. 4 H. 4.
Cap. 23.


judgment: and the
houſe of Parliament, in which he with his Lords is the ſu.


that the King cannot arreſt a man for ſuſpicion of trea-


effect is, juditia in curid Regis reddita non annibilentur,


Prohibitions del Roy. Part XII.


law and cuſtom of England, and always judgments are given,
ideo conſideratum eff 7 curiam, ſo that the court gives the
ing hath his court, viz. in the upper


preme Judge over all other Judges; for if error be in the
Common Pleas, that may be reverſed in the King's Bench:
and if the court of King's Bench err, that may be reverſed in
the upper houſe of Parliament, by the King, with the aſſent
of the Lords ſpiritual and temporal, without the Commons;
and in this teſpect the King is called the Chief Juſtice, 20 l.
7. 7. a. by Brudnell: and it appears in our books, that the
King may fit in the Star-chamber ; but this was to conſult
with the Juſtices, upon certain queſtions propoſed to them,
and not in judicio: ſo in the King's Bench he may ſit, but
the court gives the judgment: and it is commonly ſaid in our
books, that the King is always preſent in court in the judg-
ment of law; and upon this he cannot be nonſuit : but the
judgments are always given per curiam; and the Judges are
ſworn to execute juſtice according to law and the cuſtom of
England. And it appears by the act of Parliament of 2 Ed,
3. cap. 9. 2 Ed. 3. cap. 1. That neither by the great ſeal,
nor by the little ſea], juſtice ſhall be delayed; ergo, the King
cannot take any cauſe out of any of his courts, and give judg-
ment upon it himſelf, but in his own cauſe he may ſtay it, as
it doth appear 11 H. 4. 8. And the Judges informed the
King, that no King after the Conqueſt aſſumed to himſelf to
give any judgment in any cauſe whatſoever, which concerned
the adminiſtration of juſtice within this realm, but theſe were
ſolely determined in the courts of juſtice: and the King
cannot arreſt any man, as the book is in 1 H. 7. 4. for the
party cannot have remedy againſt the King; ſo if the King
give any judgment, what remedy can the party have. ide
39 Ed. 3. 14. one who had a judgment reverſed before the
council of ſtate ; it was held utterly void, for that it was not
a place where judgment may be reverſed. Vide 1 H. 7. 4
Huſſey Chief Juſtice, who was Attorney to Ed. 4. reports,
that Sir John Markham, Chief Juſtice, faid to King Edw. 4.


ſon or felony, as others of his lieges may; for that if it
be a wrong to the party grieved, he can have no remedy:
and it was greatly marvelled that the Archbiſhop durſt in-
form the King, that ſuch abſolute power and authority, as
is aforeſaid, belonged to the King by the word of God.
Vide 4 H. 4. cap. 22. which being tranſlated into Latin, thc


f


/


Part XII. Prohibitions del Roy.
ſed iet judicium in ſus robore quouſque per judicium curiæ Regis
tanquam erroneum, &c. Vide Weſt. 2. cap. 5. Vide le flat. de
Marlbridge, cap. 1. Proviſum «ft, concordatum, et conceſſum,
quod tam majores quam minores juſtitiam habeant gt recipiant in
curid domini Regis, et vide le flat. de Magna Charta, cap. 29.
25 Ed. 3 cap. 5. None may be taken by petition or ſuggeſ-
e


tion made to our lord the King or his council, unleſs by judg-
ment: and 43 Ed. 3. cap. 3. no man ſhall be put to anſwer
without preſentment before the Juſtices, matter of record, or
by due proceſs, or by writ original, according to the ancient
law of the land: and if any thing be done againſt it, it ſhall be
void in law and held for error. Lide 28 Ed. 3. c. 3. 37 Ed. 3.
cap. 18. Vide;17 R. 2. ex rotulis Parliamenti in Turri, art. 10.
A controverſy of land between parties was heard by the
King, and ſentence given, which was repealed, for this, that
it did belong to the common law: then the King ſaid, that


he thought the“ law was founded upon reaſon, and that he Page [65]


and others had reaſon, as well as the Judges: to which it
was anſwered by me, that true it was, that God had endowed


his Majeſty with excellent ſcience, and great endowments of


nature ; but his Majeſty was not learned in the laws of his
realm of England, and cauſes which concern the life, or in-
heritance, or goods, or fortunes of his ſubjects, are not to be
decided by natural reaſon, but by the artificial reaſon and
judgment of law, which law is an act which requires long
ſtudy and experience, before that a man can atrain to the cog-
nizance of it ; and that the law was the golden met-wand and
meaſure to try the cauſes of the ſubjects; and which protect-
ed his Majeſty in ſafety and peace: with which the King was
greatly offended, and ſaid, that then he ſhould be under the
law, which was treaſon to affirm, as he faid ; to which I ſaid,
that Bracton ſaith, quod Rex non debet eſſe ſub homine, ſed ſub Deo
et lege.


Note, Bracton and Fleta both affirm, Rex habet ſupericres


in regno Deum et legen. Jem curiam ſuam, i. e. Comites et Ba-
rones, C.] g


ROBERTS's


Vide Fleta fo. 2.
Bracton 74.


-


Part XII.


R O B E R T S's Caſe,
Mich. 8 Jacobi Regis, |
Courts Eccleſiaſtical. Prohibition.


Antea 63, &c. N this term, in the caſe of one Roberts, a prohibition had


= 76077 been granted in a caſe of ſubſtraction of tithes, upon
44. ſurmiſe that the plaintiff being defendant in the Spiritual


Court, had but one witneſs in that court to prove his demiſe;
to which that court ſaid, that fmgularis zeftis is not allowable ;
and upon conſideration and fight of a prohibition granted upon
the ſame cauſe in Hil. 3 El. in Banco Regis, it was reſolved
See Gibſon's by Coke Chief Juſtice & totam curiam in Communi Banco, that

Cod. 719, 722, Conſultation ſhould be granted, and that for divers cauſes.
Watſon's Cler-. - It appears by the Regiſter, fol. 5. that it is put for a
gyman 578,589, rule, guod non eff conſonum rationi, quod cognitio acceſſorii in cu-
cc. 632, &- rid Chriſtianitatis imbediatur, ubi cognitio cauſe principalis ad
forum eccleſiaſticum noſeitur pertinere ; and with this agrees 1 R.

WM 8

8 2. If ſuch a ſurmiſe ſhall be allowed, then in every caſe
for mere delay ſuch a ſurmiſe may be made: ſor he who was
plaintiff in the Spiritual Court cannot deny, that where it is
ſurmiſed that he hath one witneſs, that he hath two or more,
for then he affirms matter againſt himſelf: and when the Spi-
ritual Court hath juriſdiction of the principal cauſe, they de-
termine the acceſſory. But it was objected, that if A. claim-
ing a leaſe by B. of a rectory, libels for ſubſtraction of tithes,
and the defendant pleads a former leaſe made by B.and C.
and the defendant hath but one witneſs in the caſe to prove
the former leaſe, if no prohibition ſhall be granted, the de-
fendant ſhall be charged: and if C. ſue him upon the ſtatute of
2 Ed. 6. at the common law, the teſtimony of that one only
will there be ſufficient, and ſo he ſhall be twice charged : to
which it was anſwered, that firſt the fault was the defen-
dant's, that he would not ſet forth his tithes, and then he
ſhall be charged whoſoever takes them: but in ſuch a caſe,
thole of the Eccleſiaſtical Court will upon one geod 44
| nel,


J


Part XII. Courts Eccleſiaſtical. Prohibition.


veſs, and any concurrent vehement preſumption, as poſſeſ-
ſion, or the like, allow of ſuch a proof: and the teſtimony of


one witneſs in our law is no concluſive evidence, but ought.


to be left to the conſcience of the jury, and fo the validity or
invalidity of proof of matters of fait ſhall be leſt to them; but


if a queſtion of the common law ariſe from the party upon the


conſtruction of a flatute, or the like, and thoſe of the Eccle-
faſtical Court will take upon them to judge of it againſt the
rule of law, * there, upon ſpecial ſurmiſe of it, and upon the
ſhewing of the anſwer or other pleadings of the parties, by
which it appears to the court, that ſuch ſurmiſe is on a good
ground, a prohibition lies; for matter in law, ariſing upon
eſtates or intereſts (given) by the common law and conſtruc-
tion of ſtatutes, ought to be determined according to the
rules of common law; et non debet trabi ad aliud examen.

And Coke Chief Juſtice cited a notable judgment, Paſch.

5 El. in Bank le Roy; Fuller brought a prohibition againſt

lemens and Wiſkard ; and Fuller counted that he himſelf
was owner of the rectory of Longham in the county of Nor-
folk; and libe'led againſt Clemens one of the defendants, be-
fore the Official of the Biſhop of Norwich, for ſubſtraftion of
tithes, ſcil. of wheat, &c. pendent which ſuit, the faid Wiſk-
ard, intervening pro intereſſe ſuo, made theſe allegations
againſt the ſaid Fuller. 2 V

1. That the ſaid rectory was impropriate to the monaſtery
of Wendling, and by the diflolution of the ſaid monaſtery,
came to the hands of H. 8. and did convey it by meſne diſ-
cent to Queen Elizabeth, who by her letters patent of con-
cealment granted itto Min and Hall, who enfeoffed Bozome,
who did let it to Wiſkard for four years, and proved his al-
legations by witneſſes, upon which in fine, ſentence was
given againſt Fuller, and 81. 10s. given to Clemens for
coſts, and 131. 6s. ro Wiſkard ; and after Fuller did appeal
to the Court of the Arches, and there Fuller claimed the faid
rectory by reaſon that Hall was ſeiſed of it, and by his deed
gave and granted the ſaid rectory, and all lands and tithes to
it appertaining, to Sir Edward Clere, before the feoffment
ſuppoſed to be made to Bozome : and that Sir Edward Clere
by his deed did enfeoff Fuller; and although that he offered to
prove the delivery of the deed of the faid feoftment made to
dir Edward Clere by one ſole witneſs, the Eccleſiaſtical
Court would not allow it without producing another witneſs ;
and Fuller further faid, that although he had further alleged
there, that theſe were matters determinable at the com-

Vol. VII. H mon


Page [66]


Page [67]


Courts Eccleſiaſtical, Prohibition. Part XII.


mon law, notwichſtanding they gave ſentence : the defendant
for to have a conſultation pleaded, that Fuller in the aid
Court of the Arches proved the delivery of the deed afore.
ſaid, by Sir Edward Clere and Mouſe, but could not prove
livery and ſeiſin according to the deed : and for this cauſe
ſentence was given, without (for) that the Judges of the
Arches would not admit the ſaid proof, unleſs he proved the
decd by other witneſſes; upon which Fuller demurred in
law; and it was objected by the counſel for Fuller.

1. That Wiſkard, who is a mere ſtranger to the ſuit, and
who comes in pro intereſſe ſuo in the ſaid rectory, pleads mat.
ter merely determinable at the common law, /c:l. letters pa-
tent, feoffment, and leaſe for years; and on the other part
Fuller claims an eſtate in the ſaid rectory, by conveyance at
the common law. And now the queſtion in the Eccleſtafti-
cal Court being only who hath the beſt eſtate in the ſaid rec-
tory by the common law, this ought to be tried by the com-


mon law, and not in the Eccleſiaſtical Court; for this is the


birth-right of the ſubject to have his inheritance and free-
hold tried and determined by common law ; for the civil law
differs much in deciding of inheritances.

2. It was objeCted, that all matters in law ought to be de.
termined by the Judges of the law ; and in this caſe, matters
of law aiifing, il, if a man hath a rectory impropriate,


which conſiſts in glebe and tithes, and by his deed gives and


grants the ſaid rectory, and all lands and tithes any way be-
longing or appertaining to it, to another and his heirs ; “ and
no livery is made in this caſe, if the tithes ſhall paſs, or no,
for that tithes may paſs without any livery : this queſtion 1s
not fit to be determined by the eccleſiaſtical Judges, but by
the Judges of the common law, quod gquiſgue novit, in hoc ſe
exerceat,

3 It was objected, that Wiſkard was a mere ſtranger to
the ſuit, and all his allegation is temporal, and for that it 15
a ſtronger caſe to maintain a prohibition, foraſmuch as be-
twixt him and Fuller nothing is in queſtion, but to whom
the inheritance of the reCtory belongs; but Clemerits, who 15
ſued for ſubſtractidn of tithes,” hath greater colour in his de-
fence, being lawfully ſued in the Eccleſiaſtical Court, than for
Wiſkard, who is no party to the ſuit for any eccleſiaſtical
cauſe, but all his allegation, as hath been ſaid, is temporal.


” | 4 it


* . —


|


Part XII. Courts Eccleſiaſtical. Prohibition:


4. It was objected, that Fuller had but one witneſs to prove
the delivery of the deed ; and in the eccleſiaſtical law, unus
teftis, eft nullus teſtis; for all which cauſes it was prayed that
the prohibition may ſtand, and that no conſultation may be

ranted.
i To which it was anſwered and reſolved by Sir Chriſtopher
Wray Chief Juſtice, and per totam curiam.

1. That to the firſt objection, for that the original belongs

to the Eccleſiaſtical Court, the determination of all that which


id depends upon it belongs to the Judges of the ſame court, al-

. though that the matter be triable by the common law; but see Cod. 1073;

2 where the original matter belongs to the common law, and is N

rt there commenced, and iſſue be taken upon matter triable by * Lat. 14. |
at the eccleſiaſtical law, there the Judges of our law ſhall write 1
i. to the Judges of the Eccleſiaſtical Court to try it, and to cer-

» tify: and the reaſon of this diverſity is, that our Judges have

1 authority to write and command them by the King's writ to

0 certify them; but they cannot write to the Judges of our law

» to try any thing, and to certify them, for they have no ſuch

i authority to command by writ, but to obey the writs of the


the King : as in any aCtion anceſtral, if baſtardy be pleaded
n in the demandant, and upon this iſſue is joined, this ſhall be
5 tried by the Biſhop, and his certificate ſhall bind: ſo in a
. Duare impedit, if iſſue be taken, whether a Clerk, which was
q preſented, was able, or not able, this ſhall be tried by exa-
mination of the clerk, and certified by the Biſhop: but al-


4 though that ſuch ifſues are in their nature triable by the eccle-
: ſiaſticai law, yet if the caſe was ſuch, that the Eccleſiaſtical
s Court could not try it, then (to the end that juſtice ſhall not
V be wanting) ſuch eccleſiaſtical matter ſhall be tried by the
p common law, as 4 Ed. 3. 26. if the preſentee be dead, if he

was able, or not able, CAT tried per pats ; for the Biſhop
: cannot try it: but againſt this was objected the ſtatute De
; Articults cleri, c. 13. by which it is provided, guod de idonei-
; tate perſone perſonate ad beneficium eccleſiaſlicum, pertineat exa-
minatio ad judicem eccleſiaſlicum; upon which it was concluded,
: that the trial De idoneitate per ſanæ, in all caſes belongs to court-


chriſtian. To which it was anſwered and reſolved, that -
true it is, that the trial of ability belongs to them; but
the ſtatute explains in what manner it ſhall be made, for
the ſtatute ſaith, pertinet examinatio ad judicem eccleſiaſ-
ticum, fo that this trial ought to be by examination of
the party, and this cannot be when the preſentee is dead:
| H 2 and


Courts Eccleſiaſtical. Prohibition. Part XII.


and although he be not party to the writ, yet he may be ex-
amined; and with this agrees 39 Ed. 3. 2. The Earl of
Arundel's caſe, and 4 Ed. 3. 25. 16 El. Dyer 327. Soif
baſtardy be alleged in one who is not party to the writ, there,
for this, that the certificate binds for ever, it ſhould be apaink
law and reaſon, that he ſhould not be party to the certiflons
for this cauſe in ſuch caſe it ſhall be tried per“ pars; and if
any difficulty ariſeth upon it, the Judges of our law uſe to
conſult with the Judges eccleſiaſtical z and with this accord;
4 Ed. 3. 37. The ſame law of profeſſion, 42 Ed. 3. 8. 80

if baſtardy be alleged in one who is dead. Vide 17 Ed. 3. 5.
where baſtardy is alleged in the tenant, and one who is a
ſtranger to the writ, who are ſiſters. Yide 32 Ed. 3. Trial
59. where the tenant alleged baſtardy in himſelf, and the de-
| mandant doth aver him mulier. Vide 29 AMl. pl. 14. 6 El.
Dyer 226, 228. If the iſſue be guod vacavit per reſignationem,
part of which is temporal, and part ſpiritual, this ſhall be tried
per pats. Vide 9 H. 7. Profeſſion and the time of it, &ec.
But admiſſion and inſtitution, although that it be alleged ina
ſtranger to the writ, yet this ſhall be tried by the ordinary;
as it appears 7 Ed. 6. 78. 6. in Dyer; for admiſſion, inſtitu-
tion, reſignation, et ſimilia, are judicial acts, and remain in
their couris and regiſter, upon which they ground their cer-
tificate ; otherwiſe it is of baſtardy, idoneity, &c. By which
it appears, that in divers caſes the Judges of the common law
write to the eccleſiaſtical Judges, commanding them to certi-
fy ſome thing put in iſſue; and the Judges of our law pro-
hibit the Judges eccleſiaſtical to hold plea of ſome things
which are determinable at common law ; but the Court Ec-
cleſiaſtical hath not power to write to our Judges, or to com-
mand them, or to prohibit them when they hold plea of
things determinable by the eccleſiaſtical Judges ; but this is
erroneous, and ſhall be reverſed by error. And of the other
ſide, if in the Eccleſiaſtical Court the ſuit is for a legacy, and
the defendant plead a releaſe, if in the admitting or rejeCting
of prooſs concerning this releaſe, which is matter determin-
able at common law, they do wrong to the plaintiff or de-
fendant, they have no remedy but by way of appeal.

2. To the ſecond it was anſwered and relolved, that if
upon conſultation with men learned in the law, they give
lentence according to law, this is well done; and no


prohibition ought to be granted; but if they take upon
| them


% AR a ñ ́ Tr aol fs ©


Part XII, Courts Eccleſiaſtical, Prohibition.


them to draw the intereſt of any man ad aliud examen ; and to


judge againſt the rule of law, concerning the inheritance ot


intereſt of any, there prohibition lies : and in the caſe at the
bar, they well reſolved the Jaw, for by the ſaid livery of the
charter the tithes do not paſs as groſs, for this, that the in-
tention of the parties was to paſs the entire rectory by feoff-
ment, and not to paſs the tithes by the ſame, and ſo to diſ-
member the rectory by fractions, and that by conſtruction of
law, againſt the intention of the parties.

3. As to the third, it was anſwered and reſolved, that by
the eccleſiaſtical law, a ſtranger may come in pro intereſſe ſus ;
and when they have juriſdiction of the original cauſe of the
ſuit, we ought not to draw in queſtion their order and pro-
ceeding ; but if they proceed inverſo o dine, or not obſerving
form, this ought to be redreſſed by appeal: and although
that the matter depending upon the original cauſe be deter-
minable by the common law, yet it ſhall be determined, as it
hath been ſaid, in the Eccleſiaſtical Court.

4. As to the fourth objection, it was anſwered and reſolved,
that ſuch a ſurmiſe, that he hath but one witneſs, is not ſuſ-
ficient to have a prohibition, for this, that the Eccleſiaſtical
Court hath juriſdiction of the principal, and if ſuch a ſur-
miſe ſhail be ſufficient, all ſuits in the Eccleſiaſtical Court
ſhall be eicher delayed, or quite taken away, for ſuch a ſur-
miſe may be made in every caſe ; and the plaintiff in the Ec-
cleſiaſtical Court cannot have any good anſwer to it to have a
conſultation, which agrees with the reſolution in the princi-
pal caſe, &c.


* 8 M I T H's Caſe.


Co. AW: Ob, =


I was reſolved, upon evidence, by Coke Chief Juſtice de
Banco, inter J. 8. who informed upon the ſtat. of uſury,
and one Smith, that the parties to the ſuppoſed uſurious con-
tract ſhall not be admitted witneſſes, for this, that upon the
matter they were tees in proprid cauſa, and by their oath ſhall
avoid their bond, &c. or ſhall be revenged on him who lent
them the money, before they are enforced to repay it: and
tor the moſt part they incite and raiſe up one of their own
ſervants to inform and have part of the thing recovered.


H 3 9 Lady


Page [69]


Ante 20.

Uſury Evidence.
See 1 Hawk. c.

82. ſect. 27.

2 Hawk. C. 46.

Sect. 24.


.

362 . S

Z « . ,
* A
Prem, £2&/,


Habeas Corpus
Antea 19, 27,


457 47.
Poſt. 32, 835


104, 219.


Part XII.


Lady THROOGMORTON's Caſe.
Trin. 8 Jac. 1.
High Commiſſioners.


PON a Habeas corpus by Elizabeth Lady Throgmorton,

priſoner in the Fleet, the return was; the Lady Throg-
morton was committed by George Biſhop of London, and
others, eccleſiaſtical Commiſhoners, under their hands, till
further order ſhould be taken for her enlargement : and the
cauſe of the commitment of her was, for that ſhe had done
many evil offices betwixt Sir James Scudamore and her daugh-
ter the Lady Scudamore, wife of the ſaid James, and to make
ſeparation betwixt them, and detained her from her huſband:
and upon her departure after ſentence before the Commiſſon-
ers, for divers contemptuous words againſt the court, ſaying,
that ſhe neither had law nor juſtice there: and it was reſolv-


| ed, that for detaining of the wife, and endeavouring to make


ſeparation, no ſuit can, be before the High Commiſſioners,
” that it is not any enormous offence within the mganing of
the act. 6

2. For the detaining of the wife, there is remedy by the
common law. |

3. Without queſtion, for ſuch an offence they cannot im-
priſon the wife. |

4. By the words it doth not appear, that they were ſpoken
in the court. 8


Secondly, it is no court of record, for that they proceed
according to the civil law, and it is like the Admiralty
Court; and for this they cannot impriſon, ſor none ſhall
be committed for miſdemeanor in court, unleſs that the
court be of record, |


5. It doth not appear by the return what court this was,
which is uncertain z and upon this, upon good conſideration,
ſhe was bailed, 0

| ut


Part XII. The Lord ApzrGaveny's Caſe,


But Randal and Hickins were this very term committed by
the High Commiſſioners, for that they were vehemently ſuſ-
| pected to be Browniſts, &c. And they obtained a Habeas
corpus, and were remanded for this, that the High Commiſ-
fioners have power to commit for hereſy. TAL nune_ far.
29 Car. 2. and the ſtatute for aboliſhing this court, &c
—— — —d l


— ꝗ565³5


3


—
2


ror 180


2.


ba 2


* The Lord ABERGAVENY's Caſe.


I the Parliament a queſtion was made by the Lord of
Northampton, Lord Privy Seal, in the Upper Houle of
Parliament : that one Edward Nevil, the tather of Edward
Nevil, Lord of Abergaveny, which now is, in the 24 and 3d
of Queen Mary, was called by writ to Parliament, and died
before the Parliament: if he was a Baron or no, and ſo ought
to be named, was the queſtion. And it was reſolved by the
Lord Chancellor, the two Chief Juſtices, Ghief Baron, and
divers other Juſtices there preſent, that the direction and de-
livery of the writ did not, make him a Baron or Noble, until
he did come to the Parliament, and there fit, according to
the commandment of the writ; for until that, the writ did
not take its effect. and the words of the writ were well pen-
ned, which are, Rex et Regina, &c, Edwards Nevil de Aber-
gaveny Chivalier, quia ds adviſamento et aſſenſu concilii noſtri pro
quibuſdam arduis et urgentibus negotiis flatum et defenſionem reg-
ni noſiri Angliæ concernentibus, quaddam Parliamentum noſirum
apud Meſimonaſlerium, 21 die Celobris proximo futuro tenert or-
dinavimus, et ibidem vobiſeum, ac cum Prælatis, Mapnatibus &
Proceribus dicti regni naſtri colloquium habere et tractatum : vobis
in fide & ligeantia, quibus nobis tenemim, firmiter injungendo
mandamus, quod conſiderats dictorum negotiorum arduitare & pe-
riculis imminentibus, ceſſunte excuſattone quacungue, dictis die &
loco perſonaliter inter ſitis nobiſcum, ac cum Prælatis, Magnatibus
ac Proceribus ſupradictis, ſuper dlictis negotiis tratlaturis, veſ-
trumque- conſilium impenſur & hac ſicut nobis, c. And in
the 35 H. 6. 46. and other books, he is called a Peer of
Parliament, the which he cannot be until he fit in Parlia-
ment, and he cannot be of the Parliament until the Par-
liament begin; and foraſmuch as be hath been made a
Peer of Parliament by writ, (by which implicitly he is a
Baron) the writ hath not cx operation and effect, until he

4 he


Page [70]


The writ doth
not make a Peer,


* =
* ” —— — — — —ä 2 ——


c.

Vide Poſt. 81,
96, 108, 112.

1 Inſt. 16.

2 Salk. 50955 10.


|
|


} |
.
ö
7
1
\ iN
[ :
[i 1
: F [} } |
" q 0
| |
1 of
"!
18
o
:


|


|
|
:
[
4


te my


; * 2
= Co. If


Poſt. 96.


Page [71]


The Lord ABERGAVENY'S Caſe. Part XII,


he fit in Parliament, there to conſult with the King and the
other Nobles of the realm ; which command of the King by
his Super ſedeas may be countermanded, or the ſaid Edward
Nevil might have excuſed himſelf to the King, or he might
have waved it, and ſubmitted himſelf to his fine; as one who
is diſtrained to be a Knight, or one learned in the law is
called to be a Serjeant, the writ cannot make him a Knight,
or a Serjeant : and when one 1s called by writ to Parliament,
the order is. that he be apparelled in his Parliament robes,
and his writ is openly read in the Upper Houſe, and he is
brought into his place by two Lords of Parliament, and then
he is adjudged in law inter pares regni, that is to ſay, ut cum
olim ſenatores e cenſu eligebantur, fic Barones apud nos habiti fue.
rint, qui per integram baroniam terras ſuas tenebant, five 13 fee
da militum, et tertiam partem unius feodi militis, quolibet feody
computato ad 201. qua faciunt 400 marcas denarii erat valentia
unius baroniæ integra, et qui terras et redditus ad hanc valen-
tiam habuerint, ad Parliamentum ſummoniri ſolebant ; ſo that by
this it appears, that every one who hath an intire barony may
have of right and of courſe a writ to be ſummoned to Patlia»
ment, for without writ none can fit in Parliament : and with
this agrees our books, for una voce they agree, that none can
fit in Parliament as Peer of the realm, without matter of te-
cord; and if iſſue be taken, whether a Baron or no Baron,
Earl or no Earl, this ſhall not be tried per pais, but by the re-
cord, by which it appears, that he was a Peer of Parliament;
for without matter of record he cannot be a Peer of Parlia-
ment, * 35 H. 6. 46. 48 Ed. 3. 30. b. 48 Aſſ. pl. 6. 22 Aſſ.
pl. £4. Regiſter 287. Henricus tertius poſi magnas perturba-
riones & enormes exactiones inter ipſum Regem, Simonem de Monte
ortis & alios Barones motas et ſuſceptas, flatuit et ordinavit,
guod omnes illi Comites et Barones regni Anglia, quibus ipſe Rex
dignatus eft brevia ſummonitionis dirigere, venirent ad Parlia-
mentum, et non alii niſi forte dominus Rex alia illa brevia eis di-
rigere voluiſſet: which act or ſtatute continues in force to this
day, ſo that now none, although that he hath an entire ba-


rony, can have a writ of ſummons to Parliament without the


King's warrant, under the privy ſeal at leaſt.
But if the King creates any Baron by letters patent


under the great teal to him and his heirs, or to him

„and to his heirs of his body, or for life, &c. there
g, he is a Nobleman preſently; for ſo he 1s expreſly cre-
, 14 ated by letters patent of the King, which cannot be


counters


* * 2 — — wo — *


Part XII. OLDFieLD and GrrLING's Caſe,


countermanded ; and he ought to have a writ of ſummons to
Parliament of right and of courſe, and he ſhall be tried by
his Peers, if he ſhall be arraigned before any Parliament ;
but ſo ſhall not he be who is called by writ, until he ſits in
Parliament, which 1s the diverſity.

Richard the ſecond created Joha Beauchamp of Holt, Baron
of Kiderminſter, by letters patent, dated 10 Oct. 11th year of
his reign, where all otkers before him were created by writ.
Vide Cotton 319, be was ſummoned by writ. But it is faid
he never ſat in Parliament. And note, he was Delapool's
friend, and fell with him,


OLDFIELD and GERLING's Caſes.
Trin. 8 Jacobi 1.


N this very term Thomas Oldfield came out of the court gtabbiag in
] out of the Duchy, and before he came into Weſtminſter- Weflminſter
hall, with a knife ſtabbed one Ferrar, a Juſtice of Peace, of 1 yes 6
which he died: and if Oldfield ſhould have his right hand cut 1 Sid. wy 30 7 8
off, was the queſtion before the two Chief Juſtices, Chief Cro. Car. 272.
Baron, Walmeſley, Warburton, Foſter, and divers other -<a Place


Juſtices. And it was reſolved, no; for it ought to be in the Pryn on 4 Inft,


hall of Weſtminſter, ſedentibus curits, as it appears in 3 Eliz. 18, 19. 21ſt.


Dyer 188. 41 Ed. 3. title Coron. 280. And a precedent 449
was ſhewn, anno 9 Eliz. in Banco Regis, where one Robert Gerling's caſe,
Gerling ſmote one in Whitehall, ſitting in the Court of Re-
queſts, and was but fined and ranſomed : the ſame law if one
{mite one in the court of the Duchy: but if one ſmite another
before the Juſtices of aſliſe, there his right hand ſhall be cut
off, as it appears, 22 Ed, 3. fol. 13. and 19 Ed. 5. title Judg- |
ment. And one Bellingham, 4% 2 Fac. in the hall of Weſt- Bellingham's
minſter, ſedentibus curiis, with his elbow and ſhoulder, out of caſe.
malice, juſtled Anthony Dyer, of the Inner Temple, ſo that
he overthrew him, and with his feet ſpurned him upon the
legs, but did not ſmite him neither with his hayd, norwith any ._.,
weapon: and yet it was held that his right hand ſhould be cuft
off, &c. upon which Bellingham was indicted in Banco Re-
£15, but after obtained his pardon, |

Biſhop


Page [72]


See 2 Co. 41.
4 Co. 76, 108.


Biſhop and Deans Leaſes.


CASE was put to all the Juſtices of England, which
: was ſuch ; the biſhopric of Waterford and Liſmore,
e


ing originally two biſhoprics diſtinct, were by lawful au-
thority in the reign of H. 3. united and conſolidated, but the
Chapters yet remain ſeveral ; after which union the Biſhop
aliened lands of the ſee of Waterford, and aliened lands of
the ſee of Liſmore, with the confirmation of the Chapter of
Liſmore ; the queſtion was, whether ſuch alienations are not
voidable by the ſucceſſor, being without the confirmations of
both the Deans and Chapters, The ſecond queſtion * was,
whether the Queen might avoid ſuch alienations, contra for-
mam collationts by ſeiſure, or otherwiſe : and the Juſtices de-
manded a view of the union ; to which it was anſwered, that
it was not extant ; then it was reſolved by the Juſtices, that
inaſmuch as the uſage hath been after the ſaid union, that the
ſeveral Deans and Chapters have ſeverally made confirma-
tions, ut ſupra, it ſhall be intended that the union was made
eſpecially in ſuch manner, /cil. that notwithſtanding the
union, yet for avoiding of confuſion, and in reſpect of the
remoteneſs of the deaneries and chapters, that eſtates made
ſhall be ſeverally confirmed, as before the union, and then
ſuch confirmations ſhall be good, for in ſuch caſe, modus et
conventio vincunt legem but if the union was made generally,
and the Biſhop eligible by both Chapters, then eſtates made
ought to be confirmed by both the Chapters. Vide 50 Ed-
ward 3. title Aſſiſe, Statham, the time of R. 2. title Grant,
27 H. 8. Dyer 58. 11 El. Dyer 33 H. 8. cap.

It was reſolved, that upon a lawful alienation made, with
confirmation of the Dean and Chapter, no contra formam cl-
lationis lieth upon the ſtatute of Weſtminſt, 2, as hath been
reſolved in the Seventh Part of my Reports.


Of


Of CONVOCATIONS.


; Trin. 8 Jac. 1.


Y Ä . . 2 . |

f OTE, it was reſolved by the two Chief Juſtices and di- See Gibſon's

f vers other Juſtices; at a committee before the Lords in * * 9
t the ſame Parliament, on divers points concerning the autho- 528 3
f rity of a convocation. | x 4 Inſt. 322,

5 1. That a convocation cannot afſemble at their own or the > ge
X Archbiſhop's convocation, without the aſſent of the King, 2 Salk, 448.

; i. e. by writ. |

t 2. That after their aſſembly they cannot confer together to

t conſtitute any canons without licence del Roy.


: 3- When they upon conference conclude any canons, yet
. they cannot execute any of their canons without royal aſſent.
: 4. They cannot execute any after royal afſent, but with
- theſe four limitations,
p 1. That they be not againſt the prerogative of the King.
: 2, Nor againſt the common law. |

1 3. Nor againit any ſtatute law.


t 4. Nor againſt any cuſtom of the realm.
: And all this appears by the ſtatute 25 Hen. 8. cap. 19. See By. Wake's
p and this was but an affirmance of what was before the ſaid State of the
ſtatute, for that it appears by the 19 Ed. 3. title Quare non ce chap.
) admiſit 7. where it is held, that if a canon Jaw be againſt

the law of the land, the Biſhop ought to obey the command-
1 ment of the K.*according to the law of the land, 10 H. 7.17.
- there is a canon that no ſpiritual perſon ſhall be put to anſwer
i before a ſecular Judge; but this does not bind, becauſe it


againſt the common law: and it appears by the ſtatute

of Merton, cap. 9. that they in caſe of baſtardy were in- 2 Inſt. 97, 98.

forced to certify againſt the law of the holy church, that |
f nati ante matrimonium fuerint baſtardi, quia ecclefia ha-
bet tales pro legitimis, & rogaverunt omnes Epiſcopi Mag-

nates qued conſentirent, quod qui nati fuerint * ante ma- Page [73]
Irimonium efſent ligitimi; which proves, that the canon
law


P1iRACY. Part XII.


3 Inft. 188, 399, law in this point being repugnant to the law of the land, was

Frog. 122,422, not of any force: and for this, they implored the aid of the

MOT IT ISIS: Parliament, et omnes Comites & Barones una voce reſponderunt,
quod nolumus leges Angliz mutari, que huc uſque uſitate ſunt
& approbate. |
2. H. 6. 13. A convocation may make conſtitutions, by
which thoſe of the ſpiritualty ſhall be bound, for this, that
they all, or by repreſentation, or in perſon, are preſent, but
not the temporalty.

21 Ed. 4. 47. The convocation is ſpiritual, and all their
couſtitutions are ſpiritual, Vide the records in the Tower of
18 H. 8. 8 Ed. . 25 Ed. 1. 11 Ed. 2. & 15 Ed. 2.
Prohibitio Regis ne clcrus in congregatione ſua, &c, attempt:

contra jus ſeu coronam. Et alia, ne quod flatuat in concilio ſu
in præjudicium Regis ſeu legts, &c. By which it appears, that
they can do nothing againſt the law of the land ; for every
part of ,the law, be it common law, or ſtatute law, cannot
be abrogated nor altered without an act of Parliament, (to
which every one ſhall be party) except for ſpiritual cauſes, or
which concern ſpiritual perſons ; nor then, if it be againſt the
prerogative of the King or the common law. |


Trin, 8 Jac. 1.


Le. Acmiral. N this very term the King referred the conſideration of
ace 4 Init, 236, J 1etters patent of the Lord Admiral of England, to the two
* Chief Juſtices, and the Chief Baron, whether the ſaid
letters patent, the goods which pirates ſnould take from others

by robbery and piracy did paſs to the Lord Admiral or no!

And upon the conſideration of the ſaid letters patent, it ap-

peared to us, that thereby he had bona et chattalla piratorum,

and alſo bona et chattallg depredata, id et, the goods robbed

| from others ; which did not paſs for two cauſes.

| Bona piraterum, I. If the King grant bona & chattalla felonum, the
Ec. tentee ſhall have the goods and chattels of the


e. felon himſelf, in which be bath property, but be dad


W NS VI "I


Part XII. SIMONY,


not have the goods and chattels which the felon ſtealeth from


others.
2. The goods taken from others the King cannot grant, for


it appears by the ſlatute 27 Ed. 3. cap. 8. 1. 2. that the mer-


chant, &c. ſo robbed ſhall be received to prove, that the
oods and chattels belong to him by his chart or cocket, or
by other lawful proof of merchants, 8c. the faid goods ſhall
be delivered without any ſuit at the common law, which act
is general, be the robber privy or a ſtranger : but it was re-
ſolved, that until ſuch proof be made, the King may ſeiſe
the ſaid goods ; for goods of which the property is unknown,
the King may ſeiſe: and if they are bona peritura, the King
may fell them; and upon proof, &c. reſtore the value,
And note, the ſtatute doth not limit the owner in caſe of de-
predation to any certain time to prove the property of the
ſame goods, as ought to be in caſe of wreck. Vide ſtat. 31
H. 6. cap. 4. Vide 2 R. 2. cap. 2. 13 Ed. 4. 9, 10. a good
reſolution of the Juſtices. And the Regiſter “ 129. F. N. B.
114. when a ſubjeR of the King, who is ſpoiled beyond the
ſeas, ſhall have a writ, &c. for to take goods within Eng-
land, &c, 15


„


Trin. 8 Fac. 1.


I was agreed ad menſam, by all the Juſtices and Barons in


Fleet-ſtreet, that if the patron, for any money, preſent
any perſon to any- benefice with cure, &c. that then every
ſuch preſentation, and the admiſſion, inſtitution, and induc-
tion thereupon, are void, although the preſentee be not party
nor privy to it; for the ſtatute intends to puniſh the wicked
avarice of corrupt exactions by the loſs of his preſentation
bac vice, and the ſtatute gives the preſentation to the Queen;
aud all this per verba /latuti, which is penned ſtrongly enough
again(t corrupt patrons, |


PRO-


Page [74]


See Watſon's
Clergyman's
Law, chap. 5.
& pa. 48, 96,
97, 146, &c.
Poſt. 101.


= % — —
— . ⏑— . _——— -— — —


Prot amation
cannot make
that an offence
which was not.
See Gibſon's


f


[


PROCLAMA TIONS,
Mich. 8 Fac. 1.


. ww


EMORANDUM, that upon Thurſday, 20 Sept. Regis
Jacobi, I was ſent for to attend the Lord Chancellor,
ord


reaſurer, Lord Privy Seal, and the Chancellor of the
Duchy ; there being preſent the Attorney, the Solicitor, and
Recorder : and two queſtions were moved to me by the Lord
Treaſurer ; the one, if the King by his proclamation may pro-
hibit new buildings in and about London, &c. the other,
if the King may prohibit the making of ſtarch of wheat ; and
the Lord "Treaſurer ſaid, that theſe were preferred to the King
as grievances, and againſt the law and juſtice : and the King
hath anſwered, that he will confer with his Privy Council,
and his Judges, and then he will do right to them. To
which I anſwered, that theſe queſtions were of great impor-
tance. 2. That they concerned the anſwer of the King to
the body, viz. to the Commons of the houſe of Parliament.
3. That I did not hear of theſe queſtions until this morn-
ing at nine of the clock; for the grievances were preferred,
and the anſwer made when I was in my circuit. And laſtly,
both the proclamations, which now were ſhewed, were pro-
mulgated, anno 5 Fac. after my time of attorneyſhip : and
for theſe reaſons | did humbly deſire them that I might have
conference with my brethren the Judges about the anſwer of
the King, and then to make an adviſed anſwer according to
law and reaſon. To which the Lord Chancellor ſaid, that


every precedent had firſt a commencement, and that he would


adviſe the Judges to maintain the power and prerogative


of the King ; and in caſes in which there is no authority


and precedent, to leave it to the King to order in it, according
to his wiſdom, and for the good of his ſubjects, or otherwiſe
the King would be no more than the Duke of Venice: and that
the King was ſo much reſtrained in his prerogative, that it was
to be ſeared the bonds would be broken : and the Lord Privy
Seal ſaid, that the phyſician was not always bound to a prece-


dent, but to apply his medicine according to the quality of the
diſeaſe ;


Part XII. PROCLAMATIONS.


diſeaſe : and all concluded that it ſhould be neceſſary at that
- time to confirm the King's prerogative with our opinions, al-
though that there were not any former precedent or autho-
rity in law; for every precedent ought to have a commence-
ment. ; | |

To which I anſwered, that true it is that every precedent
hath a commencement ; but when authority and precedent is
wanting, there is need of great conſideration, before that any
thing of novelty ſhall be eſtabliſhed, and to provide that this
be not againſt the law of the land: for I ſaid, that the King
cannot change any part of the common law, nor create any
offence by his proclamation, which was not an offence before,
without Parliament. But at this time I only deſired to have a
time of conſideration and conference with my brothers, for
deliberandum eſt diu, quod flatuendum eft ſemel; to which the
Solicitor ſaid, that divers ſentences were given in the Star-
chamber upon the proclamation againſt building; and that I
myſelf had given ſentence in divers caſes for the ſaid procla-
mation: to which I anſwered, that precedents were to be
ſeen, and conſideration to be had of this upon conference
with my brethren, for that melius eff recurrere, quam male
currere ; and that indictments conclude, contra leges et flatu-
ta, but I never heard an indictment to conclude, contra re-
giam proclamationem. At laſt my motion was allowed, an
the Lords appointed the two Chief Juſtices, Chief . and
Baron Altham to have conſideration of it.

Note, the King by his proclamation, or other ways, can-
not change any part of the common law, or ſtatute law, or
the cuſtoms of the realm, 11 Hf. 4. 37. Forteſcue D- laudibus
Angliæ legiim, cap. 9. 18 Ed. 4. 35, 36, &c. 31 H.8. cap.
8. hic infra : alſo the King cannot create any offence by his

rohibition or proclamation, which was not an offence be-

fore, for that was to change the law, and to make an of-
fence which was not; for ubi non eff lex, ibi non eft tran/-
greſſio : ergo, that which cannot be puniſhed without pro-
clamation, cannot be puniſhed with it. Vide le Jlat,


31 Hen. 8. cap. 8. which act gives more power to the King


than he had before, and yet there it is declared, that procla-
mations ſhall not alter the law, ſtatutes, or cuſtoms of the
realm, or impeach any in his inheritance, goods, body, lite,
&c. But if a man ſhould be indicted for a contempt againſt
a proclamation he ſhall be fined and impriſoned, and ſo im-
peached in his body and goods. Vide Forteſcue, cap. , 18,
34, 30, 37, &c.


But a thing which is puniſhable by the law, by fine,


and impriſonment, if the King prohibit it by his proclama-


; tion,


Page [75]


" — LCIES


| ProcLAaMATIONs, Part XII.
tion, before that he will puniſh it, and ſo warn his ſubjects
of the peril of it, there if he permit it after, this as a circum. j
A ſtance aggravates the offence ; but he by proclamation cannot
make a thing unlawful, which was permitted by the law be. t
fore: and this was well proved by the ancient and continual n
forms of indictments, for all indictments conclude, contra le- I:
gem et conſuetudinem Angliæ, or contra leges & /latuta, &c, But
never was ſeen any indictment to conclude contra regiam pro- t
clamationem. | a
So in all caſes the King out of his providence, and to pre- i
vent dangers, which it will be too late to prevent afterwards, 7


he may prohibit them before, which will aggravate the of.
fence if it be afterwards committed ; and as it is a grand pre-
rogative of the King to make proclamation (for no ſubject
can make it without authority from the King, or lawful cuf. -
tom) upon pain of fine and impriſonment, as it is held in
the 22 Hf. 8. Procl. B. But we do find divers precedents of
proclamations which are utterly againſt law and reaſon, and
for that void; for que contra rationem juris introducta ſunt, non
debent trabi in conſequentiam.

An act was made, by which foreigners were licenſed to
merchandize within London ; H, AL proclamation pro-
hibited the execution of it; and that it ſhould be in ſuſpence

 ufque ad proximum Parliament, which was againſt law. Vid

Page [76] dorſ. clauſ. 8 H. 4. Proclamation in London. But 9 H. 4.*
an act of Parliament was made, that all the Iriſh people

ſhould depart the realm, and go into Ireland before the feaſt

of the Nativity of the bleſſed Lady, upon pain of death, which


was abſolutely in terrorem, and was utterly againſt the law. be
Hollinſhed 722. anno Domini 1546. 37 H. 8. the whore- Cc
houſes, called the ſtews, were ſuppreſſed by proclamation he
and ſound of trumpet, &c. th
In the ſame term it was reſolved by the two Chief Juſtices, th
Chief Baron, and Baron Altham, upon conference betwixt w
the Lords of the Privy Council and them, that the King by th
his proclamation cannot create any offence which was not an pr
offence before, for then he may alter the law of the land by by
his proclamation in a high point ; for if he may create an of- ed
fence where none is, upon that enſues fine and impriſon- re
ment: alſo the law of England is divided into three parts, T
common law, ſtatute law, and cuſtom ; but the King's pro-
6 clamation is none of them: alſo malum aut eft malum in ſe, aut fo
probibitum, that which is againſt common law is malum in ſe, m.
malum probibitum is ſuch an offence as is prohibited by act of ſh;
Parliament, and not by proclamation. i ©


Part XII. PROHIBITION» =


Alſo it was reſolved, that the King bath no prerogative,
but that which the law of the land allows him,
But the King for prevention of offences may by proclama-
tion admoniſh his ſubjects that they keep the laws, and do
not offend them; upon puniſhment to be inflited by the
law, &C. _ | ops! |
E, if the offence be not puniſhable in the Star- chamber,
the prohibition of it by proclamation cannot make it puniſh-
able there: and after this reſolution, no proclamation impoſ-
ing fine and impriſonment, was afterwards made, &c. Quæ- Note,
ft antea 20.


PROHIBITION.
Mick, 8 Jac. 1.


OTE, it was reſolved in the fame term, that if a man No prohibition
be excommunicated by the Ordinary, where he ought after the writ De
not to be, as after a general pardon, &c. and the defendant 1
being negligent doth not ſue a prohibition, but remains ex- Comb. 166.
communicate by forty days, and upon certificate in Chancery, 2 Roll. 318.
he is taken by the King's writ De excommunicato caficndo ; fo 79 —_
that no prohibition lies in this caſe, for that he is taken by —
the King's writ, and no precedent or authority can be found ſentence. See
where a prohibition was granted after the party was taken by Lg 142, 337s
the King's writ for prohibition lies to prohibit eccleſiaſtical 1 of
proceedings, not any thing which is done by the King's writ 172.
by force of the common law; and if a prohibition be grant- Auer oy * *
ed, it will not deliver the party: then, it was moved, what = „
remedy hath the party who is ſo wrongly excommunicated
To which it was anſwered, that hc hath three remedies, &c.

1. He may have a writ out of Chancery to abſolve him;
for as it is held in 14 H. 4. fol. 14. In all cafes where a
man is excommunicated by the Biſhop againſt our law. he
ſhall have writ out of the Chancery directed to the Biſhop,
commanding him to affoil him: and with this agrees 7 Ed,
4.14. | 5

2. When a man is excommunicated againſt the law of
this realm, ſo that he cannot have a writ De cautione

Vol. VII. 1 i admit-


— — — — —
— IE


Page [77]


ee 13 Co. 4,
$5, &c. ib.


See 13 Co. 6, 7.


PROHIBITION. Part XII.


admittenda, for then he ought * parere mandatis ecelgſiæ in for.
ma juris, id eft, eccleſiaſlici, where in truth it is, excommuni-
catio contra jus et frmam juris, id eft, communis juris: but if
he ſhew his cauſe to the Biſhop, and requeſt him to aſſoil
him, for this, that he was excommunicated after the offence
was pardoned, or this, that the cauſe doth not appear to be of
eccleſiaſtical cognizance, and he refuſe to aſſoil him, fo that
he is now diſabled to ſue any writ of the King, ſo long as
he remains excommunicated, he may have an action ſur le
caſe againſt the Ordinary, who hath done him this wrong, to
diſable him in this caſe z and with this agrees the Dr. & Stud.
lib. 2. cap. 32. fol. 119.

3. If the party be excommunicated for none of the cauſes
mentioned in the act of 5 Eliz. cap. 23. then he may have
this for plea in the King's Bench by the fame act, and avoid
the penalties inflicted by the ſame act.

Note, it was reſolved by the court, &c. that where one is
cited before the Dean of the Arches in cauſe of defamation,
for calling the plaintiff whore, out of the proper dioceſe, ſcil.
the dioceſe of London, againſt the ſtatute of 23 H. 8. and the
plaintifF hath ſentence, and the defendant is excommunicat-
ed, and ſo continues 80 days: and upon certificate into the
Chancery, a writ of Excommunicato capiendo is granted, and
after the defendant is taken and impriſoned by force of it,
that he ſhall not have a prohibition upon the ſtatute 23 H. 8.
for no writ in the Regiſter extends to it, et ſententia, ſi quam


ſulminaveritis, fine dilatione revecetts, and after ſentence is ap-


pealed, a prohibition lies, as appears by the Regiſter ; but no
wrig nor precedent can be ſhewn in this caſe ; but there 1s a
writ in the Regiſter called a writ De cautione admittenda, when
the defendant is taken by the King's writ De excommunicats
capiendo, de parendo mandatis eccleſiz, and to aſſoil and de-
liver the defendant : but note a diverfity, where it appears to
the court, that the matter of the libel is not within their ju-
riſdictions, as of lay fee, or of lay contract, &c. there lies a
prohibition with clauſe to deliver the party, for there he
cannot find caution De parendo mandatis eccieſiæ, for this,
that mandata eccleſiæ are contra legem & extra juriſdictiu-
nem ſuam: but in the caſe at the bar, although it ap-
pears by the libel, that the defendant was of one ſuch
pariſh in London, yet inaſmuch as the ſtatute 23 H. 8. hath
many exceptions, /c1. that the Ordinary requeſt the Arch-
biſhop, &c. to examine the caſe, &c. ſo that the faid de-
ſamation being the matter of the libel, is of eccleſiaſti


cal cognizance, and the ſtatute hath many 1
that


„% „„ e „ @ % „ „ wy; way moi, ©


Part XII. ADMIRALTY:


that it doth not appear to us judicially without information,
that the citation is againſt the form of the ſtatute ; and this
information comes too late in this caſe after the defendant
bath perſiſted ſo long in his contumacy, and is taken by the
King's writ and impriſoned, |


ADMIRALTY.


T was reſolved per totam curiam, that if one be ſued in the
Admiralty Court for a thing alleged to be done upon the
high ſea, within the juriſdiction of the Admiral, and the de-
fendant plead to it, and confeſs the thing to be done, and af-
ter ſentence is given, the court will be adviſed to grant a pro-
hibition, upon ſurmiſe that it was done infra corpus comtatus,
againſt their own confeſſion, unleſs it can be made to appear
to the court“ by any matter in writing, or other good mat-
ter, that this was done upon the land, for otherwiſe every
one will ſtay until after ſentence, and then for vexation only
ſue out a prohibition ; for although the admittance of the
party cannot give a juriſdiction to the court where it of right

ath none, for that it will be an incroachment upon the com-
mon law; yet when the court ſhall be adviſed that it is mere-
ly for vexation, and ſhall be intended for delay, if the prohi-
bition ſhall not be ſued forth, till after ſentence ; unleſs that
he can ſhew good matter to the court to aſcertain the court
that this is not for vexation, it ſhall not be granted. And
admonition was given to them which ſue forth prohibitions,
that they ſhould not keep them by long time in their hands,
and notwithſtanding proceed in the Eccleſiaſtical Court, &c.
And when they perceive that they cannot prevail, then to caſt


mage and vexation of the party, we will take ſuch order as in
caſe of a writ of privilege, if the defendant keep it until the
Jurors are ready, &c. it ſhall not be allowed,


12 | "I


The court ean«*
not grant prohi-
bition after ſen-
tence.

Vide ant. page

58, 59, 76.


Page [78]


Vide antea 76.


in their prohibitions; for if they abuſe that liberty to the da-


Corruption in

_ officers, &c.
Vide Bildum de
falſitate verſ. fi-
nem, et Pecki-
um de jure fits
tendi, cap. 24.
See 13 Co. 24,
& c. id. |


Part XIl.


Dr. TREVOR's Caſe.
Hil. 8 Fac. 1.
Biſhops, Chancellor, and Regiſter,


FN this very term in the caſc of Dr. Trevor, who was

Chancellor of a Biſhop in Wales, it was reſolved, that the
office of a Chancellor or Regiſter, &c. in the Eccleſiaſtical
Courts, are within the ſtatute 5 Ed. 6. cap. 16. the words of
which ſtatute are, ** any office, &c. which ſhall in any ways
* touch or concern the adminiſtration or execution of jul-
e tice;” and the words are ſtrongly penned againſt corruption
of oſſicers, for they are, „which ſhall in any wiſe touch or
© concern the adminiſtration,' &c. And the preamble,
and ſor avoiding of corruption which may hereafter happen
te be in the officers and miniſters of thoſe courts, places,
and reoms, wherein there is requiſite to be had the true
„“ adminittration of juſtice in ſervices of truſt: and to the in-
„tent, that perfons worthy and meet to be advanced to the
« place wheie juſlice is to be miniſtered, in any ſervice of


„ truſt to be executed, ſhould be preſerred to the ſame, and
none other.” Which act being made for avoiding of cor-
ruption in officers, &c. and for the advancement of perſons


more worthy and ſuſſicient for to execute the ſaid offices, by


which juſtice and right ſhall be alſo advanced, ſhall be ex-


pounded molt beneficially to ſuppreſs corruption. And in-
aſmuch as the law allows eccleſiaſtical courts to proceed in


caſe of blaſphemy, hereſy, ſchiſm, incontinence, &c. and


the loyalty of matrimonies, of divorce, of the right of tithes,
probate of wills, granting of adminiitrations, &c. And that
from thele proceedings depend uot only the ſalvation of ſouls,
but alſo the legitimation cf iſſues, &c. and that no debt or
duty can be recovered by executors or adminiſtrators, without


the probate of teflaments or latters of adminiſtration, and other


things of great conſequence ; it is moſt reaſon that ſuch olli
cers, which concern the adminiſtration and execution of juſ-
tice in theſe pcints, which concern the ſalvation of ſouls, and


the other matters aforeſaid, ſhall be within this ſtatute, than ob-


ſicets which concern the adminiſtration or execution of juſtice
| in


Part XII. ADMIRALTY,


in temporal matters; for this, that corruption of officers in

the ſaid ſpiritual and eccleſiaſtical cauſes is more dangerous

than the, officers in temporal cauſes ; for the temporal judge

commits the party convict to the Gaoler, “ but the ſpiritual Page [79]
judge commits the perſon excommunicate to the devil. Alſo Ine ue
thoſe officers do not only touch and concern the adminiſtra- Gaar ef the
tion of juſtice, &c. but alſo are ſervices of great truſt, for this, Spiritual Courts.
that the principal end of their proceedings is pro ſalute anima-

rum, c. and there is no exception or proviſo in the ſtatute

for them. Ergo,

It was reſolved that ſuch offices were within the purview

of the ſaid ſtatute,


ADMIRALTY.
Hil. 8 Jacobi Regis.


| J* is to be underſtood, that the jutiſdiction of the Admi- Antes 73.
ralty is more ancient than Mr. Lambert in his juriſdiction — 4 Inſt. 134,
of courts doth affirm, for there is held an opinion in theſe 8 ä
words concerning the Admiralty; I think that the deciſion See Speim.
of marine cauſes was not put out of the K.'s houſe, and com- Gloſs verbo Ad-
mitted over to the charge of the Admiral, until the time of **
Ed. 3. whereunto I am led, partly by the conſideration of
the time of his reign, which was much occupied in affairs
beyond the ſeas, and by reaſon of his wars with France, and
of the intercourſe and trade of merchandize, which then
flouriſhed; and partly, for that I find no mention of the Ad-
miralty before the reign of R. 2. who going about by a ſta-
tute made the thirteznth year of his reign, to reſtrain the au-
thority of that court which had exceeded her known limits,
doth take order, that it ſhould meddle no more than it was
wont to do in the time of his grandfather Edw. 3. thereby re-
ducing its authority, as I think, to the firſt original (Hoc
ille: ) | Tit without queſtion the juriſdiction of the Admiralty
is more ancient than the reign of the ſaid King Edward 3.
For where it is ſaid, that there is found no mention of it be-
fore the time of Edward 3. I find a notable book in the
time of Edw. 1. title Avowry 192. which proves the juriſ-
diction of the Admiralty more ancient than Mr. Lambert
ſuppoſeth: the caſe was; one brought a replevin of his
ſhip takea on the coaſt of Scarborough, upon the fea, and 4 Inf. 149-
9 1 car-


Page [80]


ADMIRALTY. Part XII.
—


1 county of Norfolk, and there detained: the


plaint of taking in the coaſt of Scarborough, which is no
town nor place certain by which the Pais may be taken, for
the coalt contains four leagues. And alſo of a thing done at
ſea, this court cannot have cognizances, for this judgment is
given to mariners. Beresford who gave the rule in the caſe:
the King wills that the peace be kept as well upon the ſea as
upon the land : and we find that you come by due proceſs,
and we ſee nothing why you ought not to anſwer, upon
which book I obſerve five things.

1. That of things done upon the ſea, certain judgment is
given to mariners, id e/t, to Admirals, as ſhall appear, and
that doth not belong to the court of the King, for this, that
no Pais may be taken there: and for this, that of a thing in
any town or place where the pars or jury may come, there
the Admiral hath not juriſdiction,

2. This proves directly, that then the Admiral hath juriſ.
diction to adjudge things done upon the ſea, from whence no
pais may come; and this did not begin then: but without
queſtion, ſo long as there hath been trade and traffic (which
is the life of every iſland) there was marine juriſdiction to
redreſs depredations, piracies, murders, and other offences *
upon the ſea; and to determine all contracts made there:
and this doth appear by the ſaid Beresford Chief Juſtice (who
ſpeaks in the voice of all the court) where he ſays, that the
King willeth that the peace be as well kept upon the ſea as
upon the land; and it is not poſſible that peace ſhould be kept
without juriſdiction of juſtice,

3. The third thing to be obſerved is, that if part of the


matter be done upon the ſea, and part in a county, that the


common law ſhall have all the juriſdiction.

4. The fea within the juriſdiction of the Admiral is de-
ſcribed to be out of every county, for if the ſea be within any
county, then pars may come from thence, and the Admiral
hath juriſdiction where the common law cannot give remedy.

5. It a thing be done upon the ſea, hors del county, the


party may plead it to the juriſdiftion of the court: and all


theſe points are directly, without any ſtrain, collected out of
the ſaid book. |

And it is to wit, that in ancient time the juriſdiction
of the Admiral was called maritina Anglia, and ſome-
times marina Angliæ, and ſo the vacabulum artis was made


of an adjective, as the office of Chamberlainſhip of England


Was


Part XII. ADMIRALTY,


was granted to the Earl of Oxford of ancient time, per nomen
Camerarie Angliz, fo that maritina Anglia, and ſince marina
Angliæ, ſignifies the Admiralſhip. or Marineſhip of England:
for marinus, id eft quod dq, that is, of the ſea, and
$4200 1d. ey ©, is the Admiral or General of the fleet; and
almarah, by corruption Admiral, ſignifies the Governor or
Captain of the navy; and fo Archigubernus ſigniſies the Admi-
ral or chief Governor of the' Captains of the navy, chief Cap-
tain of mariners, Admiral of the fleet, Admiral of the ſhips,
&c. ſunt ſynonyma and in ancient time, ſometimes one was
Admiral of all England, and ſometimes the office was divid-
ed: and for this ex rotulo patentium de anno 6 H. 3. de mas i-
tina euflodienda, the letters patent are, dominus Rex commrſit
Galfrido de Lacy maritinam Angliæ cuſtadiendam quamdiu domi-
nus Rex placuerit, with commandment of that attendance, ad
fem, commodum, et honorem domini Regis. Teſte, &c. apud
Lend. 29 Auguſli,

Ex rotulo patentium anno ꝙ H. 3. Rex omnibus de coftera ma-
ris Nerf. & Suff. ſalutem. Sciatis quod conceſſimus Ricardo Ag-
nillum mari nam guardiam Nor f. & Suf. cum omnibus perti nen-
tiis, ſal. Erewel, Oreford, Dunmervie, Gerem. et Lenn cujt1-
diendam quandiu nobis placuerit, et ideo vobis mandamus, quod ei
in omnibus, gue ad diftam marinam pertinent, intendentes ſitis &
reſpondentes.* Teſle, Sc. apud Ii eſt. 3 Octob. And Geoffrey
Lacy was called Admiral of England. |

Charta 15 H. 3. 28. Junii, Petrus de Rivall habet ad to-
tam vitam ſuam cuſtodiam omnium portuum et totius coſteræ
marine Angie cum omnibus libe! tatibus et liberis conſuetudinibus
predi? portuum et caſteræ maris pertinentibus, &c, 2 pars Pa-


tent. 25 Ed. in 14 clauſ. in dorſs in 18 William Leybourne


Capitaneus marinariorum.

At this time' there were two Admirals ; the one had the
government of all the fleet from the mouth ot Thames ver/us
Boream, the other from the mouth of I hames verſus occiden-
tem. 1 Pars Patent. 25 Ed. 1. 25. Martii in q. Johannes Bo-
telort cuſtas Regis portuum maritinorum verſus partes boreales.
1. Pars Patentium, 10 Ed. 2 8 Dec. Nicolaus Kirril conflitut-
tur Admirallus del Fleete, ſcil. omnium navium ab ore aque
Thamiſis verſus partes occidentales, 18 Aug. Et ibid. Tho. de
Drayton Aamirailus ab ore aquæ Thamiſis verſus partes Ba-
reales. 5 | |

And ſo in the time of R. 2. H.4. H. 5. H. 6. during whoe
reigns there was likewiſe unus, gui fuit Admiraullus Angliæ.

* 8 Ed. 2 Coron. 399. Where a man may ſee that which
was done of one part, and the other of the water, &c. in
I 4 | that


Vide Spelman
ut ante,


14


Page [81]


HonovRs. Part XII.


that place the county may have cognizance, and it may be
tried by a jury; which proves alſo, that that which may be
tried by the common law, doth not belong to the Admiral'
Juriſdiction : and Stamford's Pleas of the Crown, lib. 1. ſol.
51. citing this book, ſays thus, viz. So this proves that by
the common law beſore the ſtatute, &c. the Admiral ſhall
| | not have juriſdiction, unleſs upon the high fea, which proves
j that the Admiral by the common law hath juriſdiction upon
the high ſea, ex quo ſequitur, that his juriſdiction was by the
common law, and then it 1s ſo ancient, that the commence.
ment cannot be known; ſo that I do conclude, that his au-
thority did not begin in the reign of Ed. 3. as Monſieur
Lambert, upon uncertain conjectures ſuppoſeth : for if the
Juriſdiction hath then began and been inſtituted, it would
have appeared upon record,


Honours and Dignities.


Paſch. 5 Jacobi 1.


Creations of Ba- IT was reſolved by the two Chief Juſtices, the Chief Baron,


| ronets, &c. 1 the Attorney, and Solicitor, that the King may erect any

; 2 509% name of dignity, which was not before, and for that reaſon

0 a 668. the King may create a dignity, by name of Baronet, and

[ = create one to be a Baronet, to him and his heirs males of his
body iſſuing.


| It was reſolved, that if he does not create him of ſome
1 place, he ſhall not have an eſtate tail, but ſee- ſimple condi-
= tional, which ſhall be ſorfeited for felony ; but if he create
| him Baronet of a place, then he ſhall have an eſtate-tail,
ö within the ſtatute of Weſt 1. De donis cond', and the King
] | See 10 Co. 47.b. may grant to him, and the heirs males of his body, preceden-


| Ke. ibid. cy before Knights Baronets, K nights of the Bath, and Kvights
} 1 Bachelors, and alſo may grant precedency to their wives, ſons,
6 * and daughters, &c. And that he cannot create any dignity abore
| the dignity of a Baronet, and under the dignity of a Baron: and
| that the creation of his dignity of a Baronet ſhall not diſcharge
; Note, the heir to be in guard, as if the heir be made a Knight,


for


part XII. No Acceſſary in Treaſon, &c.


for he is not made Knight by this, for the dignity of 2
Knight is not deſcendible,


No Acceſſary in Treaſon, - Petit
| Larceny, and Treſpaſs.


Paſch. 9 Jac. 1.


OTE, that in treſpaſs and treaſon, the higheſt and the

loweſt offences, there are not any acceſſaries, but all
are principals : but in caſe of felony, above the ſum of 12d.
there, and in caſe of death, &c. there may be acceſſories, as
well before as after ; in caſe of petit larceny there cannot be
any acceſſory for the ſmal'neſs of the felony ; then the caſe is,
& that. A. counterſeits the great ſeal of England, and B.
% knowing that he did counterfeit it, receives him, and abets
“ and comforts him :” if B. in this caſe was guilty of the trea-
ſon, is the queſtion. And it ſeems he is not, for although
that A. by the counterfeiting be a traitor, the accepting and
comforting of him cannot make him an acceſſory, for that in


caſe of high treaſon there can be no acceſſory, and a principal 234.
he cannot be, for this, * that at the time of the counterfeit- Page [82]


ing he did not know of it; but if one, beſore the act done,
procure one to counterfeit the great ſeal, there, it is bigh
treaſon ; for in the law he himſelf counterfeits the great ſeal :
and in the indictment he may be charged with the ſact, viz.
the counterfeiting ; but ſo is not he who receives after the


fact, for he cannot be charged with the fact: and in caſe of see Rep. GA.
treſpaſs, he who gives conſent and aid to the treſpaſs, is a prin- 25, 26.


Cipal in the treſpaſs; and this, as to me it appears, is very ap-
Parent in reaſon, and agrees with our books, as 19 H. 6. 47. b.

he who is conſenting and aiding to the making of falfe money,
commits high treaſon, for he is partrceps criminis before the ſact
done ; but it is held in Conyer's caſe, Mich. 13 & 14 El. Dyer
296. that in the ſame caſe, if one after the act done know of
the making of falſe money, and receive the party, this 1s
not treaſon, but miſpriſion of treaſon, for not making diſco-
very, and with this accords 3 H. 7. 10. that it is rot trea-
ſon, which diverſity Stamſord's Pleas of the Crown, fol. 3.


hat


*


Acceſſaties
1 Inſt. 57. a.


1 H. H. P. C.


2 Salk, 418,
334, 542


Sir William CrHaNCey's Caſe. Part XII.


hath not well obſerved. Vide Dyer 298. Vid le lat. 27 El
which made him who received a Jeſuit a felon, for by the
Judgment of the Parliament the receipt of a Jeſuit, although
he be a traitor, is not treaſon ; for the ſtatute makes the re.
turning of a Jeſuit treaſon, of which he who receives him
cannot be indicted ; but it is miſpriſion for any who receives
him, and doth not diſcover, according to the reſolution of
Conyer's caſe, IO


© —— —


7
|


4 — —
—  — _ ————-—— — —ͥꝗ —WW—„êõ—ãw =»; Daw


— Es F


Sir W1LLIAM CHANCEY's Cafe,


Paſch. 9 Fac. 1.


High commiſ- N this very term Sir Wm Chancey having the privilege
ſion. of this court, and being priſoner in the Fleet, was brought
0 2 to the bar by Habeas corpus by the Guardian de Fleete, who re-
See 4 Inft. 334. turned, that the ſaid Sir William was committed to the Fleet
| Wm. Thickne's by force of a warrant from the High Commiſſioners in eccle-


caſe, . : 2
i Poſt. 84, 26, ſiaſtical cauſes: the tenor of which warrant follows in theſe


g 104, 129. words:


——— — —
— — — —ä—äñ


Return. * HESE are to will and require you in his Majeſty's
„name, by virtue of his high commiſſion for cauſes

« eccleſiaſtical, under the great ſeal of England, to us and
others directed, by ſofce of a ſtatute in ſuch caſe provided,
that herewithal you take and receive into your cuſtody the
body of Sir William Chancey, Knt. whom we will that
% you keep and detain under cuſtody, until further order
„ ſhall be taken for his enlargement, letting you know, that
© the cauſe of his commitment is, for that being at the ſuit
© of his Lady convented before his highneſs' Commiſſioners
« Eccleſiaſtical, for adultery, and for expelling her from his
% company, and cohabitation with another woman, without
© allowing her any competent maintenance, and by his own
© confeſſion convicted thereof, he was thereupon by order of
© court enjoined to allow his wife a competent maintenance,
& according to his ability, and to perform ſuch ſubmiſhon
and other order for his adultery, as by law ſhould be en-
5 joined him. Which expreſsly he refuſed * to do, in con-

Fate [83] « tempt of his Majeſty's ſaid ebe to us in that behalf
„ committed.” Given at London 19 Marti 1611, ſub-


=> >. 2 2
— =; — 8 — N i 4


Adultery,


„ qT.- ax et.


—


ſcribed,
London. |
Henry n Thomas Morton,
George Overall, 5 Zachary Pas field.


And


*
—


Part XII. Sir WILLIAM Crancey's Caſe.


And it was moved by Nicholas Serjeant of counſel with Sir Adultery.


William, that this return was inſufficient, for two : cauſes; 33
Fre


The one for this, that adultery ought to be puniſhed by the See Fall. 81,


Ordinary, and is not ſuch enormous offence that it ſhall be 82.
puniſhed by the High Commiſſioners, upon which the offen-
der cannot have his appeal, or other remedy ; and clearly the
wife ſhall not ſue there for alimony ; guod fuit conceſſum
Coke, Warburton, and Foſter, Ao Walmſley doubted of
adultery : for it ſeemed to him, that-this was an offence en-
ormous. 2. That by force of the act 1 El. the High Com-
miſſioners cannot impriſon the ſaid Sir William for adultery,
nor for denying alimony to his wife (if that was within their
juriſdiction.) And although that the words of the letters pa-
tent give them power to impriſon the party, yet if the act doth
not warrant it, they cannot impriſon him. And Doderidge,
Serjeant to the King, of counſel on the other ſide, did not
defend the impriſonment to be lawful ; and it was clearly
agreed by Coke, Walmſley, Warburton, and Foſter, that
the Commiſhoners had not power to impriſon him in this
caſe : and Walmſley ſaid, that although they have uſed by 20

ears to impriſon in ſuch caſe, without exception taken, yet
when it came before them judicially, they ought to judge ac-
cording to law: and upon this Sir William Chancey was
bailed : alſo it was reſolved per totam curiam, that when upon
the return it doth appear, that the impriſonment is not law-
ful, the court may diſcharge him of impriſonment ; but in
this caſe, the court thought fit rather to bail him, until the
next term, and in the mean time to attend upon the Arch-
biſhop, and to do that which of right and reaſon ebeydaght |
todo, Alfo it was reſolved that the return was inſufficient in

form, viz. |

1. It is not ſhewed when the adultery was committed.

2. He was enjoined to allow his wife a competent main—

tenance, without any certainty ; and to perform ſuch ſubmiſ-

ſion and other order for his adultery, as by the law he ſhall

be enjoined, and it is all in port and uncertain what order

they will take, and yet for the refuſal they impriſon him: alſo

they make their warrant by force of a commiſhon to them and

others directed, and do not ſay, or to any four of them, ſo that

it may appear to the court that they who made the warrant had

power by the commiſſion ; alfo it is ſaid in the warrant, that he
vas ſummoned by the order of the court. Yide in my Treatiſe

at large the reaſons and cauſes for which the Commiſſioners (un-
leſs that it be in ſpecial caſes) may not ſue and impriſon, Vide 4 Laß. 33a,
FPaſch. .33%» .


'


—


— —


4 Int, 334.


EmprIncnAm's Caſe, Part XII.
Paſch. 42 El. Rot. 1209. Ed. Thickneſſe was impriſoned by


the High Commiſſioners, and upon Habeas Corpus delivered


Page [84]


* Star-chamber. -
Admiralty. ;
See 73 79, 80.


by the Juſtices of the Common Pleas,


*EMPRINGHAMss Caſe.


Paſch. 9 Fac. I.


N this very term a caſe was moved in the Star-chamber,

upon a bill exhibited by the Attorney-general againſt Rob.
Empringham, Vice-Admiral in the county of York, Marma-
duke Kettlewell, one of the Marſhals of the Admiralty, and
Thomas Harriſon, one of the informers of the Court of Ad-
miralty in the ſaid county, and they were charged with op-
preſſion and extortion, that they had fined and impriſoned
divers of the King's ſubjects in the county of Vork, which
no Judge of the Admiralty can juſtify ; for that the court is
not a court of record, but the proceedings there are according
to the civil law, and upon their ſentence, appeal and no writ
of error licth : alſo the ſaid Empringham hath cauſed divers
to be cited to appear before him for things done in the body
of the county; as for not repairing of the banks of a river,
which 1s within the body of a county : alſo for cutting of trees
upon his own ſoil, and ſuch like, which were determinable
by the common law; and not before the Admiral, for his au-
thority is limited to the high ſea, and is out of any county:
and for theſe and other oppreſſions and extortions they were
by ſentence of the court of Star chamber, fined, and im-
priſoned, and an award, that reſtitution ſhould be made, &c.


HIGH


part XII.


HIGH COMMISSION.


Trin. 9 Jac. 1.


"EMORANDUM, that upon Thurſday before the term prohibitions,
VI of Holy Trinity, all the Juſtices of England were by Antea 53, 59,
the command of the King aſſembled in the Council-chamber Ek hs.
at Whitehall, where was alſo Abbot, Archbiſhop of Canter- 15, 18, 41, 42,
bury, and with him two Biſhops and divers civilians, where 70-
the Archbiſhop did complain of prohibitions to the High 8
Commiſſioners out of the Common Pleas, and the delivery of
perſons committed by them by Haleas Corpus, and principal- Antes 82.
ly of Sir William Chancey; where I defended our proceed- 5
ings, according to the Treatiſe which I made of it, and which
I delivered before the High Commiſhoners : and after great
diſputation betwixt the Archbiſhop and me, at the laſt the
Archbiſhop faid, that he had a point not yet touched upon in
my Treatiſe, which would give ſatisfaction to the Lords, and
to us alſo without queſtion, upon which he would rely ; and
that was the clauſe of reſtitution and annexation, cil.“ and
* that all ſuch juriſdictions, privileges, ſuperiorities, and
„pre- eminencies, ſpiritual and ecclefiaſtical; as by any ſpi-
“ritual power or authority hath heretofore, or hereaſter law-
fully may be exercited or uſed, for the viſitation of the ec-
e clefiaſtical ſtate and perſons, and for reformation, order,
« and correction of the fame, and of errors, hereſies,
„ ſchiſms, &c. ſhall for ever by authority of this preſent Par-
* liament, be united and annexed to the imperial crown of
this realm :” and it was faid, that the Kings H. 8. and
Ed 6. gave power by their commiſſions under the great ſeal
to divers to 1mpoſe mulcts, &c. in ſpiritual and eccleſiaſtical
cauſes, &c. and upon this he concludes, that inaſmuch as
this had been uſed before 1 El. this is given to the Queen
Elizabeth and her ſucceſſors : alſo inaſmuch as, by the ſta- Antea 39.
.tute of 2 H. 4. and 2 H. 7. the juriſdiction * eccleſiaſtical Page [85]
may fine and impriſon in certain particular cauſes eceleſiaſ-
tical, for this cauſe juriſdiction to fine and impriſon in all
eccleſiaſtical cauſes is given to the King: and this he ſaid he
uttered to the intent that this may be anſwered ; to which I
for a time gave this auſwer, that it was good for the weal


/ .. ——_ public,


= wv — bh = \


— 2 —


.


P Hs nn — Bo ”


a b \ ww —-
o —— eee ³ ̃ ͤ ! r xñů—̃O—[LLVV—ᷣ— — —
-


z


1 Hich CoMMIss10N. Part XII.


pubilic, that the Judges of the common law ſhould interpret
the ſtatutes, and acts of Parliament within this realm; and
that if ſuch interpretation ought to be made, what he urged,
was abſurd and againſt law and reaſon for divers cauſes,


1. For that if ſuch word ( lawfully ) were omitted, that yet


this act, as appears by the title and preamble, being an act of
reſtitution, ought to be intended of lawful jurifdictions,
privileges, &c. „

2. Theſe words, © heretofore hath, or hereafter lawfully
&« may be exerciſed,” &c. This word [awfully extends as well
to times paſt, as to times ſuture: and all this was affirmed by
all the Juſtices.


3. It was ſaid by me, that before the ſtatute of 1 Eliz. no


eccleſiaſtical Judge may impoſe a fine or impriſon for any ec-
cleſiaſtical or ſpiritual offence, unleſs there be authority by act
of Parliament: and this was ſo affirmed by all the Juſtices,


that although in ſome caſes they may fine and impriſon, there-


fore to ſay, that by this clauſe in all caſes they may fine and
impriſon, was ſo manifeſt, that it was not worthy any anſwer :
but now I have ſeen the commiſſion made to Cromwell the
King's Vicegerent, and other commiſſions to others by his
appointments, for this, that he was employed in the affairs of
the kingdom, in which commiſſion are theſe words. Vide
my book of Precedents; the Commiſſion at large. |

And afterwards in this very term the Privy Council ſent
for the Juſtices of the Common Pleas only, and there the
reaſons and cauſes of the ſaid reſolution were largely debated
and oppoſition was made as much as might be by Egerton,
Lord Chancellor; but the Juſtices of the Com. Pleas remain-
ed gonſtant in their former opinion; and afterwards the
Council fent for the Chief Juſtice of the King's Bench, Jul-
tice Williams, Juſtice Croke, Tanfield Chief Baron, Snig,
Altham, and Bromley, who were not acquainted with the
reaſons and cauſes of the ſaid rule of the Common Pleas , nor
did they know for what cauſe they came before the Council;
and hearing the Lord Chancellor afkrm, that the High Com-
miſhoners have always by the act of 1 Eliz. impoſed fine and
impriſonment for exorbitant crimes (without any conference
with us) were of a ſudden opinion with us, without any con-


ference amongſt themſelves, and without hearing of the ma-


ter debated : and after at another day this very term, the ſaid
Judges of the King's Bench, Barons of the Exchequer,
and Juſtice Fenner and Yelverton, who were omitted before,
and we the Juſtices of the Common Pleas were all commanded
to attend the Privy Council; and when we all were aſſembled,

we


Part XII. Hi Commisston.


we of the Common Pleas were commanded to retire, for that,
as the Lord "Treaſurer ſaid, we had conteſted with the King,
and in our abſence the King and the Prince ſat with the
Council, and then the Juſtices of the King's Bench, and Ba-
rons of the Exchequer were (queſtioned) ſeriatim with the
Council : and the King demanded their opinions in certain

iats concerning the high commiſſion, with which they were
not acquainted before, which were not related to us. In all
which as appears after, they were not unanimouſly agreed;
and after two hours and a half, we the Juſtices of the Bench,
Coke, Walmſley, Warburton, and Foſter, were commanded
to come before the King, the Prince, and the Council,
where the King declared, that by the advice of his Council,
and by the advice of the Juſtices of the King's Bench, and
Barons, he will reform the high commiſhon in divers points,
* and reduce 1t to certain ſpiritual cauſes, the which after he
will have to be obeyed in all points: and the Lord Treaſurer
ſaid, that the principal feather was plucked from the High
Commiſhoners, and nothing but ſtumps remaining; and that
they ſhould not intermeddle with matter of importance, but
of petit crimes z and this word (errors) being general, ſhall
be explained, and no obligations ſhall be taken of the parties,
as before abſurdly and unjuſtly (as he faid) had been taken,
and divers other things were reformed, as he faid ; but he
did not declare them in particular.

To which it was ſaid by me to the King, that it was


grievous to us his Juſtices of the Bench, to be ſo ſevered from


our brethren, the Juſtices and Barons, but more grievous that
they differed trom us in opinion, without hearing one an—
other; and eſpecially foraſmuch as we have proceeded in the
cale of Sir Will, Chancey, and other caſes concerning the
power of the High Commiſſioners in impoſing of fines and
impriſonment judicially in open court, upon argument at the
bar and the bench, where it was reſolved by us, that the
High Commiſſioners cannot fine and impriſon, but in certain
caſes; and the judicial courſe ought to be ; judicially reverſed :
but I ſaid to the King, that when we the Juſt. of the Com-
mon Pleas ſee the commiſſion newly retormed, we will, as
to that which is of right, ſeck to ſatisfy the King's expeCta-
tion; and ſo we departed without any demand -of our
opinions. |


STOCK-


Page [86]


Antea $2,


U r BR _.


King's grant
void for uncer-
rainty.

See 1 Co. 50.
3 Co. 4. 4 Co.
66. 7 Co. 14.
3 Co. 45, 55.


9 Co. 23, 29,47. 40


10 Co. 26. b.
64. b. 112. b.
11 Co. 11.


Page [87]


4


STOCK DAL E's Caſe.
Trin. 9 Jac. Regis.
In the Court of Wards.


ninth year of his reign, granted, aſſigned, and ſet over

illiam Stockdale, in theſe words: | |
* Huch and ſo many of the debts, duties, arrearages, and
ſums of money, being of record in our Court of Exchequer,
Court of Wards and Liveries, Court of the Duchy of Lan-

caſter, or within any other court or courts within this our
realm of England, or being of record in any of our ſaid
courts, &c. in any year, of ſeveral years from the laſt year
« of the reign of H. 8. until the thirteenth year of our late
« dear ſiſter, as ſhall amount to the ſum of a thouſand
pounds, to have, take, levy, recover, and enjoy the ſaid
debts, duties, arrearages, and ſums of money amounting
„ unto the ſum of a thouſand pounds, before, in and by theſe
preſents given and granted to the ſaid William Stockdale,
his executors, adminiſtrators, and Mhgns.”
And jn this caſe divers points were reſolved.
1. That the faid grant of the King is void for the uncer-
tainty, for by the grant no debt in certain may paſs, and if
it cannot paſs by the grant at the beginning, it ſhall never
paſs, as this caſe is: as if the King hath a hundred acres of
land in D. and he grant to a man 20 acres of the land in D.
without any deſcribing of them by the rent, or occupation, or
name, &c. this grant is*void ; and in the caſe of the King
the patentee ſhall not have his election, as he ſhall in the
caſe of a common perſon ; but in caſe of the King, if the 20
acres are deſcribed, or by abuttals, or“ by name certain in
the particular, this is good demonſiration which 20 acres ſhall

aſs.

F 2. Where the patentee claims by force of this word a7
rearagia, to have arrearages of rents, reliefs, and meſne rates
of lands, &c. in the Couit of Wards, &c. ;

It was reſolved clearly, that he ſhall not have them, if


the patent had not gone further; for inaſmuch as this word
ar-


'F HE King by his letters patent, dated 9 April, the
to


a __*w@<@©@ aaa a” £4


Part XII. MANSLAUGHTER.


arrearages is coupled with theſe words, debts, duties, and
with theſe words ſubſequent. (ſums of money) it ſhall be in-
tended of arrearages of things perſonal, and not of things real;
as of arrearages of account of monies delivered in preſt, &c.

But the proviſo in the end of the patent, ſcil Provided al-
ways, that the ſaid William Stockdale ſhall take no benefit by
any means of arrearages of any rents, reliefs, tenths, or annual

yments whatſoever, until Sir Patrick Murrey and others be
atisfied and paig/the ſum of 10, oco 1. &c. hath well explained
what arrearages the King intended, viz. of rents, &c. and fo
to conſtrue one part of the patent by the other; but clearly
mean rates, (rents) are not within the ſaid words, for they
are the profits of demeſne land,


MANSLAUGHTER.
Trin. 9 Jacobi Regis.


(
IVERS men playing at bowls at Great Marlow in the
county of Kent, two of them fell out, and quarrelled
the one with another, and the third man who had not any


Vide Keeling's
Reports, Rex
ver. Mawgrioge,
1 Hawk. e. 30.


quarrel, in revenge of his friend, ſtruck the other with a per torum,


bowl, of which blow he died; this was held manſlaughter,


for this, that it happened upon a ſudden motion in revenge
of his friend.


In the very ſame term a ſpecial verdict, being divers years


paſt found in the county of Hereford, the effect of which;
* that two boys combating together, the one of them was
* ſcratched in the face, and his noſe voided a great quantity
* of blood, and ſo he run three quarters of a mile to his fa-
* ther, who ſeeing his ſon ſo abuſed, and the blood run from
him, and his cloaths and face all bloody, he took in his hand
da cudgel, and went three quarters of a mile to the place


* upon which he died.” And this was held but manſlaugh-


Gttled, that it ſhall be adjudged in law malice prepenſe; and
tus caſe was moved ad menſam, Ec.


Vol. VII.


K HIGH


* where the other boy was, and ſtruck him upon the head,


ter, for the ire and paſſion of the father was continued, and
there was no time that the law can determine that it was ſo


Page [88]


Vid, Ant. 19,


47, 76.


13 Co. 9, 47.


See 1 Hawk, c.
14. lect 1. &
ch. 24. ſect. 11.
Kc. Oaths to fit
in Parliam, and
Ch. 1. ſect. 12,
ch. . ſect. 4.
ch. 19. ſe. 27
to 4 29. and
ch. 24. by offi ·
cets, &c.


Part XII.


* HIGH COMMISSION
Mich. 5 Jacobi Regis.


EMORANDUM, That upon Thurſday in this term, 2
High Commiſſion in cauſes eccleſiaſtical was publiſhed
in the great chamber of the Archbiſhop at Lambeth, in which
I with the Chief Juſtice, Chief Baron, Juſtice Williams,
Juſtice Crook, Baron Altham, and Baron Bromley, were
named Commiſhoners, amongſt all the Lords of the Council,
divers Biſhops, Attorney and Solicitor, and divers Deans and
Doctors of the canon and) civil laws; and I was commanded
to ſit By force of the ſaid Commiſſion, which I refuſed for
theſe cauſes :

1. For this, that I, nor any of my brethren of the Com-
mon Pleas were acquainted with the Commiſſion, but the
Judges of the King's Bench were.

2. That 1did not know what was contained in the new
Commiſſion, and no Judge can execute any commiſſion with
a good conſcience without knowlege; and that always the
gravity of the Judges hath been to know their commiſſion, ſor
tantum fibi eft permiſſum, quantum commiſſum and if the Com-
miſſion be againſt law, they ought not to fit by virtue of it,

3. That there was not any neceliity that I ſhould fit, who
underſtood nothing of it, to long as the other Judges were
there, the advice of whom had been had in this new Com-
miſſion. |

4. That I have endeavoured to inform myfelf of it, and
have ſent to the Rolls to have a copy of it, but it was not en-
rolled,

5. None can fit by force of any Commiſſion, until he hath


took the oath of tupremacy, according to the ſtatute of 1 Eliz.


And for this, if they will read the Commiſſion ſo that we may
hear it, and have a copy to adviſe upon it, then I will either
ſit or ſhew cauſe to the contrary. But the Lord 'Treaſurer
would for divers reaſons perſuade me to fit, which I utterly
denied. Fo

n


my rj wh, SS . os ww wy Jy oo «ay» wy HQ ,  -


puny my an


mm oy, og


T
b
!


Part XII. Hicn CoMmreston.


And to this the Chief Juſtice, Chief Baron, and ſome
other of the Judges ſeemed to incline, upon which the Lord
Treaſurer conferred in private with the Archbiſhop Bancroft,
who faid to him, that he had appointed divers cauſes of he-
reſy, inceſt, and enormous crimes to be heard upon this day,
and for that he would proceed ; but at laſt he was content
that the Commiſſion ſhould be ſolemnly read, and ſo it was,
which contained three great ſkins of parchment, and con
tained divers points againſt the laws and ſtatutes of Eng-
Jand: and when this was read, all the Judges rejoiced
that they did not (it by force of it: and then the Lords of the
Council, viz. the Archbiſhop, the Lord Treaſurer, the Lord
Privy Seal, the Lord Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain, the
Earl of Shrewſbury, the Earl of Worceſter, with the Biſhops,
took the oath of ſupremacy and allegiance, and then we as
Commiſhoners were required to take the oath, which I re-
fuſed until I had conſidered of it: but as the ſubject of the
King, I and the other Judges alſo took the oaths of ſupre-
macy and allegiance.

Then the Lord Archbiſhop made an oration in commen-
dation of the care and providence of the King for the peace
and quiet of the church , alſo he commended the Commil-
ſioners, al ſo the neceſſity of the Commiſſion to proceed ſum-
marily in theſe days, wherein ſins of a deteſtible nature, and
ſactions, and ſchiſms did abound, and proteſted to proceed
ancerely by“ force of it, and then he cauſed to be called a
moſt blaſphemous heretic, and after him another, who was
brought hither by bis appointment, to ſhew to the Lords and
the auditory the neceſſity of that Commiſſion.

And after, the Archbiſhop came to the Chief Juſtice and
to me, and promiſed us, that we ſhould have a copy of the
Commiſſion, and then I ſhould obſerve the diverſity between
the old Commiſſion and this; and ail the time that the long
Commiſſion was in reading, the oath in taking, and the ora-
tion made, I ſtood, and would not fit, as 1 was requeſted by
the Archbiſhop and the Lords, and ſo by my exampre did ail
the ref}. of the Juſtices. 7

And the Archhiſhop ſaid, that the King had commanded
him to fit by virtue of this new Commiſſion, in ſome open
place, and at certain days : and for that cauſe he appointed
the Great Chamber at Lambeth in winter, and the Hall in
the ſummer ; and every 'Thurſday in the term-time, at two of
the clock in the afternoon, and in the forenoon he would have
a ſermon for the better informing of the Commiſſioners of
beit duty, in the true and fincere execution of their duties:


a Fiſhing


ſ


Page [89]


Hereſy.
Ant. 56, 57.
Poſtea 93


Rivers. Fiſh,
See Shep. Abr.
210, 211. and

Nelſon's Juſt,

tit, Fiſh,


Part XII.


Fiſhing in the River THAMEs.
Mich. 9 Jacobi Regis.


12 this ſame term the iſſue in an information upon the
ſtatute of 2 H. 6. 15. was tried at the bar, and upon the
evidence upon the words of the ſaid act, which are, that
every perſon which ſetteth or ſaſteneth in the river of Thames
any nets or engines called trincks, or any manner of nets, to
any poſts, boats, anchors, or the like thing, to ſtand conti-
nually day and night, forfeits to the King one hundred hil-
lings for every time, &c. and the defendants having ſet and
faſtened nets called trincks, in the river of Thames, &c. to
boats day and night, for ſo long time as the tide did ſerve,
and did not fay continually. |

The queſtion was, if this was within the ſtatute, And it
was clearly reſolved, that it was within the ſtatute : for the
nets called trincks, cannot ſtand but ſor fo long as the tide
ſerves : and for this the word continually ſhall be taken conti-
nually ſo long as they may ſtand to take fiſh, and as the time
of fiſning endures, be it in the day or night, for lex non inte.
dit aliquid impoſſibile, for otherwiſe the law ſhould not be of
any effect: and although that it was ſaid, that this ſtatute te-
mains in force, and if any had complained of any offence
againſt it, he ſhall be puniſhed; but the reaſon why no exe-
cution hath been made of this act, was for this, that none
ſhould have benefit by the ſuit but the King only, for the pe-
nalty is only given to the King. And as it doth appear by
the preamble in the proviſo in the act, the manner of the
nets was not the cauſe of the making of the act, for by the
proviſo every man may fiſh in his ſeaſonable time with
trincks, if they are of aſſiſe, drawing and conveying
them with their hands, as other fiſhers do, and not falt-
ening them to poſts, boats, or anchors, &c. continually to


ſtand; for the miſchief was by faſtening them, and the
* | | ſtanding


1


part XII. SnulrER's Caſe,


ſtanding of them continually, the brood and fry of fiſh were
deſtroyed, and diſturbance made to common paſſage of veſſels,
as weers, lidels, and other engines,


—


»iſä— . En OIE——_— — Ae


** S H U L T E R's Caſe. Page [90]
Mich. 9 Jac. Regis.
In the Star-Chamber.


TY Camera Stell. the caſe was ſuch ; “ John Shulter of a blind man

« Wiſbich of the age of 115 years had iſſue John his eldeſt ſeals a deed read
« ſon, and others, viz. Chriſtopher, Richard, &c. and being 8 mw 2 8
« ſeiſed of lands in fee of the value of a hundred marks per 1 5 bes

« annum, his eldeſt ion being dead, and his grandchild John Moor 182.

« being within age he intended, and ſo gave directions to! Roll. R. 440.


« make a leaſe of a farm called Rouſhall to Chriſtopher, dur- * *


e ing the minority of his grandchild, rendering the ancient


*« rent, with power of revocation : and of land in Yarſbury
« to the ſaid Richard, in the ſame manner, and for the ſame
time: and Chriſtopher and Richard by the covin and aid
« of one Woodroof a ſcrivener, 24 Eliz. drew and ingroſſed
« two ſevetal leaſes of the premiſes ſeverally to Chriſtopher
« and Richard, for one and fifty years, rendering rent but
four- pence per ann and without any power of revocation :


« and John Shulter the grandfather could read and write very


« well, but by reaſon of his great age was blind ; and Wood.
« roof declared to him, that the effect of the {aid leaſes were
in all points according to his direction: and upon this the
* ſaid John Shulter, the grandfather, ſealed and delivered as
his deeds.” wo”

And it was reſolved by the Lord Elleſmere Chancellor,
and the two Chief Juſtices, that the ſaid indentures could not


bind the ſaid John Shulter, for this, that he was blind and


like to one who could not read at all ; and that the effect
being declared unto him in other manner than in truth the


indentures were, it did fully agree with Manſer's cafe, in the


Second Part of my Reports, fol. 4. 5


K 3 | Bs |


4


YI SDSS ta CRE A IIA,


——AVY ow ttt er edt ̃ oe rr On non A nn Point Boe no te: OED: Wag os


3 =
w * *


—


3 —


See Nel. Abr.


35» 484-

1 Danv. 207,
208, &c,

x Hawk. 6. 72.


Page [91]


Sir ANTHONY ASHLEY's Caſe.


Mich. g Fac. Regis.
Conſpiracy.


Sir James Creighton, Knight, Hercules Hunnings,

hu Cantrell fervant of Hunnings, Thomas Hampton, Ar-
chibald Sterling, ſervant to Sir James Creighton, Hen. Smith,
Mary Rice, and divers others defendants, the caſe was thus:
„Sir James Creighton had bought a pretended right of
« and in the manor of Lyddy and Milliſent, and divers other
& lands of which Sir Anthony had long poſſeſſion; upon
« which divers motions were made concerning fines acknow-
s leged to be ſtaid, &c. in the Common Bench, and Sir
James Creighton not prevailing in it, and Sir Anthony, for
* divers miſdemeanors only, heard before the Lords of the
Council, at the Council table, being diſcharged to be one
© of the Clerks of the Council and in great diſgrace, he en-
„ teted into a wicked and damnable conſpiracy with the
© other * defendants, to accuſe the ſaid Sir Anthony of
0 ſome heinous and capital crime, by which he ſhould for-


BS Jam Sir Anthony Aſhley, Knight, plaintiff, and
0


feit all his land to the value of two thouſand marks per an-


* num, and his goods and chattels to a great value, which
% they ſhould ſhare amongſt them: and in the end, Henry
* Smith, who bad been ſervant to Sir Anthony, was ſub-
& orned by the ſaid Sir James, and others, to accuſe the ſaid
Sir Anthony of the murder of one William Rice who was


the huſband of the ſaid Mary Rice, one of the defendants,


„ which William Rice was dead above eighteen years beſore,
« upon ſurmiſe made by Sir James Creighton, that after the
6 attainder of Sit Anthony Aſhley, Smith ſhould have a por-
& tion of five hundred pounds in money; and that Sir James
« ſhould procure of his uncle, the Capt. of the Guard, a place
« of the Guard in ordinary, and procure the K. to grant protec-
tion to the ſaid Smith againk his creditors, and a general

pardon


D.


't


Part XII. ConsPitacy.


« pardon of all offences ; but he would not make any accu-
« ſation of the faid Sir Anthony until he had aſſurance of it


66
6c
60
6c
6&
«
10
16
10
40
«6
(6
(6
««
40
66
cf
«
cc
cc
«6
40
60
14
t
cc
cc
«
oc
10
«
6c


46


cc
£5
cc
6c
(4
cc
4s


6c


(


c&
ce


and upon this, articles by writing g1dented, were drawn
and ingrofſed by one Thomas Wood, a ſcrivener, who
dwelt in an obſcure place about the Tower, made between
Sir James Creighton of the one part, and the ſaid John
Cantrell, ſervant to Hunning, by the conſent of Smith,
and to his uſe on the other part; by which Sir James cove-
nanted, that the ſaid John Cantrell and his heirs, after the
conviction and attainder of Sir Anthony Aſhley, ſhall have
the ſixth part of his manors, lands, tenements, and here—
ditaments, goods and chattels in ſix parts to be divided,
in conlideration that Cantrell covenanted, &c. that he
ſhould procure witnetles to convict the plaintiff of murder,
or other capital crime, and to deliver to Sir James Creigh-
ton a true particular of all the lands, goods, and chattels
of Sir Anthony, which articles were ſealed and delivered
by Sir James Creizhton, 16 February anno 7 Fac. And at
the ſame time he was bound to Cantrell in an obligation of
eight thouſand pounds for performance of the ſaid articles,
and after, within two days after the faid articles were leal-
ed and delivered, Hen. Smith counterfeited himſelf to be
ſick, and then he revealed the faid murder in diſcharge, as
he pretended, of his conſcience, and, accuſed himſelf of
poiſoning of the ſaid William Rice, by the commandment
of the faid Sir Anth, Aſhley, to that he himſelf was the
principal; and upon this Sir James Creighton procured
the ſaid Mary Rice, late the wife of the faid William Rice,
to prefer a petition to the King, importing the accufation
aforeſaid : the King referred the petition to the Chief Juſ-
tice of the King's Bench, to examine the cauſe and the
witneſſes on both ſides, the which he did, and certified
the King that he had found a falſe conſpiracy, to indict
Sir Anthony without any juſt ground; and certified alſo
the effect of the faid articles; upon which the King aſter
conference with his Privy Council, and by their advice,
thought the matter neceſſary to be heard and fentenced in
the Star- chamber, the which matter upon ordinary proceed—
ings was heard by fix days in the very ſame term : and it was
objected by the counſel of the defendants, that the bill upon
the faid conſpiracy did not lie, and that it ſhould be dan-
gerous to maintain it; for if it ſhould be lawful for every
one who is accuſed, or was in fear to be accuſcd of any capital
crime, to exhibit his bill in this court againſt the accuſer
and all the witneſſes, and by many captious and intricate
intctrogator ies ſeverally to examine them, to find contrariety

| K 4 ce in


Page [92]


See 1 Hawk,
ch. 72.

ſect. 1, 2, 3, &c.
Q 11 Ca. 29.


CONSPIRACY. Part XII.


“ in them in circumſtances ; this will deter men to proſecute
„ againſt great offenders, and thence great offences will paſs
© unpuniſhed, which will be dangerous to the weal public,
and by the law, conſpiracy lies when a man is indicted,
«© and legitimo modo acquietatus: but here he was never in.
& dicted, and“ for that it may be, that Sir Anthony is guilty
Hol the ſaid crime, and then are all mouths ſtopped to ſay
« the contrary.” |

But to that it was anſwered and reſolved by the Lord
Chancellor, the two Chief Juſtices, and all the court, that in
this caſe the bill was maintainable, although that the party
accuſed was not indicted and acquitted before, as it was re-
ſolved in this court, Hil. 8 Fac. in Poulter's caſe, and for
the reaſons and cautions there expreſſed z alſo in this cafe at
the bar, be Sir Anthony guilty or not guilty of the ſaid mur-
der, yet the defendants are puniſhable for the great and hei-
nous miſdemeanor and conſpiracy, ſcil. for promiſing of the
ſaid bribes and rewards to ſubborn the ſaid Henry Smith to
accuſe the plaintiff of the ſaid murder eighteen years paſſed,
and the articles in writing to ſhare and divide the eſtate of
Sir Anthony after the attainder; for this corrupt conſpiracy,
and great and perilous practice and miſdemeanor, the defen-


dants ſhall be puniſhed, let Sir Anthony be guilty or not in


The grand pox.


Suſpicion.
Co. Lit. 6. b.
Rep. Q. A. 247.


the ſaid crime. And it is a great indignity offered to the
King for any ſubject, to preſume to covenant or aſſume, that
the King ſhall grant protection or pardon, or that the eſtate
of any man ſhall be ſhared and divided before his attainder.

So that although that the court will not enter into the ex-
amination of the crime, yet it appears by the teſtimony of a
great number of witneſſes, that the ſaid William Rice did
not die of any poiſoning, but of another horrible diſeaſe, that
he had got by his wicked and diſſolute life, which with reve-
rence cannot be ſpoken. RO

And in this caſe it was reſolved, that if felony be done,
and one hath ſuſpicion upon probable matter that another 1s
guilty of it, becauſe that he had part of the goods robbed, and
is indigent, or if the party be indicted, or if murder be com-
mitted, and one is ſeen near the place, or coming with 2
ſword or other weapon embrued with blood, or that he was in
company of felons, or hath carried the goods ſtolen to ob ·
ſcure places, or ſuch like things, theſe are good cauſes of ſuſ-
picion, and by reaſon of this he may arreſt the party ſo ſuſ-
pected, to the end that he may ſubject him to juſtice,
But in this caſe three things are to be obſerved. _
1. at


*


Part XII. Writ De Heretico comburendo.


1. That a felony be done 2 Hawk. c. 12,
2. That he who doth arreſt, hath ſuſpicion upon probable 8g, 12: © f.
cauſe, which may be pleaded, and is traverſable. _ 4. A 4
3. That he himſelf, who hath the ſuſpicion, arreſt the and 46. ſect. 42.
arty- |
; OM cannot command another to do it, for ſuſpicion is a
thing individual and perſonal, and cannot extend to another
perſon than to him who hath it.
Alſo it was reſolved, that if felony be done, and the com-
mon fame and voice 1s that one hath committed it, this is
good caule for him who knows of it to arreſt the party, to
the intent that he may be brought to juſtice ; but none can
arreſt the party ſuſpected by the command of him who hath
the ſuſpicion ; and with this agrees the book in 2 H. 7. 15,
16. 15 H. 7.5. 20 Hl. 7.12. 21H. 7. 28. 7 Ed. 4. 20.
8 Ed. 4.27. II Ed. 4. 4. 6. 17 Ed. 4. 5, 6. 20 Ed. 4.6.b.
7 H. 4. 25, 27 H. 8. 23. 26 H. 8. 9. 7 El. Dy. 226. |


Writ De Heretico comburendo. Page [93]


Hil. 9 Fac. 1.


T* this very term, the Attorney and Solicitor conſulted Breve de Here-
with me, if at this day upon conviction of an heretic be- tico comburen-
fore the Ordinary, this writ De Heretico comburendo hethz and 8 * *
it ſeems to me clearly that it doth not, for the reaſons and au- 5; Co. ag, 58.
thorities that I have reported, Trin. ꝙ Fac. fol. 73. And at- St. 2 H. 4c. 15,
ter they conſulted with Fleming, Chief Juſtice, Tanſield, > 528 BY,
Chief Baron, Williams and Crook; and they upon the re- 1 Hawk. c. 2.
port of Dr. Coſins, mentioned in my ſaid repoit, and upon Set: 10, 11.
certain precedents which paſſed in the time of Queen Eliza- en
beth, upon former precedents, although the ſtatute of 2 H.

4. was enforced, and without conſideration (as I have heard)

of the authorities cited by me in my ſaid report, chey certify

the King, that a wiit De Heretico comburendo lieth upon a

conviction before the Ordinary, but that the moſt convenient

and ſure way was to convict the heretic before the High Com-

miſſioners. | 5


Note, this writ De Heretico comburends, with all proceſs ue
thereon, is now entirely abrogz ed by ſlat. 29 Car. 2. c. 9.


Part XII,


The Lord VA U X's Caſe,


Paſch. 10 Fac. 1.


8 N this term, the Lord Vaux was indicted of a Premuvire
antes 37, 48. in the King's Bench upon the new ſtatute for refuſing
See 1 Hawk. ch. the oaths of allegiance, and upon this he was arraigned, and
19. & ch. 79. prayed that he might be tried per pares.

Bat it was reſolved, that he ſhall not in this caſe be tried
by his Peers, for the ſtatute of Magna Charta, cap. 29. Nec
ſuper eum ibimus, nec ſuper eum mittemus, niſi per legale judicium

2 Inſt. 45, partum ſuorum, is only to be underſtood of treaſon, petit
treaſon, and felony, and of acceſſories to them, &c. But
premunire is but a contempt, and pardon of all contempts

pardons it; and for this cauſe it ſhall not be per pares.

4 And upon this the Lord Vaux did confeſs the indictment.
Vide Lamb. Fuſl. del pace 520. Dalliſon's report accordingly;
that of riots, routs, unlawful aflemblies, &c. a peer of the
realm ſhall not be tried per pares. Vide Stamford, &Cc,


a> =


rage [o] Counteſs of SHREWSBURY'S Cale,


Trin, 10 Fac. 1.


Of eontempts. N this term, hefore a ſelect council, at York Houle,
See 1 Hawk, ſcil. the Lord Chancellor, the Archbiſhop, the Dake of
2 ah Lenox, the Earl of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal, the
4. ch. 23. ſe, Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Worcelter,
1, 2, 3, Kc. ch. the Earl of Pembroke, Viſcount Erſkin, Viſcount Roch-
* ers 47+ ford, che Lord Zouch, the Lord Knolls, the Lord Wootton,


Sect. 15, 17, 19- the


Part XIT. Counteſs of SurtwsBuRY's Caſe.


the Chancellor of the Exchequer, the Chancellor of the Duchy
Fleming Chief Juſtice of the King's Bench, Philips Maſter
of the Rolls, Coke Chief Juſtice of the Common Pleas, and
Tanfield, Chief Baron. : |

The Counteſs of Shrewſbury (the wife of Gilbert, Earl of
Shrewſbury) then priſoner in the Tower, was brought before
the ſaid Lords, and by the Attorney and Solicitor of the King,
was charged with a high and great contempt of dangerous
conſequence ; for they declared that the Lady Arbella, being
of the blood royal, had married Seymour, ſecond ſon
of the Earl of Hertford, without privity or aſſent of the King,
for which contempt the ſaid Seymour was committed to the
Tower, and had eſcaped and fled beyond the ſeas; the Lady
Arbella being under reſtraint eſcaped alſo, and embarked her-
ſelf upon the ſea, and was taken before ſhe got over; of which
flight of the ſaid Lady Arbella, the ſaid Counteſs being her
aunt, very well knew and abetted, as is directly proved by
Crompton, and not denied by the Lady Arbella: and admit
it, that the Lady Arbella had no evil intent againſt the King
(who had always a great and ſpecial care of her, and was ver
bountiful unto her, until her marriage with the ſaid Seymour,
which was the pomum vetitum .) yet when ſhe fled, and when
ſhe ſhould be environed with evil ſpirits, cum per verſis perverti
poſſit, and when ſhe ſhall be in another ſphere, ſhe will not
move within the ſame orb.

And 'the Lords of the Privy Council knowing the arcana
imperii, did ſhew divers perilous conſequences, and the rather
for this, that the ſaid Counteſs is an obſtinate popiſh recuſant,
and as was ſaid, perverted alſo the Lady Arbella.

«Now the charge was in two points. |

1. That the ſaid Counteſs of Shrewſbury, by command-
ment of the King, being called to the Council table, before
the Lords of the Council at Whitehall, and there being re-
quired by the Lords to declare her knowledge touching the
ſaid points, and to diſcover what ſhe knew concerning them,
for the ſafety of the King, and quiet of the realm; ſhe an-
ſwered, that ſhe would not make any particular anſwer; and
being again aſked by the King's command by the Council ar


Lambeth, and being charged again to auſwer to the ſaid point,
lhe refuſed for two cauſes,


I. For that ſhe had made a raſh vow that ſhe would
not declare any thing in particular touching the faid


points;


Acceſſorium in-
nocenti,


Q If illegal ?


Quid poſſit non
eſt.


Quid proſunt
legi ?


Univoca æqui-
voca.


Particvlare ad
generale.


mes Ferre


— — — 1


— —
—


- — — — — —


——


. dd A ³· WWW.


—


Fage [95]


Counteſs of Was un Caſe. Part XII.


points; and for that (as ſhe ſaid) it was better to obey
God than man 2

* 2, She ſtood upon her privilege of nobility, ſcil. to an-
ſwer only when ſhe was called judicially before her
Peers, for that ſuch privilege was allowed (as ſhe aid)
to William Earl of Pembroke, and to the Lord Lum.


ley.


2. The ſecond point of her charge was, that when ſuch
anſwer which ſhe had made was put in writing, and read to
to her, yet ſhe refuſed to ſubſcribe to it; which denial to dif.
cover and diſcharge her conſcience in a caſe which toucheth
the ſafety of the King, and quiet of the realm, was urged by
the King's council to be a great and high contempt, and that
nobility hath not any ſuch privilege as is alleged, nor any ſuch
allowance as was ſuppoſed ; and that raſh and illegal vows
make not an excuſe, and that this precedent being now upon
the ſtage, was of very dangerous conſequence : and the {aid
Counteſs hearing the charge, yet perſiſted in her obſtinate
refuſal, for the Fine reaſons and cauſes upon which ſhe had
inſiſted before: and the Lord Chancellor began, and the
Archbiſhop, and all the other Lords began with the firſt, and
adjudged it a great and high contempt, and the Lord Chan-
cellor ſaid, that that was againſt the law of England, with
which all the Lords agreed.

And that no ſuch allowance was given to the ſaid Earl of
Pembroke, or to the Lord Lumley in reſpeCt of their privi-
lege of nobility, but that they were vaces populi, & ideo non
audiende : and the lord Archbiſhop principally proved, that
as well the contempt, as the ſaid raſh vow was againſt the Jaw
of God, which he and the Earl of Northampion principally
proved by divers texts and examples in holy Scripture.

And the effect of all that which the three Juſtices ſaid,
was, that aſter the ſentences of all the learned, prudent, and
honourable perſonages and Counſellors of eſtate, they might
well be ſilent; but in regard that filentium in ſenatu eff vitium,
they would ſpeak ſomething briefly, viz.

'That three things in this caſe are to be well conſidered.

1. Whether the refuſals aforeſaid of the ſaid Counteſs were
offences in law againſt the King, his crown and dignity.

2. What manner of proceeding this is, and whether it was
juſtifiable by precedent or reaſon.

3. What


Part XII. Counteſs of SRREWSBVURI's Caſe.


3. What is the demerit of the offences, and how pu-

iſhable.
As to the firſt, it was reſolved by the Juſtices and Maſter of Nemo tenetur,

the Rolls, that the denying to be examined was a high and _

great contempt in law, againſt the King, his crown and dig-

nity 3 and that if it ſhould be permitted, it would be an occa-

fion of many high and dangerous deſigns againſt the King

and the realm, which cannot be diſcovered : and upon hope

of impunity it will be an encouragement to offenders, as Fle-

ming Jultice ſaid, to enterprize dangerous attempts,

And the Maſter of the Rolls ſaid, that it was not any privi-
lege of nobility, to refuſe to be examined in this caſe, no
more than of any ſubject.

Alſo, if one that is noble, and a Peer of the realm, be Quere the ex of-
ſued in the Star-chamber, or in Chancery, they ought to an- 1 _
ſwer upon their oaths, and may be examined in the Star-
chamber upon interrogatories upon their oaths: and if one
who is noble be produced as a witneſs between party and par-
ty, he ought to be ſworn, or otherwiſe his teſtimony is of no
value; and ſo is the common experience in the ſaid courts :
and. the Chief Juſtice ſaid, that foraſmuch as where order is
neglected, confuſion will follow, he would recite ſome of
the honourable privileges which the law of England (more
than any other law) attribute to the nobility * of England in Page [96]
legal proceedings; and they will not be impertinent, but
give a great light to the caſe now in hand. |

1. If a Baron, Viſcount, Earl, or other Lord of Parlia- P N N caſes
ment and Peer of the realm be plaintiff in any action, and 323
the defendant will plead that the plaintiff is not a Baron, Viſ-
count, Earl, &c. as he is named in the writ, this ſhall not
be tried at the common law by jury, who may be corrupted,
nor by witneſſes, as in the Star-chamber, or Chancery, who
may be ſuborned ; but it ſhall be tried by the record in Chan-
cery, which imports by itſelf ſolid truth; fo great regard hath |
the law to the trial of their honour and dignity, &c. | ix

2. Their perſons have many honourable privileges in law.


.
8 EE . Ai —· — ˙ ne ooo. oo. D
*


1. At the ſuit of a ſubject their bodies ſhall not be arreſted, l
neither Capias nor Exigent licth againſt them,
2. For the honour and reverence which the law gives to
nobility, their bodies are not ſubject to torture in caujd

criminis læſæ Maje/tatis.
3. They


* — IT 2


Page [97]


Counteſs of Str EwsBURY's Caſe. Part XII.


3. They are not to be ſworn in aſſiſes, juries, or other in-
queſts.

4. If any ſervant of the King, named in the cheque-roll,
compaſs or intend to kill any Lord of Parliament, or
other Lord of the King's council, this is felony.

5. In the Common Pleas, a Lord of Parliament ſhall have
Knights returned on his jury.

6. He ſhall have day of grace.

7. A Lord of Parliament ſhall not be tried in caſe of treaſon,
felony, or miſpriſion of them, but by thoſe who are

noble and Peers of the realm.

8. In trial of a Peer, the Lords of Parliament ſhall not
ſwear, but they give.their judgment ſuper fidem et lige-
antiam domino Regi debitam, fo that their faith and alle-
glance ſtands in equipage with an oath in the caſe of a
common perſon in trial of life: and the writs of Parlia-
ment directed to the lords of Parliament, are /ub fide &

 tigeantia, &c. And the reaſon and cauſe that the King
gives them many other privileges, is for this, becauſe all
honour and nobility is derived from the King as the
true fountain: and the King honours with nobility, for
two caulcs, 8


1. Ad conſulendum, and for that reaſon he gives them a
robe, |

2. Ad defendendum Regem et regnum, and for that cauſe he
gives them a ſword.


And foraſmuch as they derive their dignities, accompanied
with all thoſe honourable privileges from the King, to deny
to anſwer, being required thereto by the King, to ſuch points


as concern the ſafety of the King and quiet of the realm, is


a high contempt and diſobedience, accompanied with great
ingratitude.
This denial is contra ligeantiam ſuam debitam againſt the


faith and allegiance of a perſon noble, due to the King, and


and which the law greatly eſteems.

And that this denying 1s againſt her faith and allegiance ap-
pears by the ancient oath of allegiance, which is imprinted in
the heart of 8 ſubject, /cil. Ero verus & fidelis, et veritatem
præſtabo domino Regi de vitd et membro, et de terrens honore, ad
vi vendum et mor iendum contra omnes gentes, &c. Ft fi cognoſ-
ram aut audiam de aliquo damno aut mala quod domuno Regi
everire peterit, quad non revelato, Cc. And this Me

| alle-


Part XII. Counteſs of SyrewsruRY's Caſe,


allegiance is common to all ſubjects, as well thoſe of the no-
bility as commonalty : but the law hath greater account of the
faith and allegiance of a nobleman, than of one of the Com-
mons, for this, that the breach of their allegiance is more
dangerous to the King and eſtate, for cerruptio optimorum eff
peſſima ; and for this reaſon, the Counteſs by her allegiance
was bound, without being demanded, to reveal to the King
what ſhe knows concerning the premiſes, upon which great
miſchief may happen to the King and the realm. But being


commanded by the King to declare her knowledge, the de- |


nying of it doth greatly aggravate the offence,

Qui contemnit præceptum, contemnit præcipientem.

Command and obedience are the ligament of government,
and /igeantia efl legis effentia ; for without allegiance and obe-
dience, the law cannot proceed.


As to the ſecond point, viz. concerning the manner of
this proceeding.


1. Privative, it is not to fine and impriſon, or inflict corporal
puniſhment upon the Counteſs, for fine and impriſonment
ought to be aſſeſſed in ſome court judicially. |

2. Poſitive, the fine is ad monendum, or at the moſt ad mi-
nandum; 1t is ad inſlruendum non ad deſtruendum.

This ſelected council is to expreſs what puniſhment this of-
ſence jultly deſerved, if it be judicially proceeded within the
Star- chamber; for which reaſon this manner of proceeding is
out of the mercy and grace of the King againſt this honour-
able Lady, that ſhe ſeeing her offence may ſubmit herſelf to
the King without any puniſhment in any court judicially.

If ſentence ſhall be given in the Star-chamber according to
juſtice, you the Lords ſhall be agents in it : but in this man-
ner according to the mercy of the King, the King is only
agent ; the law hath put rules and limits to the juſtice of the
King, but not unto his mercy, that is tranſcendant and with-
out any limits of the law; et ideo proceſſes iſte eft regalis plane
& rege dignus. | | ry

Alſo inaſmuch as the allegiance and obedience of the
ſubject, is the beſt flower in his imperial garland, to
the intent, that it may neither be blaſted, nor impaired
by this dangerous example, to the prejudice of his royal
prerogative and poſterity, this proceeding hath been Ongar

necel-


IP
Jes Um itn!


0


Vide the Earl of
Eſſex's caſe,
42 & 43 Elis.


Loy :


NGO ee ꝙ — —
my . 4 o
- K
= — F . — —


Page [98]


Grand jury.

See 2 Hawk.
ch. 25. ſet, 15.
&c. to _:.*


Co. loft, J, 32»


1
2 Hawk. p. 218.
Hale's P. C. ao.


Rovrar SCARLET'S Caſe, Part XII.


neceſſary : and this is fortified by the precedent of the Earl
of Eſſex, againſt whom ſuch proceedings were in this very
place, anno 42 & 43 Eltz. Reg, Ot | |
And as to the laſt point it was reſolved by all guaſi una vice,
that if a ſentence ſhould be given in the Star-chamber judi-
cially, ſhe ſhould be fined twenty thouſand pounds, and im-
priſoned during the King's pleaſure. Vide antea 69, &c.


Hoc in terrorem, ſed quere guid inde venit ?


|


ROBERT SCARLET's Caſe.
Trin. 10 Jacobi Rexis.


OTE, that at a ſeſſions of peace held lately at Wood-
bridge in the county of Suffolk, the Sheriff returned a
grand inqueſt, of which one Robert Scarlet in the county of
Suffolk had requeſted to be one, but the Sberiff knowing the
malice of the man, refuſed to return him; but notwithſtand-


ing by confederacy with the Clerk who read the panel, he was


ſworn of the grand inqueſt, and was not returned by the
Sheriff; and being amongſt them of the grand inqueſt, and


as one of them, of his malice, and upon his own knowledge,


as he pretended (to whom the reſt gave credit) indict-
ed ſeventeen honeſt men, upon divers penal laws; and


Tome of the Juſtices looking over the bills found by the grand


inqueſt, and perceiving ſo many honeſt men to be indicted,
as they did think, maliciouſly, demanded of them of the in-
queſt, what evidence they had to find the faid bills, and they


anſwered, by the teſtimony and cogonizance of one of them-


ſelves, ſcil. of Robert Scarlet: and upon examination it did
appear, that the ſaid Robert Scarlet was not returned, but
that he, by confederacy betwixt him and the Clerk, pro-
cured himſelf to be ſworn of the ſaid grand inqueſt, with
intent to indict his neighbours maliciouſly, for which offence
he was indicted at ſummer aſſiſes, anno 10 Jacobi, held at
Bury, upon the ſtatute 11 Hen. 4. cap. 9. by which it is
provided, that no indiftment ſhall be found by any pron

| name


-_— „ — * r


A, A 2


Ow mes RR” we 3 WF = wg


Part XII. RoßERT ScarLtET's Caſe.
named to the Juſtices, , without due return of the Sheriff, but


by inqueſt of Iawful liege-people of the King, in ſuch wn.


ner as was uſed in the time of his noble progenitors, return-
ed by the Sheriff, &c. without any nomination, &c. And if
any indictment be made hereafter in any point contrary, that
the indictment ſhall be void. and for ever held nul.

And upon this act of 11 H. 4. the ſaid Robert Scarlet was


indited, and he pleaded not guiity. And all the eſpecial
matter aforeſaid was proved in evidence, and upon this he


was found guilty by a ſub{lantial jury: and in this caſe conſi-
deration was had of divers points.

1. Whether the Juſtices of Aſſiſe have power to puniſh this
offence, or no; and it was held affirmatively, ſcil. by force
of their commiſſion of Oyer and Terminer, for that the ſaid
commiſſion gives them power ad inquirendum inter alia de om-
nibus falſitatibus, negligentits, Sc. et aliis malifactis, offenſis et
imjurits quibuſcunque, and of them to hear and determine; and
this is underſtood as well of offences againſt an act of Parlia-
ment, as againſt the common law; and for that that it is
commonly uſed, that indictments of non-reſidency of Parſons,
Vicars, &c. upon the ſtatute of 21 H. 8. are taken before
the Juſtices of Aſſiſe, by force of this word in the ſaid com-
miſſion of Oyer and Terminer, viz. negligentits, &c. ſo that if
the act be indefinite or general, and doth not give juriſdiction
to any certain courts in ſpecial (for then the act is to be pur-
ſued) the general words of the commiſhon of Oyer and Ter-
miner extends to it: and it is well obſerved, that in the com-


miſhon of the peace, the ſaid general words, /cil. de omnibus


& ſingulis alits malefattis & offenſis have a qualification, an
de quibus Fuſticiarii de pace legitime inquirere peſſint aut debent,
which limitation proves the large extent of * the words,
when they ſtand without any qualification.

Vide 7 Eliz. Dyer, Commiſſioners of Oyer and Terminer
may enquire of offences againſt penal ſtatutes, unleſs that the
ſtatute appoints them to be determined in any court of re-
cord ? and the opinion there, that in any courts of record of
the King, are reſtrained to the four ordinary courts of record
at Weſtminſter, is not held for law; and continual experience
hath been always againſt it, as the ſtatute of 5 Ed. 6. 14. of
foreſtallers, ingroſſers, regrators, gives the penalty to be reco-
vered in any court of record: and Juſtices of Aſſiſe in re-
ſpect of their commiſſion of Oyer and Terminer have always


Vor. VII. L _ enquired


Page [99]


Vide antea 23,
GO, JI, &c.


or preſentment, that in the nature of an indictmo"


RozerT ScARLET's Caſe. Part XII.


enquired of them, the ſtatute 33 H. 8. 9. of unlawful games,
and the ſtatute of woods 35 H. 8. cap. 17. and many other
ſtatutes ; and. fo the quere is well reſolved in 7 Eliz. for the
opinion of Eallin Saunders, and Whiddon, there, is held x
this day for good law. | |

2. The ſecond conſideration was bath upon the ſtatute of
11 H. 4. cap. 9. and it was held, that the ſaid Robert Scar.
let was an offender within the ſtatute, for it is to be under.
ſtood, that the ſaid ſtatute is partly affirmative of the com-
mon law, and partly a new lac. MEG

In affirmance of the common law, in part privative, no in-
dictment ſhall be found by any perſon named to the Juſtices;
and in part poſitive, but by inqueſt of lawful people of the
King, returned by the eilt. And that this was in affir-
mance of the common là the ſtatute proves it, in the man-
ner as was uſed in the time of his noble progenitors; and in
the preamble it is ſaid, againſt the courſe of common law
uled and accuſtomed before this time: and that the ſaid No.
bert Scarlet was an offender againſt the ſaid act, for this, that
he knowing he was not returned of the grand inqueſt, pro-
cured himſelf by falſe conſpiracy to be ſworn, as is afore-
ſaid: and although that a perſon ſolely was in ſuch undue
and unlawful manner ſworn of the grand inqueſt, yet this
was within the act; and by *conſequence an offence againlt
the common law, far that,malice and falſeneſs alone may be
of great miſchief, as appears in this caſe,

3. The third conſideration was had of 3 H. 8. 10. which
alters the ſaid act of the 11 H. 4. in part, as to denomin-
tion; for by the act of the 3 H. 8. the Juſtices of the Gaoi-
delivery, or Juſtices of Peace, of whom one to be of the g.
rum, in open court may alter the panel returned by the Ste.
riff to enquite for the King only, by addition or extraction
of any jurors ſo returned; and they have power to command
the Sheriff to put others in the panel, according to their dil
cretion : and the Sheriff ought to return the panel ſo reform.
ed upon the penalty of the faid act, ſo that none can be of
any grand inqueſt but by the return of the Sheriff; and tor
this, the act of 3 H. 8. cap. 10. hath not altered the law, 8
to the offence of Robert Scarlet. | |

4. The ſaid act 11 Hen. 4. hath made a new law, J
licet, That any indictment found againſt the act {ball be
void, which branch doth not make void any indictme!


found any point contrary to the ſaid act, is made void *
| | aud


Part XII, Barts and Hiri“ Caſe.


faid act, ſo that this may draw in queſtion all the indicments
found at the ſame ſeſſions: and for this, judgment was given
that he ſhould be fined and impriſoned.


# BAKER and HALL Cale, Page 100]


Trin. 10 Fac. I.


OTE, that upon conſideration of the ſtatute of 3 H. 7.
N cap. 14. it was reſolved by Coke, Chief Juſtice of the
ommon Pleas, Yelverton, Williams, Snig, and others ;
that whereas it is provided, that what perſon ſoever- who takes
a woman ſo againſt her will, &c. although that the body cf
the act extend to taking only, yet in reſpect of this word (/o)
it hath relation to the preamble (to ſuch perſon as is deſcribed
in the preamble, /c:/. having fubſtance) it was agreed by all,
that if the- wife hath nothing, nor is heir apparent, it is out
of the ſtatute, for the ſtatute would not have been ſo curious
in defcribing the perſon, and all in vain.
2. This word (/-) relates to the quality and event of the
taking mentioned in the preamble, ſcil.“ to be married or de-


&« filedz” for if ſhe be not married or defiled, it is not ſuch


a taking (/o), id eft, ſo married, or ſo defiled; and it is mot
reaſonable that (/o) ſhall have relation to the taking, which
is more remote, and not to the marriage or the defiling,
which is nearer, quod fuit conceſſum, Ic. and clergy is taken
away by the ſtatute of 38 Fliz. cap, 9. for principals or pro-
curers before, vide ON fol. 37. b. accordingly: and ſo
was the law taken in the 3 & 4 Ph. & Mar. as Juſtice Dalli-
lon reported. Vide Lamb. 2 * Juſtice of Peace

Note, the receivers of the woman are principals, but not


the receivers of them who took the woman, for theſe are but


acceſſories. Vide Lamb. 61d.


L 2 Privilege


—


Star- chamber.
Women taken
againſt their
will. Antea 20,
1 Hawk. ch. 41.
per tot.

2 Hawk, ch. 23.


2 Inſt. 434, 435.


3 Inft, 61
Farr, 102, 132.


State Trials,
vol. 4.


Antes 21,


/


"TRAP,


® g Co. 66.
1 Salk. 78.


+ 4 Inſt, 323.
2 Inſt, 3» 4»


6 Mod. 53.


Page [lor] outlawed, and by that attaint of felony * he cannot be ar-


mon law to any felony done before the attainder, ſo long a5


PRIVILEGE of PRIESTS.


OTE, that I ſaw a report in the time of Queen Mary,
upon the ſtatute 50 Ed. 3. cap. 5. 1 R. 2. cap. 15. con-
cerning the“ arreſting them of holy church, that the ſaid
ſtatutes are but an affirmance of the common law, and in
maintenance of the + liberties of holy church, as appears by
the preamble of the ſame ſtatutes, and there held, that eunds,
redeundo, et morando, for to celebrate divine ſervice, the Prieſt
ought not to be arreſted, nor any who aid him in it; as the
caſe was of one who adminiſtered to the Prieſt to fing maſs;
and that the party grieved may have an action upon the ſta-
tute 50 Ed 3. for when any thing is prohibited by an act,
although that the act doth not give an action, yet action lieth
upon it; as upon the ſtatute of Marlb. which prohibits to take
in the highway; or Articuli ſuper Chartas, c. 3. which pro-
hibits the court of Marſhalſea to hold plea, &c. although that
theſe acts do not give action, yet an action lieth. 7 H. 6.
30, &c. and the ſtatute 2 H. 5. which commands a libel to
be delivered, 4 Ed. 4. 37. Vide Regift. in Breve ſuper flat,


—


— — — PY


" C (


OTF, if a man be convicted, or hath judgment of
death for a felony, he ſhall never anſwer by the com-


the attainder remains in force, vide 8 Eliz. cap. 4. 18 Eliz.
7. And at this day, if a man be adjudged to be hanged, and
hath his pardon, he ſhall. never anſwer to any felony before,
for he cannot have two judgments to be hanged. Aliter, it
the firſt attainder be reverſed by error. ſo if a man be


raigned of any felony before, for he cannot be twice attaint.


Vide 10 f. 4. Coron. 227. Caſe del Appeal, Fc,
| ES TRA.


* + A*%S


MAN ſeiſed of a manor to which he hath ſtray appen- See Lex Mane-
dant by preſcription, &c. by his bailiff he ſeiſeth an ox CREEP 1

as a ſtray within the manor, and makes proclamations accord-

ing to law; and within the year and day lets the manor with

all royalties, liberties, &c. and after the year and day paſſed:

and Dyer, Serjeant, did move thè tourt who ſhould have the

eſtray; and Brown, Juſtice, Was of opinion, that the leſſor

ſhould have it, foraſmuch as he had the poſſeſſion; and when

the year and day are paſſed the propriety ſhall have relation to

the time of the firſt ſeizure : but all the Juſtices were againſt

him, and that the leſſee ſhall have it, foraſmuch asAhe pro-

priety of the ſtray is not altered nor changed before the year

and day: and the Jord of the manor, until the year and day Q.

are paſt, hath but the cuſtody, ſo that the owner may rehave

it always within the year and day, if he will pay for the meat

of it: nor can the ox be laboured, or uſed by the lord before

the year and day, and therefore he ſhall be paid for the meat,

unleſs it be ſuch a beaſt as of neceſſity ought to be uſed as a

milch-cow, &c. And it was held, that if one take a ſtray,


and within a year and a day it ſtrays out of the manor, the
lord may retake it by ſeizure, &c.


—
˙˙˙. x nnn.


—


— *


Doctor Hur cHINSON's Caſe.


Simony.


N the caſe of Dr. Hutchinſon, Parſon of Kenn, in the Stat. 3 Eliz.
county of Devon, it was reſolved per totam curiam, 0.00090 3+
that if mw ſhould receive or take money, fee, reward, or gyman chap. 5.
other profit, for any preſentation to a benefice with cure, per tot. & p.
although in truth he which is preſented be not knowing 4, 96, 977 146,
of it, yet the preſentation, admiſſion, and induction, are
void per expreſſa verba flatuti of 31 Hen. 8. cap. 6. and
the King ſhall have the preſentation hac vice, for the ſta-


tute intends to inflict puniſhment upon the patron, as up-
3 on


Perjury.
See 1 Hawk.
ch, 29. pet tot,


Hoch ManxNey's Caſe, Part XII.


on the author of this corruption, by the loſs of his preſenta-
tion, and upon the incumbent, who came in by ſuch a cor-
rupt patron, by the loſs of his incumbency, although that he
never knew of it; but if the preſentee be not cognizant of the
corruption, then he ſhall not be within the clauſe of difabilit

in the ſame ſtatute : and ſo it was reſolved by all the Juſtices
in Fleet-ſtreet, Mich. 8 ac. fol. 7. vide verba flatuti, which
are very well penned againſt the avarice of corrupt patrons.


HUGH MANNEY's Caſk.


N an information in the Exchequer againſt Hugh Manney,
Eſq. the father, and Hugh Manney the ſon, for intruſion
and cutting of a great number of trees in the county of Me-


rioneth, the defendants plead not guilty: and Rowland ap


Eliza, Eſq. was produced as a witneſs for the King, and de-


poſed upon his oath to the jurors, that Hugh the father and


Page [102]*


1 Hawk. p. 172,
173, &C,

2 Hawk, p. 395
$33,


the ſon joined in ſale of the ſaid trees, and commanded the
vendees to cut them down, upon which the jurors ſound for
the King with great damages; and judgment upon this was
given, and execution had of a great part.

And Hugh Manney the father exhibited a bill in the Star-
chamber at the common law, againſt Rowland ap Eliza, and
did aſſign the perjury in this, that the faid Hugh the father
did never join in ſale, nor“ command the vendees to cut the
trees; and the ſaid Rowland ap Eliza was by all the lords in
the Star-chamber convict of corrupt and wilful perjury: and
it was reſolved by all that it was by the common law puniſh—
able before any ſtatute : and although that the witneſs depoſe
for the King, yet he ſhall the rather be puniſhed than for an-
other; for the King is the head and fountain of juſtice and


right; and he, who perjures himſelf for the King, doth more


oſtend than if it was in the caſe of a ſubject.


HAYE'


Part X11.


H A Y E's Caſe


In Curid Wardorunm.


Y inquiſition in the county of Middleſex, anno 6 Fac. by Diem cage ex-
virtue of a Diem clauſit extremum, after the death of tremum.
Humphrey Wilward, it was found that the faid Humphrey 23 ©*: 45, 49,
died ſeiſed of a meſſuage and 26 acres of land in Stepney; 3” 7"
and that John Wilward was his heir, and of the age of 14
years and 9 days; and that the land was held of the King 77
capite, by knight's ſervice. John Wilward died within age,
and by inquilition in Md. 8 Funit en e by virtue: e ee
writ of Devenerunt, after the death of the ſaid John Wilward,
it was found that the ſaid John died ſeiſed in ward to the
King, and that the ſaid meſſuages and lands at the time of
the death of the ſaid John, were holden of the Dean of Paul's,
as of his manor of Shadwell.
All the meſne rates incurred in the life of John Wilward,
are paid to the King,


The queſtions are,


1. Whether by the death of the ſaid John, and finding
of the meſne tenure in the Devenerunt, the ſirſt oihce
granted to Poiats be determined ?


2. Whether the tenure ſound by the office may be tra-
verſed ? |


And as to theſe queſtions, it was reſolved by the two Chief
Jaſtices'and Chief Baron, that where the ſaid John died, the
ovthce found by force of the ſaid writ of Diem claufit extremum,
after the death of Humphrey Wilward, whereby the King was
entitled to the guardianſhip of the ſaid John, hath taken its ef-
fect and is executed, and does remain as evidence for the King
after the death of the ſaid John, but nevertheleſs is not traverſ-
able, for it is travetſable during the time it remains in force on-
ly, and the jurors upon the Devencrunt aſter the death of the
laid John, are at liberty to find the certainty of the tenure,
and they are not concluded by the firit inquiſition, for they are
ſworn ad veritatem dicendum; and with this agrees 1 975 4.

L 4 .


. Pape [10
N 3]


Capias utlagat?
See 2 Hawk,
Ch. 27.

Sea. 115, 116,
& c.


Wh


Award of Capias UTLAGATUM, &c. Part XII.


68. And all this appears by the diverſity between the writ of
Diem clauſit extremum, and the writ of Devenerunt : and it is
to be obſerved, that there is no difference between the writ
of Diem clauſit extremum, and the writ of Devenerunt, but in
one point, to wit, the“ Diem clauſit extremum is general, viz,
quantum terrarum et tenementorum idem H. tenuit de nobis in
capiie, c. die quo obiit, & quantum de aliis generally; and the
Devenerunt recites quod F. filius & heres H. qui de nobis tenuit
in capite, nuper dum fuit infra ætatem, in cuſlodid nofird fuit,
Diem clauſit extremum, ut accipimus; tibi præcipimus, quod per
ſacramentum 12. inquiras, que terre & tenementa per mortem
prediai H. & ratione minoris ætatis prædidti J. ad manus no.
tras Devenerunt, c. ſo that this writ is not general, but
does reſtrain only the lands and tenements, Quæ devenerunt,
c. and all the other points of the ſaid writ do relate to the
lands and tenements, Quæ devenerunt, &c. by which it ap.
pears, that the firſt inquiſition is not ſo concluſive, but that
by the expreſs rules of the writ, the jurors are at Jarge to find
the truth of the tenure, notwithſtanding the firſt office. And
ſo it was reſolved and decreed accordingly none Jacobi, in the
Court of Wards, in the caſe of one Lewes.


Award of CAPIAS UTLAGATUM
by Juſtices of the Peace.
N the ſame term, the opinion of all the Court of Common


Pleas was, that if one be outlawed before the Juſtices of
Aſſiſe or Juſtices of Peace, upon an indictment of felony, that


they may award a Capius utlagatum; and ſo was the opinion


of Periam Ch. Baron, and all the Court of the Exchequer as
to the Juſtices of Peace, for they that have power to award
proceſs of outlawry, have alſo power to award a Capias ulla-
gatum, as incident to their authority and juriſdiction: fee
the ſtatute of the 24 Hen. 8. cap. 14. for certificate of a
ſhort tranſcript of every attainder, conviction or outlawry
of felony, by the Clerks of the Aſſiſes, Clerks of the
Peace, &c. into the King's Bench, on penalty of 408.
&c. And note well, that ſuch tranſcript is by the ſaid act
made to be of as great force as the record itſelf : ſee
Lambert in his Juſtice of Peace, fol. ee but Ly

Id,


„ we wel


Part XIT. HAS 1 y*s Caſe.


1 Ed. 6. cap. 1. Juſtices of Peace in caſe of profanation of
the ſacrament ſhall award a Capias utlagatum throughout all
England.


HE RS E Ys Caſe
Star-Chamber.


OHN HERSEY, Gent. exhibited his bill in the Star-
chamber, againſt Antho. Barker, Knt. Thomas Barker,
Counſellor of Law, Robert Wright, Doctor of Divinity,
Ravenſcroft, Clerk, and John Haynes; and did thereby charge
the defendants with the forging of the will of one Margery
Pain; and the cauſe came to hearing, ad reguiſitionem defen-
dentium, and upon hearing of the plaintiff's counſel, there


Damages on a
ſcandalouyÞvill,
Vid. ant. 35»


appeared no purpoſe. or preſumption againſt the defendants,


or any of them, but that the teſtament was duly proved in the
eccleſiaſtical court, and upon an appeal was alſo affirmed be-


fore Commiſhoners Delegates, and had alſo been decreed in


the Chancery; fo that it appeared to the court, that the ſaid
bill was preferred of mere malice and ſpite, to ſlander the
defendants without any colour, and becauſe the defendants
had no remedy at the common law for the ſaid ſlander ; and
if ſuch ſlander ſhould paſs unpuniſhed, “ it may encourage
malicious men to make this court as a paſquil, to fix therein
a libel of record to charge thoſe that are innocent with hei-
nous crimes, to remain to all perpetuity. |

In this cauſe it was refolved by the court, that by the
courſe of the court, and according to former precedents, the
court may give damages to the defendants, and ſo was it
done, viz. two hundred pounds to the Doctor of Divinity,
two hundred marks to the Knight, forty pounds to the Clerk:
a hundred and twenty pounds to the woman ; and it was ſaid,
that creare ex nihila, quando eft bonum, gi divinum ; ſed creare
aliguid ex nihilo, quando eft malum, eſi diabolicum; & plus ma-
ledrcite nocent, quam benedicite docent.


THOM


Page [104]


| _—— — _——— 8 23
2 |
. —
8 i


OH a OS — Pay
* * 1 =
* * P - 2
* - 6
—
— — — 1 CC — 2 — D —


Hab, Corpus,


Ant. 19, 27, 45
47, 69, 32,
Poſt, 12g.


Part XII.


THOML IN SON's Caſe.


Hil. 2 Jacobi 1.
Admiralty no Court of Record.


HEODORE THOMLINSON kad brought an action
of account. for goods againſt one Philips in the Com-


mon Pleas, and thereupon Philips ſued Thomlinſon in the


court of the Admiralty, ſuppoſing the goods to have been re-
ceived in foreign parts beyond the ſeas ; and the faid Thom-
linſon being committed for refuſing to anſwer upon his oath
to ſome interrogatories there propoſed to him, brought his
Habeas Corpus, which was returned thus, Ege William Pope
Mareſcallus ſupreme Curie Admiralitatis Angliæ dom? Juſſic.
Sereniſſʒ Reging noſtlre in brevi huic ſchedule annex ſpecificat
certific” quod infra vocat Theodore Thomlinſon ante advent” iſtius
brevis capt” fuit & cuſtodiæ meæ commifſ® ex & quod dictus Theo-
dorus Thomlinſan vinculo ſacramenti coram Fudice Admiralitatis
Anglie aſtrictus ad reſpondend' quibuſdem articulis contra eum in
dictd cur* dat & 4 pœna quinque librarum, &c. contumaci-


ter examen ſuum ſubire recuſavit, Ideirco, Sc. And it was re-


ſolved by the Court of Common Pleas.
1. That the Court of Admiralty hath no cognizance of
things done beyond ſea, and this appears plainly by the ſta-
tute of 13 Rich: 2. cap. 5. the words of which ſtatute are,
that the Admirals and their deputies ſhall not meddle from
henceforth of any thing done within the realm, but only of a
thing done upon the ſea. Vide 19 H. 6 f. 7. For things
tranſitory done beyond the ſeas, either are triable in the King's
courts, or the party grieved may have his remedy before the
Juſtices where the fa was done beyond ſeas.
2. That the proceedings in the court of the Admiralty are
according to the courſe of the civil law, and therefore the
court is not of record, and by conſequence cannot aſſaſs any
fine in ſuch caſe as Judges of a court of record may do-


3+ That


„ „ we


Part XII. Right to Seats in the Church. |


That the return above mentioned was inſufficient, as be-
ing too general, - becauſe it is not ſpecified for what cauſe or
matter Thomlinſon was examined, ſo as it might appear that
the interrogatories were of ſuch things, as were within their
juriſdiction, and that the party ought by law to anſwer upon
his oath ; for otherwiſe he might very well refuſe.


This caſe was intended to have been inſerted by my Nota.
Lord Coke into his Seventh Report, but not then pub-
liſhed, becauſe the King commanded that it ſhould
not be printed ; but the Judges reſolved wt ſupra.


„Gn ed - Calc. een


Right to Scats in the Church.
A 3Aut, 202. Aue. bj8. gi


FORVEN did libel againſt Pym, an attorney in this Sets in
court, for a ſeat in a church in the county of Devon: churches. |
and Pym by Serjeant Hutton, moved the court to have a pro- 3 *
hibition n this reaſon, that himſelf is ſeiſed of a houſe in 388, — 2
the ſaid Pariſh, and that he, and all thoſe whoſe eſtate he hath 643, 644.

in the houſe, have had a ſeat in an iſle of the church: and REY Cod,
it was reſolved by the court, that if a lord of the manor, or .
other perſon, who hath an houſe and land in the pariſh, time

out of mind, and had a ſeat in an iſle of the fame church, ſo
that the iſle is ſole and proper to his family, and they have

maintained it at their own charges, that if the Biſhop would

diſpoſſeſs him, he ſhall have a prohibition, for it ſhall be in-

tended that the party's anceſtors, or thoſe whoſe eſtate he

hath, have erected and built the ifle with the aſſent of the

Parſon, Patron, and Ordinary, to the intent to have it only

to himſelf. But for a ſeat in the body of the church, if a

queſtion ariſeth concerning it, it is to be decided by the

Ordinary, becauſe the freehold is to the Parſon, and the

place is dedicated and conſecrated to the ſervice of God,

and is common to all the inhabitants; and therefore it be-

longs to the Biſhop to order it in ſuch manner as the ſer-

vice of God may be belt celebrated, and that there be no con-
tention in the church, And it is to be preſumed, that the

=> Ordinary,


Page [106]


Naota:


Huſſey and
| Leighton,


of heir-lomes, which by the common law belong to the


..


Right to Seats in the Church. Part XII.


Ordinary, who hath the cure of fouls, will take order in ſuch ©
caſes, according to right and conveniency ; that is to ſay, to
take care that the gentlemen may have places fie for them,
and the poor people fit places for them alſo ; and the order.
ing thereof is a matter merely ſpiritual ; and with this agrees
8 H. 7. 12. and the Chief Juſtice cited the caſe of Dame
Wiche in 9 H. 4. 14. and faid, the caſe there was, that the
lady brought a bill in the King's Bench againſt a Parſon,
quare unum tunitam vocatam a Coat-armor and pennons with
the arms of the ſaid Sir Hugh Wiche her huſband, and a


| ſword in a chapel where he was buried.


And the Parſon claimed them as oblations, and therefore
that they did belong to him; and there it is holden, that if -
one uſe to ſit in the chancel, and hath there a place, his car.
pet, livery, and cuſhion, the Parſon cannot claim them as ob-
lations, neither ought he to have the ſaid things, for that
they were hanged there in honour of the deceaſed; and
therefore, by the ſame reaſon, although a grave-ſtene, coat
of armour, tomb, &c. are annexed to the freehold of the
Parſon, yet in regard the church is free to all the inhabitants
for burying, the Parſon cannot take them. :

And the Chief Juſtice faid, that the lady might have a
good action during her life in the caſe aforeſaid, becauſe ſhe
herſelf cauſed the faid things to be ſet up there, and after het
death, the heir to the deceaſed ſhall alſo have his action, be-
cauſe that (as the book ſays) they were hanged there for the
honour of his anceſtor, and therefore they are in the nature


heir, as being the principal of the family : the like law of a
gravg-ſtone, tomb, and the like. | |
And this agrees with the laws of other nations, Barth,
Caſſaneus, fol. 13. Cond. 29. Action. dat. fi aliquis arma, in
aliquo loco peſita, deleat five abraſit, &c. et in 21 Ed. 3. 48. in
the Biſhop of Carliſle's caſe, it appeared, * that the orna-
ments of the chapel of a preceding Biſhop do belong to the
ſucceeding Biſhop, and are merely in ſucceſſion, although
that other chattels, in caſe of a ſole corporation, do belong to
the executors of the deceaſed party, and ſhall not go in ſuc-
ceſſion ; ſo in the other caſe, things erected in the church for
the honour of the dead perſon, ſhall go to his heir, as heir-
lomes, as in manner of an inheritance. .
Note, that in Eaſter term, 10 Jacobi, it was reſolved
in the court of Star-chamber, in the caſe between Huſſey
and Katharine Leyton, and others, that if a man have a
houſe in any pariſh, and time out of mind he and all thoſe
whoſe eſtate he hath, have uſed to have a certain pew Fg
| | C


Part XII. Earl of SurewsBURY's Caſe.


the church, that if the Ordinary will diſplace him, he ſhall
have a prohibition ; for if he hath it by preſcription, he has
as good right in the ſeat, as he hath in his houſe ; but obſerve
that he muſt claim it as belonging to his houſe, and not in
other manner ; for properly it belongs to the inhabitants in
the manar- houſe, if any manor be, and not to the manor
which includes other tenants, farmers, and inhabitants : but
true it is, that the Ordinary ſhall diſpoſe of common and vul-
gar ſeats in the church, where there is no ſuch preſcription,


as is aforefaid. | |
* :


*


Earl of SHREWSBURY'S ,Cale.
RF = A. ue, V,. I:


J force of certain letters (bearing date 28 Martii 1612.)
of the Lords of the Privy Council, directed to Sir
Humphrey Winch. Sir James Lay, vir Anthony Saintleger,
and Sir James Hulleſton ; they. did certify to their lordſhips
the claim of Gilbert Earl of Shrewſbury, to the dignities of
the earldom of Waterford, and Barony of Dungarvan in Ire-
land, in ſuch manner as followeth ; | |
King Henry the ſixth, by his letters patent, in the twen-
tieth year of his reign, did grant to his thrice beloved couſin
John Earl of Shrewſbury, in conſideration of his approved
and loyal ſervices, in the city and county of Waterfo „pro
eo quoque eundem conſanguineum noſtrum prædidta terra nojira
Hiberniæ in partibus illis contra inimicorum & rebellium naſtro-
* inſultus potentius defendat, ipſum in comitem Mater ford, una
cùmiſſtilo et titulo ac nomine & honore eidem debitis ordinamus &
creamus, habendum to the ſaid Earl and his heirs males of his


Ireland. Dig - :


nities.
Ant. 70,81, 95.
Poſt. 108, 11.


7 ©. 33, 34.


body; and further by the ſaid letters patent did grant the


caſtles, lordſhips, honours, lands, and manors of Dun-
garvan to the ſaid Earl and the heirs males of his body,
to hold the premiſes of the King and his heirs, by ho-
mage and fealty, and by the ſervice of being his Majeſty's
Seneſchall in the realm of Ireland : afterwards in the
Parliament called ds abſentees, holden at Dublin in lre-
land, the 1oth of May the 28th of Henry the eighth, by
reaſon of the long abſences of George Larl of Shrewſbury

out


Page [107]


Earl of SHrzwSBURY's Caſe, Part XII.


out of his realm; it was enacted, that the King, his heirs,
and aſſigns, ſhall have and enjoy in the right of his crown of
England, all honours, manors, caſtles, lordſhips, franchiſes,
hundreds, liberties, count-palatines, juriſdictions, annuities,
fees of knights, lands, tenements; &c. and all and ſingular
poſſeſhons, hereditaments, and all other profits, as well ſpi-
ritual as temporal whatſoever, which the ſaid George Earl of
Shrewſbury and Waterford, or any other perſon or perſons
had to his uſe, &c. King Henry the eighth, by his letters pa-
tent, the twenty ninth year of his reign, reciting the ſaid
ſtatute De abſentees, * nos premiſſa conſiderantes, & nolentes ſta.
tum, honorem, et dignitatem prædicti Comitis diminuere, ſed am-
plius augere, de certa ſcientia et mero motu, Ic. did grant to
the ſaid Earl and his heirs, the abby of Rufford, with the
land thereto belonging in the county of Nottingham, and
the lordſhip of Rotherham in the county of York, the abbies
of Cheſterfield, Shirbrook, and Gloſſadel in the county of
Derby, with divers other lands and tenements of great value,
to be holden in capite ; and the queſtions were;

1. Whether by the long abſence of the Earl of Shreſbury


out of Ireland, by reaſon whereof the King and His ſubjects


wanted their defence and aſſiſtance there, the title of the ho-
nour be Joſt or forfeited, the ſaid Earl being a Peer of both
realms, and reſiding here in England.

2. Whether by the ſaid act De ab/ſentees, anno 28 H. 8. the
title of the dignity of the Earl of Waterford, be taken from
the ſaid Earl, as well as the manors, lands, tenements, and
other hereditaments in the ſaid act ſpecihed.

And afterwards by other letters patent of the Lords of the
Council, dated the 27th of September, 1612, the two Chief
Juſtices and the Chief Baron were required to conſider of the
caſe which was incloſed within their letters, and were to cet-
tify their opinions of the ſame. :

Which caſe was argued by counſel learned in the law, in
behalf of the ſaid Earl, before the ſaid Chief Juſtices and
Chief Baron, upon which they have taken great conſidera-
tion and adviſement, after they had- read the preamble, and
all the faid act of the 28 H. 8. it was unanimouſly reſolved
by them all, as followeth . a

As to the firſt it was reſolved, that foraſmuch as it
does not appear what defence was requiſite, and that the

con-


Part XII. Earl of SunLwaURt's Caſe.


conſideration executory was not found by office to be broken
as to that point, the ſaid Earl of Shrewſbury notwithſtanding
does remain Earl of Waterford. |
As to the ſecond, it was reſolved, that the ſaid act of the
twenty-eighth of H. 8. De abſentees, doth not only take away
the poſſeſhons which were given to him at the time of his
creation, but alſo the dignity itſelf, for although one may
have a dignity without any poſſeſhon ad ſuſtinendum nomen &
onus, yet it is very inconvenient that a dignity ſhould be
cloathed with poverty: and in cales of writs, and ſuch other
legal proceedings, he is accounted in law a nobleman, and fo
ought to be called, in reſpect of his dignity 3 but yet if he
want poſſeſſions to maintain his eſtate, he cannot preſs the
King in juſtice to grant him a writ to call him to the Parlia-
ment; and fo it was reſolved in the cafe of the Lord Ogle,
in the reign of Edward the ſixth, as the Baron of Burleigh,
Lord Treaſurer of England, at the Parliament anno 35 Eliz.
did report: and therefore the act of the 28 H. 8. (as all other
acts ought to be) {hall be expounded to take away all incon-
venience, and therefore by the general words of the act, viz. '
«* of honours and hereditaments, the dignity itſelf, with the Honour ken.
« lands given for maintenance of it, are given to the King, away for po-
« and the dignity is extinct in the crown :” and the cauſe of verty.
degradation of George Nevill, Duke of Bedford, is worthy Æ .
the obſervation, which was done by force of an act of Par- 3 £5;
liament, 16 June 17 Ed. 4. which act reciting the making
of the ſaid George Nuke. doth expreſs the cauſe of his degra-
dation in 'theſe words: © and foraſmuch as it is openly
© known, that the ſaid George hath not, or by inheritance
© may have any livelihood to ſupport the {ame name, eſtate,
and dignity, or any name of eſtate ;” and vftentimes it is
to be ſeen, that when any lord is called to high eſtate, and
hath not convenient livelihood to ſupport the ſame dignity, it
induceth great poverty and indigence, and cauſeth “* oſten- Page { 108]
times great extortion, imbracery and maintenance to be had,
to the great trouble of all ſuch countries where ſuch eſtate
ſhall happen to be: wherefore the King by advice of his
Lords ſpiritual and temporal, and by the Commons in this
preſent Parliament aſſembled, and by the authority of the
ſame, ordaineth; eſtabliſneth, and enacteth, that from hence-
forth the ſame creation and making of the ſaid Duke, and
all the names of diger given to the ſaid George, or to John
Nevill, his father, be from henceforth void and of none ef-
fect, &c. In which act, theſe things are to be obſerved.


1. That


Lord Ogle'scaſe.


$ee 1 Parliament
Caſes 2, 3, 4, &c.
Ant. 70, 81, 96.


9 — 1 — — *
WC, — .


23 „


A r Ot Or - 1
dy io — — — — —
x


Earl of SuxewsBurY's Caſe. Part XII.


1. That although the Duke had not any poſſeſſions to ſup-
port his dignity, yet his dignity cannot be taken away from
him without an act of Parliament.

2. The inconveniences do appear where a great ſtate and

dignity is, and no livelihood to maintain it.
23. It is good reaſon to take away ſuch dignity by at of
Parliament; and therefore the ſaid act of the 28 H. 8. ſhall
be expounded according to the general words of the writ,
to take away ſuch inconvenience: and although the ſaid Earl
of Shrewſbury be not only of great honour and virtue, but
alſo of great poſſeſſions in England, yet it was not the in-
tention of the act to continue him Earl in Ireland, when ag
his poſſeſhons in Ireland were taken away from him, but that
the King at his pleaſure might confer as well the dignity as
the poſſeſſions to any other, for the defence of the ſaid realm,
And the ſaid letters patent de anno 29 H. 8. have no words to
reſtore the dignity which the act of Parliament hath taken
away; but it was not the intent of the King aiminuere flatum,
bonarem, & dignitatem ipſius Comitis, but augere his poſſeſſions
for maintenance of his dignity, for ſo much appears by this
word augere ; for he doth by the ſaid letters patent, with ex-
ceeding great bounty, increaſe the revenues of the faid Earl
in England, which the King did think was an increaſe of
large poſſeſſions in England, inſtead of all that which was
taken away from him by the act of the 28 H. 8.

And whereas it was objected, that the general words
honours and bereditaments are explained and qualified by the
ſaid words relative ſubſequent, ** which the ſaid George, or
« any to his uſe hath;” and therefore it ſhall not be intended
of any honour or hereditament, but of ſuch whereof others
are feiſed to his uſe, and no man can be ſeiſed of the digni-
ty, and therefore that the faid act doth not extend to it; but
that it is to be underſtood reddendo ſingula ſingulis, and theſe
wards, which the ſaid George Earl hath, are ſufficient to
paſs the dignity ; and with this agrees the opinion of all the
Judges of England in Nevil's caſe upon the like words in the
ſtatute of the 28 H., 8. in the Seventh Part of my Reports,


fol. 33 & 34.


* Juriſdiction


Part XII.


* Juriſdiftion of the Court of Pie (109)
CoMMoN PLEAS,


Hil. 2 Fac.


| 1 {
IN the laſt term, by commandment of the King, the Juſ- Prohibitions,
tices of the King's Bench, and the Barons of the Ex- 1 © 5, &c-
chequer, were aſſembled before the Lord Chancellor Elſmere TI hos:

at York-houſe, to deliver their opinions, whether there was Vide Far. 8, 31,
any authority in our books, that the Juſtices of the Common 78, Wy *
Bench may upon information to the court (which commonly '3” 1855

is called ſuggeſtion) grant prohibitions, or whether of ne-

ceſſity every plea ought to be pending in the court for ſuch

cauſe, and the King would know their opinions in this caſe:

and the Judges took time to deliver their opinions until this

term. And then Fleming Chief Juſtice, Tanfield Chief, Ba-

ron, Snigg, Altham, Crook, Bromley, and Dodeyidge,

(Yelverton and Williams Juſtices being dead fince the Jaſt

term) did deliver their opinions to the faid Lord Chancellor.

That the precedents of each court are ſufhcient warrants for

their proceedings in the ſame court; and therefore as well in

the King's Bench in the Exchequer, as in the Common
Bench, the judicial precedents in them are good warrants of

their proceedings; and therefore for a long time, and in

many ſucceſſions of reverend judges, probibitions upon in-

formation, without any other plea pending, have been grant -

ed, iſſues tried, verdicts and judgments given upon demurrer;

all which being in force, they were unanimouſly agreed to

give no opinion againſt the juriſdiction of the court. of the

Common Beach in this caſe, and none of the Judges of the

Common Bench were called, or preſent at any conference

concerning this matter; and yet /aqueus confrattus ęſi et nos

liberati ſumus. Et magna eft veritas & prevalet. See my 4 Inſt, 99, 100.
particular treatiſe of the Juriſdiction of the Common Bench in |
this point, by which the juriſdiction of the court evidently

appears. | + oF; 8 705


=
— * —
— .
— — — — 2 —
. —_ _


— 7 ws
23


8 8 —
- AA


— _ 1 S — 2
— . -
4 — En” 9,
2
— —
OI —— — p ee .
——_— —— —


Vor. VII. M Pars


o = ” * =
—_ — - ——


0 i
— ——— «


a - _
— man ene er ne — —_


3


— 2


rr


|
3
4
:
1
©}
,
.
:


PARLIAMENT in IRELAND.


Hil. 10 Jacobi 1.
A ee, Bb ee. 3 Ele
neland. Parlis⸗ HE Lords of the Council did write to the two Chief
ment caſes, 78, Juſtices and Chief Barons in theſe words, “ after our
725 a % hearty commendations-to your lordſhips : whereas his Ma-
4 Inft, 5 « jeſty, for divers weighty conſiderations, hath reſolved to
« hold a Parliament within the realm of Ireland: and that by


san act made in the 10th year of H. 7. called ub ang gh |


F ng


«* act, is is provided, that all ſuch bills as ſhall be offered to
ce the Parliament there, ſhall be firſt tranſcribed hither under
<< the great ſeal of that kingdom, and having received allow-
“ ance and approbation here, ſhall be put under the great
« ſeal of this kingdom, and fo returned thither to be pre-
© ferred to the Parliament, foraſmuch as there are accord-
Page [110] * ingly transferred hither from thence * divers bills, as well
« public as private, ſome of which bills were firſt agreed on
„ here, ſome others were framed and conceived there, and
& coming now hither may happily receive amendment and
“ Alteration; we have thought meet for avoidance of any
gqueſtion or inconvenience that may ariſe of the manner and
«© form of proceedings in amending or altering of thoſe bills,
„ hereby to pray and require you. calling to you his Majeſ-
« ty's Attorney and Solicitor, to look into Poynings's act, and
** to conſider of ſuch courſe as ſhall be fit to be held concern-
« ing the ſame,” &c. dat” ultimo Junii 1612. Upon which
in this term the ſaid Chief Juſtices, Chief Baron, Attorney,
and Solicitor-general, were aſſembled two ſeveral days at
Serjeant's Inn; and they had not only conſidered of the
10 H. 7. c. 4. called Poynings's act; but alſo of an act
made in the realm of Ireland, 3 & 4 Phil. & Ma. cap. 4. in-
tituled, an act declaring how Poynings's act ſhall be ex-
„ pounded and taken:“ for by the ſaid act of the 10 H. 7.
it is provided, that no Parliament be hereaſter holden in
the ſaid land of Ireland, but at ſuch ſeaſons as the King's
Lieutenant and Council there firſt do certify the King,
under the great ſeal of that land, the cauſes and con-
fiderations, and all ſuch acts as to them ſeemeth 2
5 paſs


*


Part XII. Parliament in IRELAND.


paſs in the ſaid Parliament : and ſuch cauſes, biene
and acts affirmed by the King and his Council, to be goo


and expedient for the land, and his licence thereupon, as well


in affirmation of the ſaid cauſes and acts, as to fummon the


ſaid Parliament under the great ſeal of England had and ob-


tained : that done, a Parliament to be had and holden after
the form and effect before rehearſed : and if any Parliament
be holden in that land hereafter, contrary to the form and pro ·
viſion aforeſaid, it be deemed void and of none effect in the
law. Upou which act divers doubts and ambiguities were
conceived, ſome whereof were of greater difficulty than
others: and firſt, a doubt was conceived, whether the ſaid
act of the 10 H. 7. does extend to the ſucceſſors of H. 7. for
chat the act ſpeaks only of the King generally, and not of his
ſucceſſors. 2. If the Queen Mary were within the word
King; and although theſe were not matters of great ambi-
guity, for that this word Xing, which imports his politic ca-
pacity, which never dies, and being * indefinitely, does
extend in law to all his ſucceſſors, yet is this ſo expounded by
the ſaid act of 3 & 4 Phil. & Ma. viz. that the ſaid act of the
10 H. 7. ſhall extend to the King's and Queen's Majeſty, her
heirs and ſucceſſors. Secondly, where the act of Toys
ſays, „the King's Lieutenant and Council there,“ a ſcruple
did ariſe; that if the King appoint one by the name of his


Deputy, or Lord Juſtice, or that if he conſtitute two Lords


juſtices, Chief Governor or Governors, and the Council,
&c. and therefore it is explained in the act of the 2 & 3 Ph.
& Ma. that the ſaid act of Poynings extends to all of them.
Thirdly, the greateſt and moſt difficult doubts were upon theſe
Fords of the act of Poynings: „and ſuch cauſes, conſideta-
tions, and acts affirmed by the King and his Council to be

„ good and expedient for that land,” &c. Whether the
King may make any change or alteration of the cauſes, con-
ſiderations or acts which ſhall be tranſmitted hither from the


Lieutenant and Council of Ireland, for that it is not affirma- -


tive, but for correCtion and alteration of them ; and therefore
it was neceſſary to explain, that the act of the 3 & 4 Phil. &


Ma. was in theſe words: „either for the paſſing of the ſaid


* acts, and in ſuch form and tenor as they ſhould be ſent into
“England, or elſe for the change or alteration of them,
or any part of the ſame.” Fourthly, another queſ-

tion was upon the words of the firſt act, viz. © that
% done, a Parliament to be had and holden,” &c. If at the
ſame Parliament other acts, which have been affirmed or alters


2 0 theres


2


The word King
extends to his
ſucceſſors.
The word King
extends to the
word Queen,


1 Hale's H. P. C.
705.


ed here, may be enacted by the authority of the Parliament
| M


* W — HR R—_
Ns — — — 22 — — „ —


— m—
— eee . —


Page [111]


Parliament in IRELAND, Part XII.


®* there, the which is explained by the ſaid laſt act in theſe
words, viz. “ for paſling and agreeing upon ſuch acts, and


no others, as ſhall be ſo returned under the great ſeal of
« England.” Fifthly, great doubt did ariſe on theſe words,


6 that done, a Parliament to be holden,” whether the Lieu-


tenant and Council of Ireland, after the Parliament begun, %


and pendente Parliamento, may, upon debate and conference
had there, tranſmit any other conſiderations, cauſes, tenors,
proviſions, and ordinances, as ſhall ſeem to them to be good,
to be enacted at the ſaid Parliament, within the realm of Ire-


land, the which is explained by the ſaid 3 & 4 Ph. & Ma. by


expreſs words that they may. |
Note, reader, the order of proceedings and ſummons of
Parliament in Ireland; firſt, the Lieutenant and Council do


certify under the great ſeal of Ireland the cauſes and conſider-


ations of all ſuch acts as ſeem good to them to be paſſed in
Parliament, fo that originally it is to begin there. 2. They
are to be affirmed, altered, or changed, and returned under
the great ſeal. 3. Licence under the great ſeal to ſummon
and hold a Parliament. 4. To be done pendente Parliaments,
as it appears it ought to be. N |
And it was unanimouſly reſolved, that the cauſes, conſi-
derations, and acts tranſmitted hither under the great ſeal of
Ireland, ought to be kept and preſerved here in the Chancery.
of England, and ſhail not be remanded. 2. If they be at-
firmed, they ought to be tranſcribed under the great ſeal and
returned into Ireland, and all that which paſſes the great ſeal
ought to be inrolled here in the'Chancery. 3. If the acts
tranſmitted hither be in any part altered or changed here, the
act ſo altered and changed ought fofthwith to be returned under
the great ſeal of England; but the tranſcript under the great
ſcal of Ireland, which remains in the Chancery here, fhall
19t be amended, but the amendment ſhall be under the great
ſeal of England as aforeſaid, returned into Ireland, without
any ſignification or certification of their allowance by thoſe in
Ireland; for as the acts move originally in Ireland, fo the
amendments or alterations move here in England ; all the
bills which are tranſmitted here from Ireland, are with thc
petition of the Deputy and Council of the King all together
under the great ſeal of Ireland, and ſo all the acts which arc
affit med or altered, are returned together under the great
ſeal of England. See 10 H. 6. 8. which begins Mich. 18.


"6. 0. robs 46. coram Rege, how the Parliament in Ireland


Was


part XII. Parliament in Ia ELANPD.


was holden there before Poynings act. And ſee another act

made at the Parliament in Ireland in the ſame year of 10 H.

7. c. 22. it is enacted, that all ſtatutes late made within this

realm of England, concerning or belonging to the common

and public weal of the ſame, from henceforth to be deemed

good and effective in the law, and over that be accepted,

uſed, and executed within this land of Ireland in all points,

at all times requiſite, according to the tenor and effect of the

fame; and over that by the authority aſoreſaid, that they and

every of them be authoriſed, proved, and confirmed within

the ſaid realm of Ireland; and if any ſtatute or flatutes have

been made within this faid land theretofore to the contrary,

that they and every of them by the authority aforeſaid, be ad-

nulled and revoked, void and of none effect in the law. And

obſerve that this word (ware) in this act, hath the ſame ſenſe

as (before) ſo that this act extends to all acts of Parliament

made in England before this act of tenth Henry ſeventh,

and that is the reaſon that all acts of Parliament made in

England before this concerning Ireland, but only general

acts made ſince the ſaid act of 10 Hen. 7. do not bind

them, bacauſe that (as it hath been ſaid) they have a Parlia-

ment for the realm of Ireland, and thoſe of Ireland do not

come to our Parliament. Vide R. 3. 12. Hibernia habet Par-

liamenta, et faciunt leges, & noſirà ſlaiuta non ligant eos, quia :

non mittunt milites ad Parl:amentum, fed perfene corum ſunt ſub- Page [112]

jecti Regis, ſicut inhabitantes Calinæ, Gaſcognice, & Guienæ. Now,

But queſtion is made of this in ſome of our books. Vide

20 H. 6. B. 32 H. 6-25-24 H. 7. 3. H. . , 8 Mek. 2

Proceſs 204. 10 Ed. 5. 41. 13 Ed. 2. fituls Baſtard, 11 ll. Note.

4 7. 95. E. 4. 27. Blow. Comm. 368. 13 El. Dyer 35.

2 Eliz. Dyer. 3066. Calvin's caſe in the Seventh Part of my

Reports 226. 14 Ed. 3. 184. A Prebend in England is Where a ſtatute

made Biſhop of Dublin, in Ireland, his prebendary is vid. n 3 .

See the ſtatute of Ireland, upon what books and acts of 4 lnf-290, 1905
Parliament: this queſtion is now by common experience and 356.

opinion without any ſcruple reſolved, that the acts of Par-

liament made in England ſince the act of the 10 H. 7. do not

bind them in Ireland ; but all acts made in England before

the 10 H. 7. by the ſaid act made in Ireland anno 10 H. 7.

cap. 22. do bind them in Ireland. |


Dignity, prero-
gative.

Vide antea 70,
81, 96, 108.


See Gibſon's
Codex 531,532»


ſuetudinem.


layman, may execute eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction.


The K IN G's Prerogative in
Dignities. Qgære.


OTE, that Camden, King at Arms told me, that ſome
held, that if a Baron dies, having iſſue divers daugh-
ters, the King may confer the dignity on him who marries
any of them, as hath been done in divers caſes, viz. In the
caſe of the Lord Cromwell, who had iſſue divers daughters,
and the King did confer the dignity upon Burchier who mar-
ried the youngeſt daughter, and he was called Lord Crom-
well: and ſo in other cafes: and he ſaid, that the Earl of
Gloceſter, who had married the daughter of King Henry the
third, and the Counteſs after married Mount Hermer, who
was her huſband's Secretary, for which the King impriſoned
him; and after being reſtored to the King's favour, during
the minority of the ſon of the ſaid Earl of Gloceſter, and un-
til the infant came of full age, and when the infant was of
full age he was called to the Parliament by the name of the
Earl of Gloceſter, and the other by the name of Mount Her-
mer Knight; and he faid, that it appears in the edict, or
ſtatute made in France, that if any be made Duke, Marquis,
Earl, or Baron of any privileged place, as of Guiſe, &c if
he die without heir male of his body, the dignity is not only
extinct, but the K. ſhall have the manor or territory whereof
He took his name and dignity: ſed nos non habemus talem con-


*
*


Eccleſiaſtical Juriſdiction.


OTE, (by Linwood) that it appears, that by the canons

eccleſiaſtical, none may exerciſe eccleſiaſtical juriſdic-
tion, unleſs he be within the orders of the church, becauſe
none may pronounce excommunication, but a ſpiritual perſon ;
and there it appears, that as well the Regiſter as the Judge
ought to be ſpiritual, but now by the ſtatute of the 37 H. 8.
cap. 17. A Doctor of Law or Regiſter, although he be 2


Note


Part XII. Cuſtom of Loxvyovn.


Note, alſo, that by the canons no eccleſiaſtical Judge ought
to cite any Churchwarden to the court, but fo as he may re-
turn home again to his houſe the ſame day. | |

Alſo the canons do limit how many courts ex cio they
may have within a year.


* Cuſtom of LOND ON. Pact]
Mich. 11 Fac.


'TOTE, that if a man gives to one of his children a cer- See 2 Salk. 426.
' tain ſum in his life, and after dies, although this is not 3 =
given as a child's full portion, yet it ſhall be ſufficient for him; à Show. . |

but if the father by writing or by will does declare, that it is
but part of a child's portion, then he ſhall have a full child's
part, otherwiſe not. But ſome made a difference where this
ſum, ſo given and declared to be but tor part, ſhall be ac-
counted upon account parcel of the entire eſtate or not; that
is to ſay, if the iſſue ſo in part advanced ſhall have ſo much
as amounts to a child's part, and that the wife and. the exe-
cutor ſhall gain thereby, where that this portion ſo given,
ſhall be of no benefit to the wife or the executors, ;

As if a man hath two children, and gives to one of them
an hundred pounds in part of his advancement, and then
dies worth 9001. in this caſe the wife, the iſſue not advanced,
and the executors ſhall have but three equal parts of the gool.
viz. three hundred pounds a-piece ; and then this hundred
pounds fo given ſhall be in hotch- pot between the children;
which (as I think) cannot be; for then there ſhall not be ..
equality among the iſſues, as the cuſtom doth require, who :
ought in my opinion to have the precedency of tavour, if any


—— — —


M 4 DEVISE


-
- —_ 4


*
- -
P
* -
—
* + \
. R — —
wi —— —  ——_—_— — — — — ——— — . ̃— .ůũũ pp7«⁰«ðẽ ö


— I.


2 — — — 2 2 — A
— "a. * 2


—


rr


Felony to ſeal a


winding ſheet.


. 4. 14.
oor 378,


3 Inſt, 110, 202,


Who hath pro-
priety in them,


*


D E 5 ©


years, doth deviſe to pious uſes ſor years, and then does de-


all his debts being paid; if the widow enters generally, and


OTE, it was holden by the Judges in the King's Bench,
1 N that if a man, being ꝓpoſſeſſed of a houſe and term for


miſe this to his wife for life, the remainder over, and dies,


converts the profits to her own uſe, and not to pious works
this is a determination of her election: and this is the gene.
ral caſe, and therefore it is good that it be ſpecially found,


— at
—


H A Y N E S's Caſe.


OTE, in the Lenten aſſiſe, held at Leiceſter 11 and 12
Fac. the caſe was, that one William Haynes had dig-
ged up the ſeveral graves of three men and one woman in the
night, and had taking their winding ſheets from their bodies,
and buried them again; and it was reſolved by the Juſtices
at Serjeants Inn Fleet-ſtreet, that the propriety of the ſheets
remain in the owners, that is, in him who had property
therein, when the dead body was wrapped therewith, for the
dead body is not capable of it, as in 11 H. 4. If apparel be
put upon a boy, this is a gift in the law, for the boy hath ca-
pacity to take it; but a dead body being but a lump of earth
hath no capacity; alſo it is no gift to the perſon, but beſtow-
ed on the body for the reverence towards it, to expreſs the
hope of reſurrection. Alſo a man cannot relinquiſh the pro-
perty he hath to his goods, unleſs they be veſted in another ;
and accordingly at the faid aſſiſes, he was ſeverally. indicted
for taking each of theſe ſheets : and the firft indictment was of
petty larceny, for which he was whipped : And at the fame al-
ſiſes he was alſo indicted for the felonious taking the three
other ſheets, for which he had his clergy, and fo eſcaped the
ſentence of death, which he well deſerved, for this inhuman
and barbarous felony.


# Karl


Part Al.


{l


Earl of DERB Y's- Caſe! res
In Cancellarid.
Hil. 11 Jac.


N the Chancery, between Sir John Egerton, plaintiff, and county palatine.
William Earl of Derby, Chamberlain of Cheſter, and others, N. Chan. caſes
defendants, for the truſt and intereſt of a farm called Bud- 73“.

ſhaw in the county of Cheſter : it was reſolved by the Lord

Chancellor, the Chief Juſtice of England, the Maſter of the

Rolls, Doderidge and Winch Juſtices,

1. That the Chamberlain of Cheſter, being ſole judge of

equity, cannot decree any thing wherein himſelf is party,

for he cannot be a judge in propria cauſa, but in ſuch caſe

where he is party, the ſuit ſhall be heard here in the Chan-

cery, coram domino Rege. |
2. If the defendants dwell out of the county palatine, he cumberb. 30,49.
who hath cauſe to complain in equity, may alſo complain

here in the Chancery, for in reſpect that proceedings in

Chancery do bind the perſon only, if the perſon be out of the

juriſdiction, the Chamberlain of Cheſter cannot relieve the

party; and therefore, ne curia domini Regis deficeret in juſli-

lid exhibenda, the ſuit ſhall be here in the Chancery; for elle

the ſubject ſhall have good right, and yet have no remedy,

which will be inconvenient. 8

And this does purſue the reaſon of the common law, as

appears 13 Ed. 3. tit. Juriſdiction. 8 Ed. 2. Aſſ. 382. 5 Ed.

3. 30. 30 H. 6. 6. 7 H. 6. 37. The caſe of the Lord of the

Marches of Wales, although an action will lie in Wales, yet

becauſe he which hath cauſe of action cannot have juſtice |
there, he ſhall ſue here in the King's Bench; for where the _
particular courts cannot do juſtice to the parties, they ſhall

ſue in the King's general courts at Weſtminſter, 11 H. 4. 27.

8 Ed. 4.8. in all caſes where it appears to the court, that

thoſe who have liberties to take conuſance, do fail of right as

in matter of foreign plea, &c. the matter ſhall be determin-

cd in the general courts at Weſtminſter,


4. It;


1


Note.
Cauſes in equity
may not be de-
termined by
commiſſion.


page [115]


Proceedings in
Parliament.
4 Inſt, 6, 77 8. :


C Inſt. Te


See Bohun's


Debates in Par-
1:ament 353,


Forms and Orders of Parliament. Part X11,


3. It was reſolved, that the King cannot grant a commiſ.
ſion to determine any matter of equity, but it ought to be de-
termined in the court of Chancery, which hath had juriſdic-
tion in ſuch caſe time out of mind, and always ſuch allowance
by the law: but ſuch commiſſions or new courts of equit
ſhall never have ſuch allowance, but have been reſolved to
be againſt law, as it was agreed in Pott's caſe.

4. Upon conſideration had of the certificate of the Lord
Dyer, and other Juſtices in the time of Queen Elizabeth,
concerning the juriſdiction of the county palatine of Cheſter ;
it was reſolved, that for things tranſitory, although that in
truth they be within the county palatine, the plaintiff may by
law allege them to be done in any place within England,
and the deiendant may not plead to the juriſdiction of the
court, that they were done within the county palatine. See
Dyer 13 Eliz. fol. 202. 716. Office found by mandate out
of Chancery of land in Cheſhire is void.


* Forms and Orders of Parliament.


N the Houle of Commons, when the Speaker is choſen,
& *he in his place, where he firſt ſhall fit down, ſhall diſable
himſelf, and ſhall pray that they would proceed to a new
election; but after he is put into the chair, then he ſhall
pray them, that with their favours he may diſable himſelf to
the King, ſo that their expectations may not be deceive].

But note, that the King the firſt day of Parliament hall
ſit in the upper houſe of . and there the King or
the Lord Chancellor by his commandment, ſhall relate and
ſhew the cauſes of calling the Parliament, the which are beſt
founded on the words of the writ of ſummons of Parliament
(which is a good ſubject to treat on, &c.) and then in the
concluſion of the oration, the Commons are commanded to
chuſe a grave and learned man to be their Speaker. Upon
which the Commons ſhall preſentiy aſſemble themſelves in
the lower houſe, and he is to be a member of their Parlia-
ment, and hereupon he ſhall difable himſelf, 27 ſupra. 4 N

1 | nd


Part XII. Forms and Orders of Parliament.


And two or three days after, the Commons ſhall preſent
their Speaker in the upper houſe to the King, where he ſhall
difable himſelf again to the King, and in moſt humble man-
ner ſhall intreat the King to command them to chuſe a more
ſufficient man : and after he is allowed by the King, then he
ſhall make an oration, and in the concluſion ſhall pray the
four uſual petitions; the which oration being anſwered by
the Lord Chancellor, and his petitions allowed, the Speaker
and the Commons ſhall depart to the Houſe of Commons,
where the Speaker in the chair ſhall requeſt the Commons,
that inaſmuch as they have chofen him for their mouth, that
they would aſſiſt him, and favourably accept his proceedings,
which do proceed out of an unfeigned and ſincere heart to do
them ſervice. wn . |


Note, in the lower houſe, when a bill is read, the Speaker-


does open the parts of the bill, fo that each member of the
houſe may underſtand the intention of each part of the bill ;
and the like is done by the Lord Chancellor in the upper
houſe ; then when it 1s read the ſecond time, ſometimes it is
ingroſſed without any commitment, but then the Speaker
makes queſtion of it in this manner : the queſtion is, whe-
ther this bill ſhall be ingroſfed or not? As many as would
have the bill ingroſſed, ſhall fay, yea; and as many as would
not, ſay, no, |

But in the upper houſe of Parliament when ſuch queſtion
is made about engroſſing, if there be no contradiction, the
Lords do not deliver their aſſent in ſaying, content, or their
diſſent, in ſaying, not content, for huſbanding the time;
but if there be any contradiQion, it is tried ſeriatim, by con-
tent, or not content; but neither in the upper or lower
houſe, the Lord Chancellor or Speaker, ſhall not repeat a
bill or an amendment but once.
| When a bill is committed to the ſecond reading, then if

the committees amend it in any point, then they {hall write
down their amendments in a paper, and ſhall direct to a line,
and between what words the amendments ſhall be put in, or
= words (hall be interlined, and then all ſhall be ingroſſed
in a bill. | |

And if a hill paſs in the Commons houſe, and the Lords
amend the bill when it is ſent to the upper houſe, they
do as before ſhew the line, and between what words, and
after the amendments are ingroſſed with particular“ refe-
 rences, and the bill with the amendments are ſent fgain
to the houſe of Commons where they affirm them; the
amendments are read thrice times, and then they inſert


4 Toft. 85 23 ICs


Vide Rymeri


M S. de modo
expediendi billas
in Parliamento,


penes W. Bohun.


4 Inſt. 15 bo


Page [116]


them into the body of the bill, and ſo e converſo of a bill


which paſſeth firſt in the upper houfe. But note, that in
+ ab : one


—


x
:
.
2
HH
I
1


—— — 4 2 — — ——
- — OD


— — —


New erected oſ-
hce void.

2 Inſt. 540.

2 Inſt. 185.

4 Inſt, 31, 40,
41, 196, 199,


200.


Q. Skinner 607


WarTzR Cnurz's Caſe. Part XII.


one of theſe Caſes the entire bill ſhall not be read again in the
houſe wherein they firſt paſs, but the amendments only, for
no bill ſhall be read above three times. | Z

No Lord ought to ſpeak to the bill two times in one day,
Alſo no Knight, Citizen, or Burgeſs ought to ſpeak above
once to one bill in one day, unleſs ſometimes by way of ex-
plication. . - |

No private bill ought to be read before the public bills,
unleſs the one houſe or the other do require it.
Note, in the Houſe of Commons, thoſe that are for the
new bill, (if there be a queſtion of voices) ſhall go out of
the houſe, and thoſe who are againſt the bill, and for the
common law or any former law, ſhall fit in the houſe; for
they are in poſſeſſion of the old law: and in the upper houſe
two Lords are appointed, one of the one part, the other of the
other, to number the voices.
In both houſes, he which firſt ſtands up to ſpeak, he ſhall
firſt ſpeak, without any difference of perſons. |

When a bill is ingroſſed at the third reading, it may be
amended in the ſame houſe in any matter of ſubſtance, a for-


tiori, the error of the Clerk in the ingroſſing may be amend,
ed, &c,


* —— —


—


WA LTER CHUTE's Caſe.


*


Paſcb. 12 Fac. 1.


ALTER CHUTE. Sewer to the King, did exhibit

a petition to the King, that for the ſafety of the
realm, and the ſecurity of ſtrangers within the realm, that
the King would vouchſafe to erect a new office of regiſtcring
of all ſtrangers within the realm, except merchant-ſtrangers, |,
to be kept at London; and to grant the ſaid office to the pe.
titioner, with a reaſonable fee, or without a fee ; and that all
rangers, except merchant-ſtrangers, might depart the realm
within a certain convenient time, if they do not repair to


the ſaid regiſter, and take a billet under the Regilter's


hand : which petition the Lords of the Council did refer 5
| me,


Part XII. WALTER Sort Caſe.


me, by their honourable letters of the 13th of November,
1613, that I calling to me counſel learned in the law, ſhould
conſider what the law is in that behalf, and how it may ſtand


cution, and by whom it ought to be performed: and upon
conference had with the Juſtices of the Common Pleas, and
the other Juſtices and Barons of Serjeants Inn in Fleet-ſtreet,
it was reſolved, that the erections of ſuch new offices, for
the benefit of a private man was againſt all law, of what na-
ture ſo ever: and therefore where one Captain Lee did make
ſuit to the King to have a new office to make inventory of
goods of thoſe who died teſtate or inteſtate ; it was reſolved

y the Lord Chancellor and myſelf, that ſuch grant ſhall be
utterly void, although no certain perſon hath it, and that this
was againſt common law, and the ſtatute of 21 H. 8. In like
manner another ſued *® to have the regiſtering of birth-days,


and the time of the death of each perſon within the realm;


and that it might be on record and authentical : ſo Mich.
g Jac. To make a new office in the upper Bench, for the
only making of all latitats at the ſuit of the Lord Daubigny,
and after him of the Lord John Hungerford, and others, was
reſolved to be void. So Littleton's ſuit, to name an officer to
be a general Regiſter, or rather tabler or indexer of all judg-
ments, for debts, and damages, ery peg 10h bills, obli-
gations to the King, deeds inrolled, fines upon offenders in
the Star-chamber, and other courts whatſoever: and this was
pretended to be for the benefit of the purchaſer, and the ready
finding of records ; and to ſuch purpoſe was made the ſtatute
of the 27 Eliz. for inrolling of ſtatutes ; but the ſuit was re-
jected by the two Chief Juſtices and others: for every court
ſhall chuſe officers either by law or preſcription : the law or
cuſtom may not be changed without a Parliament; and ſo it
was reſolved Hil. 12 Fac. Regis; and divers other ſuch in-
ventions were refolved to be againſt law and record.


As to the ſecond, in the caſe of Sir Walter Chute, con-
cerning the conveniency or inconveniency of it, it was re-


ſolved, that it was inconvenient for divers cauſes. 1. For a
private man to have private ends. 2. The numbering of
ſtrangers by a private man would infer a terror; and the King
and Princes of other countries will take offence at it, and
will do the like to the King's ſubjects. 3. It is to be conſi-

dered, what breach it will be to former treaties.
| As


6


with conveniency and policy of ſtate, to put the ſame in exe-


Page [1171


— p _—_—IAalrzy..o.cacow %


Page [118]


M


Warrzz Cnurz's Caſe, Part XII.


As to the third, in the caſe of Sir Walter Chute, that may
performed without any inconvenience ; and ſo it was de-
viſed by the Lord Burleigh, ,and other Lords of the Council,
anno 37 Eliz. viz. to write letters to the Mayors, Bailiffs, and


other head officers of every city, borough, or town where any-


ſtrangers, are reſident, to certify how many ſtrangers, and of
what quality are in their cities, &c. the which they are to
know in reſpect of their inhabitants and contributions to the
poor, and other charges; and this may be done without any
writing.
Which ſuit being made to the Lords, was well approyed
by them, and the ſuit utterly diſallowed the 3d December,
anno 3 H. 8. commiſſion granted to divers, to certify the
number of ſtrangers, artificers,. with the number of their ſer.


vants within London, and the ſuburbs thereof, &c. according


to the ſtatutes. See Candiſh's caſe, 29,F1. ſor making of all


writs of Superſedeas in the King's Bench.


13 Eliz a grant of an office of Thomas Knivet, to examine


all his Majeſty's Auditors and Clerks of the Pipe concernißg


their offices for years: it was reſolved by the court to be
againſt law; for it belongs to the Barons who are Judges;
and it is alſo an innovation in a court of juſtice, 25 Eliz.


A grant of an office to Tho. Leichfield to examine all deceits,


falſe allowances of the Queen's officers for eight years, re-
ſolved to be void. , EE
The making of Subpœnas in Chancery, anciently belonged
to the fix Clerks: the late Queen's Majeſty, granted the fame
by patent to one particular man. oy
The keeping and filing of affidavits in Chancery, anciently


| belonged to the Regiſter. The King's Majeſty, that now 1s,


granted the ſame to one particular man. ee

The erecting and putting down of inns hath been ancient-
ly in the power of the Juſtice of Peace. His Majeſty's hath
given that power by patent to a particular man:

*The taking of the depoſitions, and all other proceedings
before and by the commiſſion, which hath uſed to be taken
and kept by the Commiſſioners themſelves, or ſome Clerk of.
their appointment: his Majeity bath granted the fame by pa-
tent to one particular man. N |


—


The King by his letters patent granted to Simon Darling -


ton the office of Alveger, and limited what fees he ſhould


take. KOI |
The ſole drawing, writing and ingroſſing of all licences
and pardons was granted to Edward Bacon, Gent, with 2
| eo


ſurances and policies, &c. was
Richard Gandler, Gent, with ſuch fees as the Lord Mayor


— 2 . : 4 * 4 X 4
2 5 - 5 * 9 [ 7% * 1 2 —
* = hk. *
N —
1


part III. Sir STzprnzn ProctER's Caſe.
fee that had formerly been taken, and a reſtraint for all
others, &c. |


The offices of Subpenas was. granted to Thomas George


pod. others CUBOE, Nie, with the fee of 28. and a reſtraint
that no others preſume to make thoſe writs. Sting


The office of making and regiſtering all manner of aſ-
letters patent granted to


and others ſhould rate, with power to rate fees,' and a re-
ſtraint of all others, &c. which was during pleaſure, and af-


terwards to him and others during lives.


The office of writing tallies and counter-tallies granted to
Sir Vincent Skinner, $Y

The office of ingroſſing patents to the great ſeal, and an in-
ereaſe of fees granted lately to Sir Richard Voung, and Mr, Pye.


[. Skinner 607.]


þ
|


Sir STEPHEN PROCTER's Cale.


IN an information preferred in the Star-chamber by the At- Judges divided


torney-general, againſt Sir Stephen Proctor, Berkenhead,
and others, for ſcandal and conſpiracy of the Earl of North-
ampton, and the Lord Wooton. At the hearing of this caſe,
were preſent eight lords, ſcil. the Chief Baron, the two Chief
Juſtices, two Biſhops, one Baron, the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer, and the Lord Chancellor: and the three Chief Juſ-
tices, and the temporal Barons condemned Sir Stephen Proc-
ter, and-fined and impriſoned him: but the Lord Chancellor,


the two Biſhops, and the Chancellor of the Exchequer ac-


quitted him. And the queſtion was, if Sir Stephen Procter
ſhalt be condemned or acquitted ; and-it ſeemed to ſome of
the Clerks prima facie, that the better ſhall be taken for the
King, and that he ſhall be condemned. But others were of
the contrary opinion; and hereupon the matter was re-


Quere. -


in the Star-
chamber.


ferred to the two Chief Juſtices, calling to their aſſiſt-


ance the King's learned Counſel: and firſt they reſolved,
that this queſtion muſt be determined by the precedents of
the court of Star- chamber; for that court is againſt -the rule


the


Gd


and order of all other courts, for in the King's Bench, .


”
*
— . ꝑꝙꝗñꝗ æ ß — — - „—


—- . —ꝛp—iʃ)


Sir STEPHEN PROcTER's Caſe, Part XII.


the Common Pleas, or the Exchequer, or in the Exchequer.
chamber, where all the Juſtices are aſſembled, if the Juſtices
are equally divided, no judgment can be given; and ſo it is
in the court of Parliament ; and therefore this courſe ought
to. be warranted by the cuſtom of the court; and as to. that,
two precedents only were produced for the maintenance of
the ſaid cuſtom, viz. one in the Hilary term, 39 El. between
Gibſon plaintiff, and Griffith and others defendants ; where
the complaint was for a riot, and at the hearing of the caſe
there were eight preſent; four gave their judgments that the
defendants were guilty; but the other four, whereof the
Page [119] Lord Chancellor was one, pronounced“ the defendants not
guilty, and no ſentence of condemnation was ever entered,
becauſe the Lord Chancellor.was one of the four who acquit-
ted them. The dther was Hil. 45 Eliz. in an information
by the Attorney-general againſt Catharine and others, for
forging of a will, and a miſdemeanor for procuring a fraudu-
Jent deed to defeat the Queen of her eſcheat: and eight were
in preſence at the hearing of the cauſe, whereof four found
the defendants guilty of forgery, and did inflict the puniſh-
ment according to the ſtatute of the 5 Eliz. but the others,
' whereof the Lord Chancellor was one, gave ſentence, that
p the defendants were guilty of the miſdemeanor, and not of
the forgery, and impoſed a fine of 5ool. only: which de-
cree was entered according to the Lord Chancellor's, voice,
although the ſentence on the other fide was more beneficial
for the King ; and no other precedent could be found in this
caſe, the which I have reported this term.


. Exaction of Benevolence.
fe TT AM on


See Speed's OTE, the exaction under the good name of benevolence


Chron. 529, . .
705, 742. began in this manner.


Rawley's Hift, « When King Edward the fourth had a ſubſidy granted


Pole? Virgil e to him in the 12 Ed. 4. by Parliament, becauſe he could
6 303, 527, ce have no more by Parliament, and without a Parliament he


576, 1706, dt. © could not have any ſubſidy to be levied of the lands and


— ws ce goods of the ſubject, he invented this ſhift or device, in


Loans. « which three things are to be obſerved,” |
Whitlock's MS. | 1. The
tit. Benevolence,
13 Co. 29.


Part XII. Exaction of Henevideace,


x. The cauſe.


2. The invention” ' * - |
3 The Succeſs. "Bo.
1. Fhe Duke of Burgundy, who had married Margaret,


the ſiſter of Edw. 4. ſolicited King Edward to join in war
with him againſt the French King, to which the King eaſily Holliaſhead
_ conſented, becaiife he ſought revenge againſt the French | Ay 4, 094+
King for aiding the Earl of Warwick, Queen Margaret, ang
Prince Edward, and their party ; and therefore to make war
againſt the French King was the cauſe.
2. The invention was, the King called before him at ſeve-
ral times a great number of the wealthieſt of his ſubjeQs, to
declare to them his neceſſity, and his purpoſe to levy war for
the honour and ſafety of the kingdom, and demanded of each
of them a certain ſum of money; and the King treated with
them with ſuch great grace and clemency, and with ſuch
entle prayer to aſſiſt him in his neceſſity, for the honour of
the realm, that they very freely yielded to his requeſt, for the
honour and ſafety of the realm: amongſt the reſt, there was
a widow of a very good eſtate, of whom the King merely
aſked what ſhe would willingly give him for the maintenance
of his wars; by my faith, quoth ſhe, for your lovely counte-
nance ſake, you ſhall have twenty pounds, which was more
than the King expected; the King thanked her, and vouch-
ſafed to kiſs her, upon which ſhe preſently ſwore, he ſhould
have twenty pounds more,
3. The ſucceſs and event was, that whereas the King call-
ed this a benevolence to pleaſe the people, yet many of the
people did much grudge at it, and called it a malevolence.
Primo Ed. 5. in the oration of the Duke of Buckingham
in Guildhall in London, he inveighed, amongſt other things,
apainſt this taxation under the name of benevolence, 1 Rich.
3. cap. 2. the ſubjects of the realm ſhall not be charged with
ſuch charge or impoſition called benevolence, which tendeth
to the ſubverſion of the law, and deſtruction of commonalty,
as appears in the preamble (where any ſuch charge.) And
that ſuch exaCtion before taken, under the name of benevo-
lence, ſhall not be drawn into example“ to make ſuch or Page [120]
the like charge, but ſhall be damned and adnulled for, ever:
* but it appears by the preamble, that this benevolence was
againſt the will and liberty of the ſubject, but a free-will of-


fering is not reſtrained. —
Ann © H. 7. The King declared in Parliament, that he


had juſt cauſe of war againſt the French King, which tor


the cauſes there ſhewn was approved; and for that he de-
Vorl. VII. | N. . ſired


Stow 380.


called a commiſſion of anticipation, to collect the ſubſidy be-


,


225


Camden's An-
nals, 2 part 21.


Exaction of Benevolence. Part XII.


ſired a benevolence towards the maintenance of it; and every
one promiſed his helping band, the which the King greatly
commended ; and to the intent that the poorer ſort might be
ſpared, he demanded it by way of a benevolence, accordin
to the example of Ed. 4. and publiſhed, that he would by
their open hands meaſure their benevolent hearts, and he who
gives but a little, according to his gift,

By this means he collected great ſums of money, with
fome grudge for the extremity ſhewn by the Commiſſioners,
11 H. 7. cap. 20. An act was made for levying of that be-
nevolence, according to their aſſent, but only of ſuch as aſ-
ſented. | 1

Anno 20 H. 7. A commiſſion to levy what was granted by
11 „

Note, that 15 H. 8. a commiſſion under the great ſeal,


—
—


fore the day.

Anno 16 H. 8. For war with France, a benevolence levied

by commiſſion with great curſes and imprecations againſt the
Council, and with ſuccefs ; for it was to levy a ſixth part of
the value in money or plate againſt the good will of the ſub-
ject.
8 Anno 26 H. 8. Another benevolence levied by commil-
fion ſor maintenance of war againſt France, with ill ſucceſs,
for it was exacted of the ſubject againſt his good will. But
if the ſubjects of their free will, without any compulſion,
will give to the King for public uſes any ſums of money,
this 1s not prohibited by any ſtatute.

And the ſtatute 11 H. 7. cap. 18. proves this, where the
Parliament compels them who have freely granted any thing
to the King for public uſe, to pay it. |

Feb. anno 40 Eliz. It was reſolved by all the Juſtices and
Barons, that a free grant to the Queen without coercion is
lawful; and accordingly they granted it to the Queen, ud
nota bene, quia, Sc. 1

{Note alſo, a benevolence was taken 12 Fac. I. and an-
other 19 Fac. 1. and both of them after diſſolutions of
the Parliament. See for this Whitlock's MS. tit. Be-
nevolence. And guere, if not contrary to the ſtatute
R. 3. 6, .] |


, —


IAELA RD;


Part XII.


IRELAND, and Free Borough.


Paſcb. 12 Jacobi. 1.


HE caſe of Dungannon in Ireland; the caſe of the new
corporation of Dungannon in Ireland, was in effect,


ſeil. that the King conſtituted the town of Nungannon to be


a free borough, et ulterius volumus, declaramus, & flatuimus,
quod inhabitantes vill prædictæ ſint unum corpus corporatum per
nomen Præpoſiti, 12 Burgenſium & Communitatis Dungannon,
& per idem nomen placitare poſſint : et quod ipſi prædicti Pre-
poſett et Burgenſes et ſucceſſares ſui habeant poteſlatem eligendi
duos Burgenſes &c, ad Parliamentum, &c. And the doubt
was, whether this grant of election of Burgeſſes of Parlia-
ment was good, for becauſe it was granted but to -parcel'of
the body, /c:/, to the Provoſt and Burgeſſes, and not to the
Provoſt, Burgeſſes, and Coinmonalty, And the Chief Baron
thought, that foraſmuch as this was not but a nomination or
election, it was ſuſſicient to make the Provoſt and Burgeſſes
only to have it: and he took a diverſity betwixt nomination
and other inheritance: but this was denied * by all the Juſ-
tices and Barons; for this power to elect Burgeſſes, is an in-
heritance of which the Provoſt and Burgeſſes are not capable,
for that it ought to be veſted in the entire corporation, ſcil.
Provoſt, Burgeſſes, and Commonalty : and it ſeemed to
Hobart, Chiet Juſtice of the Common Pleas, that the King
may grant to the inhabitants of Ifliugton to be a free borough z
and that the Burgeſſes of the fame town may, elect two Bur-
geſſes to Parliament: and that it thall be good, although that
the Burgeſſes be not incorporated; for there are many Bur-
geſſes who elect Burgeſſes to the Parliament, which are not
Incorporate: but it was reſolved by. all, that fuch a grant
made by the King ſhould be void; for the inhabitants have
not capacity to take an inheritance, as in 15 Ed. 4. to have
common : and Littleton ſaith in his chapter of Burgage, that


the boroughs which ſend Burgetles to Parliament, were the


moſt ancient and principal cities, &c. fo that it ſhall be in-
tended, that at the firſt they were incorporate. Alſo plus va-
let ſæpenumero vulgaris conſuetudo, quam regalis concefſis,


. Fete 4.


Page [121]


See 3 Salk. 18. a


But


Felons goods:
when forfeited.
See 2 Hawk. c.
30. ſet. 29. c.
49. ſect. 10, 11,
12, 13, &c.


Fate Goops. Part XII.


But it was reſolved by Hobart, Tanfield, Altham, Winch,
Nichols, and Haughton, quod volumus, was a good word of
rant, as Piggot was of opinion, 21 Ed. 4. And this ſhall
e an implied grant to all the corporation, that the Provoſt
and Burgeſſes ſhall eleA, &c. And regularly, when the
grant is indefinite, /c/. firſt, concedimus an uncertain thing,
et ulterius quod prepoſitus, et Burgenſes, et ſucceſſores ſui elegerini;
this ſhall be within the firſt concedimus to all the body, which
that party ſhall chuſe: but the Chief Juſtice of England,
and Doderidge, thought the contracy'; for in this caſe there
was but an ordinance to erect the corporation, and no grant
altogether to any perſon, fo that this clauſe, et quod, &c. is
idle and vain. |
And note, all the new corporations were of the ſame form,
and in none of them is any clauſe to elect new Burgeſſes, ſo
that when thoſe of the modern Burgeſſes die, this power to
elect Burgeſſes is gone. |


FELONS GOODS.
Mich. : 2 Jacobi I.


| Queſtion was moved to the Chief Baron, and the Juſ-
tices of Serjeants Inn in Chancery-lane, that if a felon

e convict either by verdict or confeſſion, if immediately by
his conviction, his goods and chattels be forfeited. And it
was ſaid, that if the felon after his conviction pray his cleryy,
that then clearly he ſhall forfeit his goods and chattels, for
guodammodo this is a flight, becauſe he refuſeth to be adjudged
by the common law, and flies to the privilege of the holy
church. But it was reſolved by the Chief Baron and the
Juſtices, that immediately by his conviction his goods and
chattels are forfeited ; and the praying of his clergy is not
any forfeiture; for then in caſe where he cannot have his
clergy, he forfeits nothing until his attainder, which none
will affirm. And with this agrees Stamford 192. a. where he
ſays, that the goods of a felon are forfeited, which he hath
the day of the verdict given; and this is proved alſo by the
ſtatute of 1 R. 3. where it is admitted, that the goods of 2
felon convict are forfeited and may be ſeized. And of the
ſame opinion was the Chief Juſtice, and the Juſtices of Set-


jeants Inn in Fleet- ſtreet. Fide Trin. 41 Eliz. 332.


* ANNE -


Part XII. 25


K


*
c — —


P _— —_—— — — — —


ANN HUNGATE's Caſe. Page [122] _
In Cam. Stell. oh;


725 Mich. 11 Jacobi 1 *


| br this very term a great caſe was heard and determined in ige by an in-
the Star-chamber, between Sir Henry Day, who died, fant, good.
pendent the bill, and Anne his wife, and Nicholas Beding- Sec for this
field, Eſq. and Eliz. his wife, plaintiffs, and Anne Hungate, * 3: ag "*
widow, Sir Robert Wind, Henry Branthwaite, Eſq. Thomas 5 Co * Phot
Townſend, Eſq. Thomas Blomfield, Gent, and George 35: 44 45
Min, Gent. defendants; and the caſe in effect was, that - *
Henry Hoogan, Eſq. being ſeiſed of the manor of Hamonds, 2 Salk. $67.
and of divers lands in Eaſt Bradenham, &c. in the county of
Norfolk in fee, by deed made a feoffment of them to the uſe

of the ſaid Anne who took Hungate to huſband, and ſhe

had iſſue by him a ſon and a daughter, and he died: and

Anne obtained a grant of the wardſhip of the ſon, and after

when the ſon was of the age of one and twenty years, faving

ſix weeks; by Dedimus poteſtatem, directed to Sir Robert

Wind, Henry Branthwait then feodary, and Thomas 'Townſ-

end, they took cognizance of a fine of the ſaid ſon, being
then of the age aforeſaid, and ſick: and the bill charged

them all with practice in procuring the ſaid fon to acknow-

ledge the fine; they all knowing that the ſaid fon was within

age, and in ward of the King in cuſtody of the ſaid Anne:

but there was not any practice or circumyention uſed by any

of the defendants to procure the ſaid ſon to acknowledge the

ſame, but the ſon of his own good will Ixvied it. And by

indenture the uſe was limited to his mother; aid Anne

and her heirs with power of revocation by the ſon upon._tender

of ten ſhillings, &c. and this was in conſideration, that the

the mother had paid the debts of his father to a very great

value, and had obtained the wardſhip of him, and that her

jointure ſhould be confirmed; and that his mother, if the

pleaſed, might give it to his brother which ſhe had by Hun-

gate, who was ot half-blood; and it appeared that the mother

knew the ſon to be within age, but the Commiſſioners, for

any thing that was proved, were ignorant of it, nor did they

ſend for the book of the church, in which his age appeared,

being in the ſame pariſh, 3 5

. And


Page [123]


ANNE Hoxcarz's Caſe, Part XII.


And the counſel for the plaintiff prayed, that the defen.
dants ſhould be puniſhed for their miſdemeanor; and that
the ſaid women being plaintiffs, who were couſins, and heirs
to the ſaid ſon of the entire blood, who ſhould be diſinherited
by the ſaid fine. To which it was reſolved by the two Chief
Juſtices, and the Chief Baron, that there was not any crime
puniſhable by the law in this caſe : for the Judges of law, and
of this court, may puniſh ſuch offences and crimes as are de-
terminable in this court: but the Judges cannot create of-
fences, nor do as Hannibal did, to make his way over the
Alps, when he could find none, for jndicandum eft legibus ;
& ubi non eft lex, nec eft tranſgreſſio and for this, when the
infant levied the fine, if it be not reverſed during his minori.
ty, the fine is unavoidable in law, and the heirs of the infant
have not any remedy by the law to reverſe it; the cauſe is for
this, that the age of the infant is not to be tried but by in.
ſpection of his perſon : non te/lium teſtimonio, non juratorum
veredicto, ſed judicis inſpectione ſolummodo : but the Judges a8
by adjuncula, may inform themſelves by witneſſes, “ church-
books, &c. And the reaſon of it is, that the fine ſhould
otherwiſe as well loſe its effect as its name, for dicitur finis
ab effettu, quia finem litibus imponit : and if infancy ſhould be
tried otherwiſe than by inſpection, no man ſhould be ſure of
his inheritance ; for after the death of the cogniſor, averment
may be made many years after, that the cogniſor was within
age at the time of the fine; and ſo many records avoided by
naked averment, which ſhould be againſt law, and the cauſe
of great vexation and ſuit, and Fitz. N. B. fol. 21. If an in-
fant levy a fine, he ſhall have a writ of error during his nonape,
and aſſign it for error; and this 1s error of the court in law,
and ihall be tried by the Judges of law.

And for this it was reſolved by the ſaid Juſtices, that ſoraſ-


much as no corruption and circumvention was proved in the


Commiſſioners, or in any of the parties, of which they may


be indicted at the ſuit of the King, or puniſhed in this court,


the fine ſhall ſtand. |

And it was not apparent to the Commiſſioners, that he was
within age, foraſmuch as he wanted but fix weeks of his ſull
age; but if the Commiſſioners had knowledge that he was
within age, then this had been a miſdemeanor in them: for
it was faid, that fines and recoveries are like to the pole arctic
and antarCtic, for upon thoſe aſſurances of lives depend; for
which by naked averment they cannot be ſhaken or impeach-
ed, for which divers notable precedents have been concerning
the matter in queſtion in this court. An

O : n


1 1 ˙ 790 ——


Part XII. MansFieLD's Caſe,


And for this in this court, Mich. 24 & 25 El. Caſe 14.
between William Cavendiſh and Anne his wife, one of the
co-heirs of Henry Knightly, againſt Robert Worſley, and
Catharine Lanter co-heir, and Trafford, and other defen-
dants. And the caſe was, that Robert Worſley and Catha-

rine his wite being within age acknowledged a note of a fine

re Trafford, and another of the defendants, by Dedimus

poteſiatem : and the decree faith, that the Commiſhoners did
perfectly know that the ſaid Catharine was within age;


and for this cauſe every one of them was fined; but the hne.


ſtands.

Mich. 38 & 39 Eliz. In this court one Alexander Gilder-
brand being ſeiſed of certain lands in Windham, in com” Norf.
in fee, one Hubbard procured one Roger, who was in his
cuſtody in his houſe, to take upon him the name of Alex-


ander Gilderbrand, who was then beyond the feas, to ac-


knowledge a fine to the ſaid Hubbard of the faid lands, and
they were fined in this court; and it was pait of the ſentence,


that if he did not re-afſure the land to the taid Alexander, he


ſhould forfeit a greater fine to the Queen : but there was no


ſentence to draw the fine off from the file, nor damages


awarded to the ſaid Alexander, who was the party grieved.


— ha,
*
*


MANSFIEL D “'s Caſe.
Mich. 12 Facobi 1.


INNO 23 Eliz. in the court of Wards, the caſe was this, Fine, by an


that Henry Buſhley ſeiſed in fee of certain lands in
North Mins in the county of Hertford, by his will in writing
demiſed the ſaid lands to Henry Buſhley his ſon in tail, the
_ remainder to one William Buſhley. in
And ſor this, that his ſon was within age, he demiſed
the education of him to Thomas Harriſon, whom he made


ideot.


Page [124]


Sec for this


his executor: and afterwards it happened that Henry the 2 Co. 58.


ſon became a monſtrous and deformed cripple, and proved
an ideot a èrativitate; the which ideot by the practice of
one Nichols and others, was raviſhed and taken out of the


4 Co. 2. and


124, 125.
10 Co. 42.


cuſtody of his guardian, and was carried upon men's


ſhoulders to a place unknown, and there kept in ſecret,
until he had acknowledged a fine of his lands to one Bo-
thome, beſote j uſtice Southcot, anno 9 Reg. Eliz. and by

| N 4 . inden-


*
.
-
-
- - — — — — _ 4 — —— — x
\ = — = =_ —


— we ˙ ˙‚ 7—＋Üũ,Ä½⅛ö On Oo OY OS —
— — — — — _— 2 — — — — » 5


— — —


EE ˙


— ——— _ — ²˙ A


Fine by an in-
fant feme covert.
Vide ſupra and


- Warcowsz and CaRREL's Caſe. Part XII. Par


indenture betwixt them, the uſe of the ſaid fine was declared Cat]
to the uſe of the congniſee and his heirs, which Bothome, Ban
anno 12 Eliz. conveyed the ſaid land to one Henry Mansfield: the
and anno 22 Eliz. the ſaid Henry Buſhley the ſon, by inqui- Joh
ſition was found an ideot a nativitate; and upon this in anng He
33. the court of Wards took order for the poſſeſſion of the ſaid ſon
lands. Vide Calvert's caſe in my Reports. anc
And it was moved as a doubt in the ſaid court of Wards, iff
whether the ſaid fine ſhould be to the uſe of the ſaid ideot led
and his heirs; for notwithſtanding that the fine which is of an
record binds the ideot for the cauſes aforeſaid, yet the inden- rig
tures are not ſufficient to direct the uſes: but it was reſolved, mt
that foraſmuch as he was enabled by the fine as to the princi- G
Pal, he ſhall not be diſabled to limit the uſes, which are but as m
acceſſory. 5 di
And the ſame is the law of an infant and feme covert. th
And the ſaid Mansfield brought an action of treſpaſs in the tl


Common Pleas againſt one 'Trott, the farmer of the faid
lands; and the iſſue was to be tried at the bar: and the ſaid
deformed ideot was ſent out of the court of Wards, to be
ſhewn to the Judges of the Common Pleas, and to the jurors
there tried and ſworn: and being brought upon a man's
ſhoulders, the Judges hearing that the title of Mansfield was
under the ſaid fine levied by that ideot; the Lord Dyer, aud
the court by conſent of parties, cauſed a juror to be with-
drawn; and the Lord Dyer faid, that the Judge who took
the fine, was never worthy to take another; but notwith-
ſtanding this, and although the monſtrous deformity and


ideocy of Buſhley was apparent and vilible, yet the fine
ſtood good, |


WARCOMBE and CARRELs Caſe.
Mich. 12 Jacobi 1.


20 CTOBER 6 Eliz. in the Star- chamber, where were
preſent Sir Nicholas Bacon, Knight, Keeper of the |
Great Seal, the Marquis of Northampton, the Earl of Welt-
morland, the Earl of Suſſex, the Earl of Leiceſter, Lord Clyn-
ton, High Admiral, Lords Strange and Hunſden, Progers
Knight, Comptroller of the Houſhold, Sir Francis Knols, Se-
cretary, Sir William Peetdͤrs, Sir John Maſon, Sir Richard
Sackvil, Under-Treaſurec of the Exchequer, Sir 3
zatlin,


—


part XII. Wancontzz and Carers Caſe,


Catlin, Maſter of the Rolls, Sir James Dyer, Juſtice del
Banc, The caſe was, that Edward Carrell, an apprentice of
the laws, for a great ſum of money bought the wardſhip of
Johan, daughter and heir of Waincombe of the county of
Hereford, and married her to Edward Carrell, his youngeſt
ſon : and after“ Hil. anno 5 Eliz., the ſaid Johan fell ſick,
and being of the age of nineteen years, and not having any
iſſue, the ſaid Edward her huſband perſuaded” her to acknow-
ledge a fine of her inheritance, by which. ſhould be conveyed
an eflate to the huſband and wife in tail, the remainder to the
right heirs of the wife: and cognizance was taken by Dedi-
mus poteſtatem directed to Sir T. Sanders and one Cheſnell of
Gray's-Inn, before Eaſter, divers Judges being here who
might have examined her: and on Friday in Eaſter week ſhe
died, but the fine and “' argent du Roigne was entered as of
the laſt term, ſcil. the term of St. Hilary, four days before
the death of the wife. |

And the original writ of covenant bore teſte 15 Jan. re- See 3 Co. 77,72,
turnable cra/tins pur. and the Dedimus poteſlatem 18 die 5 Co. a Pan,

an. And James Warcombe, couſin and heir of the ſaid “
= complained by bill againſt Edward Carrell for ob-
taining of the ſaid fine by indirect practice; and thereupon
the ſentence of the honourable court enſued thus:

This day a right honourable preſence being aſſembled in

& this court, the matter depending in the ſame, between
„% James Warcombe, Eſquire, complainant, and Edward Car-
c rell, of London, Gent. defendant, as well for and con-
« cerning the validity of the fine levied by the ſaid Edward
« Carrell, and Johan his late wife, of certain manors, &c. of
„ the inheritance of the ſaid Johan, which Johan, as the
« plaintiff doth allege, was not of full age at the time of the
& fine levied ; as alſo for certain ſiniſter and undue means
© committed and dove by the ſaid Edward Carrell, in the ſu—
ing and getting out of the ſaid fine, as is ſuppoſed and al-
© leged by the ſaid complainant, was by great and long de-
liberation heard and examined, with all the allegations and
% ſayings that could be alleged and faid on both parts.“

Upon hearing of which matter the ſaid fine was by the
whole opinion of the court adjudged good, available and ef-
feCtual in the law. .

Aud alſo no fault adjudged to be in the ſaid Edward
Carrell, in the ſuing and getting out of the ſaid fine, but
that the ſame was duly and orderly ſued out, according to
the due form and order of the laws of this realm. And
all this is within the rule, ala tenent mulia quæ fieri
probibentur and the heir hath damnum abſque injuria,
for the law doth not give him any remedy to 1everſe it.

A, | And


Page [125]


H. P. C. 184,
1 Inſt, 289.
Bro. Appeal
100.

1 Danv. 490.

2 Hawk. c. 23.
ſect. 44» &c.


Page [126]


' ſpondendum, &c, Out of which record theſe things are to be


See 2 Hawk,
ch. 7. ſect. 9.
ch. 23. ſect. 44,


45, 47, and 48.


Laurentius & omnes alii, &c. eunt inde 1 et prædicda


Appeal of Robbery. Part X11,


And as Edward Carrell was not puniſhed, although that he
knew that his wife was within age; ſo the ſaid Hungate ſhall
not be puniſhed, although that ſhe knew that her ſon wa


within age; and that the rather, by reaſon of the ancien:
verſe,


F
Leges communes ft neſcit ſœmina, miles, 4
Clericus, & cultor, judex ſibi parcet & ultor, pur
WY o1

And by ſentence all were diſmiſſed, &c. -
| he
— — —— 3. | * 3 tri
5


Appeal of Robbery.


MONGST the records in the 2 et inter placita
coram domino Rege de termino Sancti Mich. anno 42 Ed,


felony aforeſaid, nec unquam ſe ſubtraxerunt, ideo prædiclus


rot. 27. k
: Cornubia, Helena, filia Hugonis Allot, brought an appeal of 6
robbery againſt Laurence Boikoſleake, Richard Cohorta, Jo.
Gilman, and Johan his wife, and divers others ; the defen- *
dants plead not guilty, &c. and were found not guilty of the i

|
[


Helena pro falſo appel ſus committitur priſonæ in cuſtodid Ma-
reſcalli Ric. de Imworth, Mareſcalli, Sc. Et ſuper * hoc pra-
dictus Laurentius & alii petunt ger eee flatuti quod ju-
1 atores hoc inguirant que damna præd Laurentius et alii ſuſtinue-
unt occaſione falſi appelli prædicti et fi pred” Helena fit ſuff.
ciens ad damna ſolvenda: of wang hoc queſitum ef1 a prefatis u.


ratoribus que damna prædictus Laurentius et alii ſuſtinuerunt


ſingulatim occaſione prædicta. Qui dicunt quod prædictus Lau-


rentius ſuſtinuit damna ad valentiam 101. Et Richardus Cohorta
ad valentiam 10l. & Johannes Gilman 5 l. & Fohanna uxor diclli
Johannis Gilman 51. & fic ſingulatim de ceteris : queſitum t/t


i prædicta Helena fit ſufficiens ad aliqua damna ſolvenda. Yu


aicunt, quod non. Quæſitum, quis vel qui abbettavit vel abbetta-
verunt prafatam Helenam ad appellationem prediftam projequen-
dam. Qui dicunt, quod Johannes Riddel, ſenior, Johannes Rid-
del, junior, Tho. Drury & Alicia Allet, abbettaverunt prefatam
Helenam, ideo. ipſi diſtringantur ſecundum formam ſlatuti ad re-


obſerved. | | | |
1. Although it is enacted by the ſtatute of Weſlm. 2. cap.
21. that in this cafe Juticiarii, Cc. puniant appellatorem
ter priſenam unius anni, Cc. and according to the court
com-


Part XII. Appeal of Robbery.


committed to priſon, &c. ſo that they were hot bailable, yet
quia eadem Helena pregnans 25 & in periculo mortis, ſhe was
Jet out upon mainpriſe to have her body, 15 Mich. ad ſatis-
aciendum prædicto Laurentio et aliis de damnis ſingulatim adjudi-
catis occaſione predifta: and the reaſon of this is, for this,
that the common law requires in every caſe conveniency ;


” and it is inconvenient that a woman with child ſhould remain


in common gaol ſub ſalva et ara cuſtodia, where women
cannot reſort to her upon times as neceſſity ſhall require
forthwith for conveniency ; and principally where it is for
avoiding the danger of death, the court hath power to put
her mainpriſe until ſhe be delivered, for it ought to be a
truth concerning the Judges of the common law, which the
moral poet hath ſpoken,


Reddere perſone ſcit convenientia cuique.


And with it agrees that advice which Bracton gives to the
Judges, lib. 2. cap. 2. |


Conſiderent judices — ter quid oportuerit ſecundiim neceſſita-


tem, quid expedierit ſecundùm utilitatem, quid ligatum fuit ſe-
cundùm permiſſionem, et quid deceat ſecundum honeſlatem.

2. That the defendants recover their damages either wholly
againſt the principal, or wholly againſt the abettors, and


not part againſt the one, and part againſt the other; and that


the record is que/itum eſt, fi prædicta Helena eft ſufficiens ad
aligua damna ſolvenda ; and with this it is agreed in 8 Ed. 4. 3.
3. Although that the ſtatute ſaith, re/tituant appellatores
damna appellatis, yet the damages ſhall be ſingulatim aſſeſſed;
for that the words are further, ſecundum diſcretionem juſliciari-
orum, habito reſpectu ad priſonam vel arreſlationem, &c. 80
that foraſmuch as the cauſes of damages are ſeveral, as the
defamation, &c. of the one may be greater than of the other,
ſo the damages of the one may be greater than of the other.

4. That although that the appellor be not ſufhcient for to
pay, yet his body ſhall be taken ad ſatisſaciendum. Quia qui
non habet in ere, luet in corpore.

5. That although that the jurors in the appeal have ſound the
defendants abettors, yet inſomuch as they are ſtrangers to the
original, they ſhall not be concluded, for they ſhall be diſ-
trained ad reſpondendum : and ſo that they may plead not guil-
ty, or other plea; ui res inter alios actæ alleri nocere non de-


bent,
| Vide


U


— ——_ ————_————


- *
1
4 *
7
© .
» *
1
*
1 *
7
—
4
4
IE. -
1


—


2 — — * * —
0 *


« * —


— >; 1
TA. FRY


—


—


—


r


- *
* 8
2
4


r
2 : a


"X SK Ax tas. Ig * ——
p. * was 4M: 4 : LEY 2 * 5 * 0


*


— —


*


*


Raſt. Ent.


Page [127]


2 Hawk. C. 24.
ſeQ, 20.


Dureſs per Gaoler. Part XIl.


Vide the Book of Entries, title, Appeal, divi/ione damages
1&2. And this doth appear alſo by the ſaid ſtatute, which
ſays, that / abettor * convictus ſit de hujuſmodi abettat' per na-
litiam, puniatur per priſonam & tenetur ad reſtitutionem damno-


rum faciendam. 5


Dureſs per Gaoler.


| PE ACIT A coram Rege apud Ebor' in craſtino Sanctæ Trin.

an. 7 Ed. 3. 44. diviſione indictment (are very worthy of
obſervation;) the effect of one indictment was, quod ubi qui-
dem Robertus de Bayons de Tunelly captus fuit & in priſond Caſtri
London” detentus pro quodam debito flatuti mercatorit in cuſlodid


Thome Botelier Conſtabularii Caſtri de London” ubi ipſe Thomas k


Hotelier poſuit ipſum Robertum in profunde gaolo, inter leone


et vili priſona contra formam ſtatuti, &c. vix. de 1 Ed. 3. &
in eodem profundo detinuit quoſque idem Robertus fecit finem cum


eo de 405. quos ei ſoluit et hec per exactionem.


Item pre/entant, that one Wellingoner was arreſted far treſ-
paſs at the ſuit of James Cantelupe, and detained in the ſaid
gaol, the faid Thomas for forty ſhillings ad largum ire permiſit:
idem Mallingoner ire non potuit quouſque finem fecit cum Roberts
de Barton Clerico de dimidio Marcæ quod ei ſolvit et ulterius pro
Ferris, &c.

Item præſentant, that one John Aylmer of Digby purchaſed
of Thomas Lord, of Bardolfe, one meſſuage, &c. ibi venit
magiſter clericus eſchetoris' colore officti ſui, et abſque aliqua cauſa
dictam terram ſeiſruit in manus domini Regis et noluit ipſum Je
hannem permitiere terram ſuam prædictam habere quouſque idem


Johannes finem feciſſet cum prædicto magiſtro Roberta 405. gui
cepit per extortionem & nunc manum ſuam amovit.


Item præſentant, quod ubi Thomas Balivus wapentachia de Flax- ©
well et Laughton, tenet wapentachiam ſuam ſuper proclamationem,
et illa proclamatio debet fieri ſolenniter in villa de Lasford et Kirby,
ſuper quam proclamationem bomines wapentachie poſſent pervenire
ili: prædictus Thomas non fecit proclamationes ſuas per quod
homines patrie amerciati ſunt graviter, & hujuſmadi amer-
ctlamenta de tis levata fuerint, & bac per extortionem: to


which
,


1


\ * ,


Part III. Falſe Affidavits.
which he appeared and pleaded not guilty, and was found
guilty, and fined and impriſoned, | |
Item preſentant, quod Thomas de Maudon Balivus wapenta- ,
chiæ de Boby et Grafton, tenere debuiſſet 2 wapentachia in di- |
verſis locts ad aiſiamentum patriæ prout de jure deberet. Idem :
Thomas tenebat ambo wapentachia in uno loco, ad maximum dams
num populi wapentachie prædict', et homines eorundem wapenta-
chiorum nimis exceſſive fuerint amerciati |


Item T homas Carleton, under Sheriff of the 8 Lin- uy 1
otgrave u. I Dan. 1


coln, was indicted for this, that one Barthol. de
purchaſed a writ againſt Nicholas de Nottingham, and de- 7% 180.
livered the ſaid writ to the ſaid Sheriff, who returned a Trade
upon the ſaid writ, although the ſaid writ was ſufficiently in
time delivered: et fic fecit iter um, &c. |

ltem Hugo de Baxter latro notorius indiftatus de felonia non
fuit replegiabilis et quod male fame ixtitit,


Falſe Affidavits. ' Page [128] \


7 an action fur le caſe, it was reſolved per totam curiam, Caſe of a falſe
that if a Sumner return one certified upon his oath in **tura by a ſum-
court-chriſtian, where in truth he was not, and he is pro- Fitzgib. 174.
nounced contumax, and after he is excommunicated, he ſhall
have an action ſur le caſe, for here is injuria et damnum.
And in ſuch caſe the plaintiff ſhall have judgment to recover,
for although that the proceeding and oath touching this matter
are eccleſiaſtical, yet the damage 1s temporal, for he is diſ-
abled to ſue in any court. | |
And it was reſolved, that perjury, by which damages do
accrue, may be punithed as a miſdemeanor at the ſuit of the
ing. | 3 <4 1
And alſo the party may have his action upon the caſe
to recover damages, for it ſhould be a very great defect
in the law, and. encouragement to. parties, if men may
commit perjury with impunity: and for that reaſon, if
jurors uſe perjury themſelves, an attaint lieth at the com-
mon law, for ſo it appears by Glanvill, lib. 2. cap. 29.
15 H. 8. tit. Attaint 70. 6H. 3. ib. 73&75. and in the
time of Ed. 1. Attaint 70. for the firſt act, which gave
the attaint; the ſtatute of Welt. 1. cap. 38. Vide F. N. B.
109.


® See Carthew


Page [129]


-


Falſe Aſſidavits. Part XII.


109. Vide 2. 7 H. 6. 25. one who was to be a pledge affirm.
ed upon his oath, that he could diſpend 40s. per annum, and
upon re- examination he confeſſed it falſe, for which he was
committed to the Fleet, until he made a fine, which proves,
that the falſe oath was the wrong and injury, and puniſhable
by the law, & ex conſeguenti, when damage follows to the
party, he ſhall have remedy by action upon the caſe.

In like manner it was agreed, that if one make a falſe aſh.
davit by which the partys arreſted and moleſted by proceſs of
contempt, he may have an action ſur le caſe, and recover da-
mages. And although that when the matter is merely eceleſi-
aſtical, the court-chriſtian may puniſh pro ſalute anime, yet
they cannot award any damages to the party, for if one within
holy orders be beaten, they may proceed againſt the delin-
quent pro ſalute anime, but the Prieſt ought to recover his
damages by action of battery; ſo notwithſtanding that they
may puniſh the ſaid Sumner in the caſe at the bar, for perjury
and falſe certificate, yet the party grieved ſhall recover his da-
mages at the common law, and although the matter be mere-
ly eccleſiaſtical, yet if the party grieved hath damages either
by any wrongful proceedings of the Judge, or misfeaſance,
or non-feaſance, * or falſity of any miniſter, or by unjuſt
proſecution of the party, the party grieved may have an action
ſur le caſe, and recover his damages. h

Doctor and Student 118, 119. Action ſur le cafe, lieth
againſt the Ordinary, for a wrongful excommunication
touching any thing out of his juriſdiction, ſo there are many
other good caſes: and the caſe in Fitz. 47 H.6. 8. If an
Archdeacon refuſe to induct the Clerk, &c. he ſhall have an
action upon the caſe, which was affirmed for good law by all
the court, with which agrees 26 H. 8. 3. a. and true it is,
that it is held in 38 H. 6. 14. that in ſuch caſe he ſhall have
remedy againſt the Archdeacon to puniſh him; but ſaving
the opinion there, they cannot award him damages in ſuch
' Caſe, but he ſhall recover them at common law: ſo F. N. B.
92. Ifa man proceed againſt a prohibition, the party may
have an action upon the caſe againſt him for proſecuting in
cCourt-chriſtian. Vide Trin. 20 Ed. 3. rot. 46. in the Trea-
ſury, Rich. Treſil's caſe, there he recovered damages againſt
the Biſhop of Norwich, by him excommunicated after prohi-
bition z Epiſcopus adjudicatur eſſe illicitum expugnatorem au-
thoritatis Regia, & querens recuperavit decem mille libras,
fimile Paſch. 13 Ed, rot. 78. Philip * de Hardeſhal's caſe,


Hl,


part XII. Ha EAS Cokpus.


Hil. 32 Ed. 3. rot. 78. Sir Thomas Seaton, Knt. recovered
zpainſt Lucy, who was the wife of Robert Cockſide, for ſuing
to Rome pro tranſgreſſione facta per ipſum Thomam, pro captione
jonorum & catallorum ſuorum & pro debitis, & inde pronuntiari
fecit ſententiam excommunicationts, Sc, he recovered by verdict
damages to three thouſand pounds, &c. Trin. 37 Ed. 1.
coſts were recovered againſt the Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
forty pounds pro damnis, per quod ipſum excommunicauit pro ex-
ucutione brevis Regis pro manu fortia amovends, Ideo Epiſcopus
wpt. Mich. 29 Ed. 3. rot. 19 fimiliter : and divers other re-
cords you may ſee in my Book of Precedents. EE


HAWKERIDGE' Caſe.
| Paſeh. 14 Jacobi r.


Habeas Corpus. L


ed in Hilary term laſt paſt, for Hawkeridge, priſoner in
the cuſtody of the ſaid Marſha], who did return quedam cauſa
| ſpolii, &c. contra Hawkeridge pendet inde pro judicio & ſenten-
tia parata fit, Sc. Qui quidem William Hawkeridge fic
commiſſus remanet donec ante difta cauja per prefatum Daniel”


Habeas Corpus, he made ſuch a return, and otherwiſe parata
fit, Cc. which the court took to be very inſuificient, and
gave divers days to amend the return, and to ſhew the cauſe
of delay, and for why ſentence was not given, foraſmuch as


priſon : and the Marſhal would not amend his return, upon
which the party being in priſon ſixteen or eighteen weeks,
always the return was / parata, &c. ſo the cauſe was long
parata ad judicium, ſed nunquam judicata: and after in another
writ returnable craſtino Aſcenſionis, was another return of pa-
rata, &c, without ſhewing cauſe of delay: alſo it ſeems the
return was inſufficient for another cauſe, viz. guædam cauſa
ſpolii civilis & maritima que coram, c. which is too general
for two cauſes,


Dun certificata fuerit, et hæc ęſt cauſa. And alſo upon another


ſententia fuit parata, or otherwiſe a man may be in perpetual |


1. For


J-


N Habeas Corpus to the Marſhal of the Admiralty grant- Ant. 69, 104,
&c, SPI"
See 13 51,


=
—— re ——_—y RO
_ —
— — - <<
> ” - —
8


HARBEASs Corpus; Part XII.


1. For that (/þoli:) is uncertain, and ought to be ſpecified
in ſome more certainty of. what things, or of, or in what


things in particular, and does not ſhew any value of the


13 Co. 51, 52.


Page [130]


oods.
: 2. That maritima eft ſuper littus, or in portu maris, ſor
thoſe appertain or are next to the ſea, and yet the Admiral
hath not juriſdiction ſuper littus maris, or in portu, for that
they are infra corpus comtatus, as appears in many books and
records. And fo it was adjudged in Lacy's caſe, that infra
the high water-mark, and low water-mark, when the ſea is at
an ebb, it is within the body of the county, Dy. 15 El. the
Abbot of Ramſey's cafe, yet this is maritima, 15 El. Dy. fol,
326. Paſch. 17 El. in Scaccario ac contra Diggs ; for which
cauſe he ought to have ſaid ſuper altum mare, infra juriſdic-
tionem Admiralli; for the ſtatute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5. 2 H. 4.
cap. 11. 19 H. 6. 7. confine him only ſuper altum mare : and
the return which concerns the impriſonment of the body
ought to be certain. . RO

But for the firſt, all the court reſolved, that it was inſuffi-


_ cient : alſo there was ſhewn no time of the ſpoil ; and for this,


in the ſame term, for the inſufficiency of the return which
the court could not obtain to be amended, the ſaid Hawker-
idge was bailed in open court until the next“ term: alſo the
words are quedam cauſa ſpalii ac civilis ac maritima. itt
28 H. 8. cap. 15. that upon an inſufficient return the party
ought to be bailed or diſcharged, as all our books and infinite
precedents are. Vide 6 H. 6. 44. otherwiſe if the return
ſhall be inſufficient when it is falſe. And note the procecd-
ing was civiliter, for to have reſtitution, et non criminaliter.


Judgment and Execution in Treaſon


and Felony.


OTE, that it was ſaid by ſome, that when judgment

is given, that one ſhall be hanged until he be dead;

the King cannot alter the judgment, and command
that he ſhall be beheaded, for that the execution ought
to be conformed to the judgment: and with this ac-
cords 35 Hen, 6. folio 58. & Stamford, lib. 1. fol. 13. =
| | 27 All,


land, &Cc,


Part XII. Judgment and Execution, &c.


27 Aff. pl. 41. Vide F. N. B. 144. where it ſeems that he
may be beheaded, 22 Aſſ. pl. 49. One was beheaded for kill-
ing of Adam Waltam, the King's Meſſenger, which is there
taken for petit treaſon, But when one is attaint of treaſon,
his judgment is to be hanged by the neck, and cut down
alive, and his entrails and privy members cut off from his
body, and burnt in his ſight, his head to be cut off, his
body to be divided into four parts, and diſpoſed of at the
King's will; fo that in ſuch caſe the King may pardon all
the execution, but decapitation, for this 1s parcel of the
judgment, and the King may pardon all or any part at his
pleaſure; and it was reſolved that the Duke of Somerſet, for-
aſmuch as his judgment was to be hanged by the neck could
not be beheaded, for that would alter the judgment. And ſo
it was reſolved in the caſe of the Lord Sturton in the time of

neen Mary, and of the Lord Dacres in the time of H. 8.
both which were hanged for felony.

It was refolved alſo, that King H. 8. could not by the law
behead his wives for treaſon, for judicandum eſt legibus, non
exemplts.

And note, that when a nobleman is attaint of treaſon, and
hath this judgment as is aforeſaid ; the courſe is, that the
King makes his letters patent directed to the Lord Chancel-
lor of England, reciting the attainder; yet we minding to
diſpenſe with that manner of execution of judgment, in re-
ſpect that the ſaid A. B. is a nobleman, do therefore by theſe
preſents remit and releaſe the faid A. B. of and from ſuch ex-
ecution of judgment, and inſtead thereof, our pleaſure is,
to have the head of the ſaid A. B. cut off, &c. as in ſuch caſes
hath been uſed, touching and concerning noblemen: and by
the fame do require the Lord Chancellor to make two writs
under tne great'feal, one to the Lieutenant to deliver the faid
priſoner, and the other to the Sheriff of London, to receive
and execute the ſaid priſoner, &c. And the caſe of the Lord
Sanchar was ſtronger, for that he was not noble within Eng-


3 o N


Vol. VII. 0 Oath


Juſtices power
on the ſtatute

7 Jac. 1 c. 6.
See 11 Co. 62. b.
2 Hwk. c. 10.
ſect. 2 34. ch.
11. ſect. 2, 3.


Page [131]


Oath before Juſtices.


Trin. 9 Jac. 1.


4 this very term, I moved the Juſtices in Serjeants-Inn in
leet-ſtreet, upon the ſtatute ann? 7 Fac. cap. 6. which
gave power to two Juſtices of Peace, to require any perſon
or perſons, &c. and in ſome caſes one Juſtice of Peace only,
if the Jultices of Peace may make a ſpecial warrant to Con-
ſtables, &c. to have the bodies of parties, who are to take
the oath according to the ſtatute before them. And it was te-
ſolved by all ung voce that they may, and that for two reaſons:

1. When the ſtatute gave power to Juſtices of Peace to re-
quire any perſon or Perſons, &c. to take the oath, the Jaw
implicitè gave them power * to make a warrant to have the
body before them, for quand? lex aliquid alicui concedit, conce-
ditur & id fine quo res ipſa eſſe non poteſt. NE

2. It is againſt the oſfices of the Juſtices, and of the au-


| thority given chem by the ſtatute, that they ſhall go and ſeek


* Zee 6 Mod.
105 210.


1 Salk,


the parties: and principally in a caſe of ſo great conſequence.
hen I moved, if in ſuch caſe the Conſtables may break the
houſes of the parties named in their warrants : and it ſeemed
to us all that they cannot, for that they are not any offenders
until they refuſe to take the oath beſore them who have autho-
rity to tender it to them, or commit ſome contempt to the
King; and inſomuch as they are not yet offenders, nor are
indicted or charged by any matter of record. their houſes ®
cannot be broken by warrant made by conſtruction upon the
ſtatute, by which authority is given, -&c. to require them to
take the oath, vide ſtatute 7 Pre. and ſce in it, that Barons
and Baronefles, as to the tender of the oath, need not to be
indicted, &, for theſe words, © of or above the ſaid age or
& degree,“ are to be intended of the ſame age, and above
the ſaid degree, or otherwiſe the firſt clauſe concerning Ba—
rons ſhould be idle; vide thoſe who have power to tender
the oath to them of the nobility, have power to commit them
upon refuſal to the common gaol, by the general act; and it
any perſon or perſons being of the age of eighteen years,
| or


Part XII. Oath before Juſtices,
or above, ſhall refuſe to take the ſaid oath duly tendered, &c.


which clauſe extends to all before.

Note, if the perſon be fugitive in another county, be
evades the ſtatute for the preſent; but he may be indicted
ſor recuſancy, and the indictment may be removed into the
King's Bench, and they may make proceſs againſt them in any
county of England: alſo if they are in their houſes, the door


being ſhut, &c. then they may be indicted either before the


Juſtices of Aſſiſe, or before the Juſtices of Peace at the quar-
ter · ſeſſions, and then after a Venire facias, &c. by force of a
Capias, their houſes may be broken by the Sheriff, vide ſtat.
10 Eliz. cap. 2. (to which the ſtatute of 23 Eliz. refers, & c.)
ſuch proceſs is given in Caſe of not repairing to church, as in
indictment of treſpaſs, which is Venire facias, cap. &c,


Memorandum, Hil. Term, 9 Jacobi. All the Juſtices of Stat, 10 El. e. 2.


England, by commandment of the King, ſignified by the
Lord Chancellor, were aflembled to have conſideration of
| theſe two ſtatutes. And in the beginning of this term, the
ſaid points were recited and debated ; and after good conſi-
deratign ſeverally, and conference had all together, it was re-
ſolved by all, that if one be indicted for recuſancy, the court
may proceed by proceſs upon the ſtatute of 23 Eliz. or by pro-
clamation according to the ſtatute of 28 Eliz. And ha th
proceſs upon the indictment, for recuſancy, is Jen' fac,

pas, &c. which is the proceſs in indictment of treſpaſs ; and
upon the Capras, the Sheriff upon requeſt firſt made to open


23 El. oꝙ——


Recuſancy

2 Hawk. c, 27.
ſect. 29.

Antea 1, 2.


the door, may do it, according to the reſolution in Seyman's


caſe; and when the Sheriff has brought him into court, he
may. upon refuſal of taking his oath, be generally indicted
as before Juſtices of Aſſiſe, or in open ſeſſions of the peace
upon refuſal before them: but the Juilices upon the ſecond
day of con{crence, did not {peak to the other point. And
after this reſolution was reported to the Lords of the Privy
Council at Whitehall, in the prefence of all the Juſtices of


England, the ſeventh day of Feb in Termin. Sandti Hil, ꝙ Re-


gis, and the Lord Chancellor delired that we ſhould put our
reſolutions in writing; to which I anſwered, that the Judges
never uſed to put their reſolutions in writing ; but that if the
Attorney or Solicitor come to us (as the ancient uſe hath been
to our predeceſſors) we will deliver our opinions to them again
ore tenus, but not in writing.

* At the third day of the conference in this very term,


it ſeemed upon the ſtatute 3 Jac. if Juſtices of Peace upon
O 2 retuſal


age [132]


— — — —


Stat. 3 Jac. 1.


Co. 63. b.


Stat. 7 Vc. 1.
c. 2. and 6.


Oath before Juſtices. Part XIT,


reſuſal before them, commit any perſon to gaol without bail
or mainpriſe, and mention in their warrant the tender and


refuſal, then the Juſtices of Aſſiſe, or Juſlices of Peace,
ought to tender the oath again, and to have a ſpecial indict-


ment; for the words of the act 3 Fac. are © and if the faid


e perſon or perſons, or any other whatſoever,” &c. ſo that
this word (ether) excludes the perſons who were committed
for refuſal. But it ſeems if the Miitimus of the Juſtices of
Peace, &c. do not comprehend any tender and refuſal of the
oath, then they may be generally indicted, as upon refuſal in
open court, for the court cannot take notice of the former
tender and reſuſal in ſuch caſe: and it was reſolved, that the
major number of the Juſtices of Peace who commit the par-
ties, have election to commit either to the next afliſes, or the
next ſeſſions; for the words of the ſtatute being in the diſ-
junctive, ſome may be more apt to be committed until the
next aſſiſes, and ſome until the next ſeſſions: and it is to be


obſerved, that two Juſtices, of which the one is to be of the


quorum, by the ſtatute 7 Fac. may commit any perſon above
the age of eighteen, and under the degree of nobility, al-
though that he be not indicted, nor convict, &c. But a Juſ-
tice of Peace cannot commit any unleſs they be proſecuted,
indicted, or convicted, &c. according to the ſtatute 7 ac.
And it was reſolved by all, that if the indictment be com-
menced upon the ſtat. 3 Fac. upon refuſal in open court, the
indictment may be ſhorc and genera], of what the parties are
indicted, &c. and not ſo, if the indictment be upon the com-
mitment made by two Juſtices of Peace ; this is good of any
perſon whatſoever, bnt in ſuch caſe, if the Miitimus be eſ-
pecial, comprehending the tender of the oath and reſufal,
there ought to be a ſpecial indictment and refuſal in open
court. Alſo if the Juſtice of Peace make a ſpecial Miltimus,
then the indictment ought to be ſpecial, ci. to recite that
the party was indicted or preſented, &c. in certain, accord-
ing to the ſtatute 7 Jac. and that he refuſed before one Juſ-
tice of Peace, or otherwiſe in open court; but if the Mitti-
mus be general, as is atorefaid, then the indictment before
Juſtices of Aſſiſe at the aſſiſes, or Juſtices of Peace at the ſeſ-
ſions of peace, may be general upon the ſtatute 3 Fac.


mg
D
*
bd +
—


*


The Earl of Northampton's Caſe.
Mich. 10 Jacobi I.


HE Attorney-general informed againſt Thomas Goode- San magnat
rick, Gent. Sir Richard Cox, Kt. Hen. Vernon, Gent. See 1 Cro g3.
Henry Minors, Serjeant of the Waggons, Tho. Lake, Gent. 2 79: 186.
and James Ingram, Merchant, ore teuus in the Star-chamber, 8 8
the laſt day of the Star- chamber, and charged Gooderick that 1 Loon: 4666.
he had ſpoken and publiſhed of the Earl of Northampton, Fele. 2
one of the grandees and Peers of the realm, one of the King's * 5 30
Privy Council, Lord Privy Seal, and Loid Guardian of the Rob. 35.
Cinque-ports, divers falſe and horrible ſcandals, /cil. that
more Jeſuits, papifis, &c. have come into England, fince
the Earl of Northampton was Guardian of the Cinque- ports,
than betore.
2, That the ſaid Earl had writ a book openly againſt Garnet, Page [133]
Ke. but * ſecretly he had writ a letter to Bellarmine, intimating
that he writ the ſaid book ad placandum Regem, jive ad facien-
dum ¶ placendum] populum, and requeſted that hñis book might
not be anſwered; and that the Archbiſhop of Canterbury had
certified it to the King, and that the ſaid Gooderick did re-
jate it to one Dewſbury, a Bachelor in Divinity, who had ac-
quainted the ſaid Earl with it. Gooderick being examined,
confeſſed the words ſpoken ; but to extenuate his offence ſaid,
that he was not the firit founder: and he vouched the ſaid
Sir Richard Cox, who confeſſed that he related to Govdeiick
the matter concerning the book of the Earl, and his letter to
HBellarmine, but not the words concerning the Cinque ports
and that the Archbiſhop of Canter bury had informed the Eing
of it, to the intent that the Earl of Northampton ſhould not
be Lord 'Treaſurer, and to extenuate his offence, he vouchse
ed the ſaid Vernon, who upon examination confelled Hat
which Richard Cox had publiſhed, but that he was not the
ſirſt author, but he cited the ſaid Lake, who did likewiſe |
confeſs what Vernon had ſaid, but that he heard it from
Derjeant Nichols, who being examined confeſſed it; and
with all, that one Speaket related it to him, and that he
had heard it from one James Ingram, and James Ingram


3 | being


The Earl of NoxTHamproN's Caſe. Part XII.


being examined, confeſſed the words concerning the ſaid book
of the Earl, and of the letter to Bellarmine ; ; and that in the
month of October he heard the faid words of two Engliſh ſu-
gitives at Leghorn, and never did publiſh them until the
death of the Earl of Saliſbury, "Treaſurer, who died in May
laſt: and all the ſaid defendants confeſſed at the bar, all that
with which they were charged, and at the hearing of this cafe
. were eleven Judges. of law, Fleming Juſtice being abſent
propter ægritudinem.

And ſo it was reſolved, that the publiſhing of falſe rumors,
either concerning the King, or of the high grandees of the
realm, was in ſome caſes puniſhed by the common law : but
of this were divers opinions. Yet it was reſolved in general.


1. Touching the matter and quality of the words.
2. Touching the perſons of whom they are ſpoke.
The manner of contrivance, or publiſhing of them.
4. Touching the puniſhment, for which cauſe divers acts
have made declaration, and have put things in certainty.


- And firſt of all, as to the words or rumours themſelves.
1. They ought to be falfe and horrible.
2. Of which diſcord or ſlander may ariſe betwixt the King
and his people, or the grandees of the realm, Wet. 2. cap.
24. or between the Lords and Commons, 2 R. 2. c. 53. by


which great peril and miſchief may come to all the realm.
Ibidem.


The ſubverſion and deſtruction of the realm, ibidem. And
for this the ſaid act of 2 R. 2. againſt rumours, falſe and
horrible meſſages (meſcrgnes) i. e. lies“.


0

2. As to perſons, they are declared to be Prelates, Dukes,
Earls, Barons, and other nobles and grandees of the realm,
and alſo of the Chancellor, "Treaſurer, Clerk of the Privy
Seal, Steward of the Houſhold of our Sovereign Lord the
King, Juſtice of the one Bench and of the other, or of any
the great officers of the realm, at 2 R. 2. c. 5. and the King
is contained within the act of Weſt. 1. cap. 34. as appears in
Dyer 5. Mar. 155.


Note, theſe ſtatutes were occaſioned. by reaſon of ſome ſcandalous reflec +»
nous, that had been raiſed by William Wickham, and the clergy, againſt John
of Gaunt, &c. et e contra.


3. AS


Part XII. The Earl of Nox THamerTox's Caſe,


3. As to the third point it was reſolved, that if one hear


ſuch falſe and“ horrible rumours, either of the King, or of Page [134]


any of the ſaid grandees, it is not lawiul for him to relate to
others, that he hath heard J. S. to ſay ſuch falſe and horrible
words; for if it ſhould be lawful, by this means they may
be publiſhed generally, &c, And this doth appear by the {ci
ſtatute, viz. that the party ſhall be impriſoncd until be find
out the party who ſpoke them, which proves that it was an
offence, or otherwiſe he ſhould not be puniſhed tor it by fine
(for this is implied) and impriſonment.

4. It was allo reſolved, that the offenders at bar, if againſt
them the proceedings had been by indictment upon thete fta-
tutes, no judgment could be had againſt them that they ſhould
be impriſoned until they found their author: for, for ex-
ample, Gooderick did not relate to Dewſbury that he heard
from Sir Richard Cox, but he related the ſame words as of
himſelf: and for this no judgment can be given againſt him,
that he ſhall be impriſoned until he find his author; ſor this
that he ought to be indicted for the words which he himſelf
did ſpeak, and then, de non apparentibus et non exiſlentibus
eadem e2/t rati:, \Vhen the indictment is general without any
relation to a certain author, the judgment, which always
ought to be given of matter apparent within the record, can-
not be that he ſhall be impriſoned, until he hath found his
author.

And it was reſolved, that if A. ſay to B. “did you not
© hear that C. is guilty of treaſon,” &c. this is tantamount
to a ſcandalous publication: and in a private action for lan -
der of a common perſon, if J. S. publiſh that he hath heard
J. N. fay, that J. G. was a traitog or thief; in an action of
the cafe, if the truth be ſuch, he may juſtify.

But if J. S. pubiiſh that he hath beard generally without
a certain author, that J. G. was a traitor or thief, there an
action ſur le caſe lieth againſt J. S. for this, that he hath
not given to the party grieved any cauſe of action againſt any,
but againit himfelf who publiſhed the words, although that in
truth he might hear them; for otherwiſe this might tend to a
great ſlander of an innocent; for it one who hath em han-
taſiam, or who is a crunkard, or of no eſtimation, ipeak ſcan-
dalous words, if it ſhould be lawful for a man of credit to report
them generally, that he had heard ſcandalous words, without
mentioning of his author, that would give greater colour and pro-
bability that the words were true in reſpect of the credit of the
"3-16 reporter,


Page [135]


The Earl of Nox THamPToON's Caſe, Part XII.


reporter, than if the author himſelf ſhould be mentioned, for


the reputation and good name of every man is dear and pre-


cious to him: and a record was vouched in Mich. 33 & 34
Ed. and in the 30 Aſſ. pl. 10. and in the Exchequer, Mich,
18 E. 1. rot. 4.

Note, that all the commiſſions of Oyer and Terminer give
authority to enquire de ucts verborum propalationibus. Vide
le flat. 5 R. 2. cap. 6. & 17 R. 2. cap. 8. concerning ru-
mours, and in 3 Fd. 2. in the Exthequer, Henry Bray ſpoke
of John Foxlcy Baron of the Exchequer: it was reſolved,
that the judgment in an indictment upon the faid ſtatutes,
when the words are ſpoken generally, without relation to a
certain author, is, that the offender ſhall be fined and im-
priſoned, for this is implied and included in the ſaid ſtatutes,
as an incident to the offence, although that it is not expreſſ-
ed. Alſo the party grieved may have an action de ſcandals
magnatum, and recover his damages. Alſo the party grieved,
and the King's Attorney, if the offenders deny it, may ex-
hibit a bill in the Star-chamber againſt the offender, in which


the King ſhall have a fine, and the party ſhall be impriſoned, .


and the court of Star-chamber may inflict corporal puniſh-
ment, as to ſtand upon the pillory, and to have papers about
his head. |

* And if the offenders confeſs it, then to proceed ore tenus
upon their own confeſſion ; and for the publication of the ſaid
words, all the defendants were puniſhed by all the preſence,
una voce nullo contradicente by fines and impriſonments ; and
Gooderick and Ingram were fined the moſt, for that Goode-
rick had no authority for the words concerning the cinque
posts, nor could Ingram find any author for to vouch, that


he heard by perſons unknown at Leghorn in foreign parts;


and therefore it was taken as a fiction of his own.


ESTWICE'


e


Part XII.


4)


ESTWICK' Caſe.


Trin. 10 Jac. 1.


In Curid Wardorum. G


ING Philip and Queen Mary by their letters patent de


. 5 5 King's. grant
gratia ſpeciali et ex certa ſcientid et mero motu, c. grant- how expounded,
ed to Aringal Wade in fee, the farm or grange called Milton 7 0% 43 g.
Grange in com' Bedford, parcel of the poſſeſſions of the late * C 32


5 Co. 73.
diſſolved ng ag of Wooborne, tenendum prædidtam firmam 4 Co. 34,35, 102.


e grangium de nobis et ſucceſſoribus noſtris, ut de manerio noſ- 9 wy =

tro de Eaft Greenwich in com Kantiæ in capite per ſervitium di- g. 3˙ 9,
ceſſime partis unius feed: militis pro omnibus redditibus, ſervitits,

exactionibus, et demandis quibuſcungue, which grange, by mean

conveyance, came to Chriſtopher Eſtwick, after whole death

the tenure was found verbatim, according to the words of the

patent. And the queſtion was, if the tenure was by a mean,

as of the ſaid honour, or in capite; * and their principal rea- „it was argued
ſon was, that the letters patent of the King ſhall be conſtrued do be a tenure in
according to the King's intention exvrefſed in his charter. Fe.

And in this caſe of neceſſity ſome words ought to be rejected,

ſal. theſe words (in capite) and then the ſenſe will be, tenen-

dum de nobis, &c. ut de manerio noſiro de Eaſt Greenwich in

cam Kantiæ per ſervitium viceſime partis unius feed: militis,

Sc. or theſe words, de manerio noſiro de Eaſt Greenwich in

com Kantiæ, and then the ſenſe will be, tenendum de nobis,

Sc. in capite per viceſimam partem unius feadi militis, &c. for

both together cannot ſtand; and then the better ſhall be taken

for the K. as in 5 Mar. Dy. 162. tenure of the King per ſervi-

tium militare, is to be intended tenure in capite. So tennre

de quo vel quibus & per que ſervitia ignorant, is tenure in ca-


pite, for the beſt ſhall be taken for the King. * 15
; | | | 7.


i
8 |
|
77
. }
4
|
}
'
.
i
|
7
—
4


,
——-  —  —  ——— ——— _
_ - *
— * * D


— —— —


—_— F— — — —
"TOW »


Page (1 36]


See Cotton's

Records 107.

a Tenendum in
capite as of the

caſtle of Dover.


ͤ—ũ—F— — — ́ — —


FsTwick's Caſe. Part XII.


H. 7. 7. 14 Ed. 4. 5. & 3 H. 7. 12. 9 H. . 9. 6. per Hul.
ſey, 13 UH. 7.4. per Fineux. 19 H. 8. title Office. Brook
58. Action. Another reaſon was added, that if theſe words,
in capite, ſhall be rejected, then the words enſuing, /cl. per
ſervitium viceſimæ partis unius feodi militis, c. ſhall be re.
jected here; and then the tenure will bet by one entire fee of
a Knight, for words in the middle of a ference may be ex-
tracted, and as well the conſequent as the precedent ſtand,
But it was anſwered and reſolved, that the ſaid Grange
was held of the King as of the honour, and not in capite; and
the reaſon was for this, that tenure of the King in capite is
as much as to ſay, tenure in groſs, or of the perſon of the
King: and for this, that the chief and principal part of the
body of the tenure of the perſon of the King is ſaid 2u capite,
And it appears by ancient records, that in ancient time all
tenures in groſs, or * of the perſon of a ſubject, were called
tenure in capite ; as inclauſe 9 H. 3. Membr. 28. Rebertus
filius Madoek tenuit terram de Thoma Corbet in capite: and in
the ſame manner you ſhall find by many other records, Jands
to be held of ſubjects in capire, which we call tenure of the
perſon, or in groſs, but ot late time dicitur de Rege ſolummodo,
terras teneri in eapite. Then it is as much as to ſay, tenendum
de nobis, &c. ut de manerio noſtro de Eaſt Greenwich in groſs,
ut de perſond noſird, which is againſt the nature of a tenure in
groſs, or of the perſon, when the land is expreſly limited to
be holden of a manor, &c. And for this, it the ſaid words
ſhould be tranſpoſed, ſcil. tenendum de nobis in capite ut de ma-
neris nsftro de Eu Greenwich, &c, this will not alter the caſe;
ſo when in the beginning or end, the land is expreſly limited
to · be held ut de manerio, the tenure of the perſon is abun-
dant ; or it may have this ſenſe, that the King is caput totius
regni and for this, inaſmuch as it is limited to hold of the
King, who is chief, it may be vulgarly ſaid, that the tenute
is in chief, inaſmuch as it is of the King as of a manor.
And as to the ſecond objection, it was reſolved, that the abun-
dant words ſhall be extended in conſtruction of the law, and not
the words ſublequent, which doth limit the term in certainty:


and with this reſolution inthe principal point agrees 3 7
1


95. wy „ 2 Oo 444


. ü nf wh and as fu


—— encore


Part XII, srwick's Caſe.


& 18 Eliz. 345. where it was found that Owen ap David
was ſeiſed of certain land in fee held of the Queen, as of
the principality of Wales in capite. And it was held, per con-
dium curiæ, no tenure in capite; and ſo (as it was ſaid) it
was reſolved in the time of H. 8. in Baron Luke's caſe, where
lands were granted by the King to hold of him as of the ho-
nour of Huntington, in capite, that this was a mean tenure,
and not in capite. .

Nota, that a tenure of we ancient honour, as of Rawleigh,
Hagent, and Peverel, are by uſage, and allowance in all
ages, taken to have the effect of a tenure in capite, ſcil. to
have all the lands in guard, &c. et non valet ratio contra expe-
rimentum. Vide the ſtatute of Magna Charta, cap. 31. and
the 11 H. 7. in ret. Parliamenti not printed, and 1H. 6. c. 4.
Vide Bracton, lib. 2. fol. 87. 30 H. 8. Dyer 8. 58. 29 H. 8.
Brook, title Livery 28, 57. 5 Ed. 3. 5.


— — —_ — 5 —
— — ——[« “ — N


Part XII,


PRINCIPAL MATTERS


Contained in this


B O


A.


BSENTEES, 28 H. 8.
Ireland, 107
Acceſſaries, where, and where

not, 81
Action popular, 29, 30
Action on the caſe lieth a-

gainſt a Sumner for a falſe
return, 128


Account in Common Pleas,


O


K.


Admiralty, no court of re-
cord, ES
Its original and juriſdiction
13 79, 80, 84

It claims juriſdiction, becauſe


of goods, &c. beyond the
ſeas, 104
Adultery 83


Appeal of robbery, the ap-
pellant committed, 125, 126
Appropriations of ancient

time


A Table of the principal Matters Part XII.


time, now not queſtion-
able, 4
Appropriations not void, be-
cauſe. of an eſtate-tail in
the patron, grantor, &c.
4, 5» 6

Armour and Pennons hanged
in a church upon ſolemni-
ties of burial, who hath the


property, 105
Aſſiſes, and Juſtices of Af-
ſiſe, 31


Aurum Reginæ, the King's
right in it, with Cook's
limitations 21, 22


B.


ENEVOLENCE, when it
began, and how lawful 119
Upon what occaſions allowed
of, ibid.
Biſhops after the firſt ſeſſion
of Parliament 4 Jac. 1.


luawful Biſhops,


Biſhoprics, two united. 71
Blind man ſealing a deed, not
good, where 90
Bridges repaired, &c. 30
Buggary, expoſition of the ſta-


| otute of, 25 H. 8. cap. 6.


concerning it 36, 37
Borough. See Free Bo-
rough,


C;
(CAP145 utlagatum by Juſ-


tice of Peace awarded,
where it may be, 103
Ce/luy que uſe, what he
ſhould have forfeited in
treaſon, I
Ceſtuy que uſe nec habet jus in


re nec jus ad rem, 2
Chancellor in court- chriſtian
his power, 78


Commiſſions in Engliſh a.
gainſt law, other reaſons


why, I, 32, 7:
Common Pleas furl?
: 109
Confederacy puniſhed in the
Star-chamber, 122
Conſpiracy where it lies, 91,
2

Conſpiracy lies not n
Juror or indictor, but againſt

a witneſs, 23, 24,25
Conſultation when grantable,
when not, 41, 42
Contempt in reſuſing to be
examined, 94
Argued, 95, 96
Puniſhed, 97
Conviction of a felon forfeits
his goods, 122
Convocation, its power, and
how limited, 72
County palatine, 114
Court of Wards, | $6


Cuſtoms, ſubſidies, and im-
poſitions, the King's power
in them, where, and where


not, 33» 34 \
Cuſtoms del Roy, 17, 18, 19


D.
DIGNITY and prerogative,


112

Diſpenſing power, 18
Dureſſe by a Gaoler preſented,
the puniſhment, 127, 128


E.
CCLESIASTICAL law,


— where, and where not al-
lowable, 38, 39, 49
Of what it hath cognizancey
of what not, and the rea-
ſons, : 425 43
Eccleſiaſtical juriſdiction, 112
Endowment


Part XII. contained in this Book.


Endowment is preſumed when
a vicarage hath long con-
tinued, | "= Þ

Equity, cauſes cannot be de-
termined by commiſſion,


114
Evidence. See Uſury.


F.
FALSE return, 95127


Felony after attainder not

to be anſwered unto, 100
Felony for ſtealing a winding-
ſheer, 113
Ferryman, an action againſt
him for things loſt, 63
Fine levied by a fool, what it


operates, 123, 124
Fine by feme covert under


Firſt-fruits, what, when


granted, and to whom they


belong, 45
Forfeiture in treaſons, 6
Foreits and chales, what, and

what not, | 22
Free borough, 120

G.


*


GS, whether it in-


cludes dedts and choſes


in action, 1
Grant le Rey void for uncer-
tainty, 86


I TABEAS Corpus when al-
lowable, when not, 45,
40, 69, 70
Habeas Corpus returnable and
diſcharged by judgment of


the court, 47, 82, 83
Habeas Corpus returned 82
Diſcuſſed, - 83


Habeas Corpus to the Marſhal
of the Admiralty, 129
Heæretico comburendo, where it
lieth, 93, &c.
Hereſy, the power eceleſiaſ-
tical and temporal in it;
what 1s hereſy ; how to be
puniſhed, 56, 57, 89, 93
High Commiſſioners, what
power they have, 19, 20,
21, 41, 49, 5O, 56, 85, 86
High Commiſſioners, their
proceedings examined, 84,
85, 86

High Commiſſioners not war-
rantable, wherefore, 88,


89
Honours and hereditaments
explained, 108


Hue and cry, expoſition of
the che ſtatute of Winton,


62
J.


JNDICTMENT fur le ſtat.
11 H. 4. cap. 9g. 98, 99
Information, ſur le ſtat. 2 H.
6. cap. 15 concerning fiſh-
ing, 89
Information in the Star-
chamber ore tenus by the
Attorney- general, againſt
perſons who had ſpoke
ſcandalouſly againſt a Peer,


i N 132, 133
Inquiſition upon dem clauſum
. exlremum, 102


Intereſt common, cannot be
drawn ad aliud amen than
the common Jaw allow-
eth, 68

Ireland, Parliament there, 109

Judges divided in the Star-
chamber, how the matter


ſhall be taken, 118


Judges


A Table of the principal Matters Part XII.


Judges of eccleſiaſtical mat-
ters, 63

Juriſdiction eccleſiaſtical.
See E.

Juſtices of Wales cannot be
by commiſſion but patent,
why 49

Juſtices of Aſſiſe, Oyer and
Terminer, &c. 31, 32,103


K.
KING cannot diſcharge an


offender, why, and in
what caſes, (ſee 65) 29, 30
King may ordain a new name
of dignity not before 81,

| 112
King, the word extends to
ſucceſſors, 110, 111

It extends to Queen, ibid.


L.


] BEL», what they are;
and where puniſhable, 35,

| 103
Libel for ſeats in the church, 104
London, Cuſtoms there, 113


8 M.
\ A ANSLAUGHTER, 87


Modus decimandi, See
Tithes, a
O.
OATH eXx officio, 265 27


Oath for recuſants, by

the ſtatute of 7 Fac. cap. 6.
Ordinary cannot enforce a
man to anſwer generally
articles ex officio 26, 27
Office newly erected void,
where, 116, 117
The power of Juſtice of
Peace, Juſtice of Aſſiſe,
Conſtable, in ſerving war-
rants, 130, 131, 132


Outlawed perſon, what he
ſhall forfeit, 2


P.
PARLIAMEN T, writ of


ſummons, doth not make

a Peer, 70
Parliament in Ireland, Poyn-
ings's law, 10 H. 7. ex-
plained, 110, 111, 112
Patentee, what he ſhall have
by the grant of goods, 1
Penal ſtatutes not extendable


by equity, 3
erjury, 101
Pirates goods, &c. granted,
73


Pope, his pretence to power
in England, 28, 29
Pre- emption of Tin in Corn-
wall, its original and the
reaſon, 9, 10, 11
Premunire by ſtatute and
common law, 37, 38
Prerogative of the King to
make good debts
Prerogative to diſpenſe with
ſtatutes 18
Prerogative of the King in
ſalt-petre, and where li-
mited, by Cook, 12, 12, 14
Principals, where all the of-
fenders are fo, 81, 82
Privilege of Prieſts. 100
Proceedings in Parliament,
115
Proclamation cannot make
that an offence which was
not, | 7475
Prohibition, where it lieth,
58, 59, 63, 64, 05, 66, 67,
84, &c. 88
Prohibition, none after a writ
of Excommunicato capiend?


Nor after a ſentence to the
Admiralty, 77


ure


Part XII.


Q.
UARE impedit ſtayed by
24 prayer, 3


R.


eee eee taken
by a recuſant in another's
name, betwixt ſtatute 23
Eliz. and 28 Eliz. how it


appears, 1, 2
Recuſancy, forfeiture per
Menſem, I
Recuſant convit, what he
forfeits, 2


Regiſter in court-chriſtian,
his authority, 78
Reſervation, whether good
to the heir or not, where
and why, 36


8.


QALT-FETRE, what the
King's miniſters may do

in digging for it, and where,
13, 14

S$alt-petre,.-licence to take it,
when it begun, and upon
what occaſion, ibid.
Scandal of a Peer, examined
in the Star-chamber, 132,
133, 134


Seats in churches, 105
Simony, what


74
Simony upon the ſtat. 31 H.


8. cap. q. 101
Star-chamber, its juriſdiction,
84, 90


Star- chamber, bill for fol-


gery,


Vol. VII.


103


contained in this Book.


Statutes in England, where
of force in Ireland, 112

Statutes relating to ſpiritual
matters,

To be expounded by the
Judges, 6
Stray, who ſhall have it, and
when, 101
Summons, citation, and pro-
ceſs in the eccleſiaſtical
court ſhall be made in the
name and ſtyle of the


King, 7» 8, 9
5 of ;


"P REASON for counter ·
feiting the great ſeal,
where and when, 15, 16, 17
To kill an Ambaſſador, 16
Tithes, what power the ec-
cleſiaſtical Judges have in
expoſition of the ſtatutes,


63

Trayle Baſton Juſtices, why

ſo called, 25
TE


SE and truſt of goods,
&c. i
Uſury. See evidence therein,


69
W.


WW Eſtminſter- hall, ſtab-
bing there, ſedente cu»

ria, offence and puniſh-
ment, 71
Women, the ſtat. of 3 H. 7.
Cap. 14. expounded, 20g
100


„


0


THE


THIRTEENTH PART.


OR CERTAIN


SELECT CASES in LAW,


REPORTED BY


Sr EDWARD COKE, Enight,


| Late Lord Chief Juſtice of ENGLAND,
A ND


One of his MajzesTy's Council of STATE.


The FIFTH EDITION, carefully corrected ; with the Addition of
REFERENCES to all the later Reports.


Hornet uae tb Chen tn [þ 57.


With two exact TaBLes, the one of the Names of the Caſes, and the other of
the Principal Matters therein contained,


—T


2 KS


READER,


T may ſeem altogether an unneceſſary
work to ſay any thing in the praiſe
and vindication of that perſon and his la-


dours, which have had no leſs than the


general approbation of a whole nation
convened in Parliament: for if King
Theodorick in Caſſiodore could affirm,
Neque enim dignus eft a quopiam redargui qui
neftro judicio meretur abſolvi, that no man
ought to be reproved whom his Prince


commends; how much rather then
ſhould men forbear to cenſure thoſe and


their works, which have had the greateſt
allowance and atteſtation a ſenate could
3 give,


—


9 © *
— ͤ U ²˙ ůwi!m ꝛ— — "Es KK — . „ who's +
— — --
— - =—2 *


— —— ——— <em> — —
— wh——4—4— —


—


— —
*


—


To the READER.


give, and to acquieſce and reſt ſatisfied
in that judgment? Such reſpect and al-
lowance have been given to the learned
works of the late honourable and vener-
able Chief Juſtice, Sir Edward Coke,
whoſe perſon in his life-time was reve-
renced as an oracle, and his works (ſince
his deceaſe) cited as authentic authori-
ties, even by the reverend Judges them-
ſelves. The acceptance his books (al-
ready extant) have found with all know-
ing | perſons, have given me the confi-
dence to commend to the public view
ſome remains of his, under his own


| hand-writing, which have not yet ap-


peared to the world, yet (like true and
genuine eaglets) are well able to behold
and bear the light : they are of the ſame
Piece with his former works, and in re-
ſpect of their own native worth, and the
reference they bear to their author, can-
not be too highly valued: though, in re-
ſpect of their quantity and number, the
caſes reported are but few; yer, as the
{ſkilful jeweller will not loſe ſo much as
the very filings of rich and precious me-

tals;


WD 4 . 1


To the READER.


tals; and the very fragments were com-
manded to be Kept where a miracle had
been wrought, propter miraculi claritatem &
evidentiam - ſo theſe ſmall parcels, being
part of thoſe vaſt and immenſe labours
of their author, great almoſt to a mi-
racle (if I may be allowed the compari-
ſon), were there no other uſe to be made
of them (as there is very much ; for they
manifeſt and declare to the reader many
ſecret and abſtruſe points in law, not or-
dinarily to be met with in other books ſo
fully and amply related) deſerve a pub-
lication, and to be preſerved in the re-
ſpets and memories of learned men, and
eſpecially the profeſſors of the law; and
to that end they are now brought to light


and publiſhed. = a 990 bo Lhe fo ee,


Harte 4 : Zu unc
* 7 e al


87>» { Ars 7 fee C1 D 7 —
eee, of Meet REL AH AI FEE a,
Farewel.
10.
2 | ; CM :
RT J. G. . ee
. 4g P 7
Gee e, - v4 = 51% 74,
5 .


6
—


OF THE


& + ©


FAASE of the Admi-


ralty, 7 Jac. 51
Cale of St. Alphage Pa-


riſh in Canterbury, 8 Ja.
70

Baron and Boy's Caſe,
6 Jac. 18
Caſe of repairing Bridges,


&c. 7 Jac. 33
Bedell 7 and Sherman's
Caſe, 40 El. 47


Baily's Caſe, 7 Jac. 48
Caſe in Chancery, Hil.
H. 19
Caſe in the Common

Pleas, 6 Jac. 26
Collings and Harding's

Caſe, 39 El. 57
Cumberland (Earl) his
_ Cale,


49


WL "Ss


Caſe of Modus Decimandi,
6 Jac. 12
Caſe of Modus Decimandi
and of Prohibitions be-
fore the King, 7 Jac.


Diſow and Beſtney's Cale,
bw wp
Edward's Caſe, 6 Jac. 9
Caſe in Ejedtione firm,
-: e. 58
Hulm's Caſe, 7 Jac, 61
Hayward's and Sir John
W hitebrook's Caſe, 64
Hoghes and Crowther's
Caſe, 7 Jac. 66
Haidon and Smith's Caſe,
8 Jac. 67
Meavill's Caſe, 27 Eliz.
I
More


The Names of the CAsks. Part XIII.


More and Webb's Caſe,
Jac. 65
Mutton's Caſe, 7 Jac. 39
Neale and Rovſe's Cale,
WM 24.
Porter and 1
Caſe, 6 Jac
Caſe of Prohibitions, 61a.
.-" Jv 8}
Sir Allen Percy's Cale,
Jac. 60
Parliament's Caſe, 7 Ja. 63
Prichard and Hawkin' 8
Caſe, 5 Jac. 71
Sir William Read and
Booth's Caſe, 7 Jac, 34


Samm's Caſe, 7 Jac, 54

Smith and Hill's Cafe,
8 Jac. 71

Spary's Cale, 7 Jac.

Sprat and Heal's 1
44 El.

Caſe of Sewers, ' 7 12


Taylor and Moyl's Cai

6 Jac. 11
Weſtcot's Caſe, 7 Jac, 72
Will's Cafe, 7 Jac. 50


Willowes's Caſe, 6 Jac. 1


Caſe in the court of

Wards, 7 Jac. 48
Caſe in the court of
Wards, 7 Jac. 49


WILLOWES's


Pal


WILLOWES's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Jac. 1.


In the Common Pleas.


N treſpaſs brought by Richard Stallon, one of the attor-

nies of the court, againſt Thomas Brayde (which began
in Eaſter term, anno 6 Facobi Rot. 1845,) for breaking of
his houſe and cloſe at Fenditton in the county of Cambridge;
and the new aſſignment was in an acre of paſture: the deſen-
dant pleads, that the place where, &c. was the land and free-
hold of Thomas Willowes and Richard Willowes ; and that
he as ſervant, &c. And the plaintiff for replication faith,
that the place where, was parcel of the manor of Fenditton,
and demiſable, &c. by copy of court roll in fee-fimple : and
that the lords of the manor granted the tenement 1a which,
&c. to John Stallon and his heirs, who ſurrendered them un-
to the ſaid Willowes and Willowes, lords of the faid manor,
to the uſe of the plaintiff and his heirs, who was admitted
accordingly, &c. The defendant doth rejoin, and ſaith,
that well and true it is, that the tenements in which, &c.
were parcel of the manor, and demiſzable, &c. And the
ſurrender and admittance ſuch, praut, &c, But the ſaid Tho-
mas Brayde further faith, that the tenements in which, &c.
at the time of the admiſhon of the ſaid Richard Stallon, were,
and yet are of the clear yearly value of fiſty three ſhillings
and four pence ; and that within the faid manor there is ſuch
a cuſtom, quod rationabilis denariorum ſumma ltgalis monetæ
Anglia ſuper quamlibet admiſſionem cuj iſi het perſanæ, five qua-
rumcungue per ſonarum tenent' vel tenent” per dom vel duminos
mnanerii prædic five per ſeneſchallum, Ic. ad aliquas ter-
ras ſive tenementa cuſtomaria maneru prædict“ ſecundum con-
ſuetudinem manerii illius debetur, et a tempore que, c. debit
fuit dom, &c, 33 gjuſdem edmiſſionts pra fine pro ad-


miſſune


Copyhold fine
reaſonable.
See Moor 622,
623. Cro. Elz.
351, 379. Cro
2c.199, or 296,
Co. Lit. 59. b,
bo.a, 4 Co. 27. b.
Cumberd. 44.
Skin. 248, 249.


The Names of the CAsks.


More and Webb's Caſe,

7 Jac. 65
Mutton's Caſe, 7 Jac. 59
Neale and Rowle's Cale,


* 24.
Porter and 1

' _ Caſe, 6 Jac.
Caſe of Prohibitions, 6a
30» 3]
Sir Allen Percy's Cale,
Jac. 60


Parliament's Caſe, 7 Ja. 63
Prichard and Hawkin's
Caſe, 5 Jac. 71
Sir William Read and
| Booth's Caſe, 7 Jac. 34


Part XIII.


Samm's Caſe, 7 Jac.

Smith and Hits Cai
8 Jac. 71

Spary's Caſe, 7 Jac. 49


Sprat and Heal's Caſe,


44 El.


Caſe of Sewers, 7 1


3
Taylor and Moyl's Cat


6 Jac.
Weltcor's Caſe, 7 Jac, *
Will's Caſe, 7 Jac. 50
Willowes's Caſe, 6 Jac. x
Caſe in the court of
Wards, 7 Jac. 48
Caſe in the court of
Wards, 7 Jac. 49


—


WILLOWES's


Pal


WILLOWES's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Fac. 1.


In the Common Pleas.


N treſpaſs brought by Richard Stallon, one of the attor- Copybold fine


nies of the court, againſt 'Thomas Brayde (which began
in Eaſter term, anno 6 Facobi Rot. 1845,) for breaking of
his houſe and cloſe at Fenditton in the county of Cambridge;
and the new aſſignment was in an acre of paſture: the deſen-
dant pleads, that the place where, &c. was the land and free-


that the place where, was parcel of the manor of Fenditton,
and demiſable, &c. by copy of court roll in fee-fimple : and
that the lords of the manor granted the tenement in which,
&c. to John Stallon and his heirs, who ſurrendered them un-
to the ſaid Willowes and Willowes, lords of the ſaid manor,
to the uſe of the plaintiff and his heirs, who was admitted
accordingly, &c. The defendant doth rejoin, and ſaith,
that well and true it is, that the tenements in which, &c.
were parcel of the manor, and demiſeable, &c. And the
ſurrender and admittance ſuch, prout, Sc. But the ſaid Tho-
mas Brayde further ſaith, that the tenements in which, &c.
at the time of the admiſſion of the ſaid Richard Stallon, were,
and yet are of the clear yearly value of fiſty three ſhillings
and four pence ;z and that within the faid manor there is ſuch
a cuſtom, quod rationabilis denariorum ſumma legalis monetæ
Anglia ſuper quamlibet admiſſionem cujnflibet perſong, ſive qua-
rumceunque perſonarum tenent” vel tenent” per dom” vel dominos
manerii predie? five per ſeneſchallum, &c. ad aliguas ter-
ras five tenementa cuſtemeria maneriu predifa ſecundum con-
ſuetudinem manerii illius debetur, et a tempore quo, Cc. debit
fuit dom, Sc. tempore ejuſdem admiſſionis pra fine pro ad-


miſſune


See Moor 622,

623. Cro. Eliz.
51, 379. Cro.
ac. 190, or 296,
Co. Lit. 59. b.

: ; _ bo.a, 4 Co. 27. b.
hold of Thomas Willowes and Richard Willowes; and that Cumberb. 44.


he as ſervant, &c. And the plaintiff for replication faith, Sin. 248, 249-


Page [2]


Lurtejoinder.


WII Low E s's Caſe, Part XIII.
miſſione illa, quod idem dominus, vel itdem dem” predic? vel Se.
neſchallus ſuus curiæ ejuſdem manerii pro tempore exiſlen” uſus
uit, vel uſi fuerunt per totum tempus ſupradit? in plend curid
mantrii illius pro admiſſione ejuſdem perſonze, ſeu earundem perſi-
narum fic fatla aſſidere & appunttuare, Anglice, to aſſeſs and
appoint eandem rationabilem denariorum ſummam pro fine pro
eadem admifſione fic ut prafertur fatta, nec non ſuperinde ean-
dem denarior um ſummam 7 aſſ'{ſam & appundtuatam, præfuiæ
perſonæ ſive per ſanis fic admiſaæ ſive ddmiſſis, ſolveret el ſolve.
rent, Sc. eidem domino, c. prædidtam rationabilem denariq-
rum ſummam pro fine, pro admiſſione ſua predie” fic aſſeſſam &
appunituar. And further faith, that the Steward ot the ſaid
manor at a court holden 1 October, in the fourth year of the
reign of the King that now is, admitted the plaintiff to the
tenements, in which, &c. and aſſeſſed and ſet a reaſonable
ſum of money, that is to ſay, five pounds fix - ſhillings eight
pence, that is to ſay, valorem eorundem tenementorum per duos
annos, & non ultra pro fine pro prædict'ꝰ x admiſſione predict
Richard: Stallon, to the ſaid lords of the manor to be paid:
and alſo the ſaid- Steward at the ſame court did give notice,
and ſignify to the plaintiff the ſaid ſum was to be paid to the
ſaid lords of the manor, &c. And further ſaith, that the ſaid
Willowes and Willowes, afterwards, that is to ſay, the ſe—
cond day of November, in the fourth year aforeſaid, at Fen-
ditton aforeſaid, requeſted the ſaid Richard Stallon to pay to
them five pounds fix ſhillings cight pence there, for the fine
for his admittance, &c. which the ſaid Richard Stallon then
and there utterly denied and refuſed, and as yet doth refuſe.
By which the ſaid Richard Stallon forfeited to the aforeſaid
Tho. and Rich, Wi“ owes all his fight, eſtate, &c. of and in the
tenements aſoreſaid in which, &c. The plaintiff ſurrejoin-
eth, and faith; that the ſaid fum of five pounds 6x ſhillings
eight pence, &c. was not rationabilts fints, as the ſaid I ho-
mas Brayde above hath alledged, &c. upon which the de-
fendant doth demur in law. And in this caſe theſe points
were reſolved by Coke, Chief Juſtice, Walmſley, War-
burton, Daniel, and Foſter, Juſtices. 1. And principally,
if the fine aſſeſſed had been reaſonable, yet the lords ought
to have ſet a certain time and place when the ſame ſhould
be paid, becauſe the fame ſtands upon a point of for-
feiture: as if a man barguins and aſſures land to one
and his heirs, upon condition that if he pay to the bar-
gaigee or his heirs, ten pounds at ſuch a place, that -
an


part XIII. WIIIOWES's Caſe.


and his heirs ſhall re-enter : in that caſe, becauſe no time is


limited, the bargainor ought to give notice to the bargainee,
c. when he will tender the money, and he cannot tender it


when he pleaſeth ; and with that agrees 19 Eliz. Dyer 354.
For a man ſhall not loſe his land, unleſs an expreſs default
be in him; and the bargainee in ſuch caſe is not tied to ſtay
always in the place, &c. So in the caſe at bar, the copyholder
is not tied to carry his fine always with him, when he is at
church, or at plough, &c. And although that the rejoinder
is, that the plaintiff refuſed to pay the fine ; ſo he might well
do, when the requeſt is not lawful nor reaſonable; for in all
caſes when the requeſt is not lawful nor reaſonable, the party
may without prejudice deny the payment. And he who is to
pay a great fine as 1001. or more, it is not reaſonable that he
carry it always with him in his pocket, and preſently the co-
pyholder was not bound to pay it, becauſe that the fine was
uncertain and arbitrable, as it was reſolved in Hubbard's
caſe, in the Fourth Part of my Reports, amongſt the copy-
hold caſes. 2. It was reſolved, that although the fine be un-
certain and arbitrable, yet it ought to be ſecundum arbitrium
boni viri and it ought to be reaſonable and not exceſſive,
for all exceſhveneſs is abhorred in law, exceſſus in re qualibet
jure reprobatur communt ; for the common law forbids any ex-
ceſſive diſtreſs, “ as it appeareth in 41 E. 3. 26. Where a
man avowed the taking of ſixty ſheep for 3s. rent, and the
plaintiff prayed that he might be amerced for the diſtreſs:
and the court (who is always the Judge whether the diſtreſs
be reaſonable or exceſſive) held, that fix ſheep had been a
ſuſſicient diſtreſs for the ſaid rent, and therefore he was
amerced for ſo many of them as were above ſix ſheep: and
the court ſaid, that if the avowant ſhall have return, he thall
have a return but of fix ſheep : and this appeareth to be the
common law; for the ſtatute of Artauli ſuper chartas extends
only where a grievous diſtreſs is taken tor the King's debt.
See F. N. B. 174. a. and 27 Aſſ. 51. 28 Aff. 50. 11 Hen.
4. 2. and 8 Hen. 4. 16, &c. Non capiatur gravis diſtric-
tro, Sc. And ſo if an exceſhve or an unreaſonable
amerciament be impoſed in any * court-baron or other
court which is not of record, the party ſhall have mo-
derata miſericordia- and the ſtatute of Magna Charta
is but an affirmance of the common law in ſuch point,


men moderat' ſecundim quantitatem feodornm ſuotum & ſecundùm facultates ut pemini gra vida
viderentur, Ke. Vide Brafton, 84. b. rationab' relev 1. quod rationem et menſuram nou axce-


Gt; and ſee him there 85, &c. optime,


4 Co. 27. b.


Fitzgib 86,87.


Vid F. N. B. 32.
a reaſonable aid
uncertain until
the ſtatute
Glanv1) lib. g.
fol. 70. 14 Hf. 4.
9. by Hill.

14 Ii. 4. 1. a.


Page [3]
See Clanvil.
lib. 9. cap. 8.
Opume B. ra-
tionalidus
auxillis, ita ta-


* - —_— - —
- — — - * - —— — — — =
——— —ͤ 1 on — —


= K — - OY —
. ITT


=ZL_<_


o =_— —üä—ä—


WILLIOWE3's Cafe. Part XIII.


See F. N. B. Nullus liber homo amercietur niſi ſecundum Juan.

titatem deliti, And gravis redemptio non efl exigenda. And

the common law gives an aſſiſe of vient diſtreſs, on multi.

plication of diſtreſs found, which is exceſſive in reſpect of

the multiplicity of vexation, And therewith agreeth 27 Af;

30. 51. Non capiatur multiplex diſtrictio, F. N. B. 178. b.

And if tenant in dower hath villains, or tenants at will who

are rich, and ſhe by exceſſive tallages and fines makes them

poor and beggars, the ſame is adjudged waſte. And there.

with agreeth F. N. B. 61. b. 16H. 3. Waſte 135, and 16

H. 7. and fee the Regiſter judicial, fol. 25. b. waſte lieth

in exulando Henricum, et Harmanum, &c. villanos ſuos; gus-

rum quilibet tenet unum meſſuagium et unam virgat” terre, in

villenagio in prædici' villa de T. by grievous and intolerable

diſtreſſes ; by all which it appeareth, that the common law

doth forbid intolerable and exceffive oppreſſing and ranſoming

of villains, whereby of rich they become poor : and yet it

may be ſaid, that a man may do with his villain what he

pleaſeth, or with his tenant at will; but the law limits the

ſame in a reaſonable and convenient manner : for it appear-

eth, that ſuch intolerable oppreſſion of the poor tenants is to

the diſinheriſon of him in the reverſion. So in the caſe at

bar, although the fine is uncertain, (and arbitrary) yet it

ought to be reaſonable ; and fo it appeareth by the ſaid cuſ-

tom which the defendant hath alleged. And therefore in

ſuch caſe the lord cannot take as much as he pleaſeth, but

4 Co. 27, b. the fine ought to be reaſonable, according to the reſolve of

Vide 14. H 4-4+ the court in the ſaid caſe of Hubbard in the Fourth Part of
by Hil, | e

my Reports.

It was reſolved, that if the lord and tenant cannot agree

Of the fine, but the lord demandeth more than a reaſonable

fine, that the ſame ſhall be decided and adjudged by the

court, in which any ſuit ſhall be, for or by reaſon of the de-

nying of the fine, and the court ſhall adjudge what ſhall be

ſaid a reaſonable fine, having regard to the quality and value

of the land, and other neceſſary circumſtances which ought

to appear in pleading upon a demurrer, or found by verdict:

BraQon 1. 2 fel. and if the fine which the lord or his Steward aſſeſſeth be rea-

51. Quam len- ſonable, let the copyholder well adviſe himſelf before he de-

L ny the payment of it: and always when reaſonableneſs is in

nitur in jure, ſed queſtion, the ſame ſhall be determined by the court in which

pendet ex juſti- the action dependeth ; as reaſonable time, 21 H. 6. 30. 22

ts 9g di E. 4. 27 & 50. 29 H. 8. 32, &c,. So if the diſtreſs be rea-

| ſonable, and the like, &c, :

4+ 8


roar ar wa, YT


I. NPart XIII. WiLLowss's Caſe,


4. It was reſolved, that the faid fine in the caſe at the bar
was unreaſonable, viz. to demand for a cottage and an acre
of paſture, fave pounds fix ſhillings eight pence, for the Note the differ:
admittance of a copyholder in fee-ſimple upon a ſurrender e. |
made ; for this is not like to a voluntary grant, as when the
4 copyholder hath but an eſtate for life, and leaſeth; or if he
hath an eſtate in fee-ſimple, and committeth felony, there
arbitrio domini ves & flimari debet; but when the lord is com-
pellable to admit him to whoſe uſe the ſurrender is, and when
Cefluy que uſe is admitted, he ſhall be in by him who made
6 the ſurrender, and the lord is but an inſtrument to pre-
a ſent the ſame: and thereſore in ſuch caſe the value of two
years for ſuch an admittance is unreaſonable, eſpecially when


g the value of the cottage and one acte of paſture is on a rack,
, at fifty: three ſhillings by the year.


5 It was reſolved, that the ſurrejoinder is no more than *
5 what the * law faith, for in this caſe in the judgment of the Page [4]
law the fine is unreaſonable ; and therefore the ſame is but |


a er abundanti; and now the court ought to judge upon the
1 whole ſpecial matter; and for the cauſes aforeſaid, judgment
. was given for the plaintiff.


And Coke, Chief Juſtice, ſaid in this caſe, that where the
uſage of the court of Admiralty is to amerce the defendant
for his default by its diſcretion, as it appeareth in 19 Hen. 6. 7.
: that if the amerciament be outrageous and exceſſive, the ſame


n ſhall not bind the party, and if it be exceſſive or not, it ſhall

f be determined in the court in which the action ſhall be

£ brought for the Jevying of it: and the writ of account is
againſt the bailiff, or guardian, quod riddat ei rationabilem

, mputum de exitibus manerii. And the law requireth a thing

g which is reaſonable, and no excels or exutmity in any thing.

g |

:

e

0

R

n

h

2


PoR TER


Porter and Rocheſter's Caſe.
2 Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


P


In the Common Pleas.


The ſtatute of \HIS term Lewis and Rocheſter who dwelt in Ffſex
23 H. 8. c. go within the dioceſe of London, were ſued for ſubſttac-
ö out orf tion of tithes growing in B. within the county of Effex, by
See 5 Co. 9. Porter, in the court of the arches of the Biſhop of Canter.
. bury in London. And the caſe was, that the Archbiſhop of


1046, & r05o. Canterbury hath a peculiar juriſdiction of fourteen pariſhes,
Poſt. 15, c. Called a deanry, exempted from the authority of the Biſhop
See Fitzgib.110, of London, whereof the pariſh of St. Mary de Arcubus is the
S os, chief: and the court is called the Arches, becauſe the court is
holden there; and a great queſtion was moved, if in the faid
court of Arches holden in London within his peculiar, he
might cite any dwelling in Eſſex for ſubſtraction of tithes
growing in Eſlex ; or if he be prohibited by the ſtatute of the
twenty-third year of King Henry the eighth, c. 9. And al-
ter that the matter was well debated as well by counſel at the
bar, as by Dr Ferrard, Dr. James, and other civilians in
open court; and Jaſtly, by all the Juſtices of the Common
Pleas, a prohibition was granted to the court of Arches,

And in this caſe divers points were reſolved by the court.


| See the Proem 1. That all acts of Parliament, made by the King, Lords
to the Codex 20, and Commons of Parliament, are parcel of the laws of Eng-


5 Ga. 44445,&c, land, and therefore ſhall be expounded by the Judges of the


5 Co. 9, +6, 20. laws of England, and not by the civilians and canoniſts, al-


12 Co. 63. though the acts concern eccleſiaſtical and ſpiritual juriſdic-
11 Co. 25.


12 Co. 63. tion; and therefore the act of * 2 H. 4 cap. 15. by which


N 5, & in effect it is enacted, quod nullus teneat, doceat, informet, Se.
® 5 Co. 23


clam, vel public? aiiquam nefandam opinionem cantrar iam fidei ca-
tholicæ ſen deter minutioni eccleſiæ ſacroſantte, nec de hujuſmadi ſee-
ta, et nefandis doftrinis conventiculas faciat : and that in ſuch
caſes the dioceſan might arreſt and impriſon ſuch offender,
&c. And in 10 Hen. 7. the Biſhop of London command-


ed one to be impriſoned, becauſe that the plaintiff faid, *
| e


Il


1


Part XIII. PorTtR and RochrsrR's Caſe;


he ought not to pay his tithes to his Curate ; and the party fo
impriſoned brought an action ef falſe impriſonment againſt
thoſe who arreſted him by the commandment of the Biſhop ;
and there the matter 1s well argued, what words are within
the ſaid ſtatute, and what without the ſtatute : ſo vpon the
fame ſtatute it was reſolved in 5 E. 4. in Keyſar's caſe in the |
* King's Bench, which you may ſee in my book of Prece- Page [5]
dents : and fo the ſtatutes of Articult cleri, de probibitione re- , , Co as 4
gia; de circumſpedte agatis, of 2 E. b. cap. 13. and al other Kc. *
acts of Parliament concerning ſpiritual cauſes, have always 5 Co. 9
been expounded by the Judges of the common law; as it was - bag n
adjudged in Wood's caſe, Paſch. 29 Eliz. in my notes fol.
22. So the ſtatute of 21 H. 8. cap. 13. hath been expound-
ed by the Judges of the realm concerning pluralities, and the
having of two benefices : canon laws and diſpenſations, ſee
7 Eliz. Dyer 233. The King's courts ſhall adjudge of dil-

nſations and commendams : fee allo 17 Eliz. Dyer 251.
14 Eliz. Dyer 312. 15 Eliz. Dyer 327. 18 Eliz. Dyer 352,
& 347. 22 Eliz. Dyer 377. Conſtruction of the ſtatute,
cap. 12. Smith's cafe, concerning ſubſcription which is a
mere ſpiritual thing. Allo it appeareth by 32 Eliz. Dyer Stat. 24 EL e.
377- That for want of ſubſcription the church was always 8. OPIN
void by the ſaid act of 23 El. and yet the civilians fay, that Cit, 4
there ought to be a ſentence declaratory, although that the 50, & 152.
act (expreſly) maketh it void. 4 Init. 323,324.

2. It was reſolved by Coke, Chief Juſtice, Warburton,
Daniel, and Foſter, Juſtices, that the Archbiſhop of Canter-
bury is reſtrained by the act of 23 H.8. cap. g. to cite any one
out of his own dioceſe, or his peculiar juriſdiction, although
that he holdeth his court of Arches within London, And
lirſt it was objected, |

That the title of the act is, “ an act that no perſon ſhall
& be cited out of the dioceſe where he or {he dwelleth, ex-
c cept in certain caſes :”? And here the Archbiſhop doth not
cite the ſaid party dwelling in Eſſex, out of the dioceſe of
London, for he holdeth his court of Arches within London,
(and Eſſex is in the dioceſe of London.) |

2. The preamble of the act is, © where a great number of
© the King's ſubjeCts dwelling in divers dioceſes, &c. And
here he doth not dwell in divers dioceſes.

3. Far out of the dioceſe where ſuch men, &c. dwell,”
and here he doth not dwell far out, &c.

4. The body of the act is, No manner of perſon ſhall
&« be cited before any Ordinary, &c, out ot.the dioceſe or
« peculiar juriſdiction where the perſon ſhall be inhabiting,”
&. And here he was not cited out of the dioceſe of Lon»


Vor. VII. Q, don.


See Weſenbeck's
Occonomics,
fol. 264.
Calepine in

ver do.


*


Page [6]


PoxTzR and RocnesTER's Caſe. Part XIII.


don. To all which it was anſwered and refolved, that the
ſame was prohibited by the ſaid act for divers cauſes.

1. As to all the ſaid objections, one anſwer makes an end
of them. all : for diœceſis dicitur diflino, vel diviſis, five pu.
bernatio, que diviſa, et diverſa e ab eccliſia alterius epiſcopatis,
ct cemmiiſſu eft guber natio in unius; and is derived à di quod rf
aus, et ocefis, frdes del ſepavatis. quia ſæparat duas juriſdifiones;
ſo dioceſe ſignifies the juriſdiction of one Ordinary ſeparated
and divided from others: and becauſe the Archbiſhop of
Canterbury hath a peculiar juriſdition in London, exempt
out of the dioceſe or juriſdiction of the Ordinary or Biſhop of
London: for that cauſe it is fitly ſaid, in the title, preamble,
and body of the act, that when the Archbiſhop ſitting in his
exempt peculiar in London, cites one dwelling in Effex, he
cites him out of the dioceſe or juriſdiction of the Biſhop of
London, ergo he is cited ont of the dioceſe : and in the claute
of the penalty of ten pounds, it is faid, out of the dioceſe or
other juriſdiction where the party dwelleth, which apreeth
with the ſignification of dioceſe belore. And as to the words
„ far off,” &c. they were put in the preamble, to ſhew the
great miſchief which was before the act: as the ſtatute of 32
Ilena. 8. c 33 in the preamble, it is diſſciſin with ſtrength,
and the body“ of the ac faith, 4 ſuch difleifor,” yet the fame
extendeth to all diſſciſors, but difleifn with force was the
greateſt miſchief, as it is holden in 4 & 5 KEliz. Dyer 219.
So the preamble of the ſtatute of Veſtm. 2. cap. 5. is, heis
in ward, and the body of the act is, Dujuſmodi preſenta, as it
is adjudged in 44 E 3. 18. that an intant who hath an ad-
vowlon by deſcent, and is out of ward, ſhall be within the
remedy oi the ſaid act, but the frauds of the guardians was
the greater miſchief. So the preamble of the act of 21 H. 8.
cap. 15. which gives fſaliſying of recoveries, recites in the
preamble, that whereas divers leflzes have paid divers gieat
incomes, &c. * Be it enacted, that ail ſuch termors,” &c.
and yet the ſame extends to all termors ; and yet all theſe
caſes are ſtronger than the caſe at bar, for there, that word
(/uch) in the body of the act relerreth the ſame to the pre-
amble, which is not in our caſe,

2. The body of the act is, „no manner of perſon hall
« be henceforth cited before any Ordinary, &c. out of the
«*« dioceſe of peculiar juriſdiction where the perſon ſhall be
« dwelling :” and if he ſhalt not be cited out of the peculiar
before any Ordinary, 4 fortwori, the court of Arches which
ſts in a peculiar, ſhall not cite others out of another *

CCL +


—- tots A ans fd MC Aa” Lad


Part XIII. PorTrr and RochrsrER's Caſe,


ceſe: and theſe words, © out of the dioceſe,” are to be


meant out of the dioceſe or juriſdiction of the Ordinary,


where he dwelieth; but the exempt peculiar of the Arch -


biſhop is out of the juriſdiction of the Biſhop of London, as


St. Martin's, and other places in London, are not part of


London, although they were within the circumterence of it,
Vide 4 E. 4. 17. 20 E. 4. 8, &, |

3. It is to be obſerved, that the preamble reciting the great
miſchief, recites expreſly, ** that the ſubjefts were called by
&© compulſory proceſs to appear in the Arches, Audience,
« and other high courts of the archbithoprics of this realm
ſo as the intention of the ſaid act was to reduce the Arch-
biſhop to his proper dioceſe or peculiar juriſdiction, unleſs it
were in five caſes. |

1. For any ſpiritual offence or cauſe committed or omitted
contrary to the right and duty by the Biſhop, &c. which word
(omitted) proves that there ought to be a deſault in the Ordi-
nary.

5 Except it be in caſe of appeal, and other lawful cauſe,
wherein the party ſhall find himſelf grieved by the Ordinary
after the matter or cauſe there firſt begun ; ergo the ſame
ought to be firſt begun before the Ordinary.

In caſe that the Biſhop of the dioceſe, or other imme-
diate Judge or Ordinary dare not, or will not convent the
party to be ſued before him; where the Ordinary is called
the immediate Judge, as in truth he is; and the Archbiſhop,
unleſs it be in his own dioceſe (theſe ſpecial caſes excepted)
mediate Judge, /c:/. by appeal, &c.

4. Or in caſe that the Biſhop of the dioceſe, or the Judge
of the place within whoſe juriſdiction, or before whom the
ſuit by this act ſhould be begun and proſecuted, be party di-
rectly or indirectly to the matter or cauſe of the ſame ſuit ;
which clauſe in expreſs words is a full expoſition of the body
of the act, ſcil. that every ſuit (other than thole which are ex-
preſſed) ought to be begun and proſecuted, before the Biſhop
of the dioceſe, or other Judge of the ſame place.

5. In caſe that any Biſhop, or any inferior Judge, having
under him juriſdiction, &c. made requeſt or inſtance to the
Archbiſhop, Biſhop, or other inferior Ordinary or Judge,
and that to be done in caſes. only where the law civil or canon
doth affirm, &c, By which it fully appeareth, that the act in-
tendeth, that every Ordinary and“ eccleſiaſtical Judge, ſhould
have the conuſance of cauſes within their juriſdiction, without
any concurrent authority or ſuit by way of prevention: and by


this, the ſubjeCt hath great benefit as well by ſaving of travel
aud charges to have Juſtice in his Ny of habitation, as to
| Q 2

7 ;


/ be


Page [7]


PorTrr and RochEsrRR's Caſe, Part XIII.


be judged where he and” the matter is beſt known; as alſo

that he ſhall have as many appeals as his adverſary in the high.

eſt court at the firlt. Alto there are two proviſoes which ex.

plain it alfo, /c:/. ** that it ſhall be lawful to every Archbiſhop

5 to cite any perſon inhabiting in any Biſhop's dioceſe with.

6“ in his province, ſor matter of hereſy ;” (which were a vain

proviſo, if the act did not extend to the Archbiſhop : but by

that ſpecial proviſo for hereſy, it appeareth, that, for all

cauſes not excepted, it is prohibited by the act) then the

words of the proviſo go further; © it the Biſhop or other Or.

% dinary immediately hercunto content, or if the fame Biſhop

&« or other immmediate Ordinary or Judge do not his duty in

„% puniſhment of the ſame;“ which words immediately and

immediate expound the intent of the makers of the act. |

2. There 1s a faving for the Archbiſhop, the calling any

perſon out of the dioceſe where he {hall be dwelling, to the

probate of any teſtament; which proviſo ſhould be alſo in

vain, if the Archhiſhop, notwichſtanding that act, ſkould

have concurrent authority with every Ordinary through his

whole province : wherefore it was concluded, that the Arch-

biſhop out of his diocete, unleſs in the cates excepted, is pro-

hibited by the act of 23 H. 8. to cite any man out of any

other dioceſe. And in truth the act of 23 H. 8. is but a hw

declaratory of the ancient canons, and of the true expoiition

The act of 23 of them: and that appeareth by the canon, Cap. Romana in

R. b ſexto de appellationibus, and Cap. de campetenti in ſexto. And
claration of the , ,

ed canon law. the ſaid act is ſo expounded by all the clergy of England, at

Gibfon's Cod. a convocation in London, ano 1 Tac. Regis 1603. Canon 94.

1046, 1050. where it is decreed, ordained, and declared, that none ſhouid

be cited to the Arches or Audience, but the inhabitants with-

in the Archbiſhop's dioceſe, or peculiar, other than in ſuch

particular caſes only as are expreſly excepted and reſerved in

| Caron 1 Jac. at and by a ſtatute, anno 23 H. 8 cap. 9. And the King by

* ſynod at letters Patent under the great ſeal hath given his royal ailent

88 4. to this amongſt others, from time to time to be obſerved,

exccuſationibus, fulfilled, and kept, as well by the Archbiſhop of Canterbury,

200. Lit. m. 5. the Biſhops and their ſucceſſors, and the reſt of the whole

pas. a. L. a. Clergy of the province of Canterbury, in their ſeveral callings,

ofhces, functions, miniſteries, degrees, and adminiſtrations; as

allo by all and every Dean of the Arches, and other Judge of the

ſaid Archbiſhop's courts, Guardians of fpiritualties, Chancellors,

&c. So the ſame is alſo expreſly confirmed under the great ſeal.

Andalthough the Archbiſhoprick of Canterbury was then void,

yet the Guardian of the ſpiritualties was there, * *

: ICH»


Part XIII. PorTrr and RochEsrER's Caſe.


, Archbiſhop of Canterbury that now is, and then Biſhop of
London, was by letters patent, Preſident of the ſaid Council
in the place of the Archbiſhop then deceaſed : and the King
gave his royal aſſent to the ſame, and, the ſaid canon is of as
full force as if the faid late Archbiſhop of Canterbury had
been then alive. And whereas it is ſaid in the preamble of
the act; “in the Arches, Audience, and other high courts
« of the Archbiſhops of this realm ;” it is to be known, that
the Archbiſhops of this realm before that act, had power le-
gatine from the Pope, by which they pretended to have not
only ſuper-eminent authority over all, but concurrent autho-
rity with every Ordinary in his dioceſe, not as Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, &c. but by. his power and * authority legatine :
for ſunt tria genera legatorum. 1. Quidam de latere dom”
Pape mittuntur ut Cardinales quos appellant fratres. 2. Ali
ſunt dativi, & non de latere, qui ſimpliciter in legatione mittan-
tur, Sc. 3. Sunt nati, ſive nativi, qui ſuarum ecclefiarum pre -
textu legatione ſungantur, et tales ſunt quatuer, ſcil. Archiepiſco-
pus Cant” Eboracen/is, Remanenſis, et Piſanis, So as belore
that act, the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, was legatus natus,
and by force of his authority legatine uſurped againſt the ca-
nons upon all the Ordinaries in his precinct, and by colour
thereof claimed concurrent authority with them, which al-
though they held in the courts of the Archbiſhop, the fame
was remedied by the act of 23 H. 8. cap. q. and all that
which he uſurped before, was not as he was Archbiſhop, for
as to that he was reitrained by the canons, but as he was /egatus
natus, which authority is now taken away and aboliſhed ut-
terly.

Laſtly, if the ſaid act of 23 H. 8. cap. 9. ſhould not be fo
expounded, then the act which is principally made (as it ap-
peareth by the preamble againſt the courts of the archbiſhop-
ricks) ſhould be as to them illuſory ; for it the Biſhop of Can-
terbury, in reſpect of his exempt peculiar in London, may
draw to him all the dioceſe in London; ſo might he at New-
ington, which is a peculiar in Wincheſter dioceſe, draw to


Archbiſhops _
were legati nati,
and had legatine
power, which is
now aboliſhed,
Vid. Linwood.


Page [8]


Vid. Ib. Arch,
Cant. p. 39. that
the Archotſhop
of Cant, hath a
peculiar in many
dioceſes.

Gibſ. Cod. 417,
& 1050s


him the whole diocefe of Winchelter ; and at Totteridge near


Barnet, the whole dioceſe of Lincoln, and fo of the like.

3. It was reſolved, that when any Judges are prohib*t=
ed by any act of Parliament, that if they do proeeed
againſt the act, there a ptohibition lieth. As againſt the
Steward and Marſhal of the Houſhold. Qued Sznefchallus
& Mariſchallus non teneant placit” de libero tenen de de-
bito, de canventione, &c. So in the ſtatute of Articuli ſu-
per Chartas, cap. 3. Regiſter, fol. 185. inter brevia ſuper
fiatuta, So againſt the Conſtable of the caſtle of Dover:


Q 3 | quod


Vid. Paſc. 42 El.
Rot. 139.

Rug d's caſe, a
prohibition for
citing out of the
dioceſe.

. 44 El. rot,
107 3. the like in
an information
upon the ſtatute
againſt Zachary
Babington,

Vid. If any one
in the ſpiritual
Court appeals
contrary to the
ſtatute of 24 H.
S.c.12, although
the matter be
merely ſ:iritua!,
a prohibition li-
th. So upon the
ſtatute of 2 H. 5.
Cp. 2,


Page [9]
See 2 H. 4. 10.
by Hawktord,
and to affirmed
by ihe court,
when ode who
hath not autho-
rity, holdeth
p:ca in ſpiritual
tiiings, whereof
the juriſdiction
du'h nt belong
to him, yet no
contult tion mall
be granted, be-
czuſe a conſulta-
tion ſal! not be
granted to one
that hath not
power, &c.


5. cap. 15.
other matters of mere ſpiritualty do not proceed according to


Part XIH,
quod nen tangit cuſtodiam caſiri. 80 to Juſtices of Aſſiſe upon
the ſtatute Duod inguiſitiones quæ ſunt magne ex-
actionis non capiantur in pate id.

Alſo to the Treaſurer and Barons of the Exchequer, upon
the ſtatute De Articul ſuper Coartas, cap. 4. The ſtatute of
Rutland, cap. ultimꝛ. Ouod communia placit' non teneantur in
Scaccario. All which and many more, you may ſee in the


Regiſter inter brevia ſuper ſlatuta. See F. N. B. 45 & 56,
Kc. 1 17 H. 6. 54. vide 13. E. 3. tit. Prohibition: a prohibi-


Pog r ER and Roch STER'S Caſe.


tion to the Chancellor, and diverſity of courts in the title of


Chancery. So agaiuſt all eccleſiaſtical Judges upon the ſta-
tute of 2 HL. 5. cap. 3. If the Judges there will not give or
deliver to the party a copy of the libel, although that the mat-
ter be meiely eccleſiaſtical : and therewith agreeth 4 E. 4.
37- and F. N. B. 43. e. 50 the caſe upon the ſtatute of 2 H.
If the eccleſiaſtical Judges in caſe of hereſy, and


the intention of the ſame ſtatute ; as it appeareth by the pre-
cedent in 5 E. 4. Keyion's cale, 10 H. 7. 17. See the
opinion of Pailon, 9 kl. 6. 3. A man excommunicated by
the Biſhop of London, for a crime done in another dioceſe,
{tall not be grieved thereby ; ſo as the common law takes no-
tice of the canons, in 04: 1 20% as cram non judice. And al-
though the ſtatute of 23 H. 8. inflits a penalty, yet a pro-
hibition lieth, tor the 7 in ning of the penalty doch not take
aw: 08 che Probibit dition of the law : and therefore, Cap. which
e Sheriff doth put his name unto
the return ; yet the fr ze is error if he doth not put to his
name. Sec 35 H 6.6 when any thing is prohibited by a
ſtazute, il the Party A convicted, he ſhall be fined for * the
contempt to the law; aud 19 H. 6. 4. agrees in mainte-
nance : and if every perſon ſhould be put to his action upon
the ſtatute, the ſame would be cauſe of ſuits and vexation,
and the ſhorteſt and more eaſy is to have a prohibition: ſce
the ſtatute of 21 II. 8. cap. 6. of mortuaries, by which it is
enacted, that no Parſon, Vicar, Curate, &c. demand any
mortuary but in ſuch manner as is mentioned in the act,
upon pain of ſorfeiture of ſo much in value as they take,
more than is limited by the act, and forty ſhillings over to the
party grieved. Let it appeareth by Doctor and Student, lib.
2. cap. 15. fol. 105. that if the Parſon, &c. ſucth for mor-
tuaries otherwiſe taan the act appointeth, that a probibition
lieth; yet there is a penalty added, which is an authority ex-
preſly in the point: and the caſe at bar is a more ſtrong caſe,


and that for three reaſons.
1.


0 al. ones LY


Part XIII. | E DWARPDS“s Caſe.


1. It was made an affirmance of the canon law.

2. It was made for the eaſe of the people and ſubjects;
and 3. For the maintenance of the juriſdiction of the Ordi-
nary, ſo as the ſubjects have benefit by the act; and there-
fore although that the King may diſpenſe with the penalty,
yet the ſubject grieved ſhall have a prohibition. And the rule
of the court was, fiat prohibitio curiæ Cantuar* de Arcub' inter
partes predif” per curiam. And Sherley, and Harris, jun.
Serjeants at law, were of counſel in the caſe.


?
|
|


E DB WAR D S's Caſe.


3 Mich. 6 Jacobi 1.


H E High Commiſſioners in clauſes eccleſiaſtical ob- High commi-
jecded divers articles in Engliſh, againſt Thomas Ed- fien.
wards dwelling in the city of Exeter. . 3 4
1. That Mr. John Walton hath been many years trained 76, —
up in learning in the univerſity of Oxford, and there worthily See Gibſon's
admitted to ſeveral degrees of ſchools, and deſervedly took pogo Ag be
upon him the degree of Doctor of Phyſic. - — 20 396.
2. That he was a reverend, and well practiſed man in the
art of phylic.
3. That you the ſaid Thomas Edwards faid to him, “ you
«& are no graduate,” &c. '
4. That you knowing the premiſes, notwithſtanding you
the ſaid Edwards, &c. of purpoſe to diſgrace the ſaid Dr.
Walton, and to blemiſh his reputation, learning, and ſkill,
with infamy and reproach, did ayainſt the rules of charity
write and ſend to the ſaid Mr. Doctor Walton, a lewd and un-
godly, and uncharitable letter, and therein taxed him of want
of civility and honeſty, and want oi ſkill and judgment in
his art and profeſſion, &c. And you fo far exceeded in your
immoderate and uncivil letter, that you told him therein in
plain terms, „be may be crowned for an aſs,” as if he had
no manner of {kill in his profeſſion, and were altogether un-
worthily admitted to the ſaid degrees, and therein you pur-
poſely and adviſedly taxed the whole univerſity of raſhnels and
indiſcretion for admitting him to chat degree without ſuffi-
ciency and deſert.


24 5. And


Page [10]


Sce Rook of En-
tries 4145 &
447. Non eſt
juri conſentane-
um quod quis
ſuper 11s quorum
connitto ad nos
pertinet in cu-


rid chtiſtianitatis


EdwarDs's Caſe, Part XIII.


5. And further to diſgrace the ſaid Mr. Doctor Walton, in
the ſaid univerſity, did publiſh a copy of the ſaid letter to Sir


William Courtney, and others, and in your letter was con-


tained, /ip/ſelam lichenen mentegram, take that for your inheri-
tance, and thank God you had a good father: and did not
you thereby covertly * mean and imply, that the father of the
ſaid Dr. Walton (being late Biſhop of Exeter, and a reverend
Prelate of this land) was ſubject to the diſeaſes of the French-
pox and leproſy, to the diſlike of the dignity and calling of
Biſhops. |

6. That in another letter you ſent to Mr. Doctor Maders,
Doctor of Phyſic, you named Mr. Dr. Walton, and made a
horn in your letter: and we require you upon your oath to
ſet down, whether you meant not that they were both cuck-
o'ds, and what other meaning you had. ;

7. You knowing that Dr. Walton was one of the high
commiſſion in the dioceſe of Exeter, and having obtained 1
ſentence againſt him in the Star chamber, for contriving an
publiſhing of a libel, did triumphingly ſay, that you had
gotten on the hip a Commiſſioner for cauſes eccleſiaſtical in
the dioceſe of Exeter, which you did to vilify and diſgrace
him, and in him the whole commiſſion eccleſiaſtical in thoſe
Parts. |
Laſtly, that after the letter miſſive ſent unto you, you ſaid
arrogantiy, “that you cared not for any thing that this court
can do umo you, nor for their. cenſure, for that you can
remove this matter at your pleaſure.”

And this term it was moved to have a prohibition in this
this caſe. And the matter was well argued : and at laſt it
was reſolved by Coke Chief Juſtice, Warburton, Daniel,
and Foſter Juſtices, that the firſt fix articles were merely tem-
poral, concerning Doctor Walton in his profeſſion of Fhyſic,
and ſo touched only the temporal perſon, and a temporal
matter, and in truth, it is in the nature of an action upon
the cafe for ſcandal in his profeſſion of phyſic: and yet the
Commiſſioners themſelves do proceed in the ſame ex officio.
And it was reſolved, that as for them, a prohibition doth lic
for divers cauſes. „

1. Becauſe that the matter and perſons are temporal.

2. Secondly, becauſe it is for defamation, which if any
ſuch ſhall be for the ſame, it ought to begin before the
Ordinary, becauſe it is not ſuch an enormous offence,
which is to be determined by the High Commiſſionets:
and for the ſame reaſon ſuit doth not lie before them, for


trahatur in placita, Vide ſtatute eireumſpecte agatis, anno 13 E. 1. Epiſcopus teneat placita in cu-
114 chriſt anitatis de his que ſunt mere ſpiritualia, Et vide Lindwood, fol. 70. Lit. m. dicuntur
mere ſpiritualia quia non habent mixtaram temporalem. Vide 22 E. 4.1. Conſultat. Vide 22 E.


4+ the Abbot of Sion's caſe,


calling


Part XIII. EDWARPDs's Caſe.


calling the Doctor cuckold, as it was objected in the feventh
article: and it was ſaid that the High Commiſſioners“ ought
« toincur the danger of Premunire.“

2. It was retglved, that the eccleſiaſtical Judge cannot ex-
amine any man upon his oath, upon the intention and thought
of his heart, for cogitationis fœnam neme emeret. And in caſes
where a man is to be examined upon his oath, he ought to be


examined upon acts or words, and not of the intention or


thought of his heart; and if every man ſhould be examined


upon his oath, what opinion he holdeth concerning any point


of religion, he is not bound to anſwer the ſame ; for in
time of danger, quis modo tutus exit, if every one ſhould be
examined of bis thoughts. And ſo long as a man doth not
offend neither in aCt nor in word any law eſtabliſhed, there is
no reaſon that he ſhould be examined upon his thought or co-
gitation: for as it hath been ſaid in the proverb, thought is
free; and therefore for the fixth and ſeventh articles, they
were reſolved as well for the matter as for the form, in offer-


ing to examine the defendant upon his oath, of his intention


and meaning, to be ſuch, to which the defendant was not to
be compelled to anſwer : ergo, it was refolved, that as to the
article, he might juſtiſy the ſame, becauſe as it appeareth


upon his own ſhewing, that “ the Doctor was ſentenced in Page [11]


the Star-chamber : alſo the libel is matter mere temporal, and
if itwere merely ſpiritual, ſuch a defamation 1s not examinable
before the High Commiſſioners.

As to the laſt article, it appeareth now by the judgment of
this court, that he might well juſtify the ſaid words: alſo the
High Commillioners ſhall not have conuſance of any ſcandal
to themſelves for that they are parties; and ſuch ſcandal is
puniſhable by the common law, as it was reſolved in Hale's


' caſe, which ſee in the book of the Lord Dyer's Reports, and


ſee in my book of precedents, the copy of the indictment of
Hales, for ſcandalljng of the eccleſiaſtical Commiſſioners.
Note, the Biſhop of Wincheſter being viſitor of the
ſchool of Wincheſter of the foundation of Wickham Bi-
ſhop of Wincheſter ; and the Biſhop of Canterbury, and
other his colleagues, anno 5 Car. cited the Uſher of the ſaid


Judex non poteſt
1njuriam fibi da-
tam punire.


Vid. the ſtat. of
23 H. 8. cap. 9.


ſchool, by force of the ſaid commiſſion to appear before


them, and proceeded there againſt him, for which they in-
curred the danger of a Præmunire. And ſo did the Biſhop
of Canterbury and his colleagues, by force of a high
commiſhon to them directed, cite one Humphry Frank
Maſter of Arts, and Schoolmaſter of the ſchool of Sevenock,


(of


Brewer, a trade
within 5 Eliz.
Inditments, &e.
on the ſaid. tat.
Sce 1 Salk, 370,
373, 382.

5 Mod. 180.

2 Roll. Abr. 81.
pl. 6.

Cumb. 179 212.
254, &c. 288.


Page [12


TAvrTox and SyoiLE's Caſe, Part XIII.


(of the foundation of Sir William Sevenock, in the time of
King Henry the fixth) to appear before the High Commiſ.
fioners at Lambeth, the ſixh day of December laſt paſt,
which citation was ſubſcribed by Sir John Bennet, Doctor of
Laws, Doctor James, and Dr. Hickman, three of the High
Commiſſioners: and Sir Chriſtopher Perkins procured the
ſaid citation to be made, and when the ſaid Frank appeared,
the Archbiſhop being aſſociated with Sir Chriſtopher Per—
kins, and Dr. Abbot Dean of Wincheiter, made an order
concerning the ſaid ſchool, (eil) that the ſaid Frank ſhall
continue in the ſame ſchool until the Anunciation, that he
ſhould have twenty pounds paid to him by Sir Ralph Boſvile,
Knight, who it ſeems was never cited; (but guere, if he was
not plaintiff ?) e


3 _ he. IM [1 , IE N
.
”
*
by .


TAYLOR and SholLE's Caſe.


4 Mich. 6 Jac. 1.


bl


FFTAYLON informed upon the ſtatute 5 Eliz. cap. 4. tam

pro doming Reo” quain pro ſerpſ9 in the Exchequer, that
the detendant had exerciſed the art and myſtery of a Brewer,
&c. and averred that Shoile the defendant did not uſe or ex-


erciſe the art or myſtery of a Brewer, at the time of the mak-


ing the act, nor had been apprentice by ſeven years at leaſt,
according to the ſaid act, &c. The defendant did demur in
law upon the information, and judgment was given againſt
him by the Barons of the Exchequer. And now in this
term, upon a writ of error, the matter was argued at Ser—
jeant's Inn, before the two Chief Juſtices, and two matters
were moved; the one, that a Brewer is not within the faid
branch of the ſaid act: for the words are, “ that it ſhail not
« be lawful to any perſon or perſons, other than ſuch as now
„ Jawfully uſe or exerciſe any art or myſtery, or manual oc-
& cupation,to ſet up, uſe, or exerciſe any art, myſtery, or manual
« occupation, except he ſhall have been brought up therein
« ſeven years at the leaſt, as an apprentice.” And it was ſaid,
that the trade of a Brewer is not any art, myſtery, or
manual occupation within the ſaid branch, becaute the


ſame is eaily and preſently learned, and he“ needs g's to
| ave


Part XIII. Tartor and Sioits's Caſe.


have ſeven years apprenticeſhip to be inſtructed in the ſame,
for every houſewife in the country can do the ſame: and the
act of Henry the eighth is, that a Brewer is not a handicraft
artificer.

2. It was moved, that the ſaid averment was not ſufficient,
for the averment ought to be as general as the exception in the
ſtatute is, (/c:/. ) that the defendant did not uſe any art, myſ-
tery, or occupation at the time of the making the ſame act;
for by this pretence, if any art, &c. then as a Taylor, Car-
penter, &c he may now exerciſe any other art whatſoever.

As unto the firſt, it was reſolved, that the trade of a Brewer,
(ſcil.) to hold a common brewhouſe, to ſell beer or ale to an-
other, is an art or myſtery within the ſaid act; for in the
beginning of the act, it is enacted, that no perſon ſhall be re-
tained for leſs time than a whole year in any of the ſervices,
crafts, myſteries, or arts of Cloathing, &c, Bakers, Brewers,
&c. Cooks, &c. 50 as by the judgment of the ſame Par-
liament, the trade of a Brewer is an art and myſtery ; which
words are in the ſaid branch upon which the ſaid inſorma-
tion is grounded. Alſo becauſe that every houſewife brews
for her private uſe ; ſo alſo ſhe bakes, and drefleth meat: and
yet none can hold a common bakehouſe, or a cook's-ſhop to
ſell to others, unleſs that he hath been an apprentice, &c. for
they are expreſly named alſo in the act as arts and myſteries :
and the act of 22 H. 8 cap. 13. is explained, that a Brewer,
Baker, Surgeon, and Scrivener alien, are not handicrafts
mentioned within certain penal laws : but the fame doth not
prove, but that they are arts or myſteries, for art or myſtery
is more general than handicraft, for the ſame is reſtrained to
manufactures.

As to the ſecond point, it was reſolved, that the intention
of the act was, that none ſhould take upon him any art, but
he who hath ſkill or knowledge in the ſame: and therefore
the ſtatute intendeth, that he who uſed any art or myſtery at
the time of the act, might uſe the ſame art or myſtery : for
quod quiſque norit in hec ſe exerceat. And the words of the act
are, as now do lawfully uſe,” &c. And it was faid, that
it was very neceſſary, that Brewers ſhould have knowledge and
ſbill in brewing good and wholeſome beer and ale, for that
tie ſame doth greatly conduce to men's health: and ſo the
hit judgment was afſirmed.


(5) The Caſe of Mopus DRCIuANP..
Mich. 6 Tac. 1.


In the Common Pleas,


De non Neci- QAHERLE V, Serjeant, moved to have a prohibition, be-
mando ſilvæ cæ- cauſe that a perſon ſued to have tithes of filva cadua un-
dug. . X _

Vide poſt. 23, der twenty years growth in the Weild of Kent; where by the
37, 58, &c. cuſtom of it, which is a great part of the country, tithes of


12 Co. 63,64. any wood was never paid. And if ſuch a cuſtom in non Deci-
Watſon's Cler- 2 2 5
ey man 546, mando for all lay people within the ſaid Weild, were lawſul
$47 &c. or not, was the queſtion; and to have a prohibition it was
arx!l. 137. ſaid, that although one particular man ſhall not preſcribe in
nm Decimando, yet ſuch a general cuſtom within a great
country right well be, as in 43 E. 3. 32. and 45 E. 3.
Cuſtom 15. It was preſented in the King's Bench, that an
Ibid 515, 516, Abbot had purchaſed tenements aſter the ſtatute, &c. And
Page [13] the Abbot came and ſaid, that he was lord of the“ town,
Cuſtom de non &c, And the cuſtom of the town was, that when the
Decimando, tknant cefleth ſor two years, that the lord might enter until
where good or -
wee agreement be made for the arrearages; and that he who held
See Watſon's theſe tenements was his tenant, and ceſſed for two years, and


Clergywan, coz, : ; 2
2 l 8 was an
. he entered: and the rule of the court is, becauſe it was


544, Kc. uſage only in that town, and not in the towns, that is, in
_ * the country adjoining, he was put to anſwer. So as by the
gen o


5 lame it appeareth, that a cuſtom was not good in a particu-
feR. 2, 3, &c. lar town, which perhaps might be good and of force in a
country, &c. See 40 Aſſ. 21, and 27. 39 E. 3. 2. A cuſ-

tom within a town, that an infant, &c. might alien, is not

good; but yet ſuch a cuſtom within Kent hath oftentimes

been adjudged to be good. See 7 H. 6. 26. b. 16 E. 2. Pre-

ſcription 53. Dyer 365. 22 H. 6. 14. 21 E. 4. 15. and 45

Aff. 8. See Doctor and Student, lib. 2.c. 55. A particular

country may preſcribe to pay no tithes for corn, hay, and

other things, but that is with this caution, ſo as the Mi-

niſter hath ſuflicient portion beſides to maintain him, to

celebrate divine ſervice: and fol. 172. it is holden, that

where tithes have not been paid of underwoods under

twenty years growth, that no tithes ſhall be paid bY the

. | ME,


Part XIII. The Caſe of Mopus Dzcrmanpt:


fame, becauſe that they do not renew nor increaſe from year


to year, ſo as they are not due to the Parſon but by cuſtom.® Note no tithes
And he ſaith, fol. 174. that ſuch a cuſtom of a whole coun- ate due for wood


try, that no tithes of a lordſhip ſhall be paid, is good; and it
is to be obſerved, that in all libels for tithes of woods, they
allege a preſcription to have tithes of them : but the court
would adviſe, whether ſuch a cuſtom for a town or country
ſhould be good: but in ancient times, the pariſhioners have
given or procured to the Parſon a wood or other lands, &c.
to have and to hold to him and his ſucceſſors in ſatisfaction
of all tithes of wood in the ſame pariſh; and the Parſon is
now ſeiſed of the fame wood, and that without queſtion is a
good diſcharge of his tithes ; and that in ſuch caſe, if he ſu-
eth for tithes of wood, a prohibition heth : and for that it
hath been ſaid now of late, that ſuch opinions were new and
without any antiquity, unto the great prejudice of the church :
1 will cite you an ancient judgment many years paſt, Mich.
25 H. 3. Wilts. Rot. 5. before the King at Weſtminſter.
Sampſon Foliet brought an attaint upon a prohibition, againſt
Thomas Parſon of Swynden, becauſe he ſued him in the ſpi-
ritual court for a lay fee of the ſaid Sampſon, in Draycot,
contrary to the King's prohibition, &c. The defendant
pleaded, quod coram Fudicibus delegatis petiit de exdem decimas
feeni de quodam prato ipſius Samſonis in Malcot ande eft in poſſeſ»
frme per ſententiam judiciim ſuorum, & fuit, anteguam prohnbitio
dom? Regis ad eum pervenerit, et quod pratum predic? gſt in
alcot unde ipſe ei perſona, et non in Draycet : to which the ſaid
Sampſon replied and faid, qued anteceſſores ſut anteguitùs dede-
runt duas acras prati eccleſiæ de Draycot pro decimis fœni quam
predict? Thomas mods petit in eodem prato, quas quidem duas acras
prati eadem eccleſia adhuc habet, et ſemper hucuſque habuit, unde
videtur ei quoad illud quod preditt Thomas ultra petit, ef? de
laico feodo ſua, et dicit quod pratum illud in quo idem Thomas
petit decimas eft in Draycet ſicut breve dicit, & non in Malcot, &
de hoc ponit ſe ſuper patriam : and the jury found, gued predic?
T. perſana de Swyndon' ſecutus fuit placita in curid chriſtianitatis
de laico feads predict Sampſonis contra prohibitienem dom” Regis,
petendo ab ipſo decimas fam de. quodam prato ipſius Sam-
ſenis in Draycot unde anteceſſores ſui antiguitùs dede-
runt eccleſiæ de Draycet duas acras prati pro decima * font
quam pred" Thomas modo petit, et quas eadem eccleſia ad-
buc habet & ſemper hucuſque habuit, &c. Et quod pratum præ-
dict in quo idem Thomas petiit decimas gi in Draycot, et non in
Walt,


of common
right,


Page [14]


: The Caſe of Mopvs DreitAnpi. Part XIII.


Malrot, c, Idis cen ſideratum eft quod prædic Thomas fit inde

in miſericord' & reddat præd Samſoni 20 marcas quas verſus eum

| pro damnis, &c, Which ancient judgment I have recited at

Wo large, becauſe that the ſame agrees with the rule and reaſon

of the law continued until this day: for judgments or prece-

dents in the time of Ed. 2. E. 1. H 2. John, R. 1. and more

ancient are not authorities or precedents to be now followed,

unleſs that they concur and agree with the law, and common

experience and practice at this day; for many acts of Parlia-

ments (and ſome of them not extant) have changed the an.

cient laws in divers caſes: and deſuetude hath antiquated, and

time and cuſtom hath taken away divers others; and ſo as the

rule is good, gued judiciis poſterioribus fides eft adhibenda ; et a

communi obſervantia non eſt recedendum. There are two points

adjudged by the ſaid record.

Vide poſt, 15, 1. That ſatisfaction may be given in diſcharge of payment

16, 46. of tithes ; and if the ſucceſſor of the Parſon enjoyeth the
Diſchargeot , , thing given in ſatisfaction of the tithes, and ſueth for tithes
at common law, in kind, the defendant ſhall have a prohibition, becauſe that
See and note the he chargeth his lay ſee with tithes, which is diſcharged of
Gibs Cg them. By which it appeareth that tithes may be diſcharged,
20, 21, and altogether taken away and extinct : and herewith agreeth
Antea 4, &c. ib. the Regilter which is the moſt ancient book of the law, J. 38.
* o. 38, 44, to Rox, fc. tali judici, &c. ſalutem. Monſtravit nobis A. tenens
4 Co. 74. quandam partem manerii de D. quod licet E. nuper dominus ma-
5 Co. 9,13, 15, nerii pred” per quoddam ſeriptum indentat' dediſſet & conceſſiſſet
&c, F. nuper per ſonæ eccleſiæ de D. quatuor acras terre cum pertiu
in eodem manerio babend' & tenend' ezdem F. & ſucceſſoribus
ſuis per ſonis eceltſia pred? in perpetuum. Et idem F. per præd
ſaiptum de aſſenſu & voluntatæ Epiſcopi Lincoln dicceſani lic
pred? & FJ. tunc patront eccleſie pred” conceſſit Pref et ſucceſ-
foribus ſuis quod idem E. heredes et aſſignati ſui ent quieti de
| decimis vitulorum, &c. in manerio pred” pro pred” guatuor
| acris ſibi datis, &c. At tamen nunc perſona eccleſiz pred”
tenens pred? quaturr acras terre pred” A. afſienat” prad' E.
ſuper decimam hujuſmodi vitulorum, Sc. in ecdem manerio, ſibi
præſentand' trahit in placitum, coram, Cc. in curia chriſtianita-
tis, Sc. Et quia diſcuſſin hujuſmodi donalionis de laico frodo in
regno naſiro in curid noſtid, & non alibi traftari & fferi
debet, vobis probibemius, quod placitum aliguad ſuper lat-
cum feodum in veeno neſtro nen teneatis in curid cbriſ-
tianitatis, nec quicquam in hac parte quad in enervationem
digti feripti aut donationis, & conceſſionis pred” gue in
curid noftra & nm alibi traclari ſicut pred” eſt decor nere po-
terit atlentetis, five attentim faciatis quoviſinada; by which


allo


part XIII. The Caſe of Mopus DRIMANPDI.


alſo it appeareth, that tithes may be diſcharged, and that the
matter of diſcharge ought to be determined hy the common
law, and not in the ſpiritual court: and it is to be obſerved,

that neither in the ſaid judgment, nor in the Regiſter any
averment is taken of the value of the thing given in ſatisſac-
tion of the tithes. Alſo by the ack of Circumſpecle agatis,
made 13 E. I. it is ſaid, / rector petat verſus parachianos ela-
tiones, et deci mas debitas, ſeu conſuetas, c. which proves that
there are tithes due in kind, and other tithes due by cuſtom,
as a Mods decimandi, Sc. And yet it is reſolved in 19 E. 3.
Juriſdiction 28. that the ordinance of Circumſpecte agatis is
not a ſtatute +; and that the Prelates made the ſame ſans aſ-
ſent, &c. and yet then the Prelates acknowledged, “ that
there were tithes due by cuſtom, which is a Modus decimandi.
By which it appeareth alſo, that tithes by cuſtom may be al-
tered into another thing ||: ſo where a man grants a parcel
of his manor to a Parſon in fee to be quit of tithes, and
makes an indenture, and the Parſon with the aſſent of the
Ordinary (without the Patron) grants to him that he ſhall
be quit of tithes of his manor for that parcel of land : af-
terwards if he or his aſſignee be ſued in the ſpiritual court for
tithes of his manor, he or his aſhgnee ſhall have a prohibition
ppon that deed. And if that deed was made before time of
memory, and he hath fo continued to be quit of tithes, he ſhall
have a prohibition upon that deed, if he be ſued for the tithes
of that manor, or of any parcel of the ſame upon that matter
ſhewed. See 8 E. 4. 14. F. N. B. 41. G. Vide 3. E. 3. 17.
16 E. 3. 1. Annuity 24 40 E. 3. 3. b. and F. N. B. 152.
And therefore, if the lord of a manor hath always holden his
manor diſcharged of tithes, and the Parſon had before time of
memory, or in ancient times, divers lands in the ſame pariſh,
of the gift of the lord, of which the Parſon is ſeiſed at this
day in fee, in reſpect of which, the Parſon nor any of his
predeceſſors ever had received any tithes of the ſaid manor;
if the Parſon now ſueth for tithes of the manor, the owner of
the manor may ſhew that ſpecial matter, and that the Parſon
and his ſucceſſors time out of mind have holden thoſe lands, &c.
of the gift of one who was lord of the ſaid manor, in full


Averment,
Poſt, 38.


+ See the Dedi-


cat. Pryn's 3. to
Papal. Uſurp. p.
19 & lib. 1270.
and Bohun's
Law of Tithes,
O8, &c, |


age [15]


[| Vide Bohun,
ib. 211, 212.
& poſt. 16.


ſatisſaction of the tithes of the ſaid manor; and the proof


that the lord of the manor gave the lands, that tithes ſnould
never be paid, at this day, is good evidence to prove the ſur-
miſe of the prohibition. And lo of the like; and 19 E. 3. t. Ju-


riſdiction 28. it is adjudged, that title of preſcription, ſball-


be determined in the King's court, and therelore a I-
dus


Preſcriptions ta
be adjudged in
the King's
courts, vide 15,
16.


Watſon's Cler-
gyman 528,


Idid. 518, 519,

526, &c. 529.

Ibid. 578, 584,
. |


Ibid. 536, 560,


564, 571, 586,
c. 598, &c,
614, 623, 032,
&c.


Page [16]


See Watſon
503, 512, &c.
to 558.4


Ibid, 546, &c.


Ibid, 526, &c.


Ibid. 502.


The Caſe of Mopus Decinanndi. Part XIII.


dus decimandi which accrueth by cuſtom, and preſcription ſhall


be ſued in the King's court. And it appeareth by the ſtatute
of 7 H. 4. c. 6. that the Pope by his bulls diſcharged divers
from payment of tithes, againſt which the act of Parliament


was made; and by lat. 31 H. 8. c. 13. That the poſſeſſions


of religious perſons given to the King, were diſcharged of
payment of tithes in certain caſes: and by ſtatute 32 H. 8, c.
7. it is provided, that all and ſingular perſons ſhall divide,
ſet out, yield and pay all and fingular tithes and offerings


aforeſaid, according to the lawful cuſtoms and uſages of the


pariſhes and places where ſuch tithes or duties ſhall come, or
immediately riſe or be due: provided always, and be it cn-
acted, “that no perſon or perſons ſhall be ſued or otherwiſe
„ compelled to pay any manner of tithes, for any manors,
lands, tenements, or hereditawents, which by the laws or
& ſtatutes of this realm are diſcharged, or not chargeable
* with the payment of any ſuch tithes :?? and the ſtatute 2 E.
6. c. 13. enacts, that every of the King's ſubjects ſhall from
benceforth juſtly and truly, without fraud or guile, divide,
ſet out, &c. all manner of their predial tithes in their proper
kind as they ſhall riſe and happen, in ſuch manner and form
as hath been of right yielded and paid, within forty years
next before the making ot this act, or of right or cuſtom ought
to be paid. So as it appeareth by this, that tithe is due of
right, and by cuſtom: and alſo in the ſame act there is a
proviſo in theſe words; “ provided always and be it enacted,
„that no perion ſhall be ſued, or otherwife compelled to
« yield, give, or pay any manner of tithes for any manors,
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, which by the laws
«© and ſtatutes of this realm, or by any privilege or preſcrip-
& tion, are not * chargeable with the payment of any ſuch
* tithes, or that he be diſcharged by any compoſition real :”
ſo as it appeareth by that act, that one may be diſcharged
from the payment of tithes five manner of ways.

1. By the law. of the realm, that is, the common law; 23
tithes ſhall not be paid of coals, quarries, brick, tiles, &c.
F. N. B. 53. and Regiſter 54. nor of the aſter-paſture of a
meadow, &c. nor of rakings, nor of wood to make pales, or
mounds, or hedges, &c.

2. By the ſtatutes of the realm: as by the ſtatute of 31 H.
8. c. 13. the ſtatute of 45 E. 3, &c .

3. By the privilege, as thoſe of St. John's of Jeruſalem in
England; the Ciſtertians, Templars, &c. as it appearcth by
20 H. 7, 277. Dyer.

4. By preſcription, as by Medis decimandi, or an annual
recompence in ſatisfaction of them, as appeareth before by
the authorities aforeſaid,


5: Dy


\
Sn, %


Part XIII. The Caſe of Mopus Decritano::.


5. By real compoſitjon, as appeareth by the ſaid writ cited


dut of the Regiſter : and ſo you have one or two examples


(for many others which may be added) of theſe five manners
of diſcharges of tithes. And bv them all it appeareth, that
a man may be diſcharged of the payment of tithes, as before
it is ſaid: fo as now it apparently appeareth by the laws of
England, both ancient and modern, that a layman ought to
preſcribe in mods decimandi, but not in non decimando ; and that
in effect agrees with the opinion of Thomas Aquinas in his
Secunda ſecundæ, gneft. 86. art. ultimo. For there he ſaith,
' quod in veteri lege preceptum de ſolutione decimarum partim erat
morali inditum ratione naturali que dictat quod its qui diving cul-
tui miniflrant ad ſalutem totius populi neceſſaria vittui debent mi-
niſir' juxta illud, 1 Cor. 9. Luis militat, &c. Who goeth to
war at his own charges, &c. Partim autem erat judiciale ex
diving inſlitutione robur babens, (ſcil.) quantum ad determina-
tionem certæ partis. And all that agrees with our law; and
he goeth further, in tempore vero nopæ legis etiam eft determina-
tio partis folvend” authiritate eccleſiæ that is, by their canons)
inſtituta ſecundum quandam humanitatem, ut om non minus po-
pulus nove legis miniflris Ni Teftamenti exhibeat, quam populus
veteris legis miniſtris Veteris Teſtamenti exhibebat, præſertim cum
miniſiri nove legis ſunt majores dignitate, ut probat Apeſlolus,
2 Cor. 3. Sic ergo patet quod ad ſolutionem decimarum tenentur ho-
mines .partim gquidem ex jure naturali, quantum ad hoc quad aliqua
portio data eft miniftris eccleſie, partim vero ex inſlitulione eccleſ”
quantum ad determinationem dlecimæ partis. See Doctor and
Student, lib. 2. cap, 56. fol. 164. That the tenth part is
not due by the law of God, nor by the law of nature, which
he calleth the law of reaſon: and he citeth ſohn Gerſon, who
was a Doctor of Divinity, in a treatife which he calleth re-
gulæ morales ( ſcilicet) ſolutis decimarum ſacerdotibus ęſt jure di-
ding, quatenus inde ſiſlententur, fed quoad partem hanc vel illam
aſſignare aut in alio redditus commutare, paſitivi juris t. And
afterwards, non vocatur portio curatis debita prepterea decima,
eo quod eft deci ma pars, imo eft interdum viceſima aut triceſima.
And he holdeth, that a portion is due by the law of na-
ture, which is the law of God, but it appertaineth to
the law of man to aſlign hanc wel illam portionem, as
neceſſity requireth for their ſuſtenance. And further he ſaith,


that tithes may be e into lands, annuity, or
Vol. VI. tene,


See Selden of
Tithes, c. 14.
ſect. 3 lib. 507.
Bohun's Law of
Tithes,214,21 55
&c,


Selden of Tithes
c. 6,7, $, Ke.
Watſop, 4314
506, $114


.,. ͤ—ͤ—T—' k LC ccCYY


The Caſe of Monvs Decruanyi. Part XIII.


Vide R buff. „ rent, which ſhall be ſufficient for the Miniſter,“ &c. And


'Traftat. De de- | 175 5
N 8 tis there he ſaith, that in Italy, and in other the eaſt countries,


13. an d cim they pay no tithes, but a certain portion according to the cuſ-
ic ti poftunt. tom, &c. And all this is true, if“ not, that tithes be diſ-
Page [17] charged or changed by one of the ſaid five ways: and foraf-
much as it appeareth from themſelves that the tenth part or
value was part of the judicial law only, certainly the ſame
doth not bind any Chriſtian commonwealth, but that the
fame may be altered by reaſon of time, place, or other con-
ſideration, as it apprareth in all puniſhments inflicted by the
Judicial law, they do not now bind any ; for felony is now
puniſhed by death, &c. which was not ſo by the judicial law,
&c. Allo foralmuch as now it is confeſſed, that the tenth
part is now due only ex inſtitutione eccleſ* that is to ſay, by
their canons, and it appeareth by the ſtatute of 25 H.8. c.
19. that all canons, '&c. made againſt the prerogative of the
King or his laws, ſtatutes, or cuſtoms of the realm, are void,
and that was but a declaratory law ; for no ſtatute or cuſtom
of the realm can be taken away or abrogated by any canon,
Canons againſt & c. made out or within the realm, but only by act of Parlia-
e ment; and that well appeareth by 10 H. 7. f. 17. c. 18. that
or preſcription, there is a canon or conſtitution, that no Prieſt ought to be im-
ar- oid. See plcaded at the common law. And there Brian faith, that a
2 — 599 Kc. grave Doctor of the Law once ſaid unto him, that Prieſts and
3 Clerks might (notwithſtanding) be ſued at the common law
well enough ; for he ſaid, that Rex eft perſona mixta, and is
perſona unit cum ſacerditibus ſtatutis A. 2 In whieh.caſe
the King might maintain bis juriſdiction by preſcription ; \by
Thich it appeareth, that preſcription doth prevail againſt ex-
preſs canons or conſtitutions, and is not taken away by them,
which proves that the ſtatute of 25 H. 8. was but a declara-
tion of the ancient law before: and there is an expreſs prohi-
bition in Numb. 18. Nil aliud poſſidebunt, ſed dicimarum ob-
latione contenti quas in uſus eorum & neceſſaria ſeparavi which
was not part of the moral law, or law of nature, but part of
Second point, the judicial : and therefore men of the church at this day do
Limits and poſſeſs houſes, lands, and tenements, and not tithes only.


bour.ds of pa-


rithes, Kc. rote The ſecond point which agrees with the Jaw at this day, which


tied by common was adjudged in the ſaid record of 25 JI. 3. is, that the limits
law. _Yige Lu and bounds of towns and pariſhes {hall be tried by the common
„ and not in the ſpiritnal court, and in this the law
&.. 2 luit. 599. hath gicat reaſon, ſor thereupon depends the title of inhe-

| r1tance


|


Part XIII. The Caſe of Mopus DRcIMANPDI.


ritance of the lay-fee, whereof the tithes were demanded for

fines, and recoveries are the common aſſurances of lay inhe-

ritances ; and if the ſpiritual court ſhould try the bounds of

towns, if they determine that my land lieth in another town

than is contained in my fine, recovery, or other aſſurance, I

ſhall be in danger to loſe my inheritance, and therewith a-

greeth 39 E. 3. 29. 5 Hl. 5. 10. 32 E. 4. t. Conſultation,

3E. 4. 12. 19 H. 6. 20. 50 E. 3. 20. and many other prece-

dents until this day. And note, there is a rule in law, that

when the right of tithes ſhall be tried in the ſpiritual court,

and the ſpiritual court hath juriſdiction thereof, that our

courts ſhall be ouſted of the juriſdiction, 35 H. 6. 47. 38 H.

0.21. 2 E. 4.15. 22 E. 4. 23. 38 E. 3. 20. 14 H. 7. 17.

13 Hf. 2. Juriſd. 19. but that is, when debate is between

Parſon and Vicar, or when all is in one pariſh ; but when they

are in ſeveral pariſhes, then this court ſhall not be ouſted of

the juriſdiction. See 12 H. 2. tit. Juriſdiction 17. 13R. 2.

ibid. 19. 7 H. 4. 34. 14 H. 4. 17. 38 E. 3. 56. 42 E. 3.

12. And yet there is a canon expreſly againſt this, which

ſee in Linwood titulo de parnis 55. And fo folio 227, 228,

amongſt the canons or conſtitutions of Boniface, anno Dom.

1277. And the cauſes whereof the Judges of the common

law would not permit the eccleſiaſtical Judges to try Modum

decimandi, being pleaded in their court is, becauſe that if the

recompence * which is to be given to the Parſon, in fatis- Page [18] '

faction of his tithes doth not amount to the value of the tithes

in kind, they would overthrow the ſame: and that alſo

appeareth by Linwood among{t the conſtitutions Simonis

Mepham, titulb De Decimis, cap. Quoniam propter, Fal. Note this differ-

139. 6. verbo conſuetudines, conjſuetuds ut neu ſolvantur, ence; although

unt minus piene ſelvantur decimæ, non valet; and thidem that the parties
p > . | . Ss 1 3 do admit the Ju-

ſecundum altos, ' quod in dicimis realibus, non valit conſue- on

tudo ut foluatur minus decima parte, fed in fperſenaulus, &c. court, yet upon

the pleading,

though the right of the tithes ſhall come in debate, there this court ſhal be ouſted of the juriſdie-

tion, and the ſpiritual court ſhall have juriſdiction. But when the right of tithes cometh in debate,

and the ſpiritual court cannot have juriſdictian or conuſance of it; as where a layman is plaintiff ag

farmor, or defendant as ſervant ef the Perſon, as a lay man f.rmor cannot ſue there, nor he who

- Juſtlifies a ſervant cannot be ſued in treſpaſs ; but if the ſuit be between Parſon and Vicar, or Par-

ſon and Parſon, and other ſpiritual perſons, if the King's court be ouſted of the juriſdiction after

_ ſeverance of the ninth part; yet the litel ought to be for fubſtraign of tithes, for of that they

have juri!diftion, and not of tithes ſevered frem the nine parts; for that ſhall be in caſe of a Pre-

munire, and it appertaineth to the common law. See 16 H. 2. in the caſe oi mortuary, Vice


Decietalla Sexti, lib. 3. tit. de Decimis, cap. 1. fo. 130. col. 4. Et ſumma Angelica, fo. 72»
Note, Al this ſeems the opinion of ſome civilian ; ergo quæte.


R 2 And


No law cold
bind them, if
againſt the
church's inter-
eft, |


Baton and Boys's Caſe. Part XIII.


And ibidem Lit. M. verbo, integre, faciunt expreſſe contra opi.
nionem quorundam theologorum, qui dicunt ſufficere aliquid dari
pro decima. And that is the true reaſon in both the ſaid
caſes, ſcil. de modo decimandi, et de limitibus parochiarum, c.
that they would not adjudge according to their own canons;
and therefore a prohibition lieth; and therewith agreeth 8 E.
4+ 14. and the other books aboveſaid, and infinite precedents;
and the rather after the ſtatute of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. And alſo
the cuſtoms of the realm ate part of the laws of the realm,


and therefore they ſhall be tried by the common law, as is


Zur ſtat. 2 E. 6.
cup. 14. of In-
groſſors.

1 Hawk. c 80.
ſect. 1, 2, 3, 5.
& ſect. 15, 16,
17, &.


aforeſaid. See 7 Ed. 6. Dyer 79. and 18 Eliz. Dyer 349.
the opinion of all the Juſtices.


(6) BARON and BOYS's Caſe.
Mich. 6 Fac. 1.


In the Exchequer,


N the cafe between Baron and Boys, in an information
upon the ſtatute of 5 F. 6. cap. 14. of ingroflers, after
verdict it was found for the informer, that the defendant had
ingtoſſed apples againſt the ſaid act: the Barons of the Ex-
chequer held clearly, that apples were not within the ſaid act,
and gave judgment againſt the informer upon the matter ap-
parent to them, and cauſed the ſame to be entered in the
margin of the record where the judgment was given; and
the informer brought a writ of error in the Exchequer-cham-
ber, and the only queſtion was, whether apples were within
the ſaid act? The letter of which is, that whatſocver
« perſon or perſons, &c. ſhall ingroſs or get into his
or their hands, by buying, contracting, or promiſe, tak-
$ ing (other than by demiſe, grant, or leaſe of land, or
&« tithe any eorn growing in the fields, or any other corn or
| | „grain,


Part XIII, Baron and Bors's Caſe,"


&« grain, butter, cheeſe, fiſh, or other dead victual within
&« the realm of England, to the intent to ſell the ſame again,
« ſhall be accepted, &c. an unlawful ingrofſer.” And al-
though that the ſtat. of 2 E. 6. cap. 15. made againſt ſellers
of victual, which for their great gain conſpire, &c. number-
eth butchers, brewers, bakers, cooks, coſter - mongers, and
fruiterers, as victuallers: yet apples are not dead victuals
within the ſtatute of 5 E. 6. for the buyers and ſellers of
corn and other victuals have divers proviſoes and qualifica-
tions for them, as it appeareth by the ſaid act, but * coſter-
mongers and fruiterers have not any proviſo for them: alſo,
always after the ſaid act they have bought apples and other
fruits by ingroſs, and fold them again, and before this time
no information was exhibited for them, no more than for
plumbs or other fruit, which ſerveth more for delicacy than for
neceſſary food. But, the ſtatute of 5 E. 6. is to be intended
of things neceſſary and of common uſe for the ſuſtenance
of man ; and therefore the words are corn, grain, butter,
cheeſe, or other dead victual; which is as much as to ſay
victual of like quality, that is, of like neceſſary and common
uſe : but the ſtatute of 2 E. 6. cap. 15. made againſt conſpi-
racies to enhance 'the prices, was done and made by expreſs
words, to extend it to things which are more of pleaſure
than of profit: fo it was ſaid, that of thoſe fruits a man can-
not be a foreſtaller within this act of 5 E. 6. for in the ſame
branch the words are, “any merchandize, victual, or any
other thing.” But this was not reſolved by the Juſtices,
becauſe that the information was conceived upon that branch
ol the ſtatute concerning ingrollers, ;


R 3  MENVILL's


Fine, Lower.
See 2 Co. 74,78.
6 Co. 79.

7 Co. 38, 40.
St. 27 H. 8. c.
10.

St. 4 H. 7. c. 24.
St. 18 E. 1. de
Modo levandi.

5 Co. 2. Part
38, 39

2 Iaſt. 511, &c,


Part XII,


(7) ME N V I L's Caſe.
Hil. 27 Eliz.


(Dower.) In the Chancery.


ILARY term, the 27th of Eliz. in the Chancery, the
caſe was thus: one Ninian Menvill ſeiſed of certain
lands in fee, took a wife, and levied a fine of the ſaid lands
with proclamations, and afterwards was indicted and out-
lawed of high treaſon, and died: the conuſees convey the
lands to the Queen, who is now ſeiſed; the five years paſs
aſter the death of the huſband : the daughters and heirs of the
ſaid Ninian in a writ of error in the King's Bench, reverſe
the ſaid attainder, Mic. 26 & 27 Eliz. laſt paſt ; and there-
upon the wife ſueth to the Queen, (who was ſeiſed of the ſaid
land as aforeſaid) by petition, containing all the ſpecial mat-
ter, ſcil. the fine with proclamations, and the five years paſſed
after the death of her huſband, the attainder and the reverſal
of it? and her own title, /c:/. her marriage, and the ſeiſin of
her huſband before the fine: and the petition being endorſed
by the Queen, fiat droit aux parties, &c. the fame was ſent
into the Chancery, as the manner is.
And in this cafe divers objeCtions were made againſt the


| demandant.


1. That the ſaid fine with proclamations ſhould bar the
wife of her dower, and the attainder of her huſband ſhould
not help her ; for as long as the attainder doth remain in
force, the ſame was alſo a bar of her dower, ſo as there was
a double bar to the wite, viz. the fine levied with proclama-
tions, and the five years palt after the death of her huſband,
and the attainder of her huſband of his treaſon. But admit
that the attainder of the huſband ſhall avail the wife in ſome
manner, when the ſame is now reverſed in a writ of error,
and now upon the matter is in judgment of law, as it
no attainder had been: and againſt tat a man might
plead, that there is no ſuch record, becauſe that the
firſt record is reverſed, and utterly difatirmed and an-
nihilated, and now by relation made no record av r

an


wy %


Part XIII. Menvir's Caſe, in the Chancery,


and therewith agreeth the book of 4 H. 7. 11. for the words

of the judgment in a writ of error are, quod judicium prædici“

& errores prædic & alios in recordo, &c. revocetur & adnulle-

tur, &c. & quod ipſa ad poſſeſſienem ſuam ſive ſeiſinam ſuam

(as the caſe requireth) tenementorum * ſuorum pradift una cum Page [20
exitibus & proficuts inde a tempore juſicii predit? reddit percept .
& ad omnia que occaſtone judicii illius amiſit reſtituatur. By
which it appeareth, that the firſt judgment, which was ort- .
ginally imperfect and erroneous, is for the ſame errors now
annulled and revoked ab intro; and the party, againſt whom

the judgment was given, reſtored to his poſſeſſions, and to all

the meſne profits, from the time of the erroneous judgment
given, until the judgment in the writ of error, fo as the re-
verſal hath a retroſpect to the firſt judgment, as if no judg-
ment had been given: and therefore in 4 HH 7. 10. b. the cafe

is, A. ſeiſed of land in fee, was attainted of high treaſon, and

the King granted the land to B. and afterwards A. committed
treſpaſs upon the land, and afterwards by Parliament A. was
reſtored, and the attainder made void, as if no act had been;

and ſhall be as available and ample to A, as if no attainder

had been : and afterwards B. bringeth treſpaſs for the treſpaſs
meſne; and it was adjudged in 10 H. 7. fol 22. b. that the
action of treſpaſs was not maintainable, becauſe that the at-
tainder was diſaffirmed and annulled ab initio, And in 4 H.

7. 10. it is holden, that after a judgment reverſed in a writ of
error, he who recovered the land by erroneous judgment
Jhall not have an action of treſpaſs for a treſpats meſne,
which was faid, was all one with the principal cate in 4H. 7.
10. and divers other caſes were put upon the ſame ground.

Tt was fecondly objected, that the wife could not have a |
petition, becauſe there was not any office by which her title N
of dower was found, fcil. her marriage, the ſeiſin of her buſ- l

band, and death: for it was faid, that although ſhe was mar-
ried, yet if her huſband was not ſeiſed after the age that ſhe
is dowable, ſhe ſhall not have dower; as if a mau ſeiſed of
land in fee, taketh to wife a woman of eight years, and al-
terwards before her age of nine years, the huiband alieneth ,
the lands in fee, and afterwards the woman attaineth to the |
age of nine years, and the hufband dieth; it was, faid, that
the woman ſhall not be endowed. And that the title of him
who ſueth by petition ought to be found by office, appear-
eth by the books in 11 H. 4. 52. 29 &4il 31. 30 Al. 28. 46

E. 3. bre. 618. 9 II. 7. 24, &c.

"3 7 1 As


Limitations.
Vide 2 Co. 93-
3 Co. 87.
8 Co. 72, 100.
9 Co. 140, tc.
10 Co. 49, 99.
Cumb. 70.
Fail, 3, 12, &c.


Page [21]


Rela'ion.

See 3 Co. 29.
4 Co. 42.
Plow. 31, 260.
Moor 140.
Cro. El. 196,


739.


MzVvVIII's Caſe, Part XIII.


As to the firſt objection, it was reſolved, that the wiſe
ſhould be endowed, and that the fine with proclamations was
not a bar unto her, and yet it was reſolved that the act of
4 H. 7. c. 24. ſhall bar a woman of her dower by a fine levied
by her huſband with proclamations, if the woman doth not
bring her writ of dower within five years after the death of her
huſband, as it was adjudged, Hil. 4 H. 8. rot. 344. in the
Common Pleas, and 5 El. Dyer 244. For by the act, the
right and title of a feme covert is ſaved, fo that ſhe take her
action within five years after ſhe becomes uncovert, &c. but
it was reſolved, that the wife was not to be aided by that fay-
ing; for in reſpect of the ſaid attainder of her huſband of trea-
ſon, ſhe had not any right of dower at the time of the death
of her huſband, nor can ſhe after the death of her huſband
bring an action, or proſecute an action to recover her dower,
according to the direction and ſaving of the ſaid act: but it
was reſolved, that the wife was to be aided by another former
ſaving in the ſame act, viz. and ſaving to all other perſons
(/cil.) who were not parties to the fine) ſuch actions, right,
title, claim, and intereſt in or to the ſaid lands, &. as {hall


firſt grow, remain, deſcend, or come to them after the faid


fine ingroſſed, and proclamations made, * by force of any pi't
in tail, or by any other cauſe or matter had and made bctore
the ſaid fine levied, ſo that they take their actions and pur-
ſue their right and title according to the law, within five
years next aſter ſuch action, right, claim, title, or intereſt to
them accrued, deſcended, fallen, or come, &c. And in this
caſe the action and right of dower accrued to the wife after
the reverſal of the attainder, by reaſon of a title of record be-
fore the fine, by reaſon of the ſeiſin in fee (had) and the mar-
riage. (made) before the fine levied, according to the inten-
tion and meaning of the ſaid act.

And as to the ſaid point of relation, it was reſolved, that
ſometimes by conſtruction of law a thing ſhall relate ab intio
to ſome intent, and to ſome intent not; tor relatio et fictis ju-
71s, to do a thing which was and had eſſence, to be annulled
ab initio, betwixt the ſame parties to advance a right, or ut res
magis valeat quam pereat: but the law will never make ſuch a
conſtruction to advance a wrong, which the law abhorreth, or
to defeat collateral acts which are lawful, and principally if they
do concern ſtrangers: and this appeareth in this cafe (/c:/.) when
an erroneous judgment is reverſed by a writ of error: for


true it is, as it hath been ſaid, that as to the meſne pro-


fits, the ſame ſhall have relation by conſtruction of hy .
. | unti


—


Part XIII. | in Chancery.


until the time of the firſt judgment given, and that js to fa.
vour juſtice, and to advance the right of him who hath wrong
by the erroneous judgment. But if a ſtranger hath done à
treſpaſs upon the land in the mean time, he who recovereth
after the reverſal, ſhall have an aCtion of treſpaſs againſt the
treſpaſſors; and if the defendant pleadeth that there is no
ſuch record, the plaintiff ſhall ſhew the ſpecial matter, and
ſhall maintain his action, ſo as unto the/treſpaſſors who are
wrong doers, the law ſhall not make any conſtruction by way
of relation ab initis to excuſe them, for then the law by a fic-
tion and conſtruction ſhould do wrong to him who recover-
eth by the firſt judgment: and for the better apprehending
the law on this point, it is to know, that when any maa re-
covers 2ny poſſeſſions or ſeiſin of land, in any action by erro-
neous judgment, and afterwards the judgment is reverſed as
is ſaid before, and upon that the plaintiff in the writ of error


ſhall have a writ of reſtitution, and that writ reciting the


firſt recovery, and the reverſal of it in the writ of error, is,
that the plaintiff in the writ of error ſhall be reſtored to his
poſſeſſion and ſeiſin, ana cum exitibus thereof from the time of
the judgment, &c. Tibi præcipimus quod eundem A. ad plena-
riam ſeifinam tenementorum predic” cum pertinentiis fine dilatione
re/litui facias, et per ſacramentum proborum & legalium haminim
de com” tuo diligenter inquiras ad quantum exitus & proficua te-
nementorum illorum cum pertinentiis a tempore fulſi judicii pre-
dic? reddit uſque ad Oct. Sant? Mich. anno, &c, quo die ju-
dicium illud per prafar Juſliciar noſtros revocat' ſuit, ſe attin-
gunt, juxta verum valorem eorundem, eadem exitus et proficua de
terris & catallis prædict“ B. in balivd tud fieri facias, et denarios
inde prefato A. pre exitibus & proficuts tenementorum per eun-
dem B. dicto medio tempore percept fine dilatione haberi facias :
et qualiter hoc praceptum noſtrum fuerit execut” conſtare facias,
&c. in Ota, Sc. By which it appeareth, that the plaintiff
in the writ of error ſhall have reſtitution againſt him who re-
covereth of all the meſne profits, without any regard by them
taken ; for the plaintiff in the writ of error cannot have any
remedy againſt any ſtranger, but only againſt him who is
party to the writ of error, and therefore the words of the ſaid
writ command the Sheriff to enquire of the iſſues and pro-
fits generally, between the reverſal and the judgment, with
all which he who recovers ſhall be charged, and as the
law chargeth him with all the meſne profits, ſo the law
gives to him remedy, notwithſtanding the reverſal, againſt
all treſpaſſors in the interim, for otherwiſe the law ſhould

| | maks


Page [22]


Co. 25, 25, &c.
. 87.
Moor Ca. 384.


MENVILI's Caſe, Part XIII.


make a conſttuction by relation to diſcharge them who are
wrong doers, and to charge him who recovers with the
whole, who peradventure hath good right, and who entereth
by the judgment of the law, which peradventute is reverſed
for want of form, or negligence or ignorance of a Clerk,
And therefore as to that purpoſe the judgment ſhall not be
reverſed ab initio, by a fiction of law, but as the truth was,
the ſame ſtands in force until it was reverſed : and therefore
the plaintiff in the writ of error aſter the reverſal ſhall not have


an action of treſpaſs for a treipaſs meſne, becauſe he ſhall re-


cover all the meine profits againſt him who recovered, nor he
that recovereth ſhall be aſter barred of his action of treſpaſs
for a treſpaſs meſne, by reaſon that his recovery is reverſed,
becauſe he ſhall aniwer for all the meſne profits to the plaintiff
in the writ of error: and therewith agreeth Brian Chief Juſ-
uce, 4 H. 7. 12. a. |

Note reader, if you would underſtand the true ſenſe
and judgment of the law, it is needful for you to know the
true entries of judgments, and the entries of all proceedings
in law, and the manner and the matter of writs of execution
of ſuch judgments. Hee Butler and Baker's caſe in the Third
Part of my Reports, good matter coneerning relations. So
as it was reſolved in the caſe at bar, although that to ſome in-
tent the reverſal hath relation, yet to bar the wife of her dower
by fiction of law, by the fine with proclamations, and five
years palt after the death of her huſband, when in truth ſhe


had not cauſe of action, nor any right or title ſo long as the


attainder ſtood in force, ſhould be to do wrong by a fiction of
Jaw, and to bar the wite, who was a mere ſtranger, and who
had not any means, to have any relief until the attainder
was reverſed. | |

And as unto the other point or objection, that the de-
mandant on the petition ought to have an office ſound for her,
it was reſolved, that it needed not in this caſe, becauſe that
the title of dower ſtood with the Queen's title, and affirmed
it; otherwiſe if the title of the demandant in the petition had
diſafirmed the Queen's title ; alſo in this cafe, the Queen
was not intitled by any oſſice that the wife ſhould be driven
to traverſe it, &c. for then ſhe ought to have had an office to
find her title: but in caſe of dower, although that office had
been found for the Queen which doth not diſafficm the title
in dower, in ſuch cafe the wife ſhall have her petition ewith-
out office, becauſe that dower is favoured in law, the claim-
ing but only for term of life, and afhrming the title of the
Queen, See the Sadler's caſe in the Fourth Part of my Re-


orts,
f And


Part XIII. in the Chancery.


And the caſe which was put on the other ſide was utterly
denied by the court, for it was reſolved, that if a man ſeiſed


of lands in fee, taketh a wife of eight years of age, and a-


lieneth his lands, and afterwards the wife attaineth to the
age of nine years, and afterwards the huſband dieth, that the
wife ſhall be endowed : for although at the time of the ali-
enation the wife was not dowable; yet, foraſmuch as the
marriage and ſeiſin in fee, was before the alienation, and the
title of dower is not conſummate until the death of her huſ-
band, ſo as now there was marriage, ſeiſin of fee, age of nine
years, during“ the coverture, and the death of the huſband,
for that cauſe ſhe ſhall be endowed: for it is not requiſite
that the marriage, ſeiſin and age concur together all at one
time, but it 1s ſufficient if they happen during the coverture :


Page [23]


ſo if a man ſeiſed of lands in fee take a wife, and afterwards .


ſhe elopes from her huſband, now ſhe is barred of her dower,
yet if during the elopement the huſband alieneth, and after
the wife is reconciled, the wife ſhall be endowed : ſo if a man
hath iſſue by his wife, and the iſſue dieth, and afterwards land
deſcendeth to the wife, or the wife purchaſeth land in fee,
and dieth without any other iſſue, the huſband (for the iſſue
which he had before the deſcent or purchaſe) ſhall be tenant
by the curteſy, for it is ſufficient if he have iſſue, and that
the wife be ſeiſed during the coverture, although that it be at
ſeveral times. But if a man taketh an alien to wife, and af-


terwards he alieneth his lands, and afterwards ſhe is made a


denizen, ſhe ſhall not be endowed, for ſhe was abſolutely diſ-
abled by the law, and by her birth not capable of dower,
but her capacity and ability began only by her denization
but in the other caſe there was not any incapacity or diſability
in the perſon, but only a temporary bar, until ſuch age or
reconcilement, which being accompliſhed, the temporary bar
ceaſeth: as if a man ſeiſed of lands in fee, taketh a wife, and
afterwards the wile is attainted of felony, and afterwards the
huſband alieneth, and afterwards the wife is pardoned, and
afterwards the huſband dieth, the wife ſhall be endowed,
for by her birth ſhe was not uncapable, but was lawfully,
by her marriage and ſeiſin in fee, entitled to have dower ;
and therefore, when the impediment is removed, ſhe ſhall be
endowed,


(8) SPRAT


Tithes ſubftraft.
ed, covin, vide
Ant. 12.

Poſt. 37, 38,
48. &c.

5 Co. 2. Part
67, 68.


Watſ. 540, 555,


588, &c. 533
&c. 632, Kc.


Page [C24]


(8) SPRAT and HEAL's Caſe.
Trin. 44 Eliz.
In the King's Bench.


Jan SPRAT libelled in the ſpiritual court againſt Wal.
ter Heal, for ſubſtraction of tithes; the defendant, in the
ſpiritual court, pleaded, that he had divided the tithes from
the nine parts: and then the plaintiff made addition to the
libel (in the nature of a replication) il. that although the
defendant divided the tithes from the nine parts, quod predi?
the plaintiff non fatetur, ſed prorſus diffitetur ; yet preſently af-
ter this pretended diviſion in fraudem legis, he took and car-
ried away the ſame tithes, and converted them to his own
uſe ; and the plaintiſf thereupon obtained ſentence in the ſpi-
ritual court; and to recover the treble value, according to the
ſtatute of 2 Ed. 6. cap. 13. And thereupon Heal made a
ſurmiſe, that he had divided his tithes, and that the plain-
tiff ought to ſue in the ſpiritual court for the double value,
and at the common law for the treble value : and it was ob-
jected, that when the owner of the corn divides them, then
they are become lay-chattels, for the taking of which an ac-
tion lieth at the common law ; and therefore, after ſeverance
from the nine parts, the Parſon ſhall not ſue for them in the
ſpiritual court. |
But it was reſolved by the whole court, that the ſaid divi-
ſion or ſeverance mentioned in the libel, was not any diviſion
or ſeverance within the ſtat, of 2 Ed. 6, c. 13. For tht fame
act provides, that every of the King's ſubjects ſhall, from hence»
forth, truly and juſtly, without fraud “or guile, divide, ſet out,
„yield, and pay all manner“ of other predial tithes in their pro-
per land. ſo as when he divides them to the purpoſe to carry them
away, he doth not divide them juſtly and truly, without fraud
or guile; but heic is fraud and guile, and no way a juſt
diviſior


2 OUS SEES the een. SER —


Part XIII. SPprar and Hrar's Caſe,


diviſon, and therefore the ſame is out of the ſtatute, for the
makers of the ſtatute reſpect quo animo he divides them ( etl.)
with a mind and intention that the Parſon carry them away,
as in right he ought, or with a mind and intention that he
himſelf carry them away, which he ought not, quia fraus &
dolus alicui pradaſe, aut ſimplicitas alicui obeſſæ non debet : and
the ſame is, crimen ſtellionatum, which we call fraudis rem &
impeſturam : and where the words of the ſtatute are, divide,
ſet out, &c. their predial tithes, &c. And if any perſon car-
rieth away his corn and hay, and his and their predial tithes,
&c. And to make an evaſion out of theſe words, this inven-
tion was deviſed; the owner of the corn by covin ſold his
corn before ſeverance to another, and then, as ſervant to the
vendee, reaped the corn, and carried away the corn, without
any ſeverance ; pretending, that neither the vendee,_becauſe
he did not carry them away, nor the vendor, becauſe he had
no property in them, for he did not carry away his corn, or
his predial tithes, ſhould be within that ſtatute : but it was re-
ſolved, that the vendor ſhould be charged in that cafe with
the penalty of the ſtatute, for he carried them away, in frau-
dem legis, and his fraud and covin ſhould not help him or
avail him. See 8 Ed. 3. 290. A real action brought by a man
of religion by colluſion, although that he hath right, yet he
ſhall not have execution, 9 Hen. 6. 41. A recovery upon a
good title by colluſion, ſhall not abate the writ, 33 Hen. 6.
5. A. fale in open market by covin, ſhall not bind the pro-


perty of a ſtranger: but it was reſolved, that the plaintiff , Dane. 22
could not ſue in the "ſpiritual court for the treble value, but Poſt 48,


for the double value that he might. |


Note, the ſuit for the treble value on that ſtatute, muſt
be at the common law.]


(9) NeaLe


be. * — 5 I


2 _— — *


Extortion.

Stat. 25 H. 8.
cap. 5.

See 10 Cn. 101.
12 Co. 78.

1 Hawk. 68.


ginit. 147, 149,
150.

See Sir John
Bennet's Calc.


4 Iaſt. 336.


Page [25]


(9) NEALE's and RowsE's Caſe,
Hil. 6 Jac.
In the Common Pleas.


T a Niſi prius in London, before myſelf this term, the
A caſe was this: Edward Neale informed, upon the ſtatute
21 H. 8. cap. 5. which plea begun Mich. 6 Fac. rot 1031.
againſt James Rowſe, Commiſſaty and Official within the
archdeaconry of Huntington, within the dioceſe of Lincoln,
and having probate of wills and teſtaments, &c. within the
ſame archdeaconry ; and that Nicholas Neale, the third year
of the reign of the King that now is, made his teſtament
and laſt will in writing, and made the plaintiff his executor,
and died poſſeſſed of goods and chattels to the value of a hun-
dred and fifty pounds: the defendant, then Commiſſary and
Official, &c. the 23d of February, 1605, at the pariſh of St.
Mary Bow, te/tament” predit prolavit, inſinuavit, regiſtravit
& fagillavit z ac per manus cujuſuam Theme Niche tune miniſtri
ipſius Jacobi Rotuſe in ed parte depurat” et authorizat” 145. 104.
pro prebatione, inſinuatione ct reciſtratione teflanunti pr adi? de
eadem Edwardo, &c. qui tam, &c. colore officit ſui prædict' ga-
tune i ilidem extorſive recepit, et habuit contra far mam flatutt
predif” with this, that the ſaid Edward, gui tam, &c. will
add, that the writing of the ſaid teſtament, according to the
rate of a penny for every ten lines of the faid teitament, every
line thercot containing * in length ten inches, non attingebaty
to the ſum of 128. 4d. according to the form of the
ſtatute aforeſaid, &c. The defendant pleaded mnibil debet,
and at the Ni/i prins, the evidence of two witneſſes was,
that the plaimiff cauſed the faid teſtament which was in
paper, to be engreſſed in parchment; and the plaintiff of-
fered both to the ſaid Rowſe, the Official, to be proved;
and he anſwered, that he would prove it if his fees ſhall be
paid to him; and the plaintiff aſked him what were his fees,
and he wrote them in a paper, which amounted to 148. 1 d.

or


1 „ ˙ . PET Der og ren =_ ww * —


Part XIII. Ne A1 E and Rowsz's Caſe.


for the probate, inſinuation, regiſtering, and ſcaling : and
thereupon the plaintiff laid upon the table 20s. and deſired
him to take as much as was due to him, and all that was in
the houſe of the Official z but he would receive nothing there
but appointed the plaintiff to come in court, where he would
receive his fees, and accordingly the plaintiff came to him in
court, and prayed to have the {aid will proved ; and the de-
fendant required the ſaid Nicke his Miniſter, to take of him
for the probation, infinuation, regiſtering, and ſealing,
148. 10d, and thereupon he put the ſeal of his office to the
ſaid parchment 1ngrofſed, which the plaintiff brought with
him, and which he delivered to the defendant. And it was
objected, that this caſe was out of the ſaid ſtatute, ſor there-
by as to this purpoſe, it is provided, viz. and where the goods
of the teſtator, &c, amount above the value of gol. that
then the Biſhop, nor Ordinary by him or themſelves, nor any
of his or their regiſters, ſcribes, praifers, ſummoners, appa-
rators, or any other their Miniſters, for the probation, inſi-
nuation, and approbation of any teſtament or teſtaments, &c.
for the regiſtering, ſealing, writing, praiſing, making of in-
ventories, making acquittances, fines, or any thing concern-
ing the ſame probate of teſtaments, ſhall take, or cauſe to be
taken, of any perfon or perſons, but only 58. and not above,
whereof to the Biſhop, Ordinary, &c. for him and his Mi-
niſters 2s. 6d. and not above, and 2s, 6d. to the Scribe for
regiſtering of the ſame, &c. And it was objected by the
counſel of the defendant, that the defendant did not take the
148. 10. for the probation, inſinuation, regiſtering, or ſeal-
ing of the teſtament for no probate was written upon the
teſtament itlelf, nor any ſeal put to it, but the teſta-
ment was ingroſſed in parchment, and the probate and ſeal
put to the tranſcript ingroſſed, and not to the teſtament itſelf,
and ſo out of the ſtatute; and the ſtatute extends only when
the probate and ſeal is put to the teſtament itſelf, and for the
ingroſſing of it after the probate, no certain fee is provided by
the ſtatute; but for the regiſtering of it after it is proved, there
is an exprels fee in the ſtatute: but I conceived that the faid
taking the 148. 10d. in the caſe at bar, was directly againſt
the ſtatute ; for the act is in the negative, and if the executor
requireth the teſtament to be ingroſſed in parchment, he ought
to agree with him whom he requireth to do it, as he may:
but the Ordinary, Official, & ought not to exact any fee


for the ſame of the party as a thing due to him, for divers
cauſes,


1. Becauſe


|
;
|
|


'
N
1
1.
*
N
F
P


Page [26]


Nx Al E and Rowsz's Caſe, Part XIII.


1. Becauſe the words of the act are expreſſed, for the pro-
bation, &c. and for the regiſtering, fealing, writing, praiſ-
ing, making of inventories, fines, giving acquittances, &c,
which word (writing) extends expreſly to this caſe.


2. The words are, or any thing concerning the ſame


probate, and when the ſeal and probate is put to the tranſ-
cript, the ſame, without queſtion, concerns the probate, ſor


the probate. is not put to any writing but only to that, there-


fore the ſame concerns the probate. |

. Such a conſtruction ſhould make the act idle and vain,
for if the Ordinary, Official, &c. might take as much as he
pleaſeth for the ingtoſſing done by his Miniſters, as a fee due
to him, all the purview of the ſtatute which is penned ſo pre-
ciſely concerning perſons, ſcil. Biſhops, Ordinaries, and all
perſons who have power to prove wills and teftaments, Re-
giſters, Scribes, Summoners, Apparators, or any other the
Miniſters, as for the thing itſelf, /cz/. the probation, inſinua-
tion, approbation, regiſtering, ſealing, writing, praiſing,
making of inventories, fines, giving of acquittances, or any
other thing concerning the ſame, ſhould be all in vain, by


that evaſion of tranſcribing of it, as well againſt the expreſs


letter of the act as the intention and meaning of it : alſo the
{tatute ſaith 58. and not above, ſo as the manner of preciſe
penning of it excludes all nice evaſions: and the act ought to
be expounded to ſuppreſs extortion, which is a great affliction,
and impoveriſhing of the poor ſubjects.

4. As this caſe is, he atinexeth 'the probate and ſeal to the
tranſcript ingrofſed, which the plaintiff brought with him and
offered to the defendant; ſo as the caſe at bar was without
queſtion, and generally the Ordinary, Official, &c, cannot
exact or take any fee for any thing which concerns the pro-
bate of a will or teſtament, but that which the ſtatute limits:
and afterwards the jury found for the 8 and of ſuch
opinion was Walmfley, Warburton, Daniel, and Foſter,
Juſtices, the next term in all things, but upon exception in
arreſt of judgment for not purſuing of the act, in the infor-
mation, judgment is not yet given, &.


(10) AID


11


3 4 _— a. P Dc Vw fas a3 "We


Patt XIII. .


(10) Alp to the KING,
Hil. 6 Jacobi.


In the Common Pleas.


—


OT 4, that in this term a queſtion was moved to the
court, which was this: it tenant in burgage ſhould pay

aid unto the King to make his eldelt fon a Knight. And the
oint reſts upon this, if the tenure in burbage be a tenure in
8 for by the ancient common law every tenant in
knight's ſervice, and every tenant in ſocage, was to give to
his lord a reaſonable aid to make his eldeſt fon a Knight, and
to marry his eldeſt daughter, and that was uncertain at the
common law, and alſo uncertain when the ſame ſhould be
paid. And this appeareth by Glanvil, lib 9. cap. 8. ſol. 70.
who wrote in the time of Henry II. Nil autem certam ſtatu-
tum eft de hujuſmodt auxiliis dandis, vel exigendis, etc. ſunt alii
preterea Ro in quibus licet dominis auxilia ſoluvenda ſunt certa
forma præſcripta ab hominibus ſuis ut filius ſuus et heres fiat
Miles, vel ſi primogenitam juam filiam maritaverit, etc. And in
the beginning of the chapter it is called Ratianabile auxilium,
becauſe then it was not certain, but to be moderated by rea-
fon in reſpect of circumſtances: and by the pteamble of the
ſtatute of Weſtm. I. ano 3 E. 1. cap. 35. where it is ſaid,
foraſmuch as before that time reaſonable aid to make one's ſon
Knight, or to marry his daughter, was never put in certain,
* nor when the fame ought to be paid, nor how much be
taken; the ſaid act put the ſaid two unce tainties to a certain-
ty. 1. That fora whole knight's fee there be taken but 209.
and of 201. lands holden in ſocage 20s. and of more, more,
and of leſs, leſs, according to the rate by which the aid itſelf
was made certain. 2. 'That none might levy ſuch aid, to
make his ſon a Knight, until his fon be of the age of
fifteen years, nor to marry his daughter until ſhe be ot the
age of ſeven years. And Fleta, who wrote after the ſaid
act, calls them vationabilia auxilia ad filium Militem facien—
dum, vel ad filiam primogenitam maritandum and by the
ſtatute of 25 Edw. 1. where it is provided, that no taxes
ſnall be taken but by common conſent of the realm,


there is an exception of the ancient aids, &c, which is to
Vor, VII. 8 be


.


Aid to make the
King's eldeſt fon
Knizht. Vide
poſt, 23; and
Gilbert's Hiſto-
rical View,

cap. 2, 3. and
Paul. Manut.
poſt.


Vide F. N. B,
$2. ac.


dee the ſtatute
of 27 H. 8. cap.
10, of uſes in
the preamble,
concerning aids,
to make the el-
deft ſon Knight,
and 10 marry the
daughter.


Page [27


|
|
|
t
k
q


Vide Paulam
Manuyrum ge
Senatu Romano,
pag. 9, Of A's
inſlituted by Ho-
mulus ad r-41 -
mendum curou9
Domini, & ad
filias collocan-
das, &. per
clientes erga
patronos,
Burgrge-teau e,
quid,


Alp to the KING. Part XIII.


be intended of theſe aids due unto the King by the ancient
common law: but notwithftanding the faid act of Weſtm. 1.
it was doubted, whether the King, becauſe he is not expreſly
named, was bound by it; and therefore in the 20th year of
Ed. 2 the King took an aid of 498. of every knight's fee for
to make the Black Prince Knight, and nothing then of lands
holden in focage ; and to take away all queſtion concerning
the fame, the ſame was confirmed to him in Parliament: and
afterwards anno 25 L. 3 cap. 11. it is enacted, that reaſon-
able aid to make the King's eldeſt ſon Enight, and to marr

his eldeſt daughter, ſhall be demanded and levied after the
form, of the flatute made thereof, and not in other manner;
that is to ſay, of every Knight's fee holden of the King with-


out mean 208. and no more, and of every 201. land holden


of the King without mean in ſocage 20s. and no more,
Now Littleton, lib. 2, cap. 10. fol. 36. b. ſaith, burgage-te-
nure is, where an ancient borough is, of which the King is
jord ; and thoſe who have tenements within the borough, hold
of the King their tenements, that every tenant for his tene-
ment, ought to pay to the King a certain rent: and ſuch te-
nute is but tenure in focage ; and all ſocage- land is contribu-
tary to aid, and therefore a tenant in burgaze ſhall he contri-
butary to it.

And it is to be obferved, and fo it appeareth in the Re-
giſter, fol. 1 and 2. That in a writ of right, if the lands or
tenements are nolden by knight's ſervice, it is faid, gras cla-
mat tenere de te per ſervitium unius feodi Militis- and if the
lands be holden in ſocage, the writ is, quas clamat tenere de te
per liberum ſervitium unius libre cinnini, etc. To as ſocage-te-
nure in all wits is called Lib-rum fervitium. And by the


wit of aid, F. N. B. 82. it is commanded to the Sheriff,


gred guſie, We. facias bubere A. rationabile auxilium de / militibus,
et liberis teventibus ſuis in baliva tud, &c. fo as the fame writ
makes a diſtinction of knight's ſervice by the name of Militi-
bus, and of focige by the name of Liberis tenentibus, And in
the Regitter, fol. 2. b. the wizt of right for a houſe in Lon-
don (which is holden of the King in burgage) is in thele
words, Rex, 47eri, wel cuſlodi & Vicecom', London: pre:
cipimus vcbhis quod fine dilatione teneatis G. de uno miſſua-
gie, fc. in Londim, gue clamat tenere de nobis per lilerum
ſer vitium, Se. which proves, that tenure in burgage is a
tenure in ſocage: but it appeareth by the books of A-
vod ry 26. and 10 Henry 6. fo Ancient Demeſne 11. it was
reſolved by all the Juitices in the Exchequer-charaber,
that no tenure ſhould pay for a reaſonable aid to _

| the


Part XIII. Alp to the Kixc.


the daughter, or to make the ſon a Knight, but tenure by
knight's ſervice, and tenure by ſocage; but not tenure by
grand ſerjeanty, nor no other: and 13 H. 4. 34. agrees to
the caſe of grand & ſerjeanty: and by the ſaid books it ap-
peareth, that tenure by frankalmoign, and tenure by divine
ſervice, ſhall not pay, for they are none of them: but tenure
in burgage is a tenure in ſocage; and therefore the ſaid books
prove, that ſuch a tenure ſhall pay aid And I conceive, that
tenure by petit ſerjcanty ſhall pay alſo aid. For Lit. lib. 2.
cap. 8. fol. 36. ſays, that ſuch a tenure is but ſocage in ef-
fect: but Fitz. N. B. 83. A. avoucheth 13 H. 4. 34. that
tenant by petit ſerjeanty ſhall not pay aid: for the book only
extends to grand ferjeanty : if the houſes in a city or borough
are holden of the King in burgage, and the King grant the
ſeigniories to one, and the city or borough to another to hold
of him, then thoſe houſes thall not be contributary to aid, for
they are not immediately holden of the King, as is required
by the law.

And I conceive, that he who holdeth a rent of the King
by knights ſervice, or in ſocage, ſhall pay aid ; for the words
of the act of Weſtm. cap. 36. are, from henceforth of a
whole knight's fee only be taken 20s. of 201. land holden
in ſocage 20s. and the meſne is faid in ſuppoſition of law to
hold the land: and it is not reaſon that the tenant by a fe-
offment before the ſtatute ſhould prejudice the lord of his be-
nefit; And although it was f#d, that a tenure in ſocage is


ſervitium ſacæ, as Littleton faith, and the fame cannot be ap-


lied to houſes : to that it was anſwered, that the land upon
which the houſe is built, or if the houſe falleth down, may be
made arable, and be ploughed. And a rent may be holden in
ſocage, and yet it is not ſubject to be ploughed, but by a poſ-
ſibility afterwards eſcheat to the lord of the land. See Hun-
tington, Polydore Virgil, and Hollingſhed's Chronicle, fol.
35. 15 Hen, 4. Aid was levied by Hen. 2. to marry Maud
his eldeſt daughter to the Emperor, viz. 31. of every hide of
land, 8c. And ſee the Grand Cuſtomery of Normandy, cap.
35. there is a chapter cf aids, whereof the firſt is, to make
the eldeſt ſon of his lord a Knight; and the ſecond to marry
his eldeſt daughter. And ſee a itatute made in azno 19 H. 7.
which beginneth thus, Item præfati C:mmunes in Parliaments
prædicto exiſlentes ex aſſenſu Dominor um ſpiritualium S tempera-
lium in dicto Parliamento familiter exiftentes conceſſerunt præ-


fato Regi quandam pecuniæ ſimmam in loco duorum rationa-


bilium auxiliarum ſug majeſlati de jure debitum tam rutione crea=
| 2 tions


Page [28]


t Inſt, 162. b.
2 Inſt. 231,232,
&c. |
11 Co. 44.


e


|
|
|
Fx
1
!
|


Alp to the KING. Part XIII.


tionis nobiliſſimi filii ſui primogeniti bonæ memoriæ, Domini Ar-
thuri nuper Principis Malliæ, quam ratione matrimonii et tra-
ductianis nobiliſſimi Principis Margaritæ filig ſue primagenit
guam etiam multipitcare pro regni ſui perpetua pace et tranquilli-
tate, Oc, certis viis et modis levand” cujus quidem conceſſionis te.
nor, &c. ſequitur in hec verba : foraſmuch as the King, our
ſovereign lord, is rightfully intitled to have two reaſonable
aids, according to'the Jaw of this land, the one for the mak-
ing Knight the right nonourable his ſirſt begotten ſon Arthur,
late Frince of Wales, deceaſed, and the other for the mar-
riage of the right noble Princeſs his firſt begotten daughter
Margaret, now married to the King of Scots: and alſo that
his Highneſs hath born great and ineſtimable charges for the


defence of the realm, &c. conſidering the premiſes; and if


Page [29]


Note.
Nee Mr, Madox's
F.rma Burgi.
Cad. To


the ſame aids ſhould be levied and had, by reafon of their te-
nures, according to the ancient laws of the land, ſhould be to
them doubtful and uncertain, and great unquietneſs, for the
ſearch and not knowledge of their ſeveral tenures, and their
lands chargeable to the ſame, have made humble petition un-
to his Highneſs graciouſly to accept and take of them the ſum
of 40,0001. * as well in recompence and ſatisfaction of the
ſaid two aids, as for the ſaid great and ineſtimable charges,
&c. as is aforeſaid, The King, to eſchew and avoid the
great vexation, troubles and unquietneſs which to them ſhould
have entued, if the ſaid aids were levied after the ancient
laws : and for the good and acceptable ſervices of the Nobles
of this realm, and other his faithful ſubjects, in their own
erſons, and otherwiſe done to his grace, and thereby ſuſ-
tained manifold coſts and charges, to his great honour and
pleaſure, doth pardon the ſaid. two aids, and accepteth the
offer aforeſaid : and, that the pooreſt of his ſaid Commons
ſhould not be contributary to the ſaid ſum of 40,0001. hath
pardoned 10,0001. parcel thereof, and doth accept of 30,0001.
in full ſatisfaction, &c, And that the cities and boroughs,
towns, and places, being in every ſhire not by themſelves ac-
countable in the Exchequer for fifteenths and tenths, be
chargeable with the ſhires, &c. And all cities and boroughs
not contributary, &c. hut accountable by themſelves, &c.
ſhall be chargeable by themſelves, towards the payment of the
ſaid 30,0001. with ſuch ſums as under the act particularly appear,
&c. And there under the act appear the ſeveral taxations of e-
very ſeveral county, city, borough, &c. and that the city of
London is taxed to 6181. 3s. 5d the city of Norwich to dl.
68. 11d. the city of Canterbury to 531. 138. 3d. 0 rt
01k


,


Part XIII, Alp to the Kino;


folk, 2861. 6s. 10d Suffolk, 12141. 58. 4d. o, Sc. The
ſum. of all the ſums then expreſſed, is 31,6481. whereof al-
lowable for ſees and wages of Commiſhoners and Collectors
6511. 168. 2d. and fo remaineth 31co6l. 4s. and 10d.
Note, that the univerſities of Cambridge and Oxford, and
the college of Eton be excepted. _

See rot. 30 H. 3. ex parte remem' Dam' Theſaur* in ſcacca-
rio, in auxilio nobis cenceſ ad primogenttam fillam noſtram mari-
tand. And note, thet King Henry III. bad aid granted to
him in Parliament ad- Iſabellam ſororem ſuam imperateri mari-
tand' but that was of benevolence. |

Rot. 42 H. 3. ibid. 6. Minflrat R. Fohadnes le Francois
Baro de Scaccario, quod cum dominus Rex non caperet niſi 20 5. de
integro £9 militis de auxilio ad primogenttam filiam ſuam mari-
tand Rado ſil' Rad fil Mich injuſte excgit de codem 308. ad
primogenitam filiam ſuam maritand' pro duabus partibus unius


ferdr militis, et averia ſua cepit, & ea detinet. Et ides man-


dotum eft Vic com Bedd' & Buck" quod venire faciant, Sc. præ-
dif? R. ad reſpondendum eidem Fobanni de prædict tranſgreſſiane,
tt predi? averio, c. HBO as it appeareth by this, that fome
held, that the ſtatu:e of Weſtm. 1. aforeſaid was but a con-
{11 mation of the common law, and that the King alſo ought
not to take more: but that was doubted.

Ib. in regno 2 Ed. 1. rot. 3. de auxilio ad militiam, (which is
meant of knighthood of the King's ſon) in the time of Henry
III. et Jſabella Comitiſſa Albermarte, perdonata 1161. 83. 7d.
pro endem auxilio, quia Baldtinus de inſula frater ejus ci us hæ—
res ipſa eft fuit infra ætatem, et in cuſtodia ejus : & quia tenen-
tes dictæ [ſabelle onerentur per ſervitium militare de prædict'“ pe-
cuniis, Note, that that was before the ſtatute of Weſtm. 1.
and by Hat it appearcth, that if one within age be in ward of
the King, he ſhall not be contributary to aid, but his tenants
which hoid of him (and then held of the King by reaſon of


ward) ſhall pay aid unto the King, as it appeareth by that re-


cord. |

Ibid. 30 Ed. 1. Rex dilectis & filelibus, Vie Kanc' & Rico de
R. * ſalutem. Sciatis, quad in primo die Funii anno regni noſ-
tri 18. Prelati, Comites, Baroncs, et cæteri Magnates, de regno
noſirg conceditur, pro ſe et tota conimunitate ej uſdem regni in pe-
na Parliaments noftre, nobis conceſſerunt 40s. de ſingulis feodis
militum in dicto regno ad auxilium ad primogenitam filiam m0,
tram maritand* levandos, ſicut hujuſmod: auxilium alias in cajit
conſimil'ꝰ levari conſuevit, cui quidem levationt faciend' pro dit/a
cammunitatis eaſimento hucuſque ſuperſedimus faciend' pratirje
affirnauimus vos ad prediftam auxilium, &c, Note, that his


eldeil daughter was married to the Earl of Bar.


O 3 ia.


*


Mat, Paris.


Benevolence.
See 12 Co. 119,
120.


Page 301
Note, that this
double charge
was in reſpect-
that they were
6:/charged of


any coniributio:


for ſocage,
which I con-


ceive was for the


difficulty to f
the ſocag* te
nure.


E * oO * —
2 Wn o


uf
k
i
'Y
i
S
1
N
*
&


PROHIBITIONSV. Part XIII.
Ttid. T. R. 34 Ed. 1. De auxilio conceſſo ad militiam fili


Regis,

ſbid. Hil. 4 Hen. 4. Not. 19. De rationabili auxilis de
Will. Domino Ross, for the marriage of Blanch the King's eld.
eſt daughter, out of the manor of W ragby in the county of
Lincoln: the like M. Rot. 5 H. 4. rot. 33. Lincoln, and rot.
24. Lincoln, and rot. 35. Lincoln, and Tr R. 5 H. 4. rot. 2.
Kanc. and rot. 3 Kanc', and rot. 5. Kanc'.

See ibid. T. R. 21 Ed. 3. ret. Caniab' de auxilio de flium
Regis primogenitum milit” faciend' per Epiſcopum Elienſem : by
which it appeareth, that a Biſhop, for his lands which he


holdeth by knight's ſervice, or ſocage, {hall pay aid: but thoſe


Preſident of
York,

See 4 Inſt. 242,
246. *

12 Co. 48, 50,52.


who hold by frankalmoign, or by divine ſervice, ſhall not
pay aid, as before is ſaid.

See ibid. 20 Ed. 3. rot. 13. and 14. de auxiliando ad prints
jenitum filium Regis militem faciend* and collectors thereupon
appointed. By all which before cited, it appeareth, that te-
nure in burgage 1s ſubject to the payment of aid. And note,
that a great part of London was abbey or chauntry land, and
the lands of perſons attainted : and all thoſe which are im-
mediately holden of the King by knight's ſervice, or in ſo-
Cage, ſhall be contributary to the payment of aid, &c.


(Ii) PROHIBITIONS.
Hil. 6 Jacobi.


PO N Wedneſday, being Aſh-Wedneſday, the

day of February, 1606, A great complaint was made
by the Preſident of York unto the King, that the Judges of
the common Jaw hai, in contempt of the command of
the King the laſt ten, granted fixty, or fiſty prohibitions
at the leaſt, out of the Common Pleas, to the Preſident
and Council of York after the 6th day of February, and
named three in particular, (eil. one between Bell and


Thawptes, another between duell and Huet, and another
in


Part XIII. PROHIBITIONS;


in an information of a riotous reſcue preferred by Engliſh bill
by the Attorney General againſt Chriſtopher Dickenſon; one
of the Sheriffs of York, and divers others, in reſcuing of one
William Watſon out of the cuſtody of the Deputy of one of


the Purſvivants of the fame Council who had arreſted i! e (ſaid


Watſon by force of a commiſſion of rebellion awarded by the
Preſident and Council, which prohibition in the ſaid infor-
matioh was (as was affirmed) denied upon a motion made in
the King's Bench the laſt term, and yet granted by us. And
the King ſent for me to anſwer to that complaint: and I only,
all the reſt of the Juſtices being abſent, waited upon the King
in the chamber near the pallery; who, in the preſence of
Egerton, Lord Chancellor, the Earl of Saliſbury, Lord Trea-
ſurer, the Lord of Northampton, Lord Privy Seal, the Earl of
Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Worceſter, the
Archbiſhop of Canterbury, the Lord Wotton, and others of
his counſel, rehearſed to me the complaint aforeſaid : and I
perceived well, that upon the * faid information he had con-
ceived great diſpleaſure againſt the Judges of the Common
Pleas, and chielly againit me; to which I (having the copy
of the complaint ſent to me by the Lord Treaſurer the ſab-
bath-day betore) anſwered in this manner, that I had, with
as much brevity as the time would permit, made ſearch in the
offices of the Prothonotarys of the Common Pleas: and as
to the faid caſes between Bell and Thawptes, and Snell and
Huet, no ſuch could be found: but my intent was to take ad-
vantage of the miſpriſal: and the truth was, that the fixth
day of February the court of Common Pleas had granted a
prohibition to the Preſident and Council of York, between
Lock, plaintiff, and Bell and others .defendants: and that
was, a replevin in Englith was granted by the ſaid Prefident
and Council, which 1 affirmed was utterly againſt law: for
at the common law no replevin onght to be made, but by
original writ directed to the Sheriff. And the ſtatute of


 Marlbridge,. cap. 21. and Weſtm, 1. cap. 17. bath authoriz-


ed the Sheriff upon plaint made to him, to make a replevin;
and all that appeareth by the faid ſtatutes, and by the
books of 29 E. 3. 21. 8 Eliz. Dyer 245. And the King,
neither by his inſtructions had made the Prefident and
Council Sheriffs, nor could grant to them power to make
a replerin againſt the law, nor againſt the ſaid acts of
Parliament; but the ſame ought to *be made by the She-
riff. And all that was affirmed by the Lord Chance! or
for very good law : and I ſaid, that it might well be th t
we have granted other 5 in other caſes of *
4 lich


Page [31]


OY n


nnd


: — Fr IT ew Tg on,
—— RE Pe EDITED * X


Page [32]


PROHIBITIONS. Part XIIT,


liſh replevins. Another prohibition I confeſs we have grant-
ed between Sir Bethel Knight, now Sheriff of the county of
York, as executor of one Stephenſon, who had made him
and another his executors, and preferred an Engliſh bill
againſt Chambers, and divers others in the nature of an ac-
tion upon cale, upon a troyer and converſion in the life of the
teſtator of goods and chattels, to the value of 10001. and be-
cauſe the other executor would not join with him, although
he was named in the bill, he had not any remedy at the com-
mon law, he prayed remedy there in equity: and I ſay, that
the Preſident and Council have not any authority to proceed
in that caſe, for divers cauſes.

I. Becauſe there is an expreſs limitation in their commiſ-
ſion, that they ſhall not hold plea between party and party,
&c. unleſs both parties, or one of them, tanta paupertate ſunt
gravati, that they cannot ſue at the common law: and in that
caſe the plaintiff was a night, and Sheriff, and a man of
great ability,

2. By that ſuit the King was deceived of his fine, for he
ought to have had 2001. fine, becauſe that the damages a-
mounted to 40001. and that was one of the cauſes that the
Sheriff began his ſuit there, and not at the common law:
another cauſe was, that their decrees which they take upon
them are final and uncontroulable, either by error, or any
other remedy. And yet the Prefident is a Nobleman, but
not learned in the law ; and thoſe which are of the Council
there, although that they have the countenance of law, yet
they are not learned in the law; and nevertheleſs they take
upon them final and uncontroulable decrees in matters of
great importance : for if they may deny relief to any at their
pleaſure without controulment, ſo they may do it by their
final decrees without error, appeal, or other remedy : which

is not ſo in the King's courts where there are five Judges; for
they can deny juſtice to none who hath right, nor give any
judgment, but the ſame is controulable by a writ of error,
&c. * And if we ſhall not grant prohibitions in cafes where
they hold plea without authority, then the ſubjects ſhall be
wrongfully oppreſſed without law, and we reſfirained to do
them Juſtice : and their ignorance in the Jaw appeareth by
their allowance of that ſuit, ci. that the one executor had
no remedy by the common Jaw, becauſe the other would
not join in ſuit with him at the common law : whereas
every one learned in the law knoweth, that ſummons and
ſeverance lieth in any ſuit brought as executors : and this
alſo in chat Particular cate was athrmed by the Lord Chay-

cellor;


Part XIII. ProHIBITIONS..


cellor ; and he much inveighed againſt actions brought there
upon trover and converſion, and ſaid, that they could not be
found in our ancient books. |

Another prohibition I confeſs we have granted, between
the Lord Wharton, who by Engliſh bill ſued before the
Council, Banks, Buttermere, and others; for fiſhing in his
ſeveral fiſhings in Darwent in the county of C. in the nature
of an action of treſpaſs at the common law, to his damage of
2001. And for the cauſes next before recited, and becauſe
the ſame was merely determinable at the common law, we
granted a prohibition ; and that alſo was allowed by the Lord
Chancellor. And as to the cafe of information upon the
riotous reſcous. I having forgotten to ſpeak to that, the
King himſelf aſked what the caſe was? Jo whom J anſwer-
ed, that the cafe was, that one exhibited a bill there in the
nature of an action of debt, upon a Mutuatus againſt Watſon,
who upon his oath afhrmed, that he had ſatisfied the plaintiff,
and that he owed him nothing; and yet becauſe the defen-
dant did not deny the debt, the Council decreed the ſame a-
gainſt him, and upon that decree the Purſuivant was ſent to
arreſt the faid Watſon, who arreſted him, upon which the
reſcous was made : and becauſe that the ſuit was in the na-
ture of an action of debt upon a Mutuatus at the common law,
and the detendant at the common law might have waged his
law, of which the defendant ought not to be barred by that
Engliſh bill, % benefecium juris nemini eft auſerendum the
prohibition was granted; and that was affirmed allo by the
Lord Chancellor: whereupon I concluded, that if the princi-
pal cauſe doth not belong unto them, all their proceedings
was coram non judice, and then no reſcous could be done: but
the Lord Chancellor ſaid, that though the ſame cannot be a
reſcous, yet it was a riot, which might be puniſhed there :
which I denied, unleſs it were by courſe of law by force of a
commiſſion of Oyer and Terminer, and not by an Engliſh bill:
but to give the King full ſatisfaction in that point, the truth
is, the ſaid caſe was debated in court, and the court inclined
to grant a prohibition in the ſaid cafe; but the ſame was
ſtayed to be better adviſed upon, ſo as no prohibition was ever
under ſeal in the ſaid caſe.

Alſo I confeſs, that we have granted divers piohi-
bitions to ſtay ſuits there by Engliſh bill upon penal fta-
tutes: for the manner of proſecution, as well for the ac-
tion, proceſs, &c. as for the count, is to be purſued, and
cannot be altered, aud therefore without queſtion the

| Council


— GG ccc


4


Page [33]


See 1 H. c. 7.
ſect. 1, 2, 3, 4
55 6. 1 Salk.
358,359.

12 Co. zo.
Parr. 54,98, &c.


Repair of BRIDGES, &c. Part XIII.


Council in ſuch cafes cannot hold plea, which was alfo af-
firmed by the Lord Chancellor. And I faid, that it was re-
ſolved in the reign of Queen Elizabeth in Parot's cafe, and
now lately in the caſe of the Preſident and Council of Wales,
that no court of equity can be erected at this day without act
of Parliament, for the reaſons aud cauſes in the report of the
laid caſe of Parot.

And the King was well ſatisfied with theſe reaſons and
cauſes of ® our proceedings, who of his Grace gave me hig
royal hand, and I departed from thence in his favour. 'And
the ſurmiſe of the number, and that the prohibition in the
ſaid caſe in the information was denied in the King's Bench,
was utterly denicd; for the ſame was moved when two
Judges only were in court, who gave not any opinion there-
in, but required Serjzant Hutton, who moved it, to move
the ſame again when the court was full, &c.


(12) REPAIR of BRIDGES, GC.


Paſch. 7 Fac. 1.


OTE, that this term a queſtion was moved at Ser-
N jeant's-Inn; who by the common Jaw ought to repair
the bridges, common rivers, and ſewers, and the highways,
and by what means they ſhall be compelled to it? And firſt
of the bridges: and as to them it is to be known, that of
common right all the county ſhall be charged to the repara-
tion of a bridge ; and therewith agreeth 10 Ed. 3. 28. b.


That a bridge ſhall be levied by the whole county, becauſe it


is a common eaſement for the whole county; and as to that
point, the ſtatute of 22 H. 8. cap. 5. was but an aſſirmance
of the common law: and this is true, when no other is bound
by the law to repair it, but he who hath the toll of the
men or cattle which paſs over a bridge or cauſey, he
onght to repair the fame, for he hath the toll to that
purpoſe, et gui ſentit commadum ſentire devet & 1

an


Part XIII. REPAIR of BRIDOES, &c.


and therewith agrees 14 E. 3. Bar 276. Alſo a man may be
bounden to repair a bridge, ration? tenuræ of certain land,
but a particular perſon cannot be bound by preſcription, ſcil.
that he and all his anceſtors have repaired the bridge, if it be
not in reſpect of the tenure of his land, taking of toll, or
other profit; for the act of the anceſtor cannot charge the heir
without profit. But an Abbot or other corporation who hath
a lawful being may be charged, /c:/. that he and his predeceſ-
ſors time out of mind, &c. have repaired the bridge ; for the
Abbot and Convent may bind their ſucceſſors. Vide 21 E. 4.
28. 27 E. 3. 8. 22 Aſſ. 8. 5 H. 7. 3 And if an Abbot
and his predeceſſors time out of mind have repaired a bridge
of alms, they ſhall be compelled to repair it ; and therewith
agreeth 10 Ed. 3. 28. 80 it is of a highway of common
right, all the county ought for to repair it, becauſe that the
county have their eaſe and pailage by it, which ſtands with
the reaſon of the caſe of the bridge; but yet ſome may be


1 Salle. 258,359-


particularly bounden to repair it as is aforeſaid, He who hath Sewers:
the land adjoining, ought of common right witkout preſcrip- Poſt. 35.


tion to ſcour and cleanſe the ditches, next to the way to his
land; and therewith agreeth the book of 8 H. 7. 5. But he


who hath land adjoining without preſcription, is not bound


to repair the way. So of a common river, of common rig lit
all who have eaſe and paſſage by it, ought to cleanſe and ſcour
it; for a common river is as a common ſtreet, as it is fail
in 22 AiT, and 37 Af. 10. But he who hath land adjoining
to the river is not bounden to cleanſe the river, unleſs he
hath the benefit of it, /c:1, a toll, or a fiſhing, or other pro-
fit, Sce 37 All. p. 10.


Page [ 34]


Caſe of forgery,
&c. See I Salk,
342, 371, 375

I Hawk, ch. 70.
per totum.

2 Hawk. ch. 8.
ſect. 38. ch. 27.
ſect. 28. ch. 4 Jo


lea. 25. ch. 40.


ſe. 19, &c. 24.
4 Co. 18.

5 Co. 2. Part
50, Gi. P

10 Co. 103.

1 Halcs II. P. C.
6386.


Part XIII.


(13) Sir WILLIAM READ and
Boorfs Cale.


Paſch. 7 Jacobi.


N the great caſe in the Star- chamber of a forgery between
Sir William Read, plaintiff, and Roger Booth, and Cuth-
bert Booth, and others, defendants ; the caſe was this:

The ſaid Roger Booth, 38 Eliz. was convicted in that court
of the publication of a writing under ſeal, forged in the name
of Sir Thomas Greſham, of a rent-charge of an hundred
pounds, out of all his lands and tenements, to one Markham
for ninety-nine years, bearing date the one and twenticth
year of Queen Elizabeth ; the faid Roger knowing it to be
forged. And afterwards the ſaid Sir William Read exhibited
the ſaid bill againſt the ſaid Booth and others, for forging of
another writing under ſeal, bearing date the twentieth of El.
in the name of the ſaid Sir Thomas Greſham, purporting a
deed of feoffment of all his lands (except certain) to Sir
Rowland Heyward and Edward Hoogon and their heirs, to
certain uſes; which was in eifeCt to the uſe of Markham the
younger and his heirs: and for the publication of the ſaid
writing, knowing the ſame to be forged, was the bill exhibit-
ed. And now upon the hearing of the cauſe in the Star-
chamber this term, theſe doubts were moved upon the ſtatute
of 5 El. 1, If one who is convicted of publication of a deed
of feoffment or rent-charge, knowing the ſame to be forged,
again at another day forge another deed of feoffment, or rent-
charge, if he be within the caſe of felony within the ſaid
act (which doubt ariſeth upon theſe words (ey com-
mitted againit any of the ſaid offences.) And therefore it
was objected, that he ought to commit again the ſame nature
of offence, il. if he were convicted of torgery he ought to
forge again, and not only publiſh, knowing, &c. And if
firit he were convicted of publiſhing, knowing, &c. he ought
to offend again in publication, knowing, &c. and not in for-


gery, for (e/t/sons) which is (iterum) implieth that it ought


to be of the ſame nature of offence, Ihe ſecond doubt
| Was;


Part XIII. Sir William Read and Booth's Caſe.


was, if a man committed two forgeries, the one in 37th of


Eliz. and the other in 38, and he is firſt convicted of the laſt,
if he may be now impeached for the firſt. The third doubt
was, when Roger Booth was convicted in 38 Eliz. and after-
wards is charged with a new forgery in 37 Eliz. if the wit-
neſſes proving in truth that it was forged after the firſt con-
viction, if the Star- chamber hath juriſdiction of it. The laſt
doubt was, when Cuthbert Booth, whonever was convicted of
forgery before, if in truth the forgery was done, and ſo prov-
ed in 38 Eliz. if he might be convicted upon this bill, be-
cauſe that the forgery is alleged before that it was done. As
to the firſt and ſecond doubts, it was reſolved by the two
Chief Juſtices and the Chief Baron, that if any one be con-
victed of forgery or publication of any writing concerning
frechold, &c. within the firſt branch; or concerning intereſt
or term for years, &c. within the ſecond branch and
be convicted, if afterwards he offend either againſt the
firſt branch or ſecond, that the ſame is felony: as if
he forgeth a writing concerning intereſt for years within
the ſecond branch, and be convicted, and afterwards he forg-
eth a charter of feoffment within the firſt branch, or e conver-
ſo, * that that is ſelony, and that by expreſs words of the act;
that if any perſon or perſons being hereatter convicted or con-
demned of any of the ſaid offences, (which words
any -of the ſaid offences, extend to all the offences men-
tioned before, either in the firſt branch, or in the ſecond
branch) by any the ways or means above limited, ſhall, after
any ſuch conviction or condemnation, eftſoons commit or
perpetrate any of the ſaid offences, in form aforefaid, which
words, any of the ſaid offences,” &c. do extend to the na-
ture of all the offences mentioned in the firſt and ſecond
branches : but if one forge a writing in 37 of Eliz. and af-
terwards he forge another in 38 of Eliz. yet it is not felony,
although that he forgeth many writings one after the other,
for by the expreſs words of the act, it is not felony. The
forgery, &c. which is felony by the act, ought to be after
conviction or condemnation of a former writing. As to the
third doubt, it was reſolved, that the allegation of the time
by the plaintiff in the bill, ſhall not alter the offence, but
ſhall give unto the court juriſdiction ; but if it appeareth to
the court, that the forgery or publication was after the ſen-


Page [35]


tence, then the court ſhall ſurceaſe. As to the laſt point, it


was reſolved, ' That the time of the forgery is not mate-
rial, be it beſore or alter the oftence in truth com-


mitted,


N


{
|
p
3
i
;
9


2 LIED SY
; — 9 2


Sewers, ant' 33.
See 5 Co. 2.
Part 100,

6 Co. 20.

10 Co. 138.5.C,


139 to 143.


The Caſe of Szwens. Part XIII.


mitted, if it be committed before the exhibiting of the bill;
but if the date of the writing ſuppoſed to be forged had been
miſtaken, there, the defendant could not be condemned of a
deed of another date, for that is not the offence complained
of in the bill, of which the court can give ſentence.


(14) The Cale of S EWE RS.
Paſch. 7 Jacobi Regis.


IHE cafe was, that there was a cauſey or mill- ſtank of

I ſtone in the river of Dee. and city of Cheſter, which
cauſey before the reign of King Edward the firſt, was erected
for the neceſſary maintainance of certain mills, ſome of the
King's, and others of the ſubjects at the end of the ſaid cau-
ſey : and now a certain decree was made by certain Commiſ-
ſioners of Sewers, ſor a breach to be mate of ten poles in
length in the ſaid cauſey, which cauley as it was admitted by
both parties was erected before the reign of King Edward the
fric, and fo hath continued until this day without s any exalta-
tion or inhancing : and if by any decree of the Commiſſioners
by force of any ſtatute, any breach may be made in that
cauſey, was the queſtion. And it was referred by the letters
of the Lords of the Privy Council, to the two Chief Juſtices
and the Chief Baron; and upon hearing of counſel learned at
divers days, ang good conſideration had in the time of the
laſt vacation, of all the ſtatutes concerning ſewers,'and upon
conference had Among themiclves, it was rcfolved as fol-
loweth :

1. Whereas it is provided by the ſtatute of /{rgna Charta,
cap. 23. Quod omnes Ridelli deponantur de ca tere per Than, fam,
et ¶adetbeiam et per tetam Ang! niſi per coſieram mar is, It was
reſolved, that that ſtatute extended only to Fidelle, fe, open
wears for taking of ſiſn: but the firſt. Natute which extended
to. pulling down, or abating of any mills, mill. Hanks and
cauſeys, was the ſtatute of 25 Edward 3. cap. 4. which act

ap. vinted


Part XIII. The Caſe of Sgwrnxs.


appointed ſuch only to be thrown down or abated, which
were levied or erected in the reign of King Edward the firſt,
or after: * but by the ſtatute made anno 1 H. 4. cap. 12.
upon complaint in Parliament of the great damages which
have riſen by the outrageous inhancing of- mills, mill-ſtanks,
and other impediments made and erected before the reign of
King Edward the firſt: the ſaid old mills and mill-ſtanks were
appointed by act then made to be furveyed, and ſuch as were
found to be much inhanced to be corrected and amended ;
ſaving always reaſonable ſubſtance of ſuch mills, mill-ſtanks,
wears, &c. ſo in old time made and levied : none of which
acts extended to the caſe in queſtion ; ſor thot cauſey was
erected before the reign of Edward the firſt, and never exalted
or inhanced after the erection of it: and the ſtatute of 12
Hen. 4. cap. 7. doth confirm all the faid acts, and by them
the generality of the act of Magna Charta is reſtrained, as by
the ſaid acts appeareth. And by the ſtatute of 23 Hen. 8.
cap. 5- None of the ſaid acts, as to the caſe in queition, is
repealed ; for firſt, the ſame act appoints the manner, form,
tenor, and effect of the commiſiion of Sewers, by which,
power is given to the Commiſſioners to ſurvey walls, &c.
fences, cauſeys, &c. mills, &c. and then to correct, repair,
amend, pull down, or overthrow, or reform, as cauſe re-
quireth, according to their wiſdoms and diſcretions; and
therein as well to ordain and do aſter the form, tenor, and
effect of Ml and fingular the ſtatutes and ordinances made be-
fore the firſt of March, in the twenty-third year of Henry the
eighth, as alſo to enquire by the oaths of honeſt and Jawful
men, &c. through whole default the ſaid hurts and damages
nave happened, &c. By which it appeareth, that the diſcre-
tion of the Commiſſioners was limited, /c:/. to proceed ac-
cording to the ſtatutes and ordinances before made, &c, and
alſo to reform, repair, and amend the ſaid walls, &c. which
by force of that word (/azd) hath relation to the precedent
purview of the act, &c. And further to reſorm, proſtrate
and overthrow all ſuch mills, &c. and other impediments and
annoyances (aforeſaid) as ſhall be found by inquiſition or by
your ſurvey and diſcretion to be exceſhve, i. e. hurtful ; which
word (aſoreſaid) refers that clauſe allo to the precedent purview,


Page [36]


ſeil. ſuch impediments and aunoyances as are againſt the ſtat,


and ordinances before made, Alſo it is further provided by
the ſame act, that all and every ſtatute, act, and ordinance


heretofore


109 — p N "— on 2 ES  enttineadt* o H..S. +. SOA 8 4 — — „5
* * — — ů ** 0 f 1 . *

n TY - 2 1 * » as * —_— 4 wx — 4 "34% - *, * ”

9 - I SE _ .


The Caſs De Mopo Dretuaxvpt, Part XIII.


heretofore made concerning the premiſes or any of them, not
being contrary to this preſent act, nor heretofore repealed,
ſhall from henceforth ſtand and be good and effectual for
ever. But the ſaid acts of 25 E. 3. and 1 H. 4. are not con-
trary to any clauſe of that act, nor were repealed before: and
always ſuch conſtruction ought to be made, that one part of
the act may agree with another, and all to ſtand together;
and if they had intended a repeal of the ſaid former acts, they
would not have repealed them by ſuch general and doubtful
words, when they concerned the inheritances of many ſub-
jects: and according to this reſolution we certified the Lords


of the Council, that the ſaid ſtatutes of 25 E. 3. and of 1 H.


4. remained yet in force; and that the authority given by the
commiſſion of Sewers did not extend to mills, mill-ſtanks,
cauſeys, &c. erected before the reign of King Edw. 1. un-

leſs that they have been 1inhanced and exalted above their
former height, and thereby made more prejudicial, &c. In
which caſe they are not to be overthrown or ſubverted, but to
be reformed by abating the exceſs and inhancement only,


(15) The Caſe D Mopo DRCIuANPDI,


And of Prohibitions debated before the King's


. Majeſty. |


Page [37] .


D Moda Dori 1 BANCROFT Archbiſhop of Canterbury, ac-


mandi ant, 12.


companied with the Biſhop of London, the Biſhop of


1 Bath and Wells, the Biſhop of Rocheſter, and divers Doctors
Gin Coder Of the civil and canon law, as Dr. Dunn, Judge of the
1072. Arches ; Dr. Bennet, Judge of the prerogative; Dr. James,


Watſon's Cler- Dr. Martin, and divers other Doctors of the civil and canon
ag = law, came attending upon them to the King to Whitehall
543, Kc. to 5638, the Thurſday, Friday, and Saturday after Eaſter term, in

| the Council-chamber, where the Chief Juſtice and myſelf,


Daniel


2 ²˙ v — eG ST RR ——_


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &c.


Daniel Judge of the Common Pleas, and Williams Judge of
the King's Bench, by the command of the King, attended
alſo: where the King being aſſiſted by his Privy Council, all
ſitting at the council-table, ſpake as a moft gracious, good,
and excellent ſovereign, to this effect, & As 1 would not ſuf-
« fer any novelty or innovations in my courts of Juſtice ec-
« cleſiaſtical or temporal; fo I will not have any of the laws,
e which have had judicial allowances in the times of the
« Kings of England before me, to be forgotten, but to be
& put in execution. And foraſmuch as upon the contentions
« between the eccleſiaſtical and temporal courts, great trouble,
« inconvenience, and Joſs may ariſe to the ſubjects of both
« parts; namely, when the controverſy ariſeth upon the ju-
« riſdiction of my courts of ordinary juſtice; and becauſe [
« am the head of juſtice immediately under God, and know-
« ing what hurt may grow to my ſubjects of both ſides, when
« no private caſe, but when the juriſdictions of my courts
« are drawn in queſtion, which in effect concerneth all my
« ſubjects ; I thought that it ſtood with the office of a King,
& which God hath committed to me, to hear the controver-
e ſies between the Biſhops and other of his clergy, and the
« Judges of the laws of England, and to take order, that for
« the good and quiet of my ſubjects, the one do not incroach
« upon the other, but that every of them, hold themſelves
& within their natural and local juriſdiction, without in-
«© croachment or uſurpation the one upon the other.” And
he ſaid, that the only queſtion then to be diſputed was, if a
Parſon, or a Vicar of a pariſh ſueth one of his pariſh m the
ſpiritual court for tithes in kind, or lay-fee, and the defendant
alledgeth a cuſtom or preſcription, Pe Ado Decimandi, if
that cuſtom or preſcription De Modo Decimaudi, ſhall be tried
and determined before the Judge eccleſiaſtical where the ſuit is
begun; or a prohibition lieth, to try the fame by the com-
mon law. And the King directed, that we who were Judges
ſhould declare the reaſons and cauſes of our proceedings, and
that he would hear the authorities in the law which we
had to warrant our proceedingss in granting of prohi-
bition in caſes of Mido Decimandi. But the Archbiſhop»
of Canterbury kneeled before the King, and deſired him,
that he would hear him and others who are provided to
ſpeak in the caſe for the good of the church of Eng-
land; and the Archbiſhop himſelf inveighed much a-
gainſt two things, 1. That a 4Zodus Decimandi ſhould be
Vor. VII. T tried


Page [38]


2 Co, 43, 44,
4


Note.


Poſt. 58.
Antea 12, 14.


The Caſe DR Mobo DECIMAN DI, | Part XIII.


* tried by a jury, becauſe that they themſelves claim more or
leſs a Modum Decimandi; ſo as in effect they were triers in
their own cauſe, or in the like caſes. 2. He inveighed much
againſt the precipitate and haſty trials by juries ; and aſter
him Dr. Bennet, Judge of the Prerogative court, made a
large invection againſt prohibitions 2 cauſis eccleſiaſticis: and
that both juriſdictions as well eccleſiaſtical as temporal were
derived from the King; but all hat which he ſpake out of
the book which Dr. Ridley hath lately publiſhed, I omit ag
impertinent : and he made hve reaſons, why they ſhould try a
Modum Decimandi.

And the fiſt and principal reaſon was out of the Regiſter,
fo. 58. guia non eft conſonans rationi, quad cognitio acceſſarii in
curid chriſtianitatis impediatur ubi cognitto cauſe principalis ad


forum eccleſia/ticum noſcitur pertinere. And the principal cauſe


is right of tithes, and the plea of Modo decimandi ſounds in ſa-
tisfaction of tithes; and therefore the conuſance of the origi-
nal caufe, (/cil.) the right of tithes appertaining to them, the
conuſance of the bar of tithes, which he ſaid was but the ac-
ceſſary, and as it were dependent upon it, appertained alſo to
them. And whereas it is faid in the Biſhop of Wincheſter's
cafe, in the Second Part of my Reports, and8 E. 4. 14. that
they would not accept of any plea in diſcharge of tithes in the
ſpiritual court, he ſaid, that they would allow ſuch pleas in
the ſpiritual court, and commonly had allowed them ; and
therefore he ſaid, that that was the myſtery of iniquity found-
ed upon a falſe and feigned foundation, and humbly defired
the reformation of that error, for they would allow 7 de-
cimandi being duly proved before them.

2. There was great inconveniency, that laymen ſhould be
tsiers of their own cuſtoms, if a Modus dectmandi ſhould be
tried by jurors; for they ſhall be upon the matter jurors (i. e.
Judges) in their own cauſe.

3. That the cuſtom De modo decimandi is of eccleſiaſtical
Juriſdiction and conuſance, for it is a manner of tithing, and
all manner of tithing belongs to ecclefialtical juriſdiction :


and therefore he ſaid, that the Judges, in their anſwer to


certain objections made by the Archbiſhop of Canterbury,
have confeſſed, that ſuit may be had in ſpiritual courts pro
modo decimandi ; and therefore the ſame is of eccleſfiaſtical
conuſance ; and by conſequence it ſhall be tried before the ec-
cleſiaſtical Judges: for if the right of tithes be of eccleſiaſtical
conuſance, and the ſatisfaction alſo for them of the ſame ju-
riſdiction, the ſame ſhall be tried in the eccleſiaſtical cont.
4. lu


SS nh, we ws


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &c:


4. In the prohibitions of Madus decimandi averment is ta- Averment,


ken, that although the plaintiff in the prohibition offereth to Þ


prove Hodum decimandi, the eceleſiaſtical court doth refuſe to
allow of it, which was confeſſed to be a good cauſe of probi-
bition: but he ſaid, they would allow theplea De modo decimandi
in the ſpiritual court, and therefore ceſſante cauſa crſſabit & ef.


feftus, and no prohibition ſhall lie in the caſe.


He ſaid, that he can ſhew many conſultations granted
in the cauſe De modo decimandi, and a conſultation is of
greater force than a prohibition ; for conſultation, as the
word imports, 1s made by the court with conſultation and de-
liberation. And Bacon, Solicitor-general, being (as it is
ſaid) aſſigned with the clergy by the King, argued before the
King, and in effect faid leſs than Dr. Bennet ſaid before;
but he vouched 1 R. 3. 4. the opinion of Huſſey, when the
original ought to begin in the ſpiritual court, and afterwards a
* thing cometh in iſſue which is triable in our law, yet it
ſhall be tried by their law: as if a man ſueth for a horſe de-
viſed to him, and the defendant faith, that the deviſor gave
to him the ſaid horſe, the ſame ſhall be tried there. And the
Regiſter 57 and 58. If a man be condemned in expences in
the ſpiritual court for laying violent hands upon a Clerk, and
afterwards the defendant pays the coſts, and gets an acquit-


| tance, and yet the plaintiff ſueth him againſt his acquittance


for the coſts, and he obtains a prohibition, . for that acquit-
tances and the deeds are to be determined in our law, yet he


ntea 14.


oft, 44.


Page 39


ſhall have a conſultation, becauſe that the principal belongeth


to them, 38 E. 3. 5. Right of tithes between two ſpiritual
perſons ſhall be determined in the eccleſiaſtical court. And
43 E. 3. 6. where the right of tithes comes in debate between
two ſpiritual perſons, the one claiming the tithes as of com-
mon right within his pariſh, and the other claiming to be diſ-
charged by real compolition, the eccleſiaſtical court ſhall have


juriſqiction of it.


And thereupon the ſaid Judges made humble ſuit to the
King, that foraſmuch as they perceived that the King in his
princely wiſdom did deteſt innovations and novelties, that he
would vouchſafe to ſuffer them with his gracious favour, to in-
ſorm him of one innovation and novelty which they conceiv-
ed would tend to the hindrance of the good adminiſtration
and execution of juſtice within his realm.

| . 2 Youx


—


ꝛt— n. — — —
w — —
—


— —
pan n —


- —


—— — —pä—P —


— — —


a,
1
*
9 an
'T
Pe
wy
FX
7
c
[1
4
1.
|
1
*


——— 2
— "acts b


=
LE
;
q F
by *
„
=
©
CL
7
„
4
3
4
1d od
8 4
C4
BY.
+
x 4
_
ö
5
8 N
7 q
1
+
.
5 1
5
os


The Caſe De Mobo Decimanor, Part XIII.


Your Majeſty, for the great zeal which you have to Juſtice,
and for the due adminiſtration thereof hath conſtituted and
made fourteen Judges, to whom you have committed not on-
ly the adminiſtration of ordinary juſtice of the realm, but
crimina læſæ Majeſtatis, touching your royal perſon for the
legal proceeding :' aifo in Parliament we are called by writ,
to give to your Majeſty and to the Lords of the Parliament
our advice and counſel, when we are required : we two
Chief Juſtices fit in the Star-chamber, and are oftentimes
called into the Chancery, Court of Wards, and other high
courts of juſtice : we in our circuits do viſit twice in the year

our realm, and execute juſtice according to your laws; and
if we who are your public Judges receive any diminution of
ſuch reverence and reſpect in our places, which our predeceſ-
fors had, we ſhall not be able to do you ſuch acceptable ſer-
vice as thev did, without having ſuch reverence and reſpect
as Judges ought to have, T he ſtate of this queſtion 1s not in


flatu deliberativo, but in flatu judiciali; it is not diſputed 4e


bens but de vero, non de lege ſienda, ſed de lege lata ; not to frame
or deviſe new laws, but to inform your Majeſty what your
law of England is: and therefore it was never ſeen before,
that when the queſtion is of the law, that your Judges of the
law have been made diſputants with him who is inferior to
them, who day by day plead before them at their feveral
courts at Weſtminſter : and although we are not afraid to dif-
pute with Mr. Bennet and Mr. Bacon, yet this example being
prime impreſſionis, and your Majeſty deteſting novelties and
innovations, we leave it to your grace and princely conſidera—
tion, Whether your Majeſty will permit our anſwering in hoc
flatu gudiciali, to this charge upon your public Judges of the
realm? But in obedience to your Majeſty's command, we,
with your Majeſty's gracious favour, in moſt humble man-
ner will inform your Majelty touching the ſaid queſtion,
which we, and our predeceſſors before us, have oftentimes
adjudged upon judicial proceedings in your courts of jullice
at Weſtminſter: which judgments cannot be reverſed or exa-
mined for any error in law, if * not by a writ of error in a
more high and fupreme court of juſtice, upon legal and judi-
cial proceedings: and that is the ancient law of England, as
appeareth by the ſtatute of 4 H. 4..cap. 22.

And we being commanded to proceed; all that which
was ſaid by us, the Judges, was to this effect: that the
trial De mods decimandi ought to be by the 7

*


1


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &c.


| law by a jury of twelve men, it appeareth in three manners of
proof: firſt, by the common law: ſecondly, by act of Parlia-
ment: and laſtly, by infinite judgments and judicial pro—
ceedings long times paſt without any impeachment or inter-


—_—
ut firſt it is to ſee, what is a Modus decimandi? Modus Modus deciman-
decimandi is, when lands, tenements, or hereditaments 4. i
have been given to the Parſon and his ſucceſſors, or an annual . ,
certain ſum, or other profit always, time out of mind, to the 350, dc. ;
Parſon and his ſucceſſors, in full ſatisfaction and diſcharge of
all the tithes in kind in ſuch a place; and fuch manner of
tything is now confeſſed by the other party to be a good bar
of the tithes in kind,
2. That AHodus decimand: ſhall be tried by the common law,
that is, that all ſatisfactions given in diſcharge of tithes, ſhall
be tried by the common law: and therefore put that which is
the moſt common caſe ; that the lord of the manor of Dale
preſcribes to give to the Parton 40s. yearly, in full ſatisfac-
tion and diſcharge of all tithes growing and renewing within
the manor of Dale, at the feaſt of Eaſter : the Parſon ſueth
the lord of the manor of Dale for his tithes of his manor ;
in kind, and he in bar preſcribes in manner ut ſupra : the
queſtion is, if the lord of the manor of Dale may upon that
have a prohibition, for if the prohibition lieth, then the ſpi-
ritual court ought not to try it; {or the end of the prohibition
is, that they do not try that which. belongs to the trial of the
common law; the words of the prohibition being, that they
would draw the fame ad aliud examen
Firſt, the law of England is divided into common law, ſta- n+ popes Wh
tute-law, and cuſtoms of England; and therefore the cuſtoms IN | f
of England are to be tried by the trial which the law of Eng- triable at com-
land doth appoint. | | _ law, Car-
Secondly, preſcriptions by the law of the holy church, and“ 33. 3+
by the common law, differ in the times of limitation; and
therefore preſcriptions and cuſtoms of England ſnall be tried
by the common law. See 20 H. 6. fol. 17. 19 E. 3. Juriſ-
dition 28. The Biſhop of Wincheſter brought a writ of an-
nuity againſt the Archdeacon of Surry, and declared, how
that he and his anceſtors were ſeiſed by the hands of the de-
fendant by title of preſcription, and the defendant demanded
Judgment, if the court would hold jurifdiction being between
ſpiritual perſons, &c. Stone, Juſtice : be aſſured, that upon
title of preſcription we will here hold juriſdiction ; and upon
that, Wilby Chief Juſtice gave the rule, anſwer over:
upon which it follows, has it a Aodus decimandi, which:
3 ig


*
%
.
F
4
U
1
>
, 7


— > — = —— — — . —
— LY * ha 2
- 1 1 A pas
5 > pos . k .
rr er SIE —_—__ _—_ 4
. .


———
—


*
—


—


—


r


.


PRE =


— N
* =y -


— ——ß
— — Laff 4


- — — —
—ͤ—ũ—4— ò] «— —ẽ—ꝓ
*

=


*
Page [41]
See Carthew 33,


The Caſe DE Mopo DERCIMHAN DT, Part XIII


is an annual ſum ſum for tithes by preſcription, comes in de-
bate between ſpiritual perſons, that the ſame ſhall be tried
here: for the rule of the book is general, (/cl.) upon title of
preſcription, we will hold juriſdiction, and that is fortified
with an affeveration, #now afſuredly ; as if he ſhould ſay, that
it is ſo certain, that it is without queſtion, 32 E. 3. Jurild,
26. There was a Vicar who had only tithes and oblations,
and an Abbot claimed an annuity or penſion of him by pre-
ſcription : and it was adjudged, that the ſame * preſcription,
although it was betwixt ſpiritual perſons, ſhould be tried by
the common law. Vide 22 H. 6. 46 and 47. A preſcription,
that an Abbot time out of mind had found a Chaplain in his
chapel to ſay divine ſervice, and to miniſter ſacraments, tried
at the common law. |

3. See the record of 25 H. 3. cited in the caſe of Modus
decimandi before; and ſee Regiſter fol. 38. when lands are
given in ſatisfaction and diſcharge of tithes.

4. See the ſtatute of circumſpecle agatis, decimæ debite, ſeu
conſuetæ, which proves that tithes in kind, and a Modus, by
cuſtom, &c. difter.

5. 8 E. 4. 14. and F. N. B. 41 G. a prohibition lieth ſor
lands given in diſcharge of tithes. 28 H. 3. 97. a. There
ſuit was for tithes, and a prohibition licth, and ſo abridged
by the book, which of neceſlity ought to be upon matter De
modo decimandi, or diſcharge.

6. 7 E. 6. 79. If tithes are ſold for money, by the ſale the
things ſpiritual are made temporal, and ſo in the cafe De mods
decimandi, 42 E. 3. 12. agrees,

7. 22 E. 3. 2. Becauſe an appropriation is mixt with the
temporalty, (/cl.) the King's letters patent, the ſame ought
to be ſhewed how, &c. otherwiſe of that which is mere tem-
poral : and ſo it is of real compoſition, in which the patron
ought to join. Vide 11 H. 4. 85. Compoſition by writing
that the one ſhall have the tithes, and the other ſhall have
money, the ſuit ſhall be at the common law. |

Secondly, by acts of Parliament.

1. The ſaid act of circumſpecte agatis, which giveth power
to the eccleſiaſtical Judge to ſue ſor tithes due firit in kind, or
by cuſtom, i. e. Modus decimandi : fo as by authority of that act,
although that the yearly ſum ſoundeth in the temporalty, which
was paid by cuſtom in diſcharge of tithes, yet becauſe the ſame
cometh in the place of tithes, and by conſtitution, the tithes are
changed into money, and the Parſon hath not any moody

or


, \ +


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, dcbated, &c.


for the ſame, which is the Modus decimandi at the common
law; for that cauſe the act is clear, that the ſame was a doubt
at the common law: and the ſtatute of Articuli Cleri, cap. 1.
If corporal penance be changed in panam pecuniariam, for that
pain ſuit Jieth in the ſpiritual court: for fee Mich. 8. Hen. 3.
Rat. 6. in Theſaur. A prohibition lieth pro eo quod Rector de Prohibition.
Cheſterton exigit de Hugone de Logis de certd portione pro decimis Antea 8, &e
molendinar um; ſo as it appeareth, it was a doubt before the * |
ſaid ſtatute, if ſuit lay in the ſpiritual court De modo decimandi. Poſt, 47, Ec. ]
And by the ſtatute of 27 Hen. 8. cap. 20. it is provided and |
; enacted, that every of the ſubjects of this realm, according to
the eccleſiaſtical laws of the church, and after the laudable
| uſages and cuſtoms of the pariſh, &c. ſhall yield and pay his
tithes, offerings, and other duties: and that for ſubſtraction
of any of the ſaid tithes, offerings, or other duties, the Parſon,
&c. may by due proceſs of the King's eccleſiaſtical laws, con-
vent the perſon offending before a competent Judge, having
authority to hear and determine the right of tithes, and allo
to compel him to yield the duties, i. e. as well Modus deci-
mandi, by laudable uſage or cuſtom of the pariſh, as tithes in
kind: and with that in effect agrees the ſtatute of 32 H 8.
cap. 7. By the ſtatute of 2 E. 6. c. 13. it is enacted, that
every of the King's ſubjects ſhall from henceforth, truly and
juitly, without fraud or guile, divide, &c. and pay all man-
ner-of their predial tithes in their proper kind, as they riſe
* and happen in ſuch manner and form as they have been of Page [42]
right yielded and paid within 40 years next before the making
of this act. or of right and cuſtom ought to have been paid.
And after, in the ſame act, there is this clauſe and proviſo,
Provided always, and be it enacted, that no perſon ſhall be
| ſued, or otherwiſe compelled to yield, give, or pay any man-
ner of tithes for any manors, lands, tenements, or heredita—
ments, which by the laws and ſtatutes of this realm, or by
any privilege or preſcription, are not chargeable with the pay-
ment of any ſuch tithes, or that be diſcharged by any compo-
ſitions real. And afterwards, there is another branch in the
ſaid act: And be it further enacted, that if any perfun do
ſubſtract or withdraw any manner of tithes, obventions, pro-
fits, commodities, or other duties before mentioned (which
extends to cuſtoms of tithing, i. e. Modus decimand!, mention -
ed before in the act, &c ) that then the paity ſo ſubſtracting, &c,
may be convented and ſued in the King's eccleſiaſtical court, 9
&c. And upon the ſaid branch, which is the negative, that ;
no perſon ſhall be ſued ſor any tiches of any lands which
T 4 ary


The Caſe De Mopo DRCIMAN DI. Part XIII.


are not chargeable with the payment of ſuch tithes by any law,

ſtatute, privilege, preſcription, or real compoſition. And al-

ways when an act of Parliament commands or prohibits any

count, be it temporal or ſpiritual, to do any thing temporal or ſpi-

ritual if the ſtatute be not obeyed, a prohibition lieth: as upon

the ſtatute De articulis ſuper Cartas, cap, 4. Quod Communia Pla-

tita non tenentur in Scaccario : a prohibition lieth to the court of

Exchequer, if the Barons hold a common plea there, as appear»

eth in the Regilter 187. b. So upon the ſtatute of Veſim. 2. quod

inguiſitianes qua magne ſunt examinationts non capiantur in patrid ;

a prohibition licth to the Juſtices of Ni prius. So upon tue

ſtatute of Articult ſuper Cartas, cap. 79. Quod Conſtabularius

Caſir. Dover, non teneat placitum forinſecum quod non tangit cuſ-

Sec Lib. Entr.. todiam ca/tri, Regiſter 185. So upon the ſame ſtatute, cap. 3.
430 „en Ouod Sencſcallus & Mariſeallus non teneant placita de libero tene-
the laute that mento, de debito, conventione, &c, a prohibition lieth 185.
one ſhall not And yet by none of theſe ſtatutes, is any prohibition or Super-
8 ſeteas given by expreſs words of the ſtatute. So upon the
pen law. See ſtatutes 13 R. 2. cap. 3. 15 R. 2. cap. 2. 2 H. 4. cap. 11.
. . B. 30 B. by which it is provided, that Admirals do not meddle with
* any thing done within the realm, but only with things done
Pleas upon the upon the feas, &c, a prohibition lieth to the court of Admi—
Rat. of Magna ralty. So upon the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 43. againſt Hoſ-
Page ee pitalers and Templars, if they do againſt the ſame ſtatute,
in a write Pre Regilt 29. a. So upon the llatute de prohibitione regid, ne lai-
cipe in Ce, © ad citationem Fffcopt convemant ag recegnitionem faciend' vel
5 4 Fg? acrament” pra/landa nift in caſibus matrimonialibus & teflamen-
the King. & 7arits, a prohibition lieth Regiſt. 36. b. And ſo upon the +
2 liz. y, 170 ſtatute of 2 FL. 5. cap. 3. at what time the libel is grantable
ab use ne. by theglaw, that it be granted and delivered to the party with-
Fature of arten Out difficulty, 1f the eccleſiaſtical Judge, when the cauſe which
Laid, and Peat depends before him is mere ecclefiaſtical, denieth the libel,
LEON | porn a prohibition lieth, becauſe that he doth is againſt the ſtatute;
an hang, and yet no prohibition by any expreſs words is given by the
+ See 12 Co. 67, ſtatute. And upon the ſame (latute the caſe was in 4 E. 3.
*. . 37. Pierce Peckham took letters of adminiſtration of the goods
of Role Brown of the Biſhop of London, and afterwards T.

T. fued to Thomas Archbithop of Canterbury, that becauſe

the {aid Roſe Brown had goods within his dioceſe, he prayed

Jettersof ad miniſtration to be committed to him, upon which, the

Page [43] HEithop granted him letters of adminiſtration, and aſterwards *


T. T. lbclled in the ſpiritual court ofthe Archbiſhop in the Arches


againſt Pierce Peckham, to whom the Biſhopof London had com-
| ; ' mitted


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &c.


mitted letters of adminiſtration to repeal the ſame: and Pierce
Peckham, according to the ſaid ſtatute, prayed a copy of the
libel exhibited againſt him, and could not have it, and there-
upon he ſued a prohibition, and upon that an attachment :
and there Cateſby Serjeant, moved the court, that a prohibi-
tion did not lie, for two cauſes: 1. That the ſtatute gives
that the libel ſhall be delivered, but doth not ſay that the plea
in the ſpiritual court ſhall ſurceaſe by prohibition. 2. The
ſtatute is not intended of matter mere ſpiritual, as that caſe
is, to try the prerogative and the liberty of the Archbiſhop of
Canterbury and the Biſhop of London, in committing of ad-
miniſtrations. And there Danby Chief Juſtice, If you will
not deliver the libel according to the ſtatute, you do wrong,
which wrong 18 a temporal matter, and puniſhable at the com-


Note.


mon law; and therefore in this caſe the party ſhall have a


ſpecial prohibition out of this court, reciting the matter, and
the ſtatute aforeſaid, commanding them to ſurceaſe, until he
had the copy of the libe] delivered unto him: which caſe is a
ſtronger caſe than the caſe at bar, for that ſtatute is in the af-
firmative, and the ſaid act of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. is in the nega-
tive, /cil. that no ſuit ſhall be for any tithes of any land in
kind where there is Modus decimandi, for that is the effect of
the ſaid act, as to that point. And always after the ſaid
act, in every term in the whole reigns of King Edward. 6.
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth, until this day, prohibi-
tions have been granted in cauſa Modi decimanat, and judg-
ments given upon many of them, and all the ſame without

ueltion made to the contrary. And accordingly all the
3 reſolved in 7 E. 6. Dyer 79. Et contemporanea expo-
ſitio eft optima & fartiſſima in lege, & a communi obſervantia non
et recedendum, & minime mutanda ſunt que certam habuerunt
interpretationem.

And as to the firſt objection, that the plea of Modus deci-
mandi is but acceſſary to the right of tithes ; it was refolved,
that the ſame was of no force, for three cauſes.

1. In this caſe, admitting that there is a Modus decimandi,


then by the cuſtom, and by the act of 2 E. 6. and the other


acts, the tithes in kind are extinct and diſcharged ; for one
and the ſameland cannot be ſubject to two manner of tithes, but
the Modus decimandi is all the tithe with which the land is charge-
able: as if a horſe or other thing valuable be given in ſatis-
faction of the duty, the duty is extinct and gone: and it
ſhall be intended, that the Modus decimandi began at the
firſt by real compoſition, by which the lands were diſcharged


of the tithes, and a yearly ſum in ſatisfaction of them aſ-


ſigned


See 2 Inſt, 648,
to 664,


A Modus ex-
tinguiſhes tithes
in kind.

Anſea 13,14, 16.


Page [44]


Antea 14, 38.


ine Caſe DR Mopo DECIMAN DT, Part XIII.


ſigned to the Parſon, &c. So as in this caſe there is neither
principal or acceſſary, but an identity of the ſame thing.

2. The ſtatute of 2 E. 6. being a prohibition in itſelf, and
that in the negative, if the eccleſiaſtical Judge doth againſt it,
a prohibition lieth, as it appeareth clearly before.

3. Although that the rule be general, yet it appeareth by
the Regiſter itſelf, that a Modus decimandi is out of it; for
there is a prohibition in cauſa Modi aecimand when lands
are given in ſatisfaction of the tithes,

As to the ſecond objection, it was anſwered and reſolred,
that that was from, or out of the queſtion ; for fatus gue/1ionis
non ot & deliberativus ſed judicialis, not what was fit and con-
venient, but what the law 1s: and yet it was faid, it ſhall be
more inconvenient to have an eccleſiaſtical Judge, who is not
ſworn to do juſtice, to give ſentence in a caſe between a man
of the clergy and a layman, than for twelve men ſworn to
give their verdict upon hearing of witneſſes viva voce, beſore
an indifferent Judge, who is ſworn to do right and juſtice to
both parties: but convenient or inconvenient is not the queſ-
tion : alſo they have in the ſpiritual court ſuch infinite excep-
tions to witneſſes, that it is at the will of the Judge with which
party he ſhall give his ſentence. ENT

As to the third objeCtion, it was anſwered and reſolved.
Firſt,* that ſatisfactio pecuniaria of itſelf is temporal: but for-
afmuch as the Parſon hath not remedy pro Modo deci-
mandi at the common law, the Parſon by force of the
act cited before might ſue pro Modo decimandi in the
eccleſiaftical court: but that doth not prove, that if he
ſueth for tithes in kind, which are utterly extinct, and the
lanc diſcharged of them, that upon the plea De modo deci andi
a prohibition ſhould not lie, for that without all queſtion it ap-
peareth by all that which before hath been ſaid, that a prohi-
bition doth lie. See alſo 12 Ha7. 24. b. Where the origi-
nal cauſe is the ſpiritual, and they proceed upon a temporal,
a prohibition lieth. 'Sce 30 E. 3. 22 E. 4. Conſultation, that
right of tithes which is merely eccleſiaſtical, yet if the queſ-
tion ariſeth of the limits of a pariſh, a prohibition lieth : and
this caſe of the limits of a pariſh was granted by the Lord Chan-
cellor, and not denied by the other fide. |

As to the fourth objection, that an averment is taken of the
refuſal of the plea De modo decimandi; it was anſwered and


relolved, that the ſame is of no force for divers cauſes. .
I, it


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &o.


1. It is only to inforce the contempt,

2. If the ſpiritual court ought to have the trial De modo di- See the Proem
cimandi, then the refuſal of acceptance of ſuch a plea ſhould to Gibſon's Co-
give cauſe of appeal, and not of prohibition: as if an excom- = Gage the
munication, divorce, hereſy, ſimony, &c. be pleaded there, 735. be OP
and the plea refuſed, the ſame gives no cauſe of prohibition: nr orga
as, if they deny any plea, a mere ſpiritual appeal, and no an, ch. 54
e ee lieth. : l 2 3 b

3. From the beginning of the law, no iſſue was ever taken
upon the refuſal of the plea in Cauſa Modi decimandi, nor any
conſultation ever granted to them, becauſe they did not re-
fuſe, but allowed the plea. |

4. The refulal is no part of the matter iſſuable or material
in the plea ; for the ſame is no part of the ſuggeſtion which
only is the ſubſtance of the plea: and therefore the Modus de-
cimandi is proved by two witnefles, according to the ſtatute
of 2 E. 6. cap. 13. and not the refuſal ; which proveth, that
the Modus decimandi is only the matter of the ſuggeſtion, and
not the refuſal. | | |

5. All the ſaid five matters of diſcharge of tithes mention-
ed in the ſaid branch of the act of 2 E. 6. being contained
within a ſuggeſtion, ought to be proved by two witneſſes, and
ſo have been always from the time of the making of the ſaid
act; and thereſore the ſtatute of 2 E. 6. clearly intended,
that prohibitions ſhould be granted in ſuch cauſes,

6. Although that they would allow bona fide de Modo deci-
mandi, without refuſal, yet if the Parſon ſueth there for tithes
in kind, when the Modus is proved, the ſame being expreſly
prohibited by the“ act of 2 E. 6. a prohibition lieth, although Page [45]
the Modus be ſpiritual, as appeareth by the ſaid book of 4 E.

4. 37. and other the caſes aforeſaid, | |

And afterwards, in the third day of debate of this caſe Third day's
before his gracious Majeſty, Dr Bennet and Dr. Martin had debe.
reſerved divers conſultations granted in cauſd Modi decimandi,
thinking that thoſe would make a great impreſſion in the opr-
nion of the King: and thereupon they ſaid, that conſulta-
tions were the judgments of courts had upon deliberation,
whereas prohibitions were only granted upon ſurmiſes : and
they ſhewed four precedents :

One, where three jointly ſued a prohibition in the caſe of
Medi decimandi, and the conſultation ſaith, pro eo quod fue
tio materiaquein eadem contenta minus ſufficiens in lege exiſtit, Sc.

2. Another in cauſa Mod decimandi, to be paid to the Par-
ſon or Vicar, 7


3. Where |


The Caſe DER Mopo DECTIMAN DI. Part XIII.


3. Where the Parſon ſued for tithes in kind, and the de-
fendant alledged Modus decimandi to be paid to the Vicar.

The fourth, where the Parſon I:'belled for tithe- wool, and
the defendant alleged a cuſtom, to reap corn, and to make it
into ſheaves, and to ſet forth the tenth ſheaf at his charges,
and likewiſe of hay, to fever it from the nine cocks at his
charge, in full ſatisfaction of tithes of the corn, hay, and
wool,

To which I anſwered, and humbly defired the King's Ma-
jeſty to obſerve that theſe have been reſerved for the lat, and
centre point of their proof: and by them your Majeſty ſhall
om ve theſe things :


That the King's courts do thera juſtice, when with their
. and oaths they can.

2. That all the ſaid caſes are clear in the judgment of thoſe
who are learned in the laws, that conſultation ought by the
law to be granted,

For as unto the firſt precedent, the caſe upon their own
ſhewing appeareth to be, three perſons joined in one prohibi-
tion for three ſeveral parcels of land, each of which had a ſe-
veral manner of tithing ; and for that cauſe they could not
join, when their intereſts were ſeveral ; and therefore a con-
ſultation was granted.

As to the ſecond precedent, the manner of tithing was al-
jeged to be paid to the Parſon or Vicar, which was altogether
uncertain.

As to the third precedent, the Modus never came in de-
bate, but whether the tithes did belong to the Parſon or Vicar?
Which being betwixt two ſpiritual perſons, the eccleſiaſtical
court all have Juriſdiction: and therewith agreeth 38 E. 3.
6. cited before by Bacon: and alſo there the Prior was of the
order of the Ciſtertians; for if the tithes originally belonged
to the Parſon, any recompence for them fhall not bar the
Parton.

As to the laſt precedent, the ſame was upon the matter of a
cuſtom of Modus decimandi for wool: for to pay the- tithe of
corn or hay in kind, in ſatisfaction of corn, hay, and wool,
cannot be a ſatisfaction for the wool, for the other two were
due of common right ; and all this appearcth in the conſulta-
tions themſelves, which they ſhew, but underſtand not. To
which the Biſhop of London faid, that the words of the con-
ſultation were, Qu ſugge/tio pred materiaque in cadem con-
tenta minus ſufficiens in lege exiflit, Se. ſo as materia cannot be


referred to form, and therefore it ought to extend to the Mo-
dus deci mandi.


* To


Part XIII. and of Prohibitions, debated, &c,


* To which I anſwered, that when the matter is inſuſ-
ciently. or uncertainly alleged, the matter itſelf faileth ; for
matter ought to be alleged in a good ſentence: and although
the matter be in truth ſufficient, yet if it were inſufficient!
alleged, the plea wanteth matter. And the Lord Treafurer
ſaid openly tothem, that he admired that they would allege
ſuch things which made more againſt them than any thing which
had been {aid. And when the King relied upon the faid pro-
hibition in the Regiſter, when land is given in diſcharge of
tithes, the Lord Chancellor faid, that that was not like to this
caſe; for there, by the gift of the land in diſcharge of tithes,
the tithes were actually diſcharged : but in the caſe De modi
decimandi, an annual ſum is paid for the tithes, and the land
remains charged with the tithes, but ought to be diſcharged
by plca De modo decimandi : all which was utterly denied by
me; for che land was as abſolutely diſcharged of the tithes in


caſu de modo decimandi, when an annual ſum ought to be paid,


as where land is given: for all the records and precedents of
prohibitions in ſuch caſes are, that ſuch a ſum had been al-
ways, &c. paid in plenam contentationem, ſatisfactionem & exone-
rationem omnium & ſingularum decimarum, &c. And although
that the ſum be not paid, yet the Parſon cannot ſue for tithes
in kind, but for the money : for, as it hath been faid before,
the cuſtom and the faid acts of Parliament (where there is'a
lawful manner of tithing) hath diſcharged the lands from
tithes in kind, and prohibited, that no ſuit ſhall be for them,
And although that now (as it hath been ſaid) the Parſons,
&c, may ſue in the ſpiritual court Pro modo decimandi, yet
without queſtion, at the firſt, the annual payment of mone
was as temporal, as annual profits of lands were: 'all which
the King heard with much patience. And the Lord Chan-
cellor an{wered not to that which I anſwered him in, &c.
And after that his moſt excellent Majeſty, with all his
Council, had for three days together heard the allegations on
both ſides, he faid that he would maintain the law of England,
and that his Judges ſhould have as great reſpe& from all his


Page [46]


Gibſon's Codes
7009.
Watlon's Cler-


fgymin 3552 (0
588.


Note,


ſubjeCts as their predeceſſors had had: and for the matter, he


ſaid, that for any thing that had been ſaid on the part of the
clergy, that he was not fatisfied: and adviſed us his Judges
to confer amongf ourſelves, and that nothing be encroached
upon the ectlefiaſtical juriſdiction, and that they keep them-
ſelves within their lawful juriſdiction, without unjuſt vexation
and moleſtation done to his ſubjects, and without delay or
hindering of juſtice, And this was the end of theſe three days
conſultations.


And


The Caſe DER Mopo DectmanD1, &c. Part XIII.


And note, that Dr. Bennet in his diſcourſe inveighed much
againſt the opinion in 8 E. 4. 14. and in my Reports in
Wright's caſe, that the eccleſiaſtical Judge would not allow a
Modus decimandi ; and ſaid, that that was the myſtery of ini-
quity, and that they would allow it. And the King aſked,
for what cauſe it was ſo ſaid in the ſaid books? To which !
anſwered, that it appeared in Linwood, who was Dean of
the Arches, and of ſo profound knowledge in the canon and
civil law, and who wrote in the reign of King Henry VI. a
little before the ſaid caſe in 8 E. 4. in his title De decimis, cap.
Duoniam propter, &c. fol. 139. bo Quod decimæ ſolvantur,
Sc. abſque ulla diminutione and in the Gloſs it is ſaid, ud
conſuetudo de non decimando, aut de non bene decimando non valet.


And that being written by a great canoniſt of England, was


Page (47]


Antea 13,1517,


Antca 1 7.


Note.


High commiſ-
ſion.

Antea 9, 10.

12 Co. 51 to 55.
84 to 89.
Gibſon's Codex
30, 54, 56, 58,
59, &c.


the cauſe of the ſaid ſaying in 8 E. 4. that they would not al-
low the ſaid plea De modo decimand: ; for always the Modus *
decimanat is leſs in value than the tithes in ſpecie, and then the
ſame is againſt their canon; Quod decimæ ſolvantur abſque di-
minutione, et quod con ſuetudo de non plene decimando non valet.
And it ſeemed to the King, that that book was a good cauſe
for them in the time of King Edward IV. to ſay, as they had
ſaid ; but J faid, that I did not rely upon that, but upon the
grounds aforeſaid, (ſcil.) the common law, ftatute laws, and
the continual and infinite judgments and judicial proceedings;
and that if any canon or conſtitution be againſt the fame,
ſuch canon and conſtitution, &c. is void by the ſtatute of 25
H. 8. c. 19. which ſee and note: for all canons, conſtitu-
tions, &c. againſt the prerogative of the King, the common
laws, ſtatutes, or cuſtoms of the realm, are void,

Laſtly, the King faid, that the high commiſſion ought not
to meddle with any thing but that which is enormous and ex-
orbitant, and cannot permit the ordinary proceſs of the eccle-
ſiaſtical law; and which the ſame law cannot puniſh, And
that was the cauſe of the inſtitution of the ſame commiſſion,
and therefore, although every offence, ex vi termini, is en-
ormous, yet in the ſtatute it is to be intended of ſuch an of-
fence, as is extra omnem normam, as hereſy, ſchiſm, inceſt,
and the like great offences : for the King faid, that it was not
reaſon that the high commiſhon ſhould have conuſance of
common offences, but to leave them to ordinaries, /cl, be-


cauſe that the party cannot have an appeal in caſe the high


commiſhon ſhall determine of it. And the King thought
that two high commiſſions, for either province one, ſhould
be ſuſſicient for all England, and no more.


Bedell


Part XIII.


(16) Bedell and Sherman's Caſe.
Mich. 39 & 40 Elizabeth.


In the King's Bench.


was this; Robert Bedell, Gent. and Sarah his wife, farmers
of the rectory of Litlington in the county of Cambridge,
brought an action of debt againſt John Sherman, in the cuſ-
tody of the Marſhal of the Marſhalſea, and demanded 5501.
and declared, that the Maſter and Fellows of Clare-hall in
Cambridge, were ſeiſed of the ſaid rectory in fee, in right of
the ſaid college, and in June 10, 29 El. by indenture demiſed
to Chriſtopher Pheſant the faid rectory for twenty-one yeare,
rendering 171. 158. 5d. and reſerving rent-corn according
to the ſtatute, &c. which rent was the ancient rent, who en-
tered into the ſaid rectory, and was poſſeſſed, and aſſigned all


his intereſt thereof to one Matthew Batt, who made his laſt


will and teſtament, and made Sarah his wiſe his executrix,


and died; Sarah proved the will, and entered, and was there-


of poſſeſſed as executrix, and took to huſband the ſaid Robert
Bedell, by force whereof, they in the right of the ſaid Sarah
entered, and were poſſeſſed thereof; and that the defendant
was then tenant, and ſeiſed for his life of 300 acres of arable
lands in Litlington aforeſaid, which ought to pay tithes to the
Rector of Litlington ; and in anne 38 El. the defendant grano
ſeminavit 200 acres, parcel, &c. And that the tithes of the
fame did amount to 1501. and that the defendant did not
divide nor ſet forth the ſame from the nine parts, but
took and carried them away, againſt the form and effect


ICH. 39 & 40 Eliz. which is entered Mich. 40 Fliz. $uRution of
in the Common Pleas, Rot. 699. Cantabr. the caſe tithes.


Gibſon's Codex
718, &c. $36,
antes 23.


* of the ſtatute of 2 E. 6, &c. And the defendant pleaded Page [48]


nihil debet, and the jury found that the defendant did owe
51. and to the reſidue they found nihi! debet, &c. and in


arreſt of judgment, divers matters were moved. |


o


Antea 24.


2 Dany, 223.


Diem clauſt ex-
tremum.

12 Co. 102,

8 Co, 168,


Ions BAILIE's Caſe, Part XIII.


1. That grans ſeminata is too general and uncertain, but it
ought to be expreſſed with what kind of corn the ſame was
ſowed. - |

2. It was moved, if the Parſon ought to have the treble
value, the forfeiture being by expreſs words limited to none
by the act, or that the ſame did belong to the Queen.

3. If the ſame did belong to the Parſon, if he onght to ſue
for the ſame in the eccleſiaſtical court, or in the King's tem-
poral court,

4. If the huſband and wife ſhould join in the action, or
the huſband alone ſhould have the action, and upon ſolemn


argument at the bar and at the bench, the judgment was al-
firmed, |


(17) JoHN BalLIE's Caſe.


Trin. 7 Jac. .


In the Court of Wards.


Ll
T was found by writ of Diem clauſit extremum, that the
ſaid John Bailie was ſeiſed of a meſſuage or tenement,
and of and in the fourth part of one acre of land, late parcel
of the demeſne lands of the manor of Newton, in the county


of Hereford, in his demeſne as of fee, and found the other


I Salk X I 69,


Poſt, 50, 72.


3 Co. 168.
Poſt, 72.


points of the writ, and it was holden by the two Chief Juſ-
tices, and the Chief Baron.

I. That meſſuagium, vel tenementum, is uncertain ; for tene-
mentum is nomen colleftivum, and may contain land, or any
thing which is holden,

2. It was holden, that it was void for the whole, becauſe
that no town is mentioned in the office where the meſſuage or
tenement, or the fourth part of the acre lieth ; and from the
viſne of the manor upon a traverſe none can come, becauſe it


is not affirmed by the office, that they are parcel of the ma-


nor, but nuper parcel of the manor, which implieth, that now


they are not, and it was holden by them, that no Aelius in-
guirendum ſhall iſſue forth, becauſe that the whole office is un-


Certain and void,
(18) CovENANTS


Part XIII.


(18) COVENANTS to UsEs.


Trin. 7 Jac. 1.
In the Court of Wards.


TME. Attorney of the court of Wards moved the two 4 Mod. 163.
Chief Juſtices and Chief Baron in this caſe, that a man 2 Salk. 675 to

ſcited of lands in fee ſimple, covenants for the advancement 1 Cent. 137
of his ſon, and of his name, and blood, and poſterity, that 138, Ke. ;
he will ſtand ſeiſed of them, to the uſe of himſelf for the Of uſes. Vile
term of his life, and after to the uſe of his eldeſt ſon, and to r
ſuch a woman which he ſhall marry, and to the heirs males of Caſes 103.
the body of the ſon, and afterwards the father dieth, and af-
ter the ſon taketh a wife and dieth; if the wife ſhall take an
eſtate for life, and the doubt was, becauſe the wife of the
ſon was not within the conſiderations, and the uſe was limit-
ed to one who was capable, /c/, the fon, and to another who
was not capable, and therefore the ſon ſhould take an eſtate |
in tail executed. But it was reſolved by the ſaid two Chief BY
Juſtices and Chief * Baron, that the wife ſhould take well Page [49]
enough ; and as to the firſt reaſon, they reſolved, that the
wife was within the conſideration, for the conſideration was
for the advancement of his poſterity ; and without a wife,
the ſon cannot have poſterity : alſo when the wife of the ſon
is ſure of a jointure, the ſame is for the advancement of the
ſon, ſor thereby he ſhall have the better marriage. And as to
the ſecond, it was reſolved, that the eſtate of the ſon ſhall
ſupport the uſe to the defendant; and when the contingent
happeneth, the eſtate of the fon ſhall be changed according
to the limitation, ſcil. to the fon and the woman, and the
heirs of the body of the ſon : and ſo it was reſolved in the
King's Bench by Popham Chief Juſtice, and the whole
court of the King's Bench, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
in Sheffield's cafe, for both points.


Vol. VII, U (19) SPARY's


Ps | Part XIII.


— —


(19) SP AR Y*'s Cafe.
Trin. 7 Jac. 1.
In the Court of Wards.


ara Meſne TOHN SPARY ſeifed in fee in the right of his wife of
mts, videin- lands holden of the crown by knight's-ſervice, had iſſue
3 loſt. 216. by her, and 22 Decemb. anno q Eliz. aliened to Edward
4 Inſt. 196,197, Lord Stafford; the wife died, the ifſue of full age, the lands
TED 27% continue in the hands of the alienee, or his aſſigns; and ten
7 Co. 21. years after the death of the father, and twelve years after the
8 Co. 138. death of the mother, oſſice is found, 7 Jacobi, finding all the
0 be 14.05» ſpecial matter after the death of the mother: the queſtion was,
whether the meſne profits are to be anſwered to the King ?
And it was reſolved by the ſaid two Chief Juſtices and the
Chief Baron, that the King ſhould not have the meſne profits,
becauſe that the alience was in by title; and until entry the
heir hath no remedy for the meſne profits, but that the King
might ſciſe and make a livery, becauſe that the entry of the


heir is lawſul by che the ſtatute of 32 H. 8.


(20) The Earl of CuMBERLAND's Caſe,


Trin. 7 Fac. 1.


Die 6: In the Court of Wards:


1

. , 7 .
e T was ſound by force of a Mandamus, at Kendal in the
Ly "3g N county of Weſtmoreland, the twenty-firſt of Decem-
2 Co. 31, 34, 66. ber, 6 Jacobi Regis, that George Earl of Cumberland, long
6 Co. 26. before his death, was ſeiſed in tail to him and to


2 164 165, the heirs males of his body, of the caſtles and manors of Brow-
9 Co.126, 132. ham, Appleby, &c. the remainder to Sir Ingram Clifford,


10 Co. 80, 81, & e. with


Part XIII. In the Court of Wards.


with divers remainders over in tail; the remainder to the
right heirs of Henry Earl of Cumberland, father of the ſaid
George; and that the ſaid George, Earl, ſo ſeiſed by fine and
recovery, conveyed them to the uſe of himſelf and Margaret
his wite for their lives, for the jointure of the faid Margaret
and afterwards to the heirs males of the body of George Earl
of Cumberland. and for want of ſuch iſſue, to the uſe of
Francis now Earl of Cumberland. and to the heirs males of
his body begotten ; and for want of ſuch iſſue, to the uſe of
the right heirs of the ſaid George; and afterwards, by an-
other indenture, conveyed the fee- ſimple to Francis, Earl ; by
force of which, and of * the ſtatute of uſes they were ſeiſed
accordingly: and afterwards, 20 Octob. anno 3 Jacobi, the
ſaid George Earl of Cumberland died without 54 male of
his body lawfully begotten: and further found, that Marga—
ret, Counteſs of Cumberland, that now is, was alive, and
took the profits of the premiſes from the death of the ſaid
George Earl of Cumberland. until the taking of that inquiſi-
tion; and further found the other points of the writ.

And firſt it was objected, that here was no dying ſeiſed
found by office, and therefore the office ſhall be inſufficient :
but as to that, it was anſwered and reſolved, that by this of-
fice the King was not intitied by the common law, tor then a
dying ſeiſed, or at leaſta dying (ſeiſin) the day of his death
was neceſſary ; but this office is to be maintained upon the
ſtatutes of 32 & 34 H. 8. by force of which no dying ſeiſed is
requiſite, but rather the contrary, /c/. if the land be (as this


caſe is) conveyed to the wiſe, &c. And ſo it was reſolved in 4


Vincent's caſe, anno 23 Eliz. where all the lands holden in
capite, was conveyed to the younger ſon, and yet the eldeſt
ſon was in ward, notwithſtanding that nothing deſcended.

The ſecond objection was, It doth not appear that the eſ-
tate of the wife continued in her until the death of the Earl,
for the huſband and wife had aliened the ſame to another;
and then no primer ſeiſin ſhall be, as ir is agreed in Bing-
ham's caſe. 0 : |

As to that, it was anſwered and reſolved, that the office
was ſufficient prima facie for the King, becauſe it is a thing
collateral, and no point of the writ ; and if any ſuch aliena-
tion be (which ſhall not be intended) then the fame ſhall
come in of. the other part of the alienee by a Honſirans de
droit; and the caſe at bar is a ſtronger caſe, becauſe it is
found, that the ſaid Counteſs. took the profits of the premiles
from the death of George the Earl, until the finding of the


office. |
U 2 (21) Wills's


Page [$oJ


Vide poſt, 71.
ant, 48 . :


Stat. 32 H. 9. e. r.
& 34 H. 8. 6. 5.
See 2 Co. 93,945
Cc,


See 1 Co. 50,545
158, 173.

4 Co. 54, &c.

7 Co. 10, & s,


Uſes,
1 Co, 121, 127,
140.
2 Co, 57, 53.
(Co. 64.
7 Co. 13 & 24.
Vide ant. 48.
poſt. 5 5, 56.


Page [51]


Part XIII.


(21) WILL S's Caſe,
Trin. 7 Jac. 1.
In the Court of Wards.


ENP.Y WILLS, being ſeiſed of the fourth part of the
manor of Wryland in the county of Devon, holden of
Queen Elizabeth in ſocage-tenure in capite, of the ſaid fourth
part enfeotted Zachary Iriſh and others, and their heirs, to
the uſe of the ſaid Henry for the term of his life, and after-
wards to the uſe of Tho. Wills his ſecond ſon in tail; and af-


.terwardstotheuſeof Rich Wills his youngeſt ſon in tail; and for


deiault of ſuch iſſue, to the uſe of the right heirs of the ſaid
Henry; and afterward the ſaid Henry ſo ſeiſed as aboveſaid
died thereof ſeiſed, William Wills being his ſon and heir of
full age ; T homas the ſecond ſon entered as into his remain-
der: all this matter is found by office, and the queſtion was,
if the King ou2ht to have primer ſeiſin in this caſe, and that
livery or oer le main ſhall be ſued in this caſe by the ſtatutes
of 32 and 34 H. 8. And it was refolved by the two Chief
Juſtices and the Chief Baron, that not; if in this caſe by the

common law no livery or er le main ſhall be ſued ; and that
was agreed by them all by the experience and courſe of the
court. See 21 Eliz. Dyer, 362. If tenant in ſocage dieth
ſeiſed in“ poſſeſſion, his heir within the age of fourteen


years, he ſhall not ſue livery, but ſhall have an Ouſter le main,


una cm exitibus; but otherwiſe it is, if the heir be of the
age of fourteen years, which is his full age for ſocage; and
therewith agreeth 4 Eliz. Dyer 213.

And two precedents were ſhewed, which were decreed in
the ſame court by the advice of the Juſtices aſſiſtants to the
Court. | | |

One in Trinity term, 16 Elizabeth, Thomas Stavely
the father enfeoffed William Strelly, and Thomas Law *
| the


Part XIII, WII Is's Caſe.


the manor of Ryndly in the county of Nottingham, upon
condition that they re- enfeoff the feoffor and his wife for their
lives, the remainder to Thomas Stavely ſon and heir appa-
rent of the feoffor in fee, which manor was holden of Queen
Elizabeth in ſocage in capite and upon conſideration of the
ſaving in the ſtatute of 32 H. 8. next aſter the clauſe con-
cerning tenure in ſocage in chief, it was reſolved, that no li-


very or Ouſler le main ſhould be ſued in ſuch caſe, and the


reaſon was, becauſe that the precedent clauſe giveth liberty
to him who holdeth in ſocage in chief, to make diſpoſition of
it, either by act executed, or by will at his free will and plea-
ſure: and before the ſaid act, no livery or Oufter le main
ſhould be ſued in ſuch caſe : and the words of the ſaving ate,
ſaving, &c to the King, &c. all his right, &c. of primer ſeiſin
and relief, &c. fortenurein ſocage, or of the nature of tenure in
ſocagein chief, as heretofore hath been uſed and accuſtomed: but
there was no uſe or cuſtom before the act, that the King ſhould
have any primer ſeiſin or relief in ſuch caſe : and tne words
ſubſequent in the ſaid ſaving depend upon the former words,
and do not give any primer ſeiſin or relief where none was
before.

Another precedent was in Paſch. 37 Eliz. in the Book of
Orders, fol. 444. where the caſe was, that William Allet was
ſeiſed of certain lands in Pitſey called Lundſey, holden of the

ueen in ſocage in chief, and by deed covenanted to ſtand
ſeiled to the uſe of his wife for life, and afterwards to the uſe
of Richard his younger ſon in fee, and died, his heir of full
age; and all that was found by office, and it was reſolved,
ut ſupra, that no livery or Oufter le main ſhould be ſued in
that caſe ; but the doubt in the caſe at bar was, becauſe that


Henry the feoffor had a reverſion in fee, which deſcended to
the ſaid William his eldeſt fon.


Admiralty.

See 12 Co. 129,

&c. ibid.

2 Co. 93.

10 Co. 115,117.
5 Co. 2.


12 Co. 129.


Part XIII.


(22) The Caſe of the Admiralty.


Trin. anno 7 Jac. 1.


BILL was preferred in the Star-chamber againſt Sir
Richard Hawkins, Vice-admiral of the county of De-
von ; and it charged, that one William' Hull and others were
notorious pirates upon the high ſeas, and ſhewed in certain,
what piracy they had committed: the ſaid dir Richard Haw-
kins knowing the ſame, did them receive, abet and comfort
within the body of the county, and for bribes and rewards
ſuffered them to be di:charged. And what offence that was,
the court referred to the conſideration of the two Chief Juſ-
tices, and the Chief Baron, who heard counſel of both ſides
divers days at Serjcants Inn.
And firſt, it was by them reſolved, that by the common


law the Admirals ought not to meddle with any thing done


Page [52]


within the realm. but only with things done upon the ſea ;
and that appeareth fully by“ the ſtatute of 13 R. 2. cap. 5.
by which it appeareth, that ſuch was the common law in the
time of King Edward the third, and therewith agreeth the
ſtatute of 2 Hen. 4. cap. 11. and the ſtatute of 15 Hen. 4.
cap. 13. That becauſe the Admirals and their deputies in-
croach to themſelves divers juriſdictions and franchiſes more
than they ought to have, Be it enacted, that all contracts,
pleas, and complaints, and all other things ariſing within the
bodies of the counties as well by land as by water, as alſo
of wreck of the ſea, the Admiral court ſhall not have
any conuſance, power, or juriſdiction, &c. Neverthe-
leſs of the death of a man, and of mayhem done in
reat ſhips, being in the main ſtream of great rivers,
only below the bridges nigh to the ſea, and not in o-
| ; | has


*


Part XIII. The Caſe of the Aten ui r


ther places of the ſame rivers ; and to arreſt ſhips in the great
flotes for the great voyage of the King and of his realm: and
by the ſtat. of 2 Hen. 5. cap. 6. the Admirals of the King of
England have done and uſed reaſonably, according to the an-
cient law and cuſtom, upon the main ſea. See the ſtatute of
5 Eliz. cap. 5. And all this appeareth to be by the common
law; and with that agreeth Stamford, fol. 5 1. And if a man
be killed or layed within the arms of the fea, where a man
may ſee from one part of the land to the other, the Coroner
ſhall inquire of it, and not the Admiral, becauſe that the
country may well know it: and he voucheth 8 Ed. 2. Coron,
399. ſo faith Stamford, the ſame proves that by the common
law-before the ſtatute of 2 H. 4. cap. 11. the Admiral ſhall
not have juriſdiction unleſs upon the high ſea. See Plow.
Com. 37. 6. If the Marſhal holdeth plea out of the verge of
the Admiral within the body of the county, the ſame is void,
See 2 R. 3. 12. 30 H. 6. 6. by Priſot.

2. It was reſolved, that the ſaid ſtatutes are to be intended
of a power to hold plea, and not of a power to award execu-
tion, ſcil, De juriſdiftime tenendi placiti; non de jur iſdictione
exequendi : for notwithſtanding the ſaid ſtatutes, the Judge of
the Admiralty may do execution within the body of the
county; and therefore in 19 Hen. 6 7. the caſe was, W. T.
at Southwark affirmed a plaint of treſpaſs in the court of Ad-
miralty before the Steward of the Earl of Huntingdon againft
J. B. of a treſpaſs done upon the high ſea, upon which iflued
a Citation to cite the ſaid J. B. to appear beſote the Steward
aforeſaid at the common day then next enſuing, directed to
P. who ſerved the ſaid citation; at which day the ſaid J B.
made default: and the uſage of the court is, that if the de-
fendant maketh default, he ſhall be amerced by the diſcretion
of the Steward, to the uſe of the plaintiff: to which J. B. tor
his default aforeſaid, was amerced to twenty marks; wherc-
upon command was made to the ſaid P. as Miniſter of
the court aforeſaid, to take the goods of the ſaid J. B.
to make agreement with the beforeſaid W. T. by force
of which he for the ſaid twenty marks took five cows,
and an hundred ſheep, in execution for the money a-
foreſaid, in the county of Leiceſter, And there it
is holden by Newton, and the whole court, that the
ſtatutes reſtrain the power of the court of Admi-

U 4 ralty


Page [53]


See this point
{volved 8 Elz.
Dyer per curiam,
which is omitted
out of the print-


4
4
U
4
L
N


The Caſe of the ApMIRALTv. Part XIII.


ralty to hold plea of a thing done within the body of the
county,- but they do not reſtrain the execution of the ſame
court to be ſerved upon the land: for it may be that the party
hath not any thing upon the ſea, and then it is reaſon to
have it upon the land: and if ſuch a defendant have nothing
wherewithal to make agreement, they of the court have power
to take the body of ſuch a defendant upon the land in exe-
cution.

In which caſe theſe points were obſerved:

1. Although that the court of Admiralty is not a court of
record, becauſe they proceed there according to the civil law,
(ſee Brook Error, 77. acc.) yet by cuſtom of the court they
may amerce the defendant for his default by their diſcretion.
2. That they may make execution for the ſame of the goods
of the defendant in corpore comitatus and if he hath not goods,
then they may arreſt the body of the defendant within the
body of the county. |

But the great queſtion between them was, If a man com-
mitted piracy upon the ſea, and one knowing thereof, re-
ceiveth and comforteth the defendant within the body of the
county; it the Admiral and other the Commiſhoners, by
force of the act of 28 H. 8. cap. 16. may proceed by indict-
ment and conviction againſt the receiver and abettor, inaſ-
much as the ofrence of the acccilary hath his beginning with-
in the body of the county ?

And it was reſolved by them, that ſuch a receiver and
abettor by the common law could not be indicted or convict-
ed, becauſe that the common law cannot take conuſance of
the original oftence, becauſe that is done out of the juriſdic-
tion pf the common law: and by conſequence, - where the
common law cannot puniſh the principal, the ſame ſhall not
puniſh any one as acceſſary to ſuch a principal. And there-
tore Coke, Chief Juſtice reported to them a cafe which was in
Suffolk in anne 28 Elix. where Butler and others upon the
ſea, next to the town of Layſtoft, in Suffolk, robbed divers
of the Queens ſubjects, and ſpoiled them of their goods,
which goods they brought into Norfolk ; and there they were
apprehended, and there brought before me, then a Juſtice of
the Peace within the ſame county, whom I examined; and in
the end they confetled a cruel and barbarous piracy, and that
thoſe goods which then they had with them, were part of
the goods which they had robbed from the Queen's ſub-
zects upon the high ſea: and I was of opinion, that in
that caſe 1t could not be felony puniſhable by the common
Jaw, becauſe that the original act, (/cl.) the 9 of

| them


Part XIII. The Caſe of the Apmigearlty.


them was not any offence whereof the common law taketh Note, The Ad-
knowledge; and by conſequence, the bringing of them into e FO”
a county could not make the ſame felony puniſhable by our 5 =p
law: and it is not like, where one ſtealeth goods in one gia, whereby the
county, and brings them into another, there he may be in- 5 N
dicted of felony in any of the counties, becauſe that the ori- Bend Kh fob-
ginal act was felony, whereof the common law taketh know- jefts by fea, &c.
ledge : and yet notwithſtanding I committed them to the _ this by the
gaol, until the coming of the Juſtices of Aſſiſes. And at the which cores...
next aſſiſes the opinion of Wray Chief Juſtice, and Periam ene gave him a
Juſtice of Aſſiſe, was, that foraſmuch as the common law nigh iy wig
doth not take notice of the original offence, the bringing of this 0n/ the
the goods ſtolen upon the ſea into a county, did not make the land; and there-
ſame puniſhable at the common law: and thereupon they 1
were committed to Sir Robert Southwell, then Vice-Admiral br
of the ſaid counties: and this in eſfect agrees with Lacy's the King's de-
caſe, which ſee in my Reports cited in Bingham's caſe in the ®*!2%
Second Report, 93. and in Conſtable's caſe, 'Third Report,
107. |

See that piracy was felony, the book of 40 Aſſiſ. 25. by
Schard, where a Norman Maſter or Captain of a ſhip, toge-
ther with ſome Engliſhmen, robbed the King's ſubjects upon
the ſeas ; where he ſaith, that it was felony in the Norman
Captain, and treaſon in the Engliſhmen his companions :
and the reafon of the ſaid caſe was, becauſe the Normans were
not then under the obedience and allegiance of the King * of Page [54]
England (for King John loſt Normandy) and for that cauſe
piracy was but felony in the Norman ; but in the Engliſh,
who were under the obedience and allegiance of the King of
England, the ſame was adjudged treaſon, which is to be un-
derſtood of petit treaſon, which was high treaſon before : and
therefore in that caſe, the pirate being apprehended, the Not-
man Captain was hanged, and the Engliſhmen were hanged
and drawn, as appeareth by the ſame book. See Stamford 10.

And ſome objected, and were of opinion, that treaſons
done out of the realm might have been here determined by
the common law; but truly the ſame could not be puniſhable, -
bat only by the civil law before the Admiral, or by aCt of Par-
liament, as all foreign treaſons and felonies were by the common
law: and therefore where it is declared by the ſtat. of 25 E. 3.
that adherence to the enemies of the King within England, 2.
or elſewhere, is treaſon, the ſame ſhall be tried by the com-
mon law: but where it is done out of the realm, the of-
fender ſhould not be attainted but by Parliament, until the
latute of 35 Hen. 8. cap. 2. although that there are opini-
8 f nmions


Fine, proclama-
tions amended,
& Co. 42.

See 5 Co. 2.
Part 28, 39, 43,
44, & 45.

8 Co. 157, to
161.


PeTTvs and GonsaLve's Caſe, Part XIII.
ons in ſome books to the contrary. See 5 R. 2. Quare im-
pedit, Cc. | 1 IA


[Note, All crimes are local, and muſt be tried where com-
mitted. See Rep. Q. A. p. 9g.] |


(23) Pettus and Godfalve's Caſe.
Trin. 7 Jac. 1.


In the Common Pleas.


1 a fine levied Trinity term, anno quinto of this King,
between John Pettus, Eſq. plaintiff, and Roger Godſalve
and others, deforcients of the manor of Caſtre, with the ap-
purtenances, &c. in the county of Norfolk, where in the
third proclamation upon the foot of the ſame fine the ſaid pro-
clamation is ſaid to have been made in the ſixth year of the
King that now is, which ought to have been made anne guinto
of the King: and whereas upon the foot of the ſame fine, the


fourth proclamation is altogether left out; but becauſe upon


the view of the proclamations upon dorſis, upon the record,
& note finis ejuſdem termini per Fuſliciarios, remaining with
the Chirographer, and the book of the ſaid Chirographer, in
which the ſaid proclamations were firſt entered, it appeareth,
that the ſaid proclamations were rightly and duly made,
therefore it was adjudged, that the errors or defects aforeſaid
ſhould be amended, and made to agree as well with the pro-
clamation upon record of the ſaid fine, and entry of the faid
book, as with the other proclamations in dorſis ſuper pedes a-
liorum finium of the ſame term: and this was done upon the


motion of Haughton, Serjeant at Law.


(24) Sau


Part XIII.


*


/


(24) SAMME S's Caſe.
Mich. 7 Jac. .
In the Court of Wards.


OHN SAMMES being ſeiſed of Grany Mead by copy of ves.

court roll of the manor of Tolleſham the Great, of which See Co. 107,
Sir Thomas Beckingham was lord, and held the ſame of the % *
King by knight's ſervice in capite ; Sir Thomas by his deed 2c. 53, 78.
indented, dated the 22d of December, in the“ firſt year of * &». 64.
King James, made between him of the one part, and the ſaid pC.
John Sammes and George Sammes fon and heir apparent of vs (55) .
the ſaid John of the other part, did bargain, ſell, grant, en- Utes, Vide an,
feoff, releaſe, and confirm unto the ſaid John Sammes the 48, 50, 54.
ſaid mead called Grany Mead, to have and to hold the ſaid
mead unto the ſaid John Sammes and George Sammes, and
their heirs and aſſigns, to the only uſe and behoof ot the ſaid
John Sammes and George Sammes, their heirs and aſſigns
for ever: and by the ſame indenture Sir I homas did cove-
nant with John and George, to make further «flurance to John
and George, and their heirs, to the uſe of them and their
heirs, and livery and ſeiſin was made and delivered, accord-
ing to the true intent of the ſaid indentures, of the within
mentioned premiles to the uſes within mentioned.

John Sammes the father dierh, George Sammes his ſon and Wardſhip,
heir being within age, the queſtion was, W hether George
Sammes ſhould be in ward to to the King or no? And in
this caſe three points were reſolved: |

1. Foraſmuch as George was not named in the premiſes, Habendum,
he cannot take by the Habendum; and ihe livery made ac-
cording to the intent ot the indenture, doth not give any
thing to George, becauſe the indenture as to him 1s void:
but although the teoffment be good only to John and his heirs,
1 the uſe limited to the ule of John and George, and their

E115, is good,
: 2, If


Uſes.


Joint-tenants,
4.


Page [56]


SAMMEs's Caſe. Part XIII.


2. If the eſtate had been conveyed to John and his heirs by
the releaſe and confirmation, as it well may be to a tenant by
copy of court-roll, the / limited to them is good: for upon
a releaſe which creates an eſtate, a uſe may be limited, or a
rent reſerved without ; waar, but upon a releaſe or confir-
mation, which enures by way of mitter le droit, an uſe cannot
be limited, or a rent pr eee

But the third was of greater doubt, if in this caſe the fa-
ther and ſon were joint-tenants, or tenents in common? For
it was objected, when the father is only enfeofted to the only
uſe of him and his fon, and their heirs in the per, that in this
caſe, they ſhall be tenants in common. By the feoffment the
father is in by the common law in the per, and then the li-
mitation of the uſe to him and his ſon, and to their heirs,
cannot diveſt the eſtate, which was veſted in him by the com-
mon law, out of him, and velt the eſtate in him in the Po/?
by force of the ſtatute, according to the limitation of the ule ;
and therefore, as to one moiety, the father ſhall be in by force
of the feoffment in the per, and the ſon, as to the other
moiety, ſhall be in by force of the ſtatute, according to the
imitation of the uſe in the p, and by conſequence they
ſhall be tenants in common. But it was anſwered and re-


ſolved, that they were joint-tenants, and that the ſon in the


caſe at bar ſhould have the ſaid grange by the ſurvivor: for
if at the common law A. had been enfeoffed to the uſe of him
and B. and their heirs, although that he was only ſeiſed of the
land, the uſe was jointly to A. and B. For a uſe ſhall not
be ſuſpended or extinct by a ſole ſeiſin, or joint ſeiſin of the
land: and therefore if A. and B. be enfeoffed to the uſe of A.
and his heirs, and A. dieth, the 15 8 uſe ſhall deſcend to
his heir: as it appears in 13 H. 7. 6. in Stoner's caſe: and
by the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. cap. Ry of uſes, it appeareth, that
when ſeveral perſons are ſeiſed to the uſe of any of them, that
the eſtate ſhall be executed according to the uſe.

And as to that which was ſaid, that the eſtate of the land
which the father hath in the land, as to the moiety of the uſe
which he himſelf * hath, ſhall not be diveſted out of him: to
what it was anſwered and reſolved, that that ſhall well be: for if
a man maketh a feoffment in fee to one, to the uſe of him and the
heirs of his body; in this caſe, for the benefit of the iſſue, the
ſtatute according to the limitation of the uſes, diveſts the eſtate
veſted in him by the common law, and executes the ſame .


in


Part XIII. SAMMESs's Caſe,


in himſelf by force of the ſtatute ; and yet the ſame is out of
the words of the ſtatute of 27 H. 8. which are, where any
perſon, &c, ſtand or be ſeiſed, &c. to the uſe of any other
perſon ; and here he is ſeiſed to the uſe of himſelf : and the
other clauſe 1s, where divers and many perſons, &c. be
jointly ſeiſed, &c. to the uſe of any of them, &c. and in this
caſe A. is ſole ſeiſed: but the ſtat. of 27 H. 8. hath been al-
ways beneficially expounded, to fatisfy the intention of the
parties, which is the direction of the uſe according to the
rule of the law. So if a man, ſeiſed of lands in fee- ſimple,
by deed covenants with another, that he and his heirs will


ſtand ſeiſed of the ſame land, to the uſe of himſelf and the


heirs of his body, or unto the uſe of himſelf for life, the re-
mainder over in fee; in that caſe, by the operation of the ſta-
tute, the eſtate which he hath at the common law is diveſted,
and a new eſtate veſted in himſelf, according to the limitation
of the uſe. And it is to be known, that an uſe of land
(which is but a pernancy of the profits) is no new thing,
but part of that which the owner of the land had : and there-
fore, if tenant in borough Engliſh, or a man ſeiſed of the
part of his mother, maketh a feoffment to another without
conſideration, the younger ſon in the one caſe, and the heir
on the part of the mother on the other, ſhall have the uſe, as
they ſhould have the land itſelf, if no feoffment had been
made: as it is holden in 5 E. 4. 7. See 4 & 5 Phil. & Mar.
Dyer 163. So if a man maketh a ſeoffment unto the uſe of
another in tail, and afterwards to the uſe of his right heirs,
the feoffor hath the reverſion of the land in him; for if the do-
nee dieth without iſſue, the law giveth the uſe, which was
Part of the land to him: and ſo it was reſolved, Trinity,
31 Elz. between Fenwick and Milford in the King's Bench.
So in 28 H. 8. Dyer 11. the Lord Roſle's caſe: a man ſeiſed
of one acre by priority, and of another acre by poſteriority,
and make a feoffment in fee of both to his uſe ; and it was
adjudged, that although both paſs at one inſtant, yet the law
ſhall make a priority of the uſes, as if it were of the land it-
ſelf : which proves, that the uſe is not any new thing, for
then there ſhould be no priority in the caſe. See 13 H. 7. b.

by Butler. | |
So in the caſe at bar, the uſe limited to. the feoffee
and another, is not any new thing, but the pernancy of
the old profits of the land, which well may be limited to
the feoffee and another j
only limited to the feolfee and his heirs, there, becauſe
there is not any limitation to another perſon, nec in pre-
| ſenti,


ointly: but if the uſe had been


See the Duke of
Norfolk*s caſe ia
3 Chans, Ca.


SammEes's Caſe, Part XIII.


ſenti, nec in futuro, he ſhall be in by force of the feoffment.
And it was reſolved, that joint-tenants might be ſeiſed to
an uſe. although that they come to it at ſeveral times: as, if
a man maketh a feoffment in fee to the uſe of himſelf, and to
ſuch a woman. which he ſhall after marry, for term of their
lives, or in tail, or in fee; in this caſe, if after he marrieth
a wife, ſhe ſhall take jointly with him, although that they
take the uſe at ſeveral times, for they derive the uſe out of the
fame fountain and freehold, c. the firſt feoffment. See 17
El. Dyer 340. 50 if a diſſeiſin be had to the uſe of two,
and one of them agreeih at one time, and the other at an-
Page [57] other time, they ſhall “ be joint-tenants ; but otherwiſe it is
of eſtates which paſs by the common Jaw: and therefore, if a
rant be made by deed to one man for term for life, the re-
mainder to the right heirs of A. and B. in fee, and A. hath
iſſue and dieth, and afterwards B. hath iſſue and dieth, and
then the tenant for life dieth ; in that caſe the heirs of A. and
B. are not joint tenants, nor ſhall join in a Scare factas to ex-
ecute the fine, 24 E. 3. Joinder in Action 10 becauſe that
although the remainder be limited by one fine, and by joint
words, yet becauſe that by the death of A. the remainder as
to the moiety, veſted in his heir, and by the death of B. the
other moiety veſted in his heir at ſeveral times, they cannot
be joiat- tenants : but in the caſe of a uſe, the huſband taketh
all the uſe in the mean time; and when he marrieth, the
wife takes it by force of the feoffment and the limitation of
the uſe jointly with him, for there is not any fraction and ſe-
veral veſting by parcels, as in the other caſe, and ſuch is the
differenee. See 18 E 3. 28. And upon the whole matter it
was reſolved, that becauſe in the principal caſe the father and
ſon were joint-tenants by the original purchaſe, that the fon
having the land by ſurvivor, ſhould not be in ward: and ac-
cordingly it was fo decreed,


(25) CoLLINS


Part XIII.


YO __


(25) Coriins and Harping's Caſe. e . e 1
. . Ja. .


Paſch. 39 Eliz. Rot. 233. 8


In the King's Bench.


=
—— H


HE cafe between Collins and Harding was; a man Rent apportioa- \
ſeiſed of lands in fee, and alſo of lands by copy of gd.
court-roll in fee, according to the cuſtom of the manor, made * 855 *
one entire demiſe of the lands in fee, and of the lands holden 3 Co. 2 Part
by copy according to the cuſtom, to Harding for years, ren- 5, 85.
dering one entire rent: and afterwards the leſſor ſurrendered, Co. 2.
the copyhold land to the uſe of Collins and his heirs: and at 8 Co, 4.4
another time granted by deed the reverſion of the freehold 9 Co. 135.
lands to Collins in fee, and Harding attorned ; and afterwards “ e. 4
for the rent behind, Collins brought an action of debt for the
whole rent: and it was objected, that the reſervation of the
rent was an entire contract, and by the act of the leſſee the
ſame cannot be apportioned : and therefore if one demiſeth
three acres, rendering 3s. rent, and afterwards bargaineth
and ſelleth, by deed indented and inrolled, the reverſion of
one acre, the whole rent is gone, becauſe that the contract is
entire and cannot be ſevered by the act of the leſſor: alſo the
leſſee by that ſhall be ſubject to two fealtes, where he wa
ſubject but to one before. \
As to theſe points, it was anſwered and reſolved, that the
contract was not entire, but that the ſame by the act of the
leſſor, and the affent of the leſſee, might be divided and ſever-
ed: for the rent is incident to the reverſion, and the reverſion
is ſeverable, and by conſequence the rent alſo: for acceſſarium
ſeguitur naturam ſui principalis, and that cannot be ſevered or di-
vided by the aſſent of the. leſſee, or expreſs attornment, or im-
plied by force of an act of Parliament, to which every one is 4
party as by force of the ſtatute of inrolments, or of uſes, &c. |
And as to the two fealties, to hat the leſſee ſhall be ſubject, " |
although that the rent ſhall be extinct: for fealty is b - |
necel- WR


Modus decim.
antea 12, 37,
38, &c.


—


DR Mopo Dreruavp!. Part XIII.


neceſſity of law incident to the reverſion, and to every part of
it; but the rent ſhall be divided pro rata portionis and ſo it
was adjudged. y |
* And it was alſo adjudged, that although Collins cometh
to the reverſion by ſeveral conveyances, and at ſeveral times,
yet he might bring an action of debt for the whole rent. Hil,


43 Eliz. Rot. 243. Weſt. and Laſſel's caſe: a man made a


leaſe for years of certain lands, and afterwards deviſeth the
reverſion of two parts to one, he ſhall have two parts of the
rent; and he may have an action of debt for the ſame, and
have judgment to recover, Hil. 42 Eliz. Rot. 108. in the
Common Pleas, Ewen and Moyle's cafe : the deviſee of the
reverſion of part ſhall avow for part of the rent, and ſuch
avowry ſhall be good and maintainable.

Note well theſe caſes and judgments, for they are given
upon great reaſon and conſideration, for otherwiſe great in-
convenience would enſue, if by ſeverance of part ot the re-
verſion, the entire rcut ſhould be loſt: and the opinion re-
ported by Serjeant Bendloes, in Hil. 6. and 7 E 6. to the
contrary, nihil valet (ſcil.) that the rent in ſuch caſe ſhould
be loſt, becauſe that no contract can be apportioned, which
is not law: for, 1. A rent reſerved upon a leaſe for years is
more than a contract, for it is a rent-fervice. 2. It is inci-
dent to the reverſion which is ſeverable. 3. Upon recovery
of part in waſte, or upon entry in part for a forſeiture, or
upon ſurrender of part, the rent is apportionable.


(26) De Modo Decimandi.


OTE, it was adjudged 19 Eliz. in the King's Bench,
that where one obtained a prohibition upon preſcription
De modo decimandi, by payment of a certain ſum of money at
a certain day; upon which ifſue was taken, and the jury found
the Modus decimandi by payment of the ſaid ſum, but that it had
been paid at another day: and the caſe was well debated, and at
the laſt it was reſolved, that no conſultation ſhould be granted;
for although that the day of payment be miſtaken, yet it appear-
eth to the court, that no tithes in kind were due, for which =
uit


Part XIII. Ejectment De duabus partibus, &c.
ſuit was in the ſpiritual court: and the trial of the cuſtom
De modo decimandi belongeth to the common law, and a con-


ſultation ſhall not be granted where the ſpiritual court hath


not juriſdiction of the cauſe: Tanfield, Chief Baron, hath
the report of this caſe.


(27) Ejectment De duabus partibus, &c,


Mich. F Fac. I,


N an Ejectione firmæ, the writ and declaration were of two gee 4 co. 16, 47
parts of certain lands in Hetherſet and Windham in Nor- 4 ©o. 26, 66.
folk, and doth not ſay in two parts, in three parts to be divid- ES . 77.
ed; and yet it was good as well in the declaration as in the 11 Co. Nog 552
writ : for without queſtion the writ is good, De duabus par- &c.
tibus, generally, and ſo is the Regiſter. See 4 E. 3. 162.
2E. 3. 31. 2 Aſſ. 1. 10 Aſſ. 12. 10 E. 3.511. 11 Aſſ. 21.
IT E. 3. Bre. 478. 9 H. 6. 36. 17 E. 4. 40. 19 E. 3. Bre.
244. And upon all the ſaid books it appeareth, that by the
intendment and conſtruction of the law, when any parts are
demanded without ſhewing in how many parts the whole is
divided, that there remains but one part not divided : as if
two parts are demanded, there remains a third part; and
when three parts are divided, there remains a fourth part, &c.
But when any demand is of other parts in other form, there
he ought to ſhew the ſame ſpecially: as if one demandeth
three parts of “ five parts, or four parts of the fix, &c. And Page [59]
according to this difference it was ſo reſolved in Jourden's
caſe in the King's Bench: and accordingly judgraent was
given in this term in the caſe at bar,


Vor. VII. X (28) Murs


Part XII.


(28) MUT T O N's Cale.
Mich. 7 Jacobi r.


In the Common Pleas.


Slander, N action upon the caſe was brought againſt Mutton, for
Poſtea 71. A calling the plaintiff, “ forcerer and inchanter,” who
3 955 to pleaded not guilty; and it was found-againſt him to the da-
See Inſt. Leg. mages of 6d. And it was holden by the whole court in the
291, 292 Comman Pleas, that no action lieth for the ſaid words: for
2 £9, * fortilegium eff rei futuri per ſertes exploratio : ef ortilegus ſive
Hob, 137, 155, Jortilegi/ta eff gui per ſortes futura prænunciat. Inchantry %


162. Der bis aut rebus aunts aliguid preter naturam malir: : whetre-


1 Cro. 1c.
2 Cro. 20 5, 233, Of the poct faith,


236, 306, 399,
531, 560. Carminibus Circes fecios mutavit Ulyſſis.
s

See 45 E. 3. 77. One was taken in Southwark with the
head and viſage of a dead man, and with a book of ſorcery in
his mail : and he was brought into the King's Bench before

Knevet Juſtice, but no indictment was framed againſt him:
for which the Clerks made him ſwear, that he ſhould never
after commit any ſorcery, and he was ſent. to priſon : and the
head and the book were burned at 'Tuthil, at the charges of
the prifoner. And the ancient law was, as it appeareth by
Britton, that thoſe who were attainted of ſorcery were burned ;
but the law is not ſuch at this day; but he who is convicted
of ſuch impoſture and deceit ſhall be fined and impriſoned.
And it was ſaid, that it was adjudged, that if one calleth an-

other witch, that an action will not lie, for it is too general:
et dlicitur Latine ven?#fica but if one ſaith, ſhe is a witch, and
hath betwitched ſuch a one to death, an action upon
the caſe lieth, if in truth he be dead. Conjuration is
derived of theſe words, cou and juro et proprie dici-
tur quando multi in alicujus pernicium jurant : and in the
ſtatute of 5 Elizabeth, cap. 16. it is taken for e
0


Part XIII. Sir Atien Pexcy's Caſe,
of any evil and wicked ſpirits, 7. e. / conjurare verbis concep-
tis alios matos & iniquos ſpiritus; the ſame is made felony : but
witchcraft, inchantment, charm, or ſorcery, is not felony,
it by them any perſon be not killed or dieth. So that conju-
ration eff verbis conceptis compellere males & iniquos ſpiritus ali-
quod facere vel dicere, &c. But a witch, who works any
thing by an evil ſpirit, doth not make any conjuration or in-
vocation by any powerful names of the devil, but the wicked
ſpirit comes to her familiarly, and therefore it is called a fa-
miliar: but if a man be called a conjurer, or a witch, he
ſhall not have any action upon the caſe, unleſs that he ſaith,
that he is a conjurer of the devil, or of any evil or wicked ſpi-
rit: or, that one is a witch, and that he hath betwitched any
one to death, as is before ſaid.

And note, that the firſt ſtatute which was made againſt


conjuration, witchcraft, ſorcery, and inchantment, was the


act of 33 H. 8. c. 8. and by it they were made felony in cer-
tain caſes ſpecial, but that act was repealed by the ſtatute of
1 E. 6. cap 12. and it ſeems all the former ſtat. againſt
witchcraft are now repealed.


(29) Sir ALLEN PERCY's Cale.
* Mich. 7 Jacobi "Y
In the Court of Wards.


AIR John Fitz and Bridget his wife, being tenants for life

of a tenement called Ramſhams, the remainder to Sir
John Fitz in tail, the remainder to Bridget in tail, the re-
verſion to Sir John and his heirs: Sir John and Bridget his
wife, by indenture demiſed the ſaid tenement to William


Sprey for divers years yet to come, except all trees of timber, }


oak and aſh, and liberty to carry them away, rendering rent ;
and afterwards Sir John died, having iſſue Mary his daughter,
now the wife of Sir Allen Percy, Knt. and afterwards the ſaid
Wm. Sprey demiſed the ſame tenement to Sir Allen for 7 years:
the queſtion was, whether Sir Allen, having the immediate
inheritance in the right of his wife, expectant upon the


X 2 eſtate


Page [60]


Waſte in cutting
trees, &c,

See 2 Co, 9%»

4 Co. 63, »

to 70.

5 Co.2. Part 22,
11 Co, 45, 48;
2.


— —
* „„


5 Co. 12.


Page [61]


Sir ALLEN PER 's Caſe. Part XIII.


eſtate for the life of Bridget, and alſo having tlie poſſeſſion by
the ſaid demiſe, might cut down the timber- trees, oaks,
and aſhes: and it was objected, that he might well do it: for
it was reſolved in Saunders's caſe, in the Fifth Part of my
Reports, fol. 12. That if leflee for years, or for life, aſſigns
over his term or eſtate unto another, excepting the mines, or
the trees, or the clay, &c. that the exception 1s void, becauſe
that he cannot except that which he cannot lawfully take, and
which doth not belong unto him by the law. But it was an{-
wered and reſolved by the two Chief Juſt. and the Ch. Baron,
that in the caſe at bar, the exception was good without queſ-
tion, becauſe that he who hath the inheritance, joins in the
leaſe with the leſſee for life. And it was further reſolved, that if
tenant for life lcaſeth for years, excepting the timber-trees,
the ſame is lawfully and wiſcly done: for otherwiſe, if the
leſſee or aſſignee cutteth down the trees, the tenant for life
ſhou!d be puniſhed in waſte, and ſhould not have any remedy
againſt the leffee for years: and alſo if he demiſeth the land
without exception, he who hath the immediate eſtate of inhe-
ritance, by the aſſent of the leſſee, may cut down all the
timber-trees, which when the term ended, all ſhould be
waſted, and then the tenant for life ſhould not have the boots
which the law giveth him, nor the pawnage and other pro-
fits of the ſaid trees, which he lawfully might take: but when
tenant for life upon his leaſe excepteth the trees, if they be
cut down by the leſſor, the leſſee or aſſignee ſhall have an ac-


tion of treſpaſs, Quare vi et armis, and thall recover damages
according to his loſs. 5

And this caſe is not like the ſaid caſe of Saunders, which
was aſlirmed to be good law; for there, the leſſee aſſigned
over his whole intereſt, and therefore could not except the
mines, trees, and clay, &c. which he had not but as things
annexed to the land: and therefore he could not have them
when he had parted with his whole intereſt, nor he could not
take them either for reparations or otherwiſe : but when te-
nant for life leafeth for years, except the timber-trees, the ſame
remaineth yet annexed to his freehold, and he may command
the leſſee to take them for neceſſary reparations of the houſes.
An in the ſaid caſe of Saunders, a judgment is cited between
Foſter and Miles * plaintiffs, and Spencer and Bourd defen-
dants, that where leſſee for years aſſigns over his term, ex-
cept the trees, that waſte in ſuch caſe ſhall be brought againſt


the athgnee, but in this caſe without queſtion _
e


> Tim.
*


F ⁵˙”- ͤ—ͤwUö ..


Part XIII. HOLM E's Caſe.


lieth againſt the tenant for life, and ſo there is a dit.
ference, cc. | |


(30) HU LM E's Caſe.
Mich. 7 Jacobi 1.
In the Court of Wards.


HE King (in the right of his Duchy of Lancaſter


lands in Male, holden 'of the meſne as of the ſaid manor


whoſe death, 31 H. 8. it was found, that he died ſeiſed of
the ſaid meſnalty, and that the ſame deſcended to Edward his
ſon and heir within age, and found the tenure aforeſaid, &c.
And during the time that he was within age, Robert Male the
tenant died; after which, anne 35 H. 8. it was found by of-
fice, that Robert Male died ſeiſed of the ſaid tenancy pera-
vail, and that the ſame deſcended to Richard his ſon and heir
within age, and that the ſaid tenancy was holden of the King,
as of his ſaid Duchy, by knight's ſervice ; whereas in truth
the ſame was holden of Edward Hulme, then in ward of the
King, as of his meſnalty : for which the King ſeiſed the ward
of the heir of the tenant. And afterwards, anno guarto Fa-
cobi Regis that now is, after the death of Richard Male, who
was lineal heir of the ſaid Robert Male, by another office it


Was found, that the ſaid Richard died ſeiſed of the ſaid te-


nancy, and held the fame of the King as of his Dutchy, by
knight's ſervice, his heir within age, whereupon Richard
Hulme, couſin and heir of the ſaid Richard Hulme, had

referred a biil to be admitted to his traverſe of the ſaid office
found in 4 Jac. Regis and the queſtion was, whether the


office found in 35 H. 8. be any eſtoppel to the ſaid Hulme,


to. traverſe the ſaid laſt oſhce? Or if that the ſaid Hulme
ſhould be driven ſirſt to traverſe the office of 35 H. 8.
X 3 And


)
Lord: Richard Hulme (ſeiſed of the manor of Male in N 11


the county of Lancaſter, holden of the King as of his Duchy See 4 Co. 43,
by knight's ſervice) meſne; and Robert Male, (ſeiſed of * 95


0.
. . * 0 2 a C *
by knight's ſervice) tenant. Richard Hulme died; after 3 Co. 188.


Page 762]
Ca. Lit. 77. a.


Co. Lit. 226. a.


HULME's Caſe, part XIII.


And it was objeQed, that he ought firſt to traverſe the office
of 35 H. 8. as in the firſt caſe of 26 E. 3. 65. That if. two fines
be levied of lands in ancient demeſne, the lord of whom the
land is holden ought to have a writ of deceit to reverſe the firſt
fine; and in that the ſecond fine ſhall not be a bar : and that
the firſt office ſhall ſtand as long as the ſame remains in force,

To which it was anſwered and refolved by the two Chief
Juſtices and the Chief Baron, and the court of Wards, that
the finding of an office is not any eſtoppe], for that is but an
inqueſt of office, and the party grieved ſhall have a traverſe to
it, as it hath been confeſſed, and therefore without queſtion
the ſame is no eſtoppel ; but when an office is found falſly,
that land is holden of the King by Knight's ſervice in capite,
or of the King himſelf in ſocage, if the heir ſueth a general
livery, now it is holden in 46 E. 3. 12. by Mowbray and
Perſey, that he ſhall not after add, that the land is not holden
of the“ King; but there is not any eſtoppel to the heir him-
ſelf who ſueth the livery, and ſhall not conclude his heir: for
ſo ſaith Mowbray himſelf expreſly in 44 Af. pl. 35. That
an eſtoppel by ſuing of livery ſhall eſtop only the heir himſelf
during his life: and in 1 H. 4. 6. b. there the caſe is put of
expreſs confeſſion and ſuing of livery by the iſſue in tail upon
a falſe office: and there it is holden, that the jurors upon a
new Diem clauſit extremum, after the death of ſuch ſpecial
heir, are at large, according to their conſcience, to find that
the land is not holden, &c. for they are ſworn ad veritatem
dicendum : and their finding is called veredictum, quaſi dictum
veritatis; which reaſon alſo ſhall ſerve; when the heir in fee-
ſimple ſueth livery upon a falſe office, and the jurors aſter


his death ought to find according to the truth: ſo it is ſaid


33H. 6. 7. by Laicon, that if two ſiſters be fonnd heirs,
whereof the one is a baſtard, if they join in a ſuit of livery,
ſhe which joineth with the baſtard in the livery, ſhall not al-
lege baſtardy in the other: but there is no book that ſaith,
that the eſtoppel ſhall endure longer than during his life : and
when livery is ſued by a ſpecial heir, the force and effect of
the livery is executed and determined by his death, and by that
the eſtoppel is expired with the death ot the heir; but zhat is to
be intended of a general livery: but a ſpecial livery ſhall not
conclude one: but as it is expreſſed, the words of a general li-
very are; when the heir is found of full age: Rex eſchaetori,
&c. Scias quad cepimus hemagium J. filii & beredis B. defunce
ti de omnibus terris & tenementis que idem B. pater iuus tenuit
4 95 ö 5 | 4


en., 0


'


Part XIII. HuLMe's Caſe,


die nobis in capite, die quo obiit, & ei terras & tenement” illa red.


didimus, ideo tibi præcipimus, &c, And when the heir was in
ward, at his full age, the writ of livery ſhall ſay, Rex, Sc.
Duia F. filius & heres B. defundti qui de nobis tenuit in capite
etatem ſuam coram te ſufficienter probavit, &c. Ceperimus ho-
magium ipſius J. de emnibus terres et tenementis, que idem B.


pater ſuus tenuit de nobis in capite die quo obiit, & ei terras et te-


nement' illa reddidimus, et ideo tibi præcipimus, ut ſupra, &c,


Which writ is the ſuit of the heir, and therefore although that


all the words of the writ are the words of the King, as all the
writs of the King are; and although that the livery be gene-
ral, de omnibus terris & tenementis de quibus B. pater J. tenuit
de nobis in capite die quo obiit, without direct affirmation that
any manor in particular is holden in capite, and notwithſtand-
ing that the ſame is not at the proſecution of the King's writ,
and no judgment upon it ; yet becauſe the general livery is
founded, upon the office, and by the office it was found, that
divers lands or tenements were holden of the King in capite,
for this cauſe the ſuing of the writ ſhall conclude the heir
only which ſueth the livery, and aſter his death the jurors in
a new writ of Diem clauſit extremum, are at large, as before is
ſaid. And if that jury find falſly in a tenure of the King
alſo, the lord of whom the land is holden may traverſe that
office: or if land be holden of the King, &c. in ſocage, the
heir may traverſe the laſt office, for by that he is grieved only;
and he ſhall not be driven to traverſe the fiiſt office: and when
the father ſucth livery, and dieth, the concluſion 1s executed
and paſt, as before is ſaid. And note, that there is a ſpecial
Jivery, but that proceeds of the grace of the King, and is not
the ſuit of the heir, and the King may grant it cither at full
age, before ætate probanda, Cc. or to the heir within age, as
it appeareth in 21 E. 3. 40. And that is general, and fhall
not comprehend any tenure, as the general livery doth, and
thereſore it is not any * eſtoppel without queſtion. And at


the common law, a ſpecial livery might have been grant-


ed before any office found: but now by the ſtatute of 33
H. 8. cap. 22. it is provided, that no perſon or perſons,
having lands or tenements above the yearly value of 201.
ſhall have or ſue any livery, before inquiſition or office
found, before the eſcheator or other commiſſion : but by
an expreſs clauſe in the ſame act, livery may be made of
the lands and tznements compriſed or not compriſed in ſuch
office; fo that if office be found of any parcel, it is ſufli-
cient; and if the land in the office doth exceed 201, then


Page [63]


X 4 SM


PARLIAMENT. Part XIII.


the heir may ſue a general livery after office thereof ſound, ag
is aforeſaid : but if the land doth not exceed 51. by the year,


then a general livery may be ſued without office by warrant


ol the Maſter of the Wards, &c. See 23 Eliz. Dyer 177.


That the Queen ex deb:ito juſtitiæ is not bound at this day, af-
ter the ſaid act of 33 Hen. 8. to grant a ſpecial livery ; but it
is at her election to grant a ſpecial livery, or to drive the
heir to a general livery.

It was allo reſolved in this cafe, that the office of 35 Hen.
8. was not traverſable, for his own traverſe ſhall prove, that
the King had cauſe to have wardſhip by reaſon of ward: and
when the King cometh to the poſſeſſion by a falſe office, or
other means, upon a pretence of right, where in truth he hath


no right, if it appeareth that the King hath any other right or


See Hale of Par-
liaments 159,
198, &c. |
Bohun's Collec-
tion 263 to 289.


See Fareſ. 1 3, &


. art


262.


intereſt to have the land there, none ſhall traverſe the office or
title of the King, becauſe that the judgment in the traverſe is,
zdeo conſideratum eſi, quod manus domint Regis a paſſeſſione amove-
antur, Sc. which ought not to be, when it appeareth to the
court, that the King hath right or intereſt to have the land,


and to hold the ſame accordingly. See 4 Hen. 4. fol. 33. in
the Earl of Kent's caſe, &c. | 4 |


(31) PARLIAMENT,
Mich. 7 Jacobi 1.


OTE, the privilege, order, or cuſtom of Parliament,
either of the Upper Houſe, or of the Houſe of Com-
mons, belongs to the determination or deciſion only of the
on of Parliament: and this appeareth by two notable prece-
ents.

The one at the Parliament holden in the 25th year of King
Henry the fixth, there was a controverly moved in the Upper
Houſe between the Earls of Arundel and of Devonſhire, for
their ſeats, places, and pre-eminences of the ſame, to
be had in the King's preſence, as well in the high court
of Parliament, as in his Councils, and elſewhere : the
King, by the advice of the Lords Spiritual and Tem—
2 committed the ſame to certain Lords of Par-
Lament, who for that they had no leiſure to I

| the


*


| Part XIII, PARLIAMENT;


| the ſame, it pleaſed the King, by the advice of the Lords at
| his Parliament, anno 27 of his reign, that the Judges of the i
| land ſhould hear, ſee, and examine the title, &c. and to re- ; |
port what they conceive herein: the Judges made report as |
followeth ; that this matter, (viz. of honour and precedency
between the two Earls, Lords of Parliament) was a matter of |
Parliament, and belongs to the King's Highneſs, and the | —_
Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament, by them to be
decided and determined ; yet being thereto ſo commanded,
they ſhewed what they found upon examination, and their | ö
opinions thereupon. I!
Another Parliament in 31 H. 6. which Parliament began 3
the 6th * of March, and after it had continued ſome time, it Page [64] |
was prorogued until the 14th of February : and afterwards in
Michaelmas term, anno 31 Hen. 6. Thomas Thorp, the «,, pun,
Speaker of the Commons Houſe, at the ſuit of the Duke of Parliamentary
Buckingham, was condemned in the Exchequer in 10001. Pebates 276,
damages for a treſpaſs done to him: the 14th of February, 7“
the Commons moved in the Upper Houſe, that their Speaker
might be ſet at liberty, to exerciſe his place: the Lords refer
this caſe to the Judges; and Forteſcue and Priſot, the two
Chief Juſtices, in the name of all the Judges, after ſad con-
ſideration and mature deliberation had amongſt them, an-
ſwered and faid, that they ought not to anſwer to this queſ-
tion, for it hath not been ufed aforetime, that the Juſtices
ſhould in any wiſe determine the privilege of this high court
of Parliament ; for it is ſo high and mighty in its nature, that
it may make laws; and that, that is law, it may make no
law: and the determination and knowledge of that privilege Lucas R. 412.
belongeth to the Lords of the Parliament, and not to the Lex Parliam.
Juſtices : but as for proceedings in the lower courts in ſuch ©P'* ad ares
caſes, they delivered their opinions. And in 12 E. 4. 2. in |
Sir John Paſton's caſe, it is holden, that every court ſhall de-
termine and decide the privileges and cuſtoms of the ſame
court, &c.


— — — _ Cf. —- —
—— 2
— — I * — — - Ju — —


(32) Heyward


Star-chamber
juritaiction, &c.
S-e 12 Co. 845


90.
4 inſt. 60.


Part XIII.


SE "I


32) HEYWARD and Sir JohN
WHITBROKE's Caſe.


Hit. 7 Jacobi 1.


In the Star-Chamber.


N the caſe between Heyward and Sir John Whitbroke in
the Star-chamber, the defendant was convicted of divers
miſdemeanors, and fine and impriſonment impoſed upon him,
and damages to the plaintiff: and it was moved that a ſpecial
proceſs might be made out of that court to levy the ſaid da-
mages upon the goods and lands of the defendant: and it was
reſerred to the two Chief Juſtices, whether any ſuch proceſs
might be made? Who this term moved the caſe to the Chief
Baron, and to the other Judges and Barons; and it was una-
nimouſly reſolved by them, that no ſuch proceſs could or
ought to be made, neither for the damages nor ſor the coſts
given to the plaiatif: for the court hath not any power or ju-
riſdiction to do it, but only to keep the defendant in priſon
until he pay them. For, for the fine duc to the King, the


court of Star- chamber cannot make forth any proceſs for levy-


Page [65]


ing of the ſame, but they eſtreat the ſame into the Exchequer,
which hath power by the law to write forth proceſs to the
Sheriff to levy the ſame. But if a man be convicted in the
Star-chamber for forgery upon the ſtatute of 5 Eliz. that in
that caſe, ſor the double coſts and damages, an Engliſh writ
ſhall be made, directed to the Sheriff, &c reciting the con-
viction, and the ſtatute for levying of the ſaid coſts and da-
mages of the goods and chattels, and profits of the lands of
the defendant, and to bring in the money into the court of
Star-chamber, and the writ ſhall be fealed with the great ſeal,
and the teſt of the King : for the ſtatute of 5 El. hath given
juriſdiction to the court of Star- chamber, and power to give
judgment (amongſt other things) of the coſts and damages,
which being given by force of the ſaid act of Parliament,
by conſequence “ the court by the act hath power to
grant execution; % quando aliguid canceduur, ei omnia
cencedi Videntur per gue devenitur ad illud. And it was re-


ſolved,


J


Part XIII. Monsz and WE BB's Caſe.


ſolved, that the giving of the damages to the plaintiff was be- a
gun of late times: and although that one or two precedents 1.
were ſhewed againſt this reſolution, they being againſt the il
law, the Judges had not any regard to them, The like re- See 12 Co. 3. i
ſolution was in the caſe of Langdale in that court.


(33) MorsE and WEBs's Caſe. |
Hil. 7 Jacobi. 1. {


In the Common Pleas.


1* a replevin brought by John Morſe againſt Robert Webb Preſeription for, . if
of the taking of two oxen the laſt day of November, in vg &c. i
the third year of the reign of the King that now is, in a place Ses 4 Co. 12.
called the Downſfield in Luddington in the county of Wor- 8 Co. 65.
ceſter: the defendant, as Bailiff to William Sherington, 9.00.33 to 36.
Gent. made conuſance, becauſe that the place where, is an 3
acre of land which is the freehold of the ſaid William She- 1 Mod. 74.
rington, and for damage-feaſants, &c. In bar of which 3
avowry the plaintiff ſaid, that the ſaid acre of land is parcel W
of Downheld, and that he himſelf at the time, and before |
the taking, &c. was and yet is ſeiſed of two yard-lands, with |
the appurtenances, in Luddington aforeſaid : and that he, and | |
all thoſe whoſe eſtate he hath in the ſaid two yards of land, : p
time out of mind, &c. have uſed to have common of paſture
per iotum contentum of the ſaid place called the Downheld,
whereof, &c. for four beaſts called rother-beaſts, and
two beaſts called horſe-beaſts, and for ſixty ſheep, at cer-
tain times and ſeaſons of the year, as to the ſaid two
yard-lands, with the appurtenances appertaining : and
that he put in the faid two oxen to uſe his common, &c.
And the defendant did maintain his avowry, and traverſed
the preſcription, upon which the parties were at iſſue, and
the jury gave a ſpecial verdict, that before the taking,
one Richard Morſe, father of the ſaid John Morſe, and
now plaintiff, whoſe heir he is, was ſeiſed of the ſaid
two yard-lands, and that the faid Richard Morſe, &c. 1
; | tae


Morsz and WB I's Caſe, Part XIII.


the common of paſture for the ſaid cattle, per totum contentum
of the ſaid Downſfield, in manner and form as before is al-


leged; and being fo ſeiſed, the ſaid Richard Morſe, in the


Page [66]
15S 1K. 170.
Cro. Ul. 794»
570.


twentieth year of Queen Eliz. demiſed to William Thomas
and John Fiſher divers parcels of the ſaid two yard-lands, to
which, &c. viz. the four buts of arable with the common
and inter-common to the ſame belonging. for the term of
four hundred years; by force of which the ſaid William
Thomas and John Fiſher entered, and were poſſeſſed : and


the ſaid Rich. being ſo ſeiled, died thereof ſeiſed; by which


the ſaid two yard-lands in poſſeſſion and reverſion deſcended
to the ſaid John Morſe the now plaintiff: and if upon the
whole matter, the ſaid John Morſe now hath, and at the time
of the taking, &c. had common of paſture, &c. for four
beaſts called rother- beaſts, and two beaſts called horſe-beaſts,
and for ſixty ſheep, &c. as to the ſaid two yards of land,
with the appurtenances belonging, in law or not, the jury
prayed the advice of the court.

Note, that this plea began Trin. 5 Fac. Rot. 1405. And
upon“ argument at the bar, and at the Bench, it was reſolv-
ed by the whole court, that 1t ought to be found againſt the
defendant, who had traverſed the prefcription : for although
that all the two yard-lands had been demiſed for years, yet the
preſcription made by the plaintiff is true; for he is ſeiſed in
his demeſne as of fee of the freehold of the two yards of land,
to which, &c. And without queſtion the inheritance and
freehold of the common, after the years determined, is ap-
pendant to the ſaid two yard lands; and therefore clearly the
iſſue is to be found againſt the defendant : but if he would
take advantage of the matter in law, he ought (confeſſing the
commoti) to have pleaded the faid leaſe ; but when he tra-


verſeth the preſcription, he cannot give the ſame in evidence.


2. It was reſolved, that if the ſaid leaſe had been pleaded,
that the common, during the leaſe for years, is not ſuſpended
or diſcharged ; for each of them ſhall have cammon rateable,
and in ſuch manner, that the land in which, &c. ſhall not be
ſurcharged: and if ſo ſmall a parcel be demiſed, which will
not keep one ox, nor a ſheep, then the whole common ſhall
remain with the leſſor, ſo always as the land in which, be not


ſurcharged.


3. It was reſolved, that common appendant to land, is
as much as to fay, common for cattle levant and couchant
upon that land to which, &c. So that by the ſeverance of
part of the land zo which, &c, no prejudice can come to the
terre tenant im which, &c, | |


4. See


Part XIII. Huckxs and biin Caſe.


4. See the caſe of in the Fourth Part of my 2 $aund. 324,
Reports, folio was affirmed for good law: and there is *<:
no difference, when the preſcription is for cattle levant and . 1.
couchant, and when for a certain number of cattle levant and |
couchant : but when the preſcription is for common appurte-
nant to land without, (alleging that it is for cattle levant and
couchant) there a certain number of the cattle ought to be ex-


which are intended by the law to be levant and cou-
chant. |


(34) Hochs and CROW THERR's Caſe.
Hil. 7 ac. 1.


In the Common Pleas.


N a replevin between Robert Hughes plaintiff, and Rich- Leaſes.

ard Crowther defendant, which began Trin. 6 Fac. Ret. 1 Co. 185.
2220. The cafe was, that Charles Fox was. ſeiſed of fix 1 aj
acres of meadow in Bedſton, in the county of Salop, in fee, 2 Go. * 3
and 10 Octob. 9 Eliz. leaſed the ſame to Charles Hibbens 11 Co. 3.
and Arthur Hibbens for fixty years, if the aforeſaid Charles * Mod. 187.
Hibbens and Arthur Hibbens ſhould ſo long live, and after-
wards Charles died ; and if the leaſe determine by his death,
was the queſtion ; and it was adjudged, that by his death the
leaſe was determined ; for the lite of a man is mere collateral
unto the eſtate for years: otherwiſe it is, if a leaſe be made
to one for the lives of J. S. and J. N. there the freehold doth
not determine by the death of one of them, for the reaſons
and cauſes given in the caſe of Brudnel, in the Fifth Part of
my Reports, fol. 9. Which caſe was affirmed to be good
law by the whole court,


|
y
=.
1
Tr
. 1


A
2 —— —-— — —ää—“t —
- "IR. * 2 —— — >


(35) Hzrpor


Part XIII.


md


COM TE OO”


Page (67) * (35) HEYDON and SMITH 's Cafe,


7 gel, 12  Paſch. 8 Fac. 1.
— 3LO

22 Au, eee, In the Common Pleas.
* eme.


Int:


ICHARD HEYDON brought an action of treſpaſs

againſt Michael Smith and others, of breaking of his
* OP cloſe called the More in Ugley in the county of Eſſex, the
4 Co. 24, pk 25th day of June in the fifth year of the King, & quandam


Manor cuſtoms.
See Lex Mane-


8 Co. 63 ar borem ſuam ad valentiam 405. ibidem nuper creſcen ſuccide-
8 runt ; the defendants ſaid, that the cloſe is, and at the time
E. 16. of the treſpaſs was the freehold of Sir John Leventhorp, Knt.


1 Leon, . &c. and that the ſaid oak was a timber - tree of the growth of
See Rep. Q A. thirty years and more, and juſtifies the cutting down of the
18. tree by his commandment: the plaintiff replieth and ſaith,
that the ſaid cloſe, and a houſe and twenty-eight acres of

land in Ugley, are copyhold, and parce] of the ſaid manor

of Upglgy, &c. of which manor Edward Leventhorp, Eſq. fa-

ther of the ſaid Sir John Leventhorp, was ſeiſed in fee, and

granted the ſaid houſe, lands, and cloſe to the faid Richard

Heydon and his heirs by the rod, at the will of the lord, ac-

cording to the cuſtom of the ſaid manor : and that within the.

ſaid. manor there is ſuch a cuſtom, quod guilibet tenens cuſlo-

mar ejuſdem manerii ſibi, & heredibus ſuis, ad voluntatem do-

mini, c. a toto tempore ſupradicto uſus fuit, et conſuevit ad

ejus libitum amputare ramos omnimodarum arborum, called pol-

lengers, or huſbords, ſuper terris et tenem? ſuis cuſtomar*

creſcen pro ligno combuſtibili ad like libitum ſuum applicand &

in prædidio meſſuagio comburend* and alſo to cut down and take

1 Brownl. 233. at their pleaſure all manner of trees called pollengers or huſ-
4 Co. 30. bords, and all other timber trees, ſuper ejuſdem cuſtumariis
ſuis creſcen” for the reparation ot their houſes built upon

the ſaid lands and cuſtomary tenemente; and alſo for

ploughbote and cartbote, and that all trees called pol-

lengers or huſbords, and all other trees at the time of

the treipals aforeſaid, or hitherto growing upon the 700

aid


22 {aid lands and tenements cuſtomary of the ſaid Richard Hey-
| es


Part XIII. Hzvpox and Smirtn's Caſe,


don, were not ſufficient, nor did ſerve for the neceffary u
aforeſaid : and that the ſaid Richard Heydon, from the time
of the ſaid grant made unto him, had maintained and pre-
ſerved all trees, &c. growing upon the ſaid lands and tene-
ments to him granted: and that after the death of the ſaid
Edward Leventhorp, the faid manor deſcended to the ſaid Sir
John Leventhorp : and that at the time of the treſpaſs the a-
foreſaid meſſuage of the ſaid Richard Heydon was in decay,
O egebat neceſſariis reparationibus in maremio ejuſdem. Upon


- which the detendant did demur in law.


And this caſe was oftentimes argued at the bar : and now


this term it was argued at the bench by the Juſtices: and in
this caſe theſe points were reſolved.


I. That the firſt part of the cuſtom was abſurd and repug-
.+ nant, ſcil. Quod quilibet tenens cuſtomarii ejuſdem manerii habens


E tenens aliquas * terras ſeu tenementa cuſtom,” Qc. uſus fuit am-


putare ramos omnimodarum arborum, vocat pollengers, &c. iu


pro ligno combuſlibili, Sc. in prædicto meſſuagio comburend”
—— (which ought to be in the meſſuage of the plaintiff, for no


bother meſſuage is mentioned before) which is abſurd and re-
pugnant, that every cuſtomary tenant ſhould burn his fuel in


the plaintiff's houſe : but that branch of the cuſtom doth not
extend unto this caſe: for the laſt part of the cuſtom, which
'= concerneth the cutting down of the trees, concerns the point


*- in queſtion ; and fo the firſt part of the cuſtom is not material.


lt was objected, that the pleading, that the meſſuage of


 *theplaintiff was in decay, & egebat necfſarits reparationibus in
nnaremis ejuſdem, was too general: for the plaintiff ought to
have ſhewed in particular, in what the meſſuage was in de-
**.cay : as the book is in 10 E. 4. 3. He who juſtifieth for
houſebote, &c. ought to ſhew that the houſe hath cauſe to
be repaired, &c.
=" To which it was anſwered by Coke Chief Juſtice, that the
{aid book proveth, the pleading in the caſe at bar was certain
enough, ſcil. Quod meſſuagium pred” egebat neceſſariis repara-
tionibus in maremio, without ſhewing the preciſe certainty :
and therewith agrees 7 H. 6. 38. and 34 H. 6, 17.
2. It was alſo anſwered and reſolved, that in this caſe
"Kjthout queſtion it needs not to allege more certainty, for
"hers the copyholder, according to the cuſtom, doth not take
it, but the lord of the manor doth cut down the tree, and
*carrieth it away where the reſt was not ſufficient, and ſo
Preventeth the copyholder of his benefit, and —_ op
by needet


Page [68]

Moor 49, 94:
2, 456, 811.

4 Co 30,

8 Co. 63.

2 Salk. 358.


"+ Eftovers.


2 Brownl. 229.
2 Bulſt, 281.
Godb. 173.


Bote, its ſignifi-
cation.

See Co. Lit. 41.
d. and 127.
Spelman in
verbo.
Verſtegon, 249.
Whitlock's MS.
in ver do.


Hz vpom and Smitn's Cafe. Part XIII.


needeth not to ſhew any decay at all, but only for increaſing
of the damages, for the lord doth the wrong when he cut-
teth down the tree which ſhould ſerve for reparations when
need ſhould be. |

3. It was reſolved, that of common right, as a thing inci-
dent to the grant, the copyholder may take as houſebote,
hedgbote, and ploughbote upon his copyhold : gui conceſſo
uno conceduntur omnia fine quibus id conſiſtere non poteſt : et
guando aliquis aliquid concedit, concedere videtur & id fine quo res
ipſa eſſe non poteſt : and therewith agreeth 9 H. 4. Walte 59.
But the ſame may be reſtrained by cuſtom, ſcil. that the co-
pyholder ſhall not take it, unleſs by alignment of the lord or
his Bailiff, &c.

4. It was refolved, that the lord cannot take all the timber-
trees, but he ought to leave ſuſſicient for the reparation of the


cuſtomary houſes, and for ploughbote, &c. for otherwiſe great


depopulation will follow; /c. ruin of the houſes, and decay


of tillage and huſbandry. And it is to be underſtood, that


bote being an ancient Saxon word, hath two ſignifications;
the one compenſatio crimints, as frithbote, which is as much
as to ſay, to be diſcharged from giving amends for the breach
of the peace; manbote, to be diſcharged of amends for the
death of man: and ſecondly, in the later ſignification, (/cl.)
for reparation, as was bridgebote, burghbote, caſtlebote, park-
bote, &c. ſcil. reparation of a bridge, of a borough, of a
caſtle, of a park, &c. And it is to be known, that bote and
e/tovers are all one: eſtovers are derived of this French word
eſtover, i. e. fovere; i. e. to keep warm, to cheriſh, to ſuſ-
tain, to defend : and there are four kinds of eſtovers, (/cl.)
ardendi, arandi, conſtruendi, & claudendi, (ſcil.) firebote,


ploughbote, houſebote, and hedgebote.


Page [69]


5. It was reſolved, that the copyholder ſhall have a general


action of treſpaſs againſt the lord, guare dauſum fegit, & ar—
borem * ſuam, c. ſuccidit; tor cuſtom hath fixed it to his eſ-
tate againſt the lord: and the copyholder in this caſe hath as

reat an intereſt in the timber-trees, as he hath in his meſ-
| Bran which he holdeth by copy; and if the lord breaketh or
deſtroyeth the houſe, without queſtion the copybolder ſhall
have an action of treſpaſs againſt his lord, gur domum fregit,
and by the ſame reaſon for the timber trees which are an-


nexed to the land, and which he may take for the repara-


tion of his copyhold meſſuage, and without which the meſ-
ſuage cannot ſtand, Trin. 40 Eliz, Rot. 37. in the King's
„ | Bench,


I


„„ Tm LOTTERY WOT *  , Fo WW. 7 7


Part XIII. Hypo and Smitn's Caſe;

Bench, between Stebbing and Groſvener, the cuſtom of the
manor of Netherhall in the county of Suffolk was, that every
copyholder might lop the pollengers upon his copyhold pro
ligno combuſiibili, &c, And' the lord of the manor cut down
the pollengers, being upon the plaintiff's copyhold, upon
which he brought his action upon the caſe, becauſe that the
lops of the trees in ſuch caſe did belong to the copyholder,
and they are taken by the lord. See Taylor's caſe, in the
Fourth Part of my Reports 30 & 3r. and ſee 5 H. 4. 2. guar-
dian in knight ſervice, who hath c/todiam terrz, ſhall have
an aCtion of treſpaſs for cutting down the trees againſt the
heir who hath the inheritance. Vide 2 H. 4. 12. A copy-
holder brought an action of treſpaſs, Quare clauſum fregit, &
arbores ſuccidit : and ſee 2 E. 4. 15. A ſervant who is com-
manded to carry goods to ſuch a place, ſhall have an action of
treſpaſs or appeal. 1 H. 6.4. 7 H. 4. 15. 19 H. 6. 34. 11
H. 4. 28. If after taking the goods, the owner hath his
goods again, yet he ſhall have a general action of treſpaſs;
and upon the evidence the damages ſhall be mitigated : fo is
the better opinion in 11 H. 4. 23. That he who kath a ſpe-
cial property of the goods at a certain time, ſhall have a gene-
ral action of treſpaſs againſt him who hath the general pro-
perty, and upon the evidence damages ſhall be mitigatedg
but clearly, the bailce, or he who hath a ſpecial property, ſhall
have a general action of treſpaſs againſt a ſtranger, and ſhall
recover all in damages, becauſe that he is chargeable over.
See 21 H. 7. 14. b. acc. And it is holden in 4 H. 7. 3.
that tenant at ſufferance ſhall have an action of treſpaſs in re-
ſpect of the poſſeſhon, and if the defendant plead not guilty,
but he cannot make title, 30 H. 6. Treſpaſs 10. 15H. 7. 2,
the King, who hath the profits of the land by outlawry, ſhall
have an action of treſpaſs, or take goods damage-feaſants,
35 H. 6. 24. 30 H. 6. Treſpaſs xo, &c, Tenant at will
ſhall have an action of treſpaſs, 21 H.7. 15. and 11 H. 4. 23.
If a man bail goods which are taken out of his poſſeſſion, if
the bailee recover in treſpaſs, the ſame ſhall be a good bar to


the bailee, 5 H. 4. 2. In a writ of waſte brought againſt te-


nant for life, and aſſigned the waſte in cutting down of trees
the defendant pleaded in bar, that the plaintiff himſelf cut


Cro, El. 6, 6
Godb. 17 1
2 Bulſt. 4
2 Brownl; 229.


them: and Culpeper, the Serjeant of the plaintiff, objected


againſt it, that it ſhould be no plea, becauſe the defendant had
not any thing in the freehold, no more than a mere ſtranger z
and if a ſtranger had cut down the ſame trees, he ſhould be


chargeable in the waſte,


Vol. VII. 9 1 | Alſo


„


232 —̃ EL END


Saas —— —


Page [yo]


*


See Gibſon's
Cod. 240.

2 Salk, 536.

2 Roll. 227.
Rep. Canon,
167, 565, 567.
See Fitzgib. 165,
166, and 272 to
374»


Froh:bition.


Pazisnu-CLenx. Part XIII.


Alfo in this caſe, we ſhould be at a miſchief if we ſhould
not recover againſt him ; for if at another time he bringeth an
action of treſpaſs againſt us, he ſhall recover damages againſt
us for the cutting, id %, for the value of the trees: and yet
it was holden by the court, that the ſame was a good bar: and
it was ſaid by the court that the plaintiff was not at any miſ-
chief in this caſe : for inaſmuch as the defendant * ſhall have
advantage now to diſcharge himſelf of waſte againſt the
plaintiff, upon this matter he ſhall not be barred for ever of
his action of treſpaſs, /c:/. to recover the value of the trees,
which was the miſchief objected by Culpeper : but without
queſtion he ſhall have an action of treſpaſs, Quare clauſum
fregit, for the entry of the leſſor, and for the cutting of the
trees, but he ſhall not recover the value of the trees, becauſe
he is not chargeable over, but for the ſpecial loſs which he
hath, ſcil. for the loſs of the pawnage, and of the ſhadow of
the trees, &c. Sce Fitz. Treſpaſs ultimo, in the Abridgment :
and afterwards, the ſame term, judgment was given on the
principal caſe for the plaintiff. |


36) PARISH-CLERK.
; Paſch. 8 Fac. 1.


In the Coramon Pleas.


HE pariſhioners of St. Alphage in Canterbury, by cuſ-

tom, ought to chuſe the Pariſh-Clerk, whom they chuſe
accordingly : the Parſon of the pariſh, by colour of a new
canon made at the convocation in the year of the King that
now is (which is not of force to take away any cuſtom) drew
the Clerk before Dr. Newman, Official of the Archbiſhop of
Canterbury, to deprive him, upon the point of the right of
election, and for other cauſes; and upon that it was moved at
the bar to have a prohibition : and upon the hearing of Dr.
Newman himſelf, and his counſel, a prohibition was grant-
ed by the whole court, becauſe the party choſen is a
| mere


Part XIII. PrrcnuarD and Hawkins's Caſe.


mere temporal man, and the means of chuſing of him, el.
the cuſtom is mere temporal, ſo as the official cannot deprive Antes 8, 9, Ke.
him; but upon occaſion the pariſhioners might diſplace him; 7. 15, 4, lle.
and this office is like to the office of a Church-warden, who
although they be choſen for two years, yet for cauſe they (the
pariſhioners) may diſplace them, as it is holden in 26 H. 8. 5.
And although that the execution of the office concerneth di-
vine ſervice, yet the office itſelf is mere temporal. See 3 E.
3 Annuity 30. He who is Clerk of a pariſh is removeable
y the pariſhioners. See 18 E. 3.27. A gift in tail was
made of the ſerjeanty or clerkſhip of the church of Lincoln,
and there adjudged that the office is temporal, and ſhall not
be tried in the eccleſiaſtical court, but in the King's court :
and it is to be known, that the deprivation of a man of a
temporal office or place, is a temporal thing, upon which no
appeal lieth by the ſtatute of 25 H. 8. but an aſſiſe, as in See Skinner 468,
4 Eliz. Dyer 209. The Preſident of Magdalen-college in & 499, Ke.
Oxford was deprived by the Biſhop of Wincheſter their viſi-
tor; he ſhall not have an appeal to the delegates, for the de-
privation is temporal, and not ſpiritual ; but he may have an
aſſiſe: and therewith agreeth the book of 8 Afi. Siracſe's
caſe: but if a Dean of a cathedral church, of the patronage
of the King, be deprived before the Commiſſioners of the
King, he may appeal to the delegates within the faid
act of 25 H. 8, For a deanery is a ſpiritual promotion, and
not temporal: and before the ſaid act, in ſuch caſe, the ap-
peal was to Rome immediately. |


w — 2 1 5 . & ——


* (37) Paricganůð and Hawxins's Cale, Page [71]
Mich. 5 Jacobi Rot. 30.


In the King's Bench,
Slander.


OHN PRICHARD brought an action upon the cafe See 1 Dany. 104.
J againſt Robert Hawkins for flanderous words pub- pl * 14
liſhed the laſt day of Auguſt, in the third year of the 7 140, 1413
King, viz. that Prichard, which ſerveth Miſtreſs Shelley, did pl. 2, to pl. 9.


2 murder


—̃ — — —
2 *. 4. „


Slander.

Antea 59.

See 1 Denv. 113.
pl. 14, 16, 17,
117. pl 41,43,
119. pl 50.

2 Sk. 591.

3 Wuſon 59.


Disox and BESHNEV's Caſe Part XIII.


murder Joan Adams's child, (guondam Iſabellam Adams modo de-
fun fi am crjuſalam Fobanms Adams, of Williamſtre in the
county of Glouceſter, 7-:4er4) upon which a writ of error
was brovp'': in the Exchequer-chamber, upon a judgment
given for }::chard in the King's Bench: and the judgment
was reverſed in Eaſter- term, 7 Jacobi, becauſe it doth not ap-
pear, that Iſabel was dead at the time of the ſpeaking the
words, for tunc defunt?* ought to have been in the place of
modo deſunct. |


(38) DISON and BESTNEY's Caſe.
Paſch. 8 Jacobi 1,
In the King's Bench.


UMPHRY DISON faid of Nicholas Beſtney, Utter

Barriſter and Counſellor of Gray's- Inn, “ Thou a
6 Barriſter ? Thou art no Barriſter, thou art a Barretor
thou wert put from the bar, and thou dareſt not ſhew thy-
“ ſeli there. Jhou ſtudy lu Thou haſt as much wit as a
% daw.” Upon not guilty picaded, the jury found for the
plain, if, and aflefled damages to 231. upon which judgment
was given: and in a wrlt of error in the Exchequer- chamber,
the judgment was af med. .


{ 39) SMITH


Part XIII.


— — — 1 * T CC ht — li.


(39) SMITH and HiLLs Caſe.
Paſch. 8 Jacobi r.


In the King's Bench.


R T OAH SMITH brought an action of aſſault and battery Prror.
againſt Walter Hill in the King's Bench, which began Return alb.

aſch. 7 Facobi, Rot. 175, upon not guilty pleaded, a verdict Nis — fo.

and judgment was for the plaintiff, and 1071. aſſeſſed for da- 1 Das, 4

mages and coſts, In a writ of error brought in the Exche- pl. 13.

quer- chamber, the error was aſſigned in the Venire facias,

which was certified by writ of Certiorari and upon the writ,

no return was made upon the back of the writ, (which is

called returnum album,) and for that cauſe, this Eaſter term


the judgment was reverſed,


F (40) W ESCO T's Caſe. Page [72]
Trin. 7 Jacobi 1. f
In the Court of Wards.


T was found by a writ of Diem clauſit extremum, after the piem gauge ex-
1 death of Roger Weſtcot, that the ſaid Roger, the day that tremum. |
he died, was ſeiſed of and in the moiety of the manor of Tre- Vide ant. 48,
walliard in his demeſne as of fee, and of ſuch his eſtate died ?P&& 102.
thereof ſeiſed: and that the moiety of the ſaid manor, 4
anno 19 E. 3. was holden of the then Prince of Wales,

as of his caſtle of Trematon, parcel of his duchy of

Cornwall, by knight's ſervice, as it appeareth by a .certain
exempliſication of T'rematon for the ſame Prince, made

9 Mariii, 19 E. 3. And the words of the extent, were

| Millieimus


WxSsrecor's Caſe. Part XIII.


Willielmus de Torr tenet duo feoda & dimid' militis apud Pick,
Strikleflomb, & Trewalliard, per ſervitium militare, &
reddit inde per annum 8 d. And it was reſolved by the two
Chief Juſtices, and the Chief Baron, that the office concern-
vide ant.48, 50. ing the tenure was inſufficient and void, becauſe that the
| verdict of a jury ought to be full and direct, and not with a
prout patet, for by that the whole force of the verdict relieth
only upon the extent, which if it be falſe, he who is grieved
ſhall have no remedy by any traverſe; for they have not
ſound the tenure indefinite which might be traverſed, but
with a prout patet, which makes the office in that point inſuf-
ficient, and upon that a Melius inquirendum ſhall ifſue forth:
Antes 47, and therewith agreeth F. N. B. 255. that a Melius inguirendum
3 Co. 268, ſhall be awarded in ſuch a caſe,


Part XIII.


A.
| Page.
CTIONS of claim to be brought within five years, 21
Acts of Parliament are parcel of the law, ergo to be
judged by the Judges of the law, | 4
Acts; none may take upon him any act, &c. but who hath


knowledge in the ſame, IA
Admiral, his power, how far it extends, 51, 52
Aid to the King, who to pay it, 26, 27, 28
For what, 29, 30
Made certain and when to be paid, 25
Apples, not contained within the words of ſtatute 5 E. 6. 14.
againſt ingroſſers, 18, 19
Avowry where it ſhall be good and maintainable, 58
B.
Benevolence, 29
Bote, a Saxon word, the ſignification whereof is various 68
Bote and eſtovers ſignify all one thing, ibid.


Brewer is within the act of 5 El. 4. for that none may keep a
common brewhouſe, unleſs formerly apprentice, 11, 12
Bridges, rivers, ſewers, &c. who ought to repair them, and
how compellable to it, 33
Burgage-tenure, what it is, | 27


C.


Canon eccleſ. againſt the King's prerogative, the common
law, &c. ipſo facto void,
Canterbury, Archbiſhop thereof cannot cite one out of his
own dioceſe, and the reaſon thereof, 5, 6, 7, 8
Commit-


47


*


The TABI E. Part XIII.


Commiſſion, High Commiſſioners, their power, and to whom
extendable, Page 10, 47
Common of paſture who ſhall have it, and who ſhall be de-
barred, and why, |
Common divided ſhall be rateable, fo that the land in which,
&c. ſhall not be ſurcharged, ibid.
Conſultations granted, 45
Copyhold, where a copyholder may deny to pay his fine, 2
Copyholders may of common right take houſebote, hedgebote,
and ploughbote, upon his copyhold, 68
Shall have an action againſt his lord for cutting down
timber-trees, 9
Cuſtoms, what cuſtoms ſhall be good, and when; and what
_. a I2, 13
Cuſtoms, where the King's court ſhall be ouſted of juriſdic-
tion in Modo Decimandi, and where not, 18
Cuſtoms and preſcriptions to be tried by the common law, 40


D.


Damages treble, where to be ſued for, 24
Decimandi Modus, what it is, and by whom to be tried,
. , 37, 38, 39, 40

Plea of Modus decimandi, where good and where not, 43
Power, how a wife may be barred of her dower, and for


what, I9, 20, 21, 22
Where ſhe ſhall be endowed, and when, 20, 22, 23
E.
Error, writ of error ſo annihilates a record as if it had nevet
been, 20
What ſhall be recovered therein, 21, 22
Error, where amended, and where not, 54
Error, what 1s ſufhcient to renew a judgment, or confirm
_ 71
Eſtoppel what, and the force thereof, 62
Executor, ſummons and ſeverance lieth in any ſuit brought
as executors, | | 32
Extortion, See page 24. |
F.
Fees, what fees may be taken for proving a will, and extor-
tion thereia how puniſhable, 24, 25, 26
| Fine


— . ⏑— . —⏑—·˙Ü¹Ü .


Part XII. The 1431 E.
Fine reaſonable in copyhold muſt have a fet time for pay-


ment, | Page 2
It muſt be reaſonable; and hot exceffive, 25 35 4
By whom to be adjudged, 3
What is a reaſonable fine, and what not, ibid.
Foreſtallers. See Ingroſſers |
Forgery what, and how puniſhable, 34, 35
Heir, eatry of the heir where lawful, A9
I.
Ingroſſers, &c. 18
Joint-tenants and tenants in common, the difference between
them, 55, 56, 57
Joint- tenants may be ſeiſed to anſwer though they come at un-
uſdal times to it. ibid.
Judge eccleſiaſtical, his power to examine upon oath, 10
K,
King, land given to the King diſcharged of tithes, 15
Where the King ſhall have the meſne profits of land, and
where not, 49
| L.
Land, where ! it ſhall deſcend, and where not, 50
Lands, how they may be diſcharged of tithes, 15
Law will do no wrong, 21
Law of England how divided, 40
Leaſe for years to two, if they ſo long live, if one dies the
teaſe is determined, 66
Livery, where no livery or Ouſter le main ſhall need to be
fued, 50, 85
The manner of ſuing livery, and the form of the writ, 82
M.


Manor, how a lord of a manor may wrong his copyhold te-
nant,


Molius inquirendum, where it liethy and for what, 72

Meſſuagium & tenementum, their difference, 48

Modus decimandi, 12, 13, Kc. 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, Kc.
O.

Office, where neceſſary to be found, where not, and when it
muſt be found, 22, 63
Where it ſhall be inſufficient, 48, 50, 72
It ſhall not be an eſtoppel, and ths reaſon FRO | 61

P.
- Pariſhes and towns, their bounds triable only by common
law, the reaſon why, 17718
Parliament, privileges, orders, and cuſtoms of Parliament,
only to be decided in Parliament, 03


Vol. VII, 2 : Pirates,


The TABLE. Part XIII.


Pirates, how, when, and by whom puniſhable, Page 53, 54
Proceſs, Star chambet cannot make proceſs againſt either


lands or goods, 6
Prohibition when, and where it lieth, and againſt whom, 8,
R. 9, 10, 41, 42, 43,70


Rent, when it may be divided, and upon what occaſion, 57
Reparations in houſes, if neceſſary to be ſhewed in certain,


& contra. | 68
Replevin, by whom grantable, and for what, 31
Rex eft perſona mixta, . 17
Seiſin, where no primer ſeiſin ſhall be, 5 80


Severance of part of a reverſion loſeth not the entire rent, 58


Sewers, Commiſſioners thereof, their power, how far and to


what it extends, 35» 36
Socage-tenure what, 27
Sorcerers and enchanters, who, and their puniſhment, 59
Statutes, to be repealed by none but by ſtatutes, 17

.
Timber-trees who may cut them, and who may not, 69
| Tithes, how ſatisfaction may be given in diſcharge of tithes,
| | | 14, 15
They cannot be altogether taken away, ; 14


Where and how they may be altered into another thing,
| 15. 16, 17, 41
How many ways one may be diſcharged of tithes, and of


what payable, | 16, 42, 43
If givided from the nine parts, not to be ſued for in court-ec-
cleſiaſtical, if it be without fraud, 2

Where the right of tithes may be tried, 59, 5
Traverſe of othces, I
Treaſon, how, and by whom puniſhable, 54.
Treſpaſs, action therein, where it lies, againſt whom, and
for what, | 69
Trials. Fide Pariſhes and Cuſtoms. T
| U.
Uſe, where a uſe may be limited, and where not, 55
Who ſhall have the uſe, i 50
— W. 0
Wards, who ſhall be a ward to the King, 557 57
Waſte, what adjudged waſte, and where it lieth, 61
Waſte, who ſhall be chargeable in a writ of waſte, 69
Wife, where a wife ſhall have an eſtate for life, 49
? 5 Y. ;
York, the Preſident and Council of York their power how
far it extendeth, 31


—


Pp 48-1 £4
