Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. I
H. T. Colebrooke (1837)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vol. I of the 1837 two-volume first edition of H. T. Colebrooke's Miscellaneous Essays (London: Wm. H. Allen). Public domain.

========================================================================

H. T. COLEBROOKE.


IN TWO VOLUMES.


VOL. I.
=


LONDON:


Wu. H. ALLEN anv CO,


LEADENHALL STREET.


1837.


SCELLANEOUS ESSAYS


ya "4 pt ‘ = a ; és PY
A PT. he. Pr
‘ ‘ Oe ' Py <“k Fae f ety
a Cis


ADVERTISEMENT.


es, with the addition of four prefaces to works
riginally edited or translated by him. It is not his
intention to carry the selection into a third volume.


+


. A Discourse read at a Meeting of the Royal Asiatic
"Society of Great Britain and Ireland, on the 15th of
March 1823. [From the Transactions of the Royal
_ Asiatic Society, vol. i., p. 17—23.] ........-.see00- 1


I. On the Védas or Sacred Writings of the Hindus. [From
the Asiatic Researches, vol. viii., p. 369—476.] ...... 9


On the Duties of a Faithful Hindu Widow. [From the
Asiatic Researches, vol. iv., p. 209—219.] .......... 114


+ On the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus, and of the
 Bréhmans especially.
cay I. [From the Asiatic Researches, vol. v.,


— II. [From the Asiatic Researches, vol. vii.,
Po 2OS—2SG.] o 5. ne ns cocscecievcesiec, 148


— III. [From the Asiatic Researches, vol. vii.,
fi. {2OO Ol Lok ahestonsaidsse'sse sce see BOG


V. On the Philosophy of the Hindus.
‘ Part I. On the Sénc’hya system. [From the


Transactions of the Royal Asiatic So-
ciety, vol. i., p. 19—43.] .......+0... 227


— Il. On the Nyaya and Vaiséshica systems.
[From the Transactions of the Royal
Asiatic Society, vol.i., p. 92—118.] .. 261


— III. On the Miménsé. [From the Transac-
tions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. i., p. 439—$61.] ...... yee ++ 295


4


viii CONTENTS.
Page
V: On the Philosophy of the Hindus.
Parr TV. On the Védénta. [From the Transac-
tions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
Vol. ii., p. 1—39.] o--0sseccee seers. S25
— VV. On Indian Sectaries. [From the Trans-
actions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. i., p. 549—559.] ....-2.00022- 398


A Discourse read at a Meeting of the Royau Asiatic
Society of Great Brirain and Irexanp, on the
15th of March 1823.


[From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. 1., p. xvii.—xxiii.]


CauuEp by the indulgence of this meeting to a chair,
which I could have wished to have seen more worthily filled,
upon so interesting an occasion as the first general meeting
of a Society ins‘ituted for the important purpose of the ad-
vancement of knowledge in relation to Asia, I shall, with
your permission, detain you a little from the special business
of the day, while I draw your more particular attention to
the objects of the Institution, for the furtherance of which
we are now assembled.

To those countries of Asia, in which civilization may be
justly considered to have had its origin, or to have attained
its earliest growth, the rest of the civilized world owes a
large debt of gratitude, which it cannot but be solicitous to
repay; and En; land, as most advanced in refinement, is,
I for that very cause, the most beholden ; and, by acquisition
of dominion in the East, is bound by a yet closer tie. As
Englishmen, we participate in the earnest wish, that this
duty may be fulfilled, and that obligation requited ; and we
share in the anxious desire of contributing to such a happy
result, by promoting an interchange of benefits, and re-
turning in an improved. state that which was received in a
ruder form.

But improvement, to be efficient, must be adapted to
the actual condition of things: and hence a necessity for


_— I. B


2 DISCOURSE, &e.


exact information of all that is there known, which belongs
to science ; and all that is there practised, which appertains
to arts.

Be it then our part to investigate the sciences of Asia,
and inquire into the arts of the East, with the hope of faci-
litating ameliorations of which they may be found suscep-
tible. :

In progress of such researches, it isnot perhaps too much
to expect, that something may yet be gleaned for the ad-
vancement of knowledge, and improvement of arts, at home.
In many recent instances, inventive faculties have been
tasked to devise anew, what might have been as readily
copied from an Oriental type; or unacknowledged imita-
tion has reproduced in Europe, with an air of novelty, what
had been for ages familiar to the East. Nor is that source
to be considered as already exhausted. In beauty of fabric,
in simplicity of process, there possibly yet remains some-
thing to be learnt from China, from Japan, from India,
which the refinement of Europe need not disdain.

The characteristic of the arts in Asia is simplicity. With
rude implements, and by coarse means, arduous tasks have
been achieved, and the most finished results have been
obtained ; which, for a long period, were scarcely equalled,
and have, but recently, been surpassed, by polished artifice
and refined skill in Europe. Were it a question of mere
curiosity, it might yet be worth the inquiry, what were the
rude means by which such things have been accomplished ?
The question, however, is not a merely idle one. It may
be investigated with confidence, that an useful answer will
be derived. If it do not point to the way of perfecting
European skill, it assuredly will to that of augmenting
Asiatic attainments.

The course of inquiry into the arts, as into the sciences,
of Asia, cannot fail of leading to much which is curious


la
|
a


DIscOURSE, &e. 3


and instructive. The inquiry extends over regions, the most


_ anciently and the most numerously peopled on the globe.


The range of research is as wide as those regions are vast ;
and as various as the people who inhabit them are diver-
sified. It embraces their ancient and modern history ; their
civil polity ; their long-enduring institutions ; their manners,
and their customs; their languages, and their literature ;
their sciences, speculative and practical: in short, the pro-
gress of knowledge among them; the pitch which it has
attained ; and last, but most important, the means of its
extension.

In speaking of the history of Asiatic nations (and it is


in Asia that recorded and authentic history of mankind


commences), I do not refer merely to the succession of
political struggles, national conflicts, and warlike achieve-
ments ; but rather to less conspicuous, yet more important
oceurrences, which directly concern the structure of so-
ciety, the civil institutions of nations, their internal, more
than their external relations, and the yet less prominent,
but more momentous events, which affect society univer-
sally, and advance it in the scale of civilized life.
_ It is the history of the human mind which is most dili-
gently to be investigated: the discoveries of the wise, the
inventions of the ingenious, and the contrivances of the
skilful.

Nothing which has much engaged the thoughts of man
is foreign to our inquiry, within the local limits which we
have prescribed to it. We do not exclude from our research


the political transactions of Asiatic states, nor the lucu-


brations of Asiatic philosophers. The first are necessarily
connected, in no small degree, with the history of the pro-
gress of society; the latter have great influence on the
literary, the speculative, and the practical avocations of
men.

B 2


4 DIscouRsE, Ke.


Nor is the ascertainment of any fact to be considered
destitute of use. The aberrations of the human mind are
a part of its history. It is neither uninteresting nor useless,
to ascertain what it is that ingenious men have done,
and contemplative minds have thought, in former times,
even where they have erred: especially, where their error
has been graced by elegance, or redeemed by tasteful fancy.

Mythology then, however futile, must, for those reasons,
be noticed. It influences the manners, it pervades the lite-
rature of nations which have admitted it.

Philosophy of ancient times must be studied, though
it be the edifice or large inference raised on the scanty
ground of assumed premises. Such as it is, most assi-
duously has it been cultivated by Oriental nations, from the
further India to Asiatic Greece. The more it is investi-
gated, the more intimate will the relation be found between
the philosophy of Greece and that of India. Whichever
is the type or the copy, whichever has borrowed or has
lent, certain it is, that the one will serve to elucidate the
other. The philosophy of India may be employed for a
commentary on that of Greece; and conversely, Grecian
philosophy will help to explain Indian. That of Arabia,
too, avowedly copied from the Grecian model, has preserved
much which else might have been lost. A part has been
restored through the medium of translation, and more may
yet be retrieved from Arabic stores.

The ancient language of India, the polished Sanscrit,
not unallied to Greek and various other languages of
Europe, may yet contribute something to their elucidation,
and still more to the not unimportant subject of general
grammar.

Though Attic taste be wanting in the literary perfor-
mances of Asia, they are not on that sole ground to be
utterly neglected. Much that is interesting may yet be


DIscouRSE, &e. 5


elicited from Arabic and Sanscrit lore, from Arabian and
Indian antiquities.

- Connected as those highly polished and refined lan-
guages are with other tongues, they deserve to be studied
for the sake of the particular dialects and idioms to which
they bear relation ; for their own sake, that is, for the lite-
rature which appertains to them; and for the analysis of
language in general, which has been unsuccessfully at-
tempted on too narrow ground, but may be prosecuted,
with effect, upon wider induction.

The same is to be said of Chinese literature and lan-
guage. This field of research which is now open to us,
may be cultivated with confident reliance on a successful
result ; making us better acquainted with a singular people,
whose manners, institutions, opinions, arts, and produc-
tions, differ most widely from those of the West; and
through them, perhaps, with other tribes of Tartaric race,
still more singular, and still less known.

Wide as is the geographical extent of the region to
which primarily our attention is directed, and from which
our association has taken its designation, the range of our
research is not confined to those geographical limits.
Western Asia has, in all times, maintained intimate rela-
tion with contiguous, and not unfrequently, with distant
countries: and that connexion will justify, and often render
necessary, excursive disquisition beyond its bounds. We
may lay claim to many Grecian topics, as bearing relation
to Asiatic Greece; to numerous topics of yet higher in-
terest, connected with Syria, with Chaldwa, with Pa-
lestine.

Arabian literature will conduct us still further. Wherever
it has followed the footsteps of Moslem conquest, inquiry
will pursue its trace. Attending the Arabs in Egypt, the
Moors in Africa; accompanying these into Spain, and


6 DISCOURSE, &c.


cultivated there with assiduity, it must be investigated with-
out exclusion of countries into which it made its way.

Neither are our researches limited to the old continent,
nor to the history and pursuits of ancient times. Modern
enterprise has added to the known world a second Asiatic
continent, which British colonies have annexed to the
British domain. The situation of Austral Asia connects it
with the Indian Archipelago: its occupation by English
colonies brings it in relation with British India. Of that
new country, where every thing is strange, much is yet to
be learnt. Its singular physical geography, its peculiar
productions, the phenomena of its climate, present nume-
rous subjects of inquiry; and various difficulties are to be
overcome, in the solution of the problem of adapting the
arts of Europe to the novel situation of that distant terri-
tory. The Astatic Socrery of Grear Brirain will
contribute its aid towards the accomplishment of those
important objects.

Remote as are the regions to which our attention is
turned, no country enjoys greater advantages than Great
Britain for conducting inquiries respecting them. Pos-
sessing a great Asiatic empire, its influence extends far
beyond its direct and local authority. Both within its
territorial limits and without them, the public functionaries
have occasion for acquiring varied information, and correct
knowledge of the people and of the country. Political
transactions, operations of war, relations of commerce, the
pursuits of business, the enterprise of curiosity, the desire
of scientific acquirements, carry British subjects to the
most distant and the most secluded spots. Their duties,
their professions, lead them abroad ; and they avail them-
selves of opportunity, thus afforded, for acquisition of ac-
curate acquaintance with matters presented to their notice.
One requisite is there wanting, as long since remarked by


DISCOURSE, &c. 7


the venerable founder of the Asiatic Society of Bengal—it
is leisure: but that is enjoyed on their return to their
native country. Here may be arranged the treasured
knowledge which they bring with them; the written or
the remembered information which they have gathered.
Here are preserved in public and private repositories, ma-
nuscript books collected in the East, exempt from the
prompt decay which would there have overtaken them.
Here, too, are preserved, in the archives of families, the
manuscript observations of individuals, whose diffidence
has prevented them from giving to the public the fruits of
their labours in a detached form.

_ An Association established in Great Britain, with views
analogous to those for which the parent Society of
_ Bengal was instituted, and which happily are adopted by
Societies which have arisen at other British stations in
Asia, at Bombay, at Madras, at Bencoolen, will furnish
inducement to those who, during their sojourn abroad,
have contributed their efforts for the promotion of know-
ledge, to continue their exertions after their return. It
will serve to assemble scattered materials, which are now
liable to be lost to the public for want of a vehicle of
publication. It will lead to a more diligent examination of
the treasures of Oriental literature, preserved in public and
private libraries. In cordial co-operation with the existing
Societies in India, it will assist their labours, and will be
assisted by them. It will tend to an object, first in im-
portance: the increase of knowledge in Asia by diffusion
of European science. And whence can this be so effec-
tually done as from Great Britain ?

For such purposes we are associated ; and to such ends
our efforts are directed. To further these objects, we are
now assembled: and the measures which will be proposed
to you, Gentlemen, are designed for the commencement of


8 Discourse, &e.


a course, which, I confidently trust, may, in its progress,
be eminently successful, and largely contribute to the aug-
mented enjoyments of the innumerable people subject to
British sway abroad ; and (with humility and deference be
it spoken, yet not without aspiration after public useful -
ness), conspicuously tend to British prosperity as con-
nected with Asia. |


Il.
On the Vipas, or Sacrep Writines of the Hindus.


[From the Asiatie Researches, vol. viii. p. 369—476. Calcutta,
: 1805. 4to.]


In the early progress of researches into Indian litera-
ture, it was doubted whether the Védas were extant; or,
if portions of them were still preserved, whether any per-
son, however learned in other respects, might be capable
of understanding their obsolete dialect. It was believed
too, that, if a Brahmana really possessed the Indian
scriptures, his religious prejudices would nevertheless
prevent his imparting the holy knowledge to any but a
regenerate Hindu. These notions, supported by popular
tales, were cherished long after the Védas had been com-
municated to DArA Suvcon, and parts of them translated
into the Persian language by him, or for his use.* The
doubts were not finally abandoned, until Colonel Potter
obtained from Jeyepuir a transcript of what purported to
be a complete copy of the Védas, and which he deposited
in the British Museum. About the same time Sir Ropert
CuameBers collected at Benares numerous fragments of
the Indian scripture: General Martine, at a later period,
obtamed copies of some parts of it; and Sir Witi1AM
Jones was successful in procuring valuable portions of the
Védas, and in translating several curious passages from one


* Extracts have also been translated into the Hindi language ; but
it does not appear upon what occasion this version into the vulgar
dialect was made.


10 ON THE VEDAS, OR


of them.* I have been still more fortunate in collecting at
Benares the text and commentary of a large portion of
_/ these celebrated books; and, without waiting to examine
them more completely than has been yet practicable, I shall
here attempt to give a brief explanation of what they chiefly
contain.

It is well known, that the original Véda is believed by
the Hindus to have been revealed by BraumA, and to have
been preserved by tradition, until it was arranged in its pre-
sent order by a sage, who thence obtained the surname of
VyAsa, or VépavyAsa: that is, compiler of the Védas.
He distributed the Indian scripture into four parts, which
are severally entitled Rich, Yajush, Saman, and At har-
vana; and each of which bears the common denomination
of Véda.

Mr. Wirxins and Sir Witiram Jones were led, by
the consideration of several remarkable passages, to suspect
that the fourth is more modern than the other three. It is
certain that Menu, like others among the Indian law-
givers, always speaks of three only, and has barely alluded
to the Av’harvara,+ without however terming it a Véda.
Passages of the Indian scripture itself seem to support
the inference: for the fourth Véda is not mentioned in the
passage cited by me in a former essay{ from the white
Yajush ;§ nor in the following text, quoted from the Indian
scripture by the commentator of the Rich.


* See Preface to Menu, page vi. and the Works of Sir Wittiam
Jones, vol. vi.


+ Menv, chap. 1], v. 33.


t Essay Second, on Religious Ceremonies. See Asiatic Researches,
vol. vii. p. 251.


§ From the 31st chapter; which, together with the preceding chap-
ter (30th), relates to the Purushamé@ha, a type of the allegorical
immolation of Nirivafa, or of Braun in that character.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs. ll


“The Rigvéda originated from fire; the Yajurvéda
“ from air; and the Samavéda from the sun.’”*

Arguments in support of this opinion might be drawn
even from popular dictionaries ; for AMERASINHA notices
only three Védas, and mentions the At’harvaria without
giving it the same denomination. It is, however, probable,
that some portion at least of the At’harvarta is as ancient
as the compilation of the three others ; and its name, like
theirs, is anterior to VyAsa’s arrangement of them: but
the same must be admitted in regard to the Itihasa and
Purdias, which constitute a fifth Véda, as the At’harvana
does a fourth.

It would, indeed, be vain to quote in proof of this
point, the Puranas themselves, which always enumerate
four Védas, and state the Itihasa and Puranas as a fifth;
since the antiquity of some among the Purda/ias now extant
is more than questionable, and the authenticity of any one
in particular does not appear to be as yet sufficiently esta-
blished. It would be as useless to cite the Mandiica and
Tapaniya Upanishads, in which the At’harva-véda is enu-
merated among the scriptures, and in one of which the
number of four Védas is expressly affirmed: for both these
Upanishads appertain to the At’harvara itself. The
mention of the sage Ar’HARVAN in various places through-
out the Védas+ proves nothing ; and even a text of the
Yajurvéda,t where he is named in contrast with the Rich,
Yajush, and Séman, and their supplement or Bréhmana,


* Mewnv alludes to this fabulous origin of the Védas (chap. 1. v. 23).
His commentator, Mfpuirtir’s, explains it by remarking, that the
Rigvéda opens with a hymn to fire; and the Yajwrvéda with one in
which air is mentioned. But Curi6casnaffa has recourse to the
renovations of the universe. “ In one Calpa, the Védas proceeded
from fire, air, and the sun; in another, from Braum4(, at his allego-
rical immolation.”


+ Vide Védas passim, t Inthe Taitiéiriya Upanishad.


£2 ON THE VEDAS, OR


is not decisive. But a very unexceptionable passage may
be adduced, which the commentator of the Rich has quoted
for a different purpose from the Ch’handégyu Upanishad, a
portion of the Saman. In it, NArepa, having solicited
instruction from SaNaTcuMARA, and being interrogated by
him as to the extent of his previous knowledge, says, “ I
have learnt the Rigvéda, the Yajurvéda, the Samavéda,
the Atharvata, {which is] the fourth, the Jtihasa and Pu-
rana, [which are] a fifth, and [grammar, or] the Véda of
Védas, the obsequies of the manes, the art of computa-
tion, the knowledge of omens, the revolutions of periods,
the intention of speech [or art of reasoning], the maxims of
ethics, the divine science [or construction of scripture], the
sciences appendant on holy writ [or accentuation, prosody,
and religious rites], the adjuration of spirits, the art of the
soldier, the science of astronomy, the charming of serpents,
the science of demigods [or music and mechanical arts] : all
this have I studied ; yet do I only know the text, and have
no knowledge of the soul.”*

From this, compared with other passages of less autho-
rity, and with the received notions of the Hindus themselves,
it appears, that the Rich, Yajush, and Saman, are the three
principal portions of the Véda ; that the Atharvana is com-
monly admitted as a fourth; and that divers mythological
poems, entitled Itihasa and Purdvas, are reckoned a sup-


* CWhdndégya Upanishad, ch.7, § 1. I insert the whole passage,
because it contains an ample enumeration of the sciences. The names
by which grammar and the rest are indicated in the original text are
obscure; but the annotations of Sancara explain them. This, like
any other portion of a Véda where it is itself named (for a few other
instances occur), must of course be more modern than another part
to which the name had been previously assigned. It will hereafter be
shown, that the /édas are a compilation of prayers, called mantras ;
with a collection of precepts and maxims, entitled Bréhmana, from
which last portion the Upanishad is extracted. The prayers are
properly the Védas, and apparently preceded the Bréhmana.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 13


plement to the scripture, and as such, constitute a fifth
Véda.* |

The true reason why the three first Védas are often men-
tioned without any notice of the fourth, must be sought,
not in their different origin and antiquity, but in the diffe-
rence of their use and purport. Prayers employed at
solemn rites, called yajnyas, have been placed in the three
principal Védas: those which are in prose are named Ya-
jush; such as are in metre are denominated Rich ; and
| some, which are intended to be chanted, are called Séman:
and these names, as distinguishing different portions of the
Védas, are anterior to their separation in VyAsa’s com-
pilation. But the At’harvaria not being used at the reli-
gious ceremonies abovementioned, and containing prayers
employed at lustrations, at rites conciliating the deities, and
as imprecations on enemies, is essentially different from the
other Védas ; as is remarked by the author of an elemen-

tary treatise on the classification of the Indian sciences.+
But different schools of priests have admitted some varia-
tions in works which appear under the same title. This
circumstance is accounted for by the commentators on the
Védas, who relate the following story taken from Puranas


* When the study of the Indian scriptures was more general than
at present, especially among the Brdéhmanas of Canydcubja, learned
priests derived titles from the number of Védas with which they
were conversant. Since every priest was bound to study one Véda, no
title was derived from the fulfilment of that duty; but a person who
had studied two Védas was surnamed Dwivédi; one who was con-
versant with three, 77ivédi ; and one versed in four, Chaturvédé :
as the mythological poems were only figuratively called a Véda no
distinction appears to have been derived from a knowledge of them
in addition to the four scriptures. ‘I'he titles abovementioned have
become the surnames of families among the Bradhmens of Canéj, and
are corrupted by vulgar pronunciation into D6ébé, Tiwdéré, and
Chaulé.


+ Mav’nusGpana Saraswati, in the Prast’hdnabhéda.


14 ON THE VEDAS, OR


and other authorities. VyAsa having compiled and ar-
ranged the scriptures, theogonies, and mythological poems,
taught the several Védas to as many disciples: viz. the
Rich to Patra, the Yajush to VaiSAMPAYANA, and the
Saman to Jaim1n1; as also the At harvana to SuMANTU,
and the Itihasa and Purdias to Séra. These disciples
instructed their respective pupils, who becoming teachers in
their turn, communicated the knowledge to their own dis-
ciples; until at length, in the progress of successive in-
struction, so great variations crept into the text, or into the
manner of reading and reciting it, and into the no less
sacred precepts for its use and application, that eleven hun-
dred different schools of scriptural knowledge arose.

The several Sanhitas, or collections of prayers in each
Véda, as received in these numerous schools or variations,
more or less considerable, admitted by them either in the
arrangement of the whole text (including prayers and pre-
cepts), or in regard to particular portions of it, constituted
the Sée’hds or branches of each Véda. Tradition, preserved
in the Puranas, reckons sixteen Sanhitas of the Rigvéda ;
eighty-six of the Yajush, or including those which branched
from a second revelation of this Véda, a hundred and one;
and not less than a thousand of the Sdmavéda, besides
nine of the At’harvaria. But treatises on the study of the
Véda reduce the Sac’has of the Rich to five; and those of
the Yajush, including both revelations of it, to eighty-six.*

The progress by which (to use the language of the Pu-
ranas) the tree of science put forth its numerous branches
is thus related. Paiia taught the Rigvéda, or Bahvrich,
to two disciples, Bascata and INpRAPRAMATI. The
first, also called BAucatt, was the editor of a Sanhita, or


* The authorities on which this is stated are chiefly the Vishhu
purdaha, part 3, chap. 4, and the Vijeyavildsa on the study of seripture ;
also the Charahavytha, on the Sac’has of the Védas.


TN EE


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 15


collection of prayers, and a Séc’hé bearing his name still
subsists: it is said to have first branched into four schools;
afterwards into three others. INDRAPRAMATI communi-
cated his knowledge to his own son MANbucfya, by
whom a Sanhité was compiled, and from whom one of the
Sac’has has derived its name. V&pamirra, surnamed
SAcazya, studied under the same teacher, and gave a
complete collection of prayers: it is still extant; but is
said to have given origin to five varied editions of the same
text. The two other and principal Séc’has of the Rich
are those of ASwaLAyana and SAnc’HyAYANA, or per-
haps Causuiraci: but the Vishriu purdia omits them,
and intimates, that SAcarUrNi, a pupil of INpRAPRA-
_ MATI, gave the third varied edition from this teacher, and
was also the author of the WViructa: if so, he is the same
with YAsca. His school seems to have been subdivided
by the formation of three others derived from his disciples.
The Yajush or Ad’hwaryu, consists of two different
Védas, which have separately branched out into various
Sée’hés. To explain the names by which both are distin-
guished, it is necessary to notice a legend, which is gravely
related in the Purdzas and the commentaries on the Véda.
The Yajush, in its original form, was at first taught by
VaiSampAyawna to twenty-seven pupils. At this time,
having instructed YAyNyawaucya, he appointed him to
teach the Véda to other disciples. Being afterwards of-
fended by the refusal of YAsNyawatcya to take on him-
‘self a share of the sin incurred by VaiSampAyANa, who
had unintentionally killed his own sister’s son, the resentful
preceptor bade YAsNyAwaucyA relinquish the science
which he had learnt.* He instantly disgorged it in a
tangible form. The rest of VarsampAyANa’s disciples


. * The Vishhu purdaa, part 3, chap. 5. A different motive of resent-
ment is assigned by others.


16 ON THE VEDAS, OR


receiving his commands to pick up the disgorged Véda,
assumed the form of partridges, and swallowed these texts
which were soiled, and for this reason termed “ black :”
they are also denominated Taittiriya, from tittiri, the
name for a partridge.

YAsnyYAWALCcyYA, overwhelmed with sorrow, had _ re-
course to the sun ; and through the favour of that luminary
obtained a new revelation of the Yajush, which is called
“ white” or pure, in contradistinction to the other, and is
likewise named Vajasanéyi, from a patronymic, as it should
seem, of YAJNYAwALcya himself; for the Véda declares,
“ these pure texts, revealed by the sun, are published by
YAsnyawa cya, the offspring of VAsasani.”* But, ac-
cording to the Vishiu purdna (3. 5. ad finem), the priests
who studied the Yajush are called Vajins, because the sun,
who revealed it, assumed the form of a horse (véjin).

I have cited this absurd legend, because it is referred to
by the commentators on the white Yajush. But I have
yet found no allusion to it in the Véda itself, nor in the
explanatory table of contents. On the contrary, the index
of the black Yajush gives a diflerent and more rational
account. VaisampAyANa, according to this authority, +
taught the Yajurvéda to YAsca, who instructed Titriri :
from him Uc’Ha received it, and communicated it to
Arrféya; who framed the Sée’hé, which is named after
him, and for which that index is arranged.


* Vrthad Arahyaca ad calcem, The passage is cited by the com-
mentator on the Rigvéda. In the index likewise, Yf{snyawancya
is stated to have received the revelation from the sun.

+ Céhddnucrama, verse 25. This index indicatorius is formed for
the Atréyi Sdée’hd. Its author is CuX61na, if the text (verse 27) be
rightly interpreted.

t This agrees with the etymology of the word Tuittiriya; for ac-
cording to grainmarians (see P(&1n1 4, iii. 102), the derivative here
implies ‘ recited by Titti7i, though composed by a different person.’
A similar explanation is given by commentators on the Upanishads.


‘SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 17


‘he white Yajush was taught by YAsnyawatcya to
pupils, who founded as many schools. The most
tkable of which are the Sac’has of CaNwa and


Baud hayanas, dak Tapantyas. The other branches of
e Yajush seem to have been arranged in several classes.
the Characas, or students of a Sée’hé, so denomi-
nated from the teacher of it, Cuaraca, are stated as
4 ‘ten subdivisions ; among which are the Cafhas,
ciples of Caf’H, a pupil of VaigampAyaANa; as also
SwétéSwataras, Aupamanyavas, and Maitrayaniyas :

last-mentioned comprehend seven others. In like man-
, the Tuaittirtyacas are, in the first instance, subdivided
— into two, the Auc’hyayas and Chandicéyas ; and these last
Gees iidare into Pare one Apastaabiyar; &e.


ie the rest, or most of them, are become rare, if not alto-
gether obsolete.

_ Sumanru, son of Jarmini, studied the Sémavéda, or
— Chhandbgya, under his father: and his own son, Sucar-
MAN; studied under the same teacher, but founded a dif-
- ferent school ; which was the origin of two others, derived
from his pupils, HrraNyANAsua and Pausuyinui, and
< ‘yam branching into a thousand more: for LécAcsut1,
_ Cuf’numt, and other disciples of Pausuy1nJ1, gave their
. i. to separate schools, which were increased by their
pupils. The Séc’hé entitled Caué’humi still subsists. H1-
—RANYANABHA, the other pupil of SucarMan, had fifteen
_ disciples, authors of Sanhitas, collectively called the nor-
 thern Sémagas ; and fifteen others, entitled the southern
_ Samagas : and Crit, one of his pupils, had twenty-four
disciples, by whom, and by their followers, the other schools
_ were founded. Most of them are now lost ; and, according
VOL. I. c


18 ON THE VEDAS, OR


to a legend, were destroyed by the thunderbolt of InpRa.
The principal Séc’hé now subsisting is that of the Ratd-
yaniyas, including seven subdivisions ; one of which is en-
titled Cau?’ humi, as above-mentioned, and comprehends six
distinct schools. That of the Talavacaras, likewise, is
extant, at least, in part: as will be shown in speaking of
the Upanishads.

The A?’harva-véda was taught by Suman rv to his pupil
Casanp’Ha, who divided it between D&vaparSa and
Par’nya. The first of these has given name to the Séc’ha
entitled Dévadarsi; as PippawApa, the last of his four
disciples, has to the Séc’hé of the Paippaladis. Another
branch of the Aé’harvara derives its appellation from
Saun aca, the third of Pav’nya’s pupils. The rest are
of less note.

Such is the brief history of the Véda deducible from the
authorities before cited. But those numerous Séc’has did
not differ so widely from each other, as might be inferred
from the mention of an equal number of Sanhitds, or dis-
tinct collections of texts. In general, the various schools
of the same Véda seem to have used the same assemblage
of prayers; they differed more in their copies of the pre-
cepts or Brahmanas ; and some received into their canon
of scripture, portions which do not appear to have been
acknowledged by others. Yet the chief difference seems
always to have been the use of particular rituals taught in
aphorisms (s&tras) adopted by each school; and these do
not constitute a portion of the Véda, but, like grammar and
astronomy, are placed among its appendages.

It may be here proper to remark, that each Véda con-
sists of two parts, denominated the Mantras and the Brah-
manas, or prayers and precepts. The complete collection
of the hymns, prayers, and invocations, belonging to one
Véda, is entitled its Sanhita. Every other portion of Indian


SACRED WRITINGS oF THE HINDUS. 19

e is included under the general head of divinity
mana). This comprises precepts which inculcate
s duties, maxims which explain these precepts, and
nts which relate to theology.* But, in the present
ent of the Védas, the portion which contains pas-


rehending the argumentative portion entitled Védanta
tained in tracts denominated Upanishads, some of
ch are portions of the Brahmana properly so called,
s are found only in a detached form, and one is a part


w On the Rievépa.


Tue Sanhita of the first Védat contains mantras, or
opraye s, which for the most part are encomiastic, as the
name of the Rigvéda implies. This collection is divided
into eight parts (Chanda), each of which is subdivided into
as many lectures (ad’hydya). Another mode of division
ese
ue * The explanation here given is taken from the Prast’hana


— bheda


a _ #1 have several copies of it, with the corresponding index for
P the Sécalya Sée’ha ; and also an excellent commentary by Sivafi-
‘ cuinya. In another collection of mantras, belonging to the Aswa-
Sacha of this Véda, I find the first few sections of each lecture
pa with the other copies, but the rest of the sections are omitted.
uestion whether it be intended as a complete copy for that Sac’hé.


_ t Derived from the verb rich, to laud; and properly signifying
my ‘prayer or hymn, in which a deity is praised. As those are
ly in verse, the term becomes also applicable to such passages
te any Véda as are reducible to measure, according to the rules of
ly. The first Véda, in VyvAsa’s compilation, comprehending
t of these texts, is called the Rigvéda; or as expressed in the
U mentary on the Index, “ because it abounds with such texts
99)


c 2


20 ON THE VEDAS, OR


also runs through the volume, distinguishing ten books
(mandala), which are subdivided into more than a hundred
chapters (anuvaca), and comprise a thousand hymns or in-
vocations (siécta). A further subdivision of more than two
thousand sections (barga)is common to both methods ; and
the whole contains above ten thousand verses, or rather
stanzas, of various measures.

On examining this voluminous compilation, a systema-
tical arrangement is readily perceived. Successive chapters,
and even entire books, comprise hymns of a single author ;
invocations, too, addressed to the same deities, hymns
relating to like subjects, and prayers intended for similar
occasions, are frequently classed together. This requires
explanation.

In a regular perusal of the Véda, which is enjoined to all
priests, and which is much practised by Mahrattas and
Telingas, the student or reader is required to notice, espe-
cially, the author, subject, metre, and purpose of each
mantra, or invocation. To understand the meaning of the
passage is thought less important. The institutors of the
Hindu system have indeed recommended the study of the
sense; but they have inculcated with equal strenuousness,
and more success, attention to the name of the Rishi or
person by whom the text was first uttered, the deity to
whom it is addressed, or the subject to which it relates,
and also its rhythm or metre, and its purpose, or the reli-
gious ceremony at which it should be used. The practice
of modern priests is conformable with these maxims. Like
the Koran among the Muhammedans, the Véda is put into
the hands of children in the first period of their education ;
and continues afterwards to be read by rote, for the sake of
the words, without comprehension of the sense.

Accordingly the Véda is recited in various superstitious
modes: word by word, either simply disjoining them, or


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 21


else repeating the words alternately, backwards and for-
wards, once or oftener. Copies of the Rigrvéda and Yajush
(for the Samavéda is chanted only) are prepared for these
and other modes of recital, and are called Pada, Crama,
Jata, Ghana, &c. But the various ways of inverting the
text are restricted, as it should appear, to the principal
_ Védas ; that is, to the original editions of the Rigvéda and
-Yajush: while the subsequent editions, in which the text
or the arrangement of it is varied, being therefore deemed
subordinate Séc’hés, should be repeated only in a simple
‘manner.

It seems here necessary to justify my interpretation of
what is called the “ Rishi of a mantra.” The last term
has been thought to signify an incantation rather than a
prayer: and, so far as supernatural efficacy is ascribed to
the mere recital of the words of a mantra, that interpre-
tation is sufficiently accurate ; and, as such, it is undoubt-
edly applicable to the unmeaning incantations of the Man-
tra-sastra, or Tantras and Agamas. But the origin of the
term is certainly different. Its derivation from a verb. which
signifies ‘ to speak privately,’ is readily explained by the
injunction for meditating the text of the Véda, or reciting it
inaudibly: and the import of any mantra in the Indian
‘scriptures is generally found to be a prayer, containing either
a petition to a deity, or else thanksgiving, praise, and ado-
ration. f

The Rishi or saint of a mantra is defined, both in the
index of the Rigvéda and by commentators, “‘ he by whom
it is spoken:” as the Dévatd, or deity, is “ that which
is therein mentioned.” In the index to the Vajasanéyt
Yajurvéda, the Rishi is interpreted “ the seer or remem-
berer” of the text; and the Dévaté is said to be “ con-
tained in the prayer; or [named] at the commencement of
it; or [indicated as] the deity, who shares the oblation or


22 ON THE VEDAs, OR


the praise.” Conformably with these definitions, the deity
that is lauded or supplicated in the prayer is its Dévata ;
but in a few passages, which contain neither petition nor
adoration, the subject is considered as the deity that is
spoken of. For example, the praise of generosity is the
Dévata of many entire hymns addressed to princes, from
whom gifts were received by the authors.

The Rishi, or speaker, is of course rarely mentioned in
the mantra itself: but in some instances he does name him-
self. A few passages, too, among the mantras of the Véda
are in the form of dialogue ; and, in such cases, the dis-
coursers were alternately considered as Rishi and Dévatd.
In general, the person to whom the passage was revealed,
or according to another gloss, by whom its use and appli-
cation was first discovered,* is called the Rishi of that
mantra. He is evidently then the author of the prayer;
notwithstanding the assertions of the Hindus, with whom
it is an article of their creed, that the Védas were com-
posed by no human author. It must be understood, there-
fore, that in affirming the primeval existence of their
scriptures, they deny these works to be the original compo-
sition of the editor (VyAsa), but believe them to have been
gradually revealed to inspired writers.

The names of the respective authors of each passage
are preserved in the Anucramani, or explanatory table of
contents, which has been handed down with the Véda it-


* Translating literally, “ the Rishi is he by whom the text was
seen.” PX1n1 (4. ii. 7) employs the same term in explaining the
import of derivatives used as denominations of passages in scrip-
ture; and his commentators concur with those of the Véda in the
explanation here given. By Rishi is generally meant the supposed
inspired writer ; sometimes, however, the imagined inspirer is called
the Rishi or saint of the text; and at other times, as above noticed,
the dialogist or speaker of the sentence.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 23


self, and of which the authority is unquestioned.* Accord-
ing to this index, ViSwAmsrra is author of all the hymns
contained in the third book of the Rigvéda; as Bua-
RADWAJA is, with rare exceptions, the composer of those
collected in the sixth book; Vasisui’HA, in the seventh ;
GritsaMApaA, in the second; VAMAD&vA, in the fourth;
and Bup’Ha+ and other descendants of Arri, in the fifth.
But, in the remaining books of this Véda, the authors
are more various: among these, besides AGastya, CaSya-
pA son of Maricu1, ANcriras, JAMADAGNI son of
Buricu, ParAgara father of VyAsa, G6rama and his
son N6ép’nas, Vrinaspati, NAREDA, and other celebrated
Indian saints, the most conspicuous are CaNwa, and his
numerous descendants, Mép’HAtTiT’H1, &c.; Mav’Hvu-
CH HANDAS, andothersamong the posterity of ViswAMITRA ;
SunaSfr’na son of Asicarta; Cursa, Hiranyasttya,
Savya, and other descendants of ANcirAs; besides many
other saints, among the posterity of personages abovemen-
tioned.

It is worthy of remark, that several persons of royal
birth (for instance, five sons of the king Vrinanerr; and
TRAYYARUNA and TrasapAsyvu, who were themselves
kings,) are mentioned among the authors of the hymns
which constitute this Véda: and the text itself, in some
places, actually points, and in others obviously alludes, to


* It appears from a passage in the Vijeya vildsa, as also from
the Védadipa, or abridged commentary on the Vajasanéyi, as well as
from the index itself, that Ciryivana is the acknowledged author
of the index to the white Yajush. That of the Rigvéda is ascribed by
the commentator to the same Ciry4yana, pupil of Saunaca. The
several indexes of the Véda contribute to the preservation of the ge-
nuine text; especially where the metre, or the number of syllables,
is stated, as is generally the case.


+ First of the name, and progenitor of the race of kings called
‘children of the moon.’


24 ON THE VEDAS, OR


monarchs, whose names are familiar in the Indian heroic his-
tory. As this fact may contribute to fix the age in which the
Véda was composed, I shall here notice such passages of
this tendency as have yet fallen under my observation.

The sixth hymn of the eighteenth chapter of the first
book is spoken by an ascetic named Cacsuivat, in praise
of the munificence of SwaNaya, who had conferred im-
mense gifison him. The subject is continued in the seventh
hymn, and concludes with a very strange dialogue between
the king BaAvayavya and his wife RmasA, daughter of
Vrinaspatt. It should be remarked, concerning Cacsui-
vat, that his mother USic was bondmaid of king ANGa’s
queen.

The eighth book opens with an invocation which alludes
toasingular legend. Asanea, son of PLayéca, and his
successor on the throne, was metamorphosed into a woman ;
but retrieved his sex through the prayers of Mf&p’nyA-
T1T’HI, whom he therefore rewarded most liberally. In
this hymn he is introduced praising his own munificence ;
and, towards the close of it, his wife Saswart, daughter
of ANneiRAs, exults in his restoration to manhood.

The next hymns applaud the liberality of the kings Vi-
BHINDU, Pacast’HAMAN (son of CurayANa), CuRUNGA,
Caégvu (son of Cufépi), and Trrinpira (son of Parasgsv),
who had severally bestowed splendid gifts on the respective
authors of these thanksgivings. In the third chapter of
the same book, the seventh hymn commends the generosity
of TrasapAsyu, the grandson of MAnn’nArry. The
fourth chapter opens with an invocation containing praises
of the liberality of Cuirra; and the fourth hymn of the
same chapter celebrates Varu, son of SusHAMAN.

In the first chapter of the tenth book there is a hymn to
water, spoken by a king named Stnp’nupwiPa, the son of
Amparisua. The seventh chapter contains several pas-


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 25


sages, from the fifteenth to the eighteenth sé&cta, which
allude to a remarkable legend. AsamAri, son or descen-
dant of IcsuwAcv, had deserted his former priests and
employed others: the forsaken Brahmanas recited incanta-
tions for his destruction: his new priests, however, not
only counteracted their evil designs, but retaliated on them,
and caused the death of one of those Brahmanas : the rest
recited these prayers for their own preservation, and for the
revival of their companion.

_ The eighth chapter opens with a hymn which alludes to
a story respecting NABHANE£pIsHT’HA, son of Menu, who
was excluded from participation with his brethren in the
paternal inheritance. The legend itself is told in the Aita-
réya Brahmana,* or second portion of the Rigvéda.

_ Among other hymns by royal authors in the subsequent
chapters of the tenth book of the Sunhita, I remark one by
MAno’HArri, son of YuvanASwa, and another by Siv1,
son of USinara, a third by Vasumanas, son of Réut-
paswa, and a fourth by Prararpana, son of DivépAsa,
king of Casi.

The deities invoked appear, on a cursory inspection of
the Véda, to be as various as the authors of the prayers
addressed to them: but, according to the most ancient
annotations on the Indian scripture, those numerous names
of persons and things are all resolvable into different titles of
three deities, and ultimately of one god. The Wig’hanti, -
or glossary of the Védas, concludes with three lists of names
of deities: the first comprising such as are deemed syno-
nymous with fire; the second, with air; and the third,
with the sun.t In the last part of the Miructa, which
entirely relates to deities, it is twice asserted that there are


* In the second lecture and fourteenth section of the fifth book.
+ Nig’hanti, or first part of the Nirueta, c. 5.


26 ON THE VEDAS, OR


but three gods; ‘ Tisra éva dévatéh.’* The further infe-
rence, that these intend but one deity, is supported by many
passages in the Véda; and is very clearly and concisely
stated in the beginning of the index to the Rigvéda, on
the authority of the Viructa and of the Véda itself.

“ Yasya vacyam, sa rishir ; ya tén’bchyaté, sa dévata ;
yad acshara-parimanam, tach ch’handé. Art’ hépsava rish-
ay dévatas ch’ handébbhir abhyad’ havan.

“Tisra fva pévaTAn ; cshity-antaricsha-dyu-st hand,
agnir vayuh strya ity: évam vyahritayah proécta vyastah ;
samastanam prajapatir. O'ncéra sarvadévatyah, para-
mésht’ hyd va, brahmé, daivéd va, ad hyatmicas. Tat tat
st’hanad anyas tad vibhitayah ; carma prit’hactwad Whi
prithag abhi@hana stutayé bhavanty: éc’aiva va mahan
atma dévata ; sa strya ity achacshaté ; sa hi sarva-bhit’-
dtmé. Tad uctam rishina: “ sGrva ATMA JAGATAS
TAST’HUSHAS cn’éTI.” Tad vibhitayd’ nya dévatas. Tad
apy étad rishiv’ éctam: “ INpRam Mirram VaruNam
AGNniM Anup iti.”

‘The Rishi [of any particular passage] is he whose speech
it is; and that which is thereby addressed, is the deity [of
the text] : and the number of syllables constitutes the metre
[of the prayer]. Sages (Rishis) solicitous of [attaining]
particular objects, have approached the Gods with [prayers
composed in] metre.

‘ The deities are only three: whose places are, the earth,


* In the second and third sections of the twelfth chapter, or lec-
ture, of the glossary and illustrations of the Véda. The Niructa
consists of three parts. The first, a glossary, as above-mentioned,
comprises five short chapters or lectures; the second, entitled Nai-
gama, or the first half of the Wiructa, properly so called, consists of
six long chapters; and the third, entitled Daivaia, or second half of
the proper Wiructa, contains eight more. The chapter here cited is
marked as the twelfth, including the glossary, or seventh exclusive
of it.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 27


_ the intermediate region, and heaven: [namely] fire, air,
and the sun. They are pronounced to be [the deities] of
the mysterious names* severally; and (PrasApari) the
lord of creatures is [the deity] of them collectively. The
syllable O'm intends every deity: it belongs to (Para-
mésh?’ht) him who dwells in the supreme abode ; it apper-
tains to (Brahme) the vast one; to (Déva) God ; to (Ad’hy-
4tma) the superintending soul. Other deities belonging to
those several regions are portions of the [three] Gods ; for
they are variously named and described, on account of
their different operations: but [in fact] there is only one
deity, THE GREAT sout (Mahan dtma). He is called the
sun; for he is the soul of all beings: [and] that is declared
by the sage, “ the sun is the soul of (jagat) what moves,
and of (tast’hush) that which is fixed.” Other deities are
portions of him: and that is expressly declared by the
text): + “ The wise call fire, INpra, Mirra, and Va-
runA ;” &e.t
This passage of the Anucramani is partly abridged from
the Wiructa (c. 12), and partly taken from the Brahmana
of the Véda. It shows (what is also deducible from texts of
the Indian scriptures, translated in the present and former
essays), that the ancient Hindu religion, as founded on the
- Indian scriptures, recognises but one God, yet not suffi-
ciently discriminating the creature from the creator.
The subjects and uses of the prayers contained in the


* Bhur, bhuvah, and swar; called the Vyéhritis. See Menu, c.
2, v.76. In the original text, the nominative case is here used for
the genitive; as is remarked by the Commentator on this passage.
Such irregularities are frequent in the /édas themselves,

+ Rishi here signifies text (not sage). See Haravarra, Buaffési,
&e, and Pixin1, 3. ii. 186.

t Niructa, ec. 12, § 4, ad finem. The remainder of the passage
that is here briefly cited by the author of the nies identifies fire
with the great and only soul.


28 ON THE VEDAS, OR


Véda, differ more than the deities which are invoked, or
the titles by which they are addressed. Every line is re-
plete with allusions to mythology,* and to the Indian notions
of the divine nature and of celestial spirits. For the
innumerable ceremonies to be performed by a householder,
and still more, for those endless rites enjoined to hermits
and ascetics, a choice of prayers is offered in every stage of
the celebration. It may be here sufficient to observe, that
InprA, or the firmament, fire, the sun, the moon, water,
air, the spirits, the atmosphere and the earth, are the
objects most frequently addressed: and the various and
repeated sacrifices with fire, and the drinking of the milky
juice of the moon-plant or acid asclepias,+ furnish abundant
occasion for numerous prayers adapted to the many stages
of those religious rites. I shall, therefore, select for re-
mark such prayers as seem most singular, rather than such
as might appear the fairest specimens of this Véda.

In the fifteenth chapter of the first book there are two
hymns ascribed to Cursa, and also to Trita, son of water,
Three ascetics, brothers it should seem, since they are
named in another portion of the Véda as (Aptya) sons of
water (ap), were oppressed with thirst while travelling in a
sandy desert. At length they found a well, and one of


* Not a mythology which avowedly exalts deified heroes (as in the
Puréhas), but one which personifies the elements and planets, and
which peoples heaven and the world below with various orders of
beings.

Iobserve, however, in many places, the ground-work of legends
which are familiar in mythological poems: such, for example, as the
demon V rirra slain by [ypRA, who is thence surnamed VrirRAHAN;
but I do not remark any thing that corresponds with the favourite
legends of those sects which worship either the Linga or Sacti, or
else Rima or CrisuXa. I except some detached portions, the ge-
nuineness of which appears doubtful; as will be shown towards the
close of this essay.

+ Soma-laté, Asclepias acida, or Cynanchum viminale.


OEE


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 29


them descended into it and thence lifted water for his com-
panions ; but the ungrateful brothers stole his effects and
left him in the well, covering it with a heavy cart-wheel.
In his distress he pronounced the hymns in question. It
appears from the text, that Cursa also was once in similar
distress, and pronounced the same or a similar invocation :
and, for this reason, the hymns have been placed, by the
compiler of the Véda, among those of which Cursa is the
author.

The twenty-third chapter of the same book commences
with a dialogue between AcAstya, INpRA, and the Ma-
Ruts; and the remainder of that, with the whole of the
twenty-fourth chapter, comprises twenty-six hymns ad-
dressed by Acastya to those divinities, and to the ASwins,
fire, the sun, and some other deities. The last of these
hymns was uttered by Acastya, under the apprehension
of poison, and is directed by rituals to be used as an incan-
tation against the effects of venom. Other incantations,
applicable to the same purpose, occur in various parts of
the Véda; for example, a prayer by VAsisuf’HA for pre-
servation from poison (book 7, ch. 3, § 18).

The third book, distributed into five chapters, contains
invocations by ViSwAmirra, son of GAr’niNn and grand-
son of Cugica. The last hymn, or sécta, in this book,
consists of six prayers, one of which includes the celebrated
Gayatri. This remarkable text is repeated more than once
in other Védas; but since ViSwAmitRa is acknowledged
to be the Rishi to whom it was first revealed, it appears
that its proper and original place is in thishymn. I there-
fore subjoin a translation of the prayer which contains it,
as also the preceding one (both of which are addressed to
the sun), for the sake of exhibiting the Indian priest’s con-
fession of faith, with its context; after having, in. former
essays, given more than one version of it apart from the


30 ON THE VEDAS, OR


rest of the text. The other prayers contained in the same
sucta being addressed to other deities, are here omitted.

‘This new and excellent praise of thee, O splendid,
playful, sun (Péshan)! is offered by us to thee. Be gra-
tified by this my speech: approach this craving mind, as
a fond man seeks a woman. May that sun (Péshan),
who contemplates and looks into all worlds, be our pro-
tector.

‘ LET US MEDITATE ON THE ADORABLE LIGHT OF
THE DIVINE RULER (Savitri):* MAY IT GUIDE OUR
INTELLEcTs. Desirous of food, we solicit the gift of the
splendid sun (Savitri), who should be studiously worship-
ped. Venerable men, guided by the understanding, salute
the divine sun (Savitr?) with oblations and praise.’

The two last hymns in the third chapter of the 7th book
are remarkable, as being addressed to the guardian spirit of
a dwelling-house, and used as prayers to be recited with
oblations on building a house. The legend belonging to
the second of these hymns is singular: Vastsuf’Ha com-
ing at night to the house of Varuna, (with the intention
of sleeping there, say some; but as others affirm, with the
design of stealing grain to appease his hunger after a fast of
three days,) was assailed by the house-dog. He uttered
this prayer, or incantation, to lay asleep the dog, who was
barking at and attempting to bite him. A literal version
of the first of those hymns is here subjoined :

‘ Guardian of this abode! be acquainted with us; be to
us a wholesome dwelling ; afford us what we ask of thee,
and grant happiness to our bipeds and quadrupeds. Guar-
dian of this house! increase both us and our wealth. Moon!


* Sivaficuirya, the commentator whose gloss is here followed,
considers this passage to admit of two interpretations: ‘ the light, or
Brahme, constituting the splendour of the supreme ruler or creator
of the universe,’ or ‘ the light, or orb, of the splendid sun.’


——


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 31


while thou art friendly, may we, with our kine and our
horses, be exempted from decreptitude: guard us as a
father protects his offspring. Guardian of this dwelling!


may we be united with a happy, delightful, and melodious


abode afforded by thee: guard our wealth now under thy
protection, or yet in expectancy, and do thou defend us.’

The fourth hymn in the fourth chapter concludes with a
prayer to Rupra, which being used with oblations after a
fast of three days, is supposed to ensure a happy life of a
hundred years. In the sixth book three hymns occur,
which being recited with worship to the sun, are believed to
oceasion a fall of rain after the lapse of five days. The two
first are aptly addressed to a cloud; and the third is so
to frogs, because these had croaked while Vasisui’Ha re-
cited the preceding prayers, which circumstance he accepted
as a good omen.

The sixth chapter of the tenth book closes with two
hymns, the prayer of which is the destruction of enemies,
and which are used at sacrifices for that purpose.

The seventh chapter opens with a hymn, in which SéryA,
surnamed SAvirri, the wife of the moon,* is made the
speaker; as DacsuinA, daughter of PrasApart, and
Junu, daughter of BraumA, are in subsequent chapters.+
A very singular passage occurs in another place, con-
taining a dialogue between Yama and his twin-sister Y a-


* This marriage is noticed in the Aitaréya Brahmaia, where the
second lecture of the fourth book opens in this manner; ‘ Pra-
shpat gave his daughter, SGry{ Sivirri, to Soma, the king.’ The
well known legend in the Purdhas, concerning the marriage of S6ma
with the daughters of Dacsua, seems to be founded on this story in
the Védas.


+ In the introduction to the index, these, together with other god-
desses, who are reckoned authors of holy texts, are enumerated and
distinguished by the appellation of Brahmevadini. An inspired writer
is, in the masculine, termed Brahmevadin.


li


32 ON THE VEDAS, OR


MUNA, whom he endeavours to seduce; but his offers are
rejected by her with virtuous expostulation.

Near the close of the tenth chapter, a hymn in a very
different style of composition is spoken by VAcu, daughter
of AMBuRiINa, in praise of herself as the supreme and uni-
versal soul.* Vach, it should be observed, signifies speech ;
and she is the active power of BrauMA, proceeding from
him. The following is a literal version of this hymn, which
is expounded by the commentator consistently with the theo-
logical doctrines of the Védas.

“I range with the Rudras, with the Vasus, with the
Adityas, and with the ViSwadévas. I uphold both the sun
and the ocean [Mirra and Varuna], the firmament [IN-
pra] and fire, and both the ASwins. I support the moon
[S6ma] destroyer of foes; and [the sun entitled] TwasuTri,
P&suan, or Buaca. I grant wealth to the honest votary
who performs sacrifices, offers oblations, and satisfies [the
deities]. Me, who am the queen, the conferrer of wealth,
the possessor of knowledge, and first of such as merit wor-
ship, the gods render, universally, present every where, and
pervader of all beings. He who eats food through me, as
he who sees, who breathes, or who hears, through me, yet
knows me not, is lost; hear then the faith which I pro-
nounce. Even I declare this self, who is worshipped by
gods and men: I make strong whom I choose; I make
him Brahma, holy and wise. For Rupra I bend the bow,
to slay the demon, foe of BraumA; for the people I make
war [on their foes]; and I pervade heaven and earth. I
bore the father on the head of this [universal mind], and


* Towards the end of the Vrthad arahyaca, Vicu is mentioned
as receiving a revelation from AmsBuini, who obtained it from the
sun: but here she herself bears the almost similar patronymic,
Amepariff.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs. 33


my origin is in the.midst of the ocean ;* and therefore do I
pervade all beings, and touch this heaven with my form.
Originating all beings, I pass like the breeze; I am above
this heaven, beyond this earth; and what is the great one,
that am I.’

The tenth chapter closes with a hymn to night; and the
eleventh begins with two hymns relative to the creation of
the world. Another on this subject was translated in a
former essay :} it is the last hymn but one in the Rigvéda,
and the author of it is AG’HaAMaRsHaNa (a son of Ma-
D’HUCH’HANDAS), from whom it takes the name by which it
is generally cited. The other hymns, of which a version is
here subjoined, are not ascribed to any ascertained author.
PrasApatt, surnamed Paraméshi’hi, and his son YasNnya,
are stated as the original speakers. But of these names,
one is a title of the primeval spirit, and the other seems to
allude to the allegorical immolation of BkaumA,

I. ‘ Then was there no entity, nor nonentity; no world,
nor sky, nor aught above it: nothing, any where, in the
happiness of any one, involving or involved: nor water,
deep and dangerous. Death was not; nor then was im-
mortality ; nor distinction of day or night. But raart


* Heaven, or the sky, is the father; as expressly declared in ano-
ther place: and the sky is produced from mind, according to one
more passage of the Védas. Its birth is therefore placed on the head
of the supreme mind. The commentator suggests three interpreta-
tions of the sequel of the stanza: ‘ my parent, the holy Ambhrvha, is
in the midst of the ocean;’ or, ‘ my origin, the sentient deity, is in
waters, which constitute the bodies of the gods;’ or, ‘ the sentient
god, who is in the midst of the waters, which pervade intellect, is my
origin.’

+ In the first Essay on the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus,
Asiatic Researches, vol. v. p. 361.

¢ The pronoun (¢ad), thus emphatically used, is understood to intend
the Supreme Being, according to the doctrines of the Védénta. When
manifested by creation, he is the entity (sat); while forms, being mere
illusion, are nonentity (asat). The whole of this hymn is expounded


VOL. I. D


34 ON THE VEDAS, OR


breathed without afflation, single with (Swad’hé) her who
is sustained within him. Other than him, nothing existed
[which] since [has been]. Darkness there was; [for] this
universe was enveloped with darkness, and was undistin-
guishable [like fluids mixed in] waters: but that mass,
which was covered by the husk, was [at length] produced
by the power of contemplation. First desire was formed in
his mind: and that became the original productive seed ;
which the wise, recognising it by the intellect in their hearts,
distinguish, in nonentity, as the bond of entity.

‘ Did the luminous ray of these [creative acts] expand in
the middle? or above? or below? That productive seed
at once became providence [or sentient souls], and matter
[or the elements]: she, who is sustained within himself,*
was inferior ; and he, who heeds, was superior.

“Who knows exactly, and who shall in this world de-
clare, whence and why this creation took place? The gods
are subsequent to the production of this world: then who
can know whence it proceeded? or whence this varied world
arose? or whether it uphold [itself], or not? He who, in
the highest heaven, is the ruler of this universe, does indeed
know ; but not another can possess that knowledge.

II. ‘ That victim who was wove with threads on every
side, and stretched by the labours of a hundred and one
gods, the fathers, who wove and framed and placed the
warp and woof, do worship. The [first] male spreads and
encompasses this [web], and displays it in this world and in
heaven: these rays [of the creator] assembled at the altar,
and prepared the holy strains, and the threads of the warp.


according to the received doctrines of the Indian theology, or
Védénta. Darkness and desire (Jamas and Cama) bear a distant
resemblance to the Chaos and Eros of Hesiop. Theog. v.116.


* So Swad’ha is expounded; and the commentator makes it equiva-
lent to Mayé, or the world of ideas.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 35


“What was the size of that divine victim whom all the
gods sacrificed? What was his form? what the motive? the
fence? the metre? the oblation? and the prayer? First
was produced the Gayatri joined with fire; next the sun
(Savitri) attended by Ushnih ; then the,splendid moon with oe
Anushtubh, and with prayers; while Vrihati accompanied Hbebisth3
the elocution of Vrinaspati (or the planet Jupirer).
Virati was supported by the sun and by water (Mrrra
and VaruNa); but the [middle] portion of the day and
Trishtubh were here the attendants of InpRa; Jagati
followed all the gods: and by that [universal] sacrifice
sages and men were formed.
_“ When that ancient sacrifice was completed, sages, and
men, and our progenitors, were by him formed. Viewing
with an observant mind this oblation, which primeval saints
offered, I venerate them. The seven inspired sages, with
prayers and with thanksgivings, follow the path of these
primeval saints, and wisely practise [the performance of
sacrifices], as charioteers use reins [to guide their steeds].’
‘Some parts of these hymns bear an evident resemblance
to one which has been before cited from the white Yajush,*
and to which I shall again advert in speaking of that Véda.
The commentator on the Rigvéda quotes it to supply some
omissions in this text. It appears also, on the faith of his’
citations, that passages analogous to these occur in the
_- Taittiriyaca, or black Yajush, and also in the Brahmana
of the Véda.
The hundred and one gods, who are the agents in the
framing of the universe, typified by a sacrifice, are, accord-
ing to this commentator, the years of Braum4’s life, or his
afflations personified in the form of ANGirAs, &c. The
seven sages, who instituted sacrifices in imitation of the


—————
* In the second Essay on the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus,

Asiatic Researches, vol. vii. p. 251.

p2


36 ON THE VEDAS, OR


primeval type, are Maricut and others. Gayatri, Ushnih,
&e. are names of metres, or of the various lengths of stanzas
and measured verses, in the Védas.

The preceding quotations may be sufficient to show the
style of this part of the Véda, which comprehends the prayers
and invocations.

Another part belonging, as it appears, to the same Véda,
is entitled Aitaréya Brahmana. It is divided into eight
books (panjica), each containing five chapters or lectures
(ad’hyaya), and subdivided into an unequal number of sec-
tions (c’harida), amounting in the whole to two hundred and
eighty-five. Being partly in prose, the number of distinct
passages contained in those multiplied sections need not be
indicated.

For want either of a complete commentary* or of an ex-
planatory index,+ I cannot undertake from a cursory perusal
to describe the whole contents of this part of the Véda. I
observe, however, many curious passages in it, especially
towards the close. The seventh book had treated of sacri-
fices performed by kings: the subject is continued in the
first four chapters of the eighth book ; and three of these
relate to a ceremony for the consecration of kings, by pour-
ing on their heads, while seated on a throne prepared for the
purpose, water mixed with honey, clarified butter, and spi-
rituous liquor, as well as two sorts of grass and the sprouts
of corn. This ceremony, called Abhishéca, is celebrated on
the accession of a king; and subsequently on divers occa-
sions, as part of the rites belonging to certain solemn sacri-
fices performed for the attainment of particular objects.

The mode of its celebration is the subject of the second
chapter of the eighth book, or thirty-seventh chapter,


* I possess three entire copies of the text, but a part only of the
commentary by Sivaticuirya.


+ The index before-mentioned does not extend to this part of the
Veda.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 37


(as is done by the commentator) from the begin-
the tho It contains an instance, which is


lactic portion, of a dmepiniion on a difference of
on among inspired authors. ‘ Some,’ it says, ‘ direct
msecration to be completed with the appropriate prayer,
ob without the sacred words (Vydhritis), which they here
x superfluous: others, and particularly SaryacAma,
f JAwAxA, enjoin the complete recitation of those
, for reasons explained at full length; and UppAuaca,
of AruNA, has therefore so ordained the performance of
jeetemony.’
e subject of this chapter is concluded by the following —
kable passage. ‘ Well knowing all the [efficacy of
eration], JANAME&JAYA, son of Paricsuir, declared:
, conversant with this ceremony, assist me, who am
- apprised [of its benefits], to celebrate the solemn
. Therefore do I conquer [in single combat], therefore
defeat arrayed forces with an arrayed army: neither the
8 of the gods, nor those of men, reach me: I shall live
a fall period of life; I shall remain master of the whole
arth.” ‘Truly, neither the arrows of the gods, nor those
f men, do reach him, whom well-instructed priests assist
celebrating the solemn rite: he lives the full period of
= ; he remains master of the whole earth.’
ie - The thirty-eighth chapter (or third of the eighth book)
ibes a supposed consecration of Inpra, when elected
byt the gods to be their king. It consists of similar, but
“more solemn rites ; including, among other peculiarities, a
i meiful construction of his throne with texts of the Véda ;
ye ides a repetition of the ceremony of consecration in various
_Tegions, to ensure universal dominion. This last part of the
Se efeetion merits to be quoted, on account of the geogra-
A phical hints which it contains.


38 ON THE VEDAS, OR


- ‘ After [his inauguration by PrasApati], the divine
Vasus consecrated him in the eastern region, with the same
prayers in verse and in prose, and with the same holy words
[as before-mentioned,] in thirty-one days, to ensure his just
domination. Therefore [even now] the several kings of the
Prachyas, in the East, are consecrated, after the practice of
the gods, to equitable rule (sémrajya), and [people] call
those consecrated princes Samraj.*

* Next the divine Rudras consecrated him in the southern
region, with the same prayers in verse and in prose, and with
the same holy words, in thirty-one days, to ensure increase
of happiness. Therefore the several kings of the Satwats, in
the south, are consecrated, after the practice of the gods, to
the increase of enjoyment (6héjya), and [people] name those
consecrated princes Bhéja.

‘ Then the divine Adityas consecrated him in the western
region, with, &c., to ensure sole dominion. Therefore the
several kings of the Nichyas and Apachyas, in the West,
are consecrated, &c. to sole dominion, and [people] deno-
minate them Swaraj.+

* Afterwards all the gods (Viswé dévah) consecrated him
in the northern region, with, &c., to ensure separate domi-
nation. Therefore the several [deities who govern the]
countries of Uttara curu and Uttara madra, beyond Hi-
mavat, in the North, are consecrated, &c. to distinct rule
(Vairajya), and [people] term them Viréj.t

‘ Next the divine Saéd@’hyas and Aptyas consecrated him,
in this middle, central, and present region, with, &c., for
local dominion. Therefore the several kings of Curu and


* In the nominative case, Samrat, Samrad, or Samral ; substitat-
ing in this place a liquid letter, which is peculiar to the Véda and to
the southern dialects of India, and which approaches in sound to the
common /.

+ In the nominative case, Sward?, Swarad, or Swardl.

¢ In the nominative, Vird?, Virdd, or Viral.


cal


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 39


Panchala, as well as Vasa and Usinara, in the middle,
central, and present region, are consecrated, &c. to sove-
reignty (rajya), and [people] entitle them Raja.

* Lastly, the Maruts, and the gods named Angiras, con-
-secrated him, in the upper region, with, &c., to promote his
attainment of the supreme abode, and to ensure his mighty
domination, superior rule, independent power, and long
reign: and therefore he became a supreme deity (para-
méshi’ht) and ruler over creatures.

‘Thus consecrated by that great inauguration, InpRa
subdued all conquerable [earths], and won all worlds: he
obtained over all the gods supremacy, transcendent rank,
and pre-eminence. Conquering in this world [below] equi-
table domination, happiness, sole dominion, separate autho-
rity, attainment of the supreme abode, sovereignty, mighty
power, and superior rule; becoming a self-existent being
and independent ruler, exempt from [early] dissolution ;
and reaching all [his] wishes in that celestial world; he
became immortal: he became immortal.”

The thirty-ninth chapter is relative to a peculiarly solemn
Tite performed in imitation of the fabulous inauguration of
Inpra. It is imagined that this celebration becomes a
cause of obtaining great power and universal monarchy,
and the three last sections of the chapter recite instances of
its successful practice. Though replete with enormous and
. absurd exaggerations, they are here translated at full length,
as not unimportant, since many kings are mentioned whose
names are familiar in the heroic history of India.

§. VII. ‘ By this great inauguration similar to InpRaA’s,
Tura, son of Cavasna, consecrated JANAMEJAYA, son
of Paricsuit; and therefore did JANAM&JAYA, son of


* In the didactic portion of the Véda, the last term in every chapter
is repeated, to indicate its conclusion. This repetition was not pre-
served in a former quotation, from the necessity of varying consider-
-ably the order of the words.


40 ON THE VEDAS, OR


Paricsnit, subdue the earth completely all around, and
traverse it every way, and perform the sacrifice with a horse
as an offering.

- “Concerning that solemn sacrifice this verse is univer-
sally chanted. ‘ In Asandivat, Janamf&saya bound [as an
offering] to the gods, a horse fed with grain, marked with a
white star on his forehead, and bearing a green wreath
round his neck.”

* By this, &c. Cayavana, son of Buricu, consecrated
SAryAra sprung from the race of Menu; and therefore
did he subdue, &c. He became likewise a householder in
the service of the gods.

* By this, &c. SomaSusuMan, grandson of VAJARATNA,
consecrated SarAnica, son of SarrAsit; and therefore
did he subdue, &c.

‘ By this, &c. Parvara and NArepa consecrated Am-
BAsntf’nya; and therefore, &c.

“ By this, &. Parvara and NArepa consecrated
Yup’ HAnSravusati, grandson of Ucraséna; and there-
fore, &e.

“ By this, &e. CaSyapa consecrated ViSwacaRrMAN,
son of Buuvana; and therefore did he subdue, &c.

* The earth, as sages relate, thus addressed him: “ No
mortal has a right to give me away; yet thou, O ViSwa-
CARMAN, son of Bauvana, dost wish to do so. I will
sink in the midst of the waters; and vain has been thy pro-
mise to CaSyapa.”*

‘ By this, &e. Vasisuf’Ha consecrated Supas, son of
Pisavana; and therefore, Kc.

* By this, &c. Samvarra, son of ANGIRAs, consecrated
Marvtta, son of AvicsniT; and therefore, &c.


* So great was the efficacy of consecration, observes the commen-
tator in this place, that the submersion of the earth was thereby pre-
vented, notwithstanding this declaration.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 4l


that subject this verse is every where chanted: “ The
| dwelt in the house of Marutra, as his
and all the gods were companions of the son of


DAM — of Arr, consecrated ANGA; and therefore
lid Anca subdue the earth completely all around, and
se it every way, and perform a sacrifice with a horse,


perfect in his person, thus addressed [the priest,
as ey on some sacrifice]: “ Invite me to this solemn


Rnictetn; for which the sons of Priyamfép’Ha aiieted

y pDAMAYA in the solemn rite, this son of Arr1 gave them

ee day], at noon, two thousand each, out of a thousand

“The son of Virécuana [Anca] unbound and gave,

ae his priest performed the solemn sacrifice, eighty thou-

sand white horses fit for use.

The son of Arri bestowed in gifts ten thousand women
ed with necklaces, all daughters of opulent persons,

and brought from various countries.

_ “While distributing ten thousand elephants in Avacha-

_ truca, the holy son of Arri grew tired, and dispatched

4 messengers to finish the distribution.

_ “A hundred [I give] to you;” “ A hundred to you;” still

“the holy man grew tired; and was at last forced to draw

ian while bestowing them by thousands.+

x te All this, observes the commentator, was owing to his solemn
_inanguration.

+: Me It was through the solemn inauguration of Anca that his priest
was able to give such great alms. This remark is by the commentator.


42 ON THE VEDAS, OR


§ IX. ‘ By this great inauguration, similar to InpRa’s,
Dire’Hatamas, son of MamarA, consecrated Boarara,
the son of Dunsuanta ;* and therefore did BHARATA, son
of DunsHAnraA, subdue the earth completely all around,
and traverse it every way, and perform repeated sacrifices
with horses as offerings.

“On that subject too, these verses are every where
chanted: “ Buarara distributed in Mashiara} a hun-
dred and seven thousand millions of black elephants with
white tusks and decked with gold.

“A sacred fire was lighted for Buarata, son of Dun-
SHANTA, in Saéchi’guna, at which a thousand Brahmanas
shared a thousand millions of cows apiece

“ Buarata, son of Dunsuanra, bound seventy-eight
horses [for solemn rites] near the Yamuné, and fifty-five in
Vritrag’hna, on the Ganga.

“ Having thus bound a hundred and thirty-three horses
fit for sacred rites, the son of DunsHanra became pre-
eminently wise, and surpassed the prudence of [every rival]
king.

“This great achievement of Buarara, neither former
nor later persons [have equalled]; the five classes of men
have not attained his feats, any more than a mortal [can
reach] heaven with his hands.”

‘ The holy saint, VrYnapuct’na, taught this great in-
auguration to Durmuc’na, king of Panchdla; and there-
fore Durmuc’na, the Pénchala, being a king, subdued


* So the name should be written, as appears from this passage of the
Véda; and not, as in copies of some of the Purdias, DusuManzA or
DusHYANTA,.

+ The several manuscripts differ on this name of a country; and
having no other information respecting it, I am not confident that I
have selected the best reading. This observation is applicable also
to some other uncommon names.


{ All this, says the commentator, shows the efficacy of inauguration,


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 43


by means of that knowledge the whole earth around, and
traversed it every way.*

“The son of SaryAnavya, sprung from the race of
Vasisuf’Ha, communicated this great inauguration to
AryarAtt, son of JANANTAPA; and therefore AryARATI,
son of JANANTAPA, being no king, [nevertheless] subdued
by means of that knowledge the whole earth around, and
traversed it every way.

“SArvanavya, of the race of Vasisni’na, addressed
him, saying, “ Thou hast conquered the whole earth around ;
{now] aggrandize me.” AryaRrAri, son of JANANTAPA,
replied; “ When I conquer Uttara curu, then thou shalt be
king of the earth, holy man! and I will be merely thy
general.” SAryanAvya rejoined; “ That is the land of
the gods; no mortal can subdue it: thou hast been ungrate-
ful towards me, and therefore I resume from thee this
[power].” Hence the king Susumi¥a, son of Siv1,
destroyer of foes, slew AryarAt1, who was [thus] divested
of vigour and deprived of strength.

“Therefore let not a soldier be ungrateful towards the
_ priest, who is acquainted [with the form], and practises [the
celebration, of this ceremony], lest he lose his kingdom and
forfeit his life: lest he forfeit his life.’

To elucidate this last story, it is necessary to observe that,
before the commencement of the ceremony of inauguration,
the priest swears the soldier by a most solemn oath, not to
injure him. A similar oath, as is observed in this place by
the commentator, had been administered, previously to the
communication of that knowledge to which Ary ARAT1 owed
his success. The priest considered his answer as illusory
and insulting, because Uttara curu, being north of Méru,


* It is here remarked in the commentary, that a Brahmana, being
incompetent to receive consecration, is however capable of knowing
its form; the efficacy of which knowledge is shown in this place.


44 ON THE VEDAS, OR


is the land of the gods, and cannot be conquered by men.
As this ungrateful answer was a breach of his oath, the
priest withdrew his power from him; and, in consequence,
he was slain by the foe.

_ The fortieth, and last chapter of the Aitaréya Brah-
mana, relates to the benefit of entertaining a Purdhita, or
appointed priest ; the selection of a proper person for that
station, and the mode of his appointment by the king ;
together with the functions to be discharged by him. The
last section describes rites to be performed, under the diree-
tion of such a priest, for the destruction of the king’s
enemies. As it appears curious, the whole description is
here translated ; abridging, however, as in other instances,
the frequent repetitions with whieh it abounds,

‘ Next then [is described] destruction around air
(Brahme).* Foes, enemies, and rivals, perish around him,
who is conversant with these rites. That which [moves] in
the atmosphere, is air (Brahme), around which perish five
deities, lightning, rain, the moon, the sun, and fire.

‘ Lightning having flashed, disappears behind rain :+ it
vanishes, and none know [whither it is gone]. When a
man dies, he vanishes ; and none know [whither his soul is
gone]. Therefore, whenever lightning perishes, _ pronounce
this [prayer] ; “ May my enemy perish : may he disappear,

_and none know [where he is].” Soon, indeed, none will
know [whither he is gone]. _

“ Rain having fallen, [evaporates and] disappears within
the moon, &c. When rain ceases, pronounce this [prayer],
Xe.

‘The moon, at the conjunction, disappears within the
sun, &c. When the moon is dark, pronounce, &c.


* So this observance is denominated, viz. Brahmahah parimarah.
t+ Behind a cloud. =


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs. 45


“The sun, when setting, disappears in fire, &e.* When
the sun sets, pronounce, &c.

“ Fire, ascending, disappears in air, &c. When fire is
extinguished, pronounce, &c.

“These same deities are again produced from this very
origin. Fire is born of air; for, urged with force by the
breath, it increases. Viewing it, pronounce [this prayer],
“May fire be revived: but not my foe be reproduced :
may he depart averted.” Therefore, does the enemy go far
away. |

“The sun is born of fire.+ Viewing it, say, “ May the
sun rise ; but not my foe be reproduced, &c.

'“ The moon is born of the sun.{ Viewing it, say, “ May
the moon be renewed, &c.”*’

“Rain is produced from the moon.§ Viewing it, say,
“ May rain be produced, &c.”

“Lightning comes of rain. Viewing it, say, “ May
lightning appear, Xc.”

“Such is destruction around air. Marrrfya, son of
CusnArv, communicated these rites to SuTWAN, son of
CirifSa, descended from BuArca. Five kings perished
around him, and SurwAw attained greatness.

“ The observance [enjoined] to him [who undertakes these
rites, is as follows]: let him not sit down earlier than the


* The Taittiriya Yajurvéda contains a passage which may serve to
explain this notion; ‘The sun, at eve, penetrates fire; and there-
fore fire is seen afar at night; for both are luminous.’

+ At night, as the commentator now observes, the sun disappears
in fire; but re-appears thence next day. Accordingly, fire is desti-
tute of splendour by day, and the sun shines brighter.

¢ The moon, as is remarked in the commentary, disappears within
the sun at the conjunction; but is reproduced from the sun on the
first day of the bright fortnight.

§ Here the commentator remarks, Rain enters the lunar orb,
which consists of water; and, at a subsequent time, it is reproduced
from the moon.


46 ON THE VEDAS, OR


foe ; but stand, while he thinks him standing. Let him
not lie down earlier than the foe; but sit, while he thinks
him sitting. Let him not sleep earlier than the foe; but
wake, while he thinks him waking. Though his enemy had
a head of storie, soon does he slay him: he does slay him.’

Before I quit this portion of the Véda, I think it right to
add, that the close of the seventh book contains the men-
tion of several monarchs, to whom the observance, there
described, was taught by divers sages. For a reason be-
fore-mentioned, I shall subjoin the names. They are V1é-
WANTARA, son of SusHapMAN; SAnApb&vA, son of Sar-
ya, and hisson S6maca; Basuru, son of DévAvrin’na,
Buima of Viparsua, NaGnasit of GANv’HARa, Sa-
NnaASRuTA of ARINDAMA, Riruvip of JANaAcA; besides
JaNnAmfésaya and SupAs, who have been also noticed in
another place.

The Aitaréya Aranyaca is another portion of the Rig-
véda. It comprises eighteen chapters or lectures, un-
equally distributed in five books (Arartyaca). The second,
which is the longest, for it contains seven lectures, con-
stitutes with the third an Upanishad of this Véda, entitled
the Bahvrich Brahmana Upanishad ; or more commonly,
the Aitaréya, as having been recited by a sage named
Arrartya.* The four last lectures of that second Arat-


* It is so affirmed by Ananparirr’aa in his notes: and he, and
the commentator, whom he annotates, state the original speaker of
this Upanishad to be Manipisa, an incarnation of Nirivafa, pro-
ceeding from V1Saua, son of Ansa. He adds, that on the sudden
appearance of this deity at a solemn celebration, the whole assembly
of gods and priests fainted, but at the intercession of Braum4,
they were revived; and after making their obeisance, they were
instructed in holy science. This Avatéra was called Mantpisa,
because those venerable personages (Mahin) declared themselves his
slaves (dasa).

In the concluding title of one transcript of this Arafya, I find it
ascribed to ASwatAyana, probably by an error of the transcriber.

On


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 47


yaca are particularly consonant to the theological doctrines
of the Védanta, and are accordingly selected by theolo-
gians of the Védanta school as the proper Aitaréya Upani-
shad.* The following is literally translated from this
portion of the second Arazyaca.


The Airarntéya Araxya. B. 2.


§ IV. ‘ Originally this [universe] was indeed sou only ;
nothing else whatsoever existed, active [or inactive]. Her
thought, ‘I will create worlds:” thus HE created these
[various] worlds ; water, light, mortal [beings], and the
waters. That ‘ water,’ is the [region] above the heaven,
which heaven upholds; the atmosphere comprises light ;
the earth is mortal; and the regions below are “ the
waters.”


On the other hand, Saunaca appears to be author of some texts of
the Arafya ; for a passage from the second lecture of the fifth (Ar. 5,
lect. 2, § 11) is cited as Saunaca’s, by the commentator on the
prayers of the Rigvéda (lect. 1, § 15).

* T have two copies of SAncara’s commentary, and one of anno-
tations on his gloss by NirivaSfénora ; likewise a copy of SivaKa’s
commentary on the same theological tract, and also on the third
Arahyaca ; besides annotations by ANANvArinr’Ha on a different
gloss, for the entire Upanishad. The concluding prayer, or seventh
lecture of the second Arafyaca, was omitted by Sancara, as suffi.
ciently perspicuous; but is expounded by SiyaKa, whose exposition
is the same which is added by Sancara’s commentator, and which
transcribers sometimes subjoin to Sancara’s gloss.

As an instance of singular and needless frauds, T must mention,
that the work of Ananvarinr’HA was sold to me, under a different
title, as a commentary on the Tuittiriya sanhitd of the Yajurvida.
The running titles at the end of each chapter had been altered accord-
ingly. On examination I found it to be a different, but valuable
work ; as above described.


+ Ambhas water, and dpas the waters. The commentators assign
reasons for these synonymous terms being employed, severally, to
. denote the regions above the sky, and those below the earth.


48 ON THE VEDAS, OR


‘He thought, “ these are indeed worlds ; I will create
guardians of worlds.” Thus ne drew from the waters,
and framed, an embodied being.* He viewed him; and of
that being, so contemplated, the mouth opened as an egg:
from the mouth, speech issued ; from speech, fire proceeded.
The nostrils spread; from the nostrils, breath passed ;
from breath, air was propagated. The eyes opened ; from
the eyes, a glance sprung ; from that glance, the sun was
produced. The ears dilated : from the ears came hearken-
ing; and from that, the regions of space. The skin ex-
panded: from the skin, hair rose; from that grew herbs
and trees. The breast opened; from the breast, mind
issued ; and from mind, the moon. The navel burst: from
the navel came deglutition+; from that, death. The gene-
rative organ burst : thence flowed productive seed ; whence
waters drew their origin.

“These deities, being thus framed, fell into this vast
ocean : and to nim they came with thirst and hunger: and
nim they thus addressed : “ Grant us a [smaller] size,
wherein abiding we may eat food.” He offered to them
[the form of] a cow: they said, “ that is not sufficient for us.”
He exhibited to them [the form of] a horse: they said,
“neither is that sufficient for us.” He showed them the
human form: they exclaimed: “ well done! ah! wonder-
ful!” Therefore man alone is [pronounced to be] “ well
formed.”

‘He bade them occupy their respective places. Fire,
becoming speech, entered the mouth. Air, becoming
breath, proceeded to the nostrils. The sun, becoming sight,
penetrated the eyes. Space became hearing, and occupied


* Purusha, a human form.

+ Apana. From the analogy between the acts of inhaling and of
swallowing ; the latter is considered as a sort of breath or inspiration :
hence the air drawn in by deglutition is reckoned one of five breaths
or airs inhated into the body.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 49


the ears. Herbs and trees became hair, and filled the skin.
The moon, becoming mind, entered the breast. Death,
becoming deglutition, penetrated the navel; and water
became productive seed, and occupied the generative


_“ Hunger and thirst addressed him, saying, “ Assign us
[our places].” Hx replied: “‘ You J distribute among these
deities ; and I make you participant with them.” Therefore
is it, that to whatever deity an oblation is offered, hunger
and thirst participate with him.

_ ‘He reflected, “ These are worlds, and regents of worlds :
for them I will frame food.” He viewed the waters: from
waters, so contemplated, form issued; and food is form,
which was so produced.

_ ‘Being thus framed, it turned away and sought to flee.
The [primeval] man endeavoured to seize it by speech, but
could not attain it by his voice: had he by voice taken it,
[hunger] would be satisfied by naming food. He attempted
to catch it by his breath, but could not inhale it by breath-
ing: had he by inhaling taken it, [hunger] would be satis-
fied by smelling food, He sought to snatch it by a glance,
but could not surprise it by a look: had he seized it by the
sight, [hunger] would be satisfied by seeing food. He at-
tempted to catch it by hearing, but could not hold it by
listening: had he caught it by hearkening, [hunger] would
be satisfied by hearing food. He endeavoured to seize it by
his skin, but could not restrain it by his touch: had he
seized it by contact, [hunger] would be satisfied by touching
food. He wished to reach it by the mind, but could not
attain it by thinking : had he caught it by thought, [hunger]
would be satisfied by meditating on food. He wanted to
seize it by the generative organ, but could not so hold it ;
had he thus seized it, [hunger] would be satisfied by emis-
sion. Lastly, he endeavoured to catch it by deglutition ;

VOL. I. E


50 ON THE VE&DAS, OR


and thus he did swallow it: that air, which is so drawn in,
seizes food ; and that very air is the bond of life.

‘ He [the universal soul] reflected, “ How can this [body]
exist without me?” He considered by which extremity he
should penetrate. He thought, “ If [without me] speech
discourse, breath inhale, and sight view; if hearing hear,
skin feel, and mind meditate ; if deglutition swallow, and
the organ of generation perform its functions; then, who
am 1?”

‘ Parting the suture [san], ux penetrated by this route.

That opening is called the suture (vidriti) and is the road
to beatitude (naéndana).*
_ © Of that soul, the places of recreation are three ; and
the modes of sleep, as many. This (pointing to the right
eye) is-a place of recreation ; this (pointing to the throat) is
[also] a situation of enjoyment ; this (pointing to the heart)
is [likewise] a region of delight.

‘ Thus born [as the animating spirit], he discriminated
the elements, [remarking] “ what else [but him] can I here
affirm [to exist] ;” and he contemplated this [thinking] per-
son,+ the vast expanse,t [exclaiming] 1r have I seen.
Therefore is he named 1T-sEEING (IDAM-DRA): IT-SEE-
ING is indeed his name: and him, being 11T-srE1NG, they
call, by a remote appellation, Inpra; for the gods gene-
rally delight in the concealment [of their name]. The gods
delight in privacy.§


* The Hindus believe that the soul, or conscious life, enters the
body through the sagittal suture; lodges in the brain; and may con-
template, through the same opening, the divine perfections. Mind,
or the reasoning faculty, is reckoned to be an organ of the body,
situated in the heart.

+ Purusha.

t Brahme, op the great one,

§ Here, as at the conclusion of every division of an Upanishad, or


of any chapter in the didactic portion of the Védas, the last phrase is
repeated.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 51


_§ V. £ This [living principle] is first, in man, a fetus, or
productive seed, which is the essence drawn from all the
members [of the body]: thus the man nourishes himself
within himself. But when he emits it into woman, he pro-
creates that [fetus] : and such is its first birth.

“ It becomes identified with the woman ; and being such,
as is her own body, it does not destroy her. She cherishes
his ownself,* thus received within her; and, as nurturing
him, she ought to be cherished [by him]. The woman
nourishes that fetus: but he previously cherished the child,
and further does so after its birth. Since he supports the
child before and after birth, he cherishes himself: and that,
for the perpetual succession of persons ; for thus are these
persons perpetuated. Such is his second birth.

“This [second] self becomes his representative for holy
acts [of religion]: and that other [self], having fulfilled its
obligations and completed its period of life, deceases. De-|
parting hence, he is born again [in some other shape]: and
such is his third birth.

“This was declared by the holy sage. “ Within the
womb, I have recognised all the successive births of these
deities. A hundred bodies, like iron chains, hold me
down : yet, like a falcon, I swiftly rise.” Thus spoke VA-
MADE£vA, reposing in the womb: and possessing this [in-
tuitive] knowledge, he rose, after bursting that corporeal
confinement ; and, ascending to the blissful region of hea-
ven,+ he attained every wish and became mmortal. He
became immortal.

§ VI. ‘ What is this soul? that we may worship him.
Which is the soul? Is it that by which [a man sees] ? by
which he hears? by which he smells odours ? by which he


* For the man is identified with the child procreated by him.
+ Swarga, or place of celestial bliss.
E2 :


52 ON THE VEDAS, OR


utters speech? by which he discriminates a pleasant or
unpleasant taste? Is it the heart [or understanding]? or
‘the-mind [or will]? Is it sensation? or power? or diseri-
mination? or comprehension? or perception? or retention ?
or attention ? or application? or haste [or pain]? or me-
mory? or assent? or determination? or animal action ?*
or wish? or desire ?

‘ All those are only various names of apprehension. But
this [soul, consisting in the faculty of apprehension] is
BraumA; he is InpRA; he is (PRAJApATI) the lord of
creatures : these gods are he; and so are the five primary
elements, earth, air, the etherial fluid, water, and light :+
these, and the same joined with minute objects and other
seeds [of existence], and [again] other [beings] produced
from eggs, or borne in wombs, or originating in hot mois-
ture,{ or springing from plants ; whether horses, or kine,
or men, or elephants, whatever lives, and walks or flies,
or whatever is immovable [as herbs and trees]: all that is
the eye of intelligence. On intellect [every thing] is found-
ed: the world is the eye of intellect, and intellect is its
foundation. Intelligence is (Braue) the great one.

‘ By this [intuitively] intelligent soul, that sage ascended
from the present world to the blissful region of heaven ;
and, obtaining all his wishes, became immortal. He be-
came immortal.


* Asu, the unconscious volition, which occasions an act necessary to
the support of life, as breathing, &e.

+ Braum( (in the masculine gender) here denotes, according to
commentators, the intelligent spirit, whose birth was in the mundane
egg ; from which he is named Hirafvacarsua. Inpra is the chief
of the gods, or subordinate deities, meaning the elements and planets.
Prasipart is the first embodied spirit, called Vir{s, and described
in the preceding part of this extract. The gods are fire, and the rest
as there stated.


t Vermin and insects are supposed to be generated from hot
moisture.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 53


 § VII. ‘ May my speech be founded on understanding,
and my mind be attentive to my utterance. Be thou ma-
nifested to me, O self-manifested [intellect]! For my sake
[O speech and mind!] approach this Véda. May what I
have heard, be unforgotten: day and night may I behold
this, which I have studied. Let me think the reality : let
me speak the truth. May it preserve me; may it preserve
the teacher : me may it preserve: the teacher may it pre-
serve ; the teacher may it preserve ; may it preserve the
teacher.’*


On the Causniract.


Another Upanishad of this Véda, appertaining to a par-
ticular Sac’ha of it, is named from that, and from the
Bréihmana, of which it is an extract, Caushitact Brah-
mana Upanishad. From an abridgment of it (for I have
not seen the work at large), it appears to contain two dia-
logues ; one, in which INDRA instructs PRaTARDANA in
theology ; and another, in which AsAraSarru, king of
CASi, communicates divine knowledge to a priest named
BAxAci. A similar conversation between these two
persons is found likewise in the Vrihad aranyaca of the
Yajurvéda, as will be subsequently noticed. Respecting
the other contents of the Brahmana from which these
dialogues are taken, I have not yet obtained any satisfac-
tory information.

The abridgment above-mentioned occurs in a metrical
paraphrase of twelve principal Upanishads in twenty
chapters, by VipyAraNnya, the preceptor of MApHAva
AcuArya. He expressly states Caushitact as the name
of a Séc’ha of the Rigvéda.


* This, like other prayers, is denominated a manira, though it be
the conclusion of an Upanishad.


54 ' ON THE VEDAS, OR


The original of the Caushitact was among the portions
of the Véda which Sir Ropert CuamBers collected at
Benares, according to a list which he sent to me some time
before his departure from India. A fragment of an Upa-
nishad procured at the same place by Sir WiLL1aM JoNEs,
and given by him to Mr. Biaguiere, is marked in his
hand-writing, ‘‘ The beginning of the Caushitact.” In it
the dialogists are Cuirra, surnamed GANGAYANI, and
Swérackru, with his father UppAuaca, son of ARuNA.

I shall resume the consideration of this portion of the
Rigvéda, whenever I have the good fortune to obtain the
complete text and commentary, either of the Brahmaia,
or of the Upanishad, ‘which bears this title.


On the Wuite YAsJURVEDA.


The Vajasanéyi, or white Yajush, is the shortest of the
Védas ; so far as respects the first and principal part,
which comprehends the mantras. The Sanhité, or collec-
tion of prayers and invocations belonging to this Véda, is
comprised in forty lectures (ad’hyaya), unequally subdivided
into numerous short sections (ca/dica); each of which, in
general, constitutes a prayer or mantra. It is also divided,
like the Rigvéda, into anuvacas, or chapters. The number
of anuvacas, as they are stated at the close of the index to
this Véda, appears to be two hundred and eighty-six: the
number of sections, or verses, nearly two thousand (or
exactly 1987). But this includes many repetitions of the
same text in divers places. The lectures are very unequal,
containing from thirteen to a hundred and seventeen sec-
tions (cardica).*


* I have several copies of Min’nyanpina’s white Yajush, one of
which is accompanied by acommentary, entitled Védadipa; the author
of which, Manfp’HaRa, consulted the commentaries of Uvafa and
Mip’nava, as he himself informs us in his preface.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs., 55


Though called the Yajurvéda, it consists of passages,
some of which are denominated Rich, while only the rest


are strictly Yajush. The first are, like the prayers of the


Rigvéda, in metre: the others are either in measured prose,
containing from one to a hundred and six syllables; or such
of them as exceed that length, are considered to be prose
reducible to no measure.

The Yajurvéda relates chiefly to oblations and sacrifices,
as the name itself implies.* The first chapter, and the
greatest part of the second, contain prayers adapted for
sacrifices at the full and change of the moon; but the six
last sections regard oblations to the manes. The subject of
the third chapter is the consecration of a perpetual fire and
the sacrifice of victims: the five next relate chiefly to a
ceremony called Agnishtéma, which includes that of drink-
ing the juice of the acid asclepias. The two following relate
to the Vajapéya and Rajaséya; the last of which cere-
monies involves the consecration of a king. Eight chapters,
from the eleventh to the eighteenth, regard the sanctifying
of sacrificial fire; and the ceremony named Sautramani,
which was the subject of the last section of the tenth
chapter, occupies three other chapters, from the nineteenth
to the twenty-first. The prayers to be used at an ASwamé-
Wha, or ceremony emblematic of the immolation of a horse
and other animals, by a king ambitious of universal empire,
are placed in four chapters, from the twenty-second to the
twenty-fifth. The two next are miscellaneous chapters; the
Sautramani and Aswaméd’ha are completed in two others;
and the Purushaméd’ha, or ceremony performed as the
type of the allegorical immolation of NArAyawna, fills the
thirtieth and thirty-first chapters. The three next belong


* Yajush is derived from the verb yaj, to worship or adore. Another
etymology is sometimes assigned: but this is most consistent with the
subject; viz. (yajnya) sacrifices, and (koma) oblations to fire.


56 ON THE VEDAS, OR


to the Sarvaméd’ha, or prayers and oblations for universal
success. A chapter follows on the Pitriméd ha, or obsequies
‘in commentoration of a deceased ancestor: and the last five
chapters contain such passages of this Véda, as are ascribed
to DAp’aYACH, son or descendant of AT’HARVAN: four of
them consist of prayers applicable to various religious rites,
as sacraments, lustrations, penance, &c.; and the last is
restricted to theology.

Excepting these five chapters, most of the passages con-
tained in the preceding part of this collection of prayers are
attributed to divine personages: many are ascribed to the
first manifested being, named PrasArati, PARAMESHT’ Hi,
or NARAYANA Purusma; some are attributed to Swa+
yAmMBut Braue, or the self-existent himself: the reputed
authors of the rest are Vrinaspati, Inpra, Varuna,
and the ASwins: except a few scattered passages, which
are ascribed to Vasisnf’ua, ViswAmrrra, VAmapfva,
Manp’nucn’HaANbAs, Mép’nAti?’nt, and other human
authors; and some texts, for which no Rishi is specified in
the index, and which are therefore assigned either to the
sun (Vivaswat or Aditya), as the deity supposed to havé
revealed this Véda; or to YASNYAWALCYA, as the person
who received the revelation: in the same manner as the
unappropriated passages of the Rigvéda are assigned to
PrajsApati or BrauMA.

Several prayers and hymns of the Yajurvéda have been
already translated in former essays,* and may serve as a
sufficient example of the style of its composition. I shall
here insert only two passages, both remarkable. The first
is the beginning of the prayers of the Sarvaméd’ha. It
constitutes the thirty-second lecture, comprising two chap-
ters (anuvdca) and sixteen verses.

“Fire is raat [original cause]; the sun is that; so is


* On the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus, As. Res., vol. v. and vii.


i


J


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 57


air; so is the moon: such too is that pure BRAHME, and
those waters, and that lord of creatures. Moments [and
other measures of time] proceeded from the effulgent person,
whom none can apprehend [as an object of perception],
above, around, or in the midst. Of him, whose glory is
so great, there is no image: he it is who is celebrated in
various holy strains.* Even he is the god who pervades
all regions: he is the first born: it is he, who is in the
womb; he, who is born; and he, who will be produced:
he, severally and universally, remains with [all] persons.

_ “Hx, prior to whom nothing was born, and who became
all beings; himself the lord of creatures, with [a body com-
posed of] sixteen members, being delighted by creation,
produced the three luminaries [the sun, the moon, and fire].

‘To what God should we offer oblations, but to him
who made the fluid sky and solid earth, who fixed the solar
orb (swar,) and celestial abode (naca), and who framed drops
[of rain] in the atmosphere? To what god should we offer
oblations, but to him whom heaven and earth mentally
contemplate, while they are strengthened and embellished
by offerings, and illuminated by the sun risen above them?

* The wise man views that mysterious [being], in whom
the universe perpetually exists, resting on that sole support.
In him, this [world] is absorbed; from him it issues: in
creatures, he is twined and wove, with various forms of
existence. Let the wise man, who is conversant with the
import of revelation,} promptly celebrate that immortal
being, the mysteriously existing and various abode; he
who knows its three states [its creation, continuance, and
destruction], which are involved in mystery, is father of the
father. That [Braume], in whom the gods attain immor-


* The text refers to particular passages.


+ For the word Gand’ harba is here interpreted as intending one
who inyestigates holy writ.


58 ON THE VEDAS, OR


tality, while they abide in the third [or celestial] region, is our
venerable parent, and the providence which governsall worlds.
“ Knowing the elements, discovering the worlds, and
recognising all regions and quarters [to be him], and
worshipping [speech or revelation, who is] the first-born,
the votary pervades the animating spirit of solemn sacrifice
by means of [his own] soul. Recognising heaven, earth,
and sky [to be him], knowing the worlds, discovering
space and (swar) the solar orb [to be the same], he views
that being: he becomes that being; and is identified with
him, on completing the broad web of the solemn sacrifice.
“ For opulence and wisdom, I solicit this wonderful
lord of the altar, the friend of INDRA, most desirable
[fire]: may this oblation be effectual. Fire! make me,
this day, wise by means of that wisdom which the gods
and the fathers worship: be this oblation efficacious. May .
VaruNa grant me wisdom; may fire and PrasApati
confer on me sapience; may INpRa and air vouchsafe me
knowledge; may providence give me understanding: be
this oblation happily offered! May the priest and the
soldier both share my prosperity; may the gods grant me
supreme happiness: to thee, who art that [felicity], be this
oblation effectually presented !”
The next passage which I shall cite is a prayer to fire.*
“ Thou art (samvatsara) the [first] year [of the cycle];
thou art (parivatsara) the [second] year; thou art (idavat-
sara) the [third] year; thou art (édvat-vatsara) the [fourth]
year; thou art (vatsara) the fifth year: may mornings
appertain to thee; may days and nights, and fortnights,
and months, and seasons, belong to thee; may (samvatsara)
the year be a portion of thee: to go, or to come, contract-
ing or expanding [thyself], thou art winged thought.
Together with that deity, remain thou firm like ANeIRAs.’


* Ch. 27, § 45th and last.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 59


I have quoted this almost unmeaning passage, because
it notices the divisions of time which belong to the calendar
of the Védas, and which are explained in treatises on that
subject annexed to the sacred volume, under the title of
Jyétish. To this I shall again advert in a subsequent part
of this essay. I shall here only observe, with the view of
accounting for the seeming absurdity of the text now cited,
that fire, as in another place,* sacrifice, is identified with
the year and with the cycle, by reason of the near con-
nexion between consecrated fire and the regulation of time
relative to religious rites; at which one is used, and which
the other governs.

_ The fortieth and last chapter of this Véda is an Upa-
nishad, as before intimated: which is usually called
Tsavasyam, from the two initial words; and sometimes
IsaP@hyaya, from the first word ; but the proper title is
“Upanishad of the Véjasanéya sanhita.’ The author, as
efore-mentioned, is Dap’HyAcu, son or descendant of
Ar’HARVAN.+ A translation of it has been published in
the posthumous works of Sir Witt1am JoneEs.

The second part of this Véda, appertaining to the
Mé@hyandina Séc’hi, is entitled the Satapat’ha Brah-
mana; and is much more copious than the collection of
prayers. It consists of fourteen books (caida) unequally
distributed in two parts (bhaga): the first of which contains
ten books; and the second, only four. The number of


* In the Satapat’ha Bréhmaha, b.ii,ch.1. The reason here assigned
is expressly stated by the commentator.

¢ Besides Manfp’nara’s gloss on this chapter, in his Védadipa, I
have the separate commentary of Sancara, and one by Bitacrisu-
NAnanvA, which contains a clear and copious exposition of this
Upanishad. He professes to expound it as it is received by both the
Cahwa and Mad@’hyandina schools. Sir Wit11AM Jones, in his version
of it, used Sancara’s gloss; as appears from a copy of that gloss
which he had carefully studied, and in which his hand-writing appears
in more than one place.


60 ON THE VEDAS, OR


lectures (ad’hyaya) contained in each book varies; and
so does that of the Brahmazas, or separate precepts,
in each lecture. Another mode of division, by chapters
(prapataca), also prevails throughout the volume: and the
distinction of Brahmanas, which are again subdivided into
short sections (cartdica), is subordinate to both modes of
division.

The fourteen books which constitute this part of the Véda
comprise a hundred lectures, corresponding to sixty-eight
chapters. The whole number of distinct articles entitled
‘Brahmana is four hundred and forty: the sections (cardicé)
are also counted, and are stated at 7624.*

The same order is observed in this collection of precepts
concerning religious rites, which had been followed in the
arrangement of the prayers belonging to them. The first
and second books treat of ceremonies on the full and
change of the moon, the consecration of the sacrificial
fire, &c. The third and fourth relate to the mode of pre-
paring the juice of the acid asclepias, and other ceremonies
connected with it, as the Jyétishtéma, &c. The fifth is
confined to the Vajapéya and Rajastya. The four next
teach the consecration of sacrificial fire: and the tenth,
‘entitled Agni rahasya, shows the benefits of these cere-
monies. The three first books of the second part are
stated by the commentator+ as relating to the Sautramani
and Aswaméd’ha ; and the fourth, which is the last, belongs


* My copies of the text and of the commentary are both imperfect ;
but the deficiencies of one occur in places where the other is com-
plete, and I have been thus enabled to inspect cursorily the whole of
this portion of the Véda.

Among fragments of this Braéahmaha comprising entire books, I
have one which agrees, in the substance and purport, with the second
book of the Mad’hyandina Satapatha, though differing much in the
readings of almost every passage. It probably belongs to a different
Sée’ha.


+ At the beginning of his gloss on the eleventh book.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 61


_ to theology. In the original, the thirteenth book is speci-
ally denominated ASwaméd’hya; and the fourteenth is en-
titled Vrihad aranyaca.

_ The Aswamé@ha and Purushaméd ha, celebrated in the
manner directed by this Véda, are not really sacrifices of
horses and men. In the first-mentioned ceremony, six
- hundred and nine animals of various prescribed kinds,
domestic and wild, including birds, fish, and reptiles, are
made fast, the tame ones, to twenty-one posts, and the
wild, in the intervals between the pillars; and, after certain
prayers have been recited, the victims are let loose without
injury. In the other, a hundred and eighty-five men of
various specified tribes, characters, and professions, are
_ bound to eleven posts; and, after the hymn concerning the
allegorical immolation of NArAyana* has been recited,
these human victims are liberated unhurt; and oblations of
} butter are made on the sacrificial fire. This mode of per-
forming the Aswaméd’ha and Purushaméd’ha, as emble-
matic ceremonies, not as real sacrifices, is taught in this
Véda: and the interpretation is fully confirmed by the
rituals,+ and by commentators on the Sanhita and Bréh-
mana; one of whom assigns as the reason, ‘ because the
flesh of victims which have been actually sacrificed at a
Yajnya must be eaten by the persons who offer the sacri-
fice: but a man cannot be allowed, much less required, to
eat human flesh.’{ It may be hence inferred, or conjec-
tured at least, that human sacrifices were not authorised
by the Véda itself; but were either then abrogated, and an
emblematical ceremony substituted in their place; or they


_ * See the second essay on the Religious Ceremonies of the Hindus,
Asiatic Researches, vol. vii. p. 251.

+ I particularly advert to a separate ritual of the Purushaméd’ha
by Yisnyapéva.

t Cited from memory: I read the passage several years ago, but I
cannot now recover it.


62 ON THE VEDAS, OR -


must have been introduced in later times, on the authority
of certain Purdias or Tantras, fabricated by persons who,
in this as in other matters, established many unjustifiable
practices, on the foundation of emblems and allegories
which they misunderstood. ,

The horse, which is the subject of the religious ceremony
~ called ASwaméd’ha, is also avowedly an emblem of Virdj,
or the primeval and universal manifested being. In the
last section of the Taittiriya Yajurvéda, the various parts
of the horse’s body are described, as divisions of time and
portions of the universe: ‘ morning is his head; the sun,
his eye; air, his breath; the moon, his ear; &c.’ A similar
passage in the fourteenth book of the Satapat’ha brahmana
describes the same allegorical horse, for the meditation of
such as cannot perform an Aswaméd’ha; and the assem-
blage of living animals, constituting an imaginary victim,
at a real ASwaméd’ha, equally represents the universal
being, according to the doctrines of the Indian scripture.
It is not, however, certain, whether this ceremony did not
also give occasion to the institution of another, apparently
not authorised by the Védas, in which a horse was actually
sacrificed.

The Vrihad Granyaca, which constitutes the fourteenth
book of the Satapat’ha brahmana, is the conclusion of
the Vajasanéyi, or white Yajush. It consists of seven:
chapters or eight lectures: and the five last lectures in one
arrangement, corresponding with the six last lectures in
the other, form a theological treatise entitled the Vrihad
Upanishad, or Vajasanéyt brahmana upanishad, but
more commonly cited as the Vrihad aranyaca.* The


* Besides three copies of the text, and two transcripts of Sancara’s
commentary, I have, also in duplicate, another very excellent com-
mentary by Niryinanp’ 4Srama, which is entitled Mitacshara; and
a metrical paraphrase of Sancara’s gloss by SurfSwar’<cnirya,
as well as annotations in prose by ANANDA GiRi.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 63


greatest part of it is in dialogue, and YAJNYAWALCYA
is the principal speaker. As an Upanishad, it properly
belongs to the Canwa Sac’ha: at least, it is so cited by
_ VipyAraNya, in his paraphrase of Upanishads before-
mentioned. There does not, however, appear to be any
material variation in it, as received by the Mad’hyandina
school: unless in the divisions of chapters and sections,
and im the lists of successive teachers by whom it was
handed down.*

_ To convey some notion of the scope and style of this
Upanishad, 1 shall here briefly indicate some of the most
remarkable passages, and chiefly those which have been
paraphrased by VinyAraNnya. A few others have been
already cited, and the following appears likewise to deserve
notice.

Towards the beginning of the Vrihad aranyaca, a
passage, concerning the origin of fire hallowed for an
Aswaméd@ ha, opens thus: ‘ Nothing existed in this world
before [the production of mind]: this universe was encircled
by death eager to devour; for death is the devourer. He
framed mind, being desirous of himself becoming endued
with a soul.’

_ Here the commentators explain death to be the intellec-
tual being who sprung from the golden mundane egg: and
the passage before cited from the Rigvéda,+ where the
primeval existence of death is denied, may be easily recon-
ciled with this, upon the Indian ideas of the periodical
destruction and renovation of the world, and finally of all
beings but the supreme one.

The first selection by VinyARANYA from this Upanishad,
is the fourth article (brahmaza) of, the third lecture of the


. This is the Upanishad to which Sir W1u114M Jones refers, in his
preface to the translation of the Institutes of Menu, p. viii. (in Sir
G. C. Hauenrton’s edition, p. xi.) + Page 33.


64 ON THE VEDAS, OR


Vrihad aranyaca. It is descriptive of VirAs, and begins
thus :

‘ This [variety of forms] was, before [the production of
body], soul, bearing a human shape. Next, looking
around, that [primeval being] saw nothing but himself;
and he, first, said “I am I.” Therefore, his name was
“T:” and thence, even now, when called, [a man] first
answers “ it is I,” and then declares any other name which
appertains to him.

“ Since he, being anterior to all this [which seeks supre-


macy], did consume by fire all sinful [obstacles to his own


supremacy], therefore does the man who knows this [truth],
overcome him who seeks to be before him.

‘He felt dread ; and therefore, man fears when alin
But he reflected, “ Since nothing exists besides myself,
why should I fear?” Thus his terror departed from him ;
for what should he dread, since fear must be of another ?

“He felt not delight; and therefore, man delights not
when alone. He wished [the existence of] another; and
instantly he became such as is man and woman in mutual
embrace. He caused this his own self, to fall in twain;
and thus became a husband and a wife. Therefore was
this [body, so separated], as it were an imperfect moiety of
himself: for so YAJNYAWALCYA has pronounced it. This
blank, therefore, is completed by woman. He approached
her; and thence were human beings produced,

“ She reflected, doubtingly; “ how can he, having pro-
duced me from himself, [incestyously] approach me? I will
now assume a disguise:” She became a cow;,and the
other became a bull, and approached her; and the issue
were kine. She was changed into a mare, and he into a
stallion; one was turned into a female ass, and the other
into a male one: thus did he again approach her; and the
one-hoofed kind was the offspring. She became a female


~


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 65


goat, and he a male one; she was an ewe, and he a ram:
thus he approached her; and goats and sheep were the
progeny. In this manner did he create every existing pair
whatsoever, even to the ants [and minutest insects].’

The sequel of this passage is also curious, but is too long
to be here inserted. The notion of VirAys dividing his own
substance into male and female, occurs in more than one


Purdia. So does that of an incestuous marriage and inter-


course of the first Menu with his daughter SararGpA;
and the commentators on the Upanishad understand that
legend to be alluded to in this place. But the institutes
ascribed to Menu make VirAs to be the issue of such a
separation of persons, and Menv himself to be his off-
spring.* There is, indeed, as the reader may observe from
the passages cited in the present essay, much disagreement
and consequent confusion, in the gradation of persons inter-
posed by Hindu theology between the Supreme Being and
the created world.

The author of the paraphrase before-mentioned has next
selected three dialogues from the fourth lecture or chapter
of the Vrihad aranyaca. In the first, which begins the
chapter and occupies three articles (bra4hmazias), a conceited
and loquacious priest, named BAtAct (from his mother


_ BatAcaA), and GArecya (from his ancestor GarGa), visits


AsATaSatrv, king of Casi, and offers to communicate to
him the knowledge of Gop. The king bestows on him a
liberal recompense for the offer ; and the priest unfolds his
doctrine, saying he worships, or recognises, as Gop, the


- being who is manifest in the sun; him, who is apparent in


lightning; in the etherial elements, in air, in fire, in water,
in a mirror, in the regions of space, in shade, and in the
soul itself. The king, who was, as it appears, a well


* See Sir W. Jones’s translation of Menu, Ch. |, v. 32 and 33.
VOL. I. F


66 ON THE VEDAS, OR


instructed theologian, refutes these several notions succes-
sively ; and finding the priest remain silent, asks, “is that
all you have to say?” GAreya replies, “ that is all.”
Then, says the king, “ that is not sufficient for the know-
ledge of God.” Hearing this, GArGyA proposes to become
his pupil. The king replies, “ It would reverse established
order, were a priest to attend a soldier in expectation of
religious instruction: but I will suggest the knowledge to
you.” He takes him by the hand, and rising, conducts
him to a place where a man was sleeping. He calls the
sleeper by various appellations suitable to the priest’s
doctrine, but without succeeding in awakening him: he
then rouses the sleeper by stirrmg him; and afterwards,
addressing the priest, asks, “ While that man was thus
asleep, where was his soul, which consists in intellect? and
whence came that soul when he was awakened?” GAreya
could not solve the question: and the king then proceeds
to explain the nature of soul and mind, according to the
received notions of the Védanta. As it is not the purpose
of this essay to consider those doctrines, I shall not here
insert the remainder of the dialogue.

The next, occupying a single article, is a conversation
between YAJNYAWALCYA and his wife, Mairrtéyi. He
announces to her his intention of retiring from the civil
world, requests her consent, and proposes to divide his
effects between her and his second wife, CAtyAyANi. She
asks, “ Should I become immortal, if this whole earth, full
of riches, were mine?” “ No,” replies YAINYAWALCYA,
“riches serve for the means of living, but immortality is
not attained through wealth.” Mairréyi declares she has
no use, then, for that by which she may not become im-
mortal; and solicits from her husband the communication of
the knowledge which he possesses, on the means by which
beatitude may be attained. YAsJNYAWALCYA answers,


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 67


“ Dear wert thou to me, and a pleasing [sentiment] dost
thou make known: come, sit down ; I will expound [that
doctrine] ; do thou endeavour to comprehend it.” A dis-
course follows, in which YAsNyAWwAtcya elucidates the
notion, that abstraction procures immortality ; because affec-
tions are relative to the soul, which should therefore be
contemplated and considered in all objects, since every thing
is soul ; for all general and particular notions are ultimately
resolvable into one, whence all proceed, and in which all
merge ; and that is identified with the supreme soul, through
the knowledge of which beatitude may be attained.

I shall select, as a specimen of the reasoning in this
dialogue, a passage which is material on a different ac-
count ; as it contains an enumeration of the Védas, and of
the various sorts of passages which they comprise, and
tends to confirm some observations hazarded at the begin-
ning of this essay.

‘As smoke, and various substances, separately issue
from fire lighted with moist wood, so from this great being
were respired the Rigvéda, the Yajurvéda, the Samavéda,
and the At’harvan and Angiras ; the Itihasaand Purdsa,
the sciences and Upanishads, the verses and aphorisms, the
expositions and illustrations, all these were breathed forth
by him.’

The commentators remark, that four sorts of prayers
(mantra) and eight sorts of precepts (brahmaria) are here
stated. The fourth description of prayers comprehends such
as were revealed to, or discovered by, At’HaARVAN and
Anorras: meaning the At’harvaria véda. The Itihasa
designates such passages in the second part of the Védas
entitled Brahmana, as narrate a story: for instance, that
of the nymph UrvaSi and the king Purtravas. The
Purdna intends those which relate to the creation and
F 2


68 ON THE VEDAS, OR


similar topics. “‘ Sciences” are meant of religious wor-
ship: “‘ Verses” are memorial lines: “‘ Aphorisms” are
short sentences in a concise style: “ Expositions” interpret
such sentences ; and “ Illustrations” elucidate the meaning
of the prayers.

It may not be superfluous to observe in this place, that
the Itihasa and Puranas, here meant, are not the mytho-
logical poems bearing the same title, but certain passages
of the Indian scriptures, which are interspersed among
others, throughout that part of the Védas called Brah-
mana, and instances of which occur in more than one quo-
tation in the present essay.

The dialogue between YAJNyAwALcya and Mairrfyi,
above-mentioned, is repeated towards the close of the sixth
lecture, with a short and immaterial addition to its intro-
duction. In this place it is succeeded by a discourse on


the unity of the soul ; said, towards the conclusion, to have _
been addressed to the two Aswins, by Dap’nyacu, a de- -


scendant of AT’HARVAN.

The fourth lecture ends with a list of the teachers, by
whom that and the three preceding lectures were handed
down, in succession, to PaurimAsuya. It begins with
him, and ascends, through forty steps, to AyAsya ; or,
with two more intervening persons, to the ASwins; and
from them, to Dapv’Hyacu, AT’HARVAN, and Mriryu,
or death; and, through other gradations of spirits, to
VirAs; and finally to Braume. The same list occurs
again at the end of the sixth lecture; and similar lists are
found in the corresponding places of this Upanishad, as
arranged for the Mad’hyandina Sac’ha. The succession is
there traced upwards, from the reciter of it, who speaks of
himself in the first person, and from his immediate teacher
SauryanaAyya, to the same original revelation, through


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 69


nearly the same number of gradations. The difference
is almost entirely confined to the first ten or twelve
names.*

The fifth and sixth lectures of this Upanishad have been
paraphrased, like the fourth, by the author beforemen-
tioned. They consist of dialogues, in which YAsnya-
wAtcya is the chief discourser.

“Janaca, a king paramount, or emperor of the race of
Vidéhas, was celebrating at great expense, a solemn sacri-
fice, at which the Brahmaras of Curu and Panchdla were
assembled; and the king, being desirous of ascertaining
which of those priests was the most learned and eloquent
theologian, ordered a thousand cows to be made fast in his
stables, and their horns to be gilt with a prescribed quan-
tity of gold. He then addressed the priests, “‘ whoever,
among you, O venerable Brahmaras, is most skilled in
theology, may take the cows.” The rest presumed not to
touch the cattle; but YAynyawaucya bade his pupil
SAmaSravas drive them to his home. He did so; and
the priests were indignant that he should thus arrogate to
himself superiority. ASwa1a, who was the king’s officiating
priest, asked him, “ Art thou, O YAynyAwaucya! more
skilled in theology than we are?” He replied, “ I bow to

' the most learned; but I was desirous of possessing the
cattle.”


*I donot find Vyisa mentioned in either list ; nor can the surname
Pérdarya, which occurs more than once, be applied to him, for it is
not his patronymic, but a name deduced from the feminine patronymic
PiéréSari. It seems therefore questionable, whether any inference
respecting the age of the Védas can be drawn from these lists, in the
manner proposed by the late Sir W. Jones in his preface to the
translation of Menu (p. viii). The anachronisms which I observe
in them, deter me from a similar attempt to deduce the age of this
Veda from these and other lists, which will be noticed further on.


70 ON THE VEDAS, OR


This introduction is followed by a long dialogue, or
rather by a succession of dialogues, in which six other rival
priests (besides a learned female, named GArgi, the
daughter of Vacuacru) take part as antagonists of YAs-
NYAWALCYA; proposing questions to him, which he an-
swers ; and, by refuting their objections, silences them
successively. Each dialogue fills a single article (6rah-
mana); but the controversy is maintained by GArci in
two separate discussions ; and the contest between YAJ-
NYAWALCYA and VipAGD’HA, surnamedSAcALya, in the
ninth or last article of the fifth lecture, concludes in a sin-
gular manner.

YAJNYAWALCYA proposes to his adversary an abstruse.
question, and declares, “ If thou dost not explain this unto.
me, thy head shall drop off.” ‘ SAcaxya (proceeds the
text) could not explain it, and his head did fall off ; and
robbers stole his bones, mistaking them for some othe
thing.’

YAsnyawatcya then asks the rest of his antagonists,
whether they have any question to propose, or are desirous
that he should propose any. They remain silent, and he
addresses them as follows :

“Man is indeed like a lofty tree: his hairs are the
leaves, and his skin the cuticle. From his skin flows
blood, like juice from bark ; it issues from his wounded
person, as juice from a stricken tree. His flesh is the
inner bark ; and the membrane, near the bones, is the white
substance of the wood.* The bones within are the wood
itself, and marrow and pith arealike. If then a felled tree
spring anew from the root, from what root does mortal man
grow again when hewn down by death? Do not say, from
prolific seed ; for that is produced from the living person.


* Snava and Cindta, answering to the periostewm and alburnum.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 71


Thus, a tree, indeed, also springs from seed ; and likewise
sprouts afresh [from the root] after [seemingly] dying ; but,
if the tree be torn up by the root, it doth not grow again.
From what root, then, does mortal man rise afresh, when
hewn down by death? [Do you answer] He was born
[once for all]? No; he is born [again]: and [I ask you]
what is it that produces him anew ?”

The priests, thus interrogated, observes the commentator,
and being unacquainted with the first cause, yielded the
victory to YAsnyawatcya. Accordingly, the text adds a
brief indication of the first cause as intended by that ques-
tion. ‘ Braume, who is intellect with [the unvaried per-
ception of] felicity; is the best path [to happiness] for the
generous votary, who knows him, and remains fixed {in
attention].’
The sixth lecture comprises two dialogues between Y AJ-
NYAWALcYA and the king JaANnaca, in which the saint
communicates religious instruction to the monarch, after
inquiring from him the doctrines which had been previously
taught to the king by divers priests.

These are followed by a repetition of the dialogue between
YAsnyawatcya and his wife Marrréyi, with scarcely a
variation of a single word, except the introduction as above-
mentioned. The sixth lecture concludes with repeating
the list of teachers, by whom, successively, this part of
the Véda was taught.

Concerning the remainder of the Vrihad aranyaca 1
shall only observe, that it is terminated by a list of
teachers, in which the tradition of it is traced back from
the son of PaurimAsui, through forty steps, to YAJNya-
WALCYA; and from him, through twelve more, to the sun.
In copies belonging to the Mad’hyandina Sacha the list
is-varied, interposing more gradations, with considerable
difference in the names, from the reciter who speaks in the


72 ON THE VEDAS, OR


first person, and his teacher, the son of BHARADWA4Ji, up
to YAsnyawatcya, beyond whom both lists agree.

The copy belonging to the Cériwa Sée’ha subjoins a
further list, stated by the commentators to be common to
all the Sac’has of the Véjin, or Vajasanéyi Yajurvéda, and
to be intended for the tracing of that Véda up to its original
revelation. It begins from the son of SanJivi, who was
fifth, descending from YAJNYAWALCYA, in the lists above-
mentioned ; and it ascends by ten steps, without any men-
tion of that saint, to Tura, surnamed CAvasufya, who
had the revelation from PrasAparti, and he from BRAHME.

Before I proceed to the other Yajurvéda, I think it ne-
cessary to remark, that the Indian saint last-mentioned
(Tura, son of Cavasua) has been named in a former quo-
tation from the Aitaréyu, as the priest who consecrated
Janamésaya, son of Paricsnit. It might, at the first
glance, be hence concluded, that he was contemporary with
the celebrated king who is stated in Hindu history to have.
reigned at the beginning of the Cali age. But, besides
the constant uncertainty respecting Indian saints, who
appear and re-appear in heroic history at periods most
remote, there is in this, as in many other instances of the
names of princes, a source of confusion and possible error,
from the recurrence of the same name, with the addition
even of the same patronymic, for princes remote from each
other. Thus, according to Puranas, Paricsuit, third
son of Curu, had a son named JANAM£JAYA; and he
may be the person here meant, rather than one of the same
name, who was the great grandson of ARJUNA.


On the Buack YAJURVEDA. )


Tue Taittiriya, or black Yajush, is more copious (I
mean in regard to mantras) than the white Yajush, but


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 73


less so than the Rigvéda, Its Sanhita, or collection of
prayers, is arranged in seven books (ashtaca or cénda),
containing from five to eight lectures, or chapters (ad’hydaya,
prasna, or prapataca). Each chapter, or lecture, is sub-
divided into sections (anuvaca), which are equally distri-
buted in the third and sixth books, but unequally in the
rest. The whole number exceeds six hundred and fifty.

Another mode of division, by candas, is stated in the
index. In this arrangement, each book (cézida) relates to
a separate subject; and the chapters (prasna) comprehended
in it are enumerated and described. Besides this, in the
Sanhita itself, the texts contained in every section are num-
bered, and so are the syllables in each text.

The first section (anuvaca) in this collection of prayers,
corresponds with the first section (cardica) in the white
Yajush,* but all the rest differ, and so does the arrange-
ment of the subjects. Many of the topics are indeed alike
inboth Védas, but differently placed and differently treated.
Thus the ceremony called Réjaséya occupies one canda,
corresponding with the eighth praéna of the first book
(ashtaca), and is preceded by two ca/das, relative to the
Véjapéya and to the mode of its celebration, which occupy
fourteen sections in the preceding prasna. Consecrated fire
is the subject of four cardas, which fill the fourth and fifth
books. Sacrifice (ad’hwara) is noticed in the second and
third lectures of the first book, and in several lectures of
the sixth. The subject is continued in the seventh and last
book, which treats largely on the Jyétishtéma, including
the forms of preparing and drinking the juice of the acid
Asclepias. The Aswaméd’ha, Nriméd’ha, and Pitriméd ha,


* Translated in the first Essay on the Religious Ceremonies of the
Hindus, with the first verse in each of the three other Vedas. Asiatic
Researches, vol. y. p. 364.


74 ON THE VEDAS, OR


are severally treated of in their places ; that is, in the col-
lection of prayers,* and in the second part of this Véda.
Other topics, introduced in different places, are numerous ;
but it would be tedious to specify them at large.

Among the Rishis of the texts I observe no human au-
thors. Nine entire cazdas, according to the second arrange-
ment indicated by the index, appear to be ascribed to
PrasApati, or the lord of creatures ; as many to S6ma,
or the moon; seven to AGNI, or fire; and sixteen to all
the gods. Possibly some passages may be allotted by the
commentators to their real authors, though not pointed out
by the index for the Atréyt Sac’ha.

Several prayers from this Véda have been translated in
former essays.+ Other very remarkable passages have
occurred, on examining this collection of mantras.t The
following, from the seventh and last book,§ is chosen as a
specimen of the Taittiriya Yajurvéda. Like several before-
cited, it alludes to the Indian notions of the creation ; and,
at the risk of sameness, I select passages relative to that
topic, on account of its importance in explaining the creed
of the ancient Hindu religion. The present extract was
recommended for selection by its allusion to a mythological
notion, which apparently gave origin to the story of the
Varaha-avatara, and from which an astronomical period,
entitled Calpa, has perhaps been taken.||


* The prayers of the ASwamé@ha occur in the concluding sections,
between the twelfth section of the fourth chapter, and the end of the
fifth chapter of the seventh and last book.

+ Asiatic Researches, vols. v. and vii.

¢ I have several complete copies of the text, but only a part of
the commentary by Sivafa.

§ Book vii, Chapter 1, Section 5.

|| One of the Calpas, or renovations of the universe, is denomi-
nated Varaha.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs, 75


_ ‘Waters [alone] there were; this world originally was
water. In it the lord of creation moved, having become
air: he saw this.[earth] ; and upheld it, assuming the form
of a boar (varaha): and then moulded that [earth], becom-
ing ViSwacarMAN, the artificer of the universe. It be-
came celebrated (aprat’hata) and conspicuous (prié’hiv?) ;
and therefore is that name (Prithivi) assigned to the earth.

“ The lord of creation meditated profoundly on the earth;
and created the gods, the Vasus, Rudras, and Adityas.
Those gods addressed the lord of creation, saying, “ How
can we form creatures?” He replied, “ As I created you
by profound contemplation (tapas), so do you seek in devo-
tion (¢apas) the means of multiplying creatures.” He gave
them consecrated fire, saying, “ With this sacrificial fire
perform devotions.” With it they did perform austerities ;
and, in one year, framed a single cow. He gave her to the
Vasus, to the Rudras, and to the Adityas, [successively],
bidding them “ Guard her.” The Vasus, the Rudras, and
the Adityas, [severally] guarded her ; and she calved, for
the Vasus three hundred and thirty-three [calves] ; and [as
many] for the Rudras; and [the same number] for the
Adityas : thus was she the thousandth.

‘ They addressed the lord of creation, requesting him to
direct them in performing a solemn act of religion with a
thousand [kine for a gratuity]. He caused the Vasus to
sacrifice with the Agnishtéma; and they conquered this
world, and gave it [to the priests]: he caused the Rudras
to sacrifice with the Uct’hya ; and they obtained the middle
region, and gave it away [for a sacrificial fee]: he caused
the Adityas to sacrifice with the Atirétra; and they ac-
quired that [other] world, and gave it [to the priests for a
gratuity ].’

This extract may suffice. Its close, and the remainder
_ of the section, bear allusion to certain religious ceremonies,


76 ON THE VEDAS, OR


at which a thousand cows must be given to the officiating
priests.

To the second part of this Véda* belongs an Araiya,
divided, like the Sanhita, into lectures (prasna), and again
subdivided into chapters (anuvaca), containing texts, or sec-
tions, which are numbered, and in which the syllables
have been counted. Here also a division by caztdas, accord-
ing to the different subjects, prevails. The six first lectures,
and their corresponding cévidas; relate to religious obser-
vances. The two next constitute three Upanishads ; or, as
they are usually cited, two; one of which is commonly
entitled the Taittirtyaca Upanishad : the other is called
the Narayana, or, to distinguish it from another belong-
ing exclusively to the A?’harvavéda, the great (Maha, or
Vrihan) Narayana. They are all admitted in collections
of theological treatises appendant on the Atharvana ; but
the last-mentioned is there subdivided into two Upanishads.

For a further specimen of this Yajurvéda, I shall only
quote the opening of the third and last chapter of the
Varuni, or second Taittirtyaca Upanishad, with the intro-
ductory chapter of the first.+

‘ Buricu, the offspring of YaruNa, approached his
father, saying, “ Venerable [father]! make known to me
Brahme.” VanvXa propounded these: namely, food [or
body], truth [or life], sight, hearing, mind [or thought], and
speech: and thus proceeded, “‘ That whence all beings are


* The Taittiriya, like other Védas, has its brahmaha, and frequent
quotations from it occur in the commentary on the prayers, and in
other places. But I have not yet seen a complete copy of this por-
tion of the Indian sacred books.

+ I use several copies of the entire Arafya, with Sancara’s
commentary on the Taittiriya Upanishad, and annotations on his gloss
by AnanpasnyAna; besides separate copies of that, and of the
Mahdnérdyaha, and a commentary on the Varuni Upanishad, entitled
Laghu dipica.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 77


produced, that by which they live when born, that towards
which they tend, and that into which they pass, do thou
seek, [for] that is Brahme.”

‘He meditated [in] devout contemplation; and having
thought profoundly, he recognised food [or body] to be
Brahme: for all beings are indeed produced from food ;
when born, they live by food ; towards food they tend;
they pass into food. This he comprehended ; [but. yet
unsatisfied] he again approached his father VaruNa, say-
ing, “ Venerable [father] make known to me Brahme.”
VaruNa replied, “ Seek the knowledge of Brahme by
devout meditation : Brahme is profound contemplation.”

‘Having deeply meditated, he discovered breath [or
life] to be Brahme ; for all these beings are indeed pro- .
duced from breath ; when born, they live by breath ; to-
wards breath they tend ; they pass into breath. This he
understood: [but] again he approached his father VaruNa,
saying, ‘‘ Venerable [father]! make known to me Brahme.”
Varuna replied, “ Seek him by profound meditation :
Brahme is that.”

“He meditated in deep contemplation, and discovered
intellect to be Brahme: for all these beings are indeed
produced from intellect : when born, they live by intellect ;
towards intellect they tend; and they pass into intellect.
This he understood: [but] again he came to his father
Varuna, saying, “ Venerable [father], make known to
me Brahme.” VanrvXa replied, “ Inquire by devout con-
templation : profound meditation is Brahme.”

‘He thought deeply ; and having thus meditated [with]
devout contemplation, he knew Ananda [or felicity] to be
Brahme: for all these beings are indeed produced from
pleasure ; when born, they live by joy ; they tend towards
happiness ; they pass into felicity.

“Such is the science which was attained by Buricu,


78 ON THE VEDAS, OR


taught by Varuna, and founded on the supreme etherial
spirit. He who knows this, rests on the same support, is
endowed with [abundant] food, and becomes [a blazing fire]
which consumes food: great he is by progeny, by cattle,
and by holy perfections, and great by propitious celebrity.’

The above is the beginning of the last chapter of the
Véruni Upanishad. 1 omit the remainder of it... The first
Taittirtyaca Upanishad opens with the following prayer.
“ May Mirra [who presides over the day], Varuna [who
governs the night], Aryaman [or the regent of the sun
and of sight], Inpra [who gives strength], VriHaspati
[who rules the speech and understanding], and VisuNu,
whose step is vast, grant us ease. [I] bow to Brahme.
Salutation unto thee, O air! Even thou art Brahme, pre-
sent [to our apprehension]. Thee I will call, “ present
Brahme :” thee I will name, “ the right one :” thee I will
pronounce, “ the true one.” May raat [Brahme, the
universal being entitled air], preserve me; may that pre-
serve the teacher: propitious be it.*


On other Upanisuans of the Yasurviipa.


Among the Sac’hds of the Yajurvéda, one, entitled
Maitrayani, furnishes an Upanishad which bears the
same denomination. An abridged paraphrase of it, in
verse,+ shows it to be a dialogue in which a sage, named
SAcAYANA, communicates to the king, VrinapRat’HA,
theological knowledge derived from another sage, called
Mairra.


* I have inserted here, as in other places, between crotchets, such
illustrations from the commentary as appear requisite to render the
text intelligible.


+ By Vipvinagya, I have not seen the original.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 79


A different Sac’ha of this Véda, entitled the Cat’ha, or
Cat’haca, furnishes an Upanishad bearing that name, and
which is one of those most frequently cited by writers on
the Védanta. It is an extract from a Brahmana, and also
oceurs in collections of Upanishads, appertaining to the
Atharvana.

SwérASwarara, who has given his name to one more
Sac’ha of the Yajurvéda, from which an Upanishad is ex-
tracted,* is introduced in it as teaching theology. This
Upanishad, comprised in six chapters or lectures (ad’ hydya),
is found in collections of theological tracts appertaining to
the At’harvavéda ; but, strictly, it appears to belong ex-
clusively to the Yajush.


On the SAMAVEDA.


ak. peculiar degree of holiness seems to be attached,
according to Indian notions, to the Samavéda ; if reliance
may be placed on the inference suggested by the etymo-
logy of its name, which indicates, according to the deriva-
tion} usually assigned to it, the efficacy of this part of the
Védas in removing sin. The prayers belonging to it are,
as before observed, composed in metre, and intended to be
chanted, and their supposed efficacy is apparently ascribed
to this mode of uttering them.

Not having yet obtained a complete copy of this Véda,
or of any commentary on it, I can only describe it imper-
fectly, from such fragments as I have been able to collect.

A principal, if not the first, part of the Samavéda is that


* In the abridgment of it by Vinyirafyva, this is the description
given of the SwétdSwatara Upanishad.

+ From the root shé, convertible into sé and sd, and signifying ‘ to
destroy.’ The derivative is expounded as denoting something ‘ which
destroys sin.”


80 ON THE VEDAS, OR


entitled Archica. It comprises prayers, among which I
observe many that constantly recur in rituals of Samavédiya,
or Ch’handéga priests, and some of which have been
translated in former essays.* They are here arranged, as
appears from two copies of the Archica,+ in six chapters
(prapétaca) subdivided into half chapters, and into sections
(dasati); ten in each chapter, and usually containing the
exact number of ten verses each. The same collection of
prayers, in the same order, but prepared for chanting, is
distributed in seventeen chapters, under the title of the
Grémagéya gana. That, at least, is its title in the only
copy which I have seen. But rituals, directing the same
prayers to be chanted, employ the designation of Archica
gana, among other terms applicable to various modes of
rhythmical recitation.

Another portion of the Samavéda, arranged for chanting,
bears the title of Araya gana. Three copies of it,{ which
seem to agree exactly, exhibit the same distribution into
three chapters, which are subdivided into half chapters and
decades or sections, like the Archica above-mentioned.§

But I have not yet found a plain copy of it, divested of the
- additions made for guidance in chanting it.

The additions here alluded to consist in prolonging the
sounds of vowels, and resolving diphthongs into two or
more syllables, inserting likewise, in many places, other
additional syllables, besides placing numerical marks for
the management of the voice. Some of the prayers being


* Asiatic Researches, vols. v. and vii.


+ One of them dated nearly two centuries ago, in 1672 Samvat.
This copy exhibits the further title of Ch’handasi Sanhita.

t The most ancient of those in my possession is dated nearly —
centuries ago, in 1587 Samvat.


§ This Arahya comprises nearly three hundred verses (séman), or
exactly 290, The Archica contains twiee as many, or nearly 600.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 81


subject to variation in the mode of chanting them, are


repeated once or oftener, for the purpose of showing these


differences, and to most are prefixed the appropriate names
of the several passages.

Under the title of Arshaya Bréhmata, I have found
what seems to be an index of these two portions of the
Samavéda : for the names of the passages, or sometimes
the initial words, are there enamerated in the same order
in which they occur in the Grama géya, or Archica, fol-
lowed by the Arartya gana. This index does not, like the
explanatory tables of the other Védas, specify the metre of
each prayer, the deity addressed in it, and the occasion on
which it should be used, but only the Rishi, or author :
and, from the variety of names stated in some instances, a
conclusion may be drawn, that the same texts are ascrib-
able to more than one author.

It has been already hinted, that the modes of chanting
the same prayers are various, and bear different appella-
tions. Thus, the rituals frequently direct certain texts of
this Véda to be first recited simply, in a low voice accord-
ing to the usual mode of inaudible utterance of the Védas,
and then to be similarly chanted in a particular manner,
under the designation of Archica gana ; showing, however,
divers variations and exceptions from that mode, under
the distinct appellation of Aniructa gana,* So, likewise,
or nearly the same passages, which are contained in the
Archica and Gramagéya, are arranged in a different order,
_ with further variations as to the mode of chanting them, in
another collection named the Uha gana.

From the comparison and examination of these parts of
the Samavéda, in which, so far as the collation of them has


* The ritual, which is the chief authority for this remark, is one by
SivaSicuiryva, entitled Yajnyatantra Sud’ hanid hi,
VOL, I. G


82 ON THE VEDAS, OR


‘been carried, the texts appear to be the same, only arranged
in a different order, and marked for a different mode of
recitation, I am led to think, that other collections, under
similar names,* may not differ more widely from the
Archica and Araya above-mentioned: and that these
may possibly constitute the whole of that part of the
Samavéda, which corresponds to the Sanhitas of other
Védas.

Under the denomination of Brahmana, which is appro-
priated to the second part or supplement of the Véda,
various works have been received by different schools of
the Samavéda. Four appear to be extant ; three of which
have been seen by me, either complete or in part. One
is denominated Shadvinsa; probably from its containing
twenty-six chapters. Another is called Adbhita, or, at
greater length, Adbhita Brahmana. The only portion,
which I have yet seen, of either, has the appearance of a
fragment, and breaks off at the close of the fifth chapter:
both names are there introduced, owing, as it should seem,
to some error; and I shall not attempt to determine which
of them it really belongs to. A third Brahmana of this
Véda is termed Panchavinsa ; so named, probably, from
the number of twenty-five chapters comprised in it: and I
conjecture this to be the same with one in my possession
not designated by any particular title, but ccentaining that
precise number of chapters.

The best known among the Brahmanas of the Sama-
véda, is that entitled Térdya. It was expounded by


* Sir Rosert Cuamsers’s copy of the Sémavéda comprised four
portions, entitled Gana, the distinct names of which, according to the
list received from him, are Vigdna Arid, Végana, Ugana, and Uhya
gana. The first of these, I suspect to be the AraAya, written in that
list, Ava: the last seems to be the same with that which is in my
eopy denominated Uha gana.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs, 83


SAvyanAcnArya; but a fragment of the text with his
commentary, including the whole of the second book
(panjica), from the sixth to the tenth lecture, is all that I
have been yet able to procure. This fragment relates to
the religious ceremony named Agnishtéma. I do not find
in it, nor in other portions of the Samavéda before described,
any passage, which can be conveniently translated as a
specimen of the style of this Véda.

Leaving, then, the Mantras and Brahmanas of the
Samavéda, 1 proceed to notice its principal Upanishad,
which is one of the longest and most abstruse compositions
bearing that title.

The Ci’handégya Upanishad contains eight chapters
(prapdtacas), apparently extracted from some portion of
the Brahmana, in which they are numbered from three to
ten.* The first and second, not being included in the
Upanishad, probably relate to religious ceremonies. The
chapters are unequally subdivided into paragraphs or sec-
tions ; amounting, in all, to more than a hundred and fifty.

A great part of the Ch’handégya+ is in a didactic form :
including however, like most of the other Upanishads,
several dialogues. The beginning of one, between Sanat-
cumAra and NArepa, which occupies the whole of the
seventh chapter, { has already been quoted. The preced-
ing chapter consists of two dialogues between Sweéractru,
grandson of AruNa, and his own father, UppAxaca, the
son of Aruna. These had been prepared in the fifth


* I haye several copies of the text, with the gloss of Sancara,
and annotations on it by Ananpasnynacir1; besides the notes of
Vvisarirr’Ha on a commentary by Ananpatint’nA.

+ Its author, indicated by VyAsarint’Ha, is Havacriva

t That is, the seventh of the extract which constitutes this Upani:
shad; but the ninth, according to the mode of numbering the chapters
in the book, whence it is taken.

G2


84 ON THE VEDAS, OR


chapter, where PravAnaNna, son of JivaLa, convicts
Swéracéru of ignorance in theology: and where that
conversation is followed by several other dialogues, inter-
mixed with successive references for instruction. The fourth
chapter opens with a story respecting JANaSRuUTI, grand-
son of Purra; and, in this and the fifth chapter, dialogues,
between human beings, are interspersed with others in which
the interlocutors are either divine or imaginary persons, The
eighth or last chapter contains a disquisition on the soul, in
a conference between PrasApati and INpRA.

I shall here quote, from this Upanishad, a single dialogue
belonging to the fifth chapter.

‘ PrAcninaSAua, son of UpAMANYu, SATYAYAINYA,
issue of Putusna, INpRaApyUMNA offspring of Buat-
LAVI, JANA descendant of SarcarAcsuy a, and Vupina
sprung from ASwararASwa, being all persons deeply
conversant with holy writ, and possessed of great dwellings,
meeting together, engaged in this disquisition, ““ What is
our soul? and who is Brahme?”

“These venerable persons reflected, “ UppAxaca, the
son of ARUNA, is well acquainted with the universal soul :
let us immediately go to him.” They went: but he
reflected, “ These great and very learned persons will ask
me; and I shall not [be able] to communicate the whole
[which they inquire]: I will at once indicate to them
another [instructor].” He thus addressed them, “‘ ASwa-
PATI, the son of Cfécaya, is well acquainted with the
universal soul; let us now go to him.”

“€ They all went ; and, on their arrival, [the king] caused
due honours to be shown to them respectively ; and, next
morning, civilly dismissed them ; [but, observing that they
staid, and did not accept his presents,] he thus spoke:
“Tn my dominions, there is no robber; nor miser; no
drunkard ; nor any one neglectful of a consecrated hearth ;


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 85


“none ignorant ; and no adulterer, nor adulteress. Whence
[can you have been aggrieved)?” [As they did not state
a complaint, he thus proceeded :] “ I must be asked, O
venerable men! [for what you desire].” [Finding, that
_ they made no request, he went on:] “ As much as I shall
bestow on each officiating priest, so much will I also give
to you. Stay then, most reverend men.” They answered:
“Tt is indeed requisite to inform a person of the purpose
of a visit. Thou well knowest the universal soul; com-
municate that knowledge unto us.” He replied; “ To-
‘morrow I will declare it to you.” Perceiving his drift,
they, next day, attended him, bearing [like pupils] logs of
firewood. Without bowing to them, he thus spoke :—
“Whom dost thou worship as the soul, O son of
Upramanyu?” “ Heaven,” answered he, ‘ O venerable
king!” “ Splendid is that [portion of the] universal self,
which thou dost worship as the soul: therefore, in thy
family, is seen [the juice of the acid asclepias] drawn,
expressed, and prepared, [for religious rites]; thou dost
consume food [as a blazing fire]; and thou dost view a
[son or other] beloved object. Whoever worships this for
the universal soul, similarly enjoys food, contemplates a
beloved object, and finds religious occupations in his family.
But this is [omly] the head of the soul. Thy head had been
lost,” added the king, “ hadst thou not come to me.”
“ He now turned to SaryayasNyA, the sonof PuLusna,
saying, “ Whom dost thou worship as the soul, O descen-
dant of Pracuinayéca?” “ The sun,” answered he,
“O venerable king!” “‘ Varied is that [portion of the]
universal self, which thou dost worship as the soul; and,
therefore, in thy family, many various forms are seen; a
car yoked with mares, and treasure, together with female
‘slaves, surround thee ; thou dost consume food, and con-
‘template a pleasing object. Whoever worships this, for


86 ON THE VEDAS, OR


the universal soul, has the same enjoyments, and finds
religious occupations in his family. But this is only the
eye of soul. Thou hadst been blind,” said the king,
“ hadst thou not come to me.”

‘ He next addressed INpRaApYUMNA, the son of BHAL-
Lavi: “ Whom dost thou worship as tle soul, O descendant
of VyAcurapap.” “ Air,” replied he, “ O venerable
king!” “ Diffused is that portion of the universal self,
which thou dost worship as the soul; numerous offerings
reach thee; many tracts of cars follow thee: thou dost
consume food: thou viewest a favourite object. Whoever
worships this, for the universal soul, enjoys food and con-
templates a beloved object: and has religious occupations
in his family. But this is only the breath of soul. Thy
breath had expired,” said the king, “ hadst thou not come
to me.”

‘ He next interrogated Jana, the son of SarcarAcsaya:
“ Whom dost thou worship as the soul, O son of Sarca-
rAcsuya?” “ The etherial element,” said he, ‘O vene-
rable king!” “ Abundant is that universal self, whom
thou dost worship as the soul; and, therefore, thou likewise
dost abound with progeny and wealth. Thou dost consume
food ; thou viewest a favourite object. Whoever worships
this, for the universal soul, consumes food, and sees a
beloved object; and has religious occupations in his family.
But this is only the trunk of soul. Thy trunk had cor-
rupted,” said the king, “ hadst thou not come to me.”

* He afterwards inquired of Vupiia, the son of ASwa-
TARASwa: “ Whom dost thou worship as the soul, O
descendant of VyAcurapap?” “ Water,” said he “O
venerable king!” “ Rich is that universal self, whom thou
dost worship as the soul; and, therefore, art thou opulent
and thriving. Thou dost consume food; thou viewest a
favourite object. Whoever worships this, for the universal


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. - $7


soul, partakes of similar enjoyments, contemplates as dear
an object, and has religious occupations in his family. But
this is only the abdomen of the soul. Thy bladder had
burst,” said the king, “ hadst thou not come to me.”

_ “ Lastly, he interrogated UppAtaca, the son of AruNA.
“ Whom dost thou worship as the soul, O descendant of
Gérama?” “ The earth,” said he, “O venerable king!”
“ Constant is that universal self, whom thou dost worship
as the soul: and, therefore, thou remainest steady, with
offspring and with cattle. Thou dost consume food ; thou
viewest a favourite object. Whoever worships this, for the
universal soul, shares like enjoyments, and views as beloved
an object, and has religious occupations in his family. But
this forms only the feet of the soul. Thy feet had been
lame,” said the king, “ hadst thou not come to me.”

“ He thus addressed them [collectively]: “ You consider
this universal soul, as it were an individual being ; and you
partake of distinct enjoyment. But he, who worships, as
the universal soul, that which is known by its [manifested]
portions, and is inferred [from consciousness], enjoys nou-
rishment in all worlds, in all beings, in all souls: his head
is splendid, like that of this universal soul; his eye is
similarly varied ; his breath is equally diffused; his trunk
_ is no less abundant; his abdomen is alike full; and his feet
are the earth; his breast is the altar; his hair is the sacred
grass; his heart, the household fire; his mind, the conse-
crated flame; and his mouth, the oblation.

“ The food, which first reaches him, should be solemnly
offered: and the first oblation, which he makes, he should
present with these words: “ Be this oblation to breath
efficacious.” Thus breath is satisfied ; and, in that, the eye
is satiate; and, in the eye, the sun is content; and, in the
sun, the sky is gratified; and, in the sky, heaven and the
sun, and whatever is dependant, become replete: and after


88 ON THE VEDAS, OR


that, he himself {who eats] is fully gratified with offspring
and cattle ; with vigour proceeding from food, and splendour
arising from holy observances.*

“* But whoever makes an oblation to fire, being unac-
quainted with the universal soul, acts in the same manner,
as one who throws live coals into ashes: while he, who
presents an oblation, possessing that knowledge, has made’
an offering in all worlds, in all beings, in all souls. As the .
tip of dry grass, which is cast into the fire, readily kindles;
so are all the faults of that man consumed. He, who
knows this, has only presented an oblation to the universal
soul, even though he knowingly give the residue to a Chan-
dala. For, on this point, a text is [preserved]: “ As, in
this world, hungry infants press round their mother ; so do
all beings await the holy oblation: they await the holy
oblation.”

Another Upanishad of the Samavéda belongs to the
Séc’hé of the Talavacéras. It is called, the “ Cénéshita,”
or “ Céna” Upanishad, from the word, or words, with which
it opens: and, as appears from Sancara’s commentary,+
this treatise is the ninth chapter (ad’hydya) of the work,
from which it is extracted. It is comprised in four sections
(c’handa). The form is that of a dialogue between instruc-
tors and their pupils. The subject is, as in other Upanishads,
a disquisition on abstruse and mystical theology. I shall
not make any extract from it, but proceed to describe the
fourth and last Véda.


* Several similar paragraphs, respecting four other oblations, so
presented to other inspirations of air, are here omitted for the sake
of brevity. The taking of a mouthful, by an orthodox Hindu
theologian, is considered as an efficacious oblation: and denominated
Prahdgnihotra.

+I have Sancara’s gloss, with the illustrations of his annotator,
and the ample commentary of CrisuXinanva: besides a separate
gloss, with annotations, on the similar Upanishad belonging to the
At harvavida.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 89


On the Av’warva-vépa.

The Sanhité, or collection of prayers and invocations,
belonging to the Atharvarta, is comprised in twenty books
(cada), subdivided into sections (anuvéca), hymns (sicta),
and verses (rich). Another mode of division by chapters
{prapétaca) is also indicated. The number of verses is
stated at 6015; the sections exceed a hundred; and the


hymns amount to more than seven hundred and sixty. The


number of chapters is forty nearly.

A passage from this Véda was quoted by Sir W. Jones
in his essay on the literature of the Hindus ;* and a version
of it was given, as a specimen of the language and style of
the At’harvara. That passage comprises the whole of the
forty-third hymn of the nineteenth book.+ In the begin-
ning of the same book, I find a hymn (numbered as the
sixth) which is almost word for word the same with that,
which has been before cited from the thirty-first chapter of
the white Yajush.t Some of the verses are indeed trans-
posed, and here and there a word differs: for example, it
opens by describing the primeval man (purusha) with a
thousand arms, instead of a thousand heads. The purport
is, nevertheless, the same; and it is needless, therefore, to
insert a version of it in this place.

The next hymn, in the same book, includes an important
passage.. It names the twenty-eight asterisms in their


* Asiatic Researches, vol. i. p. 347.

+ Sir W. Jones cites it, as from the first book; I suspect, that, in
Colonel Pouier’s copy, the nineteenth book might stand first in the
volume. It does so, in General Marrine’s transcript, though the
colophon be correct. I have another, and very complete, copy of this
Vida. General MArrinn’s, which I also possess, is defective; con-
taining only the ten first and the two last books. An ancient fragment,
also in my possession, does not extend beyond the siach.


t Asiatic Researches, vol. vii. p. 251.


90 ON THE VEDAS, OR


order, beginning with Crittica: and seems to refer the
solstice to the end of Aslésha, or beginning of Magha. I
call it an important passage ; first, because it shows, that
the introduction of the twenty-eighth asterism is as ancient
as the Ad’harva-véda ; and, secondly, because it authorises
a presumption, that the whole of that Véda, like this parti-
cular hymn, may have been composed when the solstice
was reckoned in the middle, or at the end, of Aslésha,*
and the origin of the Zodiac was placed at the beginning of
Crittica. On the obvious conclusion, respecting the age
of the Véda, I shall enlarge in another place.

An incantation, which appears to be the same that is
mentioned by Sir W. Jones,+ occurs in the fourth section
of the nineteenth book. It is indeed a tremendous in-
cantation ; especially three séctas, or hymns, which are
numbered 28, 29, and 30. A single line will be a sufficient
specimen of these imprecations, in which, too, there is much
sameness.

‘ Destroy, O sacred grass, my foes; exterminate my
enemies; annihilate all those, who hate me, O precious
gem !’

The Atharva-véda, as is well known, contains many
forms of imprecation for the destruction of enemies. But
it must not be inferred, that such is the chief subject of
that Véda ; since it also contains a great number of prayers
for safety and for the averting of calamities: and, like the

other Védas, numerous hymns to the gods, with prayers to
be used at solemn rites and religious exercises, excepting
such as are named Yajnya.


* The middle of Asléshd, if the divisions be twenty-seven, and its
end, when they are twenty-eight equal portions, give the same place
for the colure.

+ Asiatic Researches, vol. i. p. 348.


{ Darbha, Poa Cynosuroides.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 91


_ The Gépath’a Brahmana appears to belong to the se-
cond part of this Véda. Not having seen a commentary,
nor an index, of this work, I can only speak of it from a
copy in my possession: this contains five chapters (prapa-
taca), with the date of the transcript* and name of the
transcriber, at the end of the fifth, as is usual.in the colo-
phon at the close of a volume.

_ The first chapter of this Gépat’ha Brahmana traces the
origin of the universe from Brahme ; and it appears from
the fourth section of this chapter, that AT’HARVAN is con-
sidered as a Prajapati appointed by Brahme to create and
protect subordinate beings.

__ In the fifth chapter, several remarkable passages, iden-
tifying the primeval person (purusha) with the year (samvat-
sara), convey marked allusions to the calendar. In one
place (the fifth section), besides stating the year to contain
twelve or thirteen lunar months, the subdivision of that
period is pursued to 360 days; and, thence, to 10,800 mu-
héirtas, or hours.

I proceed to notice the most remarkable part of the
Avtharva-véda, consisting of the theological treatises, en-
titled Upanishads, which are appendant on it. They are
computed at fifty-two: but this number is completed by
reckoning, as distinct Upanishads, different parts of a single
tract. Four such treatises, comprising eight Upanishads,
together with six of those before described as appertaining
to other Védas, are perpetually cited in dissertations on the
Védanta.* Others are either more sparingly, or not at all,
quoted.


* It is dated at Mathura, in the year (Samvat) 1732.

‘+ The Céna and Ch’handégya from the Sdémavida; the Vrihad
@rahyaca and fiavasya from the white Yajush, and the Tuittiriyaca
from the black Yajush ; the Aitaréya from the Rigvéda; and the
Catha, Prasna, Muhdaca, and Méhdicya from the Afharvaha. -To
these should be added, the Nrisinha tapaniya.


92 ON THE VEDAS, OR


It may be here proper to explain what is meant by
Upanishad. In dictionaries, this term is made equivalent
to Rehesya, which signifies mystery. This last term is, in
fact, frequently employed by Menu, and other ancient
authors, where the commentators understand Upanishads
to be meant. But neither the etymology, nor the accepta-
tion, of the word, which is now to be explained, has any
direct connexion with the idea of secrecy, concealment, or
mystery. Its proper meaning, according to Sancara,
SAyawna, and all the commentators, is divine science, or
the knowledge of Gop: and, according to the same autho- —
rities, it is equally applicable to theology itself, and to a
book in which this science is taught. Its derivation is
from the verb sad (shad-lri), to destroy, to move, or to
weary, preceded by the prepositions upa near, and ni con-
tinually, or nis certainly. The sense, properly deducible-
from this etymology, according to the different explanations _
given by commentators, invariably points to the know-
ledge of the divine perfections, and to the consequent
attainment of beatitude through exemption from passions.*

The whole of the Indian theology is professedly founded
on the Upanishads. Those, which have been before de-
scribed, have been shown to be extracts from the Véda.
The rest are also considered as appertaining to the Indian
scripture: it does not, however, clearly appear, whether
they are detached essays, or have been extracted from a
Brahmana of the Atharva-véda. I have not found any
of them in the Sanhita of the At’harvara, nor in the
Gépatha Brahmana.


* Sanoara, and Ananp<Srama on the Vrihad drafyaca; as also
the commentaries on other Upanishads: especially Sancara on the
Caé?haca. Other authors concur in assigning the same acceptation
and etymology, to the word: they vary, only, in the mode of recon-
ciling the derivation with the sense,


+ It is expressly so affirmed in the Védanta séra, v. 3.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 93


In the best copies of the fifty-two Upanishads,* the first
fifteen are stated to have been taken from the Saunactyas,
whose Séc’hé seems to be the principal one of the At’harva-
véda. The remaining thirty-seven appertain to various
Sée’hés, mostly to that of the Paippaladis : but some of
them, as will be shown, are borrowed from other Védas.

The Murdaca, divided into six sections unequally dis-
tributed in two parts, is the first Upanishad of the At’har-
vana; and is also one of the most important, for the doc-
trines which it contains. It has been fully illustrated by
Sancara, whose gloss is assisted by the annotations of
AwnanpasnyAna. The opening of this Upanishad, com-
prising the whole of the first section, is here subjoined.

‘BranmA was first of the gods, framer of the uni-
verse, guardian of the world. He taught the knowledge
of Gop, which is the foundation of all science; to his
eldest son At’HARVA. That holy science, which BraumA
revealed to At’HARVAN,}+ was communicated by him to
Aneir, who transmitted it to Saryavana, the descendant
of BuarapwAsa; and-this son of BHarapwAjsa im-
parted the traditional science to ANGIRAs.

*Saunaca, or the son of Sunaca, a mighty house-
holder, addressing ANciras with due respect, asked,
“What is it, O venerable sage, through which, when
known, this universe is understood ?”

’ “To him the holy personage thus replied : “ Two sorts


* I possess an excellent copy, which corresponds with one tran-
scribed for Mr. Buaquiers, from a similar collection of Upanishads
belonging to the late Sir W. Jones. In two other copies, which I
also obtained at Benares, the arrangement differs, and several Upa-
nishads are inserted, the genuineness of which is questionable ; while
others are admitted, which belong exclusively to the Yajurvéda.


+ Sawcara remarks, that Ar’HaRvA, or At’HARVAN, may have


been the first creature, in one of the many modes of creation, which
have been practised by Braumi.


94 ON THE VEDAS, OR


of science must be distinguished ; as they, who know Gon,
declare: the supreme science, and another. This other is
the Rigvéda, the Yajurvéda, the Samavéda, the At’harva-
véda ;* the rules of accentuation, the rites of religion,
grammar, the glossary and explanation of obscure terms,
prosody, and astronomy: also the Jtihasa and Puréna;
and logic, with the rules of interpretation, and the system
of moral duties.

“ But the supreme science is that, by which this unpe-
rishable [nature] is apprehended ; invisible [or impercep-
tible, as is that nature]: not to be seized; not to be de-
duced; devoid of colour; destitute of eyes and ears; with-
out hands or feet, yet ever variously pervading all : minute,
unalterable ; and contemplated by the wise for the source
of beings.

“ As the spider spins and gathers back [its thread]; as
plants sprout on the earth; as hairs grow on a living
person: so is this universe, here, produced from the unpe-
rishable nature. By contemplation, the vast one germi-
nates ; from him food [or body] is produced; and thence,
successively, breath, mind, real [elements], worlds, and
immortality arising from [good] deeds. The omniscient is
profound contemplation, consisting in the knowledge of
him, who knows all: and, from that, the [manifested] vast
one, as well as names, forms, and food, proceed: and this
is truth.” .

The Praéna, which is the second Upanishad, and equally
important with the first, consists, like it, of six sections ;
and has been similarly interpreted by Sancara and BAua-
crisuNna.} In this dialogue, Suc&sa, the son of Buarap-


* Meaning the prayers contained in the four Védas, disjoined from
theology.

+ I have several copies of the text, besides commentaries on both
Upanishads.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 95


wAsa, SatyacAma, descended from Stv1, SauryAyaxt,
a remote descendant of the Sun, but belonging to the family
of Ganrea, CavSauya, surnamed ASwatAyana, or son
of ASwata, Varparsnut of the race of Buricu, together
with CaBAND’H{, surnamed CAryAYANA, or descendant
of Carya, are introduced as seeking the knowledge of
theology, and applymg to PrrepaxApa for instruction.
They successively interrogate him concerning the origin of
creatures, the nature of the gods, the union of life with
body, and the connexion of thoughts with the soul.

The nine succeeding Upanishads (from the 3d to the
11th) are of inferior importance, and have been left unex-
plained by the writers on the Védanta, because they do
not directly relate to the Séréraca, or theological doctrine re-
specting the soul.* They are enumerated in the margin.+

The Mandicya follows, and consists of four parts, each
constituting a distinct Upanishad. This abstruse treatise,
comprising the most material doctrines of the Védanta, has
been elucidated by the labours of GaufarAna, and San-
cARA. GavbapApa’s commentary is assisted by the notes
of ANANDAGIRI.

Among the miscellaneous Upanishads, the first thirteen
(from the 16th to the 28th) have been left uncommented by
the principal expounders of the Védanta, for a reason before-
mentioned. The names of these Upanishads will be found
in the subjoined note.


* This reason is assigned by the annotator on Sanvana’s gloss, at
the beginning of his notes on the Mufdaca Upanishad.


+ 3d Brahme-vidya. 4th Cshurica. 5th Chilicéd. 6th and 7th
Atharva-Siras. 8th Garbha. 9th Mahé. 10th Brahma. 11th Pré-
hagnihotra.

t 16th Nila-rudra. 17th Néda-vindu. 18th Brahme-vindu. 19th
Amrita-vindu. 20th D'hyana-vindu. 2\st Téjo-vindu. 22d Yoga-
Siceshé. 234 Yoga-tatwa. 24th Sannydésa. 25th Arufiya or Aruni-
yoga. 26th Cah@hasruti. 27th Pihda. 28th Atméa.


we


96 ON THE VEDAS, OR


The following six from (from the 29th to the 34th,) con-
stitute the Wrisinha Tapaniya ; five of them compose the
Pirva Tépaniya, or first part of the Upanishad so called ;
and the last, and most important, is entitled Uttara
Tapaniya. It has been expounded by GauapApa, as
the first part (if not the whole Upanishad) has been by
Sancara.* The object of this treatise appears to be the
identifying of Nrisinua with all the gods: but, so far as I
comprehend its meaning (for I have not sufficiently examined
it to pronounce confidently on this point,) the fabulous incar-
nation of VisHNv, in the shape of a vast lion, does not seem
to be at all intended ; and the name of Nrisinua is applied
to the divinity, with a superlative import, but with no appa-
rent allusion to that fable.

The two next Upanishads constitute the first and second
parts of the Caéhaca, or Valli, or Cat’havalli (for the name
varies in different copies). It belongs properly to the Ya-

jurvéda, as before mentioned ; but it is usually cited from
the A’harvara ; and has been commented, as appertaining
to this Véda, by Sancara, and by BALacrisuna.t

It comprises six sections, severally entitled Valli; but
constituting two chapters (ad’hydya), denominated Pér-
va-valli and Uttara-valli. The dialogue is supported by
Mrityu, or death, and the prince Nacuic&kras, whom his
father, VAsASRAVASA, consigned to Yama, being provoked
by the boy’s importunately asking him, (through zeal, how-


* I have several copies of the text, and of Gaubapipa’s commen-
tary; with a single transcript of Sancanra’s gloss on the five first of
the treatises entitled Tapaniya.

+ The commentary of Sancaxa is, as usual, concise and perspi-
cuous; and that of B{racrisufa, copious but clear. Besides their
commentaries, and several copies of the text, together with a para-


phrase by Vipyfnafva, I have found this Upanishad forming a _


chapter in a Brahmaha, which is marked as belonging to the Sama-
véda, and which I conjecture to be the Panchavinsa Braéhmana of
that Véda.


i Oi it el


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 97


ever, for the success of a sacrifice performed to ensure uni-
versal conquest,) “ to whom wilt thou give me?” Yama
receives NAcuicétras with honour, and instructs him in
theology, by which beatitude and exemption from worldly
sufferings may be attained, through a knowledge of the true
nature of the soul, and its identity with the Supreme Being.
The doctrine is similar to that of other principal Upanishads.

The Cénéshita, or Céna Upanishad, is the thirty-seventh
of the A?harvaria, and agrees, almost word for word, with
a treatise bearing the same title, and belonging to a Séc’ha
of the Saémavéda. Sancara has, however, written sepa-
rate commentaries on both, for the sake of exhibiting their
different interpretations.* Both commentaries have, as
usual, been annotated.

A short Upanishad, entitled Narayana, is followed by
two others (39th and 40th), which form the first and second
parts of the Vrihan Narayana. This corresponds, as before
mentioned, with an Upanishad, bearing the same title, and
terminating the Araziya of the Taittiriya Yajurvéda.

On the three subsequent Upanishads I shall offer no
remarks ; they have not been commented among such as
relate to the Védanta ; and I have not ascertained whence
they are extracted.+

Under the name of Anandavalli and Bhriguvalli, two
Upanishads follow (44th and 45th), which have been
already noticed as extracts from the Ararya of the black
Yajush, distinguished by the titles of Taittiriya and Varuni.

The remaining seven Upanishads + are unexplained by


* Here, as in other instances, I speak from copies in my possession.

+ Their titles are, 41st Sarv’épanishatséra. 42d Hansa. And 43d
Parama hansa.

+ 46th Garuda. 47th Célégni-rudra. 48th and 49th Réma tapaniya,
first and second parts. 50th Caivalya. 5lst Jabala. 52d Asrama.

VOL. I. H


98 ON THE VEDAS, OR


commentators on the Védanta. They are, indeed, suffi-
ciently easy, not to require a laboured interpretation : but
there is room to regret the want of an ancient commentary,
which might assist in determining whether these Upanishads
be genuine. The reason of this remark will be subsequently
explained.

Entertaining no doubts concerning the genuineness of the
other works, which have been here described, I thik it
nevertheless proper to state some of the reasons, on which
my belief of their authenticity is founded. It appears neces-
sary to do so, since a late author has abruptly pronounced)
the Védas to be forgeries.*

It has been already mentioned, that the practice of reading
the principal Védas in superstitious modes, tends to preserve
the genuine text. Copies, prepared for such modes of
recital, are spread in various parts of India, especially Be-
nares, Jeyenagar, and the banks of the Gédéveri. Inter-
polations and forgeries have become impracticable since this
usage has been introduced: and the Rigvéda, and both
the Yajushes, belonging to the several Sac’has, in which
that custom has been adopted, have been, therefore, long
safe from alteration.

The explanatory table of contents, belonging to the several
Védas, also tends to ensure the purity of the text; since
the subject and length of each passage are therein specified.
The index, again, is itself secured from alteration by more
than one exposition of its meaning, in the form of a per-
petual commentary.

It is a received and well grounded opinion of the learned
in India, that no book is altogether safe from changes and
interpolations until it have been commented : but when once
a gloss has been published, no fabrication could afterwards


* Mr. Pinkerton, in his Modern Geography, Vol. IT.


nadie ie


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 99


succeed ; because the perpetual commentary notices every
passage, and, in general, explains every word.

Commentaries on the Védas themselves exist, which tes-
tify the authenticity of the text. Some are stated to have
been composed in early times: I shall not, however, rely on
any but those to which I can with certainty refer. I have
fragments of Uvata’s gloss ; the greatest partof SAvaNa’s
on several Védas ; anda complete one by Manip’HaRa on
asingle Véda. I also possess nearly the whole of Sancara’s
commentary on the Upanishads; and a part of Gavu-
HarApa’s; with others, by different authors of less note.

The genuineness of the commentaries, again, is secured
by a crowd of annotators, whose works expound every
passage in the original gloss ; and whose annotations are
again interpreted by others. This observation is particu-
larly applicable to the most important parts of the Védas,
which, as is natural, are the most studiously and elaborately
explained.

The JViructa, with its copious commentaries on the obso-
lete words and passages of scripture, further authenticates
the accuracy of the text, as there explained. The references
and quotations, in those works, agree with the text of the
Védas, as we now find it.

The grammar of the Sanscrit language contains rules
applicable to the anomalies of the ancient dialect. The
many and voluminous commentaries on that, and on other
parts of the grammar, abound in examples cited from the
Védas: and here, also, the present text is consonant to
those ancient quotations.

Philosophical works, especially the numerous commen-
taries on the aphorisms of the Mimansé and Védanta,
illustrate and support every position advanced in them, by
ample quotations from the Védas. The object of the Mi-
ménsa is to establish the cogency of precepts contained in

H 2


100 ON THE VEDAS, OR


scripture, and to furnish maxims for its interpretation ; and,
for the same purpose, rules of reasoning, from which a sys-
tem of logic is deducible. The object of the Védanta is to
illustrate the system of mystical theology taught by the
supposed revelation, and to show its application to the en-
thusiastic pursuit of unimpassioned perfection and mystical
intercourse with the divinity. Both are closely connected
with the Védas : and here, likewise, the authenticity of the
text is supported by ancient references and citations.

Numerous collections of aphorisms, by ancient authors,*
on religious ceremonies, contain, in every line, references to
passages of the Védas. Commentaries on these aphorisms
cite the passages at greater length. Separate treatises
also interpret the prayers used at divers ceremonies. Ri-
tuals, some ancient, others modern, contain a full detail of
the ceremonial, with all the prayers which are to be recited
at the various religious rites for which they are formed.
Such rituals are extant, not only for ceremonies which are
constantly observed, but for others which are rarely prac-
tised ; and even for such as have been long since disused.
In all, the passages taken from the Védas agree with the
text of the general compilation.

The Indian legislators, with their commentators, and
the copious digests and compilations from their works, fre-
quently refer to the Védas ; especially on those points of
the law which concern religion. Here also the references
are consistent with the present text of the Indian scripture.


* The Stitras of ASwaufyana, Sinc’uyivana, Baupp’HAvANa,
Cityivana, Litivana, Gosnina, Apastampa &e.

These, appertaining to various Sée’has of the Védas, constitute the
calpa, or system of religious observances. I have here enumerated a
few only. The list might be much enlarged, from my own collection ;
and still more so, from quotations by various compilers: for the origi-
nal works, and their commentaries, as well as compilations from
them, are very numerous.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS, 101


_ Writers on ethics sometimes draw from the Védas illus-
trations of moral maxims, and quote from their holy writ
passages at full length, in support of ethical precepts.*
These quotations are found to agree with the received text
of the sacred books.

Citations from the Indian scripture occur in every branch ,

of literature studied by orthodox Hindus. Astronomy, so
far as it relates to the calendar, has frequent occasion for
reference to the Védas. Medical writers sometimes cite
them ; and even annotators on profane poets occasionally
refer to this authority, in explaining passages which contain
allusions to the sacred text.
- Even the writings of the heretical sects exhibit quotations
from the Védas. I have met with such in the books of the
Jainas, unattended by any indication of their doubting the
genuineness of the original, though they do not receive its
doctrines, nor acknowledge its cogency.+

In all these branches of Indian literature, while perusing
or consulting the works of various authors, I have found
perpetual references to the Védas, and have frequently veri~
fied the quotations. On this ground I defend the authentic
text of the Indian scripture, as it is now extant; and
although the passages which I have so verified are few,
compared with the great volume of the Védas, yet I have
sufficient grounds to argue, that no skill in the nefarious
arts of forgery and falsification, could be equal to the


* A work entitled Niti manjart is an instance of this mode of treat-
ing moral subjects.

+ The Satapat’ha Bréhmaha, especially the 14th book, or Vrihad
drahyaca, is repeatedly cited, with exact references to the numbers of
the chapters and sections, in a fragment of a treatise by a Jaina
author, the communication of which I owe to Mr. Speke, among
other fragments collected by the late Capt. Hoarx, and purchased
at the sale of that gentleman’s library.


102 ON THE VEDAS, OR


arduous task of fabricating large works, to agree with the
very numerous citations, pervading thousands of volumes,
composed on diverse subjects, in every branch of literature,
and dispersed through the various nations of Hindus, inhabit-
ing Hindustan and the Dekhin.

If any part of what is now received as the Véda, cannot
stand the test of such a comparison, it may be rejected, as
at least doubtful, if not certainly spurious. Even such parts
as cannot be fully confirmed by a strict scrutiny, must be
either received with caution, or be set aside as questionable.
I shall point out parts of the fourth Véda, which I consider
to be in this predicament. But, with the exceptions now
indicated, the various portions of the Védas, which have
been examined, are as yet free from such suspicion ; and,
until they are impeached by more than vague assertion,
have every title to be admitted as genuine copies of books,
which (however little deserving of it) have been long held
in reverence by the Hindus.

I am apprized that this opinion will find opponents,
who are inclined to dispute the whole of Indian literature,
and to consider it all as consisting of forgeries, fabricated
within a few years, or, at best, in the last few ages. This
appears to be grounded on assertions and conjectures,
which were inconsiderately hazarded, and which have been
eagerly received, and extravagantly strained.

In the first place, it should be observed, that a work must
not be hastily condemned as a forgery, because, on exami-
nation, it appears not to have been really written by the
person, whose name is usually coupled with quotations from
it. For if the very work itself show that it does not pur-
port to be written by that person, the safe conclusion is,
that it was never meant to be ascribed to him. Thus the
two principal codes of Hindu law are usually cited as
Menv’s and YAsnyawatcya’s: but in the codes them-


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 103


selves, those are dialogists, not authors: and the best
commentators expressly declare that these institutes were
written by other persons than Menu and YAynyawatcya.*
The Stérya Sidd’ hanta is not pretended to have been writ-
ten by Meya: but he is introduced as receiving instruction
from a partial incarnation of the Sun ; and their conversation
constitutes a dialogue, which is recited by another person
in a different company. The text of the Sanc’hya philoso-
phy, from which the sect of Bupp’sa seems to have bor-
rowed its doctrines, is not the work of Caprxa himself,
though vulgarly ascribed to him; but it purports to be
composed by igwara Crisuxa ; and he is stated to have
received the doctrine mediately from Capita, through
successive teachers, after its publication by PancuaSic’Ha,
who had. been himself instructed by Asuri, the pupil of
CaPi.a,

To adduce more instances would be tedious: they abound
in every branch of science. Among works, the authors of
which are unknown, and which, therefore, as usual, are
vulgarly ascribed to some celebrated name, many contain
undisguised evidence of a more modern date. Such are those
parts of Purazas in which the prophetic style is assumed,
beeause they relate to events posterior to the age of the
persons who are speakers in the dialogue. Thus Bupp’na is
mentioned under various names in the Matsya, Vishnu,
Bhagavata, Garuda, Nrisinha, and other Puranas. 1
must not omit to notice, that SancarAcuArya, the great
commentator on the abstrusest parts of the Védas, is cele-
brated, in the Vrihad @harma purana,t} as an incarna-


* Visnyinayéat, also named VisnyinfSwara, who commented
the institutes which bear the name of YAsnyAwa.oya, states the
text to be an abridgment by a different author.

+ Inthe 78th chapter of the 2d part. This is the Purdia men-
tioned by me with doubt in a former essay, (Asiatic Researches, vol.
y. p. 53.) I have since procured a copy of it.


104 ON THE VEDAS, OR


tion of VisuNu; and GausapAnpa is described, in the
Sancara vijeya, as the pupil of Suca the son of VyAsa.*

I do not mean to say, that forgeries are not sometimes
committed ; or that books are not counterfeited, in whole
or in part. Sir W. Jones, Mr. Buagquiere, and myself,
have detected interpolations. Many greater forgeries have
been attempted : some have for a time succeeded, and been
ultimately discovered: in regard to others, detection has
immediately overtaken the fradulent attempt. A conspicu-
ous instance of systematic fabrication, by which Captain
Witrorp was for a time deceived, has been brought to
light, as has been fully stated by that gentleman. But
though some attempts have been abortive, others may
doubtless have succeeded. I am myself inclined to adopt
an opinion supported by many learned Hindus, who con-
sider the celebrated Sri Bhégavata as the work ofa gram-
marian, supposed to have lived about six hundred years
ago.

In this, as in several other instances, some of which I
shall have likewise occasion to notice, the learned among
the Hindus have resisted the impositions that have been
attempted. Many others ‘might be stated, where no impo-
sition has been either practised or intended. In Europe,
as well as in the East, works are often published anony-
mously, with fictitious introductions: and diverse compo-
sitions, the real authors of which are not known, have, on
insufficient grounds, been dignified with celebrated names.
To such instances, which are frequent everywhere, the im-
putation of forgery does not attach.


* If this were not a fable, the real age of Vyisa might be hence
ascertained ; and, consequently, the period when the Védas were
arranged in their present form. Gé6vinpAnit’H, the instructor of
Sancara, is stated to have been the pupil of Gaufapipa; and, ac-
cording to the traditions generally received in the peninsula of India,
Sancara lived little more than eight hundred years ago.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 105


_ In Europe, too, literary forgeries have been committed,
both in ancient and modern times. The poems ascribed
to Orprneus, are generally admitted not to have been
composed by that poet, if, indeed, he ever existed. Nant,


‘or Annivs, of Viterbo, is now universally considered as


an impostor, notwithstanding the defence of his publica-
tion, and of himself, by some among the learned of his
age. In our own country, and in recent times, literary
frauds have been not unfrequent. But a native of India,
who should retort the charge, and argue from a few in-
stances, that the whole literature of Europe, which is held
ancient, consists of modern forgeries, would be justly cen-
sured for his presumption.

We must not then indiscriminately condemn the whole
literature of India. Even Father Harpovuin, when he
advanced a similar paradox respecting the works of ancient
writers, excepted some compositions of Cicero, Vireit,
Horace, and Puiny.


It is necessary in this country as every where else, to be
guarded against literary impositions. But doubt and sus-
picion should not be carried to an extreme length. Some
fabricated works, some interpolated passages, will be de-
tected by the sagacity of critics in the progress of researches
into the learning of the east: but the greatest part of the
books, received by the learned among the Hindus, will
assuredly be found genuine. I do not doubt that the
Védas, of which an account has been here given, will
appear to be of this description.


In pronouncing them to be genuine, I mean to say, that
they are the same compositions, which, under the same
title of Véda, have been revered by Hindus for hundreds,
if not thousands, of years. I think it probable, that they
were compiled by Dwa1pAyana, the person who is said to
have collected them, and who is thence surnamed Vydsa,


106 ON THE VEDAS, OR


or the compiler. I can perceive no difficulty in admitting,
that those passages which are now ascribed to human
authors, either as the Rishis, or as the reciters of the text,
were attributed to the same persons, so long ago, as when the
compilation was made ; and probably, in most instances,
those passages were really composed by the alleged authors.
Concerning such texts as are assigned to divine persons,
according to Hindu mythology, it may be fairly concluded,
that the true writers of them were not known when the
compilation was made; and, for this reason, they were
assigned to fabulous personages.

The different portions which constitute the Védas, must
have been written at various times. The exact period
when they were compiled, or that in which the greatest part
was composed, cannot be determined with accuracy and
-confidence from any facts yet ascertained. But the country
may ; since many rivers of India are mentioned in more
than one text; and, in regard to the period, I incline to
think, that the ceremonies called Yajnya, and the prayers
to be recited at those ceremonies, are as old as the calendar,
which purports to have been framed fur such religious rites.

To each Véda a treatise, under the title of Jyétish, is
annexed, which explains the adjustment of the calendar,
for the purpose of fixing the proper periods for the per-
formance of religious duties. It is adapted to the compari-
son of solar and lunar time with the vulgar or civil year ;
and was evidently formed in the infancy of astronomical
knowledge. From the rules delivered in the treatises
which I have examined,* it appears, that the cycle (Yuga)
there employed, is a period of five years only. The month
is lunar; but at the end, and in the middle, of the quin-


* I have several copies of one such treatise, besides a commentary
on the Jyétish of the Rigvida, by an unknown author; which is
accordingly assigned to a fabulous personage, SfsHan{oa.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUs. 107


quennial period, an intercalation is admitted, by doubling
one month. Accordingly, the cycle comprises three com-
mon lunar years, and two, which contain thirteen lunations
each. The year is divided into six seasons; and each
month into half months. A complete lunation is measured
by thirty lunar days ; some one of which must of course,
in alternate months, be sunk, to make the dates agree with
the nycthemera. For this purpose, the sixty-second day
appears to be deducted :* and thus the cycle of five years
consists of 1860 lunar days, or 1830 nycthemera ; subject
to a further correction, for the excess of nearly four days
above the true sidereal year : but the exact quantity of this
correction, and the method of making it, according to this
calendar, have not yet been sufficiently investigated to be
here stated. The zodiac is divided into twenty-seven aste-
risms, or signs, the first of which, both in the Jyétish and
in the Védas, is Crittica, or the Pleiads. The place of
the colures, according to these astronomical treatises, will
be forthwith mentioned : but none of them hint at a motion
of the equinoxes. The measure of a day by thirty hours,
and that of an hour by sixty minutes, are explained ; and
the method of constructing a clepsydra is taught.

This ancient Hindu calender, corresponding in its divi-
sions of time, and in the assigned origin of the ecliptic,
with several passages of the Védas, is evidently the founda-
tion of that which, after successive corrections, is now
received by the Hindus throughout India. The progress
of those corrections may be traced, from the cycle of five,+


* The Athenian year was regulated in a similar manner; but, ac-
cording to Geminus, it was the sixty-third day, which was deducted.
Perhaps this Hindu calendar may assist in explaining the Grecian
system of lunar months.

- + The treatises in question contain allusions to the ages of the
world: but without explaining, whether any, and what, specific period
of time was assigned to each age. This cycle of five years is men-


108 ON THE VEDAS, OR


to one of sixty lunar years (which is noticed in many popu-
lar treatises on the calendar, and in the commentary of the
Jy6tish) ; and thence, to one of sixty years of JuPITER ;
and, finally, to the greater astronomical periods of twelve
thousand years of the gods, and a hundred years of Brau-
mA. But the history of Indian astronomy is not the
subject of this essay. I shall only cite, from the treatises
here referred to, a passage in which the then place of the
colures is stated.

* Swar acramété sbma@’rcau yadi sacam savasavau ; syat
tadadiyugam, maghas, tapas, sucl6,’yanam hy udac.

* Prapadyété Sravisht hadau stryachandramasév udae ;
sarp’ard’ hé dacshin’arcas tu: mag’ha-sravanaybh sada.

* Gharma-vridd hir, apam prast hah, cshapa-hrasa, udag
gatau: dacshiné tau viparyastau, shan muhirty ayanéna tu.’

The following is a literal translation of this remarkable
passage, which occurs in both the treatises examined by me.

“ When the sun and moon ascend the sky together, being
in the constellation over which the Vasus preside ; then does
the cycle begin, and the [season] Magha, and the [month]
Tapas, and the bright [fortnight], and the northern path.

‘ The sun and moon turn towards the north at the begin-
ning of Sravish? ha; but the sun turns towards the south
in the middle of the constellation over which the serpents
preside ; and this [his turn towards the south, and towards
the north], always [happens] in [the months of ] Magha and


Sravana.


tioned by the name of Yuga, in Pardsara’s institutes of law edited by
Suvrara, and entitled V7%hat Pardsara. It is there (Ch. 12. v. 83.)
stated, as the basis of calculation for larger cycles: and that of 3600
years, deduced from one of sixty (containing twelve simple yugas),
is denominated the yuga of Vicrat1; whence the yuga of Prasi-
Niw’HA, containing 216,000 years, is derived ; and twice that consti-
tutes the Caliyuga. The still greater periods are afterwards described
under the usual names.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 109


“In the northern progress, an increase of day, and de-
crease of night, take place, amounting to a prast’ha (or
32 palas) of water: in the southern, both are reversed (i.e.
the days decrease and the nights increase), and [the differ-
ence amounts] by the journey, to six muhértas.”*

avish? ha is given, in all the dictionaries of the Sanscrit
language, as another name of D’hanishi’ha; and is used
for it in more than one passage of the Védas. This is the
constellation which is sacred to the Vasus; as A&lésha is
tothe serpents. The deities presiding over the twenty-seven
constellations, are enumerated in three other verses of the
Jyotish belonging to the Yajush, and in several places of
the Védas. The Jyétish of the Rich differs in transposing
two of them ; but the commentator corrects this as a faulty
reading.

In several passages of the Jyétish, these names of dei-
ties are used for the constellations over which they preside ;
especially one, which states the situation of the moon, when
the sun reaches the tropic, in years other than the first of
the cycle. Every where these terms are explained, as indi-
eating the constellations which that enumeration allots to
them.+ Texts, contained in the Védas themselves, confirm
the correspondence; and the connexion of Aéwini and the
Aswins is indeed decisive.

Hence it is clear, that D’hanishi’ha and Aélésha are the
constellations meant; and that when this Hindu calendar
was regulated, the solstitial points were reckoned to be at
the beginning of the one, and in the middle of the other:
and such was the situation of those cardinal points, in the


* I cannot, as yet, reconcile the time here stated. Its explanation
appears to depend on the construction of the clepsydra, which I do
not well understand; as the rule for its construction is obscure, and
involves some difficulties which remain yet unsolved.


+ I think it needless to quote the original of this enumeration.


110 ON THE VEDAS, OR


fourteenth century before the Christian era. I formerly*
had occasion to show from another passage of the Védas,
that the correspondence of seasons with months, as there
stated, and as also suggested in the passage now quoted
from the Jyétish, agrees with such a situation of the cardinal
points.

I now proceed to fulfil the promise of indicating such
parts of the fourth Véda as appear liable to suspicion.
These are the remaining detached Upanishads, which are
not received into the best collections of fifty-two theological
tracts, belonging to the At’harva-véda ; and even some of
those which are there inserted, but which, so far as my
inquiries have yet reached, do not appear to have been
commented by ancient authors, nor to have been quoted in
the old commentaries on the Védanta. Two of these
Upanishads are particularly suspicious: one entitled Rama
tapantya, consisting of two parts (Pérva and Uttara) ; and
another called Gépéla tapaniya, also comprising two parts,
of which one is named the Crishia Upanishad. The in-
troduction to the first of these works contains a summary,
which agrees in substance with the mythological history of
the husband of Siva, and conqueror of Lancé. The other
exalts the hero of Mat’hurd.

Although the Rama tépaniya be inserted in all the col-
lections of Upanishads, which I have seen ; and the Gépala
tapaniya appear in some, yet I am inclined to doubt their
genuineness, and to suspect that they have been written in
times, modern, when compared with the remainder of the
Védas. This suspicion is chiefly grounded on the opinion,
that the sects, which now worship RAma and CrisuNa as
incarnations of VisuNu, are comparatively new. I have
not found, in any other part of the Védas, the least trace
of such a worship. The real doctrine of the whole Indian


* Asiatic Researches, vol. vii. p, 283.


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. M11


scripture is the unity of the deity, in whom the universe is
comprehended : and the seeming polytheism which it exhi-
bits, offers the elements, and the stars, and planets, as gods.
The three principal manifestations of the divinity, with other
personified attributes and energies, and most of the other
gods of Hindu mythology, are indeed mentioned, or at least
indicated, in the Védas. But the worship of deified heroes
is no part of that system ; nor are the incarnations of deities
suggested in any other portion of the text, which I have
yet seen; though such are sometimes hinted at by the com-
mentators.

_ According to the notions, which I entertain of the real
history of the Hindu religion, the worship of RAma, and of
Crisuna, by the Vaishiavas, and that of ManApfiva and
BuavAni by the Saivas and Sactas, have been generally
introduced, since the persecution of the Baudd’has and
Jainas. The institutions of the Védas are anterior to
Bupp’na, whose theology seems to have been borrowed
from the system of Capita, and whose most conspicuous
practical doctrine is stated to have been the unlawfulness of
killing animals, which in his opinion were too frequently
slain for the purpose of eating their flesh, under the pre-
tence of performing a sacrifice or Yajnya. The overthrow
of the sect of Bupp’ua, in India, has not effected the full
revival of the religious system inculcated in the Védas.
Most of what is there taught, is now obsolete: and, in its
stead, new orders of religious devotees have been instituted ;
and new forms of religious ceremonies have been established.
Rituals founded on the Puranas, and observances bor-
rowed from a worse source, the Yantras, have, in a great
measure, antiquated the institutions of the Védas. In par-
ticular, the sacrificing of animals before the idols of CALi,*


* In Bengal, and the contiguous provinces, thousands of kids and
buffalo calves are sacrificed before the idol, at every celebrated tem-


112 ON THE VEDAS, OR


has superseded the less sanguinary practice of the Yajnya;
and the adoration of RAma and of CrisuNa has succeeded
to that of the elements and planets. If this opinion be
well founded, it follows that the Upanishads in question
have probably been composed in later times, since the in-
troduction of those sects, which hold Rama and G6pALA


in peculiar veneration.

On the same ground, every Upanishad, which strongly
favours the doctrines of these sects, may be rejected, as
liable to much suspicion. Such is the Atmabé@ha Upani-
shad,* in which CrisuNa is noticed by the title of Map’Hu-
s(pANA, son of Df&vaci: and such, also, is the Sunda-
ritapant,{ which inculcates the worship of Dévi.

The remaining Upanishads do not, so far as I have exa-
mined them, exhibit any internal evidence of a modern date.
I state them as liable to doubt, merely because I am not
acquainted with any external evidence of their genuineness.{


ple; and opulent persons make a similar destruction of animals at
their private chapels. The sect which has adopted this system is
prevalent in Bengal, and in many other provinces of India: and the
Sanguinary Chapter, translated from the Célicd Purana by Mr.
Buaquiere (Asiatic Researches, vol. v. p. 371), is one among the
authorities on which it relies. But the practice is not approved by
other sects of Hindus.

* I have seen but one copy of it, in an imperfect collection of the
Upanishads. It is not inserted in other compilations, which never-
theless purport to be complete.

+ According to the only copy that 1 have seen, it comprises five
Upanishads, and belongs to the A? harvaha; but the style resembles
that of the Zantras more than the Védas. It is followed by a tract,
marked as belonging to the same Véda, and entitled Tripura Upani-
shad, or Traipuriya ; but this differs from another bearing the similar
title of Tripurt Upanishad, and found in a different collection of
theological treatises. I equally discredit both of them, although they
are cited by writers on the Mantra Sdstra (or use of incantations) ;
and although a commentary has been written on the Tripura by
Buatfa Buiscara.

t The same observation is applicable to several Upanishads, which
are not inserted in the best collections, but which occur in others.


|
|


SACRED WRITINGS OF THE HINDUS. 113


But it is probable, that further researches may ascertain the
accuracy of most of them, as extracts from the Védas ; and
their authenticity, as works quoted by known authors. In
point of doctrine they appear to conform with the genuine
Upanishads.

The preceding description may serve to convey some
notion of the Védas. They are too voluminous for a com-
plete translation of the whole ; and what they contai nwould
hardly reward the labour of the reader; much less that of
the translator. The ancient dialect in which they are com-
posed, and especially that of the three first Védas, is
extremely difficult and obscure: and, though curious, as the
parent ofa more polished and refined language (the classical
Sanscrit), its difficulties must long continue to prevent such
an examination of the whole Védas, as would be requisite
for extracting all that is remarkable and important in those
voluminous works. But they well deserve to be occasionally
consulted by the oriental scholar.


For instance, the Scanda, Caula, Gopichandana, Darsana, and Vajra-
stichi, 1 shall not stop to indicate a few questionable passages in some
of these dubious tracts,


VOL. I. 1


III.


On the Duries of a Farrurut Hinpu Wipow.


' [From the Asiatic Researches, vol. iv. p. 209—219. Caleutta,
1795. 4to.]


Wuite the light which the labours of the Asiatic Society
have thrown on the sciences and religion of the Hindus,
has drawn the attention of the literary world to that subject,
the hint thrown out by the President for rejecting the autho-
rity of every publication preceding the translation of the
Gité, does not appear to have made sufficient impression.
Several late compilations in Europe betray great want of
judgment in the selection of authorities ; and their motley
dress of true and false colours tends to perpetuate error ;
for this reason it seems necessary on every topic to revert
to original authorities, for the purpose of cancelling error or
verifying facts already published ; and this object will no
way be more readily attained, than by the communication
of detached essays on each topic, as it may present itself
to the Orientalist in the progress ofhis researches.

From this or any other motive for indulgence, should the
following authorities from Sanscrit books be thought worthy
of a place in the next volume of the Society’s Transactions,
I shall be rewarded for the pains taken in collecting them.

“ Having first bathed, the widow, dressed in two clean
“ garments, and holding some cuSa grass, sips water from
“the palm of her hand. Bearing cuSa and tila* on her
“ hand, she looks towards the east or north, while the Brah-


* Sesamum,


'
‘
.


DUTIES OF A FAITHFUL WIDOW. 115


‘ mana utters the mystic word O'm. Bowing to NAri-
“ yawa, she next declares :* “ On this month, so named
“in such a pacsha, on such a tit’hi, I (naming herself and
“ her family+) that I may meet ARuNDuATit and reside in
“ Swarga; that the years of my stay may be numerous as
“ the hairs on the human body; that I may enjoy with my
“husband the felicity of heaven, and sanctify my paternal
“and maternal progenitors, and the ancestry of my hus-
“band’s father; that lauded by the Apsarases, I may be
“happy with my lord, through the reigns of fourteen
“ Indras; that expiation be made for my husband’s of-
“fences, whether he has killed a Bréhmana, broken the
“ties of gratitude, or murdered his friend, thus I ascend
“my husband’s burning pile. I call on you, ye guardians
“ of the eight regions of the world; Sun and Moon! Air,
“Fire, Ather,, Earth, and Water! My own soul!
“Yama! Day, Night, and Twilight! And thou, Con-
“science, bear witness: I follow my husband’s corpse
“on the funeral pile.” ’|


* This declaration is called the Sancalpa.


+ Gotra, the family or race. Four great families of Bréhmahas are
now extant, and have branched into many distinct races. Since the
memorable massacre of the Cshatriyds, by ParaSu-Rima, the Csha-
triyds describe themselves from the same Gétras as the Bréhmahas.

t Wife of Vasishi’ha. * § Acasa.

|| In several publications the woman has been described as placing
herself on the pile before it be lighted; but the ritual quoted is con-
formable to the text of the Bhagavata.

“ When the corpse is about to he consumed in the sahdtaja, the
faithful wife who stood without, rushes on the fire.’"—Nirepa to
Yun’utsuf’H1ra, announcing the death and funeral of Durira-
Risufra. See Bhagavata, book i.. ch. 13.

The sahétaja is a cabin of grass or leaves, sometimes erected on
the funeral pile. ‘“ The shed on the funeral pile of a Muni is [called]
parhotaja and sahitaja.” See the vocabulary entitled Hardvali.


)


116 ON THE DUTIES


* Having repeated the Sancalpa, she walks thrice round
‘the pile; and the Brahmara utters the following mantras :

‘“ O'm! Let these women, not to be widowed, good wives,
“ adorned with collyrium, holding clarified butter, consign
* themselves to the fire. Immortal, not childless, nor hus-
“ bandless, well adorned with gems, let them pass into fire,
* whose original element is water.” (From the Rigvéda.)

*“ O'm! Let these faithful wives, pure, beautiful, commit
“ themselves to the fire, with their husband’s corpse.”

(A Paurdnica mantra.)

“With this benediction, and uttering the mystic Mamé
* Namah, she ascends the flaming pile.’

While the prescribed ceremonies are performed by the
widow, the son, or other near kinsman, of the deceased,
applies the first torch, with the forms directed for funeral
rites in the Grihya,* by which his tribe is governed.

The Sancalpa is evidently formed on the words of
ANGIRAS:

“ The wife who commits herself to the flames with her
husband’s corpse, shall equal ARuNDHaTi, and reside in
Swarga;

“ Accompanying her husband, she shall reside so long
“in Swarga as are the thirty-five millions of hairs on the
“ human body.

“As the snake-catcher forcibly drags the serpent from
“his earth, so, bearing her husband [from hell], with him
“ she shall enjoy heavenly bliss.

“ Dying with her husband, she sanctifies her maternal
“and paternal ancestors ; and the ancestry of him to whom


‘


“ she gave her virginity.


* Extracts or compilations from the sacred books, containing the
particular forms for religious ceremonies, to be observed by the race
or family for whom that portion of the sacred writings has been
adopted, which composes their Grihya.


“i


OF A FAITHFUL HINDU WIDOW. 117


“ Such a wife, adoring her husband, in celestial felicity
“with him, greatest, most admired,* with him shall
“enjoy the delights of heaven, while fourteen InpRas
ot °

“ Though her husband had killed a Brahmana,+ broken
“ the ties of gratitude, or murdered his friend, she expiates


“ the crime.” (ANGIRAsS.)
__ The mantras are adopted on the authority of the Brahme
purana.


“ While the pile is preparing, tell the faithful wife of the

“ ereatest duty of woman; she is loyal and pure who burns _
“herself with her husbund’s corpse. Hearing this, fortified
“Tin her resolution], and full of affection, she completes the

“ Pitrimédha yagat and ascends to Swarga.”

(Brahme puréna.)
It is held to be the duty of a widow to burn herself with
her husband’s corpse ; but she has the alternative,

“ On the death of her husband, to live as Brahmachari,
* or commit herself to the flames.” (VisuNnu.)

The austerity intended consists in chastity, and in acts of
piety and mortification.

-“ The use of tambila, dress, and feeding off vessels of
“tutenague is forbidden to the Yati,§ the Brahmachart,
“ and the widow.” (Pracnféras.)

“ The widow shall never exceed one meal a day, nor
“sleep on a bed; if she do so, her husband falls from
“i Swarga.


«


_* The word in the text is expounded “ lauded by the choirs of
heaven, Gand’harvas,” &c.


+ The commentators are at the pains of shewing that this expiation
must refer to a crime committed in a former existence; for funeral
rites are refused to the murderer of a Braéhmaia.


t Act of burning herself with her husband.
§ Sannyasi.


118 ON THE DUTIES


“She shall eat no other than simple food, and* shall
“ daily offer the tarpana of cusa, tila, and water.+

“In Vaisac’ha, Cartica, and Magha, she shall exceed
“the usual duties of ablution, alms, and pilgrimage, and
“ often use the name of Gop [in prayer].” (The Smriti.)

After undertaking the duty of a Sati, should the widow
recede, she incurs the penalties of defilement.

“ If the woman, regretting life, recede from the pile, she
“is defiled; but may be purified by observing the fast
called Prajapatya.” t (ApasTamsa.)

Though an alternative be allowed, the Hindu legislators


have shown themselves disposed to encourage widows to


burn themselves with their husband’s corpse.

HArira thus defines a loyal wife: “ She, whose sym-
“pathy feels the pains and joys of her husband; who
“mourns and pines in his absence, and dies when he dies,
“is a good and loyal wife.” (HAnira.)

“ Always revere a loyal wife, as you venerate the Dévatds ;
“for, by her virtues, the prince’s empire may extend over
“ the three worlds.” (Matsya purana.)

“ Though the husband died unhappy by the disobedience
of his wife ; if from motives of love, disgust [of the world],
“ fear [of living unprotected], or sorrow, she commit herself
“ to the flames, she is entitled to veneration.”

(Maha Bharata.)

Obsequies for suicides are forbidden; but the Rigvéda


“cc


* If she has no male descendants. See Madana Parijata.

t+ Oblations for the manes of ancestors to the third degree, though
not exclusively; for the prayer includes a general petition for remoter
ancestors. Yet daily oblations (Vaisvadéva) are separately offered for
ancestors beyond the third degree.

{ It extends to twelve days; the first three, a spare meal may be
taken once in each day; the next three, one in each night; the suc-
ceeding three days, nothing may be eaten but what is given unsolicited ;
and the last three days are a rigid fast.


i ie en ee


OF A FAITHFUL HINDU WIDOW. 119


expressly declares, that “ the loyal wife [who burns herself’),
“shall not be deemed a suicide. When a mourning of
“ three days has been completed, the Sréddha is to be
“ performed.”* This appears from the prayer for the


occasion, directed in the Rigvéda.
Regularly the chief mourner for the husband and for


the wife, would in many cases be distinct persons: but the

_Bhavishya purana provides, that “ When the widow con-
“sions herself to the same pile with the corpse of the
“ deceased, whoever performs the Criya for her husband,
“ shall perform it for her.”

“ As to the ceremonies from the lighting of the funeral
“pile to the Pisida; whoever lights the pile shall also
“ offer the Pitida.” = - (Vayu purana.)

In certain circumstances the widow is disqualified for this
act of a Sati.

“ She who has an infant child, or is pregnant, or whose

‘" pregnancy is doubtful, or who is unclean, may not, O

“ princess, ascend the funeral pile.

“ So said NArxpa to the mother of Sacara.”

“ The mother of an infant shall not relinquish the care of
“ her child to ascend the pile; nor shall one who is unclean
. [from a periodical cause], or whose time for purification
“ after child-birth is not passed, nor shall one who is preg-
“nant, commit herself to the flames. But the mother of
an infant may, if the care of the child can be otherwise
“ provided.” (VrYnaspatt.)


“cc


* The shortness of the mourning is honourable: the longest mourn-
ing is for the lowest tribe.

+ It has been erroneously asserted, that a wife, pregnant at the time
of her husband’s death, may burn herself after delivery. Hindu
authorities positively contradict it. In addition to the text it may be
remarked, that it is a maxim, “ What was prevented in its season,
“ may not afterwards be resumed.””


120 ON THE DUTIES


In the event of a Brahmana dying in a distant country,
his widow is not permitted to burn herself.
“ A Vipra or Brahmani may not ascend a second pile.”
(Gorama.)
But with other castes, this proof of fidelity is not pre-
cluded by the remote decease of the husband, and is called
Anugamana.
“ The widow, on the news of her husband’s dying in a
“ distant country, should expeditiously burn herself: so
“ shall she obtain perfection.” (VyAsa.)
“Should the husband die on a journey, holding his
* sandals to her breast, let her pass into the flames.”
(Brahme purana.)
The expression is not understood of sandals exclusively ;
for USanas or Sucra declares :
“ Except a Vipra, the widow may take any thing that
“ belonged to her husband, and ascend the pile.
“ But a Vipra may not ascend a second pile; this prac-
“ tice belongs to other tribes.” (Sucra.)
In two of the excepted cases, a latitude is allowed for a
widow desirous of offering this token of loyalty, by post-
poning the obsequies of the deceased: for VyAsa directs
that, “ If the loyal wife be distant less than the journey of
“a day, and desire to die with her husband, his corpse
“ shall not be burnt until she arrive.” And the Bhavishya
purana permits that “the corpse be kept one night, if
“the third day of her uncleanness had expired when her
“ husband died.”
With respect to a circumstance of time,* which might
on some occasions be objected, the commentators obviate
the difficulty, by arguing from several texts, “ that to die


‘


* Occasional observances are omitted on intercalary days.


OF A FAITHFUL HINDU WIDOW. 121


“ with or after [her husband], is for a widow naimittica*
“and camya,+ and consequently allowable in the inter-
“ calary month ;” for Dacsa teaches, that “‘ whenever an
“ act both naimittica and camya is in hand, it is then to
“be performed without consulting season.” They are at
the trouble of removing another difficulty :

“ DurirarAsufra in the state of Samadhi, quitted
“ his terrestrial form to proceed to the Mucti, or beatitude,
“ which awaited him. When the leaves and wood were
“lighted to consume the corpse, his wife GANp’HARi was
“seen to pass into the flames. Now also, a husband dying
“at Cast and attaining Mucti, it becomes his widow to
“ follow the corpse in the flames.”

It were superfluous to pursue commentators through all
their frivolous distinctions and laborious illustrations on
latent difficulties.

All the ceremonies essential to this awful rite are included
in the instructions already quoted. But many practices
have been introduced, though not sanctioned by any ritual.
A widow who declares her resolution of burning herself
with the corpse, is required to give a token of her forti-
tude: and it is acknowledged, that one who receded after
the ceremony commenced, would be compelled by her rela-
tions to complete the sacrifice. This may explain cireum-
stances described by some who have witnessed the melan-
choly scene.

Other ceremonies noticed in the relations of persons who
have been present on such occasions, are directed in several
rituals :

“ Adorned with all jewels, decked with minium and other
“ customary ornaments, with the box of minium in her hand,


* Eventual; incumbent when a certain event happens.


+ Optional; done for its reward.


122 ON THE DuTIES, &c.


“ having made pija or adoration to the Dévatas, thus reflect-
“ing that this life is nought: my lord and master to me
“ was all,—she walks round the burning pile. She bestows
“jewels on the Brahmanas, comforts her relations, and
“ shows her friends the attentions of civility : while calling
“ the Sun and Elements to witness, she distributes minium
“ at pleasure ; and having repeated the Sancalpa, proceeds
“into the flames. There embracing the corpse, she aban-
“ dons herself to the fire, calling Satya! Satya! Satya!”

The by-standers throw on butter and wood: for this they
are taught that they acquire merit exceeding ten million
fold the merit of an Aswamédha, or other great sacrifice.
Even those who join the procession from the house of the
deceased to the funeral pile, for every step are rewarded
as for an ASwamédha. Such indulgences are promised by
grave authors: they are quoted in this place only as they
seem to authorize an inference, that happily the martyrs of
this superstition have never been numerous. It is certain
that the instances of the widow’s sacrifices are now rare:
on this it is only necessary to appeal to the recollection of
every person residing in India, how few instances have ac-
tually occurred within his knowledge. And, had they ever
been frequent, superstition would hardly have promised its
indulgences to spectators.


IV.


On the Revicious Ceremonies of the Hinpous,
and of the Braumens especially.


ESSAY I


[From the Asiatic Researches, vol. v. p. 345—368. Calcutta,
1798. 4to.]


Tue civil law of the Hindus containing frequent allusions
to their religious rites, I was led, among other pursuits
connected with a late undertaking, to peruse several treatises
on this subject, and to translate from the Sanscrit some
entire tracts, and parts of others. From these sources of
information, upon a subject on which the Hindus are by
no means communicative, I intend to lay before the Society,
in this and subsequent essays, an abridged explanation of
the ceremonies, and verbal translations of the prayers used
at rites, which a Hindu is bound constantly to perform. In
other branches of this inquiry, the Society may expect
valuable communications from our colleague, Mr. W. C.
Braguiere, who is engaged in similar researches. That
part of the subject to which I have confined my enquiries
will be also found to contain curious matter, which I shall
now set forth without comment, reserving for a subsequent
essay the observations which are suggested by a review of
these religious practices.

A Brahmana rising from sleep, is enjoined, under the
penalty of losing the benefit of all rites performed by him,
to rub his teeth with a proper withe, or a twig of the race~


124 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


miferous fig-tree, pronouncing to himself this prayer:
“ Attend, lord of the forest; Séma, king of herbs and
“ plants, has approached thee : mayest thou and he cleanse
“my mouth with glory and good auspices, that I may eat
“ abundant food.” The following prayer is also used upon
this occasion : “ Lord of the forest ! grant me life, strength,
“ slory, splendour, offspring, cattle, abundant wealth, vir-
“* tue, knowledge, and intelligence.” But if a proper withe
cannot be found, or on certain days, when the use of it is
forbidden, (that is, on the day of the conjunction, and on
the first, sixth, and ninth days of each lunar fortnight), he
must rinse his mouth twelve times with water.

Having carefully thrown away the twig which has been
used, in a place free from impurities, he should proceed to
bathe, standing in a river, or in other water. The duty of
bathing in the morning, and at noon, ifthe man be a house-
holder, and in the evening also, if he belong to an order of
devotion, is inculcated by pronouncing the strict observance
of it no less efficacious than a rigid penance, in expiating
sins, especially the early bath in the months of Magha,
P’halguna, and Cartica: and the bath being particularly
enjoined as a salutary ablution, he is permitted to bathe in
his own house, but without prayers, if the weather, or his
own infirmities, prevent his gomg forth : or he may abridge
the ceremonies, and use fewer prayers, if a religious duty,
or urgent business, require his early attendance. The regu-
lar bath consists of ablutions followed by worship, and by
the inaudible recitation of the Gayatri with the names of
the worlds. First sipping water, and sprinkling some before
him, the priest recites the three subjoined prayers, while he
performs an ablution, by throwing water eight times on
his head, or towards the sky, and concludes it by casting
water on the ground, to destroy the demons who wage
war with the gods. Ist. “ O waters! since ye afford


OF THE HINDUs. 125


“delight, grant us present happiness, and the rapturous
“ sight of the Supreme Gop.” 2d. “ Like tender mothers,
“make us here partakers of your most auspicious essence.”
3d. “ We become contented with your essence, with which
“ye satisfy the universe. Waters! grant it unto us.”
(Or, as otherwise expounded, the third text may signify,
* Eagerly do we approach your essence, which supports
“the universal abode. Waters! grant it unto us.’) In
the Agni purdna, the ablution is otherwise directed: “ At
“ twilight, let a man attentively recite the prayers addressed
“to water, and perform an ablution, by throwing water
“ on the crown of his head, on the earth, towards the sky ;
“again towards the sky, on the earth, on the crown of his
“head, on the earth, again on the crown of his head, and
“ lastly on the earth.” Immediately after this ablution,
he should sip water without swallowing it, silently praying
in these words: “ Lord of sacrifice! thy heart is in the
“ midst of the waters of the ocean ; may salutary herbs and
“ waters pervade thee. With sacrificial hymns and humble
“ salutation we invite thy presence ; may this ablution be
“ efficacious.” Or he may sip water while he utters in-
audibly the mysterious names of the seven worlds. Thrice
plunging into water, he must each time repeat the expiatory
text which recites the creation ; and having thus completed
his ablution, he puts on his mantle after washing it, and
sits down to worship the rising sun.

This ceremony is begun by his tying the lock of hair on
the crown of his head, while he recites the Gayatri, hdlding
much cusa grass in his left, and three blades of the same
grass in his right hand ; or wearing a ring of grass on the
third finger of the same hand. Thrice sipping water with
the same text preceded by the mysterious names of worlds,
and each time rubbing his hands as if washing them ; and
finally, touching with his wet hand, his feet, head, breast,


126 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


eyes, ears, nose, and navel, or his breast, navel, and both
shoulders only (according to another rule), he should
again sip water three times, pronouncing to himself the
expiatory text which recites the creation. If he happen to
sneeze or spit, he must not immediately sip water, but first
touch his right ear, in compliance with the maxim, ‘ after
“sneezing, spitting, blowing his nose, sleeping, putting on
“ apparel, or dropping tears, a man should not immediately
“ sip water, but first touch his right ear.’ “ Fire,” says
ParASara, “ water, the Védas, the sun, moon, and air,
“all reside in the right ears of Brahmanas. Ganga
“is in their right ears, sacrificial fire in their nostrils ; at
“the moment when both are touched, impurity vanishes.”
This, by the by, will explain the practice of suspending the
end of the sacerdotal string from over the right ear, to
purify that string from the defilement which follows an
evacuation of urine. The sipping of water is a requisite
introduction of all rites ;-without it, says the Samba
purana, all acts of religion are vain. Having therefore
sipped water as above-mentioned, and passed his hand filled
with water briskly round his neck while he recites this
prayer, “ May the waters preserve me!” the priest closes
his eyes and meditates in silence, figuring to himself that
“ Braun, with four faces and a red complexion, resides
“in his navel ; Visunv, with four arms and a black com-
“ plexion, in his heart ; and Siva, with five faces and a
“ white complexion, in his forehead.” The priest after-
wards meditates the holiest of texts during three suppres-
sions of breath. Closing the left nostril with the two
longest fingers of his right hand, he draws his breath
through the right nostril, and then closing that nostril like-
wise with his thumb, holds his breath while he meditates
the text : he then raises both fingers off the left nostril, and
emits the breath he had suppressed. While he holds his


OF THE HINDUS. 127


breath, he must, on this occasion, repeat to himself the

Gayatri with the mysterious names of the worlds, the
triliteral monosyllable, and the sacred text of Braume.

A suppression of breath, so explained by the ancient legis-

lator, YAsNyAWALcyA, consequently implies the following

\ meditation: “ O'm ! Earth! Sky! Heaven! Middle region !

“ Place of births ! Mansion of the blessed ! Abode of truth !

“We meditate on the adorable light of the resplendent

“generator, which governs our intellects ; which is water,

“lustre, savour, immortal faculty of thought, Braume,

“ earth, sky, and heaven.” According to the commentary,

of which a copious extract shall be subjoined, the text thus

" recited signifies, “That effulgent power, which governs
“ our intellects is the primitive element of water, the lus-

“* tre of gems and other glittering substances, the savour of
. “trees and herbs, the thinking soul of living beings : it is
“ the creator, preserver, and destroyer; the sun, and every
“ other deity, and all which moves, or which is fixed in the
! “three worlds, named, earth, sky, and heaven. The
4 supreme BrauMe, so manifested, illumines the seven
“worlds; may he unite my soul to his own radiance :
“(that is, to his own soul, which resides effulgent in the
“ seventh world, or mansion of truth).” On another occa-
sion, the concluding prayer, which is the Gayatri of
Braue, is omitted, and the names of the three lower
worlds only are premised. Thus recited, the Géayatri,
properly so called, bears the following import: ‘‘ On that
“ effulgent power, which is Braume himself, and is called
“ the light of the radiant sun, do I meditate, governed by
“ the mysterious light which resides within me for the pur-

“ pose of thought ; that very light isthe earth, the subtile
“ ether, and all which exists within the created sphere ; it
‘is the threefold world, containing all which is fixed or
“ moveable : it exists internally in my heart, externally in


‘


128 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“the orb of the sun; being one and the same with that
“effulgent power, I myself am an irradiated manifesta-
“tion of the supreme BranMe.” With such reflections,
says the commentator, should the text be inaudibly recited.

These expositions are justified by a very ample commen-
tary, in which numerous authorities are cited ; and to which
the commentator has added many passages from ancient
lawyers, and from mythological poems, showing the efficacy
of these prayers in expiating sin. As the foregoing expla-
nations of the text are founded chiefly on the gloss of an
ancient philosopher and legislator, YAJNyawa.cyA, the
following extract will consist of little more than a verbal
translation of his metrical gloss.

“ The parent of all beings produced all states of exist-
“ence, for he generates and preserves all creatures: there-
“fore is he called the generator. Because he shines and
“sports, because he loves and irradiates, therefore is he
‘ called resplendent or divine, and is praised by all deities.
“We meditate on the light, which, existing in our minds,
“ continually governs our intellects in the pursuits of virtue,
“wealth, love, and beatitude. Because the being who
“ shines with seven rays, assuming the forms of time and
“ of fire, matures productions, is resplendent, illumines all,
“and finally destroys the universe, therefore he, who na-
“ turally shines with seven rays, is called light or the efful-
“gent power. The first syllable denotes that he illumines
“ worlds; the second consonant implies that he colours all
‘ creatures ; the last syllable signifies that he moves with-
‘out ceasing. From his cherishing all, he is called the
“ irradiating preserver.”

Although it appears from the terms of the text, (“ Light
“ of the Generator or Sun,”) that the sun and the light
spoken of are distinct, yet, in meditating this sublime text,
they are undistinguished ; that light is the sun, and the sun


‘


‘


‘


OF THE HINDUS. 129


is light; they are identical: “ The same effulgent and
“irradiating power which animates living beings as their
“ soul, exists in the sky as the male being residing in the
“ midst of the sun.” There is consequently no distinction ;


_ but that effulgence which exists in the heart, governing the


intellects of animals, must alone be meditated, as one and
the same, however, with the luminous power residing in the
orb of the sun.

“ That which is in the sun, and thus called light or
“ effulgent power, is adorable, and must be worshipped by
“them who dread successive births and deaths, and who
“ eagerly desire beatitude. The being who may be seen in
“ the solar orb, must be contemplated by the understanding,


“to obtain exemption from successive births and deaths


“and various pains.”

The prayer is-preceded by the names of the seven worlds,
as epithets of it, to denote its efficacy; signifying, that
this light pervades and illumines the seven worlds, which,
“ situated one above the other, are the seven mansions of all
“beings: they are called the seven abodes, self-existent in
“a former period, renovated in this. These seven mysterious
“words are celebrated as the names of the seven worlds.
“ The place where all beings, whether fixed or moveable,
“ exist, is called Earth, which is the first world. That in
“ which beings exist a second time, but without sensation,
“again to become sensible at the close of the period ap-
“pointed for the duration of the present universe, is the
“ World of Re-existence. The abode of the good, where
“cold, heat, and light, are perpetually produced, is named
“Heaven. The intermediate region between the upper
“and lower worlds, is denominated the Middle World.
“The heaven, where animals, destroyed in a general con-
“flagration at the close of the appointed period, are born
“again, is thence called the World of Births. That in
VOL. I. K


130 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ which Sanaca, and other sons of Bran, justified by
“austere devotion, reside, exempt from all dominion, is
“ thence named the Mansion of the Blessed. ‘Truth, the
“ seventh world, and the abode of Braue, is placed on
“the summit above other worlds; it is attained by true
“ knowledge, by the regular discharge of duties, and by
“ veracity: once attained, it is never lost. Truth is, indeed,
“ the seventh world, therefore called the Sublime Abode.”

The names of the worlds are preceded by the triliteral
monosyllable, to obviate the evil consequence announced
by Menu, “A Bréahmana, beginning and ending a
“lecture of the Véda (or the recital of any holy: strain),
“must always pronounce to himself the syllable 6m: for
“unless the syllable 6m precede, his learning will slip
“away from him; and unless it follow, nothing will be
“ long retained.” Or that syllable is prefixed to the several
names of worlds, denoting that the seven worlds are
manifestations of the power signified by that syllable.
“ As the leaf of the palasa,” says YAsnyAwaucya, “ is
“ supported by a single pedicle, so is this universe upheld
“ by the syllable ém, a symbol of the supreme BRAuME.”
“* All rites ordained in the Véda, oblations to fire, and
“solemn. sacrifices, pass away; but that which passeth
“ not away,” says Mrnu, “ is declared to be the syllable
“6m, thence called acshara, since it is a symbol of Gon,
“ the lord of created beings.” (Menv, chap. ii. v. 74, 84.)

The concluding prayer is subjoined, to teach the various
manifestations of that light, which is the sun himself.
It is Braume, the supreme soul. “The sun,” says
YAsnyawatcya, “ is Braume: this is a certain truth,
“ vevealed in the sacred Upanishads, and in various Sae’has
“ of the Védas.” So the Bhawishya purana, speaking of the
sun: “ Because there is none greater than he, nor has
“been, nor will be, therefore he is celebrated as the
“ supreme soul in all the Védas.”


—oEooor ee


OF THE HINDUS. 131


That greatest of lights which exists in the sun, exists also
as the principle of life in the hearts of all beings. It shines
externally in the sky, internally in the heart: it is found in
fire and in flame. This principle of life, which is acknow-
ledged by the virtuous as existing in the heart and in the
sky, shines externally in the ethereal region, manifested
in the form of the sun. It is also made apparent in the
lustre of gems, stones, and metals; and in the taste of
trees, plants, and herbs. That is, the irradiating being, who
is a form of Braume, is manifested in all moving beings
(gods, demons, men, serpents, beasts, birds, insects, and
the rest) by their locomotion ; and in some fixed substances,
such as stones, gems, and metals, by their lustre; in others,
such as trees, plants, and herbs, by their savour. Every
thing which moves or which is fixed, is pervaded by that
light, which in all moving things exists as the supreme
soul, and as the immortal thinking faculty of beings which
have the power of motion. Thus the venerable commen-
tator says, “ In the midst of the sun stands the moon, in
“the midst of the moon is fire, in the midst of light is
“truth, in the midst of truth is the unperishable being.”
And again, “ God is the unperishable being residing in the
“ sacred abode: the thinking soul is light alone; it shines
“ with unborrowed splendour.” This thinking soul, called
the immortal principle, is a manifestation of that irradiating
power who is the supreme soul.

This universe, consisting of three worlds, was produced
from water. “ He first, with a thought, created the waters,
“ and placed inthem a productive seed.” (MrNv, chap.i.v.8.)
Water, which is the element whence the three worlds pro-
ceeded, is that light which is also the efficient cause of crea-
tion, duration, and destruction, manifested with these powers,
in the form of BraumA, Visunu, and Rupra: to denote
this, “ earth, sky, and heaven,” are subjoined as epithets
‘ K 2


132 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


of light. These terms bear allusion also to the three qua-
lities of truth, passion, and darkness, corresponding with. —
the three manifestations of power, as creator, preserver, and:
destroyer ; hence it is also intimated, that the irradiating
being is manifested as BraumA, VisuNu, and Rupra,
who are respectively endued with the qualities of truth,
passion, and darkness. The meaning is, that this irradi-
ating being, who is the supreme BrauMeE manifested in
three forms or powers, is the efficient cause of the creation
of the universe, of its duration and destruction. So in the
Bhawishya purana, CrisuXa says, “ The. sun is the god
“ of perception, the eye of the universe, the cause of day: f
“ there is none greater than he among the immortal powers. i
“ From him this universe proceeded, and in him it will 4
“ reach annihilation ; he is time measured by instants,” &c. |
Thus the universe, consisting of three worlds, containing all

which is fixed or moveable, is the irradiating being; and he

is the creator of that universe, the preserver and destroyer

of it. Consequently nothing can exist, which is not that
irradiating power.

These extracts from two very copious commentaries will
sufficiently explain the texts which are meditated while the

breath is held as above mentioned. Immediately after these
suppressions of breath, the priest should sip water, reciting

the following prayer: “ May the sun, sacrifice, the regent of

“ the firmament, and other deities who preside over sacri-

“ fice, defend me from the sin arising from the imperfect
“performance of a religious ceremony. Whatever sin I

“have committed by night, in thought, word or deed, be

“that cancelled by day. Whatever sin be in me, may that

“be far removed. I offer this water to the sun, whose light.
“irradiates my heart, who sprung from the immortal
“essence. Be this oblation efficacious.” He should next
make three ablutions with the prayers: “ Waters! since ye


‘


OF THE HINDUS. 133


_ “afford delight,” &e., at the same time throwing water
‘eight times on his head, or towards the sky, and once on
‘the ground as before; and again make similar ablutions
with the following prayer: “ As a tired man leaves drops of
“ sweat at the foot of a tree; as he who bathes is cleansed
“from all foulness; as an oblation is sanctified by holy
“‘srass; so may this water purify me from sin:” and
another ablution with the expiatory text which rehearses
the creation. He should next fill the palm of his hand
‘with water, and presenting it to his nose, inhale the fluid
by one nostril, and retaining it for a while, exhale it through
the other, and throw away the water towards the north-east
quarter. This is considered as an internal ablution, which
washes away sins. He concludes by sipping water with
the following prayer: “ Water! thou dost penetrate all
“beings ; thou dost reach the deep recesses of the moun-
. “tains; thou art the mouth of the universe ; thou art sacri-
“fice; thou art the mystic word vashat; thou art light,

“taste, and the immortal fluid.”
After these ceremonies he proceeds to worship the sun,
‘standing on one foot, and resting the other against his ankle
or heel, looking towards the east, and holding his hands
open before him in a hollow form. In this posture he pro-
nounces to himself the following prayers. Ist. “ The rays
“of light announce the splendid fiery sun, beautifully rising
“ to illumine the universe.” 2d. “ He rises, wonderful, the
“eye of the sun, of water, and of fire, collective power of
“ gods; he fills heaven, earth, and sky, with his luminous
“net; he is the soul of all which is fixed or locomotive.”
3d. “ That eye, supremely beneficial, rises pure from the
“© east ; may we see him a hundred years; may we live a
“hundred years; may we hear a hundred years.” 4th.
“ May we, preserved by the divine power, contemplating
“heaven above the region of darkness, approach the deity,


134 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


* most splendid of luminaries.” The following prayer may
be also subjoined : “ Thou art self-existent, thou art the
“most excellent ray; thou givest effulgence: grant it
“unto me.” This is explained as an allusion to the seven
tays of the sun, four of which are supposed to point towards
the four quarters, one upwards, one downwards ; and the
seventh, which is centrical, is the most excellent of all,
and is here addressed in a prayer, which is explained as
signifying, ‘‘ May the supreme ruler, who generates all
ul things, whose luminous ray is self-existent, who is the
“ sublime cause of light, from whom worlds receive illumina-
“ tion, be favourable to us.” After presenting an oblation to


the sun, in the mode to be forthwith explained, the Gayatri —


must be next invoked, in these words: “ Thou art light; thou
art seed ; thou art immortal life ; thou art called effulgent :
beloved by the gods, defamed by none, thou art the holiest
sacrifice.” And it should be afterwards recited measure
by measure ; then the two first measures as one hemistich,
and the third measure as the other; and, lastly, the three
measures without interruption. The same text is then in-
voked in these words: “ Divine text, who dost grant our
“ best wishes, whose name is trisyllable, whose import is the
“ power of the Supreme Being; come, thou mother of the
“ Védas, who didst spring from Braume, be constant here.”
- The Gayatri? is then pronounced inaudibly with the triliteral
monosyllable and the names of the three lower worlds, a
hundred or a thousand times, or as often as may be practi-
cable, counting the repetitions on a rosary of gems set in
gold, or of wild grains. For this purpose, the seeds of the
putrajiva, vulgarly named piténhid, are declared preferable.
The following prayers from the Vishiu purana conclude
these repetitions :* “ Salutation to the sun ; to that lumi-


* I omit the very tedious detuil respecting sins expiated by a set
number of repetitions ; but in one instance, as an atonement for un-


OF THE HINDUS. 135


“nary, O Braue, who is the light of the pervader, the
“pure generator of the universe, the cause of efficacious
“rites.” 2d. “I bow to the great cause of day (whose
“ emblem is a full-blown flower of the yavé tree), the mighty
“ Juminary sprung from Cagyapa, the foe of darkness, the
“ destroyer of every sin.” Or the priest walks a turn through
the south, rehearsing a short text : “ I follow the course of
“ the sun ;” which is thus explained, “ As the sun in his


“course moves round the world by the way of the south,


“ so do I, following that luminary, obtain the benefit arising
“ from a journey round the earth by the way of the south.”

_ The oblation above-mentioned, and which is called arg’ha,
consists of tila, flowers, barley, water, and red-sanders-wood,
in a clean copper vessel, made in the shape of a boat; this
the priest places on his head, and thus presents it with
the following text: “ He who travels the appointed path
“ (namely, the sun) is present in that pure orb of fire, and


“in the ethereal region ; he is the sacrificer at religious rites,


“and he sits in the sacred close; never remaining a single
“ day in the same spot, yet present in every house, in the
“ heart of every human being, in the most holy mansion, in


warily eating or drinking what is forbidden, it is directed, that eight
hundred repetitions of the Gayatri should be preceded by three sup-
pressions of breath, touching water during the recital of the following
text : “ The bull roars; he has four horns, three feet, two heads, seven
“ hands, and is bound by a threefold ligature: he is the mighty resplen-
« dent being, and pervades mortal men.” The bull is Religious Duty
personified. His four horns are the Brahmé, or superintending priest ;
the Udgdtrt or chanter of the Samaviéda; the Hotrv, or reader of the
Rigvéda, who performs the essential part of a religious ceremony ; and
the Ad’ hwaryu, who sits in the sacred close, and chants the Yajurvéda.
His three feet are the three Védas. Oblations and sacrifice are his two
heads, roaring stupendously. His seven hands are the Hotri, Maitra-
varuha, Bréhmanach’handasi, Gravastata, Ach’hivac Néshtri, and
Pétré ; names by which officiating priests are designated at certain
solemn rites. The threefold ligature by which he is bound, is worship-
ped in the morning, at noon, and in the evening.


136 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“the subtile ether; produced in water, in earth, in the abode
“of truth, and in the stony mountains, he is that which is

“both minute and vast.” This text is explained as signify-
ing, that the sun is a manifestation of the Supreme Being,
present every where, produced every where, pervading every
place and thing. The oblation is concluded by worshipping
the sun with the subjoined text: “ His rays, the efficient
“causes of knowledge, irradiating worlds, appear like
“ sacrificial fires.”

Preparatory to any act of religion, ablutions must be
again performed in the form prescribed for the mid-day
bath ; the practice of bathing at noon is likewise enjoined
as requisite to cleanliness, conducive to health, and effica-
cious in removing spiritual as well as corporeal defilemeuts :
it must, nevertheless, be omitted by one who is afflicted
with disease ; and a healthy person is forbidden to bathe
immediately after a meal, and without laying aside his
jewels and other ornaments. If there be no impediment,
such as those now mentioned or formerly noticed in speak-
ing of early ablutions, he may bathe with water drawn from
a well, from a fountain, or from the bason of a cataract; but
he should prefer water which lies above ground, choosing a
stream rather than stagnant water, a river in preference to
a small brook, a holy stream before a vulgar river ; and,
above all, the water of the Ganges. In treating of the
bath, authors distinguish various ablutions, properly and
improperly so called ; such as rubbing the body with ashes,
which is named a bath sacred to fire ; plunging into water,
a bath sacred to the regent of this element ; ablutions ac-
companied by the prayers, “O waters! since ye afford
delight,” &c. which constitute the holy bath ; standing in
dust raised by the treading of cows, a bath denominated
from wind or air; standing in the rain during day-light, a
bath named from the sky or atmosphere. The ablutions,


EEE


|
|
|


|


OF THE HINDUS. 137


or bath, properly so called, are performed with the following
ceremonies.

After bathing and cleansing his person, and’pronouncing
as a vow, “ I will now perform ablutions,” he who bathes
should invoke the holy rivers: “O Ganga, Yamuna,
“ Saraswatt, Satadru, Marudvid ha and Jiyiciya ! hear my
“ prayers ; for my sake be included in this small quantity of
“ water with the holy streams of Parushtt, Asicni, and Vi-
“ tasta.” He should also utter the radical prayer, consist-
ing of the words “ Salutation to Narayana.” Upon this
occasion a prayer extracted from the Padma purdia is
often used with this salutation, called the radical text ; and
the ceremony is at once concluded by taking up earth,
and pronouncing the subjoined prayer: “ Earth, sup-
“porter of all things, trampled by horses, traversed by
“ cars, trodden by VisuNvu! whatever sin has been com-
“ mitted by me, do thou, who art upheld by the hundred-
“ armed Crisun a, incarnate in the shape of a boar, ascend
“ my limbs and remove every such sin.”

The text extracted from the Padma purdana follows :
“Thou didst spring from the foot of Visuxv, daughter of
“VisuNv, honoured by him; therefore preserve us from
“ sin, protecting us from the day of our birth, even unto
“death. The regent of airhas named thirty-five millions
“ of holy places in the sky, on earth, and in the space
“between; they are all comprised in thee, daughter of
“Jaunu. Thou art called she who promotes growth;
“among the gods thou art named the lotos; able, wife:
“of Prit’nu, bird, body of the universe, wife of Siva,


“nectar, female cherisher of science, cheerful, favouring


“ worlds, merciful, daughter of Jaunv, consoler, giver
“of consolation. Ganga, who flows through the three
“ worlds, will be near unto him who pronounces these pure
PY ee . . e ”

titles during his ablutions.


138 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


When the ceremony is preferred in its’ full detail, the
regular prayer is a text of the Véda. “ Thrice did Visuxu
“step, and at three strides traversed the universe: happily
“was his foot placed on this dusty earth. Be this obla-
“tion efficacious!” By this prayer is meant, “ may the
“earth thus taken up, purify me.” Cow-dung is next
employed, with a prayer importing, “Since I take up
“ cow-dung, invoking thereon the goddess of abundance,

‘“ may I obtain prosperity!” The literal sense is this :
“T here invoke that goddess of abundance, who is the vehi-
“ cle of smell, who is irresistible, ever white, present in this
“ cow-dung, mistress of all beings, greatest of elements,
“ruling all the senses.” Water is afterwards held up in
the hollow of both hands joined, while the prayer denomi-
nated from the regent of water is pronounced: “ Because
“Varuna, king of waters, spread a road for the sun, there-
“fore do I follow that route. Oh! he made that road in
“ untrodden space to receive the footsteps of the sun. It is
“he who restrains the heart-rending wicked.” The sense is,
“ Varuna, king of waters, who curbs the wicked, made
“an expanded road in the ethereal region to receive the rays
“ of the sun ; I therefore follow that route.” Next, previous
to swimming, a short prayer must be meditated: “ Saluta-
tion to the regent of water ! past are the fetters of Varuna.”
This is explained as importing, that the displeasure of Va-
RUNA at a man’s traversing the waters, which are his fetters,
is averted by salutation : swimming is therefore preceded by
this address. The priest should next recite the invocation
of holy rivers, and thrice throw water on his head from
the hollow of both hands joined, repeating three several
texts. Ist. ‘ Waters! remove this sin, whatever it be, which
“is in me; whether I have done any thing malicious to-

‘ wards others, or cursed them in my heart, or spoken false-

“hoods.” 2d. “ Waters! mothers of worlds! purify us ;


‘


OF THE HINDUs. 139


“ cleanse us by the sprinkled fluid, ye who purify through
“ libations ; for ye, divine waters, do remove every sin.”
3d. “ As a tired man leaves drops of sweat at the foot of a
“tree,” &c. Again, swimming, and making a circuit through
the south, this prayer should be recited: “ May divine
“waters be auspicious to us for accumulation, for gain, and
“for refreshing draughts: may they listen to us, that we


“may be associated with good auspices.” Next reciting
the following prayer, the priest should thrice plunge into


water: “ O consummation of solemn rites ! who dost purify
“when performed by the most grievous offenders ; thou
“ dost invite the basest criminals to purification ; thou dost
“ expiate the most heinous crimes. I atone for sins towards
“the gods, by gratifying them with oblations and sacrifice;
“ Lexpiate sins towards mortals, by employing mortal men
“ to officiate at sacraments. Therefore defend me from the
““Dernicious sin of offending the gods.”

Water must be next sipped with the prayer, “ Lord of
“ sacrifice, thy heart is in the midst of the waters of the
“ ocean,” &c., and the invocation of holy rivers is again
recited. The priest must thrice throw up water with the
three prayers: “ O, waters, since ye afford delight,” &c. ;
and again, with the three subjoined prayers: Ist. “‘ May
“the Lord of thought purify me with an uncut blade of
‘


“ cusa grass and with the rays of thesun. Lord of purity,


‘


_“ may I obtain that coveted innocence which is the wish of


“thee, who art satisfied by this oblation of water; and of
“me, who am purified by this holy grass.” 2d. “‘ May the
-“ Lord of speech purify me,” &c. 3d. “ May the resplen-
“dent sun purify me,” &c.. Thrice plunging into water,
‘the priest should as often repeat the grand expiatory text,
of which YAsnyawa.cya says, “ It comprises the prin-
“ciples of things, and the elements, the existence of the
“ [chaotic] mass, the production and destruction of worlds.”


140 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


This serves as a key to explain the meaning of the text,
which, being considered as the essence of the Védas, is most
mysterious. The author before me seems to undertake the
explanation of it with great awe, and intimates, that he has
no other key to its meaning, nor the aid of earlier commen-
taries. ‘The Supreme Being alone existed: afterwards
“ there was universal darkness: next, the watery ocean was
“ produced by the diffusion of virtue: then did the creator,
“ lord of the universe, rise out of the ocean, and successively
“frame the sun and moon, which govern day and night,
“ whence proceeds the revolution of years; and after them
“he framed heaven and earth, the space between, and the
“ celestial region.’ The terms, with which the text begins,
both signify truth; but are here explained as denoting the
supreme Braume, on the authority of a text quoted from
the Véda: “ Braume is truth, the one immutable being.
“ He is truth and everlasting knowledge.” ‘ During the
“ period of general annihilation,’ says the commentator, ‘ the
“Supreme Being alone existed. Afterwards, during that
* period, night was produced; in other words, there’ was
“ universal darkness.’ “ This universe existed only in dark-
“ ness, imperceptible, undefinable, undiscoverable by rea-
“son, and undiscovered by revelation, as if it were wholly
“immersed in sleep.” (Menu, ch. i. v. 5.) Next, when
the creation began, the ocean was produced by an unseen
power universally diffused: that is, the element of water
was first reproduced, as the means of the creation. “ He
“first, with a thought, created the waters,” &c. (MENU,
ch. i. v. 8.)- Then did the creator, who is lord of the uni-
verse, rise out of the waters. ‘ The Lord of the universe,
* annihilated by the general destruction, revived with his
“own creation of the three worlds.’ Heaven is here ex-
plained, the expanse of the sky above the region of the
stars. The celestial region is the middle world and heavens


[


OF THE HINDUs. 141


above. ‘The author before me has added numerous quota-
tions on the sublimity and efficacy of this text, which
MENv compares with the sacrifice of a horse, in respect of


_its power to obliterate sins.


After bathing, while he repeats this prayer, the priest
should again plunge into water, thrice repeating the text,
“ As a tired man leaves drops of sweat at the foot of a tree,”
&c. Afterwards, to atone for greater offences, he should
meditate the Gayatri, &c. during three suppressions of
breath. He must also recite it measure by measure, hemi-
stich by hemistich; and, lastly, the entire text, without
any pause. As an expiation of the sin of eating with men
of very low tribes, or of coveting or accepting what should
not be received, a man should plunge into water, at the
same time reciting a prayer which will be quoted on ano-
ther occasion. One who has drunk spirituous liquors
should traverse water up to his throat, and drink as much
expressed juice of the moon-plant as he can take up in the
hollow of both hands, while he meditates the triliteral mo-
nosyllable, and then plunge into water, reciting the sub-
joined prayer: “O, Rupra! hurt not our offspring and
** descendants ; abridge not the period of our lives ; destroy
“ not our cows ; kill not our horses ; slay not our proud and
“irritable folks ; because, holding oblations, we always
“ pray to thee!”

Having finished his ablutions, and coming out of the
water, putting on his apparel after cleansing it, having
washed his hands and feet, and having sipped water, the
priest sits down to worship in the same mode which was
directed after the early bath; substituting, however, the
following prayer, in lieu of that which begins with the words,
ei May the sun, sacrifice,” &c., f May the waters purify
“the earth, that she, being cleansed, may purify me. May
“ the lord of holy knowledge purify her, that she, being


142 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ cleansed by holiness, may purify me. May the waters
“free me from every defilement, whatever be my unclean-
“ ness, whether I have eaten prohibited food, done forbidden
“acts, or accepted the gifts of dishonest men.” Another
difference between worship at noon and in the morning,
consists in standing before the sun with uplifted arms instead
of joining the hands in a hollow form. In all other respects
the form. of adoration is similar.

Having concluded this ceremony, and walked in a round
beginning through the south, and saluted the sun, the priest
may proceed to study a portion of the Véda. Turning his
face. towards the east, with his right hand towards the
south and his left hand towards the north, sitting down
with cusa grass before him, holding two sacred blades of
grass on the tips of his left fingers, and placing his right
hand thereon with the palm turned upwards, and having
thus meditated the Gayatri, the priest should recite the
proper text on commencing the lecture, and read as much
of the Védas as may be practicable for him ; continuing the
practice daily until he have read through the whole of the
Védas, and then recommencing the course.

Prayer on beginning a lecture of the Rigvéda: “ I praise
“the blazing fire, whichis first placed at religious rites,
“ which effects the ceremony for the benefit of the votary,
“ which performs the essential part of the rite, which is’the
‘ most liberal giver of gems.”

On beginning a lecture of the Yajurvéda: “1 gather
“thee, O branch of the Véda, for the sake of rain; I pluck
“ thee for the sake of strength. Calves! ye are like unto
“air; (that is, as wind supplies the world by means’ of
“rain, so do ye supply sacrifices by the milking of cows).
“ May the luminous generator of worlds make you attain
“ success in the best of sacraments.”

On beginning a lecture of the Samavéda: “ Regent of


‘


‘


OF THE HINDUs. 143


“ fire, who dost effect all religious ceremonies, approach to
“taste my offering, thou who art praised for the sake of
“ oblations. Sit down on this grass.”

The text which is repeated on commencing a lecture of
the A?harva véda has been already quoted on another occa-
sion: “ May divine waters be auspicious tous,” &e.

In this manner should a lecture of the Védas, or of the
Védangas, of the sacred poems and mythological history,
of law, and other branches of sacred literature, be con-
ducted.. The priest should next proceed to offer barley,
tila, and water to the manes. Turning his face towards
the east, wearing the sacrificial cord on his left shoulder,
he should sit down, and spread cuSa grass before him,
with the tips pointing towards the east. Taking grains
of barley in his right hand, he should invoke the gods.
“ ©, assembled gods! hear my call, sit down on this grass.”
Then throwing away some grains of barley, and putting one
hand over the other, he should pray in these words: “ Gods!
“ who reside in the ethereal region, in the world near us,
“ and in heaven above ; ye, whose tongues are flame, and
“who save all them who duly perform the saeraments,
“ hear my call; sit down on this grass, and be cheerful.”
Spreading the cusa grass, the tips of which must point
towards the east, and placing his left hand thereon and
his right hand above the left, he must offer grains of barley
and water from the tips of his fingers (which are parts
dedicated to the gods), holding three straight blades of
grass so that the tips be towards his thumb, and repeating
this, prayer: ““ May the gods be satisfied; may the holy
“ verses, the scriptures, the devout sages, the sacred poems,
“ the teachers of them, and the celestial quiristers, be satis-
“ fied; may other instructors, human beings, minutes of time,
“moments, instants measured by the twinkling of an eye,
“ hours, days, fortnights, months, seasons, and years, with


144 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ all their component parts, be satisfied herewith.”* Next,
wearing the sacrificial thread round his neck and turning
towards the north, he should offer ¢ila, or grains of barley
with water, from the middle of his hand (which is a part dedi-
cated to human beings), holding in it cusa grass, the middle
of which must rest on the palm of his hand: this oblation
he presents on grass, the tips of which are pointed towards
the north ; and with it he pronounces these words: “ May
“ Sanaca be satisfied; may SANANDANA, SANATANA,
“ Capina, Asuri, Bod’uu, and Parcuasic’nHa, be
“ satisfied herewith.” Placing the thread on his right
shoulder, and turning towards the south, he must offer
tila and water from the root of his thumb (which is a-part
sacred to the progenitors of mankind), holding bent grass
thereon: this oblation he should present upon a vessel of
rhinoceros’ horn placed on grass, the tips of which are
pointed towards the south; and with it he says, “ May
“ fire, which receives oblations presented to our forefathers,
“be satisfied herewith; may the moon, the judge of de-
“ parted souls, the sun, the progenitors who are purified
“ by fire, those who are named from their drinking the
“juice of the moon-plant, and those who are denominated
“ from sitting on holy grass, be satisfied herewith!” He
must then make a similar oblation, saying, “ May NArA-
“ anya, PArASarya, Suca, SAcatya, YAJNYAWAL-
cya, JATucARNA, CATYAYANA, ApasTAMBA, Bav-
‘ p’HAYANA, VAcnacuti, VarsavApi, Hint, LécAcsni,
“ MarrrAyani, and AinprAyani, be satisfied herewith.”
He afterwards offers three oblations of water mixed with
tila from the hollow of both hands joined, and this he
repeats fourteen times with the different titles of Yama,


“


‘


* The verb is repeated with each term, “ May the ae verses be
“ satisfied ; may the Védas be satisfied,” &c.


OF THE HINDUS. 145


_ which are considered as fourteen distinct forms of the same


deity. “ Salutation to Yama; salutation to DnzRMARAJA,
“or the king of duties; to death; to ANTAcA, or the
“ destroyer; to VaivaswaTa, or the child of the sun;
“to time ; to the slayer of all beings; to AUSuMBARA, or
“ Yama, springing out of the racemiferous fig-tree; to him
“ who reduces all things to ashes; to the dark-blue deity;
“to him who resides in the supreme abode; to him whose
“ belly is like that of a wolf; to the variegated being; to the
“ wonderful inflictor of pains.” Taking up grains of Zila,
and throwing them away, while he pronounces this address
to fire: ‘““ Eagerly we place and support thee; eagerly we
7 give thee fuel; do thou fondly invite the progenitors,
“who love thee, to taste this pious oblation:” let him
invoke the progenitors of mankind in these words: “‘ May
“our progenitors, who are worthy of drinking the juice
“of the moon-plant, and they who are purified by fire,
“approach us through the paths which are travelled by
“gods; and, pleased with the food presented at this
“sacrament, may they ask for more, and preserve us
“from evil.” He should then offer a triple oblation of
water with both hands, reciting the following text, and
saying, “ I offer this tila and water to my father, such a
“one sprung from such a family.” He must offer similar
oblations to his paternal grandfather, and great-grandfather ;
and another set of similar oblations to his maternal grand-
father, and to the father and grandfather of that ancestor :
a similar oblation must be presented to his mother, and
single oblations to his paternal grandmother and great-
grandmother : three more oblations are presented, each to
three persons, paternal uncle, brother, son, grandson,
daughter’s son, son-in-law, maternal uncle, sister’s son,


- father’s sister’s son, mother’s sister, and other relations.


The text alluded to bears this meaning : ‘‘ Waters, be the
VOL. ‘I. L


146 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ food of our progenitors : satisfy my parents, ye who con- _
“ vey nourishment, which is the drink of immortality, the
“ fluid of libations, the milky liquor, the confined and
“ promised food of the manes.”*

The ceremony may be concluded with three voluntary
oblations : the first presented like the oblations to deities,
looking towards the east, and with the sacrificial cord
placed on his left shoulder; the second, like that offered
to progenitors, looking towards the south, and with the
string passed over his right shoulder. The prayers which
accompany these offerings are subjoined: Ist. “ May the
“ gods, demons, benevolent genii, huge serpents, heavenly
“ quiristers, fierce giants, blood-thirsty savages, unmelodi-
“ ous guardians of the celestial treasure, successful genii,
“ spirits called Cushmanda, trees, and all animals which
“ move in air or in water, which live on earth, and feed
“abroad; may all these quickly obtain contentment,
“through the water presented by me.” 2nd. “ To satisfy
“ them who are detained in all the hells and places of tor-
“ ment, this water is presented by me.” 3d. “ May those
“ who are, and those who are not, of kin to me, and those
“‘ who were allied to me in a former existence, and all who
“ desire oblations of water from me, obtain perfect content-
“ment.” The first text, which is taken from the Samavéda,
differs a little from the Yajurvéda: “Gods, benevolent
“‘ genii, huge serpents, nymphs, demons, wicked beings,
“ snakes, birds of mighty wing, trees, giants, and all who
“traverse the ethereal region, genii who cherish science,
“animals that live in water or traverse the atmosphere,
“creatures that have no abode, and all living animals
“ which exist in sin or in the practice of virtue ; to satisfy
“them is this water presented by me.” Afterwards the


* See a remark on this passage below, page 170, note.


Ee


OF THE HINDUS. 147


priest should wring his lower garment, pronouncing this
text: “‘ May those who have been born in my family, and
“have died, leaving no son nor kinsman bearing the same
“name, be contented with this water which I present by
“ wringing it from my vesture.” Then placing his sacri-
ficial cord on his left shoulder, sipping water, and raising
up his arms, let him contemplate the sun, reciting a
prayer inserted above: “‘ He who travels the appointed
“path,” &c. The priest should afterwards present an
oblation of water to the sun, pronouncing the text of the
Vishnu purana which has been already cited, “ Salutation
“to the sun,” &c. He then concludes the whole ceremony
by worshipping the sun with a prayer above quoted :
“ Thou art self-existent,” &c. ; by making a circuit through
the south, while he pronounces, “ I follow the course of
“the sun ;” and by offering water from the hollow of his hand,
while he salutes the regents of space and other Deities ;
“ Salutation to space ; to the regents of space, to BRanMA,
“to the earth, to salutary herbs, to fire, to speech, to the
“ Jord of speech, to the pervader, and to the mighty Deity.”


Wie


On the Revicious Ceremontess of the Hinpus,


and of the BRAuMENS especially.


ESSAY II.


[From . the. Asiatie Researches, vol. vii. p. 232—285. Calcutta,
; 180]. 4to.]


A rorMER essay on this subject* described the daily
ablutions performed with prayers and acts of religion by
every Brihmen. His next daily duty is the performance
of the five great sacraments. The first, consisting in the
study of the Véda, has been already noticed; the sacra-
ments of the manes, of deities, and of spirits, slightly
touched upon in the first essay, will be made the subject
of the present one ; and the hospitable reception of guests
will be followed in the next by a description of the various
ceremonies which must be celebrated at different periods,
from the birth to the marriage of a Hindu.

The sacrament of deities consists in oblations to fire with
prayers addressed to various divinities ; and it is exclusive
of the offerings of perfumes and blossoms before idols. It
does not fall within my present plan to describe the manner
in which the several sects of Hindus + adore their gods, or
the images of them ; and [ shall therefore restrict myself
to explain the oblations to fire, and then proceed to deseribe


* Ante, p. 123.


t See note A, at the end of the present Essay.


iin a


Ee


RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES OF THE HINDUs. 149


funeral rites and commemorative obsequies, together with
the daily offerings of food and water, to the manes of
ancestors.

I am guided by the author now before me* in premising
the ceremony of consecrating the fire, and of hallowing the
sacrificial implements ; “because this ceremony is, as it
“were, the ground-work of all religious acts.”

First, the priest smears with cow-dung a level piece of
ground four cubits square, free from all impurities, and shel-
tered by ashed. Having bathed and sipped water, he sits
down with his face towards the east, and places a vessel
of water with cusa grass + on his left; then, dropping his
right knee, and resting on the span of his left hand, he
draws with a root of cua grass a line, one span or twelve
fingers long, and directed towards the east. From the
nearest extremity of this line he draws another at right
angles to it, twenty-one fingers long, and directed towards
the north. Upon this line he draws three others, parallel
to the first, equal to it in length, and distant seven fingers
from each other. The first line is really, or figuratively,
made a yellow line, and is sacred to the earth; the
second is red, and sacred to fire; the third black, and
sacred to BranMmA the creator; the fourth blue, and


* In the former essay, my chief guide was HeLiyun’na, who has
given very perspicuous explanations of the mantras (or prayers used
at religious ceremonies) in several treatises, particularly in one entitled
Brahmana-servaswa. In the present essay, I likewise use a ritual
composed by Buavapéva for the use of Sémavédi priests, and a com-
‘mentary on the mantras by Gu&A VisuXv, as also the Achdrachan-
dricd (a treatise on religious ceremonies observed by Sédras, but
including many of those performed by other classes), and the Aché-
radersa, a treatise on daily duties.

+ Poa Cynosuroides, Ka:nic. On the new moon of Bhadra, a
sufficient quantity of this sort of grass is provided for use during the
whole year.


150 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


sacred to INpra the regent of the firmament; the fifth
white, and sacred to S6ma. He next gathers up the
dust from the edges of these lines, and throws it away
towards the north-east, saying, ‘‘ What was [herein] bad,
“is cast away :” and he concludes by sprinkling water
on the several lines.

Having thus prepared the ground for the reception of the
sacrificial fire, he takes a lighted ember out of the covered
vessel which contains the fire, and throws it away, saying,
“T dismiss far away carnivorous fire; may it go to the
““ realm of Yama, bearing sin [hence].” He then places
the fire before him, saying, “ Earth! Sky ! Heaven!” and
adding, “this other [harmless] fire alone remains here ;
“ well knowing [its office], may it convey my oblation to the
“‘ Gods.” He then denominates the fire according to the
purpose for which he prepares it, saying, “ Fire! thou art
“named so and so ;” and he concludes this part of the
ceremony by silently burning a log of wood, one span long
and smeared with clarified butter.

He next proceeds to place the Brahmé or superintending
priest. Upon very solemn occasions, a learned Brahmana
does actually discharge the functions of superintending
priest ; but, in general, a bundle containing fifty blades of
cusa grass is placed to represent the Brahma. The officiat-
ing priest takes up the vessel of water, and walks round
the fire keeping his right side turned towards it : he then
pours water near it, directing the stream towards the east ;
he spreads cusa grass thereon ; and crossing his right
knee over his left without sitting down, he takes up a single
blade of grass between the thumb and ring finger of his left
hand, and throws it away towards the south-west corner of the
shed, saying, “ What was herein bad, is cast away.” Next,
touching the water, resting the sole of his right foot on his
left ankle, and sprinkling the grass with water, he places the


OF THE HINDUs. 151


Brahma on it, saying, “ Sit on [this] seat until [thy] fee
[be paid thee].” The officiating priest then returns by the
same road by which he went round the fire; and sitting
down again with his face towards the east, names the earth
inaudibly.

If any profane word have been spoken during the pre-
ceding eeremony, atonement must be now made by pro-
nouncing this text: “Thrice did VisuNvu step, and at


~“ three strides traversed the universe : happily was his foot


“placed on the dusty [earth].” The meaning is, since
the earth has been purified by the contact of VisuNu’s
foot, may she (the earth so purified) atone for any profane
word spoken during this ceremony.

If it be intended to make oblations of rice mixed with
milk, curds, and butter, this too is the proper time for mix-
ing them ; and the priest afterwards proceeds to name
the earth in the following prayer, which he pronounces with
downeast look, resting both hands on the ground: ‘‘ We
“adore this earth, this auspicious and most excellent
“earth: do thou, O fire! resist [our] enemies. Thou
“ dost take [on thee] the power [and office] of other[deities].”

With blades of cusa grass held in his right hand, he
must next strew leaves of the same grass on three sides of
the fire, arranging them regularly, so that the tip of one
row shall cover the roots of the other. He begins with
the eastern side, and at three times strews grass there, to
cover the whole space from north to south ; and in like
manner distributes grass on the southern and western sides.
He then blesses the ten regions of space ; and rising a little,
puts some wood * on the fire with a ladle-full of clarified


* The fuel used at sacrifices must be wood of the racemiferous fig-
tree, the leafy Butea, or the Catechu Mimosa. It should seem, how-
ever, that the prickly Adenanthera, or even the Mango, may be used.
The wood is cut into small logs, a span long, and not thicker than a
man’s fist.


152 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


butter, while he meditates in silence on BRaumA, the lord
of creatures.

The priest then takes up two leaves of eusa grass, and
with another blade of the same grass cuts off the length of
a span, saying, “ Pure leaves! be sacred to VisuNvu ;”
and throws them into a vessel of copper or other metal.
Again he takes two leaves of grass, and holding the tips
between the thumb and ring finger of his night hand, and
the roots between the thumb and ring finger of his left, and
crossing his right hand over his left, he takes up clarified
butter on the curvature of the grass, and thus silently casts
some into the fire three several times. He then sprinkles
both the leaves with water, and throws them away. He
afterwards sprinkles with water the vessel containing clarified
butter, and puts it on the fire, and takes it off again, three
times, and thus concludes the ceremony of hallowing the
butter ; during the course of which, while he holds the leaves
of grass in both hands, he recites this prayer: “ May the
“ divine generator [VisuNv] purify thee by means of [this]
“ faultless pure leaf; and may the sun do so, by means of
“ This] rays of light : be this .oblation efficacious.”

The priest must next hallow the wooden ladle by thrice
turning therein his fore-finger and thumb, describing with
their tips the figure of 7 in the inside, and the figure of 9 on
the outside of the bowl of the ladle. Then dropping his
right knee, he sprinkles water from the palms of his hands
on the whole southern side of the fire, from west to east,
saying, “‘ Apirr! [mother of the Gods !] grant me thy ap-
“ probation.” He does the same on the whole western
side, from south to north, saying, “ ANumAt1!* grant me
“thy approbation ;” and on the northern side, saying,
“Saraswati! grant me thy approbation.” And lastly


* The moon wanting a digit of full.


OF THE HINDUS. 153


he sprinkles water all round the fire, while he pronounces
this text, “ Generous sun! approve this rite; approve the
“ performer of it, that he may share its reward. May the
“celestial luminary, which purifies the intellectual soul,
“ purify our minds. May the lord of speech make our
“ prayers acceptable.”

Holding cusa grass in both hands, he then recites an
expiatory prayer, which will be inserted in another place ;
and throwing away the grass, he thus finishes the hallow-
ing of the sacrificial implements: a ceremony which neces-
sarily precedes all other religious rites.

He next makes oblations to fire, with such ceremonies,
and in such form as are adapted to the religious rite which
is intended to be subsequently performed. The sacrifice,
with the three mysterious words, usually precedes and fol-
lows the particular sacrifice which is suited to the occasion ;
being most generally practised, it will be the most proper
specimen of the form in which oblations are made.

Having silently burnt a log of wood smeared with clarified
butter, the priest makes three oblations, by pouring each
time a ladle-full of butter on the fire, saying, “‘ Earth !
“be this oblation efficacious :” “ Sky! be this oblation
“ efficacious :” “ Heaven ! be this oblation efficacious.” On
some occasions he makes a fourth offering in a similar mode,
saying, ““ Earth! Sky! Heaven! be this oblation effica-
“cious.” If it be requisite to offer a mixture of rice, milk,
curds, and butter, this is now done; and the oblations,
accompanied with the names of the three worlds, are
repeated.

As another instance of oblations to fire, the sacrifice to
the nine planets may deserve notice. This consists of nine
oblations of clarified butter with the following prayers :

1. “ The divine sun approaches with his golden car,
“returning alternately with the shades of night, rousing


154 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


‘


* mortal and immortal beings, and surveying worlds : May
“ this oblation to the solar planet be efficacious.”

2. “ Gods! produce that [Moon] which has no foe ;
“ which is the son of the solar orb, and became the off-
“ spring of space, for the benefit of this world ;* produce
“it for the advancement of knowledge, for protection
“ from danger, for vast supremacy, for empire, and for the
“sake of InpRa’s organs of sense: May this oblation to
“ the lunar planet be efficacious.”

3. “ This gem of the sky, whose head resembles fire, is
“ the lord of waters, and replenishes the seeds of the earth :
“* May this oblation to the planet Mars be efficacious.”

4. “ Be roused, O fire! and thou, [O Bup’na !] perfect
“this sacrificial rite, and associate with us ; let this votary
“and all the Gods sit in this most excellent assembly :
“ May this oblation to the planet Mercury be efficacious.”

5. “ O Vrinaspart, sprung from eternal truth, confer
“on us abundantly that various wealth which the most
“ venerable of beings may revere; which shines gloriously
“amongst all people; which serves to defray sacrifices ;
“ which is preserved by strength : May this oblation to the
“ planet Jupiter be efficacious.”

6. “ The lord of creatures drank the invigorating essence
“ distilled from food ; he drank milk and the juice of the
“ moon-plant. By means of scripture, which is truth itself,
“ this beverage, thus quaffed, became a prolific essence, the
“ eternal organ of universal perception, INpRa’s organs of


* According to one legend, a ray of the sun, called sushwmha, be-
came the moon; according to another, a flash of light from the eye
of Arrt was received by space, a goddess; she conceived and bore
S6ma, who is therefore called a son of Arri. This legend may be
found in the Harivansa. CAi1p4sa alludes to it in the Raghuvansa,
(b. 2. v. 75,) comparing SupAcsuiX4, when she conceived Raguy, to
the via lactea receiving the luminary which sprung from the eye of
Arr,


OF THE HINDUS. 155


“sense, the milk of immortality, and honey to the manes
“ of ancestors: May this oblation to the planet Venus be
“ efficacious.”

7. ““ May divine waters be auspicious to us for ac-
“cumulation, for gain, and for refreshing draughts; may
“ they listen to us, that we may be associated with good
“auspices: May this oblation to the planet Saturn be
“ efficacious.”

8. “O DérvA,* which dost germinate at every knot,
“at every joint, multiply us through a hundred, through a
“ thousand descents: May this oblation to the planet of
“ the ascending node be efficacious.”

9. “ Be thou produced by dwellers in this world, to give
“ knowledge to ignorant mortals, and wealth to the indi-
“ gent, or beauty to the ugly: May this oblation to the
“ planet of the descending node be efficacious.”
| I now proceed to the promised description of funeral
rites, abridging the detail of ceremonies as delivered in
rituals, omitting local variations noticed by authors who
, have treated of this subject, and commonly neglecting the
superstitious reasons given by them for the very numerous
ceremonies which they direct to be performed in honour of
persons recently deceased, or of ancestors long since defunct.

A dying man, when no hopes of his surviving remain,
should be laid upon a bed of cusa grass, either in the house
or out of it, if he be a Sédra, but in the open air if he
belong to another tribe. When he is at the point of
t death, donations of cattle, land, gold, silver, or other things,
according to his ability, should be made by him; or
if he be too weak, by another person in his name. His
head should be sprinkled with water drawn from the
Ganges, and smeared with clay brought from the same


* Agrostis linearis. Kania.


156 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


river. A Salagrama* stone ought to be placed near the
dying man; holy strains from the Véda or from sacred
poems should be repeated aloud in his ears, and leaves of
holy basil must be scattered-over his head.

When he expires, the corpse must be washed, petite
and decked with wreaths of flowers; a bit of tutanag,
another of gold, a gem of any sort, and a piece of coral,
should be put into the mouth of the corpse, and bits of
gold in both nostrils, both eyes, and both ears. A cloth
perfumed with fragrant oil must be thrown over the corpse,
which the nearest relations of the deceased must then carry
with modest deportment to some holy spot in the forest, or
near water. The corpse must be preceded by fire, and by
food carried in an unbaked earthen vessel; and rituals
direct, that it shall be accompanied by music of all sorts,
drums, cymbals, and wind and stringed instruments. This
practice seems to be now disused in most provinces of Hin-
dustan; but the necessity of throwing a cloth over the
corpse, however poor the relations of the deceased may be,
is enforced by the strictest injunctions: it is generally the
perquisite of the priest who officiates at the funeral.+

* The Sdlagrémas are black stones found in a part of the Gandact
river, within the limits of Népda/. They are mostly round, and
are commonly perforated in one or more places by worms, or, as the
Hindus believe, by VisuXvu in the shape of a reptile. According to
the number of perforations and of spiral curves in each, the stone is
supposed to contain VisuXvu in various characters. For example,
such a stone perforated in one place only, with four spiral curves in
the perforation, and with marks resembling a cow’s foot, and a long
wreath of flowers, contains Lacsumi NAriyafa. In like manner
stones are found in the Nermadé, near O’ncaér mandatta, which are
considered as types of Siva, andare called Ban-ling. The sélagréma
is found upon trial not to be calcareous: it strikes fire with steel,
and scarcely at all effervesces with acids.

+ In most parts of India the priests who officiate at funerals are held
in disesteem ; they are distinguished by various appellations, as Mahd-


brahmen, &e.—See Digest of Hindu Law, vol. ii, p. 175. (Octavo
edit. vol. ii, p. 61.)


OF THE HINDUS. 157


The corpse is carried out by the southern gate of the town,
if the deceased were a Sidra ; by the western, if he were a
Bréhmana ; by the northern, if he belonged to the mili-
tary class ; and by the eastern portal, if he sprung from the
mercantile tribe. Should the road pass through any in-
habited place, a circuit must be made to avoid it; and
when the procession has reached its destination, after once
halting by the way, the corpse must be gently laid, with the
head towards the south, on a bed of cusa, the tips whereof
are pointed southward. The sons or other relations of the
deceased having bathed in their clothes, must next prepare
the funeral pile with a sufficient quantity of fuel, on a clean
spot of ground, after marking lines thereon to consecrate it,
in a mode similar to that which is practised in preparing a
fire for sacrifices and oblations. They must afterwards
wash the corpse, meditating on Gaya and other sacred
places, holy mountains, the field of the Curus, the rivers
Ganga, Yamuna, Causict, Chandrabhaga, Bhadravacasa,
Gandact, Saray, and Nermada ; Vainava, Varaha, and
Pindaraca, and all other holy places on the face of the earth,
as well as the four oceans themselves.

Some of these ceremonies are only observed at the obse-
quies of a priest who maintained a consecrated fire; his
funeral pile must be lighted from that fire: but at the obse-
quies of other persons, the carrying of food to be left by the
way, and the consecration of the spot whereon the funeral
pile is raised, must be omitted, and any unpolluted fire may
be used: it is only necessary to avoid taking it from
another funeral pile, or from the abode of an outcast, of a
man belonging to the tribe of executioners, of a woman
who has lately borne a child, or of any person who is
unclean.

After washing the corpse, clothing it in clean apparel,
and rubbing it with perfumes, such as sandal-wood, saffron,


158 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


or aloe wood, the relations of the deceased place the
corpse supine with its head towards the north (or resupine,
if it be the body of a woman), on the funeral pile, which is
previously decorated with strung and unstrung flowers, A
cloth must be thrown over it, and a relation of the deceased
taking up a lighted brand, must invoke the holy places
abovementioned, and say, “‘ May the Gods with flaming
mouths burn this corpse!” He then walks thrice round the
pile with his right hand towards it, and shifts the sacrificial
cord to his right shoulder. Then looking towards the
south, and dropping his left knee to the ground, he applies
the fire to the pile near the head of the corpse, saying,
“ Namé! namah!” while the attending priests recite the
following prayer: “ Fire! thou wert lighted by him—may
“ he therefore be reproduced from thee that he may attain
“ the region of celestial bliss. May this offering be auspi-
“ cious.” This, it may be remarked, supposes the funeral
pile to be lighted from the sacrificial fire kept up by the
deceased ; the same prayer is, however, used at the funeral
of a man who had no consecrated hearth.

The fire must be so managed that some bones may remain
for the subsequent ceremony of gathering the ashes. While
the pile is burning, the relations of the deceased take up
seven pieces of wood a span long, and cut them severally
with an axe over the fire-brands (after walking each time
round the funeral pile), and then throw the pieces over their
shoulders upon the fire, saying, “ Salutation to thee who
dost consume flesh.”

The body of a young child under two years old must not
be burnt, but buried. It is decked with wreaths of fragrant
flowers, and carried out by the relations, who bury it in
a clean spot, saying, “ Vamé! namah!” while a priest
chants the song of Yama: “The offspring of the sun,
“ day after day fetching cows, horses, human beings, and


—-


—


OF THE HINDUs. 159


“ cattle; is no more satiated therewith than a drunkard
“ with wine.”

When funeral rites are performed for a person who
died in a foreign country, or whose bones cannot be found,
a figure is made with three hundred and sixty leaves of the
Butea, oras many woollen threads, distributed so as to repre-
sent the several parts of the human body according to a
fancied analogy of numbers ; round the whole must be tied
a thong of leather from the hide of a black antelope, and
over that a woollen thread ; it is then smeared with barley-
meal mixed with water, and must be burnt as an emblem
of the corpse.

After the body of the deceased has been burnt in the
mode above mentioned, all who have touched or followed
the corpse must walk round the pile, keeping their left
hands towards it, and taking care not to look at the fire.
They then walk in procession, according to seniority, to a
river or other running water, and after washing and again
putting on their apparel, they advance into the stream.
They then ask the deceased’s brother-in-law, or some other
person able to give the proper answer, “ Shall we present
water?” If the deceased were a hundred years old, the
answer must be simply, “‘ Do so:” but if he were not so
aged, the reply is, “ Do so, but do not repeat the oblation.”
Upon this, they all shift the sacerdotal string to the right
shoulder, and looking towards the south, and being clad in
a single garment without a mantle, they stir the water with
the ring-finger of the left hand, saying, “ Waters, purify us.”
With the same finger of the right hand they throw up some
water towards the south, and after plunging once under the
surface of the river, they rub themselves with their hands.
An oblation of water must be next presented from the joined
palms of the hands, naming the deceased and the family
from which he sprung, and saying, ‘‘ May this oblation reach


160 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


thee.” If it be intended to show particular honour to the
deceased, three offerings of water may be thus made.

After finishing the usual libations of water to satisfy the
manes of the deceased, they quit the river and shift their
wet clothes for other apparel ; they then sip water without
swallowing it, and sitting down on the soft turf, alleviate
their sorrow by the recital of the following or other suitable
moral sentences, refraining at the same time from tears
and lamentation.

1. “ Foolish is he who seeks permanence in the human
“ state, unsolid like the stem of the plantain tree, transient
“like the foam of the sea.”

2. “ When a body, formed of five elements to receive the
‘ reward of deeds done in its own former person, reverts to
“* its five original principles, what room is there for regret ?”

3. “ The earth is perishable ; the ocean, the Gods them-
* selves pass away: how should not that bubble, mortal
‘ man, meet destruction ?”

4. “ All that is low must finally perish ; all that is ele-
‘ vated must ultimately fall ; all compound bodies must
‘ end in dissolution, and life is concluded with death.”

5. “ Unwillingly do the manes of the deceased taste the
“tears and rheum shed by their kinsmen; then do not
* wail, but diligently perform the obsequies of the dead.”*

At night, if the corpse were burnt by day; or in the
day time, if the ceremony were not completed until night ;
or in case of exigency, whenever the priest approves, the
nearest relation of the deceased takes up water in a new
earthen jar, and returns to the town preceded by a person
bearing a staff, and attended by the rest walking in pro-


‘


é


‘


‘


* The recital of these verses is specially directed by YAsnyawat-
ova, B. 3. v. 7, &e.

+ The purpose of his carrying a staff is to scare evil spirits and
ghosts.


OF THE HINDUs. 161


- cession, and led by the youngest. Going to the door of


his own house, or to a place of worship, or to some spot
near water, he prepares the ground for the oblation of a
funeral cake, by raising a small altar of earth, and marking
lines on it as is practised for other oblations. Then, taking
a brush of cusa grass in his right hand, he washes therewith
the ground, over which cusa grass is spread, saying, “‘ Such
“a one! (naming the deceased, and the family from which
“he sprung) may this oblation be acceptable to thee.”
Next, making a ball of three handfuls of boiled rice mixed
with tila,* fruits of various sorts, honey, milk, butter, and
similar things, such as sugar, roots, pot-herbs, &c. (or if
that be impracticable, with tila at least), he presents it
on the spot he had purified, naming the deceased, and
saying, “ May this first funeral cake, which shall restore
thy head, be acceptable to thee.” Again purifying the spot
in the same manner as before, and with the same words
addressed to the deceased, he silently puts fragrant flowers,
resin, a lighted lamp, betel-leaves, and similar things, on the
funeral cake, and then presents a woollen yarn, naming the
deceased, and saying, ‘‘ May this apparel, made of woollen
ff yarn, be acceptable to thee.” He next offers an earthen
vessel full of tila and water near the funeral cake, and says,
“ May this vessel of tila and water be acceptable to thee.”

It is customary to set apart on a leaf some food for the
crows, after which the cake and other things which have
been offered must be thrown into the water. This part of
the ceremony is then concluded by wiping the ground, and
offering thereon a lamp, water, and wreaths of flowers,
naming the deceased with each oblation, and saying, “ May
“ this be acceptable to thee.”

In the evening of the same day, water and milk must be


* Sesamum Indicum, Lunn.
VOL. I. M


162 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


suspended in earthen vessels before the door, in honour of
the ‘deceased, with this address to him, “Such a one
“deceased! bathe here; drink this :” and the same cere-
mony may be repeated every evening until the period of
mourning expire.

When the persons who attended the funeral return home
and approach the house-door (before the ceremony of sus-
pending water and milk, but after the other rites above-
mentioned), they each bite three leaves of nimba* between
their teeth, sip water, and touch a branch of Samt+ with
their right hands, while the priest says, ““ May the Sami tree
“ atone for sins.” Each mourner then touches fire, while the
priest says, “ May fire grant us happiness;” and standing
between a bull and a goat, touches both those animals
while the priest recites an appropriate prayer.{ Then, after
touching the tip of a blade of dérva grass, a piece of coral,
some clarified butter, water, cow-dung, and white mustard-
seed, or rubbing his head and limbs with the butter and
mustard-seed, each man stands on a stone, while the priest
says for him, “ May I be firm like this stone ;” and thus he
enters his house.

During ten days, funeral cakes, together with libations
of water and ¢ila, must be offered as on the first day; aug-
menting, however, the number each time, so that ten cakes,
and as many libations of water and tila, be offered on the
tenth day ; and with this further difference, that the address
varies each time. On the second day the prayer is, “ May
“this second cake, which shall restore thy ears, eyes,
“and nose, be acceptable;” on the third day, “ this


* Melia Azadirachta, Linn.

+ Adenanthera aculeata, or Prosopis aculeata.

{ I must for the present omit it, because it is not exhibited at full
length in any work I have yet consulted.


OF THE HINDUS. 163


“third cake, which shall restore thy throat, arms, and
“breast ;” on the fourth, “thy navel and organs of ex-
“ cretion ;” on the fifth, ‘‘thy knees, legs, and feet ;” on
the sixth, “all thy vitals ;” on the seventh, “ all thy
“veins ;” on the eighth, “ thy teeth, nails, and hair ;” on
the ninth, “thy manly strength;” on the tenth, “ May
“ this tenth cake, which shall fully satisfy the hunger and
“ thirst of thy renewed body, be acceptable to thee.” Dur-
ing this period, a pebble wrapt up in a fragment of the
deceased’s shroud is worn by the heir supended on his neck.
To that pebble, as a type of the deceased, the funeral cakes
are offered. The same vessel in which the first oblation was
made must be used throughout the period of mourning ;
this vessel, therefore, is also carried by the heir in the frag-
ment of the shroud. He uses that slip of cloth taken from
the winding-sheet as a sacrificial cord, and makes the obla-
tions every day on the same spot ; should either the vessel
or the pebble be lost by any accident, the offerings must be
recommenced.

If the mourning last three days only, ten funeral cakes
must be nevertheless offered, three on the first and third
days, and four on the second ; if it lasts no more than one
day, the ten oblations must be made at once.

All the kinsmen of the deceased, within the sixth degree
of consanguinity, should fast for three days and nights, or
one at the least ; however, if that be impracticable, they may
eat a single meal at night, purchasing the food ready pre-
pared, but on no account preparing victuals at home. So
long as the mourning lasts, the nearest relations of the
deceased must not exceed one daily meal, nor eat flesh-
meat, nor any food seasoned with factitious salt ; they must
use a plate made of the leaves of any tree but the plantain,
or else take their food from the hands of some other persons ;
they must not handle a knife, or any other implement made
M 2


164 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


of iron, nor sleep upon a bedstead, nor adorn their persons,
but remain squalid, and refrain from perfumes and other
gratifications ; they must likewise omit the daily ceremonies
of ablution and divine worship. On the third and fifth days,
as also on the seventh and ninth, the kinsmen assemble,
bathe in the open air, offer tila and water to the deceased,
and take a repast together ; they place lamps at cross
roads, and in their own houses, and likewise on the way
to the cemetery, and they observe vigils in honour of the
deceased.

On the last day of mourning, or earlier in those countries
where the obsequies are expedited on the second or third
day, the nearest kinsman of the deceased gathers his ashes
after offering a sradd’ha singly for him.

In the first place, the kinsman smears with cow-dung
the spot where the oblation is to be presented ; and after
washing his hands and feet, sipping water, and taking up
cusa grass in his hand, he sits down on a cushion pointed
towards the south and placed upon a blade of cuSa grass,
the tip of which must also point towards the south. He
then places near him a bundle of cusa grass, consecrated by
pronouncing the word namah! or else prepares a fire for
oblations ; then lighting a lamp with clarified butter or with
oil of sesamum, and arranging the food and other things in-
tended to be offered, he must sprinkle himself with water,
meditating on VisuNu surnamed the lotos-eyed, or revolv-
ing in his mind this verse, “ Whether pure or defiled, or
“ wherever he may have gone, he who remembers the being
“‘ whose eyes are like the lotos, shall be pure externally
“and internally.” Shifting the sacerdotal cord on his right
shoulder, he takes up a brush of cusa grass, and presents
water together with ¢i/a and with blossoms, naming the
deceased and the family from which he sprung, and saying,
“ May this water for ablutions be acceptable to thee.”


OF THE HINDUS. 165


Then saying, “‘ May this be right,” he pronounces a vow
or solemn declaration. ‘‘ This day I will offer on a bundle
“of cusa grass (or, if such be the custom, “on fire”) a
“ $rad@ha for a single person, with unboiled food, together
“ with clarified butter and with water, preparatory to the
“gathering of the bones of such a one deceased.” The
priests answering “do so,” he says “namé! namah !”


while the priests meditate the Gayatrt, and thrice repeat,
“* Salutation to the Gods, to the manes of ancestors, and to


«


“ mighty saints ; to SwAnA [goddess of fire]; to Swad’hé
“‘Tthe food of the manes]: salutation unto them for ever
“and ever.”

He then presents a cushion made of cusa grass, naming
the deceased, and saying, “‘ May this be acceptable unto
“ thee ;” and afterwards distributes meal of sesamum, while
the priests recite, ‘May the demons and fierce giants that sit
“on this consecrated spot be dispersed: and the blood-
. thirsty savages that inhabit the earth, may they go to any

other place to which their inclinations may lead them.”

Placing an oval vessel with its narrowest end towards
the south, he takes up two blades of grass, and breaking
off a span’s length, throws them into the vessel ; and after
sprinkling them with water, makes a libation, while the
priests say, “ May divine waters be auspicious to us for ac-
“cumulation, for gain, and for refreshing draughts ; may
“ they listen to us, and grant that we may be associated
“ with good auspices.” He then throws in tila, while the
priests say, “Thou art tila, sacred to S6ma ; framed by
“the divinity, thou dost produce celestial bliss [for him
“ that makes oblations] ; mixed with water, mayest thoulong
“ satisfy our ancestors with the food of the manes : be this
“ oblation efficacious.” He afterwards silently casts into
the vessel perfumes, flowers, and dérva grass. Then tak-
ing up the vessel with his left hand, putting two blades of


166 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


grass on the cushion with their tips pointed to the north, he
must pour the water from the argha thereon. The priests
meantime recite, “ The waters in heaven, in the atmosphere,
“ and on the earth, have been united [by their sweetness] with
“* milk : may those silver waters, worthy of oblation, be aus-
“‘ picious, salutary, and exhilarating to us ; and be happily
“ offered: may this oblation be efficacious.” He adds
“ namah,” and pours out the water, naming the deceased,
and saying, “ May this argha be acceptable unto thee.”
Then oversetting the vessel, and arranging in due order the
unboiled rice, condiments, clarified butter, and other requi-
sites, he scatters ¢ila, while the priests recite, “‘ Thrice did
“VisuNv step,” &c. He next offers the rice, clarified
butter, water, and condiments, while he touches the vessel
with his left hand, and names the deceased, saying, “ May
“this raw food, with clarified butter and condiments, to-
“ vether with water, be acceptable unto thee.” After the
priests have repeated the Gayatrt, preceded by the names
of the worlds, he pours honey or sugar upon the rice, while
they recite this prayer: “ May the winds blow sweet, the
“ rivers flow sweet, and salutary herbs be sweet, unto us;
“ may night be sweet, may the mornings pass sweetly ; may
“the soil of the earth, and heaven, parent [of all produc-


‘


“‘ tions], be sweet unto us; may [S6m4] king of herbs and _


“ trees be sweet ; may the sun be sweet, may kine be sweet
“unto us.” He then says, “ Wamé! namah!” while the
priests recite, “ Whatever may be deficient in this food,
“whatever may be imperfect in this rite, whatever may
“ be wanting in its form, may all that become faultless.”
He should then feed the Brahmanas whom he has as-
sembled, either silently distributing food among them, or
adding a respectful invitation to them to eat. When he has
given them water to rince their mouths, he may consider the
deceased as fed through their intervention. The priests


OF THE HINDUS. 167


again recite the Gayatri and the prayer, “ May the winds
“ blow sweet,” &c., and add the subjoined prayers, which
should be followed by the music of flagelets, lutes, drums, &c.
1. “ The embodied spirit, which hath a thousand heads,
a thousand eyes, a thousand feet, stands in the human
“ breast, while he totally pervades the earth.” 2. “That being
“js this universe, and all that has been or will be; he is
“ that which grows by nourishment, and he is the distributor
“ of immortality.” 3. “Such is his greatness ; and therefore
“is he the most excellent embodied spirit : the elements of
“the universe are one portion of him; and three portions
“ of him are immortality in heaven.” 4. “ That threefold
“ being rose above [this world]; and the single portion of
“ him remained in this universe, which consists of what does,
“and what does not, taste [the reward of good and bad
“ actions] : again he pervaded the universe.” 5. “ From him
% sprung VrirAs*; from whom [the first] man was pro-
“duced: and he, being successively reproduced, peopled
“the earth.” 6. “ From that single portion, sumamed the
“universal sacrifice, was the holy oblation of butter and
“ curds produced ; and this did frame all cattle, wild or
“domestic, which are governed by instinct.” 7, “ From
“ that universal sacrifice were produced the strains of the
“ Rich and Séman ; from him the sacred metres sprung ;
“ from him did the Yajush proceed.” 8. “From him were
“produced horses and all beasts that have two rows of
“teeth ; from him sprung cows ; from him proceeded goats
“and sheep.” 9. “Him the Gods, the demigods named
Sa@hya, and the holy sages, consecrated + as a victim on
“sacred grass; and thus performed a solemn act of re-
“‘ligion.” 10. “Into how many portions did they divide this
“being whom they immolated? what did his mouth be-


“


* See translation of Menu, Ch. i. v. 32.
+ Literally, “immolated ;”’ but the commentator says, “ consecrated.”
y) ; 1


168 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“come? what are his arms, his thighs, and his feet now
“called ?” 11. “His mouth became a priest ; his arm was
“made a soldier ; his thigh was transformed into a hus-
“ bandman; from his feetsprung the servile man.” 12. “The
“ moon was produced from his mind ; the sun sprung from
“his eye ; air and breath proceeded from his ear ; and fire
“ rose from his mouth.” 13. “‘ The subtile element was pro-
“duced from his navel ; the sky from his head; the earth
“ from his feet ; and space from his ear: thus did he frame
“worlds.” 14. “‘Inthat solemn sacrifice which the Gods
“ performed with him as a victim, spring was the butter,
“summer the fuel, and sultry weather the oblation.” 15.
“Seven were the moats [surrounding the altar]; thrice
“ seven were the logs of holy fuel ; at that sacrifice which
“ the Gods performed, binding this being as the victim.” 16.
“ By that sacrifice the Gods worshipped this victim: such
“‘ were primeval duties ; and thus did they attain heaven,
“ where former Gods and mighty demigods abide.”*

Next spreading cusa grass near the fragments of the re-
past, and taking some unboiled rice with tila and clarified
butter, he must distribute it on the grass, while the priests
recite for him these prayers: “ May those in my family
“ who have been burnt by fire, or who are alive and yet un-
“ burnt, be satisfied with this food presented on the ground,
“and proceed contented towards the supreme path [of
“ eternal bliss]. May those who have no father nor mother,
“nor kinsman, nor food, nor supply of nourishment, be
“ contented with this food offered on the ground, and attain,
“ like it, a happy abode.” He then gives the Brahmanas


* I think it unnecessary to quote from the commentary the explana-
tion of this curious passage of the Véda as it is there given, because
it does not really elucidate the sense ; the allegory is, for the most part,
sufficiently obvious, Other prayers may be also recited on the same
occasion: it would be tedious to insert them all in this place.


OF THE HINDUS. 169


water to rince their mouths; and the priests once more
recite the Gayatri and the prayer, “ May the winds blow
“ sweet,” &e.

Then taking in his left hand another vessel containing
tila blossoms and water, and in his right a brush made of
cuSa grass, he sprinkles water over the grass spread on the
consecrated spot, naming the deceased, and saying, ‘“‘ May
“ this ablution be acceptable to thee :” he afterwards takes
a cake or ball of food mixed with clarified butter, and pre-
sents it, saying, “ May this cake be acceptable to thee ;”
and deals out the food with this prayer: “ Ancestors, re-
“‘joice; take your respective shares, and be strong as
“bulls.” Then walking round by the left to the northern
side of the consecrated spot, and meditating, ‘‘ Ancestors
“be glad; take your respective shares and be strong as
“bulls,” he returns by the same road, and again sprinkles
water on the ground to wash the oblation, saying, “ May
“ this ablution be acceptable to thee.”

Next, touching his hip with his elbow, or else his right
side, and having sipped water, he must make six libations
of water with the hollow palms of his hand, saying, “ Salu-
“tation unto thee, O deceased, and unto the saddening [hot]
“ season ; salutation unto thee, O deceased, and unto the
“month of tapas [or dewy season] ; salutation unto thee,
“© deceased, and unto that [season] which abounds with
“ water; salutation unto thee, O deceased, and to the nec-
“ tar [of blossoms]; salutation unto thee, O deceased, and
“ to the terrible and angry [season] ; salutation unto thee, O
“ deceased, and to female fire [or the sultry season].”*

He next offers a thread on the funeral cake, holding
the wet brush in his hand, naming the deceased, and
saying, “ May this raiment be acceptable to thee ;” the


* See note B, at the end of the present Essay.


170 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


priests add, ‘“ Fathers, this apparel is offered unto you.” He
then silently strews perfumes, blossoms, resin, and betel-
leaves on the funeral cake, and places a lighted lamp on it.
He sprinkles water on the bundle of grass, saying, “ May
“ the waters be auspicious ;” and offers rice, adding, “ May
“the blossoms be sweet, may the rice be harmless ;” and
then pours water on it, naming the deceased, and saying,
“ May this food and drink be acceptable unto thee.” In
the next place he strews grass over the funeral cake and
sprinkles water on it, reciting this prayer, ‘“ Waters ! ye are
“ the food of our progenitors ; satisfy my parents, ye who
“convey nourishment, which is ambrosia, butter, milk,
“ cattle, and distilled liquor.”* Lastly, he smells some of
the food, and poises in his hand the funeral cakes, saying,
“ May this ball be wholesome food ;” and concludes by pay-
ing the officiating priest his fee, with a formal declaration,
“I do give this fee (consisting of so much money) to such
“a one (a priest sprung from such a family, and who uses
“such a Véda and such a Séc’ha of it), for the purpose of
“ fully completing the obsequies this day performed by me
“in honour of one person singly, preparatory to the gather-
“ing of the bones of such a one, deceased.”

After the priest has thrice said, “‘ Salutation to the Gods,
“ to progenitors, to mighty saints,” &c., he dismisses him ;
lights a lamp in honour of the deceased ; meditates on
Henri with undiverted attention; casts the food and other
things used at the obsequies into the fire; and then pro-


* The former translation of this text (in the first Essay on the Re-
ligious Ceremonies of the Hindus, ante, p. 146) was erroneous in several
places ; and I still am not perfectly confident that I rightly under-
stand it. The term (céla/a) which the commentator explains as signi-
fying cattle, literally means “fit to be tied to a pole or stake.” The
reading of the next term was erroneous. I read and translated pari-
Sruta for parisruta ; “ promised” instead of “ distilled.”” The com-
mentator explains it as signifying the nourishment of progenitors.


OF THE HINDUS. 171


ceeds to the cemetery for the purpose of gathering the ashes
of the deceased.

The son or nearest relation of the defunet, accompanied
by his kinsmen, and clothed in clean apparel, repairs to the
cemetery, carrying eight vessels filled with various flowers,
roots, and similar things. When arrived there, he does
honour to the place by presenting an. argha, with perfumes,
blossoms, fragrant resins, a lamp, &c. Some of his kins-
men invoke the deities of the cemetery, when the argha is
presented ; others, when flowers are offered ; others again,
when food, fragrant resins, a lighted lamp, water, wreaths
of flowers, and rice are offered, saying, ‘‘ Salutation to the
deities whose mouths are devouring fire.” He advances to
the northern gate * or extremity of the funeral pile, sits down
there, and presents two vessels as an oblation to spirits, with
this prayer, “ May the adorable and eternal Gods, who are
“‘ present in this cemetery, accept from us this eight-fold un-
“perishable oblation: may they convey the deceased to
“ pleasing and eternal abodes, and grant to us life, health,
“and perfect ease. This eight-fold oblation is offered to
“ Siva and other deities: salutation unto them.” Then
walking round the spot with his right side towards it, he
successively places two other vessels, containing eight dif-
ferent things, at each of the three other gates or sides of the
enclosure which surrounds the funeral pile ; and he ‘pre-
sents these oblations with the same formality as before,
sprinkles them with milk, and adds, “ May Siva and the
other deities depart to their respective abodes.” He then
shifts the sacerdotal string to his right shoulder, turns his
face towards the south, silently sprinkles the bones and
ashes with cow’s milk, and, using a branch of Sami and


* The practice of enclosing the funeral pile with temporary walls is
almost universally disused,


172 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


another of palasa* instead of tongs, first draws out from
the ashes the bones of the head, and afterwards the
other bones successively, sprinkles them with perfumed
liquids and with clarified butter made of cow’s milk, and
puts them into a casket made of the leaves of the paldsa :
this he places in a new earthen vessel, covers it with a lid,
and ties it up with thread. Choosing some clean spot where
encroachments of the river are not to be apprehended, he digs
avery deep hole, and spreads cuéa grass at the bottom of it,
and over the grass a piece of yellow cloth; he places
thereon the earthen vessel containing the bones of the de-
ceased, covers it with a lump of mud, together with thorns,
moss and mud, and plants a tree in the excavation, or raises
a mound of masonry, or makes a pond, or erects a stan-
dard. He, and the rest of the kinsmen, then bathe in their
clothes. At a subsequent time, the son or other near rela-
tion fills up the excavation and levels the ground ; he
throws the ashes of the funeral pile into the water, cleans
the spot with cow-dung and water, presents oblation to
Siva and other deities in the manner beforementioned,
dismisses those deities, and casts the oblation into water. T'o
cover the spot where the funeral pile stood, a tree should be
planted, or a mound of masonry be raised, ora pond be dug,
or a standard be erected.}+ Again, at a subsequent time,


* Butea frondosa, Linn. ; and superba, Roxs.

+ This does not appear to be very universally practised; but a
monument is always erected on the spot where a woman has burnt
herself with her husband’s corpse, or where any person has died a
legal voluntary death. A mausoleum is, however, often built in
honour of a Hindu prince or noble; it is called in the Hindustani
language, a ch’hetri; and the practice of consecrating a temple in
honour of the deceased is still more common, especially in the centri-
cal parts of India. I shall take some future occasion to resume a
subject alluded to in this note; but in the mean time it may be fit to
remark, thatlegal suicide was formerly common among the Hindus, and


i


OF THE HINDUS. 173


the son, or other near relation, carries the bones, which
were so buried, to the river Ganges: he bathes there, rubs
the vessel with the five productions of kine, puts gold, honey,
clarified butter and tila on the vessel, and looking towards
the south, and advancing into the river, with these words,
“ Be there salutation unto justice,” throws the vessel into
the waters of the Ganges, saying, ‘‘ May he (the deceased)
be pleased with me.” Again bathing, he stands upright,
and contemplates the sun ; then sipping water, and taking
up cuéa grass, tila, and water, pays the priests their fees.

So long as mourning lasts after gathering the ashes, the
near relations of the deceased continue to offer water with
the same formalities and prayers as abovementioned, and to
refrain from factitious salt, butter, &e. On the last day of
mourning, the nearest relation puts on neat apparel, and
causes his house and furniture to be cleaned ; he then goes
out of the town, and after offering the tenth funeral cake in


is not now very rare, although instances of men’s burning themselves
have not perhaps lately occurred so often as their drowning themselves
in holy rivers. The blind father and mother of the young anchorite,
whom DaSarar’Ha slew by mistake, burnt themselves with the corpse
of their son. The scholiast of the Raghuvansa, in which poem, as well
as inthe RimAyaXa, this story is beautifully told, quotes a text of law
to prove that suicide is in such instances legal, I cannot refrain from
also mentioning, that instances are not unfrequent where persons
afflicted with loathsome and incurable diseases have caused them-
selves to be buried alive. I hope soon to be the channel of communi-
cating to the Asiatic Society a very remarkable case of a leper rescued
from a premature grave, and radically cured of his distemper. I
must also take this occasion of announcing a very singular practice
which prevails among the lowest tribes of the inhabitants of Berar
and Gondwana. Suicide is not unfrequently vowed by such persons
in return for boons solicited from idols; and to fulfil his vow, the
successful votary throws himself from a precipice named Calabhairava,
situated in the mountains between the Zéapti and Nermadé rivers.
The annual fair held near that spot at the beginning of spring,
usually witnesses eight or ten victims of this superstition.


174 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


the manner before described, he makes ten libations of
water from the palms of his hands, causes the hair of his
head and body to be shaved, and his nails to be cut, and
gives the barbers the clothes which were worn at the fune-
ral of the deceased, and adds some other remuneration.
He then anoints his head and limbs down to his feet with
oil of sesamum, rubs all his limbs with meal of sesamum,
and his head with the ground pods of white mustard ; he
bathes, sips water, touches and blesses various auspicious
things, such as stones, clarified butter, leaves of nimba,
white mustard, dérva grass, coral, a cow, gold, curds,
honey, a mirror, and a conch, and also touches a bambu
staff. He now returns purified to his home, and thus com-
pletes the first obsequies of the deceased.

The second series of obsequies, commencing on the day
after the period of mourning has elapsed, is opened by a
lustration termed the consolatory ceremony, the description
of which must be here abridged, for want of a commentary
to explain all the prayers that are recited at this religious
rite ; for the same reason, an account of the ceremonies
attending the consecration and dismissal of a bull in honour
of the deceased, must for the present be postponed.

The lustration consists in the consecration of four vessels
of water, and sprinkling therewith the house, the furniture,
and the persons belonging to the family. After lighting a
fire, and blessing the attendant Bréhmanas, the priest fills
four vessels with water, and putting his hand into the first,
meditates the Gayatr?, before and after reciting the follow-
ing prayers :

1. “May generous waters be auspicious to us, for
“gain and for refreshing draughts; may they approach
“towards us, that we may be associated with good
- auspices.” 2. “ Earth, afford us ease, be free from
“ thorns, be habitable ; widely extended as thou art, pro-


OF THE HINDUS. 175


“ cure us happiness.” 3. “ O waters! since ye afford de-
“light, grant us food, and the rapturous sight [of the
“ Supreme Being].” 4. “ Like tender mothers, make us
“here partakers of your most auspicious essence.” *

Putting his hand into the second vessel, the priest medi-
tates the Gayatri and the four prayers above quoted, add-
ing some others, and concluding this second consecration
of water by once more meditating the Gdayatrt.

Then taking a lump of sugar and a copper vessel in his
left hand, biting the sugar and spitting it out again, the
priest sips water; afterwards putting his hand into the
third vessel, he meditates the Gayatri and the four prayers
above cited, interposing this, “‘ May Inpra and Varuxa
“‘ [the regents of the sky and of the ocean] accept our obla-
“tions and grant us happiness; may INpra and the che-
“ rishing sun grant us happiness in the distribution of food ;
“ may Inpra and the moon grant us the happiness of
“ attaining the road to celestial bliss and the association of
“ good auspices.” The priest adds, 1. “ May we suffi-
“ciently attain your essence with which you satisfy the
“universe. Waters! grant it to us.” 2. “ May heaven
“be our comfort; may the sky, earth, water, salutary
“herbs, trees, the assembled gods, the creator, and the
“ universe, be our comfort ; may that comfort obviate diffi-


* The translation of several among these prayers is a little varied from
a former version of them (in the First Essay on the Religious Cere-
monies of the Hindus, ante, p. 124, 125), to conform with the different
expositions given in different places by the commentators I have con-
sulted. For the same purpose, I shall here subjoin another version
of the Gayatri: “ Earth! Sky! Heaven! Let us meditate on [these
“and on] the most excellent light and power of that generous, spor-
“ tive, and resplendent Sun, [praying that] it may guide our intellects.”
A paraphrase of this very important text may be found in the preface
to the translation of Menu, p. xviii. See also the Essay on the Védas,
ante, p. 30.


176 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“culties, and become to us the means of attaining our


“ wishes.” 3. “ Make me perfect in [my own person, and
“in the persons of all who are] connected with me; may
“ all beings view me with the [benevolent] eye of the sun:
“I view all beings with the solar eye; let us view each
“ other with the [benevolent] solar eye.” 4. ““ Make me
“perfect in my own person, and in the persons of all who
“are allied to me: may I live long in thy sight; long
“may I live in thy sight.” 5. “ Salutation to thee [O
* fire !] who dost seize oblations, to thee who dost shine, to
“ thee who dost scintillate ; may thy flames burn our foes ;
“* mayest thou, the purifier, be auspicious unto us.” 6. “ Sa-
“Jutation to thee, manifested in lightning; salutation to
“ thee, manifested in thunder ; salutation to thee, O Gop!
“for thou dost endeavour to bestow celestial bliss.” 7.
“ Since thou dost seek to awe the wicked [only], make us
“ fearless ; grant happiness to our progeny, and courage to
“our cattle.” 8. “‘ May water and herbs be friendly to
“us; may they be inimical to him who hates us and whom
“we hate.” 9. “ May we see a hundred years that pure
1 eye, which rises from the east, and benefits the Gods ;
“ may we live a hundred years; may we speak a hundred
4 years ; may we be free from distress a hundred years,
“and again a hundred years.” After another prayer, the
priest again meditates the Gayatri, and thus concludes the
third consecration. He then hallows the fourth vessel of
water in a similar manner, with a repetition of the prayer,
“May the earth be our comfort,” &c., and with some
others, which must be here omitted for the reason before
mentioned.*


‘


‘


* At most religious ceremonies, and especially at the deprecatory
rites, the prayers directed in the several Védas, and in the various
Sdc’hds of them, differ much. Those which are translated in the


Deed


OF THE HINDUS. 177


Though it be not positively enjoined, it is customary,
immediately after this lustration, to give away a vessel of
tila, and also a cow, for the sake of securing the passage
of the deceased over the Vaitarani, or river of hell; whence
the cow so given is called Vaitarani-Phénu. Afterwards
a bed with its furniture is brought, and the giver sits down
near the Braéhmana who has been invited to receive the
present ; after saying, “‘ Salutation to this bed with its fur-
“ niture, salutation to this priest to whom it is given,” he
pays due honour to the Bré&hmaza in the usual form of
hospitality. He then pours water into his hand, saying,
“I give thee this bed with its furniture ;” the priest re-
plies, “‘ Give it.” Upon this he sprinkles it with water,
and taking up cuéa grass, tila, and water, delivers them to
the priest, pouring the water into his hand, with a formal
declaration of the gift and its purpose ; and again delivers a
bit of gold with cusa grass, &c. making a similar formal
declaration. 1. “ This day, I, being desirous of obtaining
“ celestial bliss for such a one defunct, do give unto thee,
“such a one, a Brahmana, descended from such a family,
“ to whom due honour has been shown, this bed and furni-
“ture, which has been duly honoured, and which is sacred
“to Visuxu.” 2. “ This day I give unto thee (so and
“ so) this gold, sacred to fire, as a sacerdotal fee, for the
“ sake of confirming the donation I have made of this bed
“ and furniture.” The Brahmaza both times replies, “ Be
“ it well.” Then lying upon the bed, and touching it with
the upper part of his middle-finger, he meditates. the


present and former essays are mostly taken from the Yajurvéda, and
may be used by any Brdéhmen, instead of the prayers directed in the par-
ticular Véda, by which he should regularly be guided. The subject
of lustrations is curious ; they are performed with various ceremonies,
to avert calamities or to obviate disappointments. Should other en-~
gagements permit it, this topic will be treated in a future essay.


VOL. I. N


178 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES,


Gayatri with suitable prayers, adding, ‘‘ This bed-is sacred
“to Visunv.”

With the same ceremonies, and with similar formal de-
clarations, he next gives away to a Braéhmana (or more
commonly, in both instances, to a married couple) a golden
image of the deceased, or else a golden idol, or both, with
clothes and various sorts of fruit. ‘ Afterwards he distri-
‘ butes other presents among Brahmanas, for the greater
“honour of the deceased; making donations of land, and
‘ giving a chair or stool, clothes, water, food, betel-leaf, a
“lamp, gold, silver, a parasol, an orchard of fruit trees,
‘wreaths of flowers, a pair of shoes, another bed, another
‘ milch cow, and any other presents he may choose to give,
“ such as an elephant, a horse, a carriage, a slave, a house,
‘ and so forth.’

It is hardly necessary to remark on this quotation, that
none but very rich or superstitious persons make these
ample donations, which are not positively enjoined, though
strenuously recommended.

There is some difference in the religious formalities with
which various things are given or accepted, on this or on
any other occasion. In the formal declaration, too, a dif-
ferent tutelary Deity is named, and a different object is
specified ; but, in other respects, the form of the declara-
tion is similar, whatever be the occasion on which the gift
‘is made.

In making a donation of land, the donor sits down with
his face to the east, opposite to the person to whom he
gives it. The donor says, “ Salutation to this land with its
“ produce; salutation to this priest, to whom I give it.”
Then, after showing him honour in the usual form, he
pours water into his hand, saying, “ I give thee this land
“ with its produce.” The other replies, “ Give it.” Upon
which he sprinkles the place with water; and taking up


OF THE HINDUS. 179


water, with holy basil and cusa grass, he pours the water
into the other’s hand, making a formal declaration of the
_ donation and the motive of it. He then delivers a bit of
gold, with cusa grass, &c., declaring his purpose in giving
it, as a sacerdotal fee, to consolidate the donation of land.
The other accepts the gift by a verbal acknowledgment,
and meditates the Gayatri with some other prayers.

A chair or stool is accepted by sitting down on it;
clothes, by putting them on; a parasol, by holding the
handle of it ; shoes or sandals, by standing on them; and
a couch, by lying on it. In these and other donations
there is no variation in the prayers; but the gift of a milch
cow is made with other texts, which the donor recites
standing near the cow, and making a libation of water from
the palms of his hands after the recital of each prayer.
The gift is accepted by holding the animal’s tail.

1. “ May the Goddess, who is the Lacsumi of all
“ beings and resides among the Gods, assume the shape of
“a milch cow and procure me comfort.” 2. “‘ May the
“ Goddess who is RupRAN {in a corporeal form, and who is
“ the beloved of Siva , assume the shape of a milch cow and
“ procure me comfort.” 3, “ May she, who is Lacsumi
“reposing on the bosom of VisuXu; she, who is the
“ Lacsumi of the regent of riches; she, who is the Lacsumi
“ of kings, be a boon-granting cow to me.” 4. “‘ May
‘she, who is the Lacsumi of Braum4; she, who is
“ SwAnA, the wife of fire ; she, who is the exerted power
“ of the sun, moon, and stars, assume the shape of a milch
“ cow for [my] prosperity.” 5. “ Since thou art Swad’ha
“Tthe food] of them, who are chief among the manes of an-
“ cestors, and SwAnA [the consuming power] of them, who
“eat solemn sacrifices ; therefore, being the cow that ex-
“ piates every sin, procure me comfort.” 6. “I invoke
“ the Goddess who is endowed with the attributes of all the

N 2


180 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ Gods, who confers all happiness, who bestows [abodes
“‘ in] all the worlds for the sake of all people.” 7. Hey
“pray to that auspicious Goddess for immortality and
“ happiness.” ;

The remaining ceremonies, omitting for the present the
consecration of a bull, consist chiefly in the obsequies
called Sradd’has. The first set of funeral ceremonies is
adapted to effect, by means of oblations, the reimbodying
of the soul of the deceased, after burning his corpse. The
apparent scope of the second set is to raise his shade from
this world (where it would else, according to the notions
of the Hindus, continue to roam among demons and evil:
spirits) up to heaven, and there deify him, as it were,
among the manes of departed ancestors. For this end, a
sradd@’ha should regularly be offered to the deceased on the
day after mourning expires; twelve other Sradd’has singly
to the deceased in twelve successive months; similar obse-
quies at the end of the third fortnight, and also in the
sixth month, and in the twelfth; and the oblation called
Sapindana, on the first anniversary of his decease. In
most provinces the periods for these sixteen ceremonies,
and for the concluding obsequies entitled Sapizdana, are
anticipated, and the whole is completed on the second or
third day ; after which they are again performed at the
proper times, but in honour of the whole set of progenitors
instead of the deceased singly. The obsequies intended to
raise the shade of the deceased to heaven are thus com-
pleted. Afterwards a Sradd’ha is annually offered to him
on the anniversary of his decease.

The form of the various Sradd’has (for they are nume-
rous*) is so nearly the same, that it will be only necessary


* In a work entitled Nirheya Sindhu I find authority for classing
obsequies under twelve heads. 1. Daily obsequies, either with food or


OF THE HINDUS. 181


to describe that which is performed in honour of progenitors
in general ; and at which three funeral cakes are offered to
three paternal ancestors ; as many to three maternal fore-
fathers, and two to the Viswédévas or assembled Gods. A
srad@’ha in honour of one person singly has been already

After smearing the place with cow-dung, a square altar
of sand is raised on it, one or two fingers high, and a span
nearly in each direction, (It must be triangular at the
obsequies of one recently defunct.) The person who per-
forms the ceremony, first washes his hands and feet, sips
water, and puts a ring of cusa grass on the ring finger of
each hand. He sits down on a cushion of cuSa grass, or of
other materials, placed upon a blade of such grass. He
lights a lamp, reciting a prayer, which will be cited on
another occasion. He places the implements and mate-
rials in regular order, and sprinkles water on himself and
all around, meditating on VisuNv surnamed the lotos-eyed,
and revolving in his mind the couplet, “ Whether pure or
“ defiled,” &c. He now shifts the sacerdotal thread to


with water only, in honour of ancestors in general, but excluding the
Viswédévas. 2, Obsequies for a special cause; that is,in honour of a
kinsman recently defunct. 3. Voluntary obsequies, performed by
way of supererogation, for the greater benefit of the deceased. 4. Ob-
sequies for increase of prosperity, performed upon any accession of
wealth or prosperity, and upon other joyful occasions. 5. A sradd@’ha
intended to introduce the shade of a deceased kinsman to the rest of
the manes. 6. Obsequies performed on appointed days, such as that
of new moon, full moon, sun’s passage into a new sign, &c. 7. A
$rad1’ha to sanctify the food at an entertainment given to a company
of reverend persons. 8. One performed when stated numbers of
priests are fed at the cost of a person who needs purification from
some defilement. 9. A Sradd’ha preparatory to the celebration of any
solemn rite, and considered as a part of such rite. 10. Srédd’has in
honour of deities. 11. Oblations of clarified butter, previous to the
undertaking of a distant journey, 12. A Srddd’ha to sanctify a meal
of flesh meat prepared simply for the sake of nourishment.


182 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


his right shoulder, and solemnly declares his intention of
performing a srad@ha, and the motive of it. He thrice
meditates the Gayatri, and- pronounces the salutation to
superior beings, “ Salutation to the Gods, to the manes of

* ancestors,” &c.

After this preparation he proceeds to invite and to wel-
come the assembled Gods and the manes. First, he places
two little cushions of cusa grass on one side of the altar
for the Viswédévas, and six in front of it for the Pitris.
Each cushion should consist of three blades of grass folded
up. After strewing cusa grass on those cushions, he asks,
“ Shall I invoke the assembled Gods?” Being told “‘ Do
* so,” he thus invokes them: ‘‘ Assembled Gods! hear
my invocation ; come and sit down on this holy grass.”
After scattering barley on the same spot, he meditates this
prayer, “ Assembled Gods! listen to my invocation, ye,
* who reside in the sky; and ye who abide near us [on
earth], or [far off] in heaven; ye, whose tongues are
“ fire; and ye, who defend the funeral sacrifice, sit on this
“* ovass and be cheerful.” He then invites the manes of
ancestors with similar invocations: “ O fire! zealously we
“support thee; zealously we feed thee with fuel ; eagerly
“do thou call our willing ancestors to taste our oblation.”
“ May our progenitors, who eat the moon-plant, who are
“sanctified by holy fires, come by paths, which Gods
“ travel.* Satisfied with ancestral food at this solemn
“ sacrifice, may they applaud and guard us.” He next
welcomes the Gods and manes with oblations of water, &c.
in vessels made of leaves.+ Two are presented to the
Viswédévas, and three to paternal ancestors, and as many


“


“


* The Via Lactea seems to be meant by the path of the Gods.
+ Plantain leaves; or else leaves of the Butea frondosa, or of the
Bassia latifolia.


OF THE HINDUS. 183


to maternal forefathers. Cusa grass is put into each vessel
and water sprinkled on it, while the prayer, “ May divine
“ waters be auspicious to us,” &c. is recited. Barley is
thrown into the vessels intended for the Gods, and ¢ila into
“those intended for the manes of ancestors, with these
prayers, 1. “Barley! thou art the separator,* separate [us]
“ from our natural enemies and from our malicious foes.”
2. “ Thou art tila, sacred to Soma,” &c. At a Sradd’ha
for increase of prosperity, which is performed on many
occasions as a preparative for a solemn act of religion,
barley is thrown into the vessels instead of tila, and the
last prayer is thus varied: “‘ Thou art barley, sacred to
““S6éma: framed by the divinity, thou dost produce celes-
“ tial bliss; mixt with water, mayest thou long satisfy with .
“ nourishment my several progenitors, whose mouths are
“ full of blessings.” The vessels are successively taken
up, repeating each time a prayer before cited: “‘ The
‘ waters in heaven, in the atmosphere, and on the earth,
“have been united with milk,” &e. The cusa grass that
lay on the vessels is put into a Brahmana’s hand, and
that which was under it is held by the person who per-
forms the Sradd’ha, in his own hand; and through it he
successively pours the water out of each vessel on the
Brahmana’s hand. He then piles up the empty vessels in
three sets, and reverses them, saying, while he oversets the
first, “‘ Thou art a mansion for ancestors.”

At the last obsequies for one recently deceased, a
which are named the Sapirdana, the following prayer is
recited when the vessel which has been offered to him is
piled up with the rest: ‘“ May the mansion of those pro-


* Yava signifies barley; in this text it also signifies separator,
being derived from yw, to unmix. Many of the prayers contain similar
quibbles. |


184 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ genitors, who have reached a common abode, and who
“have accordant minds, foster him; may the blessed sa-
“ crifice, sacred to the Gods, be his.” The subjoined
prayer likewise is peculiar to the Sapindana: “ By [the
“ intercession of ] those souls who are mine by affinity, who
“are animated [shades], who have reached a common
“abode, who have accordant minds, may prosperity be
“mine in this world for a hundred years.”

The person who performs the sradd’ha next takes up food
smeared with clarified butter, and makes two oblations to
fire, reciting these prayers: 1. “ May this oblation to fire,
“which conveys offerings to the manes, be efficacious.”
2. “ May this oblation to the moon, wherein the progeni-
“tors of mankind abide, be efficacious.”

Bréhmanas should be fed with the residue of the obla-
tion ; it is accordingly consecrated for that purpose by the
following prayer: “ The vessel that holds thee is the earth;
“its lid is the sky; I offer this residue of an oblation,
* similar to ambrosia, in the undefiled mouth of a priest :
“ may this oblation be efficacious.” The performer of the
srad@ha then points with his thumb towards the food,
saying, “Thrice did VisuXv step,” &c. He adds, “‘ May
“ the demons and giants that sit on this consecrated spot
“be dispersed.” He meditates the Gayatri with the names
of the worlds, and sweetens the food with honey or sugar,
saying, “‘ May winds blow sweet,” &e. He then distributes
the food among Brahmanas ; and when they have eaten
and have acknowledged that they are satisfied, he gives
them water to rince their mouths.

He now proceeds to offer the funeral cakes, consisting of
balls or lumps of food mixed with clarified butter. He
offers three to the paternal forefathers, as many to the
maternal ancestors, and two to the Viswédévas. The
prayers (“ Ancestors! rejoice, take your respective shares,”


‘


‘


OF THE HINDUs. 185


&c.) and the form of the oblation, have been already men-
tioned. It is only necessary to add in this place, that he
wipes his hand with cusa grass in honour of remoter an-
cestors, who thus become partakers of the oblations.

In the next place, he makes six libations of water from
the palms of his hands, with the salutation to the seasons :
“ Salutation unto you, O fathers, and unto the saddening
“season,” &c. By this prayer the manes of ancestors are
doubly saluted ; for the Véda declares, “‘ The six seasons
“are the progenitors of mankind.”

A thread is placed on each funeral cake, to serve as
apparel for the manes, and each time the same words are
repeated, “ Fathers! this apparel is offered unto you.”
Flowers, perfumes, and similar things are added at plea-
sure; but water must be sprinkled on each cake, with the
prayer, ‘‘ Waters, ye are the food of our progenitors,” &c.

The performer of the Sradd’ha then takes up the middle
cake and smells to it; or his wife eats it, if they be soli-
citous for male offspring. In this case the following prayer
must be recited: “ Grant, O progenitors, the conception
“ of a male child, [long lived and healthy, like] the lotos
“and garland [or twins, that sprung from Aswini]; so
“ that, at this season, there may be a person [to fulfil the
“ wishes of the Gods, of the manes, and of human beings].”
He then takes up the cakes successively, smells to them,
throws them into a vessel, and gives away the food to a
mendicant priest or to a cow, or else casts it into the waters.

He then dismisses the manes, saying, “ Fathers, to
“whom food belongs, guard our food and the other
“ things offered by us; venerable and immortal as ye are
“ and conversant with holy truths. Quaff the sweet essence
“ of it, be cheerful, and depart contented by the paths
“which Gods travel.” Lastly, he walks round the spot
and leaves it, saying, ““ May the benefit of this oblation


186 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ accrue to me repeatedly ; may the Goddess of the earth,
“and the Goddess of the sky, whose form is the universe,
“visit me [with present and future happiness]. Father
“and mother! revisit me [when I again celebrate obse-
“ quies]. Séma, king of the manes! visit me for the
“ sake of [conferring] immortality.”

_ A Sréd@ha is thus performed, with an oblation of three
funeral cakes only to three male paternal ancestors, on
some occasions ; or with as many funeral oblations to three
maternal ancestors, on others. Sometimes separate obla-
tions are also presented to the wives of the paternal ances-
tors; at other times, similar offerings are likewise made
to the wives of three maternal ancestors. Thus, at the
monthly $raédd’has celebrated on the day of new-moon,
six funeral cakes are offered to three paternal and as many
maternal male ancestors with their wives: on most other
occasions separate oblations are presented to the female
ancestors. At the obsequies celebrated in the first half of
Aswina, on the day entitled Mahdlayé, funeral cakes are
separately offered to every deceased friend and near rela-
tion: thus, immediately after the oblations to ancestors, a
cake is presented to a deceased wife, then to a son of
daughter, to a brother or sister, to an uncle or aunt, to a
father-in-law, to a preceptor, and lastly to a friend. The
same is observed at the obsequies performed on the day of
an eclipse, or upon a pilgrimage to any holy spot, and
especially to Gayd.

Formal obsequies are performed no less than nmety-six
times in every year; namely, on the day of new moon,
"and on the dates of the fourteen Menwantaras and of four

Yugadyas ; that is, on the anniversaries of the accession of
fourteen Menus and of the commencement of four ages:
also throughout the whole first fortnight of Aéwina, thence
called pitripacsha, and whenever the sun enters a new sign,


OF THE HINDUS, 187


and especially when he reaches the equinox or either sol-
stice ; and, in certain circumstances, when the moon arrives
at Vyatipata, one of the twenty-seven yégas or astrological
divisions of the zodiac. The eighth of Pausha, called
Aindri, the eighth of Magha (when flesh meat should be
offered), and the ninth of the same month, together with
additional obsequies on some of these dates and on a few
others, complete the number abovementioned. Different
authorities do not, however, concur exactly in the number,
or in the particular days, when the sradd’has should be so-
lemnized.

Besides these formal obsequies a daily éradd’ha is like-

wise performed. It consists in dropping food into the hands
of a Brahmana after offering it to six ancestors by name,
with the usual preparatory vow and prayers, and with the
formality of placing three blades of grass as a seat for each
ancestor ; but using a single prayer only for the invocation
of the manes, and omitting the ceremony of welcoming
them with an argha. Libations of water are also made in
honour of progenitors, as noticed in the former essay on
daily ablutions.
» The obsequies for increase of prosperity, or as the same
term (Vriddhi srad@ha) may signify, the obsequies per-
formed on an accession of prosperity,* are celebrated pre-
viously to the sacrifice of a victim and to the solemnization
of a marriage, or of any of the ceremonies which, according
to the notions of the Hindus, contribute to the regeneration
of a twice-born man, that is, of a Brahmana, Cshatriya, or
Vaisya. This sradd@’ha is likewise performed at the com-
mencement and close of a solemn fast.

It should be observed respecting the practice of giving
food to priests at all these obsequies, that Brahmanas ge-


* Sometimes named Nandi muc’ha, from a word which occurs in
the prayer peculiar to this srddd’ha.


188 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


nerally give it to one or more of their own relations. A
stranger, unless indigent, would be very unwilling to accept
the food, or to attend at a sradd’ha for the purpose of eat-
ing it. The use of flesh-meat is positively enjoined to
Hindus at certain obsequies (see MENU, ¢. iii. v. 124), and
recommended at all (MENv, c. iii. v. 268, &c.); but the
precepts of their law-givers on the subject are by some
deemed obsolete in the present age, and are evaded by
others, who acknowledge the cogency of these laws. These
commonly make a vow to abstain from flesh-meat, and
consider that vow as more binding than the precepts here
alluded to. Others, again, not only eat meat at obsequies
and solemn sacrifices, but make it their common diet, in
direct breach of the institutes of their religion. (See
Menu, c. 5. v. 31, &c.)

Brahmanas who maintain a perpetual fire, which all
who devote themselves to the priesthood ought to do, per-
form the daily ceremonies of religion in their full detail.
Others, who are engaged in worldly pursuits, and even
some who follow the regular profession of the sacerdotal
tribe, abridge these rites. They comprise all the daily
sacraments in one ceremony, called Vaiswadéva, which is
celebrated in the forenoon, and by some in the evening
likewise. It consists in oblations to the Gods, to the
manes, and to the spirits, out of the food prepared for the
daily meal ; and in a gift of a part of it to guests.

Sitting down on a clean spot of ground, the Brahmana
places a vessel containing fire on his right hand, and hal-
lows it by throwing away a lighted piece of cusa grass,
saying, “I dismiss far away carnivorous fire,” &c. He
then places it on the consecrated spot reciting the prayer
with which the household and sacrificial fires should be
lighted by the attrition of wood ; “ Fires! [this wood] is
“ thy origin, which is attainable in all seasons ; whence


OF THE HINDUS. 189


“being produced, thou dost shine. Knowing this, seize
“ on it, and afterwards augment our wealth.”

He then lays euSa grass on the eastern side of the fire
with its tips pointed towards the north, reciting the first verse
of the Rigvéda, with which also it is usual to commence
the daily lecture of that Véda: “I praise divine fire, prime-
“‘vally consecrated, the efficient performer of a solemn
$ ceremony, the chief agent of a sacrifice, the most liberal
“ giver of gems.”

He next spreads cuSa grass on the southern side of the
fire with its tips pointed towards the east, reciting the intro-
duction of the Yajurvéda, with which also a daily lecture
of the Yajush is always begun. 1. “ I gather thee for the
“‘ sake of rain.” [He breaks off a branch of a tree, or is
supposed to do so, with these words.] 2. “I pluck thee
“for the sake of strength.” [He pulls down the branch
he had broken.] 3. “ Ye are like unto air.” [He touches
young calves with the branch he had plucked.] 4. “ May
“ the liberal generator [of worlds] make you happily reach
“ this most excellent sacrament.” [He is here supposed
to touch the milch cows with the same branch. |

He then spreads cua grass on the western side with the
tips pointed to the north, reciting the prayer which pre-
cedes a lecture of the Saémavéda: “ Fire! approach to taste
“ [my offering]; thou, who art praised for the gift of obla-
“tions. Sit down on this grass, thou, who art the com-
“ Dlete performer of the solemn sacrifice.”

In like manner he spreads cuSa grass on the northern
side with the tips pointed to the east, reciting the prayer
which precedes a lecture of the At’harvan: “ May divine
waters be auspicious to us,” &c.

Exciting the fire and sprinkling water on it, he must
offer with his hands food smeared with clarified butter,
three several times saying, “ Earth! Sky! Heaven!”


190 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


He then makes five similar oblations to the regent of fire ;
to the god of medicine ; to the assembled deities; to the
lord of created beings; and, lastly, to the Creator of the
universe. He concludes the sacrament of the Gods with
six oblations, reciting six prayers. 1. “ Fire! thou dost
“expiate a sin against the Gods [arising from any failure
“in divine worship}: may this oblation be efficacious.”
2. “Thou dost expiate a sin against man [arising from a
“ failure in hospitality.” 3. “‘ Thou dost expiate a sin against
“the manes [from a failure in the performance of obsequies].”
“4. “ Thou does expiate a sin against my own soul [arising
“from any blameable act].” 5. ‘“‘ Thou dost expiate re-
“peated sins.” 6. “ Thou dost expiate every sin I have com-
“mitted, whether wilfully or unintentionally: may this
“ oblation be efficacious.”

He then worships fire, making an oblation to it with this
prayer: “Fire! seven are thy fuels ; seven thy tongues;
“ seven thy holy sages; seven thy beloved abodes; seven
“ ways do seven sacrificers worship thee. Thy sources are
“seven. Be content with this clarified butter. May this
“ oblation be efficacious.”*


* The commentator enumerates the seven tongues of fire, Pravaha,
Avaha, Udvaha, Samvaha, Vivaha, Parivaha, Nivaha, (or else Anu-
vaha); all of which imply the power of conveying oblations to the
deities to whom offerings are made, The seven holy sages and sacri-
ficers are the Hétrt, Maitrdvaruna, Bréhmandch’handasi, Ach’havde,
Patri, Néshtrt, and Agnid’hra; that is, the seven officiating priests at
very solemn sacrifices. They worship fire seven ways by the Agni-
shtoma and other sacrifices, The seven abodes are the names of the
seven worlds: and fire is called in the Véda, saptachitica, which seems
to allude to seven consecrated hearths. In the sixteen verses called
Paurusha, which have been already quoted, the names of the seven
worlds, thrice repeated, are understood to be meant by the thrice
seven fuels ; and the seven oceans are the seven moats surrounding
the altar. Fire, like the sun itself, is supposed to emit seven rays:
this perhaps may account for the number seyen being so often re-
peated.


OF THE HINDUS. 191


About this time he extinguishes the Racshéghna, or
lamp lighted previously to the presenting of oblations to
the Gods and to the manes. It was lighted for the purpose
of repelling evil spirits, and is now extinguished with
this. text: “In solemn acts of religion, whatever fails
“through the negligence of those who perform the cere-
“ mony, may be perfected solely through meditation on
“ Visuxu.”

The Brahmaza should next offer the residue of the obla-
tion to spirits, going round to the different places where
such oblations ought to be made, sweeping each spot with
his hand, sprinkling water on it, and placing there lumps of
food. Near the spot where the vessel of water stands he
presents three such oblations, saying, “ Salutation to rain;
“to water; to the earth.” At both doors of his house he
makes offermgs to D’Harri and Vip’HATrI, or Bran-
mA, the protector and creator. Towards the eight princi-
pal points of the compass he places offerings, severally ad-
ding salutation to them and to the regents of them. In the
middle of the house he presents oblations, with salutation
to BraumA, to the sky, and to the sun. Afterwards he
offers similar oblations to all the Gods ; to all beings; to
twilight ; and to the lord of all beings. He then shifts the
sacrificial cord, and looking towards the south and dropping
‘one knee, he presents an oblation to the manes of ances-
tors, saying, “ Salutation to progenitors: may this ances-
“tral food be acceptable.” This ceremony is not con-
stantly practised, though directed in some rituals; but
the residue of the oblation to the Gods must be left on a
clean spot of ground as an oblation to all beings, intended,
however, for dogs and crows in particular. It is presented
with .the following prayer, which is taken from the Pu-
ranas: “ May Gods, men, cattle, birds, demigods, benevo-
“ent genii, serpents, demons, departed spirits, bloodthirsty


192 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ savages, trees, and all who desire food given by me ;” 2.


“a May reptiles, insects, flies, and all hungry beings, or
“ spirits concerned in this rite, obtain contentment from
“this food left for them by me, and may they become
“happy;” 3. “ May they, who have neither mother, nor
“father, nor kinsman, nor food, nor means of obtaining
“ it, be satisfied with that which is offered by me on this
“spot for their contentment, and be cheerful.” Or the
following prayer may be used: “To animals who night
“and day roam in search of food offered to the spirits, he
“who desires nourishment, should give something: may
“ the lord of nourishment grant it unto me.”

He concludes by performing a lustration similar to that
which has been already noticed, but much shorter. After
thus completing the other sacraments, the householder
should present food to his guests ; that is, to any person
who claims his hospitality. When he has thus allotted out
of the food prepared for his own repast, one portion to the
Gods, a second to progenitors, a third to all beings, and a
fourth to his guests, he and his family may then, and not
before, consume the remaining portion of the food. When-
ever a spiritual preceptor, a devotee or an officiating priest,
a bridegroom, or a particular friend, comes as. a guest, he
is received with honours, which will be described among
the nuptial ceremonies. In the entertainment of other
guests no religious rites are performed, nor any prayers
recited,

The householder is enjoined to give daily alms; but no
particular time is prescribed for the distribution of them ;
he is simply directed to give food to religious mendicants
whenever they come to his door; but especially if they
come at the time when food is ready for his own meal. On
the authority of the Purazas, it is also a common prac-
tice to feed a cow before the householder breaks his own


‘


OF THE HINDUS. 193


fast.* He either presents grass, water, and corn to her with
this text, “ Daughter of Surasai, framed of five elements,
“auspicious, pure, holy, sprung from the sun, accept this
“ food given by me ; salutation unto thee :” or else he con-
ducts the kine to grass, saying, “‘ May cows, who are
“ mothers of the three worlds and daughters of SuraBui,
“ and who are beneficent, pure, and holy, accept the food
“ given by me.”

Some Bréhmaras do still further abridge the compen-
dious ceremony called Vaiswadéva. They offer perfumes
and flowers to fire ; and make five oblations, out of the food
prepared for their own use, to BrauMA, to the lord of
created beings, to the household fire, to CaSyapa, and to
ANvumMati, dropping each oblation on fire, or on water, or
on the ground, with the usual addition, “ May this oblation
“be efficacious.” They then make offerings to all beings,
by placing a few lumps of food at the door, or on a
quadrangular spot near the fire, with a salutation to DuA-
TRI, &c., and they immediately proceed to their own repast.

Here too, as in every other matter relating to private


* The adoration of a cow is not uncommon. This worship consists
in presenting flowers to her, washing her feet, &c. It is entirely dif-
ferent from the practice here noticed. Both seem to be founded on
the superstitious notion, that the favour of Surasuf (the boon-grant-
ing cow) may be gained by showing kindness to her offspring. The
story of Vasisuf’Ha’s cow, Nanpin{, attended by the king Ditira
for the sake of obtaining a boon through her means, is a pretty fable
grounded on this notion. It is beautifully told by Citip4sa in the
Raghuvansa. 1 cannot refrain from mentioning another fable of a cow
named Banu, whose expostulations with a tiger, pleading to him to
spare her life, form the only admired passage in the Jtihdsas, or col-
lection of stories supposed to be related by Buimasfna, while he lay
at the point of death wounded with innumerable arrows. The fourth
day of Afwina is sacred to this cow, and named from her Bahulé
chaturthi. Images of her and of her calf are worshipped; and the
extract from the Jtihasas is on that day read with great solemnity.


VOL, I. °


194 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


morals, the Hindu legislators and, the authors of the
Puranas have heaped together a multitude of precepts,
mostly trivial, and not unfrequently absurd. Some of them
relate to diet; they prohibit many sorts of food altogether,
and forbid the constant use of others: some regard the ac-
ceptance of food, which must on no account be received
if it be given with one hand, nor without a leaf or dish ;
some again prescribe the hour at which the two daily meals
which are allowed, should be eaten (namely, in the forenoon
and in the evening); others enumerate the places (a boat
for example) where a Hindu must not eat, and specify the
persons (his sons and the inmates of his house) with whom
he should eat, and those (his wife for instance) with whom
he should not. The lawgivers have been no less particular
in directing the posture in which the Hindu must sit; the
quarter towards which he ought to look, and the precau-
tions he should take to insulate himself, as it were, during
his meal, lest he be contaminated by the touch of some un-
detected sinner, who may be present. To explain even in a
cursory manner the objects of all these, would be tedious ;
but the mode in which a Hindu takes his repast, con-
formably with such injunctions as are most cogent, may be
briefly stated, and with this I shall close the present essay.

After washing his hands and feet, and sipping water
without swallowing it, he sits down on a stool or cushion
(but not on a couch nor on a bed) before his plate,
which must be placed on a clean spot of ground that has
been wiped and smoothed ina quadrangular form, if he be
a Brahmana ; a triangular one, if he be a Cshatriya ; cir-
cular, if he be a Vaisya; and in the shape of a crescent, if
he belong to the fourth tribe. When the food is first brought
in, he is required to bow to it, raising both hands in the
form of humble salutation to his forehead ; and he should
add, “ May this be always ours :” that is, may food never


- OF THE HINDUS. ; 195


be deficient. When he has sitten down, he should lift the
plate with his left hand and bless the food, saying, “‘ Thou
“art invigorating.” He sets it down, naming the three
worlds. Or if the food be handed to him, he says, “ May
“heaven give thee,” and then accepts it with these words,
“The earth accepts thee.” Before he begins eating, he
must move his hand round the plate, to insulate it, or
his own person rather, from the rest of the company.
He next offers five lumps of food to Yama by five dif-
ferent titles; he sips and swallows water; he makes
five oblations to breath by five distinct names, Praja,
Vyana, Apana, Samana, and Udana ; and lastly, he wets
both eyes. He then eats his repast in silence, lifting the
food with all the fingers of his right hand, and afterwards
again sips water, saying, “ Ambrosial fluid! thou art the
“couch of VisuNvu and of food.”


196 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


NOTES.


(A.)

That Hindus belong to various sects is universally known;
but their characteristic differences are not perhaps so gene-
rally understood. Five great sects exclusively worship a single
deity ; one recognises the five divinities which are adored
by the other sects respectively, but the followers of this
eomprehensive scheme mostly select one object of daily
devotion, and pay adoration to other deities on particular
oecasions only. Even they deny the charge of polytheism,
and repel the imputation of idolatry ; they justify the practice
ef adoring the images of celestial spirits, by arguments
similar to those which have been elsewhere employed in
defence of angel and image worship. If the doctrines of the
Véda, and even those of the Purazas, be closely examined,
the Hindu theology will be found consistent with mono-
theism, though it contain the seeds of polytheism and idola-
try. I shall take some future occasion of enlarging on this
topic: I have here only to remark, that modern Hindus
seem to misunderstand the numerous texts, which declare
the unity of the godhead, and the identity of Visunu,
Siva, the Sun, &c. Their theologists have entered into
vain disputes on the question, which among the attributes
of God shall be deemed characteristic and pre-eminent.
Sancara AcuArya, the celebrated commentator on the
Véda, contended for the attributes of Siva, and founded
or confirmed the sect of Saivas, who worship ManwA p&va
as the supreme being, and deny the independent existence
of VisuNv and other deities. MAp’Hava AcHARYA and
VaxtaBua AcuArya have in like manner established
the sect of Vaishnavas, who adore VisuNu as God. The
Sauras (less numerous than the two sects abovementioned)
worship the Sun, and acknowledge no other divinity. The


OF THE HINDUS. 197


Ganapatyas adore GAN&SA, as uniting in his person all
the attributes of the deity.

Before I notice the fifth sect, I must remind the reader
that the Hindu mythology has personified the abstract and
active powers of the divinity, and has ascribed sexes to
these mythological personages. The Sacti, or energy of
an attribute of God, is female, and is fabled as the consort
of that personified attribute. The Sacti of Siva, whose
emblem is the phallus, is herself typified by the female
organ. This the Séctas worship; some figuratively, others
literally.

Vorapfva, the real author of the Sri Bhagavata, has
endeavoured to reconcile all the sects of Hindus by reviving
the doctrines of VyAsa. He recognises all the deities, but
as subordinate to the supreme being, or rather as attributes
or manifestations of God. A new sect has been thus
formed, and is denominated from that modern Purana.
But the numerous followers of it do not seem to have well
apprehended the doctrines they profess: they incline much
to real polytheism, but do at least reject the derogatory no-
tions of the divinity, which the other sects seem to have
adopted.

The Vaishtavas, though nominally worshippers of Visu-
Nv, are in fact votaries of deified heroes. The Géculast’has
(one branch of this sect) adore CrisuNa, while the Rama-
nuj worship RAMACHANDRA. Both have again branched
into three sects. One consists of the exclusive worshippers
of CrisuNa, and these only are deemed true and orthodox
Vaishnavas ; another joins his favourite RAp’uA with the
hero. A third, called Rad’haballabhi, adores RAv’HA
only, considering her as the active power of VisuNu. The
followers of these last-mentioned sects have adopted the
singular practice of presenting to their own wives the obla-
tions intended for the goddess ; and those among them who


198 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


follow the left-handed path (there is in most sects a right-
handed or decent path, and a left-handed or indecent mode
of worship), require their wives to be naked when attending
them at their devotions.

Among the Rémanuj, some worship RAMA only ; others
SirA; and others both RAma and Sird. None of them
practise any indecent mode of worship ; and they all, like
the Géculas?’ has, as well as the followers of the Bhagavata,
delineate on their foreheads a double upright line with chalk
or with sandal wood, and a red circlet with red sanders, ‘or
with turmeric and lime ; but the Ramanuj add an upright
red line in the middle of the double white one.

The Saivas are all worshippers of Siva and BuavAns
conjointly, and they adore the linga or compound type of
this god and goddess, as the VaisuNavas do the image
of Lacsumi-NArAyawna. There are no exclusive worship-
pers of Siva besides the sect of naked gymnosophists called
Lingts; and the exclusive adorers of the goddess are the
Sactas. In this last-mentioned sect, as in most others, there
is a right-handed and decent path, and a left-handed and
indecent mode’ of worship: but the indecent worship of
this sect is most grossly so, and. consists of unbridled de-
bauchery with wine and women. This profligate sect is
supposed to be numerous though unavowed.* In most
parts of India, if not in all, they are held in deserved detes-
tation ; and even the decent Séctas do not make public pro-
fession of their tenets, nor wear on their foreheads the mark
of the sect; lest they should be suspected of belonging to the
other branch of it. The sacrifice of cattle before idols is
peculiar to this sect.

The Saivas and Séctas delineate on their foreheads three
horizontal lines with ashes obtained, if possible, from the’


* They are avowed in some provinces.


“=


' OF THE HINDUS. 199°


hearth on which a consecrated fire is perpetually maintained ;


_ they add a red circlet, which the Saivas make with red


sanders, and which the Séctas, when they avow thetstiven,
mark either with saffron or with turmeric and borax.

The Sauras are true worshippers of the sun; some
of them, it seems, adore the dormant and active energies
of the planet conjointly. This sect, which is not very
numerous, is distinguished by the use of red sanders for the
horizontal triple line, as well as for the circlet on their fore-
heads.

The Garapatyas have branched into two sects; the
one worships Supp’ua GaXarari, the other Ucnen’at
sufa Gaxapati. The followers of the latter sect pro-
nounce their prayers with their mouths full of victuals
(whence the denomination of the deity worshipped by them).
The Génapatyas are distinguished by the use of red
minium for the circlet on their foreheads. The family of
Bréhmanas, residing at Chinchwér near Péind, and en-
joying the privilege of an hereditary incarnation of GaN £&Sa
from father to son, probably belongs to this sect. We may


- hope for more information on this curious instance of priest-


craft and credulity, from the inquiries made on the spot by
the gentlemen of the embassy from Bombay, who lately
visited that place.

Before I conclude this note (concerning which it should
be remarked, that the information here collected rests
chiefly on the authority of verbal communications), I must
add, that the left-handed path or indecent worship of the
several sects, especially that of the Sactas, is founded on the
Tantras, which are, for this reason, held in disesteem. I
was misinformed when I described them as constituting a
branch of literature highly esteemed though much neglected.
(As. Res. vol. v. p. 54.) The reverse would have been more
exact.


200 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


(B.)


This prayer, when used upon other occasions, is thus
varied, “ Salutation unto you, O fathers, and unto the sad-
“ dening season,” &c. The six seasons, in the order in
which they are here named, are the hot, dewy, rainy,
flowery, frosty, and sultry seasons. One is indicated in this
passage by the name of the month with which it begins ;
and a text of the Véda, alluded to by the late Sir Wittiam
Jones, in his observations on the lunar year of the Hindus
(As. Res. vol. iii, p. 258), specifies Tapas and Tapasya,
the lunar (not the solar) Magha and P’hdlguna, as cor-
responding with Sisira; that is, with the dewy season. The
text in question shall be subjoined to this note, because it
may serve to prove that the Véda, from which it is extracted
(Apastampa’s copy of the Yajurvéda usually denominated
the white Yajush), cannot be much older than the observa-
tion of the colures recorded by ParASara (see As. Res.
vol, ii, p. 268, and 393), which must have been made nearly
1391 years before the Christian era (As, Res. vol. v, p. 288).


According to the Véda, the lunar Madhu and Madhava, ,


or Chaitra and Vaisde’ha, correspond with Vasanta or the
spring. Now the lunar Chaitra, here meant, is the pri-
mary lunar month, beginning from the conjunction which
precedes full moon in or near Chitra, and ending with the
conjunction which follows it. Vaisdac’ha does in like man-
ner extend from the conjunction which precedes full moon
in or near Visae’ha to that which follows it. The five
nacshatras, Hasta, Chitra, Swati, Visac’ha and Anuradha,
comprise all the asterisms in which the full moons of Chaitra
and Vaisde’ha can happen ; and these lunar months may
therefore fluctuate between the first degree of Uttara P’hal-
guni and the last of Jyésh#ha. Consequently the season
of Vasanta might begin at soonest when the sun was in the


OF THE HINDUS. 201


middle of Purva Bhadrapada, or it might end at latest
when the sun wasin the middle of Mrigasiras. It appears,
then, that the limits of Vasanta are Pisces and Taurus ;
that is Mina and Vrisha. (This corresponds with a text
which I shall forthwith quote from a very ancient Hindu
author.) Now ifthe place of the equinox did then cor-
respond with the position assigned by ParASara to the
colures, Vasanta might end at the soonest seven or eight
days after the equinox, or at latest thirty-eight or thirty-nine
days ; and on a medium (that is when the full moon hap-
pened in the middle of Chitra), twenty-two or twenty-three
days after the vernal equinox. This agrees exactly with
the real course of the seasons; for the rains do generally
begin a week before the summer solstice, but their com-
mencement does vary, in different years, about a fortnight
on either side of that period. It seems therefore a probable
inference, that such was the position of the equinox when
the calendar of months and seasons was adjusted as de-
scribed in this passage of the Véda. Hence I infer the pro-
bability, that the Védas were not arranged in their present
form earlier than the fourteenth century before the Chris-
tianera. This, it must be acknowledged, is vague and con-
jectural ; but, if the Védas were compiled in India so early
as the commencement of the astronomical Cali yuga, the
seasons must have then corresponded with other months ;
and the passage of the Véda, which shall be forthwith cited,
must have disagreed with the natural course of the seasons
at the very time it was written.

I shall now quote the passage so often alluded to in this
note. “ Mad’hus cha Madhavas cha Vasanticav riti;
“ Sucras cha Suchis cha gratshmav riti ; Nabhas cha
“ Nabhasya& cha varshicav rit; Ishas chéjas cha
“ Saradav rit; Sahas cha Sahasyas cha haimanticav


‘ ag ‘
“vith; Tapas cha Tapasyas cha saisirav rith.” “Madhu


202 RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES OF THE HINDUS.


“and Méd’hava are the two portions of the season Va-+
‘ santa (or the spring); Sucra and Suchi, of grishma (or
‘the hot season); Nabhas and Nabhasya, of varsha (or
“ the rainy season) ; Zjas and Ujas, of Sarada (or the sultry
“season); and Sahas and Sahasya, of hémanta (or the
“frosty season); and Tapas and Tapasya, of Sisira (or
“the dewy season).’

All authors agree that Madhu signifies the month of
Chaitra ; Mé@hava the month of Vaisae’ha, and so forth.
These names are so explained in dictionaries and by astro-
nomical writers, as well as by the commentators on this and
other passages, where these names of the months are em-
ployed. The author now before me (DivAcara BHATTA)
expressly says, that this text of the Véda relates to the order
of the seasons according to the lunar months. He proves
it by quoting a text of the Tuittirtya Yajurvéda, and after-
wards cites the following passage from BaupHAYANA
respecting the seasons measured by solar-sidereal time;
“ Mina-Méshaybr Mésha-Vrishabhayér va vasantah,”
&e. “ Vasanta corresponds with Mina and Mésha, or with
“ Mésha and Vrisha,’ &c. It should be observed, that
the secondary lunar month, which begins and ends with full-
moon, cannot be here meant; because this mode of reckon-
ing has never been universal, and the use of it is limited to
countries situated to the northward of the Vind’hya range of
hills, as I — from the following passage of the T'ricanda
mandana : “ The lunar month also is of two sorts, commenc
“ing either with the light fortnight or with the dark one;
“ Some do not admit the month which begins with the dark
“fortnight ; and even by them who do, it is not admitted
“on the south of the Vind’hya mountains.”


}
Lal at


VI.


On the Revicious Ceremonies of the Hinpus, and of
the BrRAuMENS especially.


ESSAY III.


[From the Asiatic Researches, vol. vii. p. 288—311, Calcutta,
1801. 4to.]


Hospitality has been already mentioned in the preceding
Essay, as one of the five great sacraments which constitute
the daily duty of a Hindu. The formal reception of such
guests as are entitled to peculiar honour was reserved for
the subject of the present tract. The religious rites, inter-
mixed with acts of courtesy, which are practised by way of
formal hospitality, are nearly the same, whether it be high
rank, a venerable profession, or cordial friendship, which
entitles the guest to be welcomed with distinction. They
chiefly consist in presenting to him a stool to sit on, water
for ablutions, and honey mixed with other food for refresh-
ment. It seems to have been anciently the custom to slay
a cow on this occasion ; and a guest was therefore called
géghna, or cow-killer. Imperfect traces of this custom
remain in the hospitable ceremonies which I shall now
describe from the ritual of Bréahmazas who use the Sama-
véda. As the marriage ceremony opens with the solemn
reception of the bridegroom by the father of the bride, this
part of the nuptial solemnity may be fitly chosen as an
example of hospitable rites. It will furnish occasion too,
for proceeding to describe the whole of the marriage ce-
remony.


204 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


Having previously performed the obsequies of ancestors,
as is usual upon any accession of good fortune, the father
of the bride sits down to await the bridegroom’s arrival, in
the apartment prepared for the purpose ; and at the time
chosen for it, according to the rules of astrology. The
jewels and other presents intended for him are placed there ;
a cow is tied on the northern side of the apartment ; and a
stool or cushion, and other furniture for the reception of
the guest, are arranged in order. On his approach, the
bride’s father rises to welcome him, and recites the follow-
ing prayer, while the bridegroom stands before him: “‘ May
“ she [who supplies oblations for] religious worship, who
3 constantly follows her calf, and who was the milch cow
‘ when Yama was [the votary], abound with milk, and
“ fulfil our wishes, year after year.”

This prayer is seemingly intended for the consecration of
the cow, which is let loose in a subsequent stage of the
ceremony, instead of slaying her, as appears to have been
anciently the custom. The commentator, whose gloss has
been followed in this version of the text, introduces it by
the remark, that a guest entitled to honourable reception
is a spiritual preceptor, a priest, an ascetic, a prince, a
bridegroom, a friend, or in short any one, to welcome
whose arrival a cow must be tied for the purpose of slaying
her, whence a guest is denominated géghna, or cow-killer.
The prayer seems to contain an allusion, which I cannot
better explain than by quoting a passage from CALipAsa’s
poem entitled Raghuvansa, where Vasisui’Ha informs
the king Ditira that the cow Surasni, who was offended
by his neglect, cannot be now appeased by courtesy shown
to herself, because she remains in a place inaccessible to
him: “ Pracuéras is performing a tedious sacrifice; to sup-
“ ply the oblations of which, Surasni now abides in the in-
“ fernal region, whose gates are guarded by huge serpents.”


OF THE HINDUS. ~ 205


After the prayer above-mentioned has been meditated,
the bridegroom sits down on a stool or cushion, which is
presented to him. He first recites a text of the Yajurvéda:
“* T step on this for the sake of food and other benefits, on
“this variously splendid footstool.” The bride’s father
presents to him a cushion made of twenty leaves of cusa
grass, holding it up with both hands, and exclaiming,
“The cushion! the cushion! the cushion!” The bride-
groom replies, “‘ I accept the cushion,” and, taking it,
places it on the ground under his feet, while he recites the
following prayer: “‘ May those plants over which Séma
“ presides, and which are variously dispersed on the earth,
“incessantly grant me happiness while this cushion is
“placed under my feet.” Another is presented to him,
which he accepts in the same manner, saying, “ May those
“ numerous plants over which S6ma presides, and which
“are salutary a hundred different ways, incessantly grant
“‘ me happiness while I sit on this cushion.” Instead of
these prayers, which are peculiar to the Brahmanas that
use the Sdmavéda, the following text is commonly recited :
“ T obscure my rivals, as the sun does other luminaries; I
“ tread on this, as the type of him who injures me.”

The bride’s father next offers a vessel of water, thrice ex-
claiming, “ Water for ablutions!” The bridegroom declares
his acceptance of it, and looks into the vessel, saying,
“ Generous water! I view thee ; return in the form of fer-
“ tilizing rain from him, from whom thou dost proceed :”
that is, from the sun; for it is acknowledged, says the
commentator, that rain proceeds from vapours raised by
the heat of the sun. The bridegroom takes up water in
the palms of both hands joined together, and throws it on
his left foot, saying, “‘ I wash my left foot, and fix prospe-
“rity in this realm:” he also throws water on his other
foot, saying, “ I wash my right foot, and introduce pros-


206 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ perity into this realm :” and he then throws water’ on
both feet, saying, “‘ I wash first one and then the other,
“and. lastly both feet, that the realm may thrive and in-
“ trepidity be gained.” The following is the text of the
-Yajush, which is generally used instead of the preceding
prayers: “ Thou dost afford various elegance; I accept
“ thee, who dost so: afford it for the ablution of my feet.”

An arghya (that is, water, rice, and dérva grass, in a
conch, or in a vessel shaped like one, or rather like a boat)
is next presented to the bridegroom in a similar manner,
and accepted by him with equal formality. He pours the
water on his own head, saying, “ Thou art the splendour
“ of food ; through thee may I become glorious.” This
prayer is taken from the Yajush ; but the followers of that
Véda use different texts, accepting the arghya with this
prayer, “ Ye are waters (ap); through you may I obtain
“ (ap) all my wishes :” and pouring out the water with this
text, ‘‘ I dismiss you to the ocean ; return to your source,
“harmless unto me, most excellent waters! but my beve-
“ rage is not poured forth.”

A vessel of water is then offered by the bride’s father,
who thrice exclaims, “ Take water to be sipped:” the
bridegroom accepts it, saying, “Thou art glorious, grant
“me glory ;” or else, “‘ Conduct me to glory, endue me
“ with splendour, render me dear to all people, make me
“ owner of cattle, and preserve me unhurt in all my limbs.”

The bride’s father fills a vessel with honey, curds, and
clarified butter ; he covers it with another vessel, and pre-
sents it to the bridegroom, exclaiming three times, “ Take
“ the mad’huparca.” The bridegroom accepts it, places it
on the ground, and: looks into it, saying, “ Thou art glo-
“rious; may I become so.” He tastes the food three times,
saying, “ Thou art the sustenance of the glorious; thou art
“ the nourishment of the splendid: thou art the food of the


>


‘


my


OF THE HINDUws. 207


“ fortunate ; grant me prosperity.” He then silently: eats
until he be satisfied.

Although these texts be taken from the Yajush, yet
other prayers from the same Véda are used by the sects
which follow it. While looking into the vessel, the bride-
groom says, “I view thee with the eye of the sun [who
“ draws unto himself what he contemplates].” On accept-
ing the mad’huparca the bridegroom says, ‘‘ I take thee
“with the assent of the generous sun; with the arms of
“both sons of Aswint; with the hands of the cherishing
“Juminary.” He mixes it, saying, ““ May I mix thee, O
“ venerable present! and remove whatever might be hurt-
“ ful in the eating of thee.” He tastes it three times, say-
ing, ‘“ May I eat that sweet, best, and nourishing form of
“honey ; which is the sweet, best, and nourishing form of
“honey ; and may I thus become excellent, sweet-tem-
“ dered, and well nourished by food.” After eating until
he be satisfied, and after sipping water, he touches his
mouth and other parts of his body with his hand, saying,
“ May there be speech in my mouth, breath in my nostrils,
“ sight in my eye-balls, hearing in my ears, strength in my
“ arms, firmness in my thighs; may my limbs and mem-
“ bers remain unhurt together with my soul.”

Presents suitable to the rank of the parties are then pre-
sented to the guest. At the marriage ceremony, too, the
bride is formally given by her father to the bridegroom, in
this stage of the solemnity according to some rituals, but
later according to others. The hospitable rites are then
concluded by letting loose the cow at the intercession of
the guest. A barber who attends for that purpose, ex-
claims, ‘‘ The cow ! the cow!” Upon which the guest pro-
nounces this text: “‘ Release the cow from the fetters of
““Varuwa. May she subdue my foe: may she destroy
“ the enemies of both him (the host) [and me]. Dismiss


208 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ the cow, that she may eat grass and drink water.” When
the cow has been released the guest thus addresses her :
“I have earnestly entreated this prudent person [or, ac-
“ cording to another interpretation of the text, each do-
“ eile person], saying, kill not the innocent harmless cow,
‘who is mother of Rupras, daughter of Vasus, sister
of Anviryas, and the source of ambrosia.” In the Ya-
jurvéda the following prayer is added to this text: “ May
“she expiate my sins and his (naming the host). Re-
“lease her that she may graze.” It is evident that the
guest’s intercessions imply a practice, become obsolete,
_of slaying a cow for the purposes of hospitality.

While the bridegroom is welcomed with these ceremo-
nies, or more properly before his arrival, the bride bathes
during the recital of the following texts. Three vessels of
water are severally poured on her head, with three different
prayers. 1. ‘‘ Love! I know thy name. Thou art called
“an intoxicating beverage. Bring [the bridegroom] hap-
“ily. For thee was framed the inebriating draught.
“ Fire! thy best origin is here. Through devotion wert
“thou created. May this oblation be efficacious.” 2.
“ Damsel! I anoint this thy generative organ with honey,
“ because it is the second mouth of the Creator: by that
“thou subduest all males, though unsubdued ; by that
“ thou art lively, and dost hold dominion, May this obla-
“ tion be efficacious.” 3. “ May the primeval ruling sages,
“ who framed the female organ, as a fire that consumeth
“ flesh, and thereby framed a procreating juice, grant the
“ prolific power, that proceeds from the three-horned [bull]
“and from the sun. May this oblation be efficacious.”
To elucidate the first of these texts the commentator cites
the following passage: “ The sage Vastsut’Ha, the re-
“ gent of the moon, the ruler of heaven, the preceptor of


‘


“ the Gods, and the great forefather of all bemgs, however -


OF THE HINDUS. 209


“ old in the practice of devotion and old by the progress of
“age, were deluded by women. Liquors distilled from
“ sugar, from grain, and from the blossoms of Bassia, are
“ three sorts of intoxicating drinks: the fourth is woman,
“ by whom this world is deluded. One who contemplates
“a beautiful woman becomes intoxicated, and so does he
“ who quaffs an inebriating beverage: woman is called an
inebriating draught, because she intoxicates by her looks.”
To explain the second text, the same author quotes a pas-
sage of the Véda, intimating that BraumA has two mouths;
one containing all holiness, the other allotted for the produc-
tion of all beings: ‘ for they are created from his mouth.’
After the bridegroom has tasted the Mad’huparca pre-
sented to him, as abovementioned, the bride’s right hand
is placed on his, both having been previously rubbed with
turmeric or some other auspicious drug. A matron must
bind both hands with cuSa grass amidst the sound of cheer-
ful music. To this part of the ceremony the author of the
poem entitled Vaishadhiya has very prettily alluded, in de-
scribing the marriage of Nata and Damayanri (b. xvi.
v. 13 & 14.) ‘As he tasted the Mad’huparca, which was
* presented to him, those spectators who had foresight re-
‘ flected, “‘ He has begun the ceremonies of an auspicious
‘ “ day, because he will quaff the honey of Buarmi’s lip.
‘“ The bridegroom’s hand exults in the slaughter of foes;
‘ “ the bride’s hand has purloined its beauty from the lotos ;
“ “ it is for that reason probably that, in this well-governed
““yealm of Viderbha, both [guilty] hands are fast bound
‘ “ with strong cusa.
The bride’s father, hiding the attendant priests beg
their acclamations, such as “ happy day! auspicious be it!
“prosperity attend! blessings!” &c., takes a vessel of
water containing ¢ila* and cusa+ grass, and pours it on


“


99)


* Sesamum Indicum. + Poa cynosuroides.
VOL. I. P


210 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


the hands of the bride and bridegroom, after uttering the
words, “O'm tat sat!” “ God the existent!” and after
repeating at full length the names and designations of the
bridegroom, of the bride, and of himself; and then solemnly
declaring, ““I give unto thee this damsel adorned with
“jewels and protected by the lord of creatures.” The
bridegroom replies, “ Well be it!” The bride’s father
afterwards gives him a piece of gold, saying, “ I this day
“ give thee this gold, as a fee for the purpose of completing
“the solemn donation made by me.” The bridegroom
again says, “ Well be it!” and then recites this text:
“Who gave her? to whom did he give her? Love (or free
“ consent) gave her. To love he gave her. Love was the
“giver. Love was the taker. Love! may this be thine!
“With love may I enjoy her!” The close of the text is
thus varied in the Sémavéda: “ Love has pervaded the
“ocean. With love I accept her. Love! may this be
“thine.” In the common rituals another prayer is di-
rected to be likewise recited immediately after thus for-
mally accepting the bride: “ May the ethereal element
“ give thee. May earth accept thee.”

Being thus affianced, the bride and bridegroom then
walk forth, while he thus addresses her: “ May the re-
“gents of space, may air, the sun, and fire, dispel that
“anxiety which thou feelest in thy mind, and turn thy
“heart to me.” He proceeds thus, while they look at
each other: “ Be gentle in thy aspect and loyal to thy
“husband ; be fortunate in cattle, amiable in thy mind,
“and beautiful in thy person; be mother of valiant sons ;
“be fond of delights; be cheerful, and bring prosperity
“to our bipeds and quadrupeds. First [in a former birth]
“ Soma received thee ; the sun next obtained thee; [in
“ successive transmigrations] the regent of fire was thy
“third hushand: thy fourth is a human being. Séma


OF THE HINDUS. 211


“gave her to the sun; the sun gave her to the regent of
“fire ; fire gave her to me; with her he has given me
“wealth and male offspring. May she, a most auspicious
“ cause of prosperity, never desert me,” &c.*

It should seem that, according to these rituals, the
bridegroom gives a waistcloth and mantle to the bride
before he is affianced to her; and the ceremony of tying
the skirts of their mantles precedes that of her father’s
solemnly bestowing her on the bridegroom. But the ritual
of the Saémavédi priests makes the gift of the damsel pre-
cede the tying of the knot; and, inconsistently enough,
directs the mantles to be tied before the bridegroom has
clothed the bride. After the donation has been accepted
as abovementioned, the bride’s father should tie ‘a knot in
the bridegroom’s mantle over the presents given with the
bride, while the affianced pair are looking at each other.
The cow is then released in the manner before described ;
a libation of water is made; and the bride’s father medi-
tates the Gayatri, and ties a knot with the skirts of the
bride’s and bridegroom’s mantles, after saying, “ Ye must
“be inseparably united in matters of duty, wealth, and
“love.” The bridegroom afterwards clothes the bride with
the following ceremonies.

He goes to the principal apartment of the house, pre-
pares a sacrificial fire in the usual mode, and hallows the
implements of sacrifice. A friend of the bridegroom walks
round the fire, bearing a jar of water, and stops on the
south side of it : another does the same, and places himself
on the right hand of the first. The bridegroom then casts


* I omit the remainder of the text, which it would be indecorous
to translate into a modern language. The literal sense of it is here
subjoined in a Latin version: “ Illa redamans accipito fascinum meum,
quod ego peramans intromittam in eam, multe qua illecebre si-
stunt.”


Baw


212 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


four double handfuls of rice, mixed with leaves of sami,*


into a flat basket: near it he places a stone and mullar,


after formally touching them, and then entering the house,


he causes the bride to be clothed with a new waistcloth and
scarf, while he recites the subjoined prayers: “ May those
“ generous women who spun and wound the thread, and
“ who wove the warp and weft of this cloth, generously
“ clothe thee to old age: long-lived woman! put on this
“ raiment.” “‘ Clothe her: invest her with apparel: pro-
“ long her life to great age. Mayest thou live a hundred
“years. As long as thou livest, amiable woman ! revere
“ [that is, carefully preserve] beauty and wealth.” The
first of these prayers is nearly the same with that which is
used by the followers of the Yajush, when the scarf is put
on the bride’s shoulder. It is preceded by a different one,
which is recited while the waistcloth is wrapped round her:
“ Mayest thou reach old age. Put on this raiment. Be
“lovely: be chaste. Live a hundred years. Invite [that
“‘ is, preserve and obtain] beauty, wealth, and male off-
“spring. Damsel! put on this apparel.” Afterwards the
following prayer is recited: “ May the assembled gods
“unite our hearts. May the waters unite them. May
“air unite us. May the creator unite us. May the god
“ of love unite us.”

But, according to the followers of the Sémavéda, the
bridegroom, immediately after the scarf has been placed on
the bride’s shoulder, conducts her towards the sacrificial
fire, saying, ““S6ma [the regent of the moon] gave her to the
“sun :+ the sun gave her to the regent of fire: fire has
“ given her to me, and with her, wealth and male offspring.”
The bride then goes to the western side of the fire and


* Adenanthera aculeata.
+ Guavisu&v here explains Gandharba by the word Aditya, which
may signify the sun, or a deity in general.


OF THE HINDUS. 213


recites the following prayer, while she steps on a mat made
of Viranta grass* and covered with silk : “ May our lord
“assion me the path by which I may reach the abode of
“my lord.” She sits down on the edge of the mat; and the
bridegroom offers six oblations of clarified butter, reciting
the following prayers, while the bride touches his shoulder
with her right hand. 1. “ May fire come, first among the
“gods; may it rescue her offspring from the fetters of
“ death ; may Varuxa, king [of waters], grant that this
“woman should never bemoan a calamity befalling her
“children.” 2. “ May the domestic perpetual fire guard
“her; may it render her progeny long-lived; may she
“never be widowed; may she be mother of surviving
“children ; may she experience the joy of having male
“ offspring.” 3. “ May heaven protect thy back ; may air,
“ and the two sons of ASw1ni, protect thy thighs; may the
“sun protect thy children while sucking thy breast ; and
“ Vrinaspati protect them until they wear clothes; and
“ afterwards may the assembled gods protect them.” 4.
“ May no lamentation arise at night in thy abode; may
“crying women enter other houses than thine; mayest thou
“never admit sorrow to thy breast; mayest thou pros-
“per in thy husband’s house, blest with his survival,
“ and viewing cheerful children.” 5. “I lift barrenness,
“ the death of children, sin, and every other evil, as I would
“ lift a chaplet off thy head ; and I consign the fetters [of
“premature death] to thy foes.” 6. “ May death depart
“ from me, and immortality come ; may [Yama] the child
“ of the sun, render me fearless. Death! follow a different
“path from that by which we proceed, and from that which
“ the gods travel. To thee who seest and who hearest, I
“call, saying, hurt not our offspring, nor our progenitors.


* Andropogon aromaticum or muricatum.


214 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“* And may this oblation be efficacious.” The bridegroom
then presents oblations, naming the three worlds, separately
and conjointly, and offers either four or five oblations to fire
and to the moon. The bride and bridegroom then rise up,
and he passes from her left side to her right, and makes her
join her hands in a hollow form.

The rice,* which had been put into a basket, is then
taken up, and the stone is placed before the bride, who
treads upon it with the point of her right foot, while the
bridegroom recites this prayer: “‘ Ascend this stone ; be
“firm like this stone; distress my foe, and be not sub-
““servient to my enemies.” The bridegroom then pours a
ladleful of clarified butter on her hands; another person
gives her the rice, and two other ladlefuls of butter are
poured over it. She then separates her hands, and lets fall
the rice on the fire, while the following text is recited :
“This woman, casting the rice into the fire, says, May my
“lord be long lived, may we live a hundred years, and
“ may all my kinsmen prosper : be this oblation efficacious.”
Afterwards the bridegroom walks round the fire, preceded
by the bride, and reciting this text : “ The girl goes from
“her parents to her husband’s abode, having strictly ob-
“ served abstinence [for three days from factitious salt, &c.]
“ Damsel ! by means of thee we repress foes, like a stream
“of water.” The bride again treads on the stone and
makes another oblation of rice, while the subjoined prayer
is recited: “ The damsel has worshipped the generous sun
“and the regent of fire; may he and the generous sun
“liberate her and me from this [family]; be this oblation
“ efficacious.” They afterwards walk round the fire as be-
fore. Four or five other oblations are made with the same


* From this use of raw rice at the nuptial ceremony, arises the
custom of presenting rice, tinged with turmeric, by way of invitation
to guests whose company is requested at a wedding.


OF THE HINDUS. 215


ceremonies and prayers, varying only the title of the sun,
who is here called Péshan, but was entitled Aryaman in
the preceding prayer. The bridegroom then pours rice out
of the basket into the fire, after pouring one or two ladlefuls
of butter on the edge of the basket; with this offering he
simply says, “ May this oblation to fire be efficacious.”

The oblations and prayers directed by the Yajurvéda,
previous to this period of the solemnity, are very different
from those which have been here inserted from the Saéma-
véda ; and some of the ceremonies, which will be subse-
quently noticed, are anticipated by the priests, who follow
the Yajush.

Twelve oblations are made with as many prayers. 1.
“ May this oblation be efficacious, and happily conveyed
“ to that being whois fire in the form of a celestial quirister,
“who is accompanied by truth, and whose abode is truth ;
“ may he cherish our holy knowledge and our valour.” 2.
“ Efficacious be this oblation to those delightful plants,
“ which are the nymphs of that being who is fire in the
“ form of a celestial quirister, who is accompanied by truth,
“and whose abode is truth.” 3. and 4. The foregoing
prayers are thus varied: “To that being who is the sun, in
“the form of a celestial quirister, and who consists wholly
*¢ of the Samavéda.” “‘ Those enlivening rays, which are the
“nymphs of that sun.” 5. and 6.“ That being who is
“the moon in the form of a celestial quirister, and who is
“ a ray of the sun, and named Sushmava.” “ Those aste-
“ risms which are the nymphs of the moon, and are called
“ Bhécuri.”* 7. and 8. “ That being who is air, constantly


‘


* This term is not expounded by the commentator. Bha signifies
an asterism: but the meaning of the compound term is not obvious.
Sushmana bears some affinity to Sushwmha, mentioned in a former
essay; but neither of these names is explained in the commentaries
which I have consulted


216 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


‘


‘moving and travelling every where.” ‘“‘ Those waters
“ which are the nymphs of air, and are termed invigorating.”
9. and 10. “‘ That being who is the solemn sacrifice in the
“ form of a celestial quirister; who cherishes all beings, and
“* whose pace is elegant.” “Those sacrificial fees, which are
“ the nymphs of the solemn sacrifice, and are named thanks-
“ givings.” 11. and 12. “ That being who is mind in the
“ form of a celestial quirister, who is the supreme ruler of
“ creatures, and who is the fabricator of the universe.”
“ Those holy strains (Rich and Saman) who are the nymphs
“ of mind, and are named the means of attaining wishes.”

Thirteen oblations are next presented, during the recital
of as many portions of a single text. “‘ May the supreme
“ruler of creatures, who is glorious in his victories over
“ Thostile] armies, grant victory to Inpra, the regent of
“rain, All creatures humbly bow to him ; for he is ter-
“ rible: to him are oblations due. May he grant me victory,
“ knowledge, reflection, regard, self-rule, skill, understand-
“ing, power, [returns of] the conjunction and opposition of
“ the sun and moon, and holy texts (Vrihat and Rat’han-
“ tara).”*

Eighteen oblations are then offered, while as many texts
are meditated ; they differ only in the name of the deity
that is invoked. 1. “‘ May fire, lord of [living] beings,
“ protect me in respect of holiness, valour, and prayer, and
“ in regard to ancient privileges, to this solemn rite, and to
“ this invocation of deities.” 2. “May Inpra, lord or
“ regent of the eldest (that is, of the best of beings) protect
“me,” &e. 3. “ Yama, lord of the earth.” 4. “ Air,
“ord of the sky.” 5. “The sun, lord of heaven.” 6.
“ The moon, lord of stars.” 7. “ Vr¥uaspatt, lord [that
“is, preceptor] of BraumA [and other deities].” 8. “‘ Mr-


* Texts of the Samavéda so named.


OF THE HINDUS. 217


“pra (the sun), lord of true beings.” 9. “ Varuwa,
“lord of waters.” 10. “ The ocean, lord of rivers.” 11.
“ Food, lord of tributary powers.” 12. “‘ S6ma (the moon),
“lord of plants.” 13. “ Savirr¥ (the generative sun),
“lord of pregnant females.” 14. “ Rupra (Stva), lord
“ of [deities, that bear the shape of] cattle.” 15. “‘ The
“* fabricator of the universe, lord of forms.” 16. “ Visuxu,
“lord of mountains.” 17, “ Winds (Maruts), lords of
“ (ganas) sets of divinities.” 18. “ Fathers, grandfathers,
“ remoter ancestors, more distant progenitors, their parents,
“and grandsires.”

Oblations are afterwards made, with prayers correspond-
ing to those which have been already cited from the Sama-
véda. 1. “ May fire come, first among the gods,” &c. 2.
“May the domestic perpetual fire guard her,” &c. 3.
“ Fire, who dost protect such as perform sacrifices! grant
“us all blessings in heaven and on earth: grant unto us
“ that various and excellent wealth, which is produced on
“this earth and in heaven.” 4. “ O best of luminaries!
“ Come, show us an easy path, that our lives may be unin-
“jured. May death depart from me, and immortality
“come. May the child of the sun render me fearless.”
5. “ Death! follow a different path,” &c.

The bride offers the oblations of rice mixed with leaves
of Sami,* letting fall the offerings on the fire in the manner
beforementioned, and with the same prayers, but recited in
a reversed order and a little varied. 1. ‘‘ The damsel has
“ worshipped the generous sun in the form of fire; may
“ that generous sun never separate her from this husband.”
2. “ This woman, casting the rice into the fire, says, May
“ my lord be long-lived ; may my kinsmen reach old age.”
3. “I cast this rice into the fire, that it may become a


‘


* Adenanthera aculeata.


218 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“* cause of thy prosperity : may fire assent to my union with
“ thee.’”*

According to the followers of the Yajurvéda, the bride-
groom now takes the bride’s right hand, reciting a text
which will be subsequently quoted. The bride then steps
on a stone while this text is recited: “ Ascend this stone :
“be firm like thisstone. Subdue such as entertain hostile
“designs against me, and repel them.” The following
hymn is then chanted. “ Charming Saraswari, swift
“as amare! whom I celebrate in face of this universe,
“ protect this [solemn rite]. O thou! in whom the ele-
“ ments were produced, in whom this universe was framed,
“ T now will sing that hymn [the nuptial text] which con-
“stitutes the highest glory of women.” The bride and
bridegroom afterwards walk round the fire, while the follow-
ing text is recited: “ Fire! thou didst first espouse this
“female sun (this woman, beautiful like the sun); now
“let a human being again espouse her by thy means. Give
“her, O fire! with offspring, to a [human] husband.”
The remainder of the rice is then dropped into the fire as
an oblation to the god of love.

The next ceremony is the bride’s stepping seven steps.
It is the most material of all the nuptial rites ; for the mar-
riage is complete and irrevokable, so soon as she has taken
the seventh step, and not sooner. She is conducted by the
bridegroom, and directed by him to step successively into
seven circles, while the following texts are uttered: 1. iV May
““ VisuNv cause thee to take one step for the sake of ob-
“taining food.” 2. “‘ May VisuNv cause thee to take
“ one step for the sake of obtaining strength.” 3. “ Three
“ steps for the sake of solemn acts of religion.” 4. “‘ Four
steps for the sake of obtaining happiness.” 5. “ Five


“cc


* This version is conformable to a different commentary from that
which was followed in the former translation.


P|


OF THE HINDUS. 219


“ steps for the sake of cattle.” 6. “ Six steps for the sake
“* of increase of wealth.” 7. “ Seven steps for the sake
of obtaining priests to perform sacrifices.”* The bride-
groom then addresses the bride, “‘ Having completed seven
“* steps, be my companion. May I become thy associate.
“May none interrupt thy association with me. May such
“as are disposed to promote our happiness, confirm thy
“ association with me.” The bridegroom then addresses
the spectators : “This woman is auspicious : approach and
“‘ view her; and having conferred [by your good wishes]
“auspicious fortune on her, depart to your respective
** abodes.”

Then the bridegroom’s friend, who stood near the fire
bearing a jar of water, advances to the spot where the
seventh step was completed, and pours water on the bride-
groom’s head, and afterwards on the bride’s, while a prayer
abovementioned is recited : “‘ May waters and all the Gods
“cleanse our hearts; may air do so; may the creator
“do so ; may the divine instructress unite our hearts.” +

The bridegroom then puts his left hand under the bride’s
hands, which are joined together in a hollow form, and
taking her right hand in his, recites the six following texts :
1. “I take thy hand for the sake of good fortune, that
“ thou mayest become old with me, thy husband: may the
“ generous, mighty, and prolific sun render thee a matron,
“that I may be a householder.” 2. “ Be gentle in thy
“ aspect and loyal to thy husband ; be fortunate in cattle,
“amiable in thy mind, and beautiful in thy person; be
“mother of surviving sons; be assiduous at the [five]
“ sacraments ; be cheerful; and bring prosperity to our


“


‘


* In the Yajurvéda the texts are varied, so that the third step is for
increase of wealth, and the sixth for obtaining happy seasons.

+ It is here translated according to the gloss of GuSavisuSvu; in
the former version I followed the commentary of Hetiyup’na.


220 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ bipeds and quadrupeds.” 3. “ May the lord of creatures
“ erant us progeny, even unto old age ; may the sun render
“that progeny conspicuous. Auspicious deities have given
“thee to me: enter thy husband’s abode, and bring
“health to our bipeds and quadrupeds.” 4. “O Inpra,
“ who pourest forth rain! render this woman fortunate and
“the mother of children: grant her ten sons ; give her


“cc


a


eleven protectors.” 5. “ Be submissive to thy husband’s
“ father, to his mother, to his sister, and to his brothers.”
6. “ Give thy heart to my religious duties : may thy mind
“ follow mine ; be thou consentient to my speech. May
“ Vrinasparti unite thee unto me.”

The followers of the Yajurvéda enlarge the first prayer
and omit the rest, some of which, however, they employ
at other periods of the solemnity. “I take thy hand for
“the sake of good fortune, that thou mayest become old
“ with me, thy husband ; may the deities, namely, the divine
“sun (Aryaman), and the prolific being (Savitri), and the
“ god of love, give thee as a matron unto me, that I may
“be a householder. I need the goddess of prosperity.
“Thou art she. Thou art the goddess of prosperity.
“T need her. I am the Saéman [véda]: thou art the Rich
“ [véda]. I am the sky: thou art the earth. Come ; let
“us marry: let us hold conjugal intercourse: let us pro-
“create offspring: let us obtain sons. May they reach
“old age. May we, being affectionate, glorious, and well
“ disposed, see during a hundred years, live a hundred years,
“and hear a hundred years.”

According to the ritual, which conforms to the Samavéda,
the bridegroom sits down near the fire with the bride, and
finishes this part of the ceremony by making oblations,
while he names the three worlds severally and conjointly.
The taking of the bride’s hand in marriage is thus completed.
In the evening of the same day, so soon as the stars appear,


‘


OF THE HINDUS. 221


the bride sits down ona bull’s hide, which must be of a red
colour, and must be placed with the neck towards the east
and the hair upwards. The bridegroom sits down near her,
makes oblations while he names the three worlds as usual,
and then makes six oblations with the following prayers,
and each time pours the remainder of the clarified butter on
the bride’s head. 1. “ I obviate by this full oblation all ill
“ marks in the lines [of thy hands], in thy eye-lashes, and
“in the spots [on thy body].” 2. “ I obviate by this full
“ oblation all the ill marks in thy hair; and whatever is
“ sinful in thy looking, or in thy crying.” 3. “I obviate
_ “by this full oblation all that may be sinful in thy temper,
“in thy speaking, and in thy laughing.” 4. “ I obviate
“ by this full oblation all the ill marks in thy teeth, and in
“the dark intervals between them; in thy hands, and in
“ thy feet.” 5. “ I obviate by this full oblation all the ill
“ marks on thy thighs, on thy privy part, on thy haunches,
“and on the lineaments of thy figure.” 6. “ Whatever
‘natural or accidental evil marks were on all thy limbs, I
“have obviated all such marks by these full oblations of
“ clarified butter. May this oblation be efficacious.”

The bride and bridegroom rise up ; and he shews her the
polar star, reciting the following text: “ Heaven is stable ;
“ the earth is stable ; this universe is stable ; these moun-
“ tains are stable; may this woman be stable in her hus-
“band’s family.”* The bride salutes the bridegroom,
naming herself and family, and adding a respectful inter-
jection. The bridegroom replies, “ Be long-lived and
“happy.” Matrons then pour water, mixed with leaves,
upon the bride and bridegroom, out of jars which had been
previously placed on an altar prepared for the purpose ; and
the bridegroom again makes oblations with the names of
the worlds, by way of closing this part of the ceremony.


* Dhruva, the pole, also signifies stable, fixed, steady, firm.


222 ON THE-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


The bridegroom afterwards eats food prepared without
factitious salt. During this meal he recites the following
prayers : 1. “ I bind with the fetters of food thy heart and
“ mind to the gem [of my soul]; I bind them with nourish-
“‘ ment, which is the thread of life; I bind them with the
“ knot of truth.” 2. “ May that heart, which is yours,
“ become my heart ; and this heart, which is mine, become
“thy heart.” 3. “ Since food is the bond of life, I bind
“ thee therewith.” The remainder of the food must be then
given to the bride.

During the three subsequent days the married couple
must abstain from factitious salt, live chastely and austerely,
and sleep on the ground. On the following day, that is,
on the fourth exclusively,* the bridegroom conducts the
bride to his own house on a carriage or other suitable con-
veyance. He recites the following text when she ascends
the carriage: “‘ O wife of the sun! ascend this vehicle re-
“sembling the beautiful blossoms of the cotton-tree + and
“ butea, { tinged with various tints and coloured like gold,
“ well constructed, furnished with good wheels, and the
“ source of ambrosia [that is, of blessings]: bring happiness
“to thy husband.” Proceeding with his bride, he, or some
other person for him, recites the following text on ‘their
coming to a cross road: “ May robbers, who infest the
$ road, remain ignorant [of this journey] ; may the married


* The Muslemans of India do not scruple to borrow from the
Hindus superstitious ceremonies that are celebrated with festivity-
They take an active part in the gambols of the H6/i, and even solicit
the favours of the Indian Plutus, at the Diwali. The bridal proces-
sion, on the fourth day, with all the sports and gambols ofthe Chaut’hi
(Chaturthi), is evidently copied from the similar customs of the
Hindus. In Bengal the Muslemans have even adopted the premature
marriage of infant brides and bridegrooms.


+ Bombax heptaphyllum.
{ Butea frondosa.


OF THE HINDUS. 293


“couple reach a place of security and difficult access, by
“easy roads; and may foes keep aloof.”

Alighting from the carriage, the bridegroom leads the
bride into the house, chanting the hymn called Vamadévya.
Matrons welcome the bride, and make her sit down on a
bull’s hide of the same colour, and placed in the same man-
ner as before. The bridegroom then recites the following
prayer: “‘ May kine here produce numerous young ; may
“horses and human beings do so; and may the deity sit
“here, by whose favour sacrifices are accomplished with gifts
“ a thousand fold.”

The women then place a young child in the bride’s lap ;
they put roots of lotos, or else fruit of different kinds, in his
hand. The bridegroom takes up the child, and then pre-
pares a sacrificial fire in the usual manner, and makes eight
oblations with the following prayers, preceded and followed
by the usual oblations to the three worlds. 1. “ May there
“ be cheerfulness here.” 2. ‘“‘ May thine own [kindred] be
~ “kind here.” 3. “‘ May there be pleasure here.” 4. “Sport

“thou here.” 5. ‘‘ May there be kindness here with me.”
6. “ May thine own [kindred] be here, benevolent towards
“me.” 7. “ May there be here delight towards me.” 8.
“ Be thou here joyous towards me.” The bride then salutes
her father-in-law and the other relatives of her husband.
Afterwards the bridegroom prepares another sacrificial
fire, and sits down with the bride on his right hand. He
makes twenty oblations with the following prayers, preceded
and followed as usual by oblations to the three worlds.
The remainder of each ladleful is thrown into a jar of water,
which is afterwards poured on the bride’s head. 1. “ Fire,
“ expiator of evil! thou dost atone evils for the gods them-
“ selves. I, apriest, approach thee, desirous of soliciting
“thee to remove any sinful taint in the beauty of this
“woman.” 2. “ Air, expiator of evil!” &e. 3. “ Moon,


224 ON THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES


“ expiator of evil!” &e. 4. “ Sun, expiator of evil !” &c.
5. “ Fire, air, moon, and sun, expiators of evil ! ye do atone
“ evils for the gods. I, a priest, approach thee, desirous of
“ soliciting thee to remove any sinful taint in the beauty of
“this woman.” 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. “soliciting thee to re-
“move any thing in her person which might destroy her
“husband.” 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, “ any thing in her
“ person which might make her negligent of cattle.”

The priests who use the Yajurvéda, make only five obla-
tions with as many prayers addressed to fire, air, the sun,
the moon, and the Gandharba or celestial quirister ;_pray-
ing them to remove any thing in the person of the bride
which might be injurious to her husband, to her offspring,
to cattle, to the household, and to honour and glory. The
following text is recited while the water is poured on the
bride’s head: “ That blameable portion of thy person
“which would have been injurious to thy husband, thy
“ offspring, thy cattle, thy household, and thy honour, I
“render destructive of paramours: may thy body [thus
“ cleared from evil] reach old age with me.” The bride is
then fed with food prepared in a caldron, and the following
text is recited: “I unite thy breath with my breath ; thy
“ bones with my bones ; thy flesh with my flesh ; and thy
“ skin with my skin.”

The ceremonies of which the nuptial solemnity consists


‘


may be here recapitulated. The bridegroom goes in pro-
cession to the house where the bride’s father resides, and is
there welcomed as a guest. The bride is given to him by
her father in the form usual at every solemn donation, and
their hands are bound together with grass. He clothes
the bride with an upper and lower garment, and the skirts
of her mantle and his are tied together. The bridegroom
makes oblations to fire, and the bride drops rice on it as an
oblation. The bridegroom solemnly takes her hand in


OF THE HINDUS. 225


marriage. She treads on a stone and mullar. They walk
round the fire. The bride steps seven times, conducted by
the bridegroom, and he then dismisses the spectators, the
marriage being now complete and irrevocable. In the
evening of the same day the bride sits down on a bull's
hide, and the bridegroom points out to her the polar star
as an emblem of stability. They then partake of a meal.
The bridegroom remains three days at the house of the
bride’s father: on the fourth day he conducts her to his
own house in solemn procession. She is there welcomed by
his kindred; and the solemnity ends with oblations to fire.

Among Hindus, a girl is married before the age of pu-
berty. The law even censures the delay of her marriage
beyond the tenth year. For this reason, and because the
bridegroom too may be an infant, it is rare that a marriage
should be consummated until long after its solemnization.
The recital of prayers on this occasion constitutes it a reli-
gious ceremony; and it is the first of those that are per-
formed for the purpose of expiating the sinful taint which a
child is supposed to contract in the womb of his mother.
They shall be described in a future essay.

On the practice of immature nuptials, a subject sug-
gested in the preceding paragraph, it may be remarked,
that it arises from a laudable motive ; from a sense of duty
incumbent on a father, who considers as a debt the obliga-
tion of providing a suitable match for his daughter. This
notion, which is strongly inculcated by Hindu legislators,
is forcibly impressed on the minds of parents. But in
their zeal to dispose of a daughter in marriage, they do
not perhaps sufficiently consult her domestic felicity. By
the death of an infant husband, she is condemned to vir-
gin widowhood for the period of her life. If both survive,
the habitual bickerings of their infancy are prolonged in
perpetual discord.


TOL «1s Q


226 ON THE RELIGIOUS\CEREMONIES, Kc.


Numerous restrictions in the assortment of matches im-
pose on parents this necessity of embracing the earliest
opportunity of affiancing their children to fit companions.
The intermarriages of different classes, formerly permitted
with certain limitations, are now wholly forbidden. The
prohibited degrees extend to the sixth of affinity; and even
the bearing of the same family name is a sufficient cause of
impediment.

To conclude the subject of nuptials, I shall only add,
that eight forms are noticed by Hindu legislators. (Menv,
c. iii.) But one only, which has been here described from
the Indian rituals, is now used.


ay i


VIII.


On the Puttosoray of the Hinpvus.


PART I.°


[From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. i. p. 19—43.]


INTRODUCTION.


Tue Hindus, as is well known, possess various ancient
systems of philosophy, which they consider to be orthodox,
as consistent with the theology and metaphysics of the
Védas ; and have likewise preserved divers systems deemed
heretical, as incompatible with the doctrines of their holy
books.

The two Mimanséds (for there are two schools of meta-
physics under this title) are emphatically orthodox. The
prior one (pérva), which has Jarmin1 for its founder,
teaches the art of reasoning, with the express view of aiding
the interpretation of the Védas. The latter (uttara), com-
monly called Védénta, and attributed to VyAsa, deduces
from the text of the Indian scriptures a refined psychology,
which goes to a denial of a material world.

The Nyaya, of which Gérama is the acknowledged
author, furnishes a philosophical arrangement, with strict
rules of reasoning, not unaptly compared to the dialectics
of the Aristotelian school. Another course of philosophy
connected with it bears the denomination of Vaiséshica.
Its reputed author is CaNApe; who, like Democritus,
maintained the doctrine of atoms.


* Read at a public meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society, June 21, 1823.
Q2


228 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


A different philosophical system, partly heterodox, and
partly conformable to the established Hindu creed, is the
Sanc’hya: of which also, as of the preceding, there are
two schools; one usually known by that name; the other
commonly termed Yéga. A succinct exposition of the
Sanc’hya doctrines is the design of the present essay: they
are selected for that purpose, on account of the strong
affinity which they manifestly bear to the metaphysical
opinions of the sects of Jina and Buddha.

Though not strictly orthodox, both Sanc’hyas and the
Vaiséshica, as well as the Vyaya, are respected and studied
by very rigid adherents of the Védas, who are taught,
however, to. reject so much as disagrees, and treasure up.
what is consonant to their scriptures. “ In CaNApE’s
“ doctrine, in the Sénc’hya, and in the Yéga, that part
“ which is inconsistent with the Védas, is to be rejected. by
“those who strictly adhere to revelation. In Jarmrni’s
“ doctrine, and in VyAsa’s, there is nothing whatsoever at
“ variance with scripture.” *

Heretical treatises of philosophy are very numerous:
among which that of CuArvAca, which exhibits the doc-
trine of the Jaina sect, is most conspicuous; and next to
it, the Pasupata,

To them, and to the orthodox systems beforementioned,
it is not intended here to advert, further than as they are
noticed by writers on the Sane’hya, citing opinions of other
schools of philosophy, in course of commenting on the text
which they are engaged in expounding. It is not my
present purpose to exhibit a contrasted view of the tenets
of different philosophical schools, but to present to this
Society a summary of the doctrine of a single sect; which
will serve, however, to elucidate that of several more.


* Quotation in Visnyina-Buicsnu’s Captla-lhashya.


sANKHYA. 229


Of other philosophical sects, the received doctrines in
detail may be best reserved for separate notice, in distinct
essays to be hereafter submitted to the Society. I must
be clearly understood, however, not to pledge myself
definitively for that task.

I proceed without further preface to the immediate sub-
ject of the present essay :

A system of philosophy, in which precision of reckoning
is observed in the enumeration of its principles, is denomi-
nated Séanc’hya; a term which has been understood to
signify numeral, agreeably to the usual acceptation of
sanc’hya, number: and hence its analogy to the Pytha-
gorean philosophy has been presumed. But the name
may be taken to imply, that its doctrine is founded in the
exercise of judgment: for the word from which it is derived
signifies reasoning or deliberation ;* and that interpretation
of its import is countenanced by a passage of the Bharata,
where it is said of this sect of philosophers: “ They
“exercise judgment (sanc’hya), and discuss nature and
“‘ [other] twenty-four principles, and therefore are called
“ Sanc’hya.”

The commentator who has furnished this quotation,
expounds sanc’hyd, as here importing ‘ the discovery of
“ soul by means of right discrimination.’+

The reputed founder of this sect of metaphysical philo-
sophy was Capiia; an ancient sage, concerning whose
origin and adventures the mythological fables, which
occupy the place of history with the Hindus, are recounted
variously. In GaufaprApa’s commentary on the Sane’hya.
Caricé, he is asserted to have been a son of BRanMA; being
one of the seven great Rishis, or saints, named in Puranas
or theogonies as the offspring of that deity. His two most


* Am. Cosh. 1, 1, 4,1). + Capila-bhashya.


230 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


distinguished disciples, Asur1 and PancnaSic’Ha, are
there exalted to the same rank and divine origin with him-
self. Another commentator maintains that Capita was
an incarnation of VisuNu. It had been affirmed by a
writer on the Védanta, upon the authority of a passage
quoted by him, wherein Caria, the founder of the
Sanc’hya sect, is identified with AcN1 (fire), that he was an
incarnation, not of VisuNv, but of Acn1. The commen-
tator is not content with the fiery origin conceded to the
author. He denies the existence of more than one CAPILA;
and insists, that the founder of this sect was an incarnation
of VisuNvu, born as the son of DivaptrT1.*

In fact, the word capila, besides its ordinary signification
of tawny colour, bears likewise that of fire: and upon this
ambiguity of sense many legends in the Indian theogonies,
concerning the saint of the name, have been grounded; a
sample of which will be found quoted by Col. Wilford, in
the Asiatic Researches.+

A passage which is cited in the commentaries of Gau-
baPADA and VAcueEspATi on the Carica, assigns to
Caria intuitive knowledge and innate virtue, with trans-
cendent power and other perfections born with him at the
earliest creation: and this is taken by those scholiasts_as
relating to the founder of the Sanc’hya sect. But another
commentator of the Carica, RAMacrisuNa, who belongs
to the theistical branch of this sect, affirms that the passage
in question concerns Iéwara, or Gov, acknowledged by
that school.

A text quoted in VyAsa’s commentary on PaATANJALI’s
Yéga-sastra,t and referred by the annotator VAcHEsPATI,
as well as a modern scholiast of the Yéga-sastra, NAcési,


* Visnyina in Cap. bhash. t Vol. iii. p. 355.
t Parans. Sanc’h. prav. 1, 25.


SANKHYA. 231


to Panenaéic’na the disciple of Asurt, describes Caria
as an incarnation of the Deity: “‘ The holy and first wise
“one, entering a mind by himself framed, and becoming
“ the mighty sage (Capra), compassionately revealed this
“science to Asuri.”*

It may be questioned whether Capixa be not altogether
a mythological personage, to whom the true author of the
doctrine, whoever he was, thought fit to ascribe it.

A collection of sétras, or succinct aphorisms, in six
lectures, attributed to Capiza himself, is extant under the
title of Sanc’hya-pravachana. As an ancient work (who-
ever may have been really its author), it must doubtless
have been expounded by early scholiasts. But the only
commentary, which can at present be referred to by name
is the Capila-bhashya ; or, as the author himself cites it in
his other works, Sanc’hya-bhashya. The title at full
length, in the epigraph of the book, is Capila-sanc’hya-
pravachana-sastra-bhashya. It is by VisNYANA-BHICSHU,
a mendicant ascetic (as his designation imports), who com-
posed a separate treatise on the attainment of beatitude in
this life, entitled Sanc’hya-séra, and wrote many other
works ; particularly the Yéga-vértica, consisting of scholia
on Paransaui’s Yéga-sastra, and the Brahme-miméansa-
bhashya, which is a commentary on a treatise of Védanti
philosophy.

It appears from the preface of the Capila-bhashya, that
a more compendious tract, in the-same form of sétras or
aphorisms, bears the title of Tatwa-samdsa, and is ascribed
to the same author, Capina. The scholiast intimates that
both are of equal authority, and in no respect discordant:
one being a summary of the greater work, or else this an
amplification of the conciser one. The latter was probably


* Panch. stitra, quoted in Vyisa’s bhashya.


232 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


the case; for there is much repetition in the Sénc’hya-
pravachana.

It is avowedly not the earliest treatise on this branch of
philosophy: since it contains references to former authorities
for particulars which are but briefly hinted in the sétras ;*
and it quotes some by name, and among them PaNncua-
§10’HA,+ the disciple of the reputed author’s pupil: an
anachronism which appears decisive.

The title of Sanc’hya-pravachana seems a borrowed one;
at least it is common to several compositions. It appertains
to Paransaui’s Yéga-sdstra.

If the authority of the scholiast of Capiia may be trusted,
the Tatwa-samasa is the proper text of the Sanc’hya; and
its doctrine is more fully, but separately set forth, by the
two ampler treatises, entitled Sanc’hya-pravachana, which
contain a fuller exposition of what had been there succinctly
delivered ; ParaNnJALi’s work supplying the deficiency of
Carina’s, and declaring the existence of Gon, which for
argument’s sake, and not absolutely and unreservedly, he
had denied.

Of the six lectures or chapters into which the sétras are
distributed, the three first comprise an exposition of the
whole Sénc’hya doctrine. The fourth contains illustrative
comparisons, with reference to fables and tales. The fifth
is controversial, confuting opinions of other sects ; which
is the case also with part of the first. The sixth and last
treats of the most important parts of the doctrine, enlarging
upon topics before touched.

The Carica, which will be forthwith mentioned as the
text book or standard authority of the Sanc’hya, has an
allusion to the contents of the fourth and fifth chapters,
professing to be a complete treatise of the science, exclusive


* Cap..3, 39. + Cap. 6,


a


[ee


sANKRYA. 233


of illustrative tales and controversial disquisitions.* The
author must have had before him the same collection of
sitras, or one similarly arranged. His scholiast + expressly
refers to the numbers of the chapters.

Whether the Zutwa-samasa of Carixa’ be extant, or
whether the s&tras of Pancna§gic’na be s0, is not certain.
The latter are frequently cited, and by modern authors on
the Sanc’hya : whence a presumption, that they may be yet
forthcoming.

The best text of the Sanc’hya is a short treatise in verse,
which is denominated Carica, as memorial verses of other
sciences likewise are. The acknowledged author is ISwara-
Crisana, described in the concluding lines or epigraph of
the work itself, as having received the doctrine, through a
succession of intermediate instructors, from PANcHASICc’HA,
by whom it was first promulgated, and who was himself
instructed by Asuri, the disciple of Capina.t

This brief tract, containing seventy-two stanzas in dry
metre, has been expounded in numerous commentaries.

One of these is the work of GaufapApa, the celebrated
scholiast of the Upanishads of the Védas, and preceptor of
Gévinna, who was preceptor of Sancara-AcuArya,
author likewise of numerous treatises on divers branches of
theological philosophy. It is entitled Sanc’hya-bhashya.

Another, denominated Séne’hya-chandrica, is by NARrA-
YANA-Tirt’na, who seems from his designation to have
been an ascetic. He was author likewise of a gloss on the
Yéga-sastra, as appears from his own references to it.

A third commentary, under the title of Sanc’hya-tatwa-
caumudi, or more simply Fatwa-caumudi (for so it is cited
by later commentators), is by VAcnEsPati-MISRA, a na-
tive of Tirhét, author of similar works on various other


* C4ar.72. + NinivaXa-Tirr'ua. ¢t Cdr, 70 and 71.


234 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


philosophical systems. It appears from the multiplicity of
its copies, which are unusually aes 9% to be the most
approved gloss on the text.

One more commentary, bearing the ahedeigci but sim.
pler title of Sanc’hya-caumudi, is by RAma-crisuNa,
BuatffAcuArya, a learned and not ancient writer of Ben-
gal ; who has for the most part followed preceding commen-
tators, borrowing frequently from NArAyana Tirt’Ha,
though taking the title of his commentary from VAcuEs-
PATI’s,

The scholiasts of the Carica have, in more than one
place, noticed the text of the sétras: thus formally ad-
mitting the authority of the aphorisms. The excellence of
the memorial verses (Carica), with the gloss of Gauba-
PADA and that of VAcuEsPATI-mISRA, has been the
occasion of both collections of aphorisms (Tatwa samasa
and Sanc’hya-pravachana) falling into comparative neglect.
They are superseded for a text book of the sect by iswara-
cRisHNa’s clearer and more compendious work. Both sétras
and cérica may be considered to be genuine and authoritative
expositioins of the doctrine; and the more especially, as
they do not, upon any material point, appear to disagree.

The several works beforementioned are the principal
works in which the Sanc’hya philosophy may be now stu-
died. Others, which are cited by scholiasts, may possibly
be yet forthcoming. But they are at least scarce, and no
sufficient account of them can be given upon the strength
of a few scattered quotations. Among them, however, may
be named the Rajavartica, to which reference is made, as
to a work held in much estimation, and which appears to
comprise annotations on the sétras; and the Sangraha,
which is cited for parallel passages explanatory of the text,
being an abridged exposition of the same doctrines, in the
form of a select compilation.


| aia


SANKHYA. 235


Concerning the presumable antiquity of either Cariia’s
aphorisms or [gwara-crisn¥a’s memorial couplets, Ishall
here only remark, that notices of them, with quotations
from both, do occur in philosophical treatises of other
schools, whereby their authenticity is so far established.

Besides the Sanc’hya of Carita and his followers, ano-
ther system, bearing the same denomination, but more
usually termed the Yéga-Sastra or Yéga-sitra, as before
remarked, is ascribed to a mythological being, PATANJALI,
the supposed author of the great grammatical commentary
emphatically named the Mahabhashya ; and likewise of a
celebrated medical treatise termed Characa, and other
distinguished performances.

The collection of Yéga-sétras, bearing the common title
of Sane’hya pravachana, is distributed into four chapters
or quarters (pada): the first, on contemplation (samadhi) ;
the second, on the means of its attainment; the third, on
the exercise of transcendent power (vibhiti) ; the fourth, on
abstraction or spiritual insulation (caiwalya).

An ancient commentary on this fanatical work is forth-
coming, entitled Patanjala-bhashya. It is attributed to
Vispa-vyAsa, the compiler of the Indian scriptures and
founder of the Védanti school of philosophy. VAcuzs-
PATI M1§RA has furnished scholia on both text and gloss.
This scholiast has been already noticed as an eminent inter-
preter of the Carica: and the same remark is here appli-
cable, that the multiplicity of copies indicates the estimation
in which his gloss is held above other scholia.

Another commentary is by ViJNYANA-BuHICcSHU before-
mentioned. He refers to it in his other works under the
name of Yéga-vartica. It probably is extant ; for quota-
tions from it occur in modern compilations.

A third commentary, denominated Réja-martanda, is
ascribed in its preface and epigraph to RANA-RANGA-


236 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


MALLA, surnamed Buésa-RAJA or Bu6ésa-PATI, sove-
reign of Dhara, and therefore called Dharéswara. It was
probably composed at his court, under his auspices ; and
his name has been affixed to it in compliment to him, as is
no uncommon practice. It is a succinct and lucid expo-
sition of the text.

An ampler commentary by a modern Mahardshtriya
Brahman, named NAc6si-puatfa UpAp’nyAya, bears
the title of Patanjali-sitra-vritti. It is very copious and
very clear.

The tenets of the two schools of the Séanc’hya are on
many, not to say on most, points, that are treated in both,
the same; differing however upon one, which is the most
important of all: the proof of existence of supreme Gop.

The one school (Pa TaNJAL1’s) recognising Gop, is there-
fore denominated theistical (Séswara sine’hya). The other
(Capixa’s) is atheistical (ViriSwara sane’ hya), as the sects
of Jina and Buddha in effect are, acknowledging no crea-
tor of the universe nor supreme ruling providence. The
gods of Capixa are beings superior to man; but, like him,
subject to change and transmigration.

A third school, denominated Pauranica sanc’hya, con-
siders nature as an illusion; conforming upon most other
points to the doctrine of PaTaNnJaut, and upon many, to
that of Capita. In several of the Puranas, as the Mat-
sya, Cirma and Vishnu, in particular, the cosmogony,
which is an essential part of an Indian theogony, is de-
livered consonantly to this system. That which is found at
the beginning of Menv’s institutes of law is not irrecon-
cileable to it.*


* Menu, |. 14—19.


sANKHYA, 237


Doctrine of the Sane’hya.


Tue professed design of all the schools of the Sanc’hya,
theistical, atheistical, and mythological, as of other Indian
systems of philosophy, is to teach the means by which
eternal beatitude may be attained after death, if not be-
fore it.

In a passage of the Védas it is said, “ Soul is to be known,
“it is to be discriminated from nature: thus it does not
“come again; it does not come again.”* Consonantly to
this and to numberless. other passages of a like import, the
whole scope of the Védanta is to teach a doctrine, by the
knowledge of which an exemption from metempsychosis
shall be attainable ; and to inculcate that as the grand
object to be sought, by means indicated.

Even in the aphorisms of the Nyaya+ the same is. pro-
posed as the reward of a thorough acquaintance with that
philosophical arrangement.

In like manner the Grecian philosophers, and Pythagoras
and Plato in particular, taught that “ the end of philosophy
“is to free the mind from incumbrances which hinder its
“ progress towards perfection, and to raise it to the contem-
“ plation of immutable truth,” and “ to disengage it from
“ all. animal passions, that it may rise above sensible ob-
“ jects to the contemplation of the world of intelligence.” {

In all systems of the Sanc’hya the same purpose is pro-
pounded. “‘ Future pain,” says Paransaut, “is to be
“ prevented. A clear knowledge of discriminate truth is
“ the way of its prevention.” §

It is true knowledge, as Carrxa and his followers insist, ||
that alone can secure entire and permanent deliverance from


* Gaub. on Car. + Got. sir.
t Enfield’s Hist. of Phil. I. 382 and 233. § Pat. 2. 16. and 26.
| Cap.1.1. Car. 1.


238 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


evil : whereas temporal means, whether for exciting plea-
sure or for relieving mental and bodily sufferance, are insuf-
ficient to that end; and the spiritual resources of practical
religion are imperfect, since sacrifice, the most efficacious of
observances, is attended with the slaughter of animals, and
consequently is not innocent and pure; and the heavenly
meed of pious acts is transitory.*

In support of these positions, passages are cited from
the Védas declaring in express terms the attainment of
celestial bliss by celebration of sacrifices: ‘‘ Whoever per-
“forms an aSwaméd’ha (or immolation of a horse) con-
“ quers all worlds; overcomes death ; expiates sin ; atones
“ for sacrilege.” In another place, InpRA and the rest of
the subordinate deities are introduced exulting on their ac-
quisition of bliss. “‘ We have drunk the juice of asclepias+
“and are become immortal; we have attained effulgence ;
“we have learned divine truths. How can a foe harm
“us? How can age affect the immortality of a deathless
“being?” Yet it appears in divers parts of the Indian
scriptures, that, according to Hindu theology, even those
deities, though termed immortal, have but a definite dura-
tion of life, perishing with the whole world at its periodical
dissolution. ‘‘ Many thousands of Indras and of other
“ Gods have passed away in successive periods, overcome
“ by time ; for time is hard to overcome.” §.

Complete and perpetual exemption from every sort of ill
is the beatitude which is proposed for attainment by acqui-
sition of perfect knowledge. “ Absolute prevention of all
“ three sorts of pain,” as an aphorism of the Sane’hya inti-
mates, “is the highest purpose of soul.”|| Those three
sorts are evil proceeding from self, from external beings, or
from divine causes: the first is either bodily, as disease of


‘


* Car. 1. + Soma, the moon-plant: <Asclepias acida.
t Gaué. on Car. 2. § Ibid. \| Sdn. prav. 1.1.


sANKHYA. ~ 239


various kinds; or mental, as cupidity, anger, and other
passions: the two remaining sorts arise from external
sources ; one excited by some mundane being ; the other,
by the agency of a being of a superior order, or produced
by a fortuitous cause.

True and perfect knowledge, by which deliverance from
evil of every kind is attainable, consists in rightly diserimi-
nating the principles, perceptible and imperceptible, of the
material world, from the sensitive and cognitive principle
which is the immaterial soul. Thus the Carica premises,
that “ the inquiry concerns means of precluding the three
“sorts of pain; for pain is embarrassment. Nor is the
“inquiry superfluous, because obvious means of alleviation
“ exist ; for absolute and final relief is not thereby accom-
“ plished. The revealed mode is, like the temporal one,
“ ineffectual : for it is impure ; and it is defective in some
“ respects, as well as excessive in others. A method, dif-
“ ferent from both, is preferable; consisting in a discrimi-
“native knowledge of perceptible principles, and of the
“ imperceptible one, and of the thinking soul.”*

The revealed mode, to which allusion is here made, is
not theological doctrine with the knowledge of first prin-
ciples, insuring exemption from transmigration; but per-
formance of religious ceremonies enjoined in the practical
Védas, and especially the immolation of victims, for which
a heavenly reward, a place among the Gods, is promised.

It is not pure, observes the scholiast, for it is attended
with the slaughter of animals, which if not sinful in such
cases, is, to say the least, not harmless. The merit of it,
therefore, is of a mixed nature. A particular precept ex-
presses, “slay the consecrated victim :” but a general
maxim ordains, “ hurt no sentient being.” It is defective,
since even the Gods, InpRA and the rest, perish at the


* Car. 1 and 2 with Scholia.


240 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


appointed period. It is in other respects excessive, since
the felicity of one is a source of unhappiness to another.

Visible and temporal means, to which likewise reference
is made in the text, are medicine and other remedies for
bodily ailment ; diversion alleviating mental ills; a guard
against external injury; charms for defence from accidents.
Such expedients do not utterly preclude sufferance. But
trae knowledge, say Indian philosophers, does so; and
they undertake to teach the means of its attainment.

By three kinds of evidence, exclusive of intuition, which
belongs to beings of a superior order, demonstration is
arrived at, and certainty is attained, by mankind: namely,
perception, inference, and affirmation.* All authorities
among the Séne’hyas (PaTaNnsati and Captia, as well
as their respective followers) concur in asserting these.
Other sources of knowledge, admitted in different systems
of philosophy, are reducible to these three. Comparison,’
or analogy, which the logicians of GéramA’s school add
to that enumeration, and tradition and other arguments,
which Jarmrn1 maintains (viz. capacity, aspect, and priva-
tion of four sorts, antecedent, reciprocal, absolute, and total),
are all comprehended therein. Other philosophers, who
recognise fewer sources of knowledge, as CuArvAca, who
acknowledges perception only, and the Vaiséshicas, who
disallow tradition, are rejected as insufficient authorities.+

Inference is of three sorts, equally admitted by the schools
of the Sanc’hya and Gérama’s Nydaya, and in all distin-
guished by the same denominations. The consideration of
them more properly belongs to the dialectic philosophy
than to this, and may therefore be postponed. It will be
here sufficient to state the simplest explanation furnished
by scholiasts of the Carica and Sétras, without going into
the differences which occur in their expositions.


* Car.4. Pat.1.7. Cup. 1. t Com. on Car. 5.


sANKHYA, ’ 241


One sort, then, is the inference of an effect from a cause ;
the second is that of a cause from an effect; the third is
deduced from a relation other than that of cause and effect.
Examples of them are, Ist. Rain anticipated from a cloud
seen gathering. 2d. Fire concluded on a hill, whence
smoke ascends. 3d. A flower’s appropriate colour pre-
sumed where its peculiar scent is noticed ; or motion of the
moon’s orb, deduced from observation of it in different
aspects; or saltness of the sea, concluded from that of a
sample of sea water; or bloom surmised on mangoe-trees in
general, when an individual mangoe-tree is found in blossom,

In regard to the third kind of evidence, tradition or right
affirmation,* explained as intending true revelation,+ com-
mentators understand it to mean the Védas or sacred writ,
including the recollections of those gifted mortals, who
remember passages of their former lives, and call to mind
events which occurred to them in other worlds; and exclud-
ing, on the other hand, pretended revelations of impostors
and barbarians. .

In a dialogue cited from the Védas, one of the inter-
locutors, the holy Jaicisnavya, asserts his presence, and
consequent recollection of occurrences, through ten reno-
vations of the universe (Mahdsarga).

In a more extended sense, this third kind of evidence is
the affirmation of any truth, and comprises every mode of
oral information or verbal communication whence knowledge
of a truth may be drawn.

From these three sources, by the right exercise of judg-
ment and due application of reasoning, true knowledge is
derived, consisting in a discriminative acquaintance with
principles ; which, in the Sdnc’hya system, are reckoned
to be not less than twenty-five ; viz.


* Pat.1.7. + Car. 4 and 5,
VOL. I. R


242 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


1. Nature, Pracriti or Mila-pracriti, the root or plastic
origin of all: termed Prad’hana, the chief one: the universal,
material cause; identified by the cosmogony of the Puraias
(in several of which the Sanc’hya philosophy is followed)

‘with Maya or illusion; and, by mythologists, with Brahmt,
the power or energy of BraumA. It is eternal matter,
undiscrete ; undistinguishable, as destitute of parts; infer-
rible, from its effects: being productive, but no production.

2. Intelligence, called Budd’hi and Mahat or the great
one: the first production of nature, increate, prolific; being
itself productive of other principles. It is identified by the
mythological Sanc’hya with the Hindu triad of Gods. A’
very remarkable passage of the Matsya-purdia cited in the
Séanc’hya-sara, after declaring that the great principle is
produced “ from modified nature,” proceeds to affirm,
“that the great one becomes distinctly known as three
“ Gods, through the influence of the three qualities of
“ goodness, foulness, and darkness; ‘ being one person,
“and three Gods,’ (écé mértis trayd dévah), namely,
“ Brauma, Visaxu, and MauféSwara. In the aggre-
“gate it is the deity; but, distributive, it appertains to
“ individual beings.”

3. Consciousness, termed Ahancdra, or more properly
egotism, which is the literal sense of the term. The pecu-
liar and appropriate function of it is (abhimana) selfish
conviction ; a belief that, in perception and meditation, “I”
am concerned; that the objects of sense concern ME; in
short, that I am. It proceeds from the intellectual prin-
ciple, and is productive of those which follow.

4—8. Five subtile particles, rudiments, or atoms, deno-
minated Tanmatra ; perceptible to beings of a superior order,
but unapprehended by the grosser senses of mankind : derived
from the conscious principle, and themselves productive of
the five grosser elements, earth, water, fire, air, and space.


-


sANKHYA. 243


9—19. Eleven organs of sense and action, which also
are productions of the conscious principle. Ten are ex-
ternal: viz. five of sense, and five of action. The eleventh
is internal, an organ both of sense and of action, termed
manas or mind. The five instruments of sensation are, the
eye, the ear, the nose, the tongue, and the skin. The five
instruments of action are, Ist, voice, or the organ of speech ;
2d, the hands; 3d, the feet; 4th, the excretory termination
of the intestines; 5th, the organ of generation. Mind,
serving both for sense and action, is an organ by affinity,
being cognate with the rest.

These eleven organs, with the two principles of intelligence
and consciousness, are thirteen instruments of knowledge :
three internal, and ten external, likened to three warders
and ten gates.*

An external sense perceives ; the internal one examines ;
consciousness makes the selfish application ; and intellect
resolves: an external organ executes.

20—24. Five elements, produced from the five elementary
particles or rudiments. Ist. A diffused, etherial fluid (4césa),
occupying space: it has the property of audibleness, being
the vehicle of sound, derived from the sonorous rudiment or
etherial atom. 2d. Air, which is endued with the properties
of audibleness and tangibility, being sensible to hearing and
touch; derived from the tangible rudiment or aerial atom.
3d. Fire, which is invested with properties of audibleness,
tangibility, and colour; sensible to hearing, touch, and
sight: derived from the colouring rudiment or igneous
atom. 4th. Water, which possesses the properties of audi-
bleness, tangibility, colour, and savour; being sensible to
hearing, touch, sight, and taste: derived from the savoury
rudiment or aqueous atom. 5th. Earth, which unites the

* Car. 32—35.
R 2


244 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


properties of audibleness, tangibility, colour, savour, and
odour ; being sensible to hearing, touch, sight, taste, and
smell: derived from the odorous rudiment or terrene atom.

25. Soul, termed Purusha, Pumas, or Atman; which is
neither produced nor productive. It is multitudinous, indi-
vidual, sensitive, eternal, unalterable, immaterial.

The theistical Sane’hya recognises the same principles ;
understanding, however, by Purusha, not individual soul
alone, but likewise Gon (Jéwara), the ruler of the world.

These twenty-five principles are summarily contrasted in
the Carica. “ Nature, root of all, is no production. Seven
¥ principles; the Great or intellectual one, &c. are pro-
“ ductions and productive. Sixteen are productions (unpro-
“ ductive). Soul is neither a production nor productive.”*

To this passage a close resemblance will be remarked in
one which occurs at the beginning of Er1cENa’s treatise
De Divisione Nature, where he distinguishes these four:
“That which creates and is not created; that which is
“ created and creates; that which is created and creates
“not; and that which neither creates nor is created.”

In several of the Upanishads of the Védas a similar dis-
tribution is affirmed, viz. “ eight productive principles and
“ sixteen productions.” t

It is for contemplation of nature, and for abstraction from
it, that union of soul with nature takes place, as the halt
and the blind join for conveyance and for guidance (one
bearing and directed ; the other borne and directing). By
that union of soul and nature, creation, consisting in the
development of intellect and the rest of the principles, is
effected.

The soul’s wish is fruition or liberation. For either pur-


‘


* Car. 3. + J. Scori Ericena de div. nat. lib. 5.
t Garbha, Prasna and Maitréya Upanishads.


sANKHYA. 245


pose, it is in the first place invested with a subtile person,
towards the formation of which the evolution of principles
proceeds no further than the elementary rudiments.* This
is composed then of intellect, consciousness, and mind, as
well as the rest of the organs and instruments of life, con-


~ joined with particles, or elementary rudiments, of five sorts:


thus seventeen principles enter into its composition. +

This person or subtile frame, termed linga, linga-Sarira,
or stcshma-éartra, is primeval, produced from original
nature at the earliest or initial development of principles.
It is unconfined ; too subtile for restraint or hindrance (and
thence termed ativahica, surpassing the wind in swiftness);
incapable of enjoyment until it be invested with a grosser
body, affected nevertheless by sentiments.

This is termed the rudimental creation (tanmdatra-sarga).

The notion of an animated atom seems to be a compro-
mise between the refined dogma of an immaterial soul, and
the difficulty which a gross understanding finds in grasping
the comprehension of individual existence, unattached to
matter.

The grosser body, with which a soul clad in its subtile
person is invested for the purpose of fruition, is composed of
the five elements ; or of four, excluding the etherial, accord-
ing to some authorities; or of one earth alone, according to
others.t That grosser body, propagated by generation, is
perishable. The subtile person is more durable, transmi-
grating through successive bodies, which it assumes, as a
mimic shifts his disguises to represent various characters.

According to Carita,§ as he is interpreted by his scho-
liast, there is intermediately a corporeal frame composed of
the five elements, but tenuous or refined. It is termed

* Car. 40. + Cap. 3. 8. t Cap. 3. 16—18.
§ Car, 3.10. 11.


246 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


anush?hana sarira, and is the vehicle of the subtile
person.

It is this, rather than the subtile person itself, which
in PatanJaui’s Yéga-sastra is conceived to extend, like
the flame of a lamp over its wick, to a small distance above
the skull.

The corporeal creation (bhautica-sarga), consisting of
souls invested with gross bodies, comprises eight orders
of superior beings and five of inferior; which, together
with man, who forms a class apart, constitute fourteen
orders of beings, distributed in three worlds or classes.

The eight superior orders of beings bear appellations
familiar to Hindu theology ; Brahma, Prajapatis, Indras,
Pitris, Gan@harvas, Yacshas, Racshasas, and Pisachas;
gods or demi-gods, demons and evil spirits.

The inferior orders of beings are quadrupeds, distin-
guished in two orders ; birds ; reptiles, fishes, and insects ;
vegetables and unorganic substances.

Above is the abode of goodness, peopled by beings of
superior orders ; virtue prevails there, and consequent bliss,
imperfect however, inasmuch as it is transient. Beneath
is the abode of darkness or illusion, where beings of an
inferior order dwell; stolidity or dulness is there prevalent.
Between is the human world, where foulness or ‘passion
predominates, attended with continual misery.

Throughout these worlds, sentient soul experiences ill
arising from decay and death, until it be finally liberated
from its union with person.

Besides the grosser corporeal creation and the subtile or
personal, all belonging to the material world, the Sanc’hya
distinguishes an intellectual creation (pratyaya-sarga or
bhava-sarga), consisting of the affections of intellect, its
sentiments or faculties, which are enumerated in four


sANKHYA. 247


classes, as obstructing, disabling, contenting, or perfecting
the understanding, and amount to fifty.

Obstructions of the intellect are error, conceit, passion,
hatred, fear: which are severally denominated obscurity,
illusion, extreme illusion, gloom, and utter darkness. These
again are subdivided into sixty-two sorts ; error comprising
eight species; illusion, as many; extreme illusion, ten;
gloom, eighteen ; and utter darkness, the same number.

Error, or obscurity, mistakes irrational nature, intellect,
consciousness, or any one of the five elementary atoms,
for the soul, and imagines liberation to consist in absorption
into one of those eight prolific principles.

Conceit, termed illusion, imagines transcendent power,
in any of its eight modes, to be deliverance from evil.
Thus beings of a superior order, as INpRA and the rest of
the gods, who possess transcendent. power of every sort,
conceive it to be perpetual, and believe themselves im-
mortal.

Passion, called extreme illusion, concerns the five objects
of sense ; sound, tact, colour, savour, and odour ; reckoned
to be twice as many, as different to man and to superior
beings.

Envy or hatred, denominated gloom, relates to the same
ten objects of sense, and to eight-fold transcendent power,
furnishing the means of their enjoyment.

Fear, named utter darkness, regards the same eighteen
subjects, and consists in the dread of ill attendant on their
loss by death or by deprivation of power.

Disability of intellect, which constitutes the second class,
comprising twenty-eight species, arises from defect or injury
of organs, which are eleven: and to these eleven sorts are
added the contraries of the two next classes, containing
the one nine, and the other eight species, making a total
of twenty-eight, Deafness, blindness, deprivation of taste,


248 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


want of smell, numbedness, dumbness, handlessness, lame-
ness, costiveness, impotence, and madness, are disabilities
preventing performance of functions.

Content or acquiescence, which forms the third class, is
either internal or external: the one four-fold, the other five-
fold ; viz. internal, 1st. Concerning nature ; as, an opinion
that a discriminative knowledge of nature is a modification
of that principle itself, with a consequent expectation of
deliverance by the act of nature. 2d. Concerning the
proximate cause ; as a belief that ascetic observances suffice
to ensure liberation. 3d. Concerning time; as a fancy
that deliverance will come in course, without study. 4th.
Concerning luck; as a supposition that its attainment
depends on destiny. External acquiescence relates to ab-
stinence from enjoyment upon temporal motives: namely,
Ist, aversion from the trouble of acquisition; or, 2d,
from that of preservation; and, 3d, reluctance to incur
loss consequent on use; or, 4th, evil attending on fruition ;
or, 5th, offence of hurting objects by the enjoyment of
them.

The perfecting of the intellect is the fourth class, and
comprises eight species. Perfection consists in the pre-
vention of evil; and this being three-fold, its prevention is
so likewise ; as is the consequent perfection of the under-
standing. This is direct. The remaining five species are
indirect, viz. reasoning ; oral instruction; study ; amicable
‘intercourse ; and purity, internal and external (or according
to another interpretation, liberality). They are means of
arriving at perfection.

The Sdane’hya, as other Indian systems of philosophy, is
much engaged with the consideration of what is termed the
three qualities (guzia): if indeed quality be here the proper
import of the term; for the scholiast of Capita under-
stands it as meaning, not quality or accident, but substance,


SANKHYA. 249


a modification of nature, fettering the soul ; conformably
with another acceptation of gura, signifying a cord.*

The first, and highest, is goodness (sattwa). It is alle-
viating, enlightening, attended with pleasure and happi-
ness; and virtue predominates in it. In fire it is prevalent;
wherefore flame ascends, and sparks fly upwards. In man,
when it abounds, as it does in beings of a superior order,
it is the cause of virtue.

The second and middlemost is foulness or passion (rajas
or téjas). Itis active, urgent, and variable; attended with
evil and misery. In air it predominates, wherefore wind
moves transversely. In living beings it is the cause of vice.

The third and lowest is darkness (¢amas). It is heavy
and obstructive; attended with sorrow, dulness, and illu-
sion. In earth and water it predominates, wherefore they
fall or tend downwards. In living beings it is the cause
of stolidity.

These three qualities are not mere accidents of nature,
but are of its essence and enter into its composition. “‘ We
“speak of the qualities of nature as we do of the trees of
“a forest,” say the Sénc’hyas.+ In the Védas they are
pronounced to be successive modifications, one of the other:
“ All was darkness : commanded to change, darkness took
“the taint of foulness; and this, again commanded, as-
“ sumed the form of goodness.”

They co-operate for a purpose, by union of opposites :
as a lamp, which is composed of oil, a wick, and flame,{
substances inimical and contrary.

Taking the three qualities by which nature is modified,
for principles or categories, the number, before enumerated,
is raised to twenty-eight ; as-is by some authorities main-
tained.§


* Visnyin. on Cap. 1. 60. + Sanec’hya-sara. t Cir. 13.
§ Visnyina-Buicsuu in Sdne’hya-sdra and Capila-bhashya.


250 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


To the intellect appertain eight modes, effects, or pro-
perties: four partaking of goodness ; namely, virtue, know-
ledge, dispassion, and power; and four which are the
reverse of those, and partake of darkness, viz. sin, error,
incontinency, and powerlessness.

Virtue here intends moral or religious merit. Know-
ledge is either exterior or interior ; that is, temporal or spi-
ritual. Interior or spiritual knowledge discriminates soul
from nature, and operates its deliverance from evil. Exte-
rior or temporal knowledge comprehends holy writ, and
every science but self-knowledge.

Dispassion likewise is either exterior or interior ; as pro-
ceeding from a temporal motive, aversion from trouble ; or
a spiritual impulse, the conviction that nature is a dream,
a mere juggle and illusion.

Power is eight-fold : consisting in thefaculty of shrinking
into a minute form, to which every thing is pervious; or
enlarging to a gigantic body; or assuming levity (rising
along a sunbeam to the solar orb) ; or possessing unlimited
reach of organs (as touching the moon with the tip of a
finger) ; or irresistible will (for instance, sinking into the
earth, as easily as in water); dominion over all beings ani-
mate or inanimate ; faculty of changing the course of na-
ture ; ability to accomplish every thing desired.

The notion, that such transcendent power is attainable
by man in this life, is not peculiar to the Sanc’hya sect:
it is generally prevalent among the Hindus, and amounts to
a belief of magic. A Yégi, imagined to have acquired
such faculties, is, to vulgar apprehension, a sorcerer, and is
so represented in many a drama and popular tale.

One of the four chapters of PATANJALI’s Yoga-Sastra
(the third), relates almost exclusively to this subject, from
which it takes its title. It is full of directions for bodily
and mental exercises, consisting of intensely profound me-


sANKHYA, 251


ditation on special topics, accompanied by suppression of
breath and restraint of the senses, while steadily maintain-
ing prescribed postures. By such exercises, the adept
acquires the knowledge of every thing past and future,
remote or hidden ; he divines the thoughts of others ; gains
the strength of an elephant, the courage of a lion, and
the swiftness of the wind; flies in the air, floats in water,
dives into the earth, contemplates all worlds at one glance,
and performs other strange feats.

But neither power, however transcendent, nor dispassion,
nor virtue, however meritorious, suffices for the attainment
of beatitude. It serves but to prepare the soul for that
absorbed contemplation, by which the great purpose of
deliverance is to be accomplished.

The promptest mode of attaining beatitude through ab-
sorbed contemplation, is devotion to Gon; consisting in
repeated muttering of his mystical name, the syllable ém,
at the same time meditating its signification. It is this
which constitutes efficacious devotion ; whereby the deity,
propitiated, confers on the votary the boon that is sought ;
precluding all impediments, and effecting the attainment of
an inward sentiment that prepares the soul for liberation.

“ Gop, [Swanra, the supreme ruler,” according to Pa-
TANJALI,* “ is a soul or spirit distinct from other souls ;
“ unaffected by the ills with which they are beset ; uncon-
‘ cerned with good or bad deeds and their consequences,
‘and with fancies or passing thoughts. In him is the
“utmost omniscience. He is the instructor of the earliest
“ beings that have a beginning (the deities of mythology) ;
“ himself infinite, unlimited by time.”

Capi, on the other hand, denies an iswara, ruler of
the world by volition: alleging that there is no proof of


‘


* Yoga-sastra 1. 23~24, and 26—29,


252 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


Gop’s existence, unperceived by the senses, not inferred
from reasoning, nor yet revealed.* He acknowledges, in-
deed, a being issuing from nature, who is intelligence abso-
lute ; source of all individual intelligences, and origin of
other existences successively evolved and developed. He
expressly affirms, “ that the truth of such an [gwara is
“* demonstrated :”++ the creator of worlds, in such sense
of creation : for “ the existence of effects,” he says, “is
* dependent upon consciousness, not upon igwara 3” and
“all else is from the great principle, intellect.” { Yet that
being is finite ; having a beginning and an end; dating
from the grand development of the universe, to terminate
with the consummation of all things. But an infinite being,
creator and guide of the universe by volition, Capra posi-
tively disavows.§ “ Detached from nature, unaffected
“ therefore by consciousness and the rest of nature’s tram-
“ mels, he could have no inducement to creation ; fettered
“by nature, he could not be capable of creation. Guid-
“ance requires proximity, as the iron is attracted by the
“ magnet; and, in like manner, it is by proximity that liv-
“ing souls govern individual bodies, enlightened by ani-
* mation as hot iron is by heat.”

Passages of admitted authority, in which Gop is named,
relate, according to Capiia and his followers, either to a
liberated soul or to a mythological deity, or that superior
not supreme being whom mythology places in the midst of
the mundane egg.

Such is the essential and characteristic difference of Ca-
PILA’s and PaTaNnJAtt’s, the atheistical and deistical,


‘


Sane’ hyas.
In less momentous matters they differ, not upon points
of doctrine, but in the degree in which the exterior exer-


* Cap. 1. 91—98; 3, 52—55; 5. 2—12; and 6. 64—78.
+ Cap. 3. 55. t Cap. 6. 65 and 66. § Cap. 1.


sANKHYA. ' 253


cises, or abstruse reasoning and study, are weighed upon,
as requisite preparations of absorbed contemplation. Pa-
TANJALI’s Yoga-Sastra is occupied with devotional exer-
cise and mental abstraction, subduing body and mind: Ca-
PILA is more engaged with investigation of principles and
reasoning upon them. One is more mystic and fanatical.
The other makes a nearer approach to philosophical disqui-
sition, however mistaken in its conclusions.

The manner in which a knowledge of those principles or
categories that are recognised by the Sénc’hyas may’ be
acquired, is set forth in the Carica: ‘‘ Sensible objects
“ become known by perception. It is by inference or rea-
“soning, that acquaintance with things transcending the
“senses is attained: and a truth, which is neither to be
“ directly perceived nor to be inferred by reasoning, is de-
“duced from revelation. For various causes, things may
“ be imperceptible or unperceived ; distance, nearness, mi-
“ nuteness; confusion, concealment; predominance of other
‘ matters ; defect of organs or inattention. It is owing to
“the subtlety of nature, not to the non-existence of this
“ original principle, that it is mot apprehended by the
“ senses, but inferred from its effects. Intellect and the
“ rest of the derivative principles are effects ; whence it is
“ concluded as their cause ; in some respects analogous,
“ but in others dissimilar.” *

“ Effect subsists antecedently to the operation of cause:”


a maxim not unlike that ancient one, that “ nothing comes
“


<


«


‘


of nothing ;” for it is the material, not the efficient, cause,
which is here spoken of.

The reasons alleged by the Sane’hyas+ are, that “what
‘exists not, can by no operation of a cause be brought
‘into existence :” that is, effects are educts, rather than
products. Oil is in the seed of sesamum before it is ex-


‘


‘


* Car. 6. 8. + Car. 9.


254 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


pressed ; rice is in the husk before it is peeled ; milk is in
the udder before it is drawn. “ Materials, too, are se-
“lected, which are apt for the purpose :” milk, not water,
is taken to make curds. “ Every thing is not by every
“ means possible :” cloth, not earthen ware, may be made
with yarn. “ What is capable, does that to which it is
“ competent :”” a potter does not weave cloth, but makes a
jar, from a lump of clay, with a wheel and other imple-
ments. ‘‘ The nature of cause and effect is the same :” a
piece of cloth does not essentially differ from the yarn of
which it is wove ; as an ox does from a horse: barley, not
rice or peas, grows out of barley-corns.

“‘ There is a general cause, which is undistinguishable.’*
This position is supported by divers arguments. “ Specific
“¢ objects are finite ;” they are multitudinous and not uni-
versal: there must then be a single all-pervading cause.
Another argument is drawn from affinity : “‘ homogeneous-
ness indicates a cause.” An earthen jar implies a lump of
clay of which it is made; a golden coronet presumes a
mass of gold of which it was fabricated: seeing a rigidly
abstemious novice, it is readily concluded, says the scholiast,
that his parents are of the sacerdotal tribe. There must
then be a cause bearing affinity to effects which are seen.
Another reason is “‘ existence of effects through energy :”
there must be a cause adequate to the effects. A potter is
capable of fabricating pottery: he makes a pot, not a car,
nor a piece of cloth, The main argument of the Sanc’hyas
on this point is “ the parting or issuing of effects from
“ cause, and the re-union of the universe.” A type of this
is the tortoise, which puts forth its limbs, and again retracts
them within its shell. So, at the general destruction or
consummation of all things, taking place at an appointed
period, the fiye elements, earth, water, fire, air, and ether,


* Cér. 15. 16:


2 2 Ghee =


SANKHYA. 255


constituting the three worlds, are withdrawn in the inverse
order of that in which they proceeded from the primary
principles, returning step by step to their first cause, the chief
and undistinguishable one, which is nature.

It operates by means of the three qualities of goodness,
foulness, and darkness. It does so by mixture; as the
confluence of three streams forms one river ; for example,
the Ganges: or as threads interwoven constitute a piece of
cloth: and as a picture is a result of the union of pigments.
It operates “ by modification” too: as water, dropped from
a cloud, absorbed by the roots of plants, and carried into the
fruit, acquires special flavour, so are different objects diversi-
fied by the influence of the several qualities respectively.
Thus, from one chief cause, which is nature, spring three
dissimilar worlds, observes the scholiast, peopled by gods
enjoying bliss, by men suffering pain, by inferior animals
affected with dulness. It is owing to prevalence of particu-
lar qualities. In the gods, goodness prevails, and foulness
and darkness are foreign; and therefore are the gods su-
premely happy. In man, foulness is prevalent, and good-
ness and darkness are strangers ; wherefore man is eminently
wretched. In animals, darkness predominates, and good-
ness and foulness are wanting; and therefore are animals
extremely dull.

The existence of soul is demonstrated by several argu-
ments :* “The assemblage of sensible objects is for
another’s use ;” as a bed is for a sleeper, a chair for a
sitter: that other, who uses it, must be a sensitive being ;
and the sensitive being is soul. The converse of sensible
objects endued with the three qualities, goodness, foulness,
and darkness, indiscriminate, common, inanimate, and pro-
lifie, must exist, devoid of qualities, discriminate, and so
forth: that is soul. “‘ There must be superintendence ;”


* Car. Af.


256 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


as there is a charioteer to a car: the superintendent of in-
animate matter is soul. “ There must be one to enjoy”
what is formed for enjoyment : a spectator, a witness of it :
that spectator is soul. “There is a tendency to abstrac-
“‘tion:” the wise and unwise alike desire a termination of
vicissitude : holy writ and mighty sages tend to that con-
summation ; the final and absolute extinction of every sort
of pain: there must then be a being capable of abstraction,
essentially unconnected with pleasure, pain, and illusion :
and that being is soul.

There is not one soul to all bodies, as a string on which
pearls are strung; but a separate soul for each particular
body. “ Multitude of souls” is proved by the following
arguments.* “‘ Birth, death, and the instruments of life
“ are allotted severally :” if one soul animated all bodies,
one being born, all would be born; one dying, all would
die ; one being blind, or deaf, or dumb, all would be blind,
or deaf, or dumb; one seeing, all would see; one hearing,
all would hear; one speaking, all would speak. Birth is
the union of soul with instruments, namely, intellect, con-
sciousness, mind and corporeal organs ; it is not a modificay
tion of soul, for soul is unalterable. Death is its abandon-
ment of them ; not an extinction of it, for it is unperishable,
Soul then is multitudinous. “ Occupations are not at one
“time universally the same:” if one soul animated all
beings, then all bodies would be stirred by the same influ-
ence, but it is not so: some are engaged in virtue, others
occupied with vice ; some restraining passions, others yield-_
ing to them; some involved in error, others seeking know-
ledge. Souls therefore are numerous. “ Qualities affect
“ differently :” one is happy ; another miserable; and
again, another stupid. The gods are ever happy; man,


* Car. 18.


sANKHYA. 257


unhappy ; inferior animals, dull. Were there but one soul,
all would be alike.

The attributes of the several principles, material and im-
material, discrete and undiscrete, perceptible and impercepti-
ble, are compared and contrasted. “ A discrete principle,”
as is affirmed by the Sénc’hyas,* “is causable:” it is un-
eternal, “inconstant,” one while apparent, at another time
evanescent: it is “‘ unpervading,” not entering into all;
for effect is possessed with its cause, not cause with: its
effect : it is acted upon, and “ mutable,” changing from one
body to another: it is “ multitudinous ;” for there are so
many minds, intellects, &c. as there are souls animating
bodies : it is “ supported,” resting upon its cause: it is in-
volvable, “ merging” one into another, and implying one
the other : it is “conjunct,” consisting of parts or qualities ;
as sound, taste, smell, &c. : it is “ governed,” or dependent
on another’s will.

“The undiscrete principle” is in all these respects the
reverse : it is causeless, eternal, all pervading, immutable,
or unacted upon; single, as being the one cause of three
orders of beings; unsupported (relying but on itself) ;
uninvolvable (not merging or implying) ; unconjunct ; con-
sisting of no parts; self-ruled.

Discrete principles, as well as the undiscrete one, have
the three qualities of goodness, foulness, and darkness: the
one (nature) having them in its own right, as its form or pro-
perties; the rest, because they are its effects: as black
yarn makes black cloth. They are undiscriminating or
“ indiscriminate ;” not distinguishing quality from quality,
and confounding nature with qualities: for nature is not
distinct from itself, nor are qualities separate from it. They
are “objects” of apprehension and enjoyment for every


*) Car. 10, 11.
VOL. f. s


258 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


soul, external to discriminative knowledge, but subjects of
it. They are “common,” like an utensil, or like a harlot.
They are “irrational” or unsentient ; unaware of pain or
pleasure : from an insensible lump of clay comes an in-
sensible earthen pot. They are “‘ prolific;” one producing
or generating another: nature producing intellect, and in-
tellect generating consciousness, and so forth.

Soul, on the contrary, is devoid of qualities ; it is discrimi-
native ; it is no object of enjoyment ; it is several or pecu-
liar ; it is sensitive, aware of pain and pleasure ; unprolific,
for nothing is generated by it.

In these respects it differs from all the other principles.
On certain points it conforms with the undiscrete principle,
and differs from the discrete : in one regard it agrees with
these and disagrees with the other: for it is not single, but
on the contrary multitudinous ; and it is causeless, eternal,
pervading, immutable, unsupported, unmerging or unim-
plying, unconjunct (consisting of no parts), self-governed.

The attributes of the perceptible, discrete principles and
of the undiscrete, indefinite one, are considered to be proved*
by the influence of the three qualities in one instance, and
their absence in the converse ; and by conformity of cause
and effect: an argument much and frequently relied upon.
It concerns the material, not the efficient, cause.

From the contrast between soul and the other principles,
it follows, as the Carica + affirms, that “soul is witness,
“ bystander, spectator, solitary and passive. Therefore, by
“reason of union with it, insensible body seems sensible :
“and, though the qualities be active, the stranger (soul)
5 a as the agent.”

“Though inanimate, nature performs ihe office of pre-

“ paring the soul for its deliverance, in like manner as it is


* Car. 14. + Car. 19, 20.


SANKHYA. 259


“a function of milk, an unintelligent substance, to nourish
“ the calf. 2%

Nature is likened to a female dancer, exhibiting herself to
soul as to an audience, and is reproached with shameless-
ness for repeatedly exposing herself to the rude gaze of the
spectator. “ She desists, however, when she has sufficiently
“ shown herself. She does so, because she has been seen ;
“ he desists, because he has seen her. There is no further
“use for the world: yet the connexion of soul and nature
still subsists.”

By attainment of spiritual knowledge through the study
of principles, the conclusive, incontrovertible, single truth
is learned : so the Carica declares ¢ that “neither I am,
nor is aught mink, nor I exist.”

* All which passes in consciousness, in intellect is reflected
“by the soul, as an image which sullies not the crystal,
“but appertains not to it. Possessed of this self-know-
“ledge, soul contemplates at ease nature thereby debarred
“ from prolific change, and precluded therefore from every
“ other form and effect of intellect, but that spiritual saving
“ knowledge.”§

“Yet soul remains awhile invested with body ; as the
“ potter’s wheel continues whirling after the pot has been
“ fashioned, by force of the impulse previously given to it.
“ When separation of the informed soul from its corporeal
“frame at length takes place, and nature in respect of
“it ceases, then is absolute and final deliverance accom-
“ plished.” |j

“Thus,” concludes the Carica, “ this abstruse knowledge,
“ adapted to the liberation of soul, wherein the origin, dura-


* Car. 75. + Car. 59, 61, 66. t Car. 64,
§ Car. 65. : || Car. 67, 68.
s 2


ate a
260. =2s«ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HIN)


VD tgs


re to Pancnalte’ HA, and ‘by him it it was” ‘rei
664g mankind.” * |


* Car. 69,70.


y . ory we !
ome See
ae .


i,
2,


v


IX.
On the PuiLosorpuy of the Hinnvs.


PART IL*


[From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol, i. p. 92—118,]


In the preceding essay, the Sanc’hya, theistical as well
as atheistical, was examined. The subject of the present
essay will be the dialectic philosophy of G6rama, and
atomical of CaXApE, respectively called Vyaya “ reason-
“ing,” and Vaiséshica “ particular.” The first, as its
title implies, is chiefly occupied with the metaphysics of
logic ; the second with physics: that is, with “ particulars”
or sensible objects; and hence its name. They may be
taken generally as parts of one system, supplying each
other’s deficiencies ; commonly agreeing upon such points
as are treated by both, yet on some differing, and therefore
giving origin to two schools, the Maiyayica and Vaisé-
shica.

From these have branched various subordinate schools of
philosophy ; which, in the ardour of scholastic disputation,
have disagreed on matters of doctrine or of interpretation.
The ordinary distinction between them is that of ancients
and moderns ; besides appellations derived from the names
of their favourite authors, as will be more particularly no-
ticed in another place.

The text of Grama is a collection of s&tras or suc-
cinct aphorisms, in five books or “ lectures,” each divided


* Read at a public meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society, Feb. 21, 1824.


262 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


into two “ days” or diurnal lessons; and these again sub-
divided into sections or articles, termed pracaranas, as
relating to distinct topics. It is a maxim, that a section is
not to consist of so little as a single sétra; and to make
good the rule, some stress is occasionally put upon the text,
either splitting an aphorism or associating it incongruously.

CanAnpe’s collection of sétras is comprised in ten lec-
tures, similarly divided into two daily lessons, and these
into pracaranas, or sections, containing two or more sitras
relative to the same topic.

Like the text of other sciences among the Hindus, the
sitras of Gotama and of CaNApe have been explained
and annotated by a triple set of commentaries, under the
usual titles of Bhashya, Vartica, and T’icd. These (the
Bhashya especially) are repeatedly cited by modern com-
mentators, as well as by writers of separate treatises; but
(so far as has come under my immediate notice) without
naming the authors; and I cannot adventure, having no
present opportunity of consulting the original scholia in a
collective form, to assign them to their proper authors,
from recollection of former researches.

They are of high authority, and probably of great anti-
quity; and it frequently becomes a question with the later
commentators, whether a particular passage is to be taken
for a sétra and part of the text, or for a gloss of the an-
cient scholiast.

Commentaries which are now at hand, and which have
been consulted in the course of preparing the present trea-
tise, are the Vartica-tatparya-parisudd hi of the celebrated
UpayanAcnArya, and the Vartica-tatparya-tica of the
no less celebrated VACHESPATI-M1SRA. The more modern
scholia of ViSwANAT’HA upon G6rama’s text, and San-
CARA-MISRA upon CaNApe’s, are those to which most
frequent reference has been made for the present purpose.


NYAYA—VAISE£SHICA, 263


Separate treatises of distinguished authors teach, and
amply discuss, the elements of the science. Such are the
Nyaya-lilavatt of Bartasua-Acu Arya, following chiefly
CanAner’s system.

An easier, and more concise introduction than these
abstruse and voluminous works afford, is found requisite
to the initiatory study of the science. One of the most
-approved elementary treatises is the Tarca-bhasha of
-C&Sava-miSra, author of many other tracts. Though
adapted to the comprehension of the learner without the
aid of a gloss, it has nevertheless employed the labour of
many commentators, expounding and illustrating it. Among
others may be named, in order of seniority, G6vERD’HANA-
m1Sra in the Tarca-bhasha-pracaSa; GauricAnta (au-
thor likewise of the Sadyuctimuctévali) in the Bhavart’ha-
dipica; MAv’navapéva (author of the Nydéyasdra) in the
Tarca-bhasha-sara-manjari ; besides RAMALINGA-cRITI
in the Nydaya-sangraha, whose relative antiquity is less cer-
tain; and Batipuapra, who is known to me only from
Gavricanra’s citations.

Another compendious introduction to the study of Indian
logic is the Padart’ha-dipica by Conpa-Buatta, a noted
grammarian, author of the Vaiyacarana bhushana, on the
philosophy of grammatical structure. It does not appear to
have had any commentator, and it needs none.

Metrical treatises, or memorial verses, comprising the
elements of the science, bear the ordinary denomination of
Carica. A work of this description is the Cusumanjali,
with its commentary, by NArayawa-rTirt’na ; another,
which likewise is expounded by its author, is the Vydaya-
saneshépa of GovinDA-BHATTACHARYA.

Elementary works only have been here spoken of. Dis-
tinct treatises on divers branches of the whole subject, and
on various emergent topics, are innumerable. No depart-


264 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


ment of science or literature has more engaged the atten-
tion of the Hindus than the Vyaya; and the fruit of their
lucubrations has been an infinity of volumes, among: witch
are compositions of very celebrated schoolmen. ;

The order observed, both by GOrama and by CaNApE,
in delivering the precepts of the science which they engage
to unfold, is that which has been intimated in a passage of
the Védas cited in the Bhashya, as requisite steps of in-
struction and study: viz. enunciation, definition, and in-
vestigation. Enunciation (uddésa) is the mention of a
thing by its name; that is, by a term signifying it, as
taught by revelation: for language is considered to have
been revealed to man. Definition (acshava) sets forth a
peculiar property, constituting the essential character of a
thing. Investigation (paricsh@) consists in disquisition
upon the pertinence and sufficiency of the definition. Con-
sonantly to this, the teachers of philosophy premise the
terms of the science, proceed to the definitions, and then
pass on to the examination of subjects so premised.

In a logical arrangement the “‘predicaments” (padart’ha),

r “ objects of proof,” are six, as they are enumerated by
Cats Avg;* viz. substance, quality, action, community, par-
ticularity, and aggregation or intimate relation: to which a
seventh is added by other authors ; privation or negation. +
Thus augmented, they compose a two-fold arrangement,
positive and negative (bhava and abhava); the first com-
prising six, the latter one. t

The Baudd@ has, or followers of Bupp’HA, are said to
identify the predicaments with knowledge (jnydéna); and
according to the Védantis, who are pantheists, the predica-
ments are identified with the universal being (Brahme) in


whom all exists. §


*C.1.3 + Tare. Bhash. 1.
t Pad. Dip. |. § Tare. Bhash. and N. Sang. 2.4.


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 265


Other categories are alleged by different authorities; as
power or energy (Sacti); similarity or resemblance (sa-
drisya); and many more. But the logicians of this school
acknowledge but six, or at most seven, abovementioned.

G6ramMa enumerates sixteen heads or topics: among
which, proof or evidence, and that which is to be proven,
are chief; and the rest are subsidiary or accessory, as
contributing to knowledge and ascertainment of truth.
Disputation being contemplated in this arrangement, several
among these heads relate to controversial discussion. They
are, Ist. proof; 2d, that which is to be known and proven ;
3d, doubt; 4th, motive; 5th, instance; 6th, demonstrated
truth ; 7th, member of a regular argument or syllogism ;
8th, reasoning by reduction to absurdity ; 9th, determina-
tion or ascertainment ; 10th, thesis or disquisition ; 11th,
controversy ; 12th, objection ; 13th, fallacious reason; 14th,
perversion ; 15th, futility; 16th, confutation.*

The difference between these two arrangements is not
considered to amount to discrepancy. They are held to be
reconcileable: the one more ample, the other more suc-
cinct ; but both leading to like results.

The Sane’hya philosophy, as shewn in a former essay,+
affirms two eternal principles, soul and matter ; (for pracriti
or nature, abstracted from modifications, is no other than
matter): and reckoning, with these two permanent prin-
ciples, such as are transient, they enumerate twenty-five.

The Wydaya, as well as the Saénc’hya, concur with other
schools of psychology in promising beatitude, or (nihSréyas)
final excellence ; and (mécsha) deliverance from evil, for the
reward of a thorough knowledge of the principles which
they teach; that is, of truth; meaning the conviction of
the soul’s eternal existence separable from body.


G.I: + Ante, p. 242, &c.


266 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


Soul then, as the Bhdshya affirms, is that which is to
be known and proven. G6rama, however, enumerates.
under this head, besides soul, its associate body, the ex-
ternal senses, things or the objects of sense (that is, the
elements ; and his followers here take occasion to introduce
CaNApe’s six categories), intellect or understanding, mind
or the eternal organ, activity, fault, transmigration, fruit
or consequence of deeds, pain or physical evil, and lastly,
liberation ; making, together with soul, twelve (praméya)
objects of proof, being topics of knowledge requisite for
deliverance.

1. Evidence or proof (pramara) by which those objects
are known and demonstrated, is of four kinds : perception ;
inference of three sorts (consequent, antecedent, and ana-
logous); comparison, and affirmation (comprehending tra-
dition, as well as revelation). Inference @ priori concludes
an effect from its cause; inference @ posteriori deduces a
cause from its effect : another ground of inference is analogy.
Or one sort is direct and affirmative; another indirect or
negative ; and the third is both direct and indirect.

Proof (pramana) is defined to be the efficient or espe-
cial cause of actual knowledge: and this intends right
notion (anubhava); exclusive, consequently, of wrong notion ;
as error, doubt, and reduction to absurdity, and likewise
exclusive of memory: for notion (anubhava) is knowledge
other than remembrance.

Cause (cérana) is that which is efficacious, necessarily
preceding an effect that cannot else be: and conversely,
effect (cérya) is that which necessarily ensues and could not
else be. {

For the relation of cause and effect, and for distinguish-
ing different sorts of cause, connexion (sambandha) or
relation, in general, must be considered. It is two-fold :
simple conjunction (sanyéga), and aggregation or intimate


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 267


and constant relation (samavaya); the latter being the con-
nexion of things, whereof one, so long as they coexist,
continues united with the other: for example, parts and
that which is composed of them, as yarn and cloth; for so
long as the yarn subsists the cloth remains. Here the con-
nexion of the yarn and cloth is intimate relation ; but that
of the loom is simple conjunction. Consonantly to this
distinction, cause is intimate or direct, producing aggre-
gation or an intimately relative effect, as clay of pottery,
or yarn of cloth: or it is mediate or indirect, being proxi-
mate to the aggregating cause, as conjunction of yarn,
serving for the production of cloth: or thirdly, it is neither
direct nor indirect ; but instrumental or concomitant, as the
loom. Of positive things there must be three causes, and
the most efficacious is termed the chief or especial cause:
of negative there is but one, which is the third abovemen-
tioned.

This would be the place for an ample discussion of the
several sorts of proof abovementioned. But they are topics
embracing too great a scope of disquisition in the Hindu
philosophy, to be adequately considered within the limits
of the present essay. The subject, therefore, is reserved
for fature consideration, ina connected view of it, with rela-
tion to the various Indian systems of philosophising, after
_ they shall have been severally examined.

II. 1. The first and most important of twelve objects of
evidence or matters to be proven, enumerated by G6rama,
is soul.* It is the site of knowledge or sentiment: dis-
tinct from body and from the senses; different for each
individual coexistent person ; infinite ; eternal; perceived by
the mental organ ; and demonstrated by its peculiar attri-
butes, intellect, &c. For knowledge, desire, aversion, voli-


* G11. 3.2. and 3. 1. 1—5. Tare. Bhash. 2.1.


268 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


tion, pain and pleasure, severally and collectively, argue
the existence of soul: since these are not universal attri-
butes, as number, quantity, &c. common to all substances;
but are peculiar and characteristic qualities, apprehended
exclusively by one organ, as colour and other peculiar
qualities are; yet belonging not to apparent substances, as
earth, and the rest ; and arguing therefore a distinct sub-
stratum, other than space, time and mind, to which uni-
versal, not peculiar, qualities appertain. That distinct sub-
stance, which is the substratum of those peculiar qualities,
is the soul.

This concerns the living soul (jtvétma), the animating
spirit of individual person. Souls then, as is expressly
affirmed, are numerous. But the supreme soul (Para-
matmd) is one: the seat of eternal knowledge; demonstrated
as the maker of all things.+

The individual soul is infinite ; for whithersover the body
goes there the soul too is present. It experiences the fruit
of itsdeeds; pain or pleasure. It is eternal, because it is
infinite ; for whatever is infinite is likewise eternal; as the
etherial element (G@cééa).

Being a substance, though immaterial, as a substratum
of qualities, it is placed in CANADE’s arrangement as one
of nine substances which are there recognised.+

It has fourteen qualities: viz. number, quantity, seve-
ralty, conjunction, disjunction, intellect, pleasure, pain,
desire, aversion, volition, merit, demerit, and faculty of
imagination.

2. The second among matters to be proven in G6TAMA’s
enumeration, is body. It is the site of effort, of organs of
sensation, and of sentiment of pain or pleasure,

It is an ultimate compound ; the seat of soul’s enjoy-


* Pad. Dip. 1.8 +G. 1. t@.1.1.3.3.


9


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 269


ment, It is a whole, composed of parts; a framed sub-
stance, not inchoative: associated with which, soul expe-
riences fruition ; that is, immediate presence of pain or of
pleasure, in relation to itself.

It is the site of effort ; not of motion simply, but of action
tending to the attainment of what is pleasing, and to the
removal of what is displeasing.*

It is earthly ; for the qualities of earth are perceived in it :
(namely, smell, colour, solidity, &c.): and it is expressly
pronounced so by more than one passage of the Védas.
According to some opinions, it consists of three elements,
earth, water, and light or heat ; for the peculiar qualities of
those elements are perceptible in it, since it has smell, clam-
miness, and warmth: or it consists of four, since there is
inspiration as well as expiration of air: or of five, as indi-
cated by odour, moisture, digestion, breath, and cavities.+
Those opinions are controverted by the Nydéya. It consists
not of five, nor of four elements: else, as CANADE argues,
it would be invisible ; for the union of visible with invisible
objects is so: instance wind. Nor does it consist of three
visible elements, nor of two ; for there is no intimate inchoa-
tive union of heterogeneous substances.{ This last reason
is alleged likewise by Capita: heterogeneous materials
cannot enter into the same composition.§

Besides human and other bodies of this world, all which
are terrene, there are, in other worlds, aqueous, igneous, and
aerial bodies. In these, too, there is union with an element,
for soul’s fruition. ||

Earthly body is two-fold ; sexually bred, or not so bred :
the first is either viviparous or oviparous : the second results
from concurrence of particles by an unseen or predestined


* Tarc. Bhésh. and Com. + G. 3.1.6. 1—5.
t Cis. 4. 2. 1. and Com. § Car. 3. 16—18 and 5. 99.
| Bhaéshya on Gor.


270 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


cause, and peculiar disposition of atoms. That such beings
are, is proved from authority of the Védas, which reveal
creation of gods and demi-gods,

Or the distinction is between such as are propagated by
sexes or are otherwise generated. The latter comprehends
equivocal generation of worms, nits, maggots, gnats, and
other vermin, considered to be bred in sweat or fermented
filth ; and germination of plants sprouting from the ground.
Accordingly, the distinct sorts of body are five: Ist, un-
generated ; 2d, uterine or viviparous ; 3d, oviparous; 4th,
engendered in filth ; 5th, vegetative or germinating.*

3. Next, among objects of proof, are the organs of sensa-
tion. An organ of sense is defined as an instrument of
knowledge, conjoined to the body and imperceptible to the
senses.’

There are five external organs: smell, taste, sight, touch,
and hearing. They are not modifications of consciousness
(as the Sanc’hyas maintain), but material, constituted of the
elements, earth, water, light, air, and ether, respectively.

The pupil of the eye is not the organ of sight (as the
Baud@ has affirm) ; nor is the outer ear, or opening of the
auditory passage, the organ of hearing: but a ray of light,
proceeding from the pupil of the eye towards the object
viewed, is the visual organ; and ether, contained in the
cavity of the ear, and communicating by intermediate ether
with the object heard, is the organ of hearmg. That ray of
light is not ordinarily visible: just as the effulgence of a
torch is unseen in meridian sunshine. But, under particu-
lar circumstances, a glimpse of the visual ray is obtained.
For instance, in the dark, the eye of a cat or other animal
prowling at night.


* Pad. Dip. and Minn. on Cis. + Tare. Bhésh.
t Gor. 1. 1.3. 4-65 and 3. 1. 7 and 8.


4


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 271


The organ of vision then is lucid ; and, in like manner,
the organ of hearing is etherial ; and that of taste, aqueous
(as saliva); and of feeling, aerial ; and of smelling, earthly.

The site of the visual organ is the pupil of the eye;
of the auditory organ, the orifice of the ear ; of the olfactory
organ, the nostril or tip of the nose ; of the taste, the tip of
the tongue ; of the feeling, the skin.

Objects apprehended by the senses, are odour, flavour,
colour, touch (or temperature), and sound; which are
qualities appertaining to earth, water, light, air, and ether.*

The existence of organs of sense is proved by inference,
from the fact of the apprehension of those objects : for ap-
prehension implies an instrument to effect it, since it is an
act, in like manner as the act of cutting implies an instru-
ment, as an axe or a knife.

The organs are six, including an internal organ, termed
manas, or mind: not five only, as the followers of Bupp’Ha
maintain, disallowing an internal sense ; nor so many as
eleven, which the Sanc’hyas affirm, comprehending with the
senses the organs of action, which they reckon five.+

Mind is the instrument which effects the apprehension of
pain, pleasure, or interior sensations ; and, by its union with
external senses, produces knowledge of exterior objects ap-
prehended through them, as colour, &c., but not indepen-
dently of those senses, for outward objects.

Its existence is proved by singleness of sensation: since
various sensations do not arise at one time to the same soul.
They only seem to do so when passing rapidly, though suc-
cessively ; as a firebrand, whirled with velocity, seems a
ring of fire.

It is single ; that is, for each soul, one: not so many
minds as there are external senses. When it is conjoined


* Gér. 1.1.3.6 + Gav. on CfS.


272 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


with any one of the outward organs, knowledge is received
through that organ: when not so conjoined, none comes
through that sense, but through any other with which it
then is associated.*

It is not infinite, being imperceptible to the touch, like
the etherial element, as the Mimdansé maintains ;+ but it
is minutely small, as an atom. Were it infinite, it might be
united with every thing at once, and all sensations might
be contemporaneous. It is imperceptible to sight, touch,
and other senses, and is inferred from reasoning, as follows :
There must be an instrument of apprehension of pain and
pleasure, which instrument must be other than the sight, or
any external sense ; for pain and pleasure are experienced
though sight be wanting. Such instrument of painful or
pleasurable sensation is termed mind (manas).

It is eternal, and is distinct from soul as well as from
body, with which it is merely conjoined.

It is reckoned by CaNADE among substances ; and is the
substratum of eight qualities, none of which are peculiar to
it, bemg all common to other substances: viz. number,
quantity, individuality, conjunction, disjunction, priority,
subsequence, and faculty.

4, Next in G6rama’s arrangement are the (ar¢’ha) tls
jects of sense; that is, of the external senses: and he
enumerates odour, taste, colour, feel, and sound, which are
the peculiar qualities of earth, and the rest of the elements
respectively.§

Under this head C&Sava places the categories (padart’ha)
of CanAng, which are six ; substance, quality, &c.

I. Substance is the intimate cause of an aggregate effect
or product: it is the site of qualities and of action; or


* Gér. 1. 1. 3. 8. and 3. 2. 6. + Pad. Dip.
¢t Gav. on C£S. || Gér. 1. 3. 5.


\
j
7
‘


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 273


that in which qualities abide, and in which action takes
place.*

Nine are enumerated, sioheniniadiaaiaiaiall
Darkness has been alleged by some philosophers; but it is
no substance ; nor is body a distinct one; nor gold, which
the Mimansacas affirm to be a peculiar substance.

Those specified by CaNApE are:

1. Earth, which besides qualities common to most sub-
stances (as number, quantity, individuality, conjunction,
disjunction, priority, posteriority, gravity, fluidity, and
faculty of velocity and of elasticity), has colour, savour,
odour, and feel, or temperature. Its distinguishing quality
is smell; and it is succinctly defined as a substance odor-
ous.+ In some instances, as in gems, the smell is latent ;
but it becomes manifest by calcination.

It is eternal, as atoms; or transient, as aggregates. In
either, those characteristic qualities are transitory, and are
maturative, as affected by light and heat: for by union
with it, whether latent or manifest, former colour, taste,
smell, and temperature are in earth of any sort annulled,
and other colour, &c. introduced.

Aggregates or products are either organised bodies, or
organs of perception, or unorganic masses.

Organised earthly bodies are of five sorts [see body].
The organ of smell is terreous. Unorganic masses are
stones, lumps of clay, &c. The union of integrant parts is
hard, soft, or cumulative, as stones, flowers, cotton, &c.

2. Water, which has the qualities of earth; excepting
smell, and with the addition of viscidity. Odour, when
observable in water, is adscititious, arising from mixture of
earthy particles.


. C£S. and Com. Pad. Dip.


—


VOL. I. uy


274 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


The distinguishing quality of water is coolness. It is
accordingly defined as a substance cool to the feel.

It is eternal, as atoms; transient, as aggregates. The
qualities of the first are constant likewise; those of the
latter inconstant.

Organic aqueous bodies are beings abiding in the realm
of Varuna. The organ of taste is aqueous: witness the
saliva. Unorganic waters are rivers, seas, rain, snow, hail, &c.

It is by some maintained, that hail is pure water ren-
dered solid by supervention of an unseen virtue: others
imagine its solidity to be owing to mixture of earthy
particles.

3. Light is coloured, and illumines other substances ;
and to the feel is hot: which is its distinguishing quality.
It is defined as a substance hot to the feel. [Heat, then,
and light, are identified as one substance. ]

It has the qualities of earth, except smell, taste, and
gravity. It is eternal, as atoms; not so, as aggregates.

Organic luminous bodies are beings abiding in the solar
realm. The visual ray, which is the organ of sight, is lucid
[see organs of perception]. Unorganic light is reckoned
fourfold: earthy, celestial, alvine, and mineral. Another
distinction concerns sight and feel ; as light or heat may be
either latent or manifest, in respect of both sight and feel, or
differently in regard to either. Thus fire is both seen and
felt; the heat of hot water is felt, but not seen ; moonshine
is seen, but not felt; the visual ray is neither seen nor felt.
Terrestrious light is that, of which the fuel is earthy, as
fire. Celestial is that, of which the fuel is watery, as
lightning, and meteors of various sorts. Alvine is that, of
which the fuel is both earthy and watery: it is intestinal,
which digests food and drink. Mineral is that which is
found in pits, as gold. For some maintain that gold is
solid light ; or, at least that the chief ingredient is light,


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 275


which is rendered solid by mixture with some particles of
earth. Were it mere earth, it might be calcined by fire
strongly urged. Its light is not latent, but overpowered
by the colour of the earthy particles mixed with it. In the

tmansa, however, it is reckoned a distinct substance, as
before observed.

4. Air is a colourless substance, sensible to the feel ;
being temperate (neither hot, nor cold). Besides this its
distinguishing quality, it has the same common qualities
with light, except fluidity (that is number, quantity, indivi-
duality, conjunction, disjunction, priority, subsequence, and
faculty of elasticity and velocity).

Its existence as a distinct substance is inferred from feel-
ing. The wind, that blows, is apprehended as temperate,
independently of the influence of light: and this tempera-
ture, which is a quality, implies a substratum ; for it cannot
subsist without one: that substratum is air; different from
water, which is cold; and from light, which is hot; and
from earth, which is adventitiously warm by induction of
light.

Air is either eternal as atoms, or transient as aggregates.
Organic aerial bodies are beings inhabiting the atmosphere,
and evil spirits (Pisachas, &c.) who haunt the earth. The
organ of touch is an aerial integument, or air diffused over
the cuticle. Unorganic air is wind, which agitates trees
and other tremulous objects. To these may be added, as
a fourth kind of aerial aggregates, the breath and other
vital airs.

5. Ether (acasa), which is a substance that has the
quality of sound. Besides that its peculiar and distin-
guishing quality, it has number (viz. unity), quantity,
individuality, conjunction, and disjunction. It is infinite,
one, and eternal.

The existence of an etherial element as a distinct sub-

T2


276 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


stance is deduced, not from distinct perception, but from
inference. Sound is a peculiar quality; for, like colour
and other peculiar qualities, it is apprehended by only one
external organ of such beings as men are: now a quality
abides in a substance which is qualified; but neither soul,
nor any one of the four elements, earth, water, light, and
air, can be its substratum, for it is apprehended by the
organ of hearing: the qualities of earth, and the rest are
not apprehended by the hearing, but sound is; therefore it
is not a quality of those substances; nor is it a quality of
time, space, and mind; since it is a peculiar quality, and
those three substances have none but such as are common
to many: therefore a substratum, other than all these, is
inferred ; and that substratum is the etherial element. It
is one; for there is no evidence of diversity; and its unity
is congruous, as infinity accounts for ubiquity. It is infi-
nite, because it is in effect found every where. It is eternal,
because it is infinite.

It appears white, from connexion with a lucid white orb ;
as a rock-crystal appears red by association with a red
object. The blue colour of a clear sky is derived, accord-
ing to Paransati, from the southern peak of the great
mountain Suméru, which is composed of sapphire. On
other sides of Suméru the colour of the sky is different,
being borrowed from the hue of the peak which overlooks
that quarter. Others suppose that the black colour of the
pupil of the eye is imparted to the sky (blue and black
being reckoned tinges of the same colour), as a jaundiced
eye sees every object yellow.

The organ of hearing is etherial, being a portion of ether
(Gcasa) confined in the hollow of the ear, and (as affirmed
by the author of the Padért’ha dipica) endued with a
particular and unseen virtue. In the ear. of a deaf man,
the portion of ether which is there present is devoid of that


NYAYA—VAISE&SHICA. 277.


particular virtue, and therefore it is not a perfect and ein
cient auditory organ.

6. Time is inferred from the relation of priority and sub-
sequence, other than that of place. It is deduced from the
notions of quick, slow, simultaneous, &c., and is marked
by association of objects with the sun’s revolutions.

Young is the reverse of old, as old is of young. This
contrast, which does not concern place, is an effect, needing
a cause other than place, &c. That cause is time.

It has the qualities of number, quantity, individuality,
conjunction, and disjunction. It is one, eternal, infinite.

Though one, it takes numerous designations; as past,
present, and future, with reference to acts that are so.

7. Place, or space, is inferred from the relation of priority
and subsequence, other than that of time. It is deduced
from the notions of here and there.

It has the same common qualities as time; and like it,
is one, eternal, infinite.

Though one, it receives various designations, as east, west,
north, south, &c., by association with the sun’s position.

8. Soul, though immaterial, is considered to be a sub-
stance, as a substratum of qualities. It is eighth in
CaXApr’s arrangement. In Gérama’s it is first among
things to be proven [see before].

9. Mind, according to CanApk, is a ninth substance ;
and, in G6raMa’s arrangement, it recurs in two places, as
one of the twelve matters to be proven; and again, under
the distinct head of organs of sensation, being reckoned an
internal sense [see before].

Material substances are by CaNApe considered to be
primarily atoms; and secondarily, aggregates. He main-
tains the eternity of atoms ; and their existence and aggre-
gation are explained as follows :*


* Cak. 2. 2. 2.1. C£S. &e.


278 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


The mote, which is seen in a sunbeam, is the smallest per-
ceptible quantity. Being a substance and an effect, it must
be composed of what is less than itself: and this likewise is
a substance and an effect ; for the component part of a
substance that has magnitude must be an effect. This
again must be composed of what is smaller, and that smaller
thing is an atom. It is simple and uncomposed ; else the
series would be endless: and, were it pursued indefinitely,
there would be no difference of magnitude between a mus-
tard-seed and a mountain, a gnat and an elephant, each
alike containing an infinity of particles. The ultimate atom
then is simple.

The first compound consists of two atoms: for one does
not enter into composition ; and there is no argument to
prove, that more than two must, for incohation, be united.
The next consists of three double atoms ; for, if only two
were conjoined, magnitude would hardly ensue, since it
must be produced either by size or number of particles ; it
cannot be their size, and therefore it must be their number.
Nor is there any reason for assuming the union of four
double atoms, since three suffice to originate magnitude.*
The atom then is reckoned to be the sixth part of a mote
visible in a sunbeam. +

Two earthly atoms, concurring by an unseen peculiar
virtue, the creative will of Gon, or time, or other competent
cause, constitute a double atom of earth ; and, by concourse
of three binary atoms, a tertiary atom is produced ; and,
by concourse of four triple atoms, a quaternary atom; and
so on, to a gross, grosser, or grossest mass of earth: thus
great earth is produced ; and in like manner, great water,
from aqueous atoms; great light, from luminous; and great
air, from aerial. The qualities that belong to the effect are


* C&. + Pad. Dip.


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 279


those which appertained to the integrant part, or primary
particle, as its material cause: and conversely, the qualities
which belong to the cause are found in the effect.

The dissolution of substances proceeds inversely. In the
integrant parts of an aggregate substance resulting from
composition, as in the potsherds of an earthen jar, action
is induced by pressure attended with velocity, or by simple
pressure. Disjunction ensues ; whereby the union, which
was the cause of incohation of members, is annulled ; and
the integral substance, consisting of those members, is re-
solved into its parts, and is destroyed ; for it ceases to sub-
sist as a whole.

II. Quality is closely united with substance ; not, how-
ever, as an intimate cause of it, nor consisting in motion,
but common ; not a genus, yet appertaining to one. It is
independent of conjunction and disjunction ; not the cause
of them, nor itself endued with qualities.

Twenty-four are enumerated. Seventeen only are, in-
deed, specified in CAN Ape’s aphorisms ;* but the rest are
understood.

1. Colour. It is a peculiar quality to be apprehended
only by sight; and abides in three substances; earth,
water, and light. It is a characteristic quality of the last ;
and, in that, is white and resplendent. In water, it is
white, but without lustre. In the primary atoms of both
it is perpetual ; in their products, notso. In earth it is vari-
able ; and seven colours are distinguished : viz. white, yel-
low, green, red, black, tawny (or orange), and variegated.
The varieties of these seven colours are many, unenume-
rated. The six simple colours occur in the atoms of


* Caf. 1. 1. 2.2. and 1. 1.4. 2.

+ One commentator (MinHAvapéva) specifies blue in place of
orange; another (GauRic4nra) omits both, reducing the colours to
six,


280 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


earth ; and the seven, including variegated, in its double
atoms, and more complex forms. The colour of integrant
parts is the cause of colour in the integral substance.

2. Savour. It is a peculiar quality, to be apprehended
only by the organ of taste ; and abides in two substances,
earth and water. It is a characteristic quality of the last ;
and in it is sweet. It is perpetual in atoms of water; not
so in aqueous products. In earth it is variable; and six
sorts are distinguished : sweet, bitter, pungent, astringent,
acid, and saline.

3. Odour. It is a peculiar quality, to be apprehended
only by the organ of smell; and abides in earth alone,
being its distinguishing quality. In water, odour is adsci-
titious, being induced by union with earthy particles; as
a clear crystal appears red by association with a hollyhock,
or other flower of that hue. In air also it is adscititious :
thus a breeze, which has blown over blossoms, musk, cam-
phor, or other scented substances, wafts fragrant particles
of the blossoms, &c. The flowers are not torn, nor the
musk diminished ; because the parts are replaced by a repro-
ductive unseen virtue. However, camphor and other vola-
tile substances do waste.

Two sorts of odour are distinguished, fragrance and
stench.

4. Feel, and especially temperature. It is a peculiar
quality, to be apprehended only by the skin or organ of
feeling. It abides in four substances; earth, water, light,
and air; and is a characteristic quality of the last.

Three sorts are distinguished, cold, hot, and temperate.
In water, it is cold; in light, hot; in earth and in air,
temperate. Divers other sorts, likewise, are noticed; as
hard and soft, and diversified, &e.

These four qualities are latent in minute substances, as
atoms and double atoms ; manifest to perception in products


re


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 281


or aggregates of greater magnitude. A mote in a sunbeam
may be seen, though not felt. The colour of the visual ray,
or organ of sight, is ordinarily imperceptible.

5. Number. It is the reason of perceiving and reckon-
ing one, two, or many, to the utmost limit of numeration.
The notion of number is deduced from comparison. Of
two masses seen, this is one, and that is one: hence the
notion of two, and so of more.

It is an universal quality, common to all substances with-
out exception.

It is considered to be of two sorts, unity and multitude ;
or of three, monad, duad, and multitude. Unity is either
eternal or transient: eternal unity regards eternal things ;
that which is uneternal, concerns effects or transitory sub-
stances.

6. Quantity. It is the special cause of the use and per-
ception of measure.

It is an universal quality, common to all substances.

It is considered to be fourfold: great and small ; long
and short.

Extreme littleness and shortness are eternal; as mind,
or as atoms, whether single or double, &c. Extreme length
and greatness (termed infinite) are likewise eternal, as ether.

Within these extremes is inferior magnitude or finite
quantity; which is uneternal. It is of various degrees in
length and bulk, more or most; from the mote or tertiary
atom, upwards, to any magnitude short of infinite.

The finite magnitude of products or effects results from
number, size, or mass. Multitude of atoms, bulk of par-
ticles, and heap of component parts, constitute magnitude.
The latter, or cumulation of particles, concerns a loose
texture. The others, close or compact.

Infinity transcends the senses. An object may be too
great, as it may be too small, to be distinguished.


282 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


7. Individuality, severalty, or separateness, is a quality
common to all substances.

It is of two sorts ; individuality of one or of a pair; or it
is manifold, as individuality of a triad, &c. . Simple indi-
viduality is eternal, in respect of eternal things ; transient,
in regard to such as are transitory. Individuality of a
pair or triad, &c. is of course transitory: it results from
comparison, as duad or triad does.

8. Conjunction is a transient connexion.

It is an universal quality incident to all substances and is
transitory.

It implies two subjects, and is threefold: arising from
the act of either or of both, or else from conjunction ; being
simple, or reciprocal, or mediate. The junction of a falcon
perching, which is active, with the perch whereon it settles,
which is passive, is conjunction arising from the act of one.
Collision of fighting rams, or of wrestlers, is conjunctiom
arising from the act of both. Contact of a finger with a
tree occasions the conjunction of the body with the tree ;
and this is mediate.

9. Disjunction. It is the converse of conjunction; ne-
cessarily preceded by it, and, like it, implying two subjects.
It is not the mere negation of conjunction, nor simply the
dissolution of it.

The knowledge of this quality, as well as of its coun-
terpart, is derived from perception.

It is an universal quality incident to all substances and is
simple, reciprocal, or mediate. A falcon taking flight from
a rock, is an instance of disjunction arising from the act of
one of two subjects; the active from the inactive: The
parting of combatants, rams or wrestlers, is an example of
disjunction arising from the act of both. Disjunction of
the body and the tree, resulting from the disunion of the
finger and the tree, is mediate.


nyAyAa—valIS&sHICA. 283


» 10.—11. Priority and posteriority. These qualities, being
contrasted and correlative, are considered together. They
are of two sorts, concerning place and time. In respect
of place, they are proximity and distance; in regard to
time, youth and antiquity. The one concerns (mérta) defi-
nite bodies, consisting of circumscribed quantity ; the other
affects generated substances.

The knowledge of them is derived from comparison.

Two masses being situated in one place, nearness is de-
duced from the conjunction of one with place as associated
by comparison, referring primarily to the person of the spec-
tator ; or, secondarily, to other correlatives of place. Where
least conjunction of conjunct things intervenes, it is near-
ness; where most does, it is remoteness. Thus, Prayaga
is nearer to Mat’hura than Cast, and Cast remoter from it
than Prayaga.

In like manner, one of two masses, not restricted to
place, is young, as deduced from the association of the
object with time, by comparison discriminating that which
is connected with least time. Another is old, which is
connected with most time. Here time is determined by
revolutions of the sun. é

12. Gravity is the peculiar cause of primary descent or
falling. *

It affects earth and water. Gold is affected by this
quality, by reason of earth contained in it.

In the absence of a countervailing cause, as adhesion,
velocity, or some act of volition, descent results from this
quality. Thus a cocoa-nut is withheld from falling by ad-
hesion of the foot-stalk ; but, this impediment ceasing on
maturity of the fruit, it falls.

According to UpayANaA AcuaArya, gravity is impercep-


* Tare. Bhash. and Pad, Dip.


284 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


tible, but to be inferred from the act of falling. BaLLABHA
maintains, that it is perceived in the position of a thing de-
scending to a lower situation.

Levity is not a distinct quality, but the negation of
gravity.

13. Fluidity is the cause of original trickling.*

It affects earth, light, and water. It is natural and es-
sential in water; adscititious in earth and light; being
‘induced by exhibition of fire in molten substances, as lac,
gold, &e.

Fluidity is perceptible by the external senses, sight and
touch.

In hail and ice, fluidity essentially subsists ; but is ob-
structed by an impediment arising from an unseen virtue
which renders the water solid.

14. Viscidity is the quality of clamminess and cause of
agglutination. It abides in water only. In oil, liquid but-
ter, &c., it results from the watery parts of those liquids.+

15. Sound is a peculiar quality of the etherial element,
and is to be apprehended by the hearing. It abides in
that element exclusively, and is its characteristic quality.
Two sorts are distinguished : articulate and musical.

To account for sound originating in one place being
heard in another, it is observed, that sound is propagated by
undulation, wave after wave, radiating in every direction,
from a centre, like the blossoms of a Nauclea. It is not the
first, nor the intermediate wave, that is the sound heard,
but the last which comes in contact with the organ of hear-
ing ; and therefore it is not quite correct to say, that a drum
has been heard. Sound originates in conjunction, in dis-
junction, or in sound itself. The conjunction of cymbals,
or that of a drum and stick, may serve to exemplify the


* Tare. Bhash. and Pad. Dip. + Ibid. and Siddh. Sang.
t Ibid. and Gav. &e.


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 285


first. It is the instrumental cause. The rustling of leaves
is an instance of disjunction being the cause of sound. In
some cases, sound becomes the cause of sound, In all, the
conformity of wind, or its calmness, is a concomitant cause :
for an adverse wind obstructs it. The material cause is in
every case the etherial fluid ; and the conjunction of that
with the sonorous subject is a concomitant cause,

The Mimansa affirms the eternity of sound. This is con-
tested by the Naiyayicas, who maintain, that were it
eternal, it could not be apprehended by human organs of
sense.

16—23. The eight following qualities are perceptible by
the mental organ, not by the external senses. They are
qualities of the soul, not of material substances.

16. Intelligence (6udd’hi) is placed by CaNApE among
qualities ; and by Gérama, fifth among objects of proof.
It will be noticed in that place.

17 and 18. Pleasure and pain are among qualities enumer-

ated by CaNApe. Pain or evil is placed by Grama
among objects of proof; where (under the head of deliver-
ance) it will be further noticed, with its converse.
- 19 and 20. Desire and aversion are the two next in order
among qualities. Desire is the wish of pleasure and of hap-
piness, and of absence of pain. Passion is extreme desire ;
it is incident to man and inferior beings. The supreme
being is devoid of passion. Neither does desire intend
Gon’s will, nor a saint’s wish. Aversion is loathing or
hatred.

21. Volition (yatna), effort or exertion, is a determina-
tion to action productive of gratification. Desire is its oc-
easion, and perception its reason. Two sorts of perceptible
effort are distinguished : that proceeding from desire, seek-
ing what is agreeable ; and that which proceeds from aver-
sion, shunning what is loathsome. Another species, which


286 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


escapes sensation or perception, but is inferred from analogy
of spontaneous acts, comprises animal functions, having for
a cause the vital unseen power.

Volition, desire, and intelligence, are in man iia
variable, or inconstant. The will and intelligence of Gop
are eternal, uniform, constant.

22 and 23. Virtue and vice (D’harma and Ad harwia)s
or moral merit and demerit, are the peculiar causes of
pleasure and of pain respectively. The result of perform~
ing that which is enjoined, as sacrifice, &c. is virtue ; the
result of doing that which is forbidden, is vice. They are:
qualities of the soul; imperceptible, but inferred nie
reasoning.

The proof of them is deduced from transmigration. The
body of an individual, with his limbs and organs of sense,
is a result of a peculiar quality of his soul; since this is the
cause of that individual’s fruition, like a thing which is pro-
duced by his effort or volition. The peculiar quality of the
soul, which does occasion its being invested with body,
limbs, and organs, is virtue or vice: for body and the rest
are not the result of effort and volition.*

24, The twenty-fourth and last quality is faculty (sans-
cara). This comprehends three sorts.

Velocity (véga), which is the cause of action. It con-
cerns matter only; and is a quality of the mental organ,
and of the four grosser elements, earth, water, light, and
air. It becomes manifest from the perception of motion.

Elasticity (s¢’hitist’havaca) is a quality of particular tan-
gible, terrene objects ; and is the cause of that peculiar
action, whereby an altered thing is restored to its pristine
state, as a bow unbends and a strained branch resumes its
former position. It is imperceptible ; but is inferred from
the fact of the restitution of a sical to its adonenes condition.


* Tare. Bhish.


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 287


Imagination (bhavanda) is a peculiar quality of the soul,
and is the cause of memory. It is a result of notion or
recollection; and being excited, produces remembrance :
and the exciting cause is the recurrence of an association ;
that is, of the sight or other perception of a like object.

III. The next head in CaNApe’s eeperet after
quality, is action (carme).

Action consists in motion, and, like quality, abides in
substance alone. It affects a single, that is a finite sub-
stance, which is matter. It is the cause (not aggregative,
but indirect) of disjunction, as of conjunction: that is, a
fresh conjunction in one place, after annulment of a prior
one in another, by means of disjunction. It is devoid of
quality, and is transitory.

Five sorts are enumerated: to cast upward; to cast
downward ; to push forward; to spread horizontally ; and,
fifthly, to go on: including many varieties under the last
comprehensive head.

IV. Community (Saémdénya), or the condition of equal
or like things, is the cause of the perception of conformity.
It is eternal, single, concerning more than one thing, being
a property common to several. It abides in substance, in
quality, and in action.

Two degrees of it are distinguished: the highest, con-
cerning numerous objects; the lowest, concerning few.
The first is existence, a common property of all. The
latter is the abstraction of an individual, varying with age,
in dimensions, yet continuing identical. A third, or inter-
mediate degree, is distinguished, comprehended in the first,
and including the latter. These three degrees of commu-
nity correspond nearly with genus, species, and individual.

In another view, community is two-fold: viz. genus (jati)
and discriminative property (wpadhi), or species.

The Baud@has are cited as denying this category, and


288 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


maintaining that individuals only have existence, and that
abstraction is false and deceptive. This, as well as other
controverted points, will be further noticed at a future
opportunity.

V. Difference (visésha), or particularity, is the cause of
perception of exclusion. It affects a particular and single
object, which is devoid of community. It abides in eternal
substances, Such substances are mind, soul, time, place ;
and the etherial element; and the atoms of earth, water,
light, and air.

VI. The sixth and last of CaNApe’s categories is aggre-
gation (samavaya), or perpetual intimate relation. It has
been already briefly noticed.

VII. To the six affirmative categories of CANADE, suc-_
ceeding writers add a seventh, which is negative.

Negation or privation (abhava) is of two sorts ; universal
and mutual. Universal negation comprehends three species,
antecedent, emergent, and absolute.

Antecedent privation (pragabhava) is present negation of
that which at a future time will be. It is negation in the
material cause previous to the production of an effect ; as,
in yarn, prior to the fabrication of cloth, there is antecedent
privation of the piece of cloth which is to be woven. It is
without beginning, for it has not been produced; and has an
end, for it will be terminated by the production of the effect.

Emergent privation is destruction (dhwansa), or cessation,
of an effect.. It is negation in the cause, subsequent to the
production of the effect : as, in a broken jar, (smashed by
the blow of a mallet) the negation of jar in the heap of
potsherds. It has a commencement, but no end; for the
destruction of the effect cannot be undone.

Absolute negation extends through all times, past, pre-
sent, and future. It has neither beginning nor end. For
example, fire in a lake, colour in air.


NYAYA—VAISESHICA. 289


Mutual privation is difference (bhéda). It is reciprocal
negation of identity, essence, or respective peculiarity.

5. To return to G6rama’s arrangement. The fifth
place, next after objects of sense, is by him allotted to intel-
ligence (budd’hi), apprehension, knowledge, or concep-
tion ; defined as that which manifests, or makes known, a
matter.

It is two-fold; notionand remembrance. Notion (anu-
bhava) includes two sorts ; right and wrong. Right notion
(pram) is such as is incontrovertible. It is derived from
proof, and is consequently fourfold; viz. from perception,
or inference, or comparison, or revelation : for example: Ist,
a jar perceived by undisordered organs ; 2d, fire inferred
from smoke ; 3d, a gayal* recognised from its resemblance
to a cow; 4th, celestial happiness attainable through sacri-
fice, as inculcated by the Védas.

Wrong notion deviates from truth, and is not derived
from proof. It is threefold: doubt ; premises liable to re-
duction to absurdity ; and error (for example, mistaking
mother-o’-pearl for silver).

Remembrance (smarazia), likewise, is either right or wrong.
Both occur, and right remembrance especially, while awake.
But, in sleep, remembrance is wrong.

6. The sixth place among objects of proof is allotted to
mind. It has been already twice noticed; viz. among
organs of sense, and again among substances.

7. Activity (pravritti) is next in order. It is determina-
tion, the result of passion, and the cause of virtue and vice,
or merit and demerit ; according as the act is one enjoined
or forbidden. It is oral, mental, or corporeal ; not com-
prehending unconscious vital functions. It is the reason of
all worldly proceedings.

8. From acts proceed faults (désha): including under


* Bos gavaeus s. frontalis. As. Res. vol, viii. p. 487.
VOL, I. 18)


290 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


this designation, passion or extreme desire; aversion or
loathing ; and error or delusion (méha). The two first of
these are reckoned by CaN ADE among qualities.

9. Next in G6rama’s arrangement is (prétya-bhava) the
condition of the soul after death ; which is transmigration :
for the soul, being immortal, passes from a former body
which perishes, to a new one which receives it. This is a
reproduction (punar-utpatti).

10. Retribution (p’hala) is the fruit accruing from faults:
which result from activity. It is a return of fruition (punar-
bhéga), or experience of pleasure or pain, in association with
body, mind, and senses.

11. Pain, or anguish, is the eleventh topic of matters to
be proven.

12. Deliverance from pain is beatitude : it is absolute
prevention of every sort of ill; reckoned, in this system of
philosophy, te comprehend twenty-one varieties of evil,
primary or secondary : viz. 1, body; 2—7, the six organs
of sense ; 8—13, six objects (vishaya) of sensation ; 14—19,
six sorts of apprehension and intelligence (budd@’hi); 20,
pain oranguish ; 21, pleasure. For even this, being tainted
with evil, is pain ; as honey drugged with poison is reckoned
among deleterious substances.

This liberation from ill is attained by soul, acquainted
with the truth (tatwa), by means of holy science ; divested of
passion through knowledge of the evil incident to objects ;
meditating on itself ; and, by the maturity of self-knowledge, -
making its own essence present ; relieved from impediments ;
not earning fresh merit or demerit, by deeds done with
desire ; discerning the previous burden of merit or demerit,
by devout contemplation ; and acquitting it through com-
pressed endurance of its fruit ; and thus (previous acts being
annulled, and present body departed, and no future body ac-
cruing), there is no further connexion with the various sorts of


NYAYA—VAIS&SHICA. 291


ill, since there is no cause for them. This, then, is prevention
of pain of every sort ; it is deliverance and beatitude.

III. After proof and matter to be proven, G6TAMA pro-
ceeds to other categories, and assigns the next place to
doubt (sanSaya).

It is the consideration of divers contrary matters in regard
to one and the same thing ; and is of three sorts, arising
from common or from peculiar qualities, or merely from
contradiction ; discriminative marks being in all three cases
unnoticed. Thus an object is observed, concerning which
it becomes a question whether it be a man or a post: the
limbs which would betoken the man, or the crooked trunk
which would distinguish the post, being equally unperceived.
Again, odour is a peculiar quality of earth: it belongs not
to eternal substances, as the etherial element; nor to tran-
sient elements, as water: is then earth eternal or uneternal ?
So, one affirms that sound is eternal; another denies that
position ; and a third person doubts.

IV. Motive (prayéjana) is that by which a person is
actuated, or moved to action. It is the desire of attaining
pleasure, or of shunning pain; or the wish of exemption
from both ; for such is the purpose or impulse of every one
in a natural state of mind.*

V. Instance (drishéanta) is, in a controversy, a topic on
which both disputants consent. It is either concordant or
discordant ; direct or inverse: as the culinary hearth, for
a direct instance of the argument of the presence of fire
betokened by smoke ; and a lake, for an inverse or contrary
instance of the argument, where the indicating vapour is
mist or fog.+

VI. Demonstrated truth (sidd’hanta) is of four sorts; viz.
universally acknowledged; partially so; hypothetically ;
argumentatively (or, e concessu).t
° Gor. 1.1.4.1-3. + Gor.1.1.5.1—6.  ¢ Gor. 1.1.6.1, &e.

u 2


292 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


Thus, existence of substance, or of that to which pro-
perties appertain, is universally recognised, though the ab-
stract notion of it may not be so; for the Baudd’has deny
abstraction. Mind is by the Naiydyicas considered to be
an organ of perception, and so it is by the kindred sect of
Vaiséshicas. The eternity of sound is admitted in the Mi-
mansa, and denied in the Nyaya. Supposing the creation
of the earth to be proved, omniscience of the creator fol-
lows. In Jaimin1’s disquisition on the eternity, or the
transitoriness, of sound, it is said, granting sound to be a
quality.

On the appositeness of some of these examples, in the
eases to which they are here applied, as instances of divers
sorts of demonstration, there is a disagreement among com-
mentators, which it is needless to go into.

VII. A regular argument, or complete syllogism (nyaya),
consists of five members (avayava) or component parts.
Ist, the proposition (pratijnyd) ; 2d, the reason (hétu or
apadésa); 3d, the instance (udéharana or nidarsana); —
4th, the application (upanaya) ; 5th, the conclusion (niga-
mana). Ex.

1. This hill is fiery :

2. For it smokes.

3. What smokes, is fiery: as a culinary hearth.
4. Accordingly, the hill is smoking :

5. Therefore it is fiery.

Some* confine the syllogism (nyaya) to three mem-
bers; either the three first, or the three last. In this latter
form it is quite regular. The recital joined with the in-
stance is the major; the application is the minor; the con-
clusion follows.

VIII. Next in this arrangement is (tarca) reduction to—
absurdity. It is a mode of reasoning, for the investigation _


* The followers of the Mimansa. Pad. Dip.


NYAYA—VAISE&SHICA. 293


of truth, by deduction from wrong premises, to an inad-
missible conclusion which is at variance with proof, whe-
ther actual perception or demonstrable inference. The
conclusion to which the premises would lead is inadmissible,
as contrary to what is demonstrated, or as conceding what
is disproved.

It is not to be confounded with doubt, to which there
are two sides; but to this there is but one.

Five sorts are distinguished by the more ancient writers,
to which the moderns have added six, or even seven more
varieties. It is needless to enumerate them: one or two
examples may suffice.

Ex, 1. Is this hill fiery, or not? On this question one
delivers his opinion, that it is not fiery. The answer to
him is, Were it not fiery, it would not smoke.

Ex. 2. If there be a jar in this place, it must look like
the ground.

Fallacy of the same form, termed tarcabhasa, comprises
the like number of sorts and varieties.

The designations by which they are distinguished are
familiar to the Indian scholastic disputation. It would be
tedious to enumerate and explain them.

IX. Ascertainment (nirteya), or determination of truth,
is the fruit of proof, the result of evidence and of reason-
ing, confuting objections and establishing the position in
question.

X.—XII. Disputation (cat’ha) is conference or dialogue
of interlocutors maintaining adverse positions, whether con-
tending for victory, or seeking the truth. It comprises
three of the categories.

X. One is (jalpa) debate of disputants contending for
victory ; each seeking to establish his own position and
overthrow the opponent’s.

XI. Another is (vada) discourse, or interlocution of per-


294 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


sons communing on a topic in pursuit of truth, as preceptor —
and pupil together with fellow-students. ea
XII. The third is (vitarda) cavil, or controversy wherein
the disputant.seeks to confute his opponent without offering — -
to support a position of his own. pti
XIII. Next in G6rama’s enumeration is fallacy, or, as
it is termed, semblance of a reason (hétwabhdsa); it is the -
non causa pro causa of logicians. Five sorts are distin-
guished, embracing divers varieties or subdivisions. —
need not be here set forth. “4
XIV. Fraud (ch’hala), or perversion and misconstruc-—
tion, is of three sorts: 1st, verbal misconstruing of what is
ambiguous ; 2d, perverting, in a literal sense, what is said in
a-metaphorical one; 3d, generalizing what is particular.
XV. After all these is (j@ti) a futile answer, or self-
confuting reply. No less than twenty-four sorts are enu-
merated. :
XVI. The sixteenth, and last of G6rama’s categories,
is (nigraha-st’ hana) failure in argument, or (pardjaya-hétu)
reason of defeat. It is the termination of a controversy.
Of this, likewise, no fewer than twenty-two distinctions are
specified ; which are here passed by, as the present essay
has already been extended to too great a length.


On the Puitosorny of the Hinpus.


a  : id i 0 8


[From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. i. p. 439—461.]


INTRODUCTION,


Or the six systems of philosophy received among learned
Hindus, four have been noticed in the preceding parts of
this essay, viz. the theistical and atheistical Sanc’hyas, the
dialectic Nydya, and the atomical Vaiséshica. The prior or
practical Miménsé will be now considered ; reserving the
later or theological Mimansé, usually named Védanta, for
a future disquisition, should it appear requisite to pursue the
subject, much concerning it being already before the public.

The object of the Mimdnsé is the interpretation of the
Védas. “Its purpose,” says a commentator,+ “is to
“determine the sense of revelation.” Its whole scope is
the ascertainment of duty. Here duty intends sacrifices
and other acts of religion ordained by the Védas. The
same term (dharma) likewise signifies virtue, or moral
merit ; and grammarians have distinguished its import
according to the gender of the noun. In one, (the mas-
culine), it implies virtue ; in the other (neuter), it means an
act of devotion. It is in the last-mentioned sense that
the term is here employed; and its meaning is by com-
mentators explained to be “ the scope of an injunction ;
“ the object of a command ;§ a purpose ordained by reve-


* Read at a public meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society, March
4th, 1826.


+ Somanir'na in the Mayic’ha, 2. 1.17. t Médini cosha.
§ Pirw’wa 1.1.2. Didh. ibid.


296 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


“lation with a view to a motive, such as sacrifice com- —
“ manded by the Védas, for the attainment of bliss ;”* and —
such indeed is the main scope of every disquisition. c-

The prior (péirva) Mimansa then is practical, as relating
to works (carma) or religious observances to be undertaken
for specific ends; and it is accordingly termed Carma-
mimansa, in contradistinction to the theological, which is
named Brahme-mimansa.

It is not directly a system of philosophy ; nor chiefly so.
But, in course of delivering canons of scriptural interpreta-
tion, it incidently touches upon philosophical topics ; and
scholastic disputants have elicited from its dogmas, prin-
ciples of reasoning applicable to the prevailing points of
controversy agitated by the Hindu schools of philosophy.


Writers on the Mimansa.


The acknowledged founder of this school of scriptural
interpretation is JAimint. He is repeatedly named as an
authority in the sé#tras which are ascribed to him, Other
ancient writers on the same subject, who are occasionally
quoted in those aphorisms, as Arrfya, BApari, BApa-
RAYANA,+ LABpucAyana, ArriSAYANA, &e. are sometimes
adduced there for authority, but oftener for correction and
confutation.

It is no doubt possible, that the true author of a work
may speak in it of himself by name, and in the third person.
Nor, indeed, is that very unusual. A Hindu commentator
will, however, say, as the scholiasts of Menv’s and of
YAJNYAWALCYA’s intitutes of law do, that the oral instruc-
tions of the teacher were put in writing by some disciple ;
and, for this reason, the mention of him as of a third person
is strictly proper.


* Arpavtva; Nydya-pracaia. + Author of the Brahme-sitras.


MiMANSA. 297


The s%tras, or aphorisms, thus attributed to Jaimini,
are arranged in twelve lectures, each subdivided into four
chapters, except the third, sixth, and tenth lectures, which
contain twice as many; making the entire number sixty
chapters. These again are divided into sections, cases, or
topics (adhicaranas), ordinarily comprising several séras,
but not uncommonly restricted to one; and instances may
be noted where a single sentence is split into several adhi-
caranas ; or, on the contrary, a single phrase variously
interpreted becomes applicable to distinct cases; and sétras,
united under the same head by one interpreter, are by ano-
ther explained as constituting separate topics. The total
number of sétras is 2,652, and of adhicaratas 915, as
numbered by MAp’Hava AcnARya.

Like the aphorisms of other Indian sciences, those sétras
are extremely obscure ; or without a gloss utterly unintel-
ligible. They must have been from the first accompanied
by an eral or written exposition ; and an ancient scholiast
(Vritticara), is quoted by the herd of commentators for
subsidiary aphorisms, supplying the defect of the text, as
well as for explanatory comments on it.

Besides the work of the old scholiast, which probably is
not extant ina complete form, the sétras have, as usual,
been elucidated by a perpetual commentary, and by cor-
rective annotations on it.

The author of the extant commentary is Sanara swAmi
Bu atta, from whom it takes the name of Sabara bhashya.
He quotes occasionally the ancient scholiast, sometimes
concurring with, sometimes dissenting from him.

The annotations (wartica) are by Buatfa CumARILA
swAmi, who is the great authority of the Mimansaca
school, in which he is emphatically designated by his title,
Bhatia, equivalent to Doctor. He frequently expounds
and corrects SaBara’s gloss, often delivers a different


298 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


interpretation, but in many instances passes entire sections
without notice, as seeing no occasion for emendation or
explanation of the commentary, which he must be consi-
dered therefore as tacitly ratifying. The ancient scholiast:
is sometimes cited by him, adopting or amending the
scholia; and he criticises the text itself, and arrangement
of JArMINI.

Next to him in celebrity is a writer usually cited under
the title of Guru; more rarely under the designation of
Prabhécara.* Wis work I have had no opportunity of
examining with a view to the present essay, and he is
known to me chiefly from references and quotations; as in
MApuava’s summary, where his opinions are perpetually
contrasted with CumArixa’s; and in the text and com-
mentary of the Sastra-dipica, where his positions are can-
vassed and compared with those of numerous other writers.

CumArita Buaffa figures greatly in the traditionary
religious history of India. He was predecessor of Sancara
AcuArya, and equally rigid in maintaining the orthodox
faith against heretics, who reject the authority of the Védas.
He is considered to have been the chief antagonist of the
sect of Buddha, and to have instigated an exterminating
persecution of that heresy. He does, indeed, take every
occasion of controverting the authority and doctrine of
SAcya or Buppna, as well as Arnar or Jina, together
with obscurer heretics, B6p’HAYANA and MaSaca; and
he denies them any consideration, even when they do concur
upon any point with the Védas.{ The age of CumARiLa,
anterior to SaNcaRa,§ and corresponding with the period


* Maou. 1. 1. 3. + Preface to Wilson’s Dictionary, p. xix.

t Mim. 1.3. 4.

§ Sapara swimi Xcn(rya is expressly named by Sancara in his
commentary on the latter Mimansa (see Brahma Stitra, 3. 3. 53);
and there are allusions to CumARILA BHATTA, if no direct mention of
him. |


MiMANSA. 299


of the persecution of the Bauddhas, goes back to an
antiquity of much more than a thousand years. He is
reputed to have been contemporary with Supuanwa, but
the chronology of that prince’s reign is not accurately
determined.*

Next in eminence among the commentators of the M?-
mansé@ is PART’aaA-sARAT’HI MISRA, who has professedly
followed the guidance of CumAriLa Buatta. His com-
mentary, entitled Sastra-dipicé, has been amply expounded
in a gloss bearing the title of Maytc’ha-mala, by S6ma-
NAT’HA, a Carndtact’ Brahman, whose elder brother was
high priest of the celebrated temple at Véncatadri (or
Véncatagiri).+ PArt’Ha-sARrat’Ht is author likewise of
the Nyaya-ratna-malé and other known works.

A compendious gloss on the text of Jarmin1, following
likewise the same guidance (that of CumArita), is the
Bhatta-dipica of C’uaxa-pfva, author of a separate
and ampler treatise, entitled Mimansé-caustubha, to which
he repeatedly refers for a fuller elucidation of matters briefly
touched upon in his concise but instructive gloss. This
work is posterior to that of MApuava AcuArya, who is
sometimes quoted in it, and to PARtT’Ha-sARAT’HI, who is
more frequently noticed.

The Mimansa-nydya-vivéca is another commentary by a
distinguished author, BuavaNnAr’Ha miSra. I speak of
this and of the foregoing as commentaries, because they
follow the order of the text, recite one or more of the
aphorisms from every section, and explain the subject, but
without regularly expounding every word, as ordinary
scholiasts, in a perpetual gloss.

Among numerous other commentaries on JAimINi’s


* Preface to Wilson’s Dictionary, p. xviii.


+ 135 miles west from Madras.


300 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


text, the Nyayavali-didhiti of RAGHAVANANDA is not to
be omitted. It contains an excellent interpretation of the
siitras, which it expounds word by word, in the manner
of a perpetual comment. It is brief, but clear; leaving
nothing unexplained, and wandering into no digressions. —

It results from the many revisions which the text and ex-
position of it have undergone, with amendments, one while
arriving by a different process of reasoning at the same
conclusion, another time varying the question and deducing
from an unchanged text an altered argument for its solu-
tion, that the cases (adhicaramas) assume a very diver-
sified aspect in the hands of the many interpreters of the
Mimansa.

A summary or paraphrase of Ja1m1n1’s doctrine was put
into verse by an ancient author, whose memorial verses are
frequently cited by the commentators of Jaimin1, under
the title of Sangraha.

Another metrical paraphrase is largely employed in the
Vartica, or is a part of that work itself. An entire chapter
occurs under the title of Sléca vartica: other whole chap-
ters of CumArixa’s performance are exclusively in prose.
In many, verse and prose are intermixed.

The most approved introduction to the study of the
Mimansé is the Nyaya-mala-vistara by MApuava AcuAR-
ya. It is in verse, attended with a commentary in prose
by the same author. It follows the order of J AiM1N1’s text;
not by way of paraphrase, but as a summary (though the
title rather implies amplification) of its purport, and of
approved deductions from it; sometimes explaining sepa-
rately the doctrine of Bhatia and of Guru, under each
head ; at other times that of the old scholiast; but more
commonly confined to that of Bhatia alone; yet often


furnishing more than one application for the same text, as
Bhatia himself does.


MiIMANSA. 301


MApnava AcnArya was both priest and minister, or civil
as well as spiritual adviser of Bucca-rAya and Harinara,
sovereigns of Vidyanagara on the Gédavari, as his father
MAvyana had been of their father and predecessor San-
GAMA, who reigned over the whole peninsula of India.

Like the numerous other writings which bear his name,
the Nyaya-mala was composed, not by himself, but by his
directions, under the more immediate superintendence of his
brother, SAvana-AcnARya ; and it appears from its pre-
face to have been the next performance undertaken after
the completion of their commentary on PARASar4’s insti-
tutes of law; and it suitably enough preceded the great
commentary of the same authors on the whole of the
Védas.

According to history, confirmed by authentic inscriptions,
MApuava flourished towards the middle of the fourteenth
century : the sovereigns whose confidence he enjoyed reigned
from that time to the end of the century.


Analysis of the Mimansa.


From this brief notice of the principal writers on the
Mimansé, I pass to the subject which has occupied them.

A complete adhicarana, or case, consists of five mem-
bers, viz. 1, the subject, or matter to be explained ; 2, the
doubt, or question arising upon that matter; 3, the first
side (péirva-pacsha) or prima facie argument concerning it ;
4, the answer (uwttara) or demonstrated conclusion (sidd-
hanta); 5, the pertinence or relevancy.

The last-mentioned appertains to the whole arrangement
as well as to its subdivisions ; and commentators are occu-
pied with showing the relation and connexion of subjects
treated in the several lectures and chapters, and their right
distribution and appropriate positions.

The text of Jaimini’s aphorisms does not ordinarily


302 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


exhibit the whole of the five members of an adhicarana
Frequently the subject, and the question concerning it
are but hinted, or they are left to be surmised ; sometimes ;
the disputable solution of it is unnoticed, and the right — y
conclusion alone is set forth. The rest is supplied by 1 the
scholiasts ; and they do not always concur as to the most —
apposite examples, nor concerning the presumed allusions
of the text. tC: oo
Its fejeincteny stiitras propose the subject in this man- —
nets “* Now then the study of duty is to be commenced.
“ Duty is a purpose which is inculeated by a Cm
“ Its reason must be inquired.”* Ny
That is, according to the interpretation of commentators,
“ Next, after reading the Véda ; and therefore, for the sake
“ of understanding it; the duty enjoined by it is to be inves-
“tigated. Duty is a meaning deduced from injunction : its
“ground must be sifted. A command is not implicitly
“ received for proof of duty.’
The business of the Mimdénséa, then, being to inveatigaalal
what is incumbent as a duty to be performed, the primary
matter for inquiry is proof and authority (pramaza). This,
accordingly, is the subject of the first lecture, comprising
four chapters, which treat of the following matters: Ist,
precept and its cogency ; 2, affirmation or narrative (art’ha-
vada), as well as prayer and invocation (mantra), their co-
gency as inculcating some duty ; 3, law memorial (smriti),
and usage (4chara), their authority as presumption of some
cogent revelation ; 4, modifying ordinance and specific deno-
mination, distinguished from direct or positive injunction.
Proceeding with the subject as above proposed, the


Mimansa declares that perception or simple apprehension is
no reason of duty, for it apprehends a present object only,


# Yai 11. 13.


MiMANSA. 303


whereas duty concerns’ the future.* Simple apprehension
is defined in these words: “‘ when the organs of man are
““in contiguity with an object, that source of knowledge is
“« perception.”

The ancient scholiast has here introduced definitions of
other sources of knowledge which the author had omitted,
viz. inference, verbal communication, comparison, presump-
tion, and privation. None of these are reasons of duty
except verbal communication ; for the rest are founded on
perception, which itself is not so. Verbal communication
is either human, as a correct sentence (4pta-vécya), or
superhuman, as a passage of the Védas. It is indicative
or imperative ; and the latter is either positive or relative :
Ex. 1. “ This is to be done:” 2. “ That is to be done like
“ this.”

“On sight of one member of a known association, the
“ consequent apprehension of the other part which is not
“actually proximate, is (anwmdana) inference.+ The asso-
“‘ ciation must be such as had been before directly per-
“ ceived, or had become known by analogy.

“ Comparison (upamana) is knowledge arising from re-
“semblance more or less strong. It is apprehension of
“the likeness which a thing presently seen bears to one
“ before observed: and likeness or similitude is concomi-
“ tancy of associates or attributes with one object, which
“ were associated with another.
“ Presumption (art’hépatti) is deduction of a matter
“ from that which could not else be. It is assumption of a
“thing not itself perceived, but necessarily implied by
“ another which is seen, heard, or proven.
“ Knowledge of a thing which is not proximate (or sub-
“ject to perception) derived through understood sound,
“ that is through words the acceptation whereof is known,


‘


* Jam. 1. 1. 4. t+ Ane. Schol. Dith., Pirw’n., &e.


304 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. a


~ f. ws,
“ is (Sastra) ordinance or revelation. It is (Sabda) verbal


“ communication.” indies ie
These five sources of knowledge, or modes of proof, as —


here defined, are admitted by all Mimansacas: and the


followers of PrapuAcara are stated to restrict their ad-


mission to those five.* Bhatia with his disciples, guided
by the ancient scholiast, adds a sixth, which is privation
(abhawa) ; and the Védantis or Uttara Mimansacas concur
in the admission of that number.

The Charvacas, as noticed in the first part of this oil
recognise but one, viz. perception. The followers of Ca-
NADE and those of Sugata (Buddha) acknowledge two,
perception and inference. The Séanc’hyas reckon three,
including affirmation.t The MNaiydyicas, or followers of
G6rama, count four, viz. the foregoing together with
comparison. The Prabhacaras, as just now observed,
admit five. And the rest of the Mimansacas, in both
schools, prior and later Mimansa, enumerate six.§ It does
not appear that a greater number has been alleged by '
sect of Indian philosophy.

The first six lectures of Jaimini’s Miméansé treat of
positive injunction : it is the first half of the work. The
latter half, comprising six more lectures, concerns indirect
command: adapting to a copy, with any requisite modifi-
cations, that which was prescribed for the pattern or pro-
totype.

The authority of enjoined duty is the topic of the first
lecture : its differences and varieties, its parts (or appendant
members, contrasted with the main act), and the purpose
of performance, are successively considered in the three
next, and complete the subject of “ that which is to be
“performed.” The order of performance occupies the fifth


* Védanta-sic’ hamahi. + Ante, p. 240. t Ante, p. 266-267.
§ Vedanta sie’hdam.


MiMANSA. 305


lecture ; and qualification for its performance is treated in
the sixth.

The subject of indirect precept is opened in the seventh
lecture generally, and in the eighth particularly. Infer-
rible changes, adapting to the variation or copy what was
designed for the type or model, are discussed in the ninth,
and bars or exceptions in the tenth. Concurrent efficacy
is considered in the eleventh lecture ; and co-ordinate effect
in the twelfth: that is, the co-operation of several acts for
a single result is the subject of the one ; and the incidental
effect of an act, of which the chief paepems is different, is
discussed in the other.

These which are the principal topics of each lecture are
not, however, exclusive. Other matters are introduced by
the way, being suggested by the main subject or its excep-
tions. o

In the first chapter of the first lecture occurs the noted
disquisition of the Mimansé on the original and perpetual
association of articulate sound with sense.*

“Tt is a primary and natural connexion,” Jarm1ni
affirms, “ not merely a conventional one. The knowledge
“of it is instruction, since the utterance of a particular
“sound conveys knowledge, as its enunciation is for a par-
“ticular sense. It matters not whether the subject have
“ been previously apprehended (the words being intelligible,
“or the context rendering them so). Precept is authoro-
“tative, independently of human communication.”+

Grammarians assume a special category, denominated
sp’ hota, for the object of mental perception, which ensues


* A passage cited by writers on the dialectic Nydya from the; dis-
quisition on the perpetuity of sound (see ante, page 292), is not to be
fourfd in Jaimin1’s séitras: it must have been taken from one of his
commentators.

+ Jaum. 1.1. 5,

VOL. I. x


306 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


upon the hearing of an articulate sound, and which they
consider to be distinct from the elements or component
letters of the word. Logicians disallow that as a needless
assumption.* They insist, however, that “sound is an
“effect, because it is perceived as the result of effort ;
“ because it endures not, but ceases so soon as uttered ;
“ because it is spoken of as made or done; because it is at
“once apprehended in divers places at the same instant,
“uttered by divers persons; because it is liable to permu-—
“tation ; and because it is subject to increase of intensity
“ with the multitude of utterers.” To all which the answer
is, that “‘ the result of an effort is uniform, the same letters
“ being articulated. Sound is unobserved though existent,
“if it reach not the object (vibrations of air emitted from
“the mouth of the speaker proceed and manifest sound by
“ their appulse to air at rest in the space bounded by the
“ hollow of the ear; for want of such appulse, sound, though
“ existent, is unapprehended).+ Sound is not made or done,
“but is used : it is uttered, not called into existence. Its
“ universality is as that of the sun (common to all). The per-
“ mutation of letters is the substitution of a different one (as
‘ a semivowel for a vowel), not the alteration of the same
“letter. Noise, not sound, is increased by a multitude of
“voices. Sound is perpetual, intended for the apprehen-
“sion of others: it is universal, a generic term being: appli-
“ cable to all individuals. Its perpetuity is intimated by a
<s passage of the Véda, which expresses ‘Send forth praise,
“ with perpetual speech.’ ”{

The first chapter terminates with an inquiry into the
authority of the Véda, which is maintained to be primeval
and superhuman ; although different portions of it are de-


‘


* Didh., Pant’a, and Miou. + Didh.
¢t Jaim. 1.1. 6. 1—18 and Com.


MiMANSA. 307


nominated from names of men, as Cat’haca, Caut’huma,
Paishpala, &c. and although worldly incidents and occur-
rences are mentioned. Those denominations of particular
portions, it is affirmed, have reference to the tradition by
which a revelation has been transmitted. They are named
after the person who uttered them, as to him revealed.

The eternity of the Véda, or authenticity of its revela-
tion, is attempted to be proved by showing that it had no
human origin ; and for this purpose, the principal argument
is, that no human author is remembered. In the case of
human compositions, it is said, contemporaries have been
aware that the authors of them were occupied in composing
those works : not so with the Véda, which has been handed
down as primeval, and of which no mortal author was known,

It is, however, acknowledged, that a mistake may be
made, and the work of a human author may be erroneously
received as a part of the sacred book by those who are un-
acquainted with its true origin. An instance occurs among
those who use the Bahvrich, a sacha of the Rigvéda, by
whom a ritual of ASwALAYANA has been admitted, under
the title of the fifth Aranyaca, asa part of the Rigvéda.

The Véda received as holy by orthodox Hindus consists
of two parts, prayer and precept (mantra and bréhmaza).
Jaimini has attempted to give a short definition of the
first, adding that the second is its supplement ; “ whatever
“ is not mantra, is brahmaia.”* The ancient scholiast has
endeavoured to supply the acknowledged defect of Jarm1n1’s
imperfect definition, by enumerating the various descriptions
of passages coming under each head. Later scholiasts have
shown, that every article in that enumeration is subject to
exceptions ; and the only test of distinction, finally acknow-
ledged, is admission of the expert, or acceptance of approved


* Mim.2.1.7.
>. Yee


308 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


teachers, who have taught their disciples to use one passage
as a prayer, and to read another as a precept. JAIMINI’s
nies and his scholiast’s enumeration, serve: but to
alleviate “the task of picking up grains.”

Generally, then, a mantra is a prayer, invocation, or de-
claration. It is expressed in the first person, or is addressed
in the second. It declares the purpose of a pious act, or
lauds or invokes the object. It asks a question or returns
an answer ; directs, inquires, or deliberates ; blesses or im-
precates, exults or laments, counts or narrates, &c.

Here it is to be remarked, that changes introduced into
a prayer to adapt it, mutatis mutandis, to a different cere-
mony from that for which primarily it was intended, or
the insertion of an individual’s personal and family names
where this is requisite, are not considered to be part of the
mantra.

It is likewise to be observed, although mantras of the
Védas are ordinarily significant, that the chants of the
Samavéda are unmeaning. They consist of a few syllables,
as ira dyird, or gira gayira, repeated again and again, as
required by the tune or rhythm. Nevertheless, significant
mantras are likewise chanted ; and two of the books of the
Samavéda are allotted to hymns of this description. The
hymns consist of triplets (¢rich), or triple stanzas.

The first, or pattern verse or stanza, is found, with the
name of the appropriate tune, in the Chhandas or Yéni-
grant’ha ; and the two remaining verses or stanzas, to com-
plete the triplet, are furnished in the supplementary book
called Uttara-grant ha. ‘

Mantras are distinguished under three designations.
Those which are in metre are termed rich, those chanted
are saman, and the rest are yajush, sacrificial prayers in
prose (for yajush imports sacrifice). Nevertheless, metrical
prayers occur in the Yajurvéda, and prose in the Samavéda.


il


MimMANSA. 309


Metrical prayers are recited aloud : those termed s@man
with musical modulation ; but the prose inaudibly muttered.*
Such, however, as are vocative, addressed to a second per-
son, are to be uttered audibly, though in prose: for com-
munication is intended.+
- Metrical prayers, however, belonging to the Yajurvéda
are inaudibly recited ; and so are chants belonging to the
same inaudibly chanted: for prayers take the character of
the rite into which they are introduced; and where the
same rite is ordained in more than one Véda, it appertains
to that with which it is most consonant, and the prayer is
either audibly or inaudibly chanted accordingly.


* Mim. 3. 3. 1. + Ib. 2.1. 7—14.


t 1b.3.3.1—3. Instances of the same prayer recurring either word
for word, or with very slight variation, in more than one Véda, are
innumerable. An eminent example is that of the celebrated Gayatri,
of which the proper place is in the Rig-véda (3. 4. 10.), among hymns
of ViSwimirra. It is, however, repeated in all the Védas, and par-
ticularly in the 3d, 22d and 36th chapters of the white Yajush. (3,
§ 35; 22,§9; and 36,§ 3.)

Another notable instance is that of the Purusha-sicta, of which a
version was given, from a ritual in which it was found cited (ante,
p- 167). Ithasa place in the RYg-véda (8. 4.7.) among miscella-
neous hymns; and is inserted, with some little variation, among
prayers employed at the Purusha-médha, in the 31st chapter of the
white Yajur-véda.

On collation of those two Védas and their scholia, I find occasion to
amend one or two passages in the version of it formerly given : but
for this I shall take another opportunity.

‘That remarkable hymn is in language, metre, and style, very diffe-
rent from the rest of the prayers with which itis associated. It has
a decidedly more modern tone; and must have been composed after
the Sanscrvt language had been refined, and its grammar and rhythm
perfected. The internal evidence which it furnishes, serves to demon-
strate the important fact, that the compilation of the Védas, in their
present arrangement, took place after the Sanscri¢ tongue had ad-
vanced, from the rustic and irregular dialect in which the multitude
of hymns and prayers of the Véda was composed,.to the polished and


310 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


The prayers termed rich and séman are limited by the
metre and the chant respectively; but those which are
in prose are regulated as to their extent by the sense. A
complete sentence constitutes a single yajush : the sense
must be one, and would be deficient were the phrase divided.
Nevertheless, the sentence which constitutes a prayer may
borrow, from a preceding or from a subsequent one, terms
wanting to perfect the sense, unless an intervening one be
incompatible with that construction.*

The brahmana of the Véda is in general a precept; or
it expresses praise or blame, or a doubt, a reason, or a com-
parison ; or intimates a derivation ; or narrates a fact or an
occurrence: and a characteristic sign of it is that it very
generally contains the particle “so” (iti or itiha); as a
mantra usually does the pronoun of the second person
“ thee,” either expressed or understood, “ (thou) art.”

In a still more general view the brahmaza is practical,
directing religious observances, teaching the purpose, time,
and manner of performing them, indicating the prayers to
be employed, and elucidating their import. The esoteric
brahmana comprises the upanishads, and is theological.

It becomes a question which the Mimansa@ examines at
much length, whether those passages of the Véda which
are not direct precepts, but are narrative, laudatory, or ex-
planatory, are nevertheless cogent for a point of duty. In
this inquiry is involved the further question, whether a con-
sciousness of the scope of an act is essential to its efficacy
for the production of its proper consequence. The Mimansa
maintains that narrative or indicative texts are proof of
duty, as concurrent in import with a direct precept. There


sonorous language in which the mythological poems, sacred and pro-
phane (purdhas and cdvyas), have been written.


* Mim. 2.1, 14—18, + Sas. &c, on Mim. 1.4. 1. and 2. 1, 7.


MiMANSA, | 311


subsists a mutual relation between them. One enjoins or
forbids an act ; the other supplies an inducement for doing
it or for refraining from it: ‘‘ Do so, because such is the
fruit.” The imperative sentence is nevertheless cogent inde-
pendently of the affirmative one, and needs not its support.
The indicative phrase is cogent, implying injunction by pro-
nouncing benefit.

It virtually prescribes the act which it recommends.* In-
ference, however, is not to be strained. It is not equally
convincing as actual perception : a forthcoming injunction
or direct precept has more force than a mere inference from
premises.

A prayer, too, carries authority, as evidence of a precept
bearing the like import. This is a visible or temporal pur-
pose of a prayer; and it is a received maxim, that a per-
ceptible purpose being assignable, prevails before an imper-
ceptible one. But the recital of a particular prayer at a
religious rite, rather than a narrative text of like import, is
for a spiritual end, since there is no visible purpose of a set
form of words.{

Besides the evidence of precept from an extant revelation
or recorded hearing (Sruti) of it, another source of evidence
is founded on the recollections (smriti) of ancient sages.
They possess authority as grounded on the Véda, being
composed by holy personages conversant with its contents.
Nor was it superfluous to compose anew what was there to
be found ; for a compilation, exhibiting in a succint form
that which is scattered through the Véda, has its use. Nor
are the prayers which.the smriti directs unauthorized, for
they are presumed to have been taken from passages of
revelation not now forthcoming. Those recollections have
come down by unbroken tradition to this day, admitted by


* Mim. 1. 2. |—3. ¢t £1. 2.3. t 2.1. 2. 4.


312 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


the virtuous of the three tribes, and known under the title
of Dharma-sastra, comprising the institutes of law, civil
and religious. Nor is error to be presumed which had not,
until now, been detected. An express text of the Véda,
as the Mimansa@ maintains,* must then be concluded to
have been actually seen by the venerable author of a re-
corded recollection (smriti). 5

But if contradiction appear, if it can be shown that an
extant passage of the Véda is inconsistent with one of the
smriti, it invalidates that presumption. An actual text,
present to the sense, prevails before a presumptive one.+

Or though no contrary passage of the Véda be actually
found, yet if cupidity, or other exceptionable motive may
be assigned, revelation is not to be presumed in the instance,
the recollection being thus impeached.}

The Sécyas (or Bauddhas) and Jainas (or Arhatas), as
CumArita acknowledges, are considered to be Cshatriyas.
It is not to be concluded, he says, that their recollections
were founded upon a Véda which is now lost. There can be
no inference of a foundation in revelation, for unauthentic
recollections of persons who deny its authenticity. Even
when they do concur with it, as recommending charitable.
gifts and enjoining veracity, chastity, and innocence, the
books of the Sécyas are of no authority for the virtues which’
they inculcate. Duties are not taken from them: the asso-,
ciation would suggest a surmise of vice,§ tainting what else
is virtuous. The entire Véda which is directed to be studied
is the foundation of duty; and those only who are con-
versant with it are capable of competent recollections.

Usage generally prevalent among good men, and by them
practised as understanding it to be enjoined and therefore.


as
>
er
w
ra
>
fe
* bo


ss
& ow


MimMANSA.. 313


incumbent on them, is mediately, but not directly, evidence of
duty : but it is not valid if it be contrary to an express text.
From the modern prevalence of any usage, there arises a
presumption of a correspondent injunction by a holy per-
sonage who remembered a revelation to the same effect.
Thus usage presumes a recollection, which again presup-
poses revelation. Authors, however, have omitted particu-
lars, sanctioning good customs in general terms: but any
usage which is inconsistent with a recorded recollection is
not to be practised, so long as no express text of scripture
is found to support it.

In like manner, rituals which teach the proper mode of
celebrating religious rites, and are entitled Calpa-sitra or
Grihya-grant ha, derive their authority, like the Dharma-
Sastra, from a presumption that their authors, being persons
conversant with the Véda, collected and abridged rules
which they there found. The Calpa-sétras neither are a
part of the Véda, nor possess equal nor independent
authority. It would be a laborious enterprise to prove a
superhuman origin of them ; nor can it be accomplished,
since contemporaries were aware of the authors being occu-
pied with the composition of them.* Whenever a sétra
(whether of the calpa or grihya) is opposed to an extant
passage of the Véda, or is inconsistent with valid reason, it
is not to be followed; nor is an alternative admissible in
regard to its observance in such case, unless a corroborative
text of the Véda can be shown.+

Neither are usages restricted to particular provinces,
though certain customs are more generally prevalent in some
places than in others: as the Hélaca (vulg. Hult) or festi-
val of spring in the east; the worship of local tutelary
deities hereditarily, by families, in the south ; the racing of


* Guru on Mim. 1. 3.7. + C’uanpa-pféva.


314 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


oxen on the full moon of Jyéshé’ha, in the north ; and the
adoration of tribes of deities (matri-gazia), in the west. Nor
are rituals and law institutes confined to particular classes :
though some are followed by certain persons preferably to
others; as Vasisuf’Ha, by the Bahvrich Sac’ha of the
Rigvéda ; Gautama, by the Gdbhiliya of the Samavéda ;
Sane’na and Lic’stra, by the Vajasanéyi; and Apas-
raMBA and BaupuAyana, by the Tuaittirtya of the
Yajurvéda. There isno presumption of a restrictive revela-
tion, but of one of general import. The institutes of law,
and rituals of ceremonies, were composed by authors apper-
taining to particular séc’has, and by them taught to their
fellows belonging to the same, and have continued current
among the descendants of those to whom they were so
taught.

A very curious disquisition occurs in this part of the
Mimansa,* on the acceptation of words in correct language
and barbaric dialects, and on the use of terms taken from
either. Instances alleged are yava, signifying in Sanscrit,
barley, but in the barbaric tongue, the plant named
priyangu; varaha, in the one a hog, and in the other a
cow; plu, a certain tree,} but among barbarians an
elephant; vétasa, a rattan cane and a citron. The Mi-
mansa concludes, that in such instances of words having
two acceptations, that in which it is received by the civilized
(a4ryas), or which is countenanced by use in sacred books,
is to be preferred to the practice of barbarians (Mléch’ha),
who are apt to confound words or their meanings.

Concerning these instances, CumARILA remarks that the
words have no such acceptation, in any country, as is by
the scholiast alleged. He is wrong in regard to one, at


iad Fs


+ The name is in vocabularies assigned to many different trees.


MiMANSA. 315


least, for pilu is evidently the Persian fil or pil. Modern
vocabularies* exhibit the word as a Sanscrit one in the
same sense; erroneously, as appears from this disquisition.

Then follows, in CumArixa’s Vartica, much upon the
subject of provincial and barbaric dialects ; which, advert-
ing to the age in which he flourished, is interesting, and
merits the attention of philologists. He brings examples
from the Andhra and Dravida dialects, and specifies as
barbaric tongues the Parasica, Yavana, Raumaca, and
Barbara, but confesses his imperfect acquaintance with
these.

JAIMINI gives an instance of a barbaric term used in
the Véda, viz., pica, a black cuckow (cuculus indicus); to
which his scholiasts add néma, half, tamarasa, a lotus, and
sata a wooden colander; but without adducing examples
of the actual use of them in any of the Védas. Such terms
must be taken in their ordinary acceptation, though bar-
barous ; and the passage quoted from the Véda where the
word pica occurs, must be interpreted “ sacrifice a black
“ cuckow at night.” It will here be remarked, that pica
corresponds to the Latin picus, and that ném answers to the
Persie nim.

On the other hand, a barbaric word, or a provincial cor-
ruption, is not to be employed instead of the proper Sanscrit
term. Thus gé (gauh), and not gawi, is the right term for
a cow. Orthography, likewise, is to be carefully attended
to; else by writing or reading aswa for aswa in the direc-
tions for the sacrifice of a horse, the injunction would seem
to be for the sacrifice of a pauper (a-swa, destitute of
property).

Generally, words are to be applied in strict conformity
with correct grammar. The Sécyas, and other heretics,


* Jatipuara, &c. + Vart. 3..3. 9.


316 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


as CumAniLA in this place remarks,* do not use Sanserit
(they employ Pracrit). But Brahmanas should not speak
as barbarians. Grammar, which is primeval, has been
handed down by tradition. Language is the same in the
Védas and in ordinary discourse, notwithstanding a few
deviations: the import of words is generic, though the
application of them is specific.

The peculiarities of the dialect of the Véda are not to be
taken for inaccuracies. Thus, ¢man stands for dtman, self
or soul; and Brahmandsah for Brahmanah, priests ; with
many other anomalies of the sacred dialect.+

When the ordinary acceptation of a term is different
from that which it bears in an explanatory passage, this
latter import prevails in the text likewise, else the precept
and its supplement would disagree. Thus ¢trivrit, triplet,
is specially applied to a hymn comprising three triplets or
nine stanzas, which is the peculiar sense it bears in the
Védas.

Again, charu, which in ordinary discourse signifies boiler
or cauldron, is in the Védas an oblation of boiled food, as
rice, &c. So aswabala, which literally means horse-hair,
is a designation of a species of grass (saccharum spontaneum)
into which it is said the tail of a consecrated horse was once
transformed ; and of that grass a cushion is made for cer-
tain religious rites. ,

It will be observed, as has been intimated in speaking of
the members of an adhicarana in the Mimansa, that a case
is proposed, either specified in Jarm1n1’s text or supplied
by his scholiasts. Upon this a doubt or question is raised,
and a solution of it is suggested, which is refuted, and a
right conclusion established in its stead. The disquisitions
of the Mimansa bear, therefore, a certain resemblance to


© Kerivh.3. 7. + Mim. 1. 3. 10.


|


MiMANSA, 317


juridical questions; and, in fact, the Hindu law being
blended with the religion of the people, the same modes of
reasoning are applicable, and are applied to the one as to
the other. The logic of the Mimansa is the logic of the
law; the rule of interpretation of civil and religious ordi-
nances. Each case is examined and determined upon
general principles; and from the cases decided the prin-
ciples may be collected. A well-ordered arrangement of
them would constitute the philosophy of the law: and this
is, in truth, what has been attempted in the Mimdansa.
Jaimin1's arrangement, however, is not philosophical; and
I am not acquainted with any elementary work of this
school in which a better distribution has been achieved. I
shall not here attempt to supply the defect, but confine the
sequel of this essay to a few specimens from divers chapters
of Jaimint, after some more remarks on the general scope
and manner of the work.

Instances of the application of reasoning, as taught in
the Mimansé, to the discussion and determination of juridical
questions, may be seen in two treatises on the Law of
Inheritance, translated by myself, and as many on Adop-
tion, by a member of this Society, Mr. J. C. C. Sutherland
(See Mitacshara on Inheritance, 1. 1. 10, and 1. 9. 11, and
2.1.34; Jimita Vahana, 11.5.16—19. Datt. Mim. on
Adoption, 1. 1. 35—41, and 4. 4. 65—66 and 6. 6. 27—31.
Datt. Chand. 1. 1, 24 and 2. 2. 4).

The subject which most engages attention throughout the
Mimaansé, recurring at every turn, is the invisible or spiritual
operation of an act of merit. The action ceases, yet the
consequence does not immediately ensue. A virtue mean-
time subsists, unseen, but efficacious to connect the con-
sequence with its past and remote cause, and to bring
about at a distant period, or in another world, the relative
effect.


318 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


That unseen virtue is termed apérva, being a relation
superinduced, not before possessed.

Sacrifice (yaga), which, among meritorious works, is the
act of religion most inculcated by the Védas, and conse-
quently most discussed in the prior Miménsé@, consists in 7
parting with a thing that it may belong to a deity, whom
it is intended to propitiate.* Being cast into the fire for
that purpose, it is a burnt offering (héma). Four sorts are
distinguished : a simple oblation (ishéi), the immolation of i
a victim (pasu), the presenting of expressed juice of the
soma plant (asclepias acida), and the burnt-offering above-
mentioned.+ The object of certain rites is some definite
temporal advantage; of others, benefit in another world.
Three ceremonies, in particular, are types of all the rest:
the consecration of a sacrificial fire, the presenting of an
oblation, and the preparation of the s6ma. The oblation |
which serves as a model for the rest, is that which is offered
twice in each month, viz. at the full and change of the
moon. It is accompanied, more especially at the new
moon, with an oblation of whey from new milk. Accord-
ingly, the Yajurvéda begins with this rite. It comprehends
the sending of selected cows to pasture after separating
their calves, touching them with a leafy branch of palasa
(butea frondosa) cut for the purpose, and subsequently
stuck in the ground in front of the apartment containing
the sacrificial fire, for a protection of the herd from robbers
and beasts of prey: the cows are milked in the evening
and again in the morning ; and, from the new milk, whey
is then prepared for an oblation.

Concerning this ceremony, with all its details, numerous
questions arise, which are resolved in the Mimansa: for
instance, the milking of the cows is pronounced to be not a


* Mim. 4. 4,12. + 1b. 4.4.1.


MiMANSA,. 319


primary or main act, but a subordinate cne; and the parting
of the calves from their dams is subsidiary to that subordi-
nate act.* The whey, which im fact is milk modified, is
the main object of the whole preparation; not the curd,
which is but incidentally produced, not being sought nor
wanted.+

In the fourth chapter of the first book, the author dis-
criminates terms that modify the precept from such as are
specific denominations. Several of the instances are not a
little curious. Thus it is a question, whether the hawk-
sacrifice (Syéna-yaga), which is attended with imprecations
on a hated foe, be performed by the actual immolation of a
bird of that kind. The case is determined by a maxim,
that “a term intimating resemblance is denominative.”
Hawk, then, is the name of that incantation: “ it pounces
“on the foe as a falcon on his prey.” { So ¢ongs is a name
for a similar incantation, “ which seizes the enemy from afar
“ as with a pair of tongs ;” and cow, for a sacrifice to avert
such imprecations.

It is fit to remark in this place, that incantations for
destruction of hated foes, though frequent in the Védas
(and modes of performing them, with greater or less solem-
nity, are there taught), cannot be deemed laudable acts of
religion ; on the contrary, they are pronounced to be at least
mediately criminal; and pains in hell, as for homicide, await
the malevolent man who thus practises against the life of
his enemy.

Another instance, discussed in the same chapter, is
chitra, applied to a sacrifice performed for acquisition of
cattle. It is questioned whether the feminine termination,
joined to the ordinary signification of the word, indicates
a female victim of a varied colour. It intends, however, an


* Mim. 4. 3.10. + Ib. 4.1. 9. t 1b. 1. 4. 5. and 3.7. 23


320 ON THE PHILOSOPAY OF THE HINDUS,


offering termed various, as consisting of no less than |
different articles: honey, milk, curds, boiled butter, ees:
the husk as well as clean, and water.* ee
In like manner, udbhid is the name of a cacriicodinal
to be performed for the like purpose: that is, by a person,
desirous of possessing cattle. The sense approaches to the
etymology of the term: it is a ceremony “ by which pos-
“ session of cattle is, as it were, dug up.” It does not —
imply that some tool for delving, as a spade or hoe for
digging up the earth, is to be actually employed in we
ceremony.
A question of considerable interest, as involving the
important one concerning property in the soil in India, is
discussed in the sixth lecture.+ At certain sacrifices, such
as that which is called viswajit, the votary, for whose
benefit the ceremony is performed, is enjoined to bestow all
his property on the officiating priests. It is asked whether
a paramount sovereign shall give all the land, including
pasture-ground, highways, and the site of lakes and ponds;
an universal monarch, the whole earth ; and a subordinate
prince, the entire province over which he rules? To that
question the answer is: the monarch has not property in
the earth, nor the subordinate prince in the land. By con-
quest kingly power is obtained, and property in house and
and field which belonged to the enemy. The maxim of the
law, that “the king is lord of all excepting sacerdotal
“wealth,” concerns his authority for correction of the
wicked and protection of the good. His kingly power is
for government of the realm and extirpation of wrong; and.
for that purpose he receives taxes from husbandmen, and
levies fines from offenders. But right of property is not.
thereby vested in him; else he would have property in


* Mim. 1. 4.3. + Ib. 6.7.2.


MiMANSA, 321


house and land appertaining to the subjects abiding in his
dominions. The earth is not the king’s, but is common to
all beings enjoying the fruit of their own labour. It be-
longs, says Jaimini, to all alike: therefore, although a
gift of a piece of ground to an individual does take place,
the whole land cannot be given by a monarch, nora pro-
vince by a subordinate prince; but house and field, acquired
by purchase and similar means, are liable to gift.’

The case which will be here next cited, will bring to
recollection the instance of the Indian Calanus,+ who ac-
companied Alexander’s army, and burnt himself at Babylon
after the manner of his country.

This particular mode of religious suicide by cremation is
now obsolete; as that of widows is in some provinces of
India, and it may be hoped will become so in the rest, if
no injudicious interference by direct prohibition arouse
opposition and prevent the growing disuse. Other modes
of religious suicide not unfrequently occur ; such as drown-
ing, burying alive, falling from a precipice or under the
wheels of an idol’s car, &c. But they are not founded on
the Védas, as that by burning is.

Self-immolation, in that ancient form of it, is a solemn
sacrifice, performed according to rites which the Védas
direct, by a man desirous of passing immediately to heaven
without enduring disease. He engages priests, as at other
sacrifices, for the various functions requisite to the per-
formance of the rites, being himself the votary for whose
benefit the ceremony is undertaken. At a certain stage of
it, after wrapping a cloth round a branch of udumbara (ficus
glomerata), which represents a sacrificial stake, and having
appointed the priests to complete the ceremony, he chants


* San. Mion. and C’Hanpa, ad locum. + Calyana,


VOL. I. ¥


322 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. ©


a solemn hymn, and casts himself on a burning pile
his bodyis consumed. Afterwards, whatever conce
rite as a sacrificial ceremony, is to be completed
attendant priests: omitting, however, those matters 1
specially appertain to the votary, and which, after his d
there is no one competent to perform.* a

In like manner, if the principal die by a natural | death, —
after engaging Brahmanas to co-operate with him ‘in the :
celebration of certain rites requiring the aid of s


epidestt him ; and the bani’ is completed for his bene-
fit, according to one opinion, but for theirs according to.
another. The ashes, it is argued, do not perform the

ceremony, but the priests do. Being inanimate, the bones _
cannot fulfil the prescribed duties peculiar to the principal:
as utterance of certain prayers, shaving of hair and beard,

measure of his stature with a branch of udumbara, &e.
These and similar functions are not practicable by an inani-
mate skeleton, and therefore are unavoidably omitted.+ y
. The full complement of persons officiating at a great
solemnity is seventeen. This number, as is shown, includes —
the votary or principal, who is assisted by sixteen priests
engaged by him for different offices, which he need not

personally discharge. His essential function is the pay-
ment of their hire or sacrificial fee.t tiie a fh


proportionably. Four, whose duties are most impo
receive the full perquisite; four others are recompensed.
with a half ; the four next with a third; and the four last —
with a quarter. a
On occasions of less solemnity four priests only are
engaged, making with the principal five officiating persons.


* Mim. 10. 2. 23. + 7.10.2.17—20.. $16. 3.7. 817. ?


MiMANSA. 323


A question is raised, whether the immolator of a victim at
the sacrifice of an animal (usually a goat) be. a distinct
officiating person: the answer is in the negative. No one
is specially engaged for immolator independently of other
functions ; but some one of the party, who has other duties
to discharge, slays the victim in the prescribed manner,
and is accordingly termed immolator.*

The victims at some sacrifices are numerous: as many as
seventeen at the vajapéya, made fast to the same number
of stakes; and at an aswaméd’ha not fewer than six hun- |
dred and nine of all descriptions, tame and wild, terrestrial
and aquatic, walking, flying, swimming, and creeping things,
distributed among twenty-one stakes and in the intervals
between them; the tame made fast to the stakes, and the
wild secured in cages, nets, baskets, jars, and hollow canes,
and by various other devices. The wild are not to be slain,
but at a certain stage of the ceremony let loose. The tame
ones, or most of them (chiefly goats), are to be actually
immolated.

The various rites are successively performed for each vic
tim ; not completed for one before they are commenced for
another. But the consecration of the sacrificial stakes is
perfected for each in succession, because the votary is re-
quired to retain hold of the stake until the consecration of
it is done.

The foregoing instances may suffice to give some idea of
the nature of the subjects treated in the Mimdénsa, and of
the way in which they are handled. They have been select-
ed as in themselves curious, rather than as instructive
specimens of the manner in which very numerous and varied
cases are examined and questions concerning them resolved.
The arguments would be tedious, and the reasons of the


* Mim. 3. 7. 13. + 16.5. 2. 1—5.


324 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE H


slaon would ead much lida, a
: Smee Peqeieterstoges Sanit
a 5 a aide age Retin
, sbithclipnienineg-mphiied:to Thom ord
2a sidered as better conveying in a small cc ciel
hes? te iiicmn nt nte Sits Minna «rqud


On the PutLosorny of the Hinpus.


PART IV."


{From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatic Society,
vol. ii. p. 1—39.]


INTRODUCTION.


A PRECEDING essay on Indian philosophy contained a
succinct account of the Carma-mimansaé. The present one
will be devoted to the Brahma-mimansa; which, as the
complement of the former, is termed uttara, later, con-
trasted with piérva, prior, being the investigation of proof,
deducible from the Védas in regard to theology, as the
other is in regard to works and their merit. The two
together, then, comprise the complete system of interpre-
tation of the precepts and doctrine of the Védas, both prac-
tical and theological. They are parts of one whole. The
later Mimansé is supplementary to the prior, and is expressly
affirmed to be so: but, differing on many important points,
though agreeing on others, they are essentially distinct in a
religious as in a philosophical view.

The ordinary designation of the Uttara-mimansa is Vé-

-dénta, a term likewise of more comprehensive import. It
literally signifies “‘ conclusion of the Véda,” and bears re-
ference to the Upanishads, which are, for the most part,
terminating sections of the Védas to which they belong.
It implies, however, the doctrine derived from them, and
extends to books of sacred authority, in which that doc-


* Read at a public meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society, April 7,
1827.


326 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


trine is thence deduced ; and in this tate ae
“ the end-and scope of the Védas.”

The followers of the Védanta have apie in
sects, as ‘ ancient’ and ‘ modern’ Védantins, and
other designations. The points on which they disagree, a
the difference of their opinions, will not be a subject of =
present essay, but may be noticed in a future one. ae

Among numerous Upanishads, those which are princi
pally relied upon for the Védanta, and which according’ re
are most Lag scott rae are the Ch’handégya, Caushita t
Vrihad aranyaca, Aitaréyaca, Taittiriyaca, Cit’haca,
Cat havalli, Muidaca, Prana, Swétéswatara; to which —
may be added the Tsa-vasya, Céna, and one or two more. _

Certain religious exercises, consisting chiefly in ee
meditation, with particular sitting postures rigorously con
tinued, are inculcated as preparing the student for the
attainment of divine knowledge, and promoting his acqui-
sition of it. Directions concerning such devout exercises:
are to be found in several of the Upanishads, especially ix in
the SwétéSwatara; and likewise in other portions of the
Védas, as a part of the general ritual. These are accor te
ingly cited by the commentators of the Védanta, and must
be considered to be comprehended under that general term ; ~
and others from different Sac’has of the Védas, as further
exemplified in a note below.+


* For instance, the Agni rahasya brahmana of the Céhwas and of
the Vajins (or Vajasanéyins); the Rashasya brahmana of the Thading.” -
and of the Paingins.


+ The Udgit’ha-brahmana of the Vajasanéyins, the Panchigni-vidya-
pracarana of the same, the C’hila grantha of the Réhdyaniyas the
Préna-samvada or Praha-vidya, Dahara-vidyd, Hérda-vidya, Para-
méatma-vidya, Satya-vidyd, Vaiswénara-vidyd, Séhdilya-vidya, Vama-
dévya-vidyd, Upacosala-vidya, Paryanca-vidyé, Madht-vidya, sere:
cala-vidya, Samvarga-vidya, &e.


VEDANTA. | ; 327


. Besides the portion of the Védas understood to be in-
tended by the designation of Védanta, the grand authority
for its doctrine is the collection of séras, or aphorisms,
entitled Brahme-sitra or Sartraca-miménsé, and sometimes
Sértra-sitra or Védénta-sitra. Sartra, it should be ob-
served, signifies embodied or incarnate (soul).

Other authorities are the ancient scholia of that text,
which is the standard work of the science; and didactic
poems comprehended under the designation of smriti, a
name implying a certain degree of veneration due to the
authors. Such are the Bhagavad gita and Yéga-vasish? ha,
reputed to be inspired writings.


Writers on the VEDANTA.


The Sértraca-mtmansé or Brahme-siitra, above-mention-
ed, is a collection of succinct aphorisms attributed to
BApARAYANA, who is the same with VyAsa or Véda-
vyasa ; also called Dwaipayana or Crishna-dwaipdyana.
According to mythology, he had in a former state, being
then a brahmana bearing the name of APANTARA-TAMAS,*
acquired a perfect knowledge of revelation and of the
divinity, and was consequently qualified for eternal beati-
tude. Nevertheless, by special command of the deity, he
resumed a corporeal frame and the human shape, at the
period intervening between the third and fourth ages of the
present world, and was compiler of the Védas, as his title
of Vyasa implies.

In the Purdnas, and by ParAsara, he is said to be an
incarnation (avatara) of Visnxu. This, however, is not
altogether at variance with the foregoing legend; since
APANTARA-TAMAS, having attained perfection, was identi-
fied with the deity ; and his resumption of the human form
was a descent of the god, m mythological notions.


* Sanco. &e. on Br. Satr, 3, 3,32


328 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


Apart from mythology, it is not to be deemed unlikely,
that the person (whoever he really was) who compiled and
arranged the Védas, was led to compose a treatise on their
scope and essential doctrine. But Vyasa is also reputed —
author of the Mahabharata, and most of the principal pe-
ranas ; and that is for the contrary reason improbable, since
the doctrine of the pura*as, and even of the Bhagavad gita
and the rest of the Mahabharata, are not quite consonant to
that of the Védas, as expounded in the Brahme-sitras.
The same person would not have deduced from the same
premises such different conclusions. dite

The name of BApARAYANA frequently recurs in the
sitras ascribed to him, as does that of JAim1n1, the re-
puted author of the Pé&rva-mimansa, in his. I have already
remarked, in the preceding essay,* on the mention of an
author by his name, and in the third person, in his own
work. It is nothing unusual in literature or science of other
nations: but a Hindu commentator will account for it, by
presuming the actual composition to be that of a disciple
recording the words of his teacher.

Besides BADARAYANA himself, and his great predecessor
Jarmini, several other distinguished names likewise occur,
though less frequently : some which are also noticed in the
Pérva-mimansa, as Arréyi and BApARt; and some which
are not there found, as AsMARAT’HYA, AubduULOMI,
CArsnnNAsini, and CAsacritsna; and the Yéga of Pa-
tanjali, which consequently is an anterior work ; as indeed
it must be, if its scholiast, as generally acknowledged, be
the same VyAsa who is the author of the aphorisms of the
Uttara-mimansa.

The Sértraca is also posterior to the atheistical Séechine
of Capixa, to whom, or at least to his doctrine, there are
many marked allusions in the text.


* See p. 296, of this volume.


VEDANTA. 329


The atomic system of CaNApe (or, as the scholiast of
the Sartraca, in more than one place, contumeliously de-
signates him, CaN a-Buvus or CANABHACSHA) is frequently
adyerted to for the purpose of confutation ; as are the most
noted heretical systems, viz. the several sects of Jainas,
the Bauddhas, the Pasupatas with other classes of Méhés-
waras, the Pancharatras or Bhagavatas, and divers other
schismatics.

From this, which is also supported by other reasons,
there seems to be good ground for considering the Saréraca
to be the latest of the six grand systems of doctrine (dar-
$ana) in Indian philosophy: later, likewise, than the heresies
which sprang up among the Hindus of the military and
mercantile tribes (cshatriya and vaisya) and which, disclaim-
ing the Védas, set up a Jina or a Buddha for an object
of worship; and later even than some, which, acknowledg-
ing the Védas, have deviated into heterodoxy in their inter-
pretation of the text.

In a separate essay,* I have endeavoured to give some
account of the heretical and heterodox sects which the
Sértraca confutes: and of which the tenets are explained,
for the elucidation of that confutation, in its numerous
commentaries. I allude particularly to the Jainas, Baud-
has, Charvacas, Pésupatas, and Pancharatras.

The s&tras of BADARAYANA are arranged in four books
or lectures (adhyaya), each subdivided into four chapters
or quarters (pada). Like the aphorisms of the prior M?-
mansa, they are distributed very unequally into sections,
arguments, cases, or topics (adhicarana). The entire num-
ber of sé&tras is 555; of adhicaranas 191. But in this
there is a little uncertainty, for it appears from Sancara,
that earlier commentaries subdivided some adhicaranas,
where he writes the aphorisms in one section.


* See p. 382, of this volume,


330. ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


An adhicarana in the later, as in the prior Mf
consists of five members or parts: Ist, the subjec'
matter to be explained ; 2d, the doubt or question
ing it; 3d. the plausible solution or primd facie arg
4th, the answer, or demonstrated conclusion and tri
lution ; 5th, the pertinence or relevancy and connexion,

But in BApArAyaNa’s aphorisms, as in honnid of
Jaimin1, no adhicarana is fully set forth. Very frequently
the solution only is given by a single sé#tra, which o el
hints the question, and makes no allusion to any di Y
plausible solution, nor to arguments in favour of it. More
rarely the opposed solution is examined at some length, and
arguments in support of it are discussed through a string of ae
brief sentences. sy

Being a sequel of the prior Miménsé, the latter adopts
the same distinctions of six sources of knowledge or modes
of proof* which are taught by Jarm1n1, supplied where he
is deficient by the old scholiast. There is, indeed, no direct
mention of them in the Brahme-sitras, beyond a frequent
reference to oral proof, meaning revelation, which is sixth
among those modes. But the commentators make ample
use of a logic which employs the same terms with that of
the Pérva-mimansé, being founded on it, though not with-
out amendments on some points. Among the rest, the
Védantins have taken the syllogism (nyaya) of the dialectic
philosophy, with the obvious improvement of reducing its
five members to three.+ ‘It consists,” as expressly de~ i
clared, “‘ of three, not of five parts; for as the requisites of
“ the inference are exhibited by three members, two more
“are superfluous, They are either the proposition, the
“ reason, and the example ; or the instance, the applica
“ cation, and the conclusion.”


In this state it is a perfectly regular syllogism, as I had


* Védanta paribhasha. + Védénta paribhdsha.


VEDANTA. 331


occasion to remark in a former essay :* and it naturally be-
comes a question, whether the emendation was borrowed
from the Greeks, or being sufficiently obvious, may be
deemed purely Indian, fallen upon without hint or as-
sistance from another quarter. The improvement does not
appear to be of ancient date, a circumstance which favours
the supposition of its having been borrowed. The earliest
works in which I have found it mentioned are of no an-
tiquity.+

The logic of the two Mimansas merits a more full exami-
nation than the limits of the present essay allow, and it has
been reserved for a separate consideration at a future oppor-
tunity, because it has been refined and brought into a regu-
lar form by the followers, rather than by the founders of
either school.

The Sértraca-s&tras are in the highest degree obscure,
and could never have been intelligible without an ample
interpretation. Hinting the question or its solution, rather
than proposing the one or briefly delivering the other,
they but allude to the subject. Like the aphorisms of
other Indian sciences, they must from the first have been
accompanied by the author’s exposition of the meaning,
whether orally taught by him or communicated in writing.

Among ancient scholiasts of the Brahme-sitras the name
of BaupHAYANA occurs: an appellation to which rever-
ence, as to that ofa saint or rishi, attaches. He is likewise
the reputed author of a treatise on law. An early gloss,
under the designation of vritti, is quoted without its
author’s name, and is understood to be adverted to in the
remarks of later writers, in several instances, where no
particular reference is however expressed. It is apparently


* See p. 292, of this volume.
+ In the Védénta paribhaisha and Padartha dipica.


332 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


BavupuAyana’s. An ancient writer on both méimansas
(prior and later) is cited, under the name of Upav
with the epithet of venerable (bhagavat),* implying
he was a holy personage. He is noticed in the suppler
to the Amera-césha+ as a saint (muni), with the titles
additions of Hala-bhriti, Crita-céti, and Aydchita.
does not appear that any of his works are now forthcoming.
The most distinguished scholiast of these sitras, in
modem estimation, is the celebrated Sancara AcuAnva,
the founder of a sect among Hindus which is yet one of the
most prevalent. I have had a former occasion of «
ing the antiquity of this eminent person ; and the waljebe :
has been since examined by RAMA MOHEN RAya and by “,
Mr. Wilson.{ I continue of opinion, that the period when _
he flourished may be taken to have been the close of the —
eighth or beginning of the ninth century of the Christian —
era ; and I am confirmed in it by the concurring a —
of those very learned persons.
How much earlier the older scholia were, or the : text
itself, there is no evidence to determine. If the reputed
author be the true one, it would be necessary to go back
nearly two thousand years, to the era of the bien =
of the Védas by VyAsa. 5
Sancana’s gloss or perpetual commentary of the wees
bears the title of Sartraca-mimansa-bhashya. It has been
annotated and interpreted by a herd of commentators ;
and among others, and most noted, by VACHESPATI
migra, in the Bhamati or Sartraca-bhashya-vibhaga.
This is the same VAcuEsPaATI, whose commentaries on
the Sanc’hya-carica of [SwaRaA CHANDRA, and on the
text and gloss of Paransaxi’s Yoga and G6TAMA’s
Nydaya, were noticed in former essays. || He is the author


* Sano. 3.3. 53. + Tricahda Sésha.
{ Sanscrit Dict., first edit., pref. p. xvi.
|| See pp. 233, 235, 262, of this volume.


VEDANTA. 333


of other treatises on dialectics (yaya), and of one entitled
Tatwa-vindu on the Pérva-mimansé, as it is expounded
by Buatta. All his works, in every department, are held
in high and deserved estimation.

VAcuEspati’s exposition of Sancara’s gloss, again,
has been amply annotated and explained in the Védanta-
calpataru of ANALANANDA, surnamed Vyésasrama ;
whose notes, in their turn, become the text for other
scholia: especially a voluminous collection under the title
of Parimala, or Védanta-calpataru-parimala, by APYAYA- |
picsHiTa (author of several other works) ; and an abridged
one, under that of Védanta-calpataru-manjart, by VipyA-
NATHA BHATTA.

Other commentaries on Sancara’s gloss are numerous
and esteemed, though not burdened with so long a chain
of scholia upon scholia: for instance, the Brahma-vidya-
bharana by ApwaiTANANDA,* and the Bhashya-ratna-
prabha by GovinpANANDA: both works of acknowledged
merit.

These multiplied expositions of the text and of the gloss
furnish an inexhaustible fund of controversial disquisition,
suited to the disputatious schoolmen of India. On many


* It is by Mr. Ward named Védénta sttra vyac’hyd by Brauma-
vipyABHARANA, mistaking the title of the work for the appellation
of the author. Yet it is expressly affirmed in the rubric and colophon
to be the work of ApwarrinanpA, who abridged it from an ampler
commentary by RiminanpA Tirt’Ha. The mistake is the more re-
markable, as the same ApwAlTANANDA was preceptor of SADANAN-
DA, whose work, the Védénta-séra, Mr. Ward attempted to translate ;
and the only part of San{nanpa’s preface, which is preserved in the
version, is that preceptor’s name. Mr. Ward’s catalogue of treatises
extant belonging to this school of philosophy exhibits other like errors.
He puts Madhava for Madhustidana,the name of an author; converts
a commentary (the Muctavali) into an abridgment; and turns the
text (mila) of the Védanta-sdra into its essence. Ward’s Hindus, vol.
iv. pp. 172, 173.


334 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,
,


occasions, however, they are usefully consulted, in su
sion, for annotations supplying a right interpretation of
scure passages in Sancara’s scholia or in Velie
Another perpetual commentary on the sétrasof the Sarére
ca by a distinguished author, is the work of the celebr:
RAmAnvjJA, the founder of a sect which has sprung”
schism out of the Védantin. The points of doctrine; 08. a
which these great authorities differ, will be inquired in
another place. It may be readily supposed that
not unfrequently at variance in the interpretation of the tex
and I shall, therefore, make little use of the scholiz \
RAmAnvsa for the present essay. For the same reason;
I make no reference to the commentaries of Bauanna
AcnArya, Buatta BuAscara, ANANTA TIRT’HA sure a
named Manuv, and NiracaNi’Ha, whose interpretations
differ essentially on some points from Sancara’s. | »
Commentaries on the Sériraca-stitras by authors of less
note are extremely numerous. I shall content myself a
naming such only as are immediately under view, viz. the
Védanta-sitra-muctavali by BRAHMANANDA-SARASWA-
ti;* the Brahma-sitra-bhashya or Miménsi-bhishya, 2
by BuAscarAcnArya; the Védanta-siitra-vyac hya~ .
chandrica, by Buavapéva Misra ; the Vydsa-stitra-vritti,
by RancanAt’n ; the Subddhint or Sartra-sktra-sdrért ha-
chandrica, by GANGADHARA; and the Brahmamrita-ver-
shini, by RAMANANDA. ;
This list might with ease be greatly enlarged. Two of
the commentaries, which have been consulted in progress
of preparing the present essay, are without the author's
name, either in preface or colophon, in the only copies —
which I have seen ; and occasions have oceurred for noticing
authors of commentaries on other branches of philosophy, as


|
*


ad
-~


* Mr. Ward calls this an abridgment of the /édénta-sttras. It
is no abridgment, but a commentary in ordinary form.


VEDANTA, 335


well as on the Brahma-mimansa (for instance, ViJNYANA
BHICcSHU, author of the Sanc’hya-sara and Yéga-vartica).*

To these many and various commentaries in prose, on the
text and on the scholia, must be added more than one in
verse. For instance, the Sancshépa-sartraca, which is a
metrical paraphrase of text and gloss, by SanvAJNYATMA-
GIRI a sannydsi: it is expounded bya commentary entitled
Anwayért ha-pracasica, by RAma Tirt’na, disciple of
CrisaNa Tirt’HA, and author of several other works ; in
particular, a commentary on the Upadésa-sahasri, and one
on the Védénta-sara.

Besides his great work, the interpretation of the séras,
Sancara wrote commentaries on all the principal or im-
portant Upanishads. His preceptor, G6vinpa, and the
preceptor’s teacher, GaubarApa, had already written com-
mentaries on many of them.

Sancarais author, likewise, of several distinct treatises ;
the most noted of which is the Upadésa-sahasri, a metrical
summary of the doctrine deduced by him from the Upani-
shads and Brahma-sitras, in his commentaries on those
original works. The text of the UpadéSa-sahasri has been
expounded by more than one commentator; and among
others by RAma Tirt’sA, already noticed for his comment
on the Sancshépa-Sartraca. His gloss of the Upadésa-sa-
hasri is entitled Pada-ydjanica.

Elementary treatises on the Védanta are very abundant,
It may suffice to notice a few which are popular and in
general use, and which have been consulted in the prepara-
tion of the present essay.

The Védanta-paribhasha of DHarMA-RAJA DicsHITA
explains, as its title indicates, the technical terms of the
Védanta; and, in course of doing so, opens most of the


* See p. 231, 235, of this volume.


336 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


principal points of its doctrine. A commentary on this
work by the author’s son, RAMA-crisHNA DicsHITA, bears
the title of Védanta-sic’hamani. Taken together, they form
an useful introduction to the study of this branch of Indian
philosophy. ; :

The Védanta-sara is a popular compendium of the entire’
doctrine of the Védanta.* It is the work of SapDANANDA,
disciple of ApwayANANDA or ApwarrANanpa before-
mentioned, and has become the text for several commen-
taries ; and, among the rest, the Vidwan-mand-ranjint, by


* Mr. Ward has given, in the fourth volume of his View of the
History, Literature, and Mythology of the Hindus (third edition) a
translation of the Védanta-sdra. 1 wish to speak as gently as I can
of Mr. Ward’s performance; but having collated this, I am bound to
say it is no version of the original text, and seems to have been made
from an oral exposition through the medium of a different language,
probably the Bengalese. This will be evident to the oriental scholar
on the slightest comparison: for example, the introduction, which
does not correspond with the original in so much as a single word,
the name of the author’s preceptor alone excepted; nor is there a
word of the translated introduction countenanced by any of the com-
mentaries. At the commencement of the treatise, too, where the
requisite qualifications of a student are enumerated, Mr. Ward makes
his author say, that a person possessing those qualifications is heir to
the Véda (p. 176). There is no term in the text, nor in the commen-
taries, which could suggest the notion of heir; unless Mr. Ward has
so translated adhicaré (a competent or qualified person), which in
Bengalese signifies proprietor, or, with the epithet uétara (uttara-
dhicért) heir or successor. It would be needless to pursue the compa-
rison further. The meaning of the original is certainly not to be
gathered from such translations of this and (as Mr. Ward terms them)
of other principal works of the Hindus, which he has presented to the
public. ,

I was not aware, when preparing the former essays on the Philoso-
phy of the Hindus which have been inserted in the first volume of
the Transactions of Royal Asiatic Society, that Mr. Ward had treated
the same topics: but I think it now unnecessary to revert to the sub-
ject, for the purpose of offering any remarks on his explanation of other
branches of Indian philosophy.


VEDANTA, 337


RAma-tirt’na, who has been already twice noticed for
other works; and the Subédhini, by Nristnna saras-
wari, disciple of CrisHNANANDA,

A few other treatises may be here briefly noticed.

The Sastra-siddhanta-lésa-sangraha, by Apyaya or
(Apyal) picsuiTa, sonof RaNGANAT’HA or RANGARAJA
Dicsaira, and author of the Parimala on the Siddhanta
calpataru, before-mentioned, as well as of other works,
has the benefit of a commentary, entitled Crishialancara,
by Acuyura CrisHNANANDA Tirt’HA, disciple of Swa-
YAM-PRACASANANDA SARASWATI. The Véddanta-sid-
dhanta-vindu, by Mavuustpana, disciple of VigwhSwa-
RANANDA SARASWATI, and author of the Védanta-calpa-
latica, and of other works, is in like manner commented on
by BrauMANanpa, disciple of NARAYANA TIRT’HA.


Analysis.*


The Uttara-mimansa opens precisely as the Parva, an
nouncing the purport in the same terms, except a single,
but most important word, brahme instead of dharma.
‘ Next, therefore, the inquiry is concerning Gop.’+ It pro-
ceeds thus: ‘ [He is that] whence are the birth and [conti-
* nuance, and dissolution] of [this world]: [He is] the source
“ of [revelation or] holy ordinance.’{ Thatis, as the com-
mentators infer from these aphorisms so expounded, ‘ He
“is the omnipotent creator of the world and the omniscient
“ author of revelation.’ It goes on to say, ‘ This appears
‘ from the import and right construction of holy writ.’§


* In this analysis of the sétras, a portion of the scholia or expla-
nations of commentators is blended with the text, for a brief abstract
and intelligible summary of the doctrine.

+ Br. Sétr.1.1.§ 1. t Ib.§2and3. § Ib. § 4,

VOL. I. Z


338 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


The author of the sétras next* enters upon a confutation
of the Sane’hyas, who insist that nature, termed prad’ hana,
which is the material cause of the universe, as they affirm,
is the same with the omniscient and omnipotent cause of
the world recognised by the Védas. It is not so; for ‘ wish’
(consequently volition) is attributed to that cause, which
moreover is termed (4¢man) soul: ‘ He wished to be many
“ and prolific, and became manifold.’ And again,‘ He de-
‘ sired to be many, &c....... 4+ Therefore he is a sentient
rational being; not insensible, as the pracriti (nature) or
pradhana (matter) of Carita is affirmed to be.

In the sequel of the first chapter questions are raised
upon divers passages of the Védas, alluded to in the text,
and quoted in the scholia, where minor attributes are
seemingly assigned to the world’s cause ; or in which subor-
dinate designations occur, such as might be supposed to
indicate an inferior being, but are shown to intend the
supreme one.

The cases (adhicaravas) or questions arising on them
are examined and resolved concisely and obscurely in the
sutras, fully and perspicuously in the scholia.

‘ The omnipotent, omniscient, sentient cause of the uni-
“verse, is (4nandamaya) essentially happy.§ He is the
‘ brilliant, golden person, seen within (antar) the solar orb
“and the human eye.||_ He is the etherial element (G@céSa),
* from which all things proceed and to which all return. He
“is the breath (prana) in which all beings merge, into which
* they all rise.** He is the light (jyétish) which shines in
“heaven, and in all places high and low, every where
S throughout the world, and within the human. person. He
‘is the breath (prana) and intelligent self, immortal, unde-


* Br. Sitr.§5. (sttr. 5.11.) + Ch’handogya, 6. t§6to§1l.
§ Taittiriya. || CW’handigya, 1. % Ch’handogya, 1. ** Udgitha.


VEDANTA. 339


“ caying, and happy, with which INpra, in a dialogue with
“Pratarpana, identifies himself.*

The term prana, his HA: Wn natioct «bf ‘two “Gf ine
sections just quoted (§ 9 and 11), properly and primarily
signifies respiration, as well as certain other vital actions
(inspiration, energy, expiration, digestion, or circulation of
nourishment) ; and secondarily, the senses and organs.
But, in the passages here referred to, it is employed for a
different signification, intending the supreme Brahie ; as
also in divers other texts of the Védas: and, among the
rest, in one where the senses are said to be absorbed into
it during profound sleep ; for ‘ while a man sleeps without
“ dreaming, his soul is with Brahme.’

Further cases of the like nature, but in which the indi-
cations of the true meaning appear less evident, are dis-
cussed at length in the second and third chapters of the
first book. Those in which the distinctive attributes of the
supreme being are more positively indicated by the passage
whereon a question arises, had been considered in the fore-
going chapter: they are not so clearly denoted in the pas-
sages now examined. Such as concern Gop as the object
of devout meditation and worship, are for the most part
collected in the second chapter; those which relate to
Gop as the object of knowledge, are reserved for the third.
Throughout these cases, completed where requisite by the
scholiast, divers interpretations of a particular term or
phrase are first proposed, as obvious and plausible, and
reasons favourable to the proposed explanation set forth ;


. but are set aside by stronger arguments, for a different and


opposite construction. The reasoning is here omitted, as
it would need much elucidation; and the purpose of this


* Caushitact. + Br. Stir. 2. 4.§1, 6. (S. 1, 13.)
t Sanc. &e, on Br. Sitr. 1.1.89.
Zs


340 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


analysis is to exhibit the topics treated, and but summarily
the manner of handling them.
It is not the embodied (S@rira) and individual soul, but


the supreme Brahme himself,* on whom devout meditation —


is to be fixed, as enjoined in a passage which declares :
‘ this universe is indeed Brahme ;* for it springs from him,
“merges in him, breathes in him: therefore, serene, wor-
‘ship him. Verily, a devout man, as are his thoughts or
“ deeds in this world, such does he become departing hence
“fin another birth]. Frame then the devout meditation,
‘ “a living body endued with mind...... 7

It is neither fire nor the individual soul, but the supreme
being, who is the ‘ devourer’ (attr?) described in the dia-
logue between Yama and Nicnicfras :{ ‘ who, then,


“knows where abides that being, whose food is the priest


‘ and the soldier (and all which is fixt or moveable), and
‘ death is his sauce ?”

In the following passage, the supreme spirit, and not
the intellectual faculty, is associated with the individual
living soul, as “ two occupying the cavity or ventricle of
the heart” (guham pravishtau dtmanau). ‘ Theologists,


* as well as worshippers maintaining sacred fires, term light


‘and shade the contrasted two, who abide in the most

“excellent abode, worthy of the supreme, occupying the

4 waerity (of the heart), dwelling together in the worldly
* body, and tasting the certain fruit of good (or of evil)
* works.’§


* Brahman is, in this acceptation, a neuter noun (nom. Brahme or
Brahma); and the same term in the masculine (nom. Brahma), is one
of the three gods who constitute one person. But it is more conformable
with our idiom to employ the masculine exclusively, and many San-
scrit terms of the same import are masculine ; as Paramétman(-tmd),
Paraméswara, &c.

+ CWhandogya, 3. Sahdilya-vidyé. Br. Sétr.1. 2. §1, (8.1, 8.)

$ Cathavalli, 2, Br. Str. 1. 2.§ 2.(S. 9, 10).

§ Cathavalli, 3, Br. S. 1.2.§3. (S. 11, 12.)


VEDANTA. 341


In the following extract from a dialogue,* in which
SaryacAma instructs Urac6Saxa, the supreme being is
meant ; not the reflected image in the eye, nor the inform-
ing deity of that organ, nor the regent of the sun, nor
the individual intelligent soul. ‘ This being, who is seen
‘in the eye, is the self (@tman): He is immortal, fearless
* Brahme. Though liquid grease, or water, be dropped there-
“in, it passes to the corners (leaving the eye-ball undefiled).’

So, in a dialogue, in which YAJNYAWALCYA inetracts \
UppAxaca,} “ the internal check” (antarydémin) is the
supreme being ; and not the individual soul, nor the ma-
terial cause of the world, nor a subordinate deity, the con-
scious informing regent of the earth, nor a saint possessing
transcendent power: where premising, ‘he who eternally
“restrains (or governs) this and the other world, and all
“ beings therein,’ the instructor goes on to say: ‘ who stand-
“ing in the earth is other than the earth, whom the earth
* knows not, whose body the earth is, who interiorly restrains
“(and governs) the earth: the same is thy soul (and mine),
* the “ internal check” (antaryamin), immortal, &c.’

Again, in another dialogue, ANGrras, in answer “ei
MaunAéAta, who with Saunaca visited him for instruc-
tion, declares ‘ there are two sciences, one termed inferior,
* the other superior. The inferior comprises the four Védas,
“with their appendages, grammar, &c.’ (all of which he
enumerates): ‘ but the superior (or best and most beneficial)
“is that by which the unalterable (being) is comprehended,
“who is invisible (imperceptible by organs of sense), un-
“ grasped (not prehensible by organs of action), come of no
“ race, belonging to no tribe, devoid of eye, ear (or other


* Ch’ handogya, 4. Upacosala-vidya. Br. Sétr. 1. 2.§ 4. (8. 13, 17.)

+ Vrithad drahyaca, 5. Br. Str. 1. 2. § 5. (S. 18, 20.)

t Muhdaca, an Upanishad of the Atharvana. Br. Sitr. 1, 2. §6.
(S. 21, 23.)


342 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


‘ sensitive organ), destitute of hand, foot (or other instrument

of action), everlasting lord, present every where, yet most

‘ minute, Him, invariable, the wise contemplate as the

* source (or cause) of beings, As the spider puts forth and
* draws in his thread, as plants spring from the earth (and
‘ return to it), as hair of the head and body grows from the
2 living man, so does the universe come of the unalterable —
4 ee ? Here it is the supreme being, not nature or a
material cause, nor an embodied individual soul, who is
the invisible (adrésya) ungrasped source of (all) beings
(bhicta-yéni).

In a dialogue between several interlocutors, Pricninar
8ALa, UppAxaca, and ASwapati, king of the Caicéyis,
(of which a version at length was inserted in an essay on the
Védas,* the terms vaiswanara and atman occur (there trans-

dated universal soul), The ordinary acceptation of vaiswa-

nara is fire: and it is therefore questioned, whether the ele-
ment of fire be not here meant, or the regent of fire, that is,
the conscious, informing deity of it, or a particular deity de=
scribed as having an igneous body, or animal heat designated
as alvine fire ; and whether likewise 4¢man intends the living,
indiyidual soul, or the supreme being. The answer is, that
the junction of both general terms limits the sense, and re-
stricts the purport of the passage to the single object to
which both terms are applicable: it relates, then, to the
supreme being.+

Under this section the author twice cites JAImIni =}
once for obviating any difficulty or apparent contradiction
in this place, by taking the term in its literal and etymologi-
eal sense (universal guide of men), instead of the particular
acceptation of fire; and again, as justifying, by a parallel
passage in another Véda,§ an epithet intimating the minute


* See p.84, ofthis volume. + Ch’handogya,5. Br. Sitr.1.2.§7.(8.24,32.)
¢ Ib. S. 28 and 31. § Vajasanéyi brahmana.


VEDANTA. . 843


size of the being in question (pradésa-matra), a span long.*
On this last point other ancient authors are likewise cited :
one, ASMARAT’HYA, who explains it as the result of shrink-
ing or condensation ; the other, BApari, as a fruit of
imagination or mental conception.} Reference is also made to
another Sac’ha of the Véda,t where the infinite, supreme soul
is said to occupy the spot between the eye-brows and nose.

“ That on which heaven and earth and the intermediate
“ transpicuous region are fixt, mind, with the vital airs (or
“ sensitive organs), know to be the one soul (a¢man) : reject
‘ other doctrines. This alone is the bridge of immortality.’ §
In this passage of an Upanishad of the Atharvata,
Braume is intended, and not any other supposed site
(ayatana) of heaven, earth, &e,

Ina dialogue between NArepAand SanatrcumAra, the |
(bhiman) ‘ great’ one, proposed as an object of inquiry for
him who desires unlimited happiness, since there is no bliss
in that which is finite and small, is briefly defined. ‘ He is
‘ great, in whom nought else is seen, heard, or known, but
“that wherein ought else is seen, heard, or known, is
‘small.’| Here the supreme being is meant ; not breath
(prana), which had been previously mentioned as greatest,
in a climax of enumerated objects. <

So, in a dialogue between YAsNyAwatcya and his wife
GArci,§| being asked by her, ‘ the heaven above, and the
‘ earth beneath, and the transpicuous region between, and all
“ which has been, is, and will be, whereon are they woven and
‘ sewn?’ answers, the ether (4césa); and being further asked,


* By an oversight, the expression relative to diminutive dimension
was omitted in the translated passage.


+ Br. Sttr. 1. 2. 29.30. t Jabdla.

§ Muhdaca. Br. Sitr.1. 3.81. (8.1, 7.)

\| Ch’ hdndogya, 7. Bhimavidyé. Br. Sitr. 1. 3, § 2. (8.8, 9.)
| Vrihad arany. 5. Br. Sétr. 1.3. §3. (8.10, 12.)


344. ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


what it is on which ether is woven or sewn? replie:
“ unvaried being, whom Bréhmanas affirm to
* coarse nor subtile, neither short nor long.......”
‘supreme being who is here meant. x
The mystic syllable 6m, composed of three ele
articulation, is a subject of devout meditation ;—
efficacy of that meditation depends on the limited «
tended sense in which it is contemplated. The q'
‘concerning this mode of worship is discussed in a dialogu
between PipratApA and SatyacAma.*
If the devotion be restricted to the sense inated by
one element, the effect passes not beyond this world ;
that indicated by two of the elements, it extends to the
lunar orb, whence however the soul returns to a new 7
if it be more comprehensive, embracing the import of tl a
three elements of the word, the ascent is to the solar |
whence, stripped of sin, and liberated as a snake which has — 4
cast its slough, the soul proceeds to the abode of Brahme, Ee
and to the contemplation of (purusha) him who resides in "
a corporeal frame: that is, soul reposing in body (puri-
Saya). wes.
That mystic name, then, is applied either to the supreme _
Brahme, uniform, with no quality or distinction of parts;
or to Brahme, not supreme, but an effect (carya) diver-
sified, qualified ; who is the same with the Vir4y and
HiraXya-carsua of mythology, born in the mundaneegg.
It appears from the latter part of the text, that it is the
supreme Brahme to whom meditation is to be directed,
and on whom the thoughts are to be fixed, for that Los
result of liberation from sin and worldly trammels. “¢
In a passage descriptive of the lesser ventricle of the _
heart, it is said : ‘ within this body (Brahme-pura) Brahme’s


* Prasna, an Upanishad of the Avharvaha. Br. Sttr. 1.3. § 4.
(8. 13.)


VEDANTA. 345


“ abode, is a (dahara) little lotus, a dwelling within which is )
“a (dahara) small vacuity occupied by ether (acasa). What
“that is which is within (the heart's ventricle) is to be
‘inquired, and should be known.’* A question is here
raised, whether that ‘ ether’ (@4ca@Sa) within the ventricle of
the heart be the etherial element, or the individual sensitive
soul, or the supreme one; and it is pronounced from the
context, that the supreme being is here meant.

‘The sun shines not therein, nor the moon, nor stars:

“ much less this fire. All shines after his effulgence (reflect-
“ing his light), by whose splendour this whole (world) is
“illumined.’+ In this passage it is no particular luminary or
mine of light, but the (prajnya) intelligent soul (supreme
Brahme) which shines with no borrowed light.

In the dialogue between Yama and Nacuicéras, before
cited, are the following passages.t ‘A person (purusha) \
“ no bigger than the thumb abides in the midst of self ;’ and
again, ‘ the person no bigger than the thumb is clear as a
“ smokeless flame, lord of the past (present) and future ; he
“is to-day and will be to-morrow: such is he (concerning
‘ whom you inquire).’ This is evidently said of the supreme
ruler, not of the individual living soul.

Another passage of the same Upanishad§ declares:
“this whole universe, issuing from breath (praia), moves
“as it impels: great, terrible, as a clap of thunder. They,
“ who know it, become immortal.’ Brahme, not the thun-
derbolt nor wind, is here meant.

* The living soul (samprasada) rising from this corporeal P|
‘ frame, attains the supreme light, and comes forth with his


* Ch’ handogya, 8. Dahara-vidyé. Br. Sitr. 1. 3. § 5, (8.14, 21.)
+ Muhdaca, Br. Sitr. 1. 3. § 6. (8. 22, 23.)

t Catha. 4. Br. Sir. 1. 3. §7. (S. 24, 25.)

§ Cét’ha. 6. Br. Satr. 1, 3. § 10, (S 39.)


346 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. >


‘identical form.’* It is neither the light of the sun, nor the
visual organ, but Brahme, that is here meant. ry

“ Ether (aeasa) is the bearer (cause of bearing) of name
“and form. That in the midst of which they both are, is.
‘ Brahme: it is immortality; it is soul,’+ Acisa
intends the supreme being, not the element so named. _

[ Ina dialogue between YAJNYAWALCYA and Janaca,t
in answer to an inquiry ‘ which is the soul?’ the intelligent
internal light within the heart is declared to be so. This
likewise is shown to relate to the supreme one, unaffected
by worldly course.

It had been intimated in an early aphorism of the first
chapter, that the Védas, being rightly interpreted, do concur
in the same import, as there expressed concerning the
omnipotent and omniscient creator of the universe.§ An
objection to this conclusion is raised, upon the ground of
discrepancy remarked in various texts of the Védas,|| which
coincide, indeed, in ascribing the creation to Brahme, but
differ in the order and particulars of the world’s develop-
ment. The apparent contradiction is reconciled, as they
agree on the essential points of the creator’s attributes ;
omnipotent and omniscient providence, lord of all, soul of
all, and without a second, &c.: and it was not the object
of the discrepant passages to declare the precise succession
and exact course of the world’s formation.

Two more sections are devoted to expound passages
which define Brahme as creator, and which are shown to
comport no other construction. In one, cited from a dia-
ne between AsATASATRU and BAtAci, surnamed


CW’ hindogya 8. Prajapati-vidya, Br. Sir. L. 3. § 11. (S. 40.)
+ Ib. ad finem, Br. Str. 1. 3. § 12. (S. 41.)
t Vrihad arahyaca, 6. Br. Sitr. 1. 3. § 13. (8. 42, 43.)
§ Br. S.1. 1. § 4. \I ature Taittiriya, and Aitareya.
§ Caushitact brahmana. Br. S. \. 4. § 5. (S. 16-18.)


VEDANTA. B47


Gareya, the object of meditation and worship is pro-
nounced to be, ‘ he who was the maker of those persons
* just before mentioned (regents of the sun, moon, &c.), and
* whose work this universe is,’

In the other, sited from 9 AAilagne between .Vihsarear \
wAtcya and Mairréyi,* soul, and all else which is desir-


able, are contrasted as mutual objects of affection: ‘ it is 4.


* for soul (4tman) that opulence, kindred, and all else which
“is dear, are so; and thereunto soul reciprocally is so; and
* such is the object which should be meditated, inquired, and
“known, and by knowledge of whom all becomes known,’
This, it is shown, is said of the supreme, not of the indivi-
dual soul, nor of the breath of life.

Under this last head several authorities are quoted by the
author, for different modes of interpretation and reasoning,
viz. ASMARAT’HYA, AuDULOMI and CaAsacrRiTsNa, as
Ja1Min1 under the next preceding (§ 5).

The succeeding section + affirms the important tenet of
the Védanta, that the supreme being is the material, as
well as the efficient, cause of the universe: it is a proposi-
tion directly resulting from the tenour of passages of the
Védas, and illustrations and examples adduced.

The first lecture is terminated by an aphorism, + intimat-
ing that, in the like manner as the opinion of a plastic
nature and material’ cause (termed by the Sane’hyas, pra-
dhana) has been shown to be unsupported by the text of the
Véda, and inconsistent with its undoubted doctrine, so, by
the like reasoning, the notion of atoms (aru or paramaiu)
and that of an universal void (S&nya), and other as un-
founded systems, are set aside in favour of the only con-
sistent position just now affirmed, (Br. Sétr, 1.1. §5
and 1. 4. §7.)


* Vrthad aranyaca, Maitréyi brahmana. Br. Sitr, 1. 4.§ 6. (S. 19-22,)
+ Br. Sttr. 1.4, §7. (S. 23-27.) t Ibid. § 8, (S. 28,)


A


O@Ae


Pak


te


fads


ie


348 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.
.


Not to interrupt the connexion of the subjects, |
purposely passed by a digression, or rather seve


three first tribes) is qualified for theological studies and
theognostic attainments ; and the solution of the doubt ii a
that a Sédra, or man of an inferior tribe, is incompetent + =
and that beings superior to man (the gods of mytholog y)
are qualified. be.

In the course of this disquisition the noted quai
the eternity of sound, of articulate sound in cle os
mooted and examined. It is a favourite topic in—
Miméansas, being intimately connected with that of
eternity of the Véda, or revelation acknowledged by them. wh

I shall not, however, enter into the matter further, in this ’
place, though much remain to be added to the little which
was said on it in a former essay.{

In the fourth chapter of the first lecture, the author “g
returns to the task of confuting the Sanc’hya doctrine ; and
some passages of the Védas, apparently diene that doc-
es are differently interpreted by him: ‘ the indistinct

“ one (avyacta) is superior to the great one (mahat), and

“embodied soul (purusha) is superior to the indistinct.’§
Here the very same terms, which the Sénc’hyas employ =
for ‘ intelligence, nature, and soul,’ are contrasted, with
allusion seemingly to the technical acceptations of them. :
This passage is, however, explained away; and the terms
are taken by the Védantins in a different sense.

The next instance is less striking and may be briefly
dismissed, as may that following it: one relative to aja,
alleged to signify in the passage in question|| the unborn


* Br. Sitr. 1.3. § 8, 9. (S. 26-38.) + Br. Sttr. 1,3. (8. 28-29.)
t See p.305, of this volume. § Cat’ha, 3. Br. Str. 1, 4. § 1. (8. 1-7.)
\| SwéetdSwatara. B.S, 1, 4. § 2 (8. 8-10.) ;


VEDANTA. 349


sempiternal nature (pracriti), but explained to intend a
luminous nature (pracriti) noticed in the Ch'handégya;
(there is in the text itself an evident allusion to the ordinary
acceptation of the word, a she-goat): the other concerning
the meaning of the words pancha-panchajanah, in a pas-
sage of the Vrihad dravyaca,* which a follower of the
Sdanc’hya would construe as bearing reference to five times
five (twenty-five) principles; but which clearly relates to
five objects specified in the context, and figuratively termed
persons (pancha-jana).

It is because the Sanc’hya doctrine is, in the apprehen-
sion of the Védantins themselves, to a certain degree plau-
sible, and seemingly countenanced by the text of the Védas,
that its refutation occupies so much of the attention of the
author and his scholiasts. More than one among the sages
of the law (Dévata in particular is named) have sanc-
tioned the principles of the Sane’hya; and they are not
uncountenanced by Menu.t+ Carita himself is spoken
of with the reverence due to a saint (Mahd-rishi) and
inspired sage; and his most eminent disciples, as Pan-
cHASic’HA, &e. are mentioned with like veneration; and
their works are dignified with the appellations of tantra
and smriti as holy writings, by the Védantins, at the same
time that these oppose and refute the doctrine taught by
him.

Capita, indeed, is named in the Véda itself as possess-
ing transcendent knowledge: but here it is remarked, that
the name has been borne by more than one sage; and in
particular by VAsupf&va, who slew the sons of Sacara.t
This mythological personage, it is contended, is the Carina
named in the Véda.


* Vrihad aran. 6. Br. S. 1. 4. § 3. (S. 11-13.)
+ Menv’s Institutes, ch. xii., v. 50.
t Sanc. on Br. Satr, 2.1, § 1. (8. 1-2.)


350 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


. The second lecture continues the refutation o
Séne’hya, which, it is observed, is at variance
smritis, as with the Védas: and here the stant (
is placed at the head of them, although the
which bear his name, will be found, as just now hir
as subsequently admitted in another section, to a
ing countenance to Sénc’hya doctrines. Such pi
however, explained away by the Védantins, wi
this instance, as they do in that of the Véda itself,
texts, which are not reconcileable to the Séne’hya.

The same argument is in the following section,* 2


reasoning, to CaNApr’s atomical scheme; and to « r
systems rehich admit two distinct causes (a material bs
efficient one) of the v universe.


to be supported, likewise, by reasoning independently 4
authority. ‘ The objection, that the cause and effect are ’
‘ dissimilar, is not a valid one: instances of such dissimi~
f a are frequent. Hair and nails, which are insensible,

‘ grow from a sensible animal body; and sentient vermin

‘ (scorpions, &c.) spring from inanimate sources (cow-dung,
“ &c.) The argument, too, might be retorted ; for, accord+ —

‘ing to the adverse position, sentient beings are produced
‘from an insensible plastic nature. On these and other
“arguments the orthodox doctrine is maintainable by rea+
* soning: and by like arguments opinions concerning atoms
‘ and an universal void, which are not received by the best
‘ persons, may be confuted.’t vy


* Br. Sitr, 2.1. § 2. (S. 3.) + Ibid. 2.1. §3. (8. 4.11)
t Ibid. § 4. (S. 12.)


VEDANTA. 351


* The distinction relative to fruition, discriminating one
‘ who enjoys and that which is enjoyed, does not invalidate
“the singleness and identity of Brahme as cause and
“ effect.* The sea is one and not other than its waters;
“ yet waves, foam, spray, drops, froth, and other modifica-
“ tions of it, differ from each other.’

“An effect is not other than its cause. Brahme is
“single without a second. He is not separate from the
‘ embodied self. He is soul; and the soul is he.+ Yet he
“does not do that only which is agreeable and beneficial
“toself. The same earth exhibits diamonds, rock crystals,
“red orpiment, &c.; the same soil produces a diversity of

" Plante; the same food is converted into various excres-
* cences, hair, nails, &c.
“As milk changes to curd, and water to ice, so is
* Brahme variously transformed and diversified, without aid
“ of tools or exterior means of any sort.{ In like manner,
“ the spider spins his web out of his own substance ; spirits
‘ assume various shapes; cranes (valécé) propagate without
“the male; and the lotus proceeds from pond to pond with-
‘out organs of motion. That Brahme is entire without
* parts, is no objection: he is not wholly transformed into
‘ worldly appearances. Various changes are presented to
“ the same dreaming soul. Divers illusory shapes and dis-
* guises are assumed by the same spirit.’§

‘ Brahme is omnipotent, able for every act, without
“ organ or instrument. || No motive or special purpose need
“be assigned for his creation of the universe, besides his
* will.’

“ Unfairness and uncompassionateness are not to be im-


* Br.Sttr, 2.1. § 5.(8.13.) t Ibid. § 6.(S.14-20.) and § 7.(S.21-23.)
t Ibid. § 8, (8. 24-25.) § Thid. § 9. (S. 26-29.)
|| Thid. § 10. (S, 30-31.) 7 Thid, § 11. (8. 32-33.)


352 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


* puted to him, because some (the gods) are happ
(beasts and inferior beings) are miserable, and ot
“ (men) partake of happiness and unhappiness.
“has his lot, in the renovated world, according toh


* varies according to the seed.”*
‘ Every attribute of a first cause (omniscience, on


The aia chapter of the second lecture is controv
The doctrine of the Sanc’hyas is confuted in the first section ;_
that of the Vaitéshicas i in two more; of the i ’


too great length. They have been partly noticed in a
rate treatise on the Philosophy of Indian Sects.t It
remarkable, that the Nyaya of Gérama is entirely u
noticed in the text and commentaries of the Védinta-siitras. “4 _
In the third chapter of the second lecture, the task of
reconciling seeming contradictions of passages in the ieee
is resumed.
“ The origin of air and the etherial element (@c@Sa), un ve
‘ noticed in the text of the Véda (Ch’handégya), where the 3
‘ creation of the three other elements is described, has been
_ affirmed i in another ( Taittirtyaca).§ The omission of the a.
* one is supplied by the notice in the other ; there is no con=_
‘ tradiction, as the deficient passage is not restrictive, nor
“ professes a complete enumeration, Ether and air are by


* Br. Sitr. 2.1. §12. (S. 34-36.) + Ibid. § 13. (S. 37.) —
t See p. 378, of this volume, § Ibid. 2. 3.§ 1 and 2. (S. l-7 and 8.)


.
-_


VEDANTA. y 353


“ Brahme created. But he himself has no origin, no pro-
“ creator nor maker, for he is eternal, without beginning as
“ without end.* So fire, and water, and earth, proceed medi-
“ ately from him, being evolved successively, the one from
“ the other, as fire from air, and this from ether.+ The ele-
“ ment of earth is meant in divers passages where food (that
“is, esculent vegetable) is said to proceed from water: for
rain fertilizes the earth. It is by his will, not by their own
“ act, that they are so evolved ; and conversely, they merge
* one into the other, in the reversed order, and are re-absorbed
“ at the general dissolution of worlds, previous to renovation
* of all things.’t

* Intellect, mind, and organs of sense and action, being
“composed of the primary elements, are evolved and re-
“ absorbed in no different order or succession, but in that of
“ the elements of which they consist.’ §

“ The same course, evolution and re-absorption, or ma-
“terial birth and death, cannot be affirmed of the soul.
* Birth and death are predicated of an individual, referring
‘ merely to his association with body, which is matter fixed
‘or moveable. Individual souls are, in the Véda, com-
* pared to sparks issuing from a blazing fire; but the soul
‘ is likewise declared expressly to be eternal and unborm.
“ Its emanation is no birth, nor original production.|| It
“is perpetually intelligent and constantly sensible, as the
; Sanc’hyas too maintain ; not adventitiously so, merely by
“association with mind and intellect, as the disciples of
“CaNApe insist. It is for want of sensible objects, not for
* want of sensibility or faculty of perception, that the soul
‘ feels not during profound sleep, fainting, or trance.


* Br. Sitr. 2. 3.§3. (8. 9.) t Ibid. § 4-6. (8. 10-12.)
t Ibid. § 7-8. (S. 13-14.) § Ibid. § 9. (S. 15)
|| Ibid. § 10-11. (S. 16-17.)

VOL. 1. 2A


354 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


‘ The soul is not of finite dimensions, as its transmigra-
“tions seemingly indicate; nor minutely small abiding
‘ within the heart, and no bigger than the hundredth part
“ of a hundredth of a hair’s point, as in some passages de-
“scribed ; but, on the contrary, being identified with
“supreme Brahme, it participates in his infinity.”*

“The soul is active; not as the Sénc’hyas maintain,
“merely passive.| Its activity, however, is not essential,
“but adventitious. As the carpenter, having his tools in
* hand, toils and suffers, and laying them aside, rests and is
“ easy, so the soul in conjunction with its instruments (the
“senses and organs) is active, and quitting them, reposes.{

* Blind in the darkness of ignorance, the soul is guided in
“its actions and fruition, in its attainment of knowledge,
“and consequent liberation and bliss, by the supreme ruler
“ of the universe,§ who causes it to act conformably with
“its previous resolves: now, according to its former pur-
“ poses, as then consonantly to its yet earlier predispositions,
“accruing from preceding forms with no retrospective limit ;
* for the world had no beginning. The supreme soul makes
“the individuals act relatively to their virtuous or vicious
‘ propensities, as the same fertilizing rain-cloud causes
‘ various seeds to sprout multifariously, producing diversity
‘ of plants according to their kind.

‘ The soul is a portion of the supreme ruler,|| as a spark
‘is of fire. The relation is not as that of master and ser-
* vant, ruler and ruled, but as that of whole and part. In
‘ more than one hymn and prayer of the Védas§] it is said,
‘ “ All beings constitute one quarter of him ; three quarters


* Br. Stir. 2.3. § 13, (S. 19-32.) + Ibid. § 14. (S. 33-39.)
t Ibid. § 15. (S. 40.) § Ibid. § 16. (S. 41-42.)
\| Ibid. § 17. (S. 43-53.)

9 Rigvida, 8.4.17. Yajurvéda (Vajasanéyi) 31. 3.


vipANTA. 355


‘ “ are imperishable in heaven :” and in the [wara-gité *


“ and other smritis, the soul, that animates body, is ex-
“ pressly affirmed to be a portion of him. He does not,
* however, partake of the pain and suffering of which the
individual soul is conscious, through sympathy, during its
“ association with body ; so solar or lunar light appears as
* that which it illumines, though distinct therefrom.

“As the sun’s image reflected in water is tremulous,
* quaking with the undulations of the pool, without however
‘ affecting other watery images nor the solar orb itself; so
* the sufferings of one individual affect not another, nor the
“supreme ruler. But, according to the doctrine of the Sén-
“ ¢’hyas, who maintain that souls are numerous, each of
“them infinite, and all affected by one plastic principle,
* nature (pradhana or pracriti), the pain or pleasure, which
“ is experienced by one, must be felt by all. The like con-
“sequence is objected to the doctrine of CaXApE, who
5 taught that souls, numerous and infinite, are of themselves
‘ insensible ; and mind, the soul’s instrument, is minute as an
“ atom, and by itself likewise unsentient. The union of one
* soul with a mind would not exclude its association with other
“ souls, equally infinite and ubiquitary ; and all, therefore,
‘ would partake of the same feeling of pain or pleasure.’

The fourth chapter of the second book proceeds in the
task of reconciling apparent contradictions of passages in
the Védas.+

‘ The corporeal organs of sense and of action, designated
“ by the term praa in a secondary acceptation (it is noticed
‘in its proper signification further on, § 4), have, like the
“elements and other objects treated of in the foregoing
“chapter, a similar origin, as modifications of Brakme ;


* Sancara cites by this name the Bhagavad gita.
+ Br. Str. 2. 4. §1. (8. 1-4.)
2a 2


356 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


* although unnoticed in some passages concerning the crea-
“ tion, and mentioned in others as pre-existent, but expressly
“ affirmed in others to be successively evolved.* The de-
ficiency or omission of one text does not invalidate the ex-
* plicit tenor of another.

“ In various passages, the number of corporeal organs is
‘ differently stated, from seven to thirteen. The precise
“ number is, however, eleven :} the five senses, sight, &c. 5
‘ five active organs, the hand, &c. ; and lastly, the internal
‘ faculty, mind, comprehending intelligence, consciousness,
“and sensation. Where a greater number is specified, the
“ term is employed in its most comprehensive sense ; where
‘ fewer are mentioned, it is used in a more restricted accep-
“tation: thus seven sensitive organs are spoken of, relatively
“to the eyes, ears, and nostrils (in pairs), and the tongue.
ys They are finite and small: not, however, minute as

* atoms, nor yet gross, as the coarser elements.

“In its primary or principal signification, prava is vital
“action, and chiefly respiration. This, too, is a modifica-
“tion of Brahme. It is not wind (vayu) or the air which
“is breathed, though so described in numerous passages of
“the Védas and other authorities ; nor is it an operation of
“a corporeal organ; but it is a particular vital act, and
“ comprehends five such: Ist, respiration, or an act operat-
‘ing upwards ; 2d, inspiration, one operating downwards ;
“3d, a vigorous action, which is a mean between the fore-
“going two; 4th, expiration, or passage upwards, as in
“ metempsychosis ; 5th, digestion, or circulation of nutri-
* ment throughout the corporeal frame.’ §

“ Here, too, it must be understood of a limited, not vast
* or infinite act, nor minutely small. The vital actis not so


* Br, Sitr.2. 4. §1, (8. 1-4.) + Ibid. § 2. (S. 5-6.)
} Ibid. § 3. (S. 7.) § Ibid. § 4.(S. 8.) § 5. (S. 9-12.) § 6. (S, 13.)


=


VEDANTA. 357


“ minute as not to pervade the entire frame, as in the in-
“ stance of circulation of nourishment ; yet is small enough
“ to be imperceptible to a bystander, in the instance of life’s
* passage in transmigration.

“ Respiration and the rest of the vital acts do not take
‘ effect of themselves by an_ intrinsic faculty, but as in-
* fluenced and directed by a presiding deity and ruling
* power, yet relatively to a particular body, to whose ani-
“mating spirit, and not to the presiding deity, fruition
* accrues.*

‘The senses and organs, eleven in number, as above
“ mentioned, are not modifications of the principal vital act,
* respiration, but distinct principles.+

‘ It is the supreme ruler, not the individual soul, who is
“ described in passages of the Védas as transforming him-
“self into divers combinations, assuming various names
“and shapes, deemed terrene, aqueous, or igneous, ac-
“cording to the predominancy of the one or the other
“element. When nourishment is received into the corpo-
“ real frame, it undergoes a threefold distribution, according
* to its fineness or coarseness: corn and other terrene food
“becomes flesh; but the coarser portion is ejected, and
“the finer nourishes the mental organ. Water is con-
“ verted into blood ; the coarser particles are rejected as
“urine; ‘the finer supports the breath. Oil or other com-
‘ bustible substance, deemed igneous, becomes marrow ;
“the coarser part is deposited as bone, and the finer sup-
‘ plies the faculty of speech.’t

The third lecture treats on the means whereby knowledge
is attainable, through which liberation and perpetual bliss
may be achieved: and, as preliminary thereto, on the pas-


* Br. Str. 2. 4.§7. (8. 14-16.) + Ibid. § & (S. 17-19.)
t Ibid. §9.(S. 20-22.)


358 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. —


sage of the soul furnished with organs into the ve
world and its various conditions; and on the 1
~ attributes of the supreme being. ra ay
“ The soul is subject to transmigration. It p
* one state to another, invested with a subtile frame
“ing of elementary particles, the seed or rudim
“grosser body. Departing from that which it oce
“ ascends to the moon; where, clothed with an aque:
* it experiences the recompense of its works; and w
“returns to occupy a new body with resulting influe
‘ its former deeds. But evil-doers suffer for their mis
“in the seven appointed regions of retribution*
“The returning soul quits its watery frame in the ‘.
‘orb, and passes successively and rapidly through et
“air, vapour, mist, and cloud, into rain; and thus
‘ its way into a vegetating plant, and thence, through
* medium of nourishment, into an animal embryo.
In the second chapter of this lecture the states or con:
ditions of the embodied soul are treated of. They
chiefly three ; waking, dreaming, and profound sleep
which may be added for a fourth, that of death ; and :
fifth, that of trance, swoon, or stupor, which is interme-
diate between profound sleep and death (as it were half. :
dead), as dreaming is between waking and profound sleep.
In that middle state of dreaming there is a fanciful course.
of events, an illusory creation, which however testifies the
existence of a conscious soul. In profound sleep the soul
has retired to the supreme one by the route of the arteries
of the pericardium.t dT
The remainder of this chapter is devoted to the rae ,


ped


* Br. Sttr.3. 1. §1-3.(S. 1-7 and 8-11 and 12-21.)
+ Ibid. §4-6. (S. 22-23 and 24-27.)
¢ Ibid. 3 2.§ 1-4. (S. 1-6, 7, 8, 9 and 10.)


VEDANTA. 359


ration of the nature and attributes of the supreme being.
“ He is described in many passages of the Véda, as diver-
“ sified and endued with every quality and particular cha-
“ racter ; but in other and very numerous texts, as without
“form or quality. The latter only is truly applicable, not
“the former, nor yet both. He is impassible, unaffected
‘ by worldly modifications ; as the clear crystal, seemingly
“ coloured by the red blossom of a hibiscus, is not the less
“really pellucid. He does not vary with every disguising
“form or designation, for all diversity is expressly denied
* by explicit texts; and the notion of variableness relative
“to him is distinctly condemned in some Séc’hds of the
“ Véda.*

“ He is neither coarse nor subtile, neither long nor short, |
* neither audible nor tangible ; amorphous, invariable.’

‘ This luminous immortal being, who is in this earth,
* is the same with the luminous, immortal, embodied spirit,
‘ which informs the corporeal self, and is the same with the
“[supreme] soul.’ ‘ He is to be apprehended by mind
‘alone, there is not here any multiplicity. Whosoever
‘ views him as manifold dies death after death.’+

“ He is amorphous, for so he is explicitly declared to be ;
“ but seemingly assuming form, as sunshine or moonlight,
“ impinging on an object, appears straight or crooked.’t

“ He is pronounced to be sheer sense, mere intellect and
“thought: as a lump of salt is wholly of an uniform taste
‘ within and without, so is the soul an entire mass of intel-
‘ligence.’ This is affirmed both in the Védas and in the
smritis: and, as such, he is compared to the reflected


* Br. Str. 3,2. § 5. (S. 11-13.)
+ Passages of the Véda cited among others by the scholiasts com-
menting on the above.


t Br. Sttr, 3. 2. (8. 14.)


—-


360 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


images of sun and moon, which fluctuate with the rise and
fall of the waters that reflect them.* ‘The luminous sun,
“ though single, yet reflected in water, becomes various ;
* and so-does the unborn divine soul by disguise in divers
* modes.’

The Véda so describes him, as entering into and pervad-
ing the corporeal shapes by himself wrought.+ ‘ He framed
“bodies, biped and quadruped ; and becoming a bird, he
“ passed into those bodies, filling them as their informing
* spirit.’

In the Vrihad aranyaca, after premising two modes of
Brahme, morphous and amorphous; one composed of
the three coarser elements, earth, water, and fire ; the other
consisting of the two more subtile, air and ether; it is
said, ‘ next then his name is propounded,’ “ neither so
La nor so; for there is none other but he, and he is the
“supreme.” Here the finite forms premised are denied ;
for his existence as the supreme being is repeatedly affirmed
in this and in other passages. {

“He is imperceptible ; yet during devout meditation is,
“as it were, apprehended by perception and inference,

‘ through revelation and authentic recollections.§

‘ Like the sun and other luminaries, seemingly multiplied
s by reflection though really single, and like ether (space)
“apparently subdivided in vessels containing it within
‘limits, the (supreme) light is without difference or dis-
“tinction of particulars, for he is repeatedly declared so
“to be.|| Therefore is one, who knows the truth, iden-
“ tified with the infinite being; for so revelation indi-
“cates. But since both are affirmed, the relation is as
“ that of the coiled serpent fancied to be a hoop; or as that


* Br Sutr.3.2. (8. 15-20.) + Ibid. S: 21.
¢ Ibid. § 6. (S. 22.) § Ibid, S. 23-24. . || Ibid. S. 25.


wr


vEDANTA. 361


“of light and the luminary from which it proceeds, for
* both are luminous. *

‘ There is none other but he, notwithstanding the appa-
“rent import of divers texts, which seem to imply differ-
“ ences, various relations, and aliquot parts. He is ubiqui-
“ tary and eternal; for he is pronounced to be greater than
‘ etherial space, which is infinite. +

“ The fruit or recompense of works is from him, for that
“is congruous; and so it is expressly affirmed in the Védas.
* Jaimin1 alleges virtue or moral merit; but the author of
‘ the sétras (BApARAYANA vyAsa) maintains the former,
“because the supreme being is in the Védas termed the
* cause of virtue and of vice, as of every thing else.’}

The two last chapters of the third lecture relate chiefly to
devout exercises and pious meditation, the practice of which
is inculeated as proper and requisite to prepare the soul
and mind for the reception of divine knowledge, and to
promote its attainment. I pass rapidly over this copious
part§ of the text, for the same reason for which I restricted
myself to a very brief notice of the Yéga or theistical
Sane’ hya of Paransaut; because religious observances are
more concerned than philosophy with the topics there
treated, and the ritual of the Yéga according to both
systems, Sanc’hya and Védénta, would be a fitter subject
of a separate treatise, rather than to be incidentally touched
on while investigating the philosophical doctrines of both »
schools.

Various questions arise on the modes, forms, and object
of meditation taught in the Upanishads and in other por-


* Br. Sitr. 3. 2. (S. 26-30.) + Ibid. §7. ; Ibid. §8.

§ The third chapter contains thirty-six sections, comprising sixty-
six aphorisms; the fourth includes eighteen, comprehending fifty-two
stitras; and the subject is pursued in the cight first sections of the
fourth lecture.


362 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. |
%


tions of the Védas, as well as on exterior observan
immediately or mediately connected therewith, and li
on the direct efficacy of knowledge, which are all «
and solved at much length. In general, but no
the same divine knowledge, the same. worship,
meditations, are intended by the same designation
ferent Védas, the omissions and obscurities of one |
supplied and explained by another, and even under va
designations, By the acquisition of such knowledge, a
able as it is in the present or in a future birth, in
or to take effect after death, the influence of wo
nulled, and consequent deliverance is single, not varyin,
degree and inducing different gradations of bliss, but co
plete and final happiness. nal tY,
The fourth lecture relates chiefly to the fruit and effec
pious meditation properly conducted, and the conseq
attainment of divine knowledge. The beginning of the f
chapter is, however, supplemental to the foregoing le
treating of devout exercises, and the posture (a sitting
in which devotion and contemplation should be practised, ¥
with constant repetition of those observances, and persisting
therein during life.* onMeE
So soon as that knowledge is attained, past sin is annulled
and future offence precluded.+ “ As water wets not the —
“leaf of the lotus, so sin touches not him who knows
“ Gop: as the floss on the carding comb cast into the fire
“is consumed, so are his sins burnt away.” { er)
“In like manner, the effect of the converse (that is, of is
‘ merit and virtue) is by acquisition of knowledge annulled —
“and precluded. It is at death that these consequences _
‘take place.§ “ He traverses both (merit and demerit) —


* Br. Str. 4.1. § 1-8. (8. 1-12.) + Ibid. § 9. (S. 13.)
t Cwhandéogya, Brahme-vidya. § Br. S, 4.1. § 10. (S. 14.)


VEDANTA. 363


*“ thereby.”* “ The heart’s knot is broken, all doubts a
““ split, and his works perish, when he has seen the
*“ supreme being.”+ “All sins depart from him:” t
“meaning good works as well as misdeeds ; for the confine-
“ment of fetters is the same, whether the chain be of gold

* or iron.’§

“ But only such antecedent sin and virtue are annulled,
“as had not begun to have effect: for their influence lasts
‘until his deliverance, and then does he merge in the su-
‘ preme Brahme.|| Those which were in operation are not
“ annulled, as the arrow, which has been shot completes its
‘ flight, nor falls till its speed is spent; and the potter’s
“wheel, once set in motion, whirls till the velocity which
“has been communicated to it is exhausted.’

“ However, the maintenance of a perpetual fire, and cer-

“tain other religious observances enjoined as conducive to
“the same end, are not rendered inefficacious: for it is
‘declared that “ Brahmanas seek divine knowledge by holy
“ “ study, sacrifice, liberality, and devotion :”** and according
* to some Sac’ has ++ of the Véda, other merits remain likewise
“ effectual ; for sons succeed to the inheritance of their fa-
‘ ther’s works; the affectionate share his good deeds ; and
“ the malignant participate of his ill actions. These sacri-
‘ ficial observances may be such as are conjoined with devout
“ exercises, faith, and pious meditation ; or unattended by
“those holy practices for attainment of divine knowledge,
“since they are pronounced most efficacious when so con-
‘ joined, which implies that they are not wholly inoperative
* by themselves. ’{t


* Vrthad drahyaca. + Muhdaca. t Ch’handogya.
§ Anon. com. \| Br. Sttr. 4.1. § 11. (S.15.) Ch’handégya.
9 Br. S. 4.1, §12. (S. 16-17.) ** Virthad drahyaca.


t+ Satyayana. tt Br. Sétr. 4,1. § 13. (S. 18.) Ci’ handogya.


364 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


“divine knowledge, on demise of the body, proc


ar |


“ Having annulled by fruition other works >
“ begun to have effect; having enjoyed the recor
* suffered the pains of good and bad actions, the |


‘ reunion with Brahme* nat Te
The fruit of divine knowledge having been showr
first chapter, the second chapter of this lecture
the particular effect of devout exercises joined with a
priate meditation. It chiefly concerns the socal
soul, or mode in which it passes from the body. __ _
‘Of a dying person the speech, followed by the
“of the ten exterior faculties (not the corporeal .
“ themselves), is absorbed into the mind, for the a
“the outer organ ceases before the mind’s. T
‘ manner retires into the breath,+- attended likewioest b
“the other vital functions, for they are life’s comp:
‘ and the same retreat of the mind is observable, also,»
4 profound sleep and in a swoon. Breath, attended li
‘wise by all other vital faculties, is withdrawn into
“living soul which governs the corporeal organs, as
‘attendants of a king assemble around him when he is
‘setting out upon a journey; for all vital functions gather
‘about the soul at the last moment when it is expiring.t
“The living soul, attended with all its faculties, retires
‘ within a rudiment of body, composed of light. wih the
‘rest of the five elements, in a subtile state. “ Breath,” ae
‘is, therefore, said to withdraw into “‘ light;” not m B f
‘ that element (or fire) exclusively ; nor intending. direct
“transition, for a traveller has gone from one city to ano-
‘ther, though he passed through an intermediate town.’ _
“ This retirement from the body is common to ordinary _


* Br. Str. § 14. (8. 19.) Ch’handogya and Vrihad aérahyaca.
+ CWhandogya. Br. Stir, 4, 2.§ 1-3. { Vrthad éranyaca.


VEDANTA, 365


“uninformed people as to the devout contemplative wor-
“shipper, until they proceed further on their respective
* paths ; and immortality (without immediate reunion with
“the supreme Brahme) is the fruit of pious meditation,
“though impediments may not be wholly consumed and
* removed.*

“In that condition the soul of the contemplative worship-
‘ per remains united to a subtile elementary frame, con-
‘joined with the vital faculties, until the dissolution of
“ worlds, when it merges in the supreme deity. That ele-
* mentary frame is minute in its dimensions as subtile in its
“texture, and is accordingly imperceptible to bystanders
“when departing from the body: nor is it oppressed by
“cremation or other treatment which that body under-
* goes. It is by its warmth sensible so long as it abides
‘with that coarser frame, which becomes cold in death
“when it has departed,+ and was warm during life while
‘ it remained.

“ But he who has attained the true knowledge of Gop
“does not pass through the same stages of retreat, pro-
“ ceeding directly to reunion with the supreme being, with
“ which he is identified, as a river, at its confluence with
“the sea, merges therein altogether. His vital faculties
“ and the elements of which his body consists, all the six-
“teen component parts which constitute the human frame,
‘ are absorbed absolutely and completely : both name and
“form cease ; and he becomes immortal, without parts or
“ members.’{

In course of expounding the text, some of the commenta-
tors compare the ultimate absorption of the vital faculties


* Br. Sitr. 4. 2. §4.(S 7.)
+ Ibid. § 5. (S. 8-11.) Ca?havalli, &c.
t Thid, § 6-8 (S. 12-16.) Cahwa, Madhyandina, Prasna, &c.


366 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE 4H!


to the disappearance of water sprinkled on ¢
They seem to be unaware of its eva pi
it to have sunk into the stone.
“The soul, together with the vital ssaaia

‘ it, having retired within its proper abode, the
“summit of that viscus flashes, and lightens t
“ by which the soul is to depart: the crown of t
“ the case of the wise; and any other part of the
‘ the instance of the ignorant. A hundred and one :
“issue from the heart, one of which passes to the
“the head: it is named sushumia. By that pas
‘ virtue of acquired knowledge, and of recollection
‘ meditated way, the soul of the wise, graced by 1
“of Brahme, whose dwelling is in the heart, i
* meets a solar ray; and by that route proceeds, wh
“be night or day, winter or summer.}+ The conte


“endures: rays of light reach from the sun to the vein
: ; conversely extend from this to the sun. The pre


‘ who awaited icine return of that auspicious season to
* does not concern the devout worshipper, who has prac!


* culcated by the Védas, and has consequently acqu
e ee lnages But it does coricem those who _ fo


“ to which, the time of day and season of the yeti are not
* indifferent.’ Toe
The further progress of the soul, from the termination of ©
the coronal artery communicating with a solar ray to its”
final destination, the abode of Brahme, is variously de-


* Ranganatha on Br. Sitr. 4. 2. § 6. (S. 12.)
+ Br. Sir. 4. 2.§ 9-11. (S. 17-21.) Vrithad érah. CWhandogya, &e.


=


VEDANTA. 367


scribed in divers texts of the Véda ; some specifying inter-
mediate stations which are omitted by others, or mentioned
in a different order.* The seeming discrepancies of those
passages are reconciled, and all are shown to relate to one
uniform route, deduced from the text, for the divine journey
(déva-yana) which the liberated soul travels. A question
arises, whether the intermediate stations, which are men-
tioned, be stages of the journey, or scenes of fruition to be
visited in succession, or landmarks designated for the course
and direction of the route.+ On this point the settled con-
clusion is,t that the presiding deities or regents of the places
or regions indicated are guides to the soul, who forward
it on its way in its helpless condition, destitute of exerted
organs, all its faculties being absorbed and withdrawn ; as a
blind man is led, or a faint person is conducted, by a guide.

The route deduced from the tenour of texts compared,
and from divers considerations set forth,t is by a solar ray
to the realm of fire ; thence to the regents of day, of the
semilunation, of the summer six months, of the year; and
thence to the abode of gods; to air or wind, the regent of
which forwards the journeying soul from his precincts, by a
narrow passage compared to the nave of a chariot wheel,
towards the sun: thence the transition is to the moon,
whence to the region of lightning, above which is the realm
of Varuna, the regent of water ; for lightning and thunder
are beneath the rain-cloud and aqueous region: the rest of
the way is by the realm of INpRA, to the abode of PrasA-
pati or Brahme.


* Ch’ handogya; Caushitaci, Vrihad aranyaca, &e.

+ Buavapfva instances Pétaliputra and the Sofa river, as indicated
for the direction of the route from T¢rabhucti (Tirhtt) to Varéhasi
(Benares). It is clear that he understands Pééaliputra (the ancient
Palibothra) to be Patna.


t Br. Sitr. 4.3. § 1-1. (8. 1-¢.)


368 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


A question arises, which is here discussed, whether Brah-
me, to whose dwelling and court the soul is conducted, be _
the supreme being, according to the ordinary and chief
acceptation of the term, or be that effect of his creative
will which is distinguised as carya brahme, indentified with
the mythological personage entitled HIRANYAGARBHA, as
having been included within the golden mundane egg.
Jatmintaffirms the supreme one to be meant: but BADAaRr
maintains the other opinion ; which is that which the com-
mentators of the sééras understand the author of them to
adopt.*

The souls of those holy persons only, whose devout
meditation was addressed to the pure Brahme himself,
take the route described ;+ not those whose contemplation
was partial and restrictive : they have their special reward.
Those, too, whose knowledge of Gop was more perfect,
pass immediately, or by any route, to a reunion with the
divinity, with whom they are identified.

The soul of him who has arrived at the perfection of
divine knowledge, and is consequently liberated, ““ quitting
“its corporeal frame, ascends to the supreme light which
“is Brahme, and comes forth identified with him, conform
“ and undivided ;”{ as pure water, dropped into the limpid
lake, is such as that is.

Concerning the condition of the liberated man, a: differ-
ence of doctrine is noticed.§ Ja1m1Nn1 maintainéd, that he
is endued with divine attributes, omniscience, ubiquitary
power, and other transcendent faculties. AupULO6MI in=
sisted, that he becomes sheer thought, sentient intelligence.
The author of the sétras (BADARAyaANA) accedes to the
last-mentioned opinion; admitting, however, the practical


* Br. Sitr. 4.3. § 5. (S. 7-14.) + Ibid. § 6, (S. 15-16.)
t Ibid. § 1-2. (S. 1-4.) § Ibid. §3.(S. 5-7.)


VEDANTA, 369


or apparent possession of divine faculties by one who has
attained perfection of knowledge.

By certain devout exercises and meditation* a less per-
fect knowledge is acquired, which, as before mentioned,
qualifies the possessor of it for reception at Brahme’s
abode, though not for immediate re-union and identity
with his being. In that condition transcendent power is
enjoyed. The pitris, or shades of progenitors, may be
called up by a simple act of the will; and other super-
human faculties may be similarly exerted. The possessor
of these is independent, subject to no other’s control. He
may, at his option, be invested with one or more bodies,
furnished with senses and organs, or be unincumbered
with a corporeal frame. On this point, however, a differ-
ence of doctrine subsists. Jaim1Nn1 maintained the indis-
pensable presence of body; BApari, its absence ; and
the author (BAparAyaNa) admits the option. In one
case, the condition is that of a person dreaming ; in the
other case, as of one awake.+

“ Master of several bodies, by a simple act of his will,
“the Yégi does not occupy one only, leaving the rest inani-
‘ mate, like so many wooden machines. He may animate
“more than one, in like manner as a single lamp may be
* made to supply more than one wick.’t

Liberation (mucti), besides its proper and strict sense,
which is that of final deliverance through a perfect know-
ledge of Brahme, and consequent identification with the
divinity and absorption into his essence, is likewise em-
ployed in a secondary acceptation for that which takes
effect in life-time (jtvan-mucti) ; or which conducts the
soul after death to dwell with Brahme; not, however,


* Héarda-vidyé or Dahara-vidyé in the Ch’handogya.
+ Br. Sitr, 4, 4.§ 4. 5. (S. 9-14.) t Ibid. §6. (S. 15-16.)
VOL. I, 28


7" TT oe


370 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HIN


divested of a subtile corporeal frame. The more «
deliverance is incorporeal (vidéha mucti).* The less:
liberation appertains to a Yég?, similar, in respe
faculties and powers possessed by him, to one who:
complished the like by the observances taught in 1. s
ehya or Yoga of PATANJALI. ; ~
Such a Yégi, uncontrolled and independent as sie has
been pronounced to be, can exert every faculty and su
power analogous to that of the divinity’s which may tie .
ducive to enjoyment; but he has not a creative powel
His faculties are transcendent for enjoyment, not for ac
The more perfect liberation is absolute and final :
is no return of the soul from its absorption in the div
essence, to undergo further transmigrations as before.
incomplete knowledge, which conducts to Brahme’s abode
without qualifying the soul for such absorption into the
divinity, exempts it from return during the subsisting calpa ; _
but not at a future renovation of worlds,§ unless by special
favour of the deity. aig


Recapitulation.


In the foregoing summary of the Védanta from the sire
of VyAsa, the interpretation by Sancara has been relied —
upon; and his gloss, with notes of his annotators and the
commentaries of scholiasts who follow him, have been ex-
clusively employed, lest the doctrine of separate schools and _
different branches of the Védanta should be blended and e
confounded. Those commentaries are numerous, and ex- a
planations and elucidations.of the text have been taken from


one or from another indiscriminately, as they have been —


* Buavavfva on Br. Str. 4. 4. 8, 22.
+ Br. Sitr. 4. 4.§ 7. (S. 17-22.) t Ibid. S. 22.
§ On this point the commentators do not appear to agree.


vepANTA. 371


found pertinent and illustrative, without particular preference
or selection. This should be borne in mind in comparing
that summary with its authorities, as it has not been judged
necessary, nor generally practicable, to cite the particular
commentary that is especially used in each instance.

Some remarks will be now added, in which other autho-
rities are likewise employed, and chiefly the elementary
works* mentioned in the introduction of this essay.

The principal and essential tenets of the Védanta are,
that Gop is the omniscient and omnipotent cause of the
existence, continuance, and dissolution of the universe.
Creation is an act of his will. He is both efficient and
material cause of the world: creator and nature, framer and
frame, doer and deed. At the consummation of all things,
all are resolved into him: as the spider spins his thread
from his own substance and gathers it in again; as vege-
tables sprout from the soil and return to it, earth to earth ;
as hair and nails grow from a living body and continue
with it. The supreme being is one, sole-existent, second-
less, entire, without parts, sempiternal, infinite, ineffable,
invariable ruler of all, universal soul, truth, wisdom, intelli-
gence, happiness.

Individual souls, emanating from the supreme one, are
likened to innumerable sparks issuing from a blazing fire.
From him they proceed, and to him they return, being of
the same essence. The soul which governs the body toge-
ther with its organs, neither is born; nor does it die. It is
a portion of the divine substance; and, as such, infinite,
immortal, intelligent, sentient, true.

It is governed by the supreme. Its activity is not of its
essence, but inductive through its organs: as an artisan,
taking his tools, labours and undergoes toil and pain, but


* Védénta-séra, Véddnta-paribhasha, &e.
23.2


372 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


laying them aside reposes ; so is the soul active, and a suf-

ferer by means of its organs; but, divested of them, and

returning to the supreme one, is at rest and is happy. It

is not a free and independent agent, but made to act by the -
supreme one, who causes it to do in one state as it had pur-

posed in a former condition. According to its predisposi-
tion for good or evil, for enjoined or forbidden deeds, it is

made to do good or ill, and thus it has retribution for pre-

vious works. Yet Gop is not author of evil; for so it has

been from eternity: the series of preceding forms and of

dispositions manifested in them has been infinite.

The soul is incased in body as in a sheath, or rather ina _
succession of sheaths. The first or inner case is the intel-
lectual one (vijnyanamaya): it is composed of the sheer
(tan-matra), or simple elements uncombined, and consists
of the intellect (6uddhi) joined with the five senses.

The next is the mental (manémaya) sheath, in which
mind is joined with the preceding. A third sheath or case
comprises the organs of action and the vital faculties, and is
termed the organic or vital case. These three sheaths
(césa) constitute the subtile frame (sticshma-sartra or linga-
Sartra) which attends the soul in its transmigrations. The
interior rudiment confined to the inner case is the causal
frame (carana-sartra).

The gross body (st’héila-sartra) which it animates from
birth to death in any step of its transmigrations, is composed
of the coarse elements, formed by combinations of the simple
elements, in proportions of four-eighths of the predominant
and characteristic one with an eighth of each of the other
four: that is, the particles of the several elements, being
divisible, are, in the first place, split into moieties ; whereof
one is subdivided into quarters ; and the remaining moiety
combines with one part (a quarter of a moiety) from each
of the four others, thus constituting coarse or mixed ele-


VEDANTA. 373


ments.* The exterior case, composed of elements so com-
bined, is the nutrimentitious (annamaya) sheath; and
being the scene of coarse fruition is therefore termed the
gross body.

The organic frame assimilates the combined elements
received in food, and secretes the finer particles and rejects
the coarsest: earth becomes flesh; water, blood; and in-
flammable substances (oil or grease), marrow. The coarser
particles of the two first are excreted as feces and urine ;
those of the third are deposited in the bones. The finer
particles of the one nourish the mind ; of the other, supply
respiration ; of the third, support speech.

Organized bodies are arranged by the Védantins in either
four or three classes: for both which arrangements the
authority of passages of the Véda is cited. Their four
classes are the same with those of other writers; but the
threefold division appears to be peculiar to this school. It
is, lst, viviparous (jévaja), as man and quadrupeds; 2d,
oviparous (azdaja), as birds and insects; 3d, germinipa-
rous (udbhijja).+ The latter, however, comprehends the
two terminating classes of the fourfold distribution, vermin
and vegetable ; differing but as one sprouts from the earth,
the other pullulates from water: the one fixed, the other
locomotive. To both, equivocal and spontaneous genera-
tion, or propagation without union of parents, is assigned.

The order in which the five elements are enumerated is
that of their development: 1st, the etherial element (@césa),
which is deemed a most subtile fluid, occupying all space
and confounded with vacancy ; sound is its particular qua-
lity. 2d. Wind (vaéyu), or air in motion: for mobility is its
characteristic ; sound and feel are sensible in it. 3d. Fire
or light (téjas), of which heat is the characteristic ; and by


* Véd. Sara. 136. + Sanc., &e. on Br. Sttr, 3.1. §3. (8. 21.)


374 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


which sound, feel, and colour (or form) are made
4th. Water (ap), of which fluidity is characteristic:
which sound, feel, colour, and taste occur.
(prit’hivt or anna), of which hardness is
and in which sound, feel, colour, taste, and sm
cernible.
The notion of ether and wind as distinct e
opinion which this has in common with most of he o
schools of Indian philosophy, seems to originate in’
assumption of mobility for the essential character of the o
Hence air in motion has been distinguished from the 2
fluid at rest, which is dcéSa, supposed to penetrate
pervade all worldly space ; and, by an easy transition, vay
(wind) and motion, come to be identified, as a@c@Sa (ether) —
and space likewise are confounded. a ae
An organized body, in its most subtile state of tenuityy
comprises sixteen members (avayava) or corporeal parts, v
five organs of sense, as many instruments of action, inde
the same number of vital faculties ; to which are added — i"
mind (including intelligence, consciousness, and sensation);
or, distinguishing mind and intellect (buddhi) as separate
parts, the number is seventeen. + het
The vital faculties, termed vayu, are not properly air or
wind, but vital functions oractions. Considered, however, — =="
with a reference to the proper meaning of that term, they 1
are by some explained to be, Ist, respiration, which is”
ascending, and of which the seat is the nostril; 2d, inspi-
ration (or otherwise explained, flatus), which is descending,
and which issues from the lower extremity of the intestine ;
3d, flatuousness, which is diffused through the body, pass-
ing by all the veins and arteries; 4th, expiration, ascend-
ing from the throat; 5th, digestion, or abdominal air, of
which the seat is the middle of the body. ;
According to a different explanation, the first is respi-


VEDANTA. 375


ration; the second, inspiration ; the third, a mean between
the two, pulsation, palpitation, and other vital movements ;
the fourth is expiration ; and the fifth is digestion.

Three states of the soul in respect of the body are
recognized ; to which must be added a fourth, and even a
fifth, viz. waking, dreaming, profoundly sleeping, half-dead,
and dead. While awake, the soul, associated with body,
is active under the guidance of providence, and has to do
with a real (paramart hict) and practical (vyavahérici) crea-
tion. Ina dream there is an illusory (méyamay?) and un-
real creation: nevertheless, dreams prognosticate events.
Dreaming is the mean (sandhya) between sleeping and
waking. In profound sleep the soul is absent, having retired
by the channel of the arteries, and being as it were
enfolded in the supreme deity. It is not, however, blended
with the divine essence, as a drop of water fallen into a
lake, where it becomes undistinguishable; but, on the con-
trary, the soul continues discriminate, and returns un-
changed to the body which it animates while awake. Swoon,
or stupor, is intermediate between sleep and death. During
insensibility produced by accident or disease, there is, as in
profound sleep and lethargy, a temporary absence of the
soul. In death it has absolutely quitted its gross corporeal
frame.

Subject to future transmigration, it visits other worlds,
to receive there the recompense of works or suffer the
penalty of misdeeds. Sinners fall to various regions of
punishment, administered by Cuirracurra and other
mythological persons in the realm of Yama. The virtuous
rise to the moon, where they enjoy the fruit of their good
actions; and whence they return to this world to animate
new bodies, and act in them, under providence, conform-
ably with their propensities and predispositions, the trace
of which remains.


376 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS. |


The wise, liberated from worldly trammels, ‘ye
higher, to the abode and court of Brahme; or, if t
attainment of wisdom be complete, they at once pa:
_ re-union with the divine essence. .
‘Three degrees of liberation or deliverance (mue
distinguished: one incorporeal, which is that
tioned, and is complete ; another imperfect, which is t h
before-mentioned, taking effect upon demise, wna :
soul passes to the highest heaven, the abode of B


the possessor of it to perform supernatural actions;
evocation of shades of progenitors, translation of himself
into other bodies called into existence by the mere force of € o
his will, instantaneous removal to any place at ae

sure, and other wondrous performances. .


means of certain sacrifices, as that of a horse alasiania dha),
or by religious exercises in various prescribed modes, toge- 7
ther with pious meditation on the being and attributes of —
Gop: but the highest degree of it is attainable only by
perfect knowledge of the divine nature, and of the identity —
of Gop with that which emanated from him, or was Bikes }
of his substance and partakes of his essence.

Questions most recondite, which are agitated by Pree
gians, have engaged the attention of the Védéntins likewise, —
and have been by them discussed at much length; such as
free-will (swatantrya), divine grace (¢4wara-prasada), effi-
cacy of works (carman) or of faith (Sraddha), and many
other abstruse points.

On the last-mentioned topic, that of faith, nothing will
be found in the text of BADARAyaNA, and little in the
gloss of Sancara. Its paramount efficacy is a tenet of
another branch of the Védanta school, which follows the
authority of the Bhagavad-gita. In that work, as in many


VEDANTA. 377


of the Puranas, passages relative to this topic recur at
every turn.

The fruit of works is the grand subject of the first
Miménsa, which treats of religious duties, sacrifices, and
other observances.

The latter Mimansa more particularly maintains the doc-
trine of divine grace. It treats of free-will, which it in
effect denies ; but endeavours to reconcile the existence of
moral evil under the government of an all-wise, all-powerful,
and benevolent providence, with the absence of free-will, by
assuming the past eternity of the universe, and the infinite
renewals of worlds, into which every individual being has
brought the predispositions contracted by him in earlier
states, and so retrospectively without beginning or limit.

The notion, that the versatile world is an illusion (maya),
that all which passes to the apprehension of the waking
individual is but a phantasy presented to his imagination,
and every seeming thing is unreal and all is visionary, does
not appear to be the doctrine of the text of the Védanta. I
have remarked nothing which countenances it in the sétras
of VyAsa nor in the gloss of Sancara, but much con-
cerning it in the minor commentaries and in elementary
treatises. I take it to be no tenet of the original Védantin
philosophy, but of another branch, from which later writers
have borrowed it, and have intermixed and confounded the
two systems. The doctrine of the early Védanta is com-
plete and consistent, without this graft of a later growth.


On the Puitosorny of the Hinpus.


PAR FP: ¥.2


ON INDIAN SECTARIES.


[From the Transactions of the Royal Asiatie Society,
vol. i. p. 549—579.]


In the present essay, it is my intention to treat of the
heretical systems of Jina and Buppwa, as proposed in
the first essay of this series on the Philosophy of the
Hindus ; and to notice certain other Indian sects, which,
like them, exhibit some analogy to the Sane’hyas, or fol-
lowers of Capita or of PaTaNnsatt.

The theological or metaphysical opinions of those sec-
taries, apart from and exclusive of mythology and ritual
ceremonies, may be not inaptly considered as a branch of
philosophy, though constituting the essence of their religion,
comprehending not only their belief as to the divinity and
a future state, but also certain observances to be practised
in furtherance of the prescribed means for attaining per-
petual bliss: which here, as with most other sects of Indian
origin, is the meed proposed for true and perfect knowledge
of first principles.

The Jainas and Bauddhas I consider to have been origi-
nally Hindus ;+ and the first-mentioned to be so still,
because they recognised, as they yet do, the distinction of
the four castes. It is true, that in Hindust’han, if not in
the peninsula of India likewise, the Jainas are all of one


* Read at a public meeting of the Royal Asiatic Society, February
3, 1827. + As. Res., vol. ix. p. 288,


INDIAN SECTARIES. 379


caste: but this is accounted for by the admission of their
adversaries (CUMARILA BHATfA, &c.), who affirm that
they are misguided cshatriyas (Hindus of the second or
military tribe): they call themselves vaisyas. On renounc-
ing the heresies of the Jaina sect, they take their place
among orthodox Hindus, as belonging to a particular caste
(cshatriya or vaisya). The representative of the great
family of Jacar Se1T’H, who with many of his kindred was
converted some years ago from the Jaina to the orthodox
faith, is a conspicuous instance. Such would not be the
case of a convert, who has not already caste as a Hindu.

Both religions of Jina and Buppua are, in the view of
the Hindu, who reveres the Véda as a divine revelation,
completely heterodox ; and that more on account of their
heresy in denying its divine origin, than for their deviation
from its doctrine. Other sects, as the Sane’hyas and
Vaiséshicas, though not orthodox, do not openly disclaim
the authority of the Véda. They endeavour to reconcile
their doctrine to the text of the Indian scripture, and refer
to passages which they interpret as countenancing their
opinions. The Mimansd, which professedly follows the
Véda implicitly, is therefore applied, in its controversy
with these half-heretics, to the confutation of such misin-
terpretations, It refutes an erroneous construction, rather
than a mistaken train of reasoning. But the Jainas and
Bauddhas, disavowing the Véda, are out of the pale of the
Hindu church in its most comprehensive range; and the
Mimansé (practical as well as theological) in controversy
with these infidels, for so it deems them, argues upon general
grounds of reasoning independent of authority, to which it
would be vain to appeal.

The Uttara mimansa devotes two sections (adhicaranas)
to the confutation of the Bauddhas, and one to that of the
Jainas, They are the 4th, 5th, and 6th sections in the


: a.
380 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


2d chapter of the 2d lecture; and it proceeds in th
controversial chapter to confute the Pasupatas 2
branches of the Méhéswara sect ; and the Panchar
branch of the Vaishnava. The Charvacas are a
incidentally in a very important section concern’
distinction of body and soul, in the 3d Ni
lecture (§30). In the Pérva mimansé, controve
scattered ; recurring in various places, under ditens
but especially in the 3d chapter of the first book (
The Sanc’hya of Carita devotes a whole ch
controversy ; and notices the sect of Buddha, under
designation of Wasticas; and in one place animadverts
the Pasupatas; and in another, on the Charvacas. nil ‘
It is from these and similar controversial disquis
more than from direct sources, that I derive the informatic
upon which the following account of the philosophy


whether in the Sanscrit language or in Prberie or Pali,
the language of the Jainas and that of the Bauddhas, is
not at hand to be consulted. But, although the infor
mation be furnished by their adversaries and even invete- Pn
rate enemies, it appears, so far as I have any opportun lity
of comparing it with their own representations, essentially
correct. ise

a | Yr ~

hea


Sect or Jina. ;
The Jainas or Arhatas, followers of JINA or Aruar ‘
(terms of like import), are also denominated Vivasanas,
Muctavasanas, Muctambaras or Digambaras, with refer-
ence to the nakedness of the rigid order of ascetics in this
sect, who go “bare of clothing,” “disrobed,” or “clad —
“by the regions of space.” The less strict order of Swé-


SECT OF JINA. 381


tambaras* “clad in white,” is of more modern date and
of inferior note. Among nicknames by which they are
known, that of Zunchita-césa occurs. It alludes to the
practice of abruptly eradicating hair of the head or body
by way of mortification. PArSwaNAv’Ha is described as
tearing five handfuls of hair from his head on becoming a
devotee.+

According to the Digambara Jainas, the universe con-
sists of two classes, “animate” and “ inanimate” (jéva and
ajiva), without a creator or ruling providence (éswara).{ They
assign for the cause (caranta) of the world, atoms, which
they do not, as the Vaiséshicas, distinguish into so many
sorts as there are elements, but consider these, viz. earth,
water, fire, and air, the four elements by them admitted, as
modified compounds of homogeneous atoms.

These gymnosophists distinguish, as already intimated,
two chief categories: Ist, Jéva, intelligent and sentient soul
(chaitana atma or b6dhatmé) endued with body and conse-
quently composed of parts ; eternal: 2d, Ajéva, all that is
not a living soul ; that is, the whole of (jada) inanimate and
unsentient substance. The one is the object of fruition,
being that which is to be enjoyed (bhégya) by the soul ;
the other is the enjoyer (6hécta) or agent in fruition ; soul
itself.

This second comprehensive predicament admits a six-fold
subdivision; and the entire number of categories (padart’ha),
as distinguished with reference to the ultimate great object
of the soul’s deliverance, is consequently seven.||

I. Jiva or soul, as before-mentioned, comprising three
descriptions : 1st, nitya-siddha, ever perfect, or yéga-siddha,

* Transact. of the Roy. Asiat. Soc., vol. i. p. 416.


+ Ibid. p. 433. ~ Riminusa on Br. Sir.


|| Sawcara and other commentators on Br. Sétr.,and annotators on
their gloss,


382 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


perfect by profound abstraction; for instance, Arhats or
Jinas, the deified saints of the sect: 2d, mucta or muctatma,
a soul which is free or liberated ; its deliverance having been
accomplished through the strict observance of the precepts
of the Jinas: 3d, baddha or baddhatma, a soul which is
bound, being in any stage antecedent to deliverance ; re-
maining yet fettered by deeds or works (carma),

II. Ajiva taken in a restricted sense. It comprehends
the four elements, earth, water, fire, and air; and all which
is fixed (st’hdvara) as mountains, or moveable (jangama)
as rivers, &c. In a different arrangement, to be hereafter
noticed, this category is termed Pudgala matter.

IlI.—VII. The five remaining categories are distributed
into two classes, that which is to be effected (sadhya) and
the means thereof (sadhana): one comprising two, and the
other three divisions. What may be effected (sédhya) is
either liberation or confinement: both of which will be
noticed further on. The three efficient means (sadhana) are
as follow :

III. Asrava is that which directs the embodied spirit
(asravayati purusham) towards external objects. It is the
occupation or employment (vritti or pravritti) of the sen-
ses or organs on sensible objects. Through the means of
the senses it affects the embodied spirit with the sentiment
of taction, colour, smell, and taste.

Or it is the association or connexion of body with right
and wrong deeds. It comprises all the carmas: for they
(dsravayanti) pervade , influence, and attend the doer, fol-
lowing him or attaching to him.

It is a misdirection (mit’hya-pravritti) of the organs : -for
it is vain, as cause of disappointment, rendering the organs of
sense and sensible objects subservient to fruition.

IV. Samvara is that which stops (samvrindti) the course
of the foregoing ; or closes up the door or passage of it:


SECT OF JINA. 383


and consists in self-command, or restraint of organs inter
nal and external: embracing all means of self-control, and
subjection of the senses, calming and subduing them.

It is the right direction (samyac pravritti) of the organs.

V. Nirjara is that which utterly and entirely (nir) wears
and antiquates (jarayati) all sin previously incurred, and
the whole effect of works or deeds (carma). It consists
chiefly in mortification (¢apas): such as fasts, rigorous
silence, standing upon heated stones, plucking out the hair
by the roots, &c.

This is discriminated from the two preceding, as neither
misdirection nor right direction, but non-direction (apra-
vritti) of the organs towards sensible objects.

VI. Baddha is that which binds (badhnati) the embo-
died spirit. It is confinement and connexion, or associa-
tion, of the soul with deeds. It consists in a succession
of births and deaths as the result of works (carman).

VII. Mécsha is liberation; or deliverance of the soul
from the fetters of works. It is the state of a soul in
which knowledge and other requisites are developed.

Relieved from the bondage of deeds through means
taught by holy ordinances, it takes effect on the soul by
the grace of the ever-perfect Anuar or Jina.

Or liberation is continual ascent. The soul has a buoy-
ancy or natural tendency upwards, but is kept down by
corporeal trammels. When freed from them, it rises to
the region of the liberated.

Long immersed in corporeal restraint, but released from
it; as a bird let loose from a cage, plunging into water to
wash off the dirt with which it was stained, and drying its
pinions in the sunshine, soars aloft; so does the soul, re-
leased from long confinement, soar high, never to return.

Liberation then is the condition of a soul clear of all
impediments.


=


384 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


It is attained by right knowledge, doctrine and obser-
vances: and is a result of the unrestrained operation of
the soul’s natural tendency, when passions and every other
obstacle are removed.

Works or deeds (for so the term carman signifies, though
several among those enumerated be neither acts nor the
effect of action) are reckoned eight ; and are distributed into
two classes, comprising four each: the first, ghatin, mis-
chievous, and asédhu, impure, as marring deliverance: the
second aghdtin, harmless, or sddhu, pure, a8 opposing no
obstacle to liberation.

I. In the first set is : :

lst. Jnydna varaniya, the erroneous notion that know-
ledge is ineffectual ; that liberation does not result from a
perfect acquaintance with true principles; and that such
science does not produce final deliverance.

2d. Darsana varaniya, the error of believing that deli-
verance is not attainable by study of the doctrine of the
Arhats or Jinas.

3d. Méhantya, doubt and hesitation as to particular
selection among the many irresistible and infallible ways
taught by the Tirt’hancaras or Jinas.

4th. Antardya, interference, or obstruction offered to
those engaged in seeking deliverance, and consequent pre-
vention of their accomplishment of it.

II. The second contains :—

lst. Védanitya, individual consciousness: reflection that
“T am capable of attaining deliverance.”
2d. Namica, individual consciousness of an appellation :
reflection that ‘“ I bear this name.”

3d. Gétrica, consciousness of race or lineage: reflection
that “ I am descendant of a certain disciple of Jina, native
“ of a certain province.”

4th. Ayushca, association or connexion with the body


ne


SECT OF JINA. 385


or person: that, (as the etymology of the term de-
notes), which proclaims (cayaté) age (@yush), or duration
of life.

Otherwise interpreted, the four carmas of this second
set, taken in the inverse order, that is, beginning with
ayushca, import procreation, and subsequent progress in
the formation of the person or body wherein deliverance is
attainable by the soul which animates it: for it is by con-
nexion with white or immaculate matter that final liberation
can be accomplished. I shall not dwell on the particular
explanation respectively of these four carmas, taken in this
sense.

Another arrangement, which likewise has special refer-
ence to final deliverance, is taught in a five-fold distribution
of the predicaments or categories (asticaya). The word
here referred to, is explained as signifying a substance
commonly occurring ; or a term of general import; or (con-
formably with its etymology), that of which it is said
(cayaté) that “ it is” (asti): in other words, that of which
existence is predicated.

I. The first is jévasticaya: the predicament, life or soul.
It is, as before noticed, either bound, liberated, or ever-
perfect.

II. Pudgalasticaya: the predicament, matter: compre-
hending all bodies composed of atoms. It is sixfold, com-
prising the four elements, and all sensible objects, fixed
or moveable. It is the same with the ajiva or second of
the seven categories enumerated in an arrangement before-
noticed.

III. Dharmasticaya : the predicament, virtue ; inferrible
from a right direction of the organs. Dharma is explain-
ed as a substance or thing (dravya) from which may be
concluded, as its effect, the soul’s ascent to the region
above.

VOL. I. 2c


—_—


386 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


IV. Adharmasticaya : the predicament, vice: or the
reverse of the foregoing. Adharma is that which causes -
the soul to continue embarrassed with body, notwithstand-
ing its capacity for ascent and natural tendency to soar. —

V. Acasasticaya: the predicament casa, of which there
are two, Lécacasa and Alécacasa.

1. Lécacdsa is the abode of the bound: a wrorldihy véigiaal
consisting of divers tiers, one above the other, wherein
dwell successive orders of beings unliberated.

2. Alécacasa is the abode of the liberated, above all
worlds (/écas) or‘ mundane beings. Here acéSa implies
that, whence there is no return.

The Jaina gymnosophists are also cited* for an arrange-
ment which enumerates six substances (dravya) as consti-
tuting the world: viz.—

1. Jiva, the soul.

2. Dharma, virtue; a particular substance pervading
the world, and causing the soul’s ascent.

3. Adharma, vice; pervading the world, and causing
the soul’s continuance with body.

4. Pudgala, matter; substance having colour, odour,
savour, and tactility; as wind, fire, water, and earth :
either atoms, or aggregates of atoms; individual body, col-
lective worlds, &c.

5. Cala, time: a particular substance, which is practi-
cally treated, as past, present, and future.

6. Acasa, a region, one, and infinite.

To reconcile the concurrence of opposite qualities in the
same subject at different times, and in different substances
at the same times, the Jainas assume seven cases deemed
by them apposite for obviating the difficulty (bhanga-naya) :
‘Ist. May be, it is; [somehow, in some measure, “it so is] :


* Riminvusa on the Br. Sitr.


ere


SECT OF JINA. 387


2d. May be, it is not: 3d. May be, it is, and it is not
[successively]: 4th. May be, it is not predicable ; [opposite
qualities co-existing]: 5th: The first and fourth of these
taken together: may be it is, and yet not predicable:
6th. The second and fourth combined: may be it is not,
and not predicable ; 7th. The third (or the first and second)
and the fourth, united: may be it is and it is not, and not
predicable.

This notion is selected for confutation by the Védantins,
to show the futility of the Jaina doctrine. ‘ It is,’ they
observe, ‘ doubt or surmise, not certainty nor knowledge.
“ Opposite qualities cannot co-exist in the same subject.
“ Predicaments are not unpredicable: they are not to be
‘ affirmed if not affirmable: but they either do exist or do
“not; and if they do, they are to be aftirmed: to say that
‘ a thing is and is not, is as incoherent as a madman’s talk
‘ or an idiot’s babble.”*

Another point, selected by the Védéntins for animadver-
sion, is the position, that the soul and body agree in dimen-
sions.+ ‘ In a different stage of growth of body or of
‘transmigration of soul, they would not be conformable :
3 passing from the human condition to that of an ant or of
‘ an elephant, the soul would be too big or too little for the
“new body animated by it. If it be augmented or dimi-
“ nished by accession or secession of parts, to suit either the
“ change of person or corporeal growth between infancy and
; puberty, then it is variable, and, of course, is not perpe-
“tual. If its dimensions be such as it ultimately retains,
“ when released from body, then it has been uniformly such
‘ in its original and intermediate associations with corporeal
“frames. If it yet be of a finite magnitude, it is not
 ubiquitary and eternal.’


* Sanc.on Br. Sir, 2. 2.§ 6. (S. 33.) + Ib. S. 34-36.
200 2


388 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS,


The doctrine of atoms, which the Jainas have m common
with the Bauddhas and the Vaiséshicas (followers of Ca-
NADE) is controverted by the Védantins.* ‘The train of
reasoning is to the following effect: “ Inherent qualities of
“ the cause,’ the Vaiséshicas and the rest argue, “give origin
“to the like qualities in the effect, as white yarn makes
“white cloth: were a thinking being the world’s cause, it
“would be endued with thought.’ The answer is, that
according to CANADE himself, substances great and long
result from atoms minute and short : like qualities then are
not always found in the cause and in the effect.

‘ The whole world, with its mountains, seas, &c., consists
“of substances composed of parts disposed to union: as
“cloth is wove of a multitude of threads. The utmost
“ sub-division of compound substances, pursued to the last
* degree, arrives at the atom, which is eternal, being sim-
“ ple: and such atoms, which are the elements, earth, water,
‘fire, and air, become the world’s cause, according to
“CaNApe: for there can be no effect without a cause.
“ When they are actually and universally separated, disso-
“lution of the world has taken place. At its renovation,
“ atoms concur by an unseen virtue, which occasions action :
“ and they form double atoms, and so on, to constitute air ;
“ then fire; next water ; and afterwards earth ; subsequently
“ body with its organs; and ultimately this whole world.
“The concurrence of atoms arises from action (whether of
“ one or both) which must have a cause: that cause, alleged
‘ to be an unseen virtue, cannot be insensible; for an insen-
‘ sible cause cannot incite action : nor canit be design, for a
“ being capable of design is not yet existent, coming later
“in the progress of creation. Either way, then, no action
“can be; consequently no union or disunion of atoms ; and


* Br. Sitr. 2. 2,§ 2. and § 3. (S. 11-17.)


ar


SECT OF JINA. 389


“ these, therefore, are not the cause of the world’s forma-
“ tion or dissolution. on

* Eternal atoms and transitory double atoms differ utterly ;
“ and union of discordant principles cannot take place. If
“aggregation be assumed as a reason of their union, still
“the aggregate and its integrants are utterly different ;
“and an intimate relation is further to be sought, as a
“ reason for the aggregation. Even this assumption there-
‘fore fails.

“ Atoms must be essentially active or inactive: were they
“essentially active, creation would be perpetual; if es-
f sentially inactive, dissolution would be constant.

* Etemity of causeless atoms is incompatible with proper-
‘ ties ascribed to them; colour, taste, smell, and tactility :
* for things possessing such qualities are seen to be coarse
“and transient. Earth, endued with those four properties,
“is gross ; water, possessing three, is less so; fire, having
* two, is still less ; and air, with one, is fine. Whether the
“ same be admitted or denied in respect of atoms, the argu-
“ment is either way confuted: earthy particles, coarser
‘ than aérial, would not be minute in the utmost degree ;
“ or atoms possessing but a single property, would not be
“ like their effects possessing several.

‘The doctrine of atoms is to be utterly rejected, having
“been by no venerable persons received, as the Sane’hya
* doctrine of matter, a plastic principle, has been, in part,
“by Menu and other sages.”*

Points, on which the sectaries differ from the orthodox,
rather than those on which they conform, are the subjects
of the present treatise. On one point of conformity, how-
ever, it may be right to offer a brief remark, as it is one on
which the Jainas appear to lay particular stress. It con-


* Sano., &e. on Br. Siitr. 2. 2.§ 3.(S. 17.)


390 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


cerns the transmigration of the soul, whose destiny is espe-
cially governed by the dying thoughts, or fancies entertained
atthe moment of dissolution.* The Védas,+ in like man-
ner, teach that the thoughts, inclinations, and resolves of
man, and such peculiarly as predominate in his dying
moments, determine the future character, and regulate the —
subsequent place, in transmigration. As was his thought
in one body, such he becomes in another, into which he
accordingly passes.


Secr or Buppua.


The Bauddhas or Saugatas, followers of Buppua or
Sueara (terms of the same import, and corresponding to
Jina or ARHAT) are also called Mucta-cachha, alluding
to a peculiarity of dress, apparently a habit of wearing the
hem of the lower garment untucked. They are not unfre-
quently cited by their adversaries as (JVésticas) atheists,
or rather, disowners of another world.

Buppua muNI, so he is reverently named by the
opponents of his religious system, is the reputed author of
sutras, constituting a body of doctrine termed @gama or
astra, words which convey a notion of authority and holi-
ness. The Buppua here intended, is no doubt the last,
who is distinguished by the names of GauTAma and Sicya,
among other appellations.

Either from diversity of instruction delivered by him to
his disciples at various times, or rather from different con-
structions of the same text, more or less literal, and varying
with the degree of sagacity of the disciple, have arisen no
less than four sects among the followers of Buppua. Com-


* See Transact. of the Roy. Asiat. Soc., vol. i. p. 437.

t+ Br. Sar. 1.2.1.

t Quotations from them in the Sanserié language occur in com-
mentaries on the Védanta: (the Bhémati on Br. Sir, 2.2.19.)


SECT OF BUDDHA. 39]


mentators of the Védanta, giving an account of this schism
of the Bauddhas, do not agree in applying the scale of
intellect to these divisions of the entire sect, some attribut-
ing to acuteness or superior intelligence, that which others
ascribe to simplicity or inferior understanding.

Without regarding, therefore, that scale, the distinguish-
ing tenets of each branch of the sect may be thus stated.
Some maintain that all is void, (sarva Sémya) following, as
it seems, a literal interpretation of Buppua’s sétras. To
these the designation of Madhyamica is assigned by several
of the commentators of the Védénta; and in the marginal
notes of one commentary, they are identified with the
Charvacas: but that is an error.

Other disciples of Buppua except internal sensation or
intelligence (vijnyana) and acknowledge all else to be
void. They maintain the eternal existence of conscious
sense alone. These are called Yégacharas.

Others, again, affirm the actual existence of external
objects, no less than of internal sensations: considering
external as perceived by senses ; and internal as inferred
by reasoning.

Some of them recognise the immediate perception of ex-
terior objects. Others contend for a mediate apprehen-
sion of them, through images, or resembling forms, pre-
sented to the intellect : objects they insist are inferred, but
not actually perceived. Hence two branches of the sect of
Buppua: one denominated Sautrantica; the other Vai-
bhashica.

As these, however, have many tenets in common, they
may be conveniently considered together ; and are so treated
of by the scholiasts of VyAsa’s Brahme-sitras: under-
standing one adhicarana (the 4th of the 2d chapter in the 2d
lecture) to be directed against these two sects of Bud-
dhists ; and the next following one (2. 2. 5.) to be addressed


392 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


to the Yégacharas ; serving, however, likewise for the con-
futation of the advocates of an universal vyoid.*

The Sautrantica and Vaibhashica sects, admitting then
external (bahya) and internal (abhyantara) objects, dis-
tinguish, under the first head, elements (bAéta) and that
which appertains thereto (bhautica), namely, organs and
sensible qualities ; and under the second head, intelligence
(chitta), and that which unto it belongs (chaitta).

The elements (bhita or mahabhita) which they reckon
four, not acknowledging a fifth, consist of atoms. The
Bauddhas do not, with the followers of CaNApeE, affirm
double atoms, triple, quadruple, &c. as the early gradations
of composition ; but maintain indefinite atomic aggregation,
deeming compound substances to be conjoint primary
atoms.

Earth, they say, has the nature or peculiar character of
hardness ; water, that of fluidity ; fire, that of heat; and
air, that of mobility. Terrene atoms are hard ; aqueous,
liquid ; igneous, hot ; aérial, mobile. Aggregates of these
atoms partake of those distinct characters. One authority,
however, states, that they attribute to terrene atoms the
characters of colour, savour, odour, and tactility ; to aque-
ous, colour, savour, and tactility ; to igneous, both colour
and tactility ; to aérial, tactility only.+


* This schism among the Bauddhas, splitting into four sects, is
anterior to the age of Sancara curva, who expressly notices all
the four. It had commenced before the composition of the Brahme-
siitras, and consequently before the days of SasaAra swimi and
Cum(rita Baatta; since two, at the least, of those sects, are sepa—
rately confuted. All of them appear to have been indiscriminately
persecuted, when the Bauddhas of every denomination were expelled
from Hindust’hén and the peninsula. Whether the same sects yet
subsist among the Bauddhas of Ceylon, Thibet, and the trans-gangetie
India, and in China, deserves inquiry.


+ RAmAnvusa on Br. Sitr.


SECT OF BUDDHA. 393


The Bauddhas do not recognise a fifth element, acasa,
nor any substance so designated ; nor soul (jéva or 4tman)
distinct from intelligence (chitta) ; nor any thing irreducible
to the four categories above-mentioned.

Bodies, which are objects of sense, are aggregates of
atoms, being composed of earth and other elements. Intel-
ligence, dwelling within body, and possessing individual
consciousness, apprehends objects, and subsists as self;
and, in that view only, is (@tman) self or soul.

Things appertaining to the elements, (bhautica,) the
second of the predicaments, are organs of sense, together
with their objects, as rivers, mountains, &c. They are
composed of atoms. This world, every thing which is
therein, all which consists of component parts, must be
atomical aggregations. They are external; and are per-
ceived by means of organs, the eye, the ear, &c., which
likewise are atomical conjuncts.

Images or representations of exterior objects are pro-
duced ; and by perception of such images or representations,
objects are apprehended. Such is the doctrine of the
Sautranticas upon this point. But the Vaibhashicas ac-
knowledge the direct perception of exterior objects. Both
think, that objects cease to exist when no longer perceived :
they have but a brief duration, like a flash of lightning,
lasting no longer than the perception of them. Their iden-
tity, then, is but momentary: the atoms or component
parts are scattered ; and the aggregation or concourse was
but instantaneous.

' Hence these Buddhists are by their adversaries, the
orthodox Hindus, designated as Péirta—or Sarva-vaina-
Sicas, “ arguing total perishableness ;’ while the followers
of CaNApg, who acknowledge some of their categories to
be eternal and invariable, and reckon only others transitory —
and changeable ; and who insist that indentity ceases with


394 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


any variation in the composition of a body, and that a cor-
poreal frame, receiving nutriment and discharging excre-
tions, undergoes continual change, and consequent early
loss of identity, are for that particular opinion, called Ardha-
vaindsicas, ‘ arguing half-perishableness.’

The second head of the arrangement before-mentioned,
comprising internal objects, viz. intelligence, and that which |
to it appertains, is again distributed into five scandhas,
as follow :—

Ist. Répa-scandha; comprehending organs of sense wal
their objects considered in relation to the person, or the
sensitive and intelligent faculty which is oceupied with
them. Colours and other sensible qualities and things are
external ; and, as such, are classed under the second diyi-
sion of the first head (bhautica), appurtenance of elements :
but, as objects of sensation and knowledge, they are
deemed internal, and therefore recur under the present
head.

2d. Vijnyana-scandha consists in intelligence (chitta),
which is the same with self (@tman) and (vijnyéna) know-
ledge. It is consciousness of sensation, or continuous
course and flow of cognition and sentiment. There is not
any other agent, nor being which acts and enjoys; nor is
there an eternal soul: but merely succession of thought,
attended with individual consciousness abiding within body.

3d. Védana-scandha comprises pleasure, pain, or the
absence of either, and other sentiments excited in the mind
by pleasing or displeasing objects.

4th. Sanjnya-scandha intends the knowledge or belief
arising from names or words: as ox, horse, X&c.; or from
indications or signs, as a house denoted by a flag; and a
man by his staff.

5th. Sanscara-scandha includes passions; as desire,
hatred, fear, joy, sorrow, &c., together with illusion, virtue >


SECT OF BUDDHA. 395


vice, and every other modification of the fancy or imagina-
tion. All sentiments are momentary.

The second of these five scandhas is the same with the
first division of the second general head, chitta, or intelli-
gence. The rest are comprehended under the second head,
chaittica, appurtenance of intellect; and under the larger
designation of adhyatmica, belonging to (4tman) self. The
latter term, in its most extensive sense, includes all the
five scandhas, or branches, moral and personal.

The seeming but unreal course of events, or worldly suc-
cession, external and mental, or physical and moral, is
described as a concatenation of causes and effects in a
continual round.

Concerning the relation of cause and effect, it is to be
premised that proximate cause (/étu) and concurrent occa-
sion (pratyaya) are distinguished: and the distinction is
thus illustrated in respect of both classes, external and
personal.

From seed comes a germ; from this a branch; then a
culm or stem; whence a leafy gem; out of which a bud;
from which a blossom ; and thence, finally, fruit. Where
one is, the other ensues. Yet the seed is not conscious of
producing the germ; nor is this aware of coming from seed :
and hence is inferred production without a thinking cause,
and without a ruling providence.

Again, earth furnishes solidity to the seed, and coherence
to the germ; water moistens the grain; fire warms and
matures it; air or wind supplies impulse to vegetation ; ether
expands the seed ;* and season transmutes it. By concur-
rence of all these, seed vegetates, and a sprout grows.
Yet earth and the rest of these concurrent occasions are


* So the commentaries on Sancara (the Bhdmati, Abharaha, and
Prabha). But the fifth element is not acknowledged by the Baud-
dhas.


aa


396 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


unconscious ; and so are the seed, germ, and the rest of
the effects.

Likewise, in the moral world, where ignorance or error
is, there is passion: where error is not, neither is passion
there. But they are unconscious of mutual relation. |

Again, earth furnishes solidity to the bodily frame ; water
affords to it moisture; fire supplies heat; wind causes
inspiration and respiration ; ether occasions cavities ;* sen-
timent gives corporeal impulse and mental incitement.
Then follows error, passion, &c.

Ignorance (avidyd) or error, is the mistake of supposing:
that to be durable, which is but momentary. Thence comes
passion (sanscéra), comprising desire, aversion, delusion, Se.
From these, concurring in the embryo with paternal seed
and uterine blood, arises sentiment (wijnyana) or incipient
consciousness. From concurrence of this with parental seed
and blood, comes the rudiment of body; its flesh and
blood; its name (n@man) and shape (répa). Thence the
(shad-ayatana), sites of six organs, or seats of the senses,
consisting of sentiment, elements, (earth, &c.), name and
shape (or body), in relation to him whose organs they are.
From coincidence and conjunction of organs with name and
shape (that is, with body) there is feeling (sparsa) or expe-
rience of heat or cold, &e. felt by the embryo or embodied
being. Thence is sensation (védand) of pain, pleasure, &c.
Follows thirst (¢rishna) or longing for renewal of pleasur-
able feeling and desire to shun that which is painful.
Hence is (upadana) effort, or exertion of body or speech.
From this is (bhava) condition of (dharma) merit, or
(adharma) demerit. Thence comes birth (jaz) or aggrega-
tion of the five branches (scandhas).+ The maturity of those


* See the preceding note.
+ One commentary of the Véddnia (viz. the Abharana), explains
bhava as corporeal birth; and jadi genus, kind. Other differences


SECT OF BUDDHA. 397


five branches is (jara) decay. Their dissolution is (marana)
death. Regret of a dying person is (sca) grief. Wailing
is (paridévand) lamentation. Experience of that which is
disagreeable is (duhe’ha) pain or bodily suffrance. But
mental pain is (daurmanasya) discomposure of mind. Upon
death ensues departure to another world. That is followed
by return to this world. And the course of error, with its
train of consequences, recommences.*

Besides these matters, which have a real existence but
momentary duration, the Bauddhas distinguish under the
category and name of (nirépa) unreal, false, or non-
existent, three topics: Ist, wilful and observable destruction
(pratisane’ hya-nirédha) of an existing thing, as the break-
ing of a jar by a stroke of a mallet ; 2d, unobserved nullity
or annihilation (apratisanc’hya-nirédha); and 3d, vacancy
or space (@cdsa) unencompassed and unshielded, or the
imaginary ethereal element.

The whole of this doctrine is formally refuted by the
Védantins. ‘ The entire aggregate, referred to two sources,
“ external and internal, cannot be; nor the world’s course
“ dependent thereon: for the members of it are insensible ;
“ and its very existence is made to depend on the flash of
“thought; yet no other thinking permanent being is ac-
“ knowledged, accumulating that. aggregate, directing it,
“ or enjoying ; nor is there an inducement to activity with-
“ out a purpose, and merely momentary.

“ Nor is the alleged concatenation of events admissible :
‘for there is no reason of it. Their existence depends on
“that of the aggregate of which they are alleged to be
“ severally causes. The objections to the notion of eternal
“ atoms with beings to enjoy, are yet more forcible against


among the Védantin writers, on various minor points of the Buddhist
doctrine, are passed over to avoid tediousness.


* Sanc., Vicu., &e. on Br. Stitr, 2, 2. (S. 19.)


398 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


* momentary atoms with none to enjoy. The various matters
“ enumerated as successive causes, do not account for the
“sum of sensible objects. Nor can they, being but mo-
“ mentary, be the causes of effects: for the moment of the
* one’s duration has ceased, before that of the other’s exist-
“ence commences. Being then a non-entity, it ean be
“no cause. Nor does one last till the other begins, for
“ then they would be contemporaneous.
‘ The ethereal element (Gcé@sa) is not a non-entity: for its
* existence is inferrible from sound.
“ Nor is self or soul momentary: memory and recollee-
“ tion prove it: and there is no doubt nor error herein; for
* the individual is conscious that he is the same who ed
* remembers what he yesterday saw.
* Nor can entity be an effect of non-entity. If the one
‘ might come of the other, then might an effect accrue to a
‘ stranger without effort on his part: a husbandman would
“have a crop of corn without tilling and sowing; a potter
“would have a jar without moulding the clay; a weaver
“would have cloth without weaving the yarn: nor would
“ any one strive for heavenly bliss or eternal deliverance.”*
To confute another branch of the sect of Buppua, the
Védantins argue, that ‘the untruth or non-existence of
“ external objects is an untenable position ; for there is per-
“ ception or apprehension of them: for instance, a stock, a
“wall, a jar, a cloth; and that, which actually is appre-
“ hended, cannot be unexistent. Nor does the existence of
“ objects cease when the apprehension does so. Nor is it
‘ like a dream, a juggle, or an illusion; for the condition of
‘ dreaming and waking is quite different. When awake a
* person is aware of the illusory nature of the dream which
“he recollects.
“ Nor have thoughts or fancies an independent existence :


* Sanc. and other Com. on Br. Sir. 2. 2. § 4. (8. 18-27.)


SECT OF BUDDHA. 399


“ for they are founded on external and sensible objects, the
‘ which, if unapprehended, imply that thoughts must be so
“too. These are momentary: and the same objections
“ apply to a world consisting of momentary thoughts, as to
* one of instantaneous objects.

“The whole doctrine, when tried and sifted, crumbles
‘ like a well sunk in loose sand. The opinions advanced in
“it are contradictory and incompatible: they are severally
“untenable and incongruous. By teaching them to his
‘disciples, Buppua has manifested either his own absur-
“dity and incoherence, or his rooted enmity to mankind,
“ whom he sought to delude.’*

A few observations on the analogy of the doctrine, above
explained, to the Grecian philosophy, may not be here out
of place.

It has been already remarked, in former essays, that the
Bauddhas, \ike the Vaiséshicas, admit but two sources of
knowledge (p. 304 of this volume). Such likewise appears
to have been the opinion of the more ancient Greek philo-
sophers; especially the Pythagoreans: and accordingly
Ocexuus, in the beginning of his treatise on the universe,
declares that he has written such things, concerning the
natare of the universe, as he learned from nature itself by
manifest signs, and conjectured as probable, by thought
through reasoning ; thereby intimating, as is remarked by
his annotator, that the means of knowledge are two.+

Concerning the atomic doctrine, maintained not only
by the Vaiséshicas, or followers of CaNApr, surnamed
CASyapa,t but by the sect of Buppna, and likewise by


* Com. on Br. Sétr. 2. 2. § 5, (8. 28-32.)
+ Opuse. mytholog. phys. et eth. p. 505.


{ A remark may be here made, which was omitted in its proper
place (Part 2 of this essay), that the followers of the atomic sect are
sometimes contumeliously designated by their orthodox opponents, as


400 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


several others as well heterodox as orthodox, no person
needs to be told, that a similar doctrine was maintained by
many among the ancient Greek philosophers; and in par-
ticular by Leucippus (if not previously by Moschus), and
after him by Democritus; and likewise by Empedocles,
who was of the Pythagorean school. They disagreed, as
the Indian philosophers likewise do, respecting the number
of elements or different kinds of atoms. Empedocles ad-
mitted five, developed in the following order: ether, fire,
earth, water, and air. Here we have the five elements
(bhéitta) of the Hindus, including acasa. The great multi-
tude of philosophers, however, restricted the number of
elements to four; in which respect they agree with the
Jainas, Bauddhas, Charvacas and some other sectaries,
who reject the fifth element affirmed by the Hindus in
general, and especially by the orthodox.

In published accounts of the religious opinions of Baud-
dhas and Jainas, derived principally from oral informa-
tion, doubts have been expressed as to the sense attached
by them to the terms which they use to signify the happy
state at which the perfect saints arrive. It has been ques-
tioned whether annihilation, or what other condition short
of such absolute extinction, is meant to be described.

Both these sects, like most others of Indian origin, pro-
pose, for the grand object to which man should aspire, the
attainment of a final happy state, from which there is no
return.


Caéhabhuj (a) or Canabhacsha, in allusion to the founder’s name. Céra
signifies a crow; and the import of Céra-bhuj, synonymous with
Cahdd, is crow-eater (caha-ad). ‘The original name, however, is de-
rivable from cana little, (with ad to eat, or ddd, to receive) implying
abstemiousness or disinterestedness of the person bearing the name.
Conformably with the first of those derivations, CaXipe. himself is
sometimes called Canabhacsha or Cahabhuj.


(a) Sane. on Br. Sittr. 2. 3. § 12. (S. 18.)


SECT OF BUDDHA. 401


All concur in assigning to its attainment the same term,
mucti or mécsha, with some shades of difference in the
interpretation of the word: as emancipation, deliverance
from evil, liberation from worldly bonds, relief from fur-
ther transmigration, &c.

Many other, terms are in use, as synonymous with it;
and so employed by all or nearly all of these sects; to
express a state of final release from the world: such as
amrita, immortality ; apavarga, conclusion, completion, or
abandonment; Sréyas, excellence; nih-Sréyasa, assured
excellence, perfection; cairwalya, singleness; nih-sarana,
exit, departure. But the term which the Bauddhas, as
well as Jainas, more particularly affect, and which however
is also used by the rest, is nirvana, profound calm. In its
ordinary acceptation, as an adjective, it signifies extinct, as
a fire which is gone out; set, as a uminary which has gone
down; defunct, as a saint who has passed away: its etymo-
logy is from vé, to blow as wind, with the preposition nir
used in a negative sense: it means calm and unrufiled.
The notion which is attached to the word, in the accepta-
tion now under consideration, is that of perfect apathy. It
is a condition of unmixed tranquil happiness or ecstacy
(ananda). Other terms (as suc’ha, méha, &e.) distinguish
different gradations of pleasure, joy, and delight. But a
happy state of imperturbable apathy is the ultimate bliss
(ananda) to which the Indian aspires: in this the Jaina, as
well as the Bauddha, concurs with the orthodox Védantin.

Perpetual uninterrupted apathy can hardly be said to
differ from eternal sleep. The notion of it as of a happy
condition seems to be derived from the experience of ecsta~
cies, or from that of profound sleep, from which a person
awakes refreshed. The pleasant feeling is referred back to
the period of actual repose. Accordingly, as I had occa
sion to show in a preceding essay, the Védanta considers the

VOL. I. 2D


402 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


individual soul to be temporarily, during the period of pro-
found sleep, in the like condition of re-union with the
Supreme, which it permanently arrives at on its final eman-
cipation from body.

This doctrine is not that of the Jainas nor Bauddhas.
But neither do they consider the endless repose allotted to
their perfect saints as attended with a discontinuance of
individuality. It is not annihilation, but unceasing apathy,
which they understand to be the extinction (nirvana) of
their saints; and which they esteem to be supreme felicity,
worthy to be sought by practice of mortification, 4 as well as
by acquisition of knowledge.


CuArvacas and LécAYATICAs.


In my first essay on the Philosophy of the Hindus (p.
228, of this volume), it was stated upon the authority of a
scholiast of the Sanc’hya, that CuARvAca, whose name is
familiar as designating a heretical sect called after him, has
exhibited the doctrine of the Jainas. In a marginal note
to a scholiast of the Brahma-sitras, one of the four
branches of the sect of Buppua (the Madhyamica) is
identified with the Charvacas. This I take to be clearly
erroneous ; and upon comparison of the tenets of the Jainas
and Charvacas, as alleged by the commentators of the
Védanta in course of controversy, the other position like-
wise appears to be not correct.

For want of an opportunity of consulting an origimal
treatise on this branch of philosophy, or any connected
summary furnished even by an adversary of opinions pro-
fessed by the Charvacas, no sufficient account can be yet
given of their peculiar doctrine, further than that it is
undisguised materialism. A few of their leading opinions,
however, are to be collected from the incidental notice of
them by opponents.


CHARVACAS AND LOCAYATICAS. 403


A notorious tenet of the sect, restricting to perception
only the means of proof and sources of knowledge, has
been more’ than once adverted to (p. 240 and 304, of this
volume). Further research enables me to enlarge the cata-
logue of means of knowledge admitted by others, with the
addition of probability (s&émbhavt) and tradition (aitihya)
separately reckoned by mythologists (Pauranicas) among
those means.* The latter is however comprehended under
the head of (Sada) oral communication. In regard to
probability or possibility (for the term may be taken in
this lower meaning) as a ground or source of notions, it
must be confessed, that in the text of the mythologists
(their Puranas) a very ample use is made of the latitude ;
and what by supposition might have been and may be, is
put in the place of what has been and is to be.

The Charvacas recognise four (not five) elements, viz.
earth, water, fire, and wind (or air); and acknowledge no
other principles (¢atwa).+

The most important and characteristic tenet of this sect
eoncerns the soul, which they deny to be other than body.
This doctrine is cited for refutation in VyAsa’s sé&tras, as
the opinion of “some ;” and his scholiasts, Buavapéva
miSra and RANGANAT’HA, understand the Charvacas to
be intended. Sancara, BuAscara, and other commen-
tators, name the Léedyaticas ; and these appear to be a
branch of the sect of CuArvAca. SapANANDA, in the
Védanta sara, calls up for refutation no less than four
followers of CuArvAca, asserting that doctrine under
various modifications ; one maintaining, that the gross cor-
poreal frame is identical with the soul; another, that the
corporeal organs constitute the soul; a third affirming,


* Padért ha dipica. + Varhaspatya-sitra, cited by Budscara.
t Sancara on Br. Str. 2. 2.2. and 3. 3. 53.


2p2


404. ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


that the vital functions do so; and the fourth insisting,
that the mind and the soul are the same. In the second
of these instances, SaDANANDA’s scholiast, RAMA TIRT’HA,
names the Lécayatanas, a branch of the Charvaea, as
particularly intended. No doubt they are the same with
the Lécéyaticas of Sancara and the rest. ;

“Seeing no soul but body, they maintain the non-exis-
“tence of soul other than body; and arguing that intelli-
“ gence or sensibility, though not seen in earth, water, fire,
“and air, whether simple or congregate, may nevertheless
“ subsist in the same elements modified in a corporeal frame,
* they affirm that an organic body (céya) endued with sensi-
“bility and thought, though formed of those elements, is

‘othe human person (purusha).*
“ The faculty of thought results from a modificiitial of
* the aggregate elements, in like manner as sugar with a
* ferment and other ingredients becomes an inebriating li-
“quor; and as betel, areca, lime, and extract of cate-
“chu, chewed together, have an exhilarating property,
“ not found in those substances severally, nor in any one of
“ them singly.

“So far there is a difference between animate body and
“inanimate substance. Thought, knowledge, recollection,
“&e., perceptible only where organic body is, are proper-
“ties of an organised frame, not appertaining to exterior
“ substances, or earth and other elements simple or aggre-
‘ gate, unless formed into such a frame.

‘ While there is body, there is thought, and sense of
* pleasure and pain ; none when body is not; and hence,
“as well as from self-consciousness, it is concluded that
* self and body are identical.’

BuAscara AcuAryat quotes the Varhaspatya-sttras


* Sancara, &e. + On Br. Sétr. 3. 3. 53.


CHARVACAS AND LOCAYATICAS. 405


(Vrinaspati’s aphorisms), apparently as the text work
or standard authority of this sect or school ; and the quo-
tation, expressing that “‘ the elements are earth, water,
“ fire and air; and from the aggregation of them in bodily
“organs, there results sensibility and thought, as the ine-
“‘briating property is deduced from a ferment and other
“ ingredients.”

To the foregoing arguments of the Lécayaticas or Char-
vacas, the answer of the Védantins is, that ‘ thought, sen-
“sation, and other properties of soul or consciousness,
“ cease at the moment of death, while the body yet remains ;
“and cannot therefore be properties of the corporeal frame,
“for they have ceased before the frame is dissolved. The
* qualities of body, as colour, &c. are apprehended by others:
“not so those of soul, viz. thought, memory, &c. Their
“existence, while body endures, is ascertained: not their
“ cessation when it ceases. They may pass to other bodies.
‘ Elements, or sensible objects, are not sentient, or capable
“ of feeling, themselves ; fire, though hot, burns not itself;
‘a tumbler, however agile, mounts not upon his own
“shoulders. Apprehension of an object must be distinct
“from the thing apprehended. By means of a lamp, or
“ other light, objects are visible: if a lamp be present, the
“thing is seen; not so, if there be no light. Yet appre-
“hension is no property of the lamp; nor is it a property
“ of body, though observed only where a corporeal frame is.
‘ Body is but instrumental to apprehension.”

Among the Greeks, Dicwarchus of Messene held the
same tenet, which has been here ascribed to the Lécéyaticas,
and other followers of CuArvAca, that there is no such
thing as soul in man; that the principle, by which he per-
ceives and acts, is diffused through the body, is inseparable
from it, and terminates with it.


406 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


MAnfSwaras and PAsupatTas.


The devoted worshippers of Stva or ManfSwara, take
their designation from this last-mentioned title of the deity
whom they adore, and whose revelation they profess to
follow. They are called Méhéswaras, and (as it seems)
Siva-bhagavatas.

The ascetics of the sect wear their hair braided, and rolled
up round the head like a turban; hence they are denomi-
nated (and the sect after them) Jatadhari, ‘ wearing a
* braid.’

The Mahéswaras are said to have borrowed much of
their doctrine from the Séanc’hya philosophy: following
CaPiLa on many points; and the theistical system of
PaTANJALI on more. :

They have branched into four divisions: one, to which —
the appellation of Saivas, or worshippers of Siva, especially
appertains: a second, to which the denomination of Pasu-
patas belongs, as followers of PaSupari, another title of ,
ManfSwara: the third bears the name or Carunica-sid= |
dhantins; but RAMANvsA* assigns to this third branch :
the appellation of Calamuc’has : the fourth is by all ‘nowt
Capilas or Capilicas.

They appeal for the text of their doctrine to a book,
which they esteem holy, considering it to have been revealed’
by Mauf&Swara, Siva, or PaSupatt: all names of the
same deity. The work, most usually bearing the latter title,
Pasupati-sastra (Mahéswara-siddhanta, or Sivagama), is
divided into five lectures (adhydya), treating of as many
categories (padart’has). The enumeration of them will
afford occasion for noticing the principal and distinguishing
tenets of the sect.


* Com. on Br. Str. 2, 2. 37.


MAHESWARAS AND PASUPATAS. 407


I. Carana, or cause. The Pésupatas hold, that [swara,
the Supreme Being, is the efficient cause of the world, its
creator (carté) and superintending (adhish?’ hata) or ruling
providence ; and not its material cause likewise. They,
however, identify the one supreme Gop, with Siva, or
PaSupatt, and give him the title of ManféSwara.

II. Carya or effect : which is nature (pracriti), or plastic
matter (pradhana), as the universal material principle is by
the Pasupatas denominated, conformably with the termi-
nology of the Sénec’hyas ; and likewise mahat, the great
one, or intelligence, together with the further development
of nature, viz. mind, consciousness, the elements, &c.

III. Yéga, abstraction ; as perseverance in meditation on
the syllable 6m, the mystic name of the deity; profound
contemplation of the divine excellence, &c.

IV. Vidhi, enjoined rites; consisting in acts, by per-
formance of which merit is gained ; as bath, and ablutions,
or the use of ashes in their stead ; and divers acts of enthu-
siasm, as of a person overjoyed and beside himself.

V. Duhe’hanta, termination of ill, or final liberation
(méesha).

The purpose, for which these categories are taught and
explained, is the accomplishment’ of deliverance from the
bondage (bandha) or fetters (pasa), viz. illusion (maya),
&e., in which the living soul (jéva or atma), by this sect
termed pagu, is entangled and confined. For it is here
maintained, that pasus (living souls) are individual sentient
beings, capable of deliverance from evil, through the know-
ledge of Gop and the practice of prescribed rites, together
with perseverance in profound abstraction.

The Pésupatas argue, that as a potter is the efficient,
not the material, cause of the jar made by him; so the
sentient being, who presides over the world, is the efficient,
not the material, cause of it: for the superintendent, and


408 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


that which is by him superintended, cannot be one and the
same. < tett

In a more full exposition of their opinions* theyieteilinas
as enumerating under the heads of effects and causes, those
which are secondary; and as subdividing likewise the heads
of prescribed rites and termination of ill.

I. They distinguish ten effects (carya): namely, ie
principles (¢atwa), which are the five elements : earth, water,
fire, air, and ether ; and five qualities (guia) colour, &e.

II. They reckon thirteen causes or instruments (cérama) ;
viz. five organs of sense, and as many organs of action ;
and three internal organs, intelligence, mind, and conscious-
ness. These thirteen causes or means are the same with
the thirteen instruments of knowledge enumerated by Ca-
PILA and his followers, the Sdane’hyas.

III. Yéga, abstraction, does not appear to admit any
subdivision.

IV. Enjoined rules (widhi) are distributed under two
heads: Ist. vrata, 2d. dwara.

To the first head (vrata or vow) appertains the use of
ashes in place of water for bath or ablutions: that is,
first, in lieu of bathing thrice a day; at morning, noon,
and evening: secondly, instead of ablutions for special
causes, as purification from uncleanness after evacuation of
urine, feces, &c.

To the same head belongs likewise the sleeping upon
ashes : for which particular purpose they are solicited from
householders, in like manner as food and other alms are
begged.

This head comprises also exultation (upaléiliaa which
comprehends laughter, dance, song, bellowing as a bull,
bowing, recital of prayer, &c.


* Vidhydbharana on Br. Sitr. 2. 2. 37.


zu


= = =


MAHESWARAS AND PASUPATAS. 409


The second head (dwéra) consists of, Ist, pretending

sleep, though really awake; 2d, quaking, or tremulous
motion of members, as if afflicted with rheumatism or
paralytic affection; 3d, halting, as if lame; 4th, joy,
as of a lover at sight of his beloved mistress; 5th, affec-
tation of madness, though quite sane ; 6th, incoherent dis-
course.
V. Termination of pain (duhe’hénta) or deliverance from
evil, is twofold: one is absolute extinction of all ills; the
other is acquisition of transcendent power, and exercise of
uncontrolled and irresistible will. The last comprises energy
of sense and energy of action.

The energy of sense (dric-sacti) varies according to the
sense engaged, and is of five sorts: Ist, vision (dargana),
or distinct and perfect perception of minute, remote, con-
fused and undefined objects ; 2d, (Sravana) perfect hear-
ing of sound ; 3d, (manana) intuitive knowledge, or science
without need of study; 4th, (wijnydna) certain and un-
doubted knowledge, by book or fact; Sth, (sarvajnyatwa)
omniscience.

Energy of action (criya-Sacti) is properly single of its
kind. It admits nevertheless of a threefold subdivision ;
which, however, is not well explained, in the only work in
which I have found it noticed.*

The opinions of the Pésupatas and other Mahéswaras,
are heretical, in the estimation of the Véddntins, because
they do not admit pantheism, or creation of the universe
by the deity out of his own essence.

The notion of a plastic material cause, termed pradhdna,+
borrowed from the Sane’hyas, and that of a ruling provi-

* Abharaha (§ 39) 2.2.27. The only copy of it seen by me is in this
part apparently imperfect.


+ That by which the world is accomplished (pradhiyaté), and in
which it is deposited at its dissolution, is first (pradhana) mutter.


410 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


dence, taken from ParaNJALt, are controverted, the one
in part, the other in the whole, by the orthodox followers
of the Védanta.

“An argument drawn from the prevalence of pain, plea-
“ sure, and illusion in the universe, that the cause must have
“ the like qualities and be brute matter, is incongruous,’ say
the Védantins, ‘for it could not frame the diversities, ex-
‘ terior and interior, which occur : these argue thought and
‘ intention, in like manner as edifices and gardens, which
“ assuredly are not constructed without design. Nor could
“ there be operation without an operator; clay is wrought
“ by the potter who makes the jar; a chariot is drawn by
* horses yoked to it; but brute matter stirs not without
‘impulse. Milk nourishes the calf, and water flows in a
‘ stream, but. not spontaneously ; for the cow, urged by
‘ affection, suckles her calf, which, incited by hunger, sucks
“ the teat ; a river flows agreeably to the inclination of the
‘ground, as by providence directed. But there is not, ac-
‘ cording to the Sane’hyas and Pasupatas, any thing besides
‘ matter itself to stir or to stop it, nor any motive: for soul
‘is a stranger in the world. Yet conversions are not spon-
“taneous: grass is not necessarily changed to milk ; for
« particular conditions must co-exist : swallowed by a cow,
“not by an ox, the fodder is so converted. Or, granting
‘that activity is natural to matter, still there would be
“no purpose. The halt, borne by the blind, directs the
‘ progress: a magnet attracts contiguous iron. But direc-


‘tion and contiguity are wanting to the activity of plastic


‘matter. The three qualities of goodness, foulness, and
‘ darkness, which characterize matter, would not vary to
“become primary and secondary in the derivative prin-
3 ciples of intelligence and the rest, without some external
“instigator whomsoever. Apart from the energy of a
“thinking being, those qualities cannot be argued to have


MAHESWARAS AND PASUPATAS, 411.


“a natural tendency to the production of such effects as
“ are produced.’*

‘The Pasupatas’ notion of Supreme Gop being the
“ world’s cause, as governing both (pradhana) matter and
“(purusha) embodied spirit, is incongruous,’ say again
the Védantins, ‘for he would be chargeable with passion
“and injustice, distributing good and evil with partiality.
“Nor can this imputation be obviated by reference to the
‘ influence of works: for instigation and instigator would
“be reciprocally dependent. Nor can the objection be
‘ avoided by the assumption of an infinite succession (with-
“ out a beginning) of works and their fruits.

“ Neither is there any assignable connexion by which his
‘guidance of matter and spirit could be exercised: it is
“not conjunction, nor aggregation, nor relation of cause
“and effect. Nor,can the material principle, devoid of all
‘ sensible qualities, be guided and administered. Nor can
‘ matter be wrought without organs. But, if the Supreme
‘ Being have organs, he is furnished with a corporeal frame,
‘and is not Gop, and he suffers pain, and experiences
‘ pleasure, as a finite being. The infinity of matter and of
“embodied spirit, and Gop’s omniscience, are incompati-
“ble; if he restrict them in magnitude and number, they
‘are finite ; if he cannot define and limit them, he is not
* omniscient (and omnipotent).’+

A further objection to the Sane’hya doctrine, and conse-
quently to the Pésupata grounded on it, is “its alleged in-
* consistencies and contradictions :{ one while eleven organs
“are enumerated, at another seven only, the five senses
‘ being reduced to one cuticular organ, the sense of feeling.


* Sano., &e. on Br, Siitr. 2. 2.§ 1, (8. 1-10.)
+ Sanc., &c. on Br. Sitr. 2. 2. § 7.
t Ib. 2. 2.§1.(S. 2, and 1.)


412 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


‘The elements are in one place derived immediately from

“the great or intelligent principle; in another, from con-
“sciousness. ‘Three internal faculties are reckoned in some
‘ instances, and but one in others.’

The grounds of this imputation, however, do not ens
Such inconsistencies are not in the text of Capria, nor in
that of the Carica: and the Véddénta itself seems more
open to the same reproach: for there is much discrepancy
in the passages of the Véda, on which it relies.

The point on which the Pasupatas most essentially differ
from the orthodox, the distinct and separate existence of the
efficient and material causes of the universe, is common to
them with the ancient Greek philosophers before Aristotle.
Most of these similarly affirmed two, and only two, natural
causes, the efficient and the material ; the first active, moy-
ing: the second, passive, moved ; one effective, the other
yielding itself to be acted on by it. Ocellus terms the
latter verse generation, or rather production; the former
its cause, airiz ysvicews.* Empedocles, in like manner,
affirmed two principles of nature; the active, which is
unity, or Gop ; the passive, which is matter.+

Here we have precisely the- pracriti and cérana of the
Indian philosophers: their upadana and nimitta-caraia,
material and efficient causes. The similarity is too strong
to have been accidental. Which of the two borrowed from
the other I do not pretend to determine: yet, adverting to
what has come to us of the history of Pythagoras, I shall
not hesitate to acknowledge an inclination to consider the
Grecian to have been on this, as on many other pomts,
indebted to Indian instructors.


* Ocellus de Universo, c. 2.,in Opuse. Mythol. p. 505. Cicero,
Academ.


+ Sext. Empir. ady, Math, ix. 4.


PANCHARATRAS OR BHAGAVATAS. 413


It should be observed, that some among the Greek phi-
losophers, like the Sanc’hyas, who follow Capixa, ad-
mitted only one material principle and no efficient cause.
This appears to have been the doctrine of Heraclitus in
particular. His psegmata correspond with the sheer (¢an-
matra) particles of Cariia’s Sanc’hya ; his intelligent and
rational principle, which is the cause of production and
dissolution, is CaApiLa’s buddhi or mahat ; as his material
principle is pradhana or pracriti: the development of
corporeal existences, and their return to the first principle
at their dissolution,* correspond with the upward and down-
ward way, 6dds ave AN sdd5 naeTO, of Heraclitus.+-

- I shall not pursue the parallel further. It would not
hold for all particulars, nor was it to be expected that it
should.


PANCHARATRAS or BHAGAVATAS.


Among the Vaishnavas or special worshippers of Visn-
Xu, is a sect distinguished by the appellation of Pancha-
ratras, and also called Vishiu-Bhagavatas, or simply
Bhagavatas. The latter name might, from its similarity,
lead to the confounding of these with the followers of the
Bhagavad-gita, or of the Sri Bhagavata purana. The
appropriate and distinctive appellation then is that of Pan-
charatra, derived from the title of the original work which
contains the doctrine of the sect. It is noticed in the Bha-
rata, with the Sane’hya, Yoga and Pasupata, as a system
deviating from the Védas ; and a passage quoted by San-
carA-AcHARYA seems to intimate that its promulgator
was SANpiLyA, who was dissatisfied with the Védas, not
finding in them a prompt and sufficient way of supreme
excellence (para-sréyas) and final beatitude ; and therefore


* See p. 254, 255 of this volume. + _Diog. Laert. ix. 8 and 9.


414 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


he had recourse to this sastra. It is, however, by most
ascribed to NArAyaNa or VAsupfiva himself; and the
orthodox account for its heresy, as they do for that of
Buppua’s doctrines, by presuming delusion wilfully prac-
tised on mankind by the holy or divine personage, who
revealed the tantra, or dgama, that is, the sacred book in
question, though heterodox.

Some of its partisans nevertheless pretend, that it con-
forms with one of the sac’has of the Véda, denominated the
E’cayana. This does not, however, appear to be the case 5
nor is it clear, that any such S4c’ha is forthcoming, or has
ever existed.

Many of this sect practise the (sanscéras) initiatory cere-
monies of regeneration and admission to holy orders, accord-
ing to the forms directed by the Vajasanéyi-sac’ha.of the
Yajurvéda. Others, abiding rigidly by their own rules,
perform the initiatory rites, in a different, and even contrary


mode, founded, as is pretended, on the supposed E’cayana--


sacha. But their sacerdotal initiation is questioned, and
their rank as Bréhmanas contested, on the ground of the
insufficiency of their modes unsanctioned by either of the
three genuine and authoritative Védas.

The religious doctrine of the sect is, by admission of
Sancara and other commentators of the Védanta, recon-
cileable on many points with the Véda; but in some essen=
tial respects it is at direct variance with that authority,
and consequently deemed heretical ; and its confutation is
the object of the 8th or last adhicarana in the controversial
chapter of the Brahme-sitras (2. 2. 8.)

Yet RAMANvsA, in his commentary on those Sétras,
defends the superhuman origin and correct scope of the
Pancharatra ; the authority of which he strenuously main-
tains, and earnestly justifies its doctrine on the controverted
points ; and even endeavours to put a favourable construc-


PANCHARATRAS OR BHAGAVATAS. 415 —


tion on BAparAyaNa’s text, as upholding rather than
condemning its positions.

. VAsupéva, who is VisaNu, is by this sect identified
with Bhagavat, the Supreme Being ; the one, omniscient,
first principle, which is both the efficient and the material
cause of the universe : and is likewise its superintending
and ruling providence. That being, dividing himself, be-
came four persons, by successive production. From him
immediately sprung Sancarshana, from whom came Pra-
dyumna ; and from the latter issued Aniruddha. Sancar-
shana is identified with the living soul (jéva) ; Pradyum-
na, with mind (manas); and Aniruddha, with (ahancara)
egotism, or consciousness.

In the mythology of the more orthodox Vaishiavas,
VAsupfva is Crisuna; Sancarshana is his brother Baa-
rAMA; Pradyumna is his son CAMa (Cupid); and Ani-
ruddha is son of CAma.

VAsupkva, or Bhagavat, being supreme nature, and
sole cause of all, the rest are effects. He has six especial
attributes, being endued with the six pre-eminent qualities
of

Ist. Knowledge (jnydana), or acquaintance with everything
animate or inanimate constituting the universe.

2d. Power (Sacti), which is the plastic condition of the
world’s nature.

3d. Strength (dala), which creates without effort, and
maintains its own creation without labour.

4th. Irresistible will (aiswarya), power not to be opposed
or obstructed.

5th. Vigour (virya), which counteracts change, as_that
of milk into curds, and obviates alteration in nature.

6th. Energy (¢éjas), or independence of aid or adjunct
in the world’s creation, and capacity of subjugating
others.


416 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


From the diffusion and co-operation of knowledge with
strength, Sancarshaza sprung ; from vigour and irresistible
will, Pradyumna ; and from power and energy, Aniruddha.
Or they may all be considered as partaking of all the six
attributes.

Deliverance, consisting in the scission of worldly shackles,
is attainable by worship of the deity, knowledge of him,
and profound contemplation ; that is, lst, by resorting to
the holy temples, with body, thought, and speech subdued,
and muttering the morning prayer, together with hymns
and praise of (Bhagavat) the deity, and with reverential
bowing and other ceremonies; 2dly. By gathering and
providing blossoms, and other requisites of worship ; 3dly.
By actual performance of divine worship ; 4thly. By study
of the sacred text (Bhagavat-sdstra) and reading, hearing,
and reflecting on that and other holy books (puraémas and
agamas), which are conformable to it; 5thly. By profound
meditation and absorbed contemplation after evening wor-
ship, and intensely fixing the thoughts exclusively on (Bha-
gavat) the deity.

By such devotion, both active and contemplative (criya-.
yoga and jnydna-yoga), performed at five different times of
each day, and persisted in for a hundred years, VAsupiva
is attained; and by reaching his divine presence, the votary
accomplishes final deliverance, with everlasting beatitude.

Against this system, which is but partially heretical, the
objection upon which the chief stress is laid by VyAsa, as
interpreted by Sancara* and the rest of the scholiasts, is,
that ‘ the soul would not be eternal, if it were a produe-
“tion, and consequently had a beginning. Springing from
* the deity, and finally returning to him, it would merge in
“its cause and be re-absorbed; there would be neither


* Br, Siitr. 2. 2. 8. (42-45). Sanc., &e.


SECT OF PANCHARATRAS OR BHAGAVATAS. 417


- reward nor punishment; neither a heaven, nor a hell:
“and this doctrine virtually would amount to (nésticya)
“denial of another world. Nor can the soul, becoming
“active, produce mind; nor again this, becoming active,
“produce consciousness. An agent does not generate an
* instrument, though he may construct one by means of
“tools; a carpenter does not create, but fabricate, an axe.
“Nor can four distinct persons be admitted, as so many
‘forms of the same self-divided being, not springing one
* from the other, but all of them alike endued with divine
“ attributes, and consequently all four of them gods. ‘There
“is but one Gop, one Supreme Being. It is vain to
“assume more; and the Pénchardatra itself affirms the
“ unity of Gop.’

A few scattered observations have been thrown out on
the similarity of the Greek and Indian philosophy, in this
and preceding portions of the present essay. It may be
here remarked by the way, that the Pythagoreans, and
Ocellus in particular, distinguish as parts of the world, the
heaven, the earth, and the interval between them, which they
term lofty and aérial, Airy D2 len, ovgavay, viv, 7 merakd rovrar’
0 Oh peerdecsov nal digsoy dvopdleras.™

Here we have precisely the (swar, bhu, and antartcsha)
heaven, earth, and (¢ranspicuous) intermediate region of the
Hindus.

Pythagoras, as after him Ocellus, peoples the middle or
aérial region with demons, as heaven with gods, and the
earth with men. Here again they agree precisely with the
Hindus, who place the gods above, man beneath, and
spiritual creatures, flitting unseen, in the intermediate region.
The Védas throughout teem with prayers and incantations


* Ocell. c. 3., in Opuse. Myth. p. 528.
VOL. I. 2E


418 ON THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE HINDUS.


to avert and repel the molestation of aérial spirits, mis--


chievous imps, who crowd about the sacrifice and intpede
the religious rite.

Nobody needs to be reminded, that Pythagoras and his
successors held the doctrine of metempsychosis, as the
Hindus universally do the same tenet of transmigration of
souls.

They agree likewise generally in distinguishing the
sensitive, material organ (manas), from the rational and
conscious living soul (jivatman):* bvues and ety of Pytha-
goras; one perishing with the body, the other immortal.

Like the Hindus, Pythagoras, with other Greek philoso-
phers, assigned a subtle ethereal clothing to the soul apart
from the corporeal part, and a grosser clothing to it wher
united with body ; the sécshma (or linga) Sartra and st’hila
Sartra of the Sanc’hyas and the rest.+-

They concur even in the limit assigned to mutation and
change; deeming all which is sublunary, mutable, and that
which is above the moon subject to no change in itself.
Accordingly, the manes doomed to a succession of births,
rise, as the Védas teach, no further than the moon: while
those only pass that bourne who are never to return. But this
subject rather belongs to the Védanta: and I will therefore
terminate this treatise ; purposing to pursue the subject in
a future essay, in which I expect to show that a greater
degree of similarity exists between the Indian doctrine and
that of the earlier than of the later Greeks; and, as it is
scarcely probable that the communication should have taken
place, and the knowledge been impartéd, at the precise


* Empedocles. See Brucker, Hist. Crit. Phil. j. 1117.
+ See page 245 of this volume.
t Ocellus, Opuse. Mythol, 527.


=


SECT OF PANCHARATRAS OR BHAGAVATAS. 419


interval of time which intervened between the earlier and
later schools of Greek philosophy, and especially between
the Pythagoreans and Platonists, I should be disposed to
conclude that the Indians were in this instance teachers
rather than learners.


" oreag


ae ieee


ao ae "
Bim as oreo rw “bokewe i
“sien gthtiaeqete =hires:! avesen


Pe


a Ag capt eta cb! wi bleora b, atetrqdul ba
* 5 Ate ’
ea << pea Git Ay etal ni sil
ke - ‘ =
ina
nea


INDEX.


A.

Abhiva, p. 264, 288, 304.

Abhimana, 242,

Abhishéca, 39.

Abhyantara, 392.

Assa, 46,

Ablutions, 123, 136.

Absorption of the soul in the Su-
preme Being, 238, 365, 366,
376.

Acééa, 243, 268, 275, 338, 346,
373, 386, 393, 398.

Acé8ésticéya, 386,

Achéra, 302.

Achéra chandricé, 149.

Achérédersa, 149.

Ach’ havéc, 135, 190.

ACHYUTA CRIsHNANANDA TiRT’-
HA, 337.

Adbhiita, Adbhita bréhmaha, 82.

Adharma, 286, 386, 396.

Adharmésticéya, 386.

Adhicarahas, 297, 300, 316, 329,
391. ;

Adhisht hatri, 407.

Adhwara, 73.

Adhwaryu, 15, 135.

Adhyaya, 19, 36, 54, 60.

Aopit, 152,

Avirya, the sun, 56.

Adityas, 32, 38, 75, 208.


ApwaiTinanpnA, 333, 336.

Apwayinanpa, 336.

Agamas, 21, 390, 414, 416.

Aaastya, 23, 29.

AGHAMARSHANA, 33.

Aghitin, 384.

Aen1, author of part of the Yajur
véda,74. Incarnation of Acn1,
230.

Agnidhra, 190.

Agni puréha, 125.

Agni rahasya, 60, 326.

Agnishtoma, 55, 75, 83, 190.

Ahancara, 242, 415.

Arnprivaki, 144.

Aindri, 187.

Aiswarya, 415.

Airarfya, 46.

Aitaréya aranyaca, 46, &e.

Aitaréya bréhmaha, 25, 31, 36.
&e.

Aitaréya upanishad, 47, 91, 326.

Aitihya, 403.

AitiSivana, 296.

Ajé, 348,

AsfraSarru, 53, 65, 346.

AsiGarta, 23.

Ajiva, 381, 382.

Alocacdsa, 386.

AmBarisna, 24,

Amnfsuf'nya, 40. —


422 INDEX.


Ambhas, 47.

Ameuini, 32.

Ampurina, 32, 33.

Amritavindu upanishad, 95.

ANALANANDA, 333.

Ananda, 77, 401.

Ananpaciri, 62, 95.

Ananpasnyina, 76, 83, 93.

Ananp&Srama, 92.

Ananpatintna, 46, 83.

Anandamaya, 338.

ANANTATiRT’HA, 334.

Anandavalli upanishad, 97.

Ancestors, ceremonies performed
in their honour, 180, &e.

Aniaja, 373.

Andhra dialect, 315.

An@a, 24, 41.

Anair, 93.

Anairas, 23, 24, 35, 40, 58, 67,
93, 116, 341.

Aniructa gana, 81.

Aniruddha, 415, 416.

Anna, 374.

Annamaya, 373.

Anomalies of the dialect of the
Vedas, 316.

Anrtaca, 145.

Antardya, 384.

Antaricsha, 417.

Antaryamin, 341.

Anu, 347.

Anubhéva, 266, 289.

Anucramanhi 22, 26, 27, 98.

Anugamana, 120,

Anuména, 303.

Anumari, 152, 193.

Anuradha, 200.

Anush? hana Sarira, 246.

Anushthubh, 35.


Anuvécas of the
the White Ya 1
of the Black Yajur
of the A? harvana véda

Anuvaha, 190.

Anwayért ha pracisicé, 33

Ap, 206, 374.

Apichyas, 38.

Apadéésa, 292.

Apéna, 48, 195.. Sa

ApinTaRATAMAS, 327, ei at 2

Apastama, 17, 100, aes 44,
200, 314.

Apastambiyas, 17.

Apavarga, 401.


4
eke


Apratisane’ hya nirodha, B78
Apravritti, 383. finns a
Apsarases, 115. '


Apta vacya, 303.
Aptya, 28, 38.
Apirva, 318. &
Apyiva picsuira, 333, 337.
Arahya of the Rig véda, 46, of the
Taittiriya Yajur vida, 76.


Arahyaca, 46. Fifth <a


307. AoW o F
Arahya gana, 80,82.
Archica, 80. see
Archica gana, 80, 81. ld


Ardha vaindsicas, 394. rt ae
Argha, 135, 166. cadets
Arghya, 206. ire sh
Aruat, 380, 390, &e.
Arhatas, 380, &e. wit
ARINDAMA, 46,
Arguna, 72.
Arha, 82.
Arshaya bréhmana, 8).
Art ha, 272.
Art hapatti, 303. °


INDEX. 423

Art havéda, 302. Av harvasiras upanishad, 95.
Aru&a, 37, 54, 83, 84, 87. Atheistical Séne’hya, 236, 251,
Arunpuati, 115. 252.
Aruhiya or Aruniyoga upanishad, | Atirétra, 75.

95. Ativéhica, 245,
ARYAMAN, 78, 215, 220. Atmabodha upanishad, 112.
Asédhu, 384. Atman, 244, 342, 393, &e. 407.
Asamit1, 25. Atmé upanishad, 95.
Asandivat, 40. Atoms, 242, 278, 347, 388, 399.
Asanga, 24. Arriva, 16, 296.
Asat, 33. Arréyf, 328.
Asclepias, juice of the acid, 55, | Atréyi Sicha, 16,74.

73. See Soma. Arri, 23, 41, 154.
Ashtaca, 73. Aryarirt1, 43.
Asicni, 137. Aue’ hydyas, 17.
Asléshé, 90, 109. Avbu1éf, 328, 347, 368.


ASmarat’HyA, 328, 343, 347,

Asrama upanishad, 97.

Asrava, 382.

Asticaya, 385.

Asu, 52.

Asurt, 103, 144, 230, 231, 260.

Aswabala, 316.

ASwata, 69, 95,

ASwarkyana, 15, 46, 95, 100,
307.

Aswaléyani sacha, 19.

Aswamidha, 55, 61, &e. 73, 122,
238,

Aswamidhya, 61,

ASwapati, 84,

ASwartariSwa, 84, 86.

Afwina (month), 186, 193.

Agwini, 109.

A&Swini, 207, 213.

ASwins, 29, 32, 56, 58, 109, 207,
213.

Ar’HARVAN, 11, 56, 59, 67, 68, 93.

Atharva or Atharvaha véda, 10,
67,79, 89, &e.


.AupumBaRA, 145.


Aupamanyavas, 17. '

Avachatruca, 41.

Avaha, 190.

Avatéras, 46,110, of Aen1, 230,
hereditary avatéra of GanfSa,
199.

Avtcsnir, 40, 41.

Avidyé, 396.

Avyacta, 348.

Avisyva, 68.

Ayatana, 343,

Ayushca, 384.


B.


Basnrvy, 46.

BivarivafKa, 296, 327, 361.
Binant, 296, 328, 343, 368.
Baddha, 383.

Baddhétmé, 382.

Bauoata, 14,

Binoaus, 14,

Banuti, 193.

Bahula chaturt hi, 193.


Bahvrich, 14,307. | k

Bahvrich bréhmaka eer
46.

Bahvrich Sacha, 314,

Bahya, 392.

Bala, 415.

Bavici, 65.

Biniat1, 65, 346.

Baa orisnfa, 59, 94, 96.

Bata rina, 415.

Baipnanra, 263.

Baiasya (onirya, 263, 284,
334,

Bandha, 407.

Bén-ling, 156.

Barbara language, 315.

Barga, 20.

Bathing, 123, 136.

Bauddhas, 329, 378, &c. 390, &c.

Bauppnivana, 100, 144, 202,
314, 331.

Bauddhdyanas, 17.

Beatitude, 237, 265.

Beings, three orders of, 246.

Bhédra, 149.

Bhadréwvacdéa, 157.

Buaa@a, 32.

Bhagavad gité, 327, 413.

Buagavat, 415, &e.

Bhagavata puréha, 103, 115, 197,
413.

Bhéagavatas, 329, 413, &c.

Buattavi, 84, 86.

Bhémati, 332.

Bhanganaya, 386.

Buarapwiga, 23, 93, 94,

Buaarata, 42.

Buirea, 45,

Bhashya, 262.

Bhashya raina prabha, 333.


INDEX.


Buafta, 300, 333. na hee
Buaffa Bufsoara, “=
Buaffa Cuminima sw:
Bhatia dipicé, 299.
Bhautica, 392, 393.
Bhautica sarga, 246.
Bhéva, 264.
Buavapéva, 149.
BuavavEva MISRA, |
Bhévané, ae


Buavini, 11].
Bhévért ha dipica, 263. —
Bhévayavya, 24,
Bhavishya purdha, 130, 132.
Bhécuri, 215.
Bhéda, 289. A
Buima, 46.
Buimaséna, 193.
Bhoctr?, 381.
Bhogya, 381.
Buosa nisi or Buésa PATI, 236. ins
Bhijya, 38.
Bhrigu, 23, 40, 76, 95.
Bhriguvalli upanishad, ma
Bhi, 417.
Bhiiman, 343.
Bhur bhuvah swah, 27.
Bhita, 392.
Bhita yoni, 342. :
Black Yajur véda, 16, 72, pei o
Bodhétmé, 381.
Bopuiyana, 298.
Bopuav, 144, ‘
Body, twofold, 245. Enquiry anid
cerning body in the Nydya, 268,
Brahma or Brahme, and Brahmi, ;
340,
Brahma (Brahme), 52, 57, 7 > te.
340, &e.


INDEX.


Braun, 31, 32, 35, 52, 56, 93,
340, &e.

Braumi, Visn&Xv, and Rupra,
131, 132.

Brahma miménsé, 296, 325, &e.

Brahmémrita vershini, 334,

Brahman, 340, &c.

Braéhmaha ch’handasi, 135, 190.

Brahmahah parimarah, 44.

Brauminanpa, 337.

BraumAnanpA SARASWATI, 334.

Brahmanas of the Védas, 18, 19,
67, 68, 307, 310, &e.; of the
Rig véda, 36, &e.; of the White

Yajur vida, 59, &c.; of the

Black Yajur véda, 76, &e.; of
the Sama véda, 82, &c.; of the
At harva vida, 91, &e.

Bréhmana sarvaswa, 149,

Brahma pura, 344.

Brahma puréha, 117.

Brahma sitras, 327.

Brahma sitra bhashya, 334.

Brahmavédin (—dini), 31.

Brahma vidydbharaha, 333.

Brahmavidyé upanishad, 95.

Brahmavindu upanishad, 95.

Brahme, see Brahma.

Brahmi, 242.

Breath, 195,

Bucoa riya, 301.

Bridegroom, his solemn reception
by the father of the bride, 203,
&e.

Buppna, 103, 111, 378, &e. 390,
&e.

Buddhi, 242, 285, 289, 290, 372,
413.

Buddhists, see Bauddhas.

Bupua, 23, 154,

VOL, I.


425


Bull, an emblem of religious duty,
135.
Burning of dead bodies, 158.


Cc.


Capanpna, 18.

Capanpnnui, 95.

Cacsnivar, 24.

Caiwalya, 235, 401.

Caiwalya upanishad, 97.

Cala, 386.

Calabhairava, 173.

Célégnirudra upanishad, 97.

Célémuc’ has, 406.

Calanus, 321.

Calendar, ancient, 106, &e.

Cixf, 111.

Célicé puréha, 112.

Ciurnisa, 154, 193, 204.

Cali yuga, 108, 201.

Calpa, 100.

Calpas, 74, 379.

Calpa sitras, 313.

Cama, 34.

Cima, 415.

Camya, 121.

Cafasunus, or CafaBHacsHa,
329, 400. See CaXivr.

CiSasuus, Cixapnacsna, 400.

Cafine, 227, &e. 261, &e. 388,
&e.

Cahda, 73, 74, 89.

Cahdénucrama, 16.

Cahidlicé, 54, 60, 73.

Can? hasruti upanishad, 95.

Cakwa, 17.

Cahwa school, 59, 63, 72, 326.

Canyécubja, Bréhmans of, 13.

Capélas or Capdlicas, 406.
2F


ii cain!


426 INDEX. he


Capita, 103, 111, 144, 229, &e.
349. His doctrine contrasted
with PaTansati’s, 252.

Capila bhashya, 229, 231.

Céraha, 266, 407, 408.

Caraha Sartra, 372.

Céricé,263. See Sanc’hya cérica.

Carma miménsé, 296, &e.

Carman, 287, 376, 382, 384, &c.

Carme, see Carman.

CinsuSisint, 328.

Cartica, 118.

Cartri, 407.

Carya, 266, 407, 408.

Carya brahme, 363.

Cisacrirsna, 328, 347.

Cai, 25, 53, 65.

CaSvu, 24.

CaSyapa, 23, 40, 193.

Caf’na, 17.

Catha, 293.

Cathas, \7.

Catha, Cat’havalli, or Cathaca
upanishad, 79, 91, 96, 307,
326.

Carya, 95.

Cityiyana, 23, 95, 100, 144,

Cirviyani, 66.

Caula upanishad, 113.

CavSanya, 95.

Cause and effect, 350.

Causniract, 15.

Caushitact brahmaha upanishad,
53, 326.

CauSsici, 157.

Caut humi sacha, 17, 18, 307.

Cavasna, 39, 72.

Civasnfya, 72.

caya, 404,

Cécaya, 84.


Céna or Cénéshita upa 7
91, 97, 326.
Ceremonies, writers on, }
remonies to be o
Brahman when rising
sleep, 124, &e. Funeral


tal and nuptial creo,
203, &e. ~uapaaly


C£SavA anna, 263, an


Chatda, 19, 36.
C’Hasbavtya, 299.
Chindaéla, $8.
Chandicéyas, 17.
Chandrabhdéga, 157.
Cuaraca, 17.
Characas, 17.
Charaha vyttha, 14.
Charu, 316.
Cuirvica, 228, 240, 402. —
Charvécas, 329, 402, &e.
Chaturthi, 222.
Chaturvédi, 13.
Chaubé, 13.
Chaut’hi, 222.
Cufpf, 24,
CWhala, 294.
Ch’handasi sanhité, 80.
Ch’ handéga priests. 80.


CW héndégya, V7. ately
Ch’ handogya upanishad, 12, 83
88, 91, 328, &e.


Ch’ hetri, 172
C’hilagrant?ha, 326.
Cuirtra, 24, 54.
Chitra, 200, 319,


INDEX.


Cuirraaupta, 375.

Chitta, 392, 393, &e.

Chronology, 106, 200.

Chiilicé upanishad, 95.

Cuvavana, 40.

Ciléla, 170.

Cindta, 70.

CirniSa, 45.

Clepsydra, 109.

Colour, Nyéya doctrine respect-
ing it, 279.

Commentaries, their importance
in preserving the text of a book
from changes, 98.

Cé6S6a Bpuatta, 263.

Controversies of various philoso-
phical schools, 240, 251, &e.
269, 273, 292, 304, 312, 348,
379, 380, 387, 403, 410, 416.

Cosa, 372.

Cows let loose on certain solemn
occasions, 207.

Creation of the world, 33, 131,
140.

Crisnfa, 110, &e.

Crisufinanpa, 88, 337.

Crisufa pwaipiyana, 327.

Crishndlancara, 337.

Crisafa tirt’na, 335,

Crishha upanishad, 110.

Crit1, 17.

Critticd, 90, 107.

Criyé, 119.

Criydsacti, 409,

Criyayiga, 416.

Cshatriyas massacred by PARa-
Surima, 115.

Cshurica upanishad, 95.

CutiGoa puaffa, 11.

Cuminita swini, 297, &e. 312.


Curayifa, 24.
Cérma puréha, 236.
Curu, 72.
Curu, 38, 69.
Curunea, 24,
Cusa, 114, &e.
Cusniru, 45.
Cushion used at certain ceremo-
nies, 205, &c.
Cushméahda, 146.
CuSt1ca, 29.
Cusuméanjali, 263.
Cuf'aum, 17.
Cursa, 23, 28, 29.


D.


Dacsna, 31.

DacsmiK4, 31.

Davuyacsa, 56, 59, 68.

Dahara, 345.

Dahara vidya, 326.

Daivata, 26.

Diri Saucén, 9.

Darbha, 90.

Darsana, 409.

Darsanas, 329,

Darsana upanishad, 113.

Darsana varahiya, 384.

Dasati, 80.

Daurmanasya, 397.

Death, 364, 390.

Deistical Sanc’hya, 252.

Deities invoked in the hymns of
the Védas, are resolvable into
different titles of one God, 25.
Deities of Hindu mythology
have but a definite duration of
life, 160, 238, 240.

Deliverance from evil, 237, &e.

Dévacf, 112.


428


Dévanar§a, 18,

DévadarSi sacha, 18.

Dévapéri, 230.

Dévana, 349.

Déivata of a mantra, 21, 22.

Dévivripna, 46,

Dévayana, 367.

Dhanisht ha, 109.

DuiniSwara, 236.

Dharma, 286, 295, 385, 396.

Duarmarisa, 145.

DuArMAR(AJA picsnitra, 335.

Dharmasdstra, 312.

Dharmésticéya, 385.

Duirri, 191, 193.

Dherma, see Dharma.

Darirarisnfra, 115, 121.

Dhwansa, 288.

Dhyénavindu upanishad, 95.

Dialectic philosophy of Gorama,
261.

Dialects, provincial, 315.

Digambaras, 380.

Ditipa, 204.

Direuatamas, 42.

Divicara puaffa, 202.

Divine grace, 377.

Divépisa, 25.

Diwali, 222.

Dobé, 13.

Donations accompanied by reli-
gious formalities, 178.

Dosha, 289.

Dravida dialect, 315.

Dravya, 385, 386.

Drie sacti, 409.

Drishtanta, 291.

Duheha, 397.

Duhehdnita, 407, 409.

Duusuanta, 42.


Dwara, 408.
Dwivédi, 13.


E.


Ear. Impurity removed betonmny
ing the right ear, 126.


Earth, invoked, 137. An
E’céyana, 414. o j
Elements, five, 243, 373. Four, :


392, 395. $
Error, 247. ,
Eternity of sound, and of the

Véda, 305, &e. 348.
Etherial fluid, 243, 268, 275, 352.
Evidence, three kinds of, 240.
Evil spirits, 191.
Existence of Gop denied by Ca-

pina, 25], 252.


F.
Faith, 376. :
Fire, sacrificial, its consecration,
149, &e. Seven tongues of fire,
190. Maintenance of a sci
tual fire, 188, 363.
Frame, twofold corporeal, in-|
vesting the soul, 245.
Free will, 377.
Fruit of works, 377.
Fuel used at sacrifices, 151.
Funeral rites, 151, &e.


G.


Gana, 82. 4
Géhapatyas, 197, 199.
Ganas, 217.

Gahdaci river, 156, 157.


INDEX.


Ganpuira, 46.

Ganpuarsa, 51. The sun, 212,
224.

Ginvuirfi, 12],

GakfSa, 197.

Gangé, 42, 137, 157.

GaneAnnara, 334.

Ginefyan, 54.

Garbha upanishad, 95, 244.

Garea, 65, 95.

Ginrel, 70.

Gireya, 65, 66.

Garuda puréha, 103.

Garuda upanishad, 97.

Gir’utn, 29.

Gavufariva, 95, 96, 104, 229,
&e. 335.

Gaurfointa, 263, 279.

Gautama, 314, 390.

Gayatri, 29, 30, 124, &e.; 165,
&e.; 309. Explained, 127.
Another version, 175,

Gayatri metre, 35, 36,

Ghana copies of the Rig and
Yajur vida, 21.

Ghétin, 384.

Glossary to the Védas, 26.

Gésurta, 100.

Gobhiliya Sacha, 314.

Goculast has, 197, &e.

Gods. See Deities.

Goghna, 203, 204.

Gopdla tapaniya upanishad, 110.

Gopat’ ha bréhmaha, 91, 92.

Gopichandana upanishad, 113.

Gérama, 87, 120, 227, 261, &c.
352.

Gotras, 115.

Gotrica, 384.

GéverpuaNna miSRA, 263,


429


GévinpA, 335.

Gévinba Buafta, 263.

Gévinpinanpa, 333.

Gévinpanir’na, 104,

Grémagéya gana, 80, 81.

Gravastata, 135.

Great Soul, 27.

Grihya, 116.

Grthya grant ha, 313.

Grishma, 202.

GritsamapDA, 23,

Guest, solemn reception of, 203,
&e.

Guha, 248, 408.

Gufavisnku, 149, 212.

Guru, 298.


H.


Hansa upanishad, 97.

Harda vidya, 326,

Harimara, 301,

Hirfra, 118.

Hasta, 200.

Hayagerfiva, 83.

Heniyunna, 149, 219.

Hémanta, 202.

Heretical systems of Hindu phi-
losophy, 227.

Hétu, 292, 395.

Hétwabhésa, 294.

Himavat, 38.

Hindi language: parts of the
Védas translated into it, 9.

HiraSyvaGarsua, 52, 344, 368.

Hirnafsvanisna, 17.

Hirasyvastb6ya, 23.

Holéca or Holé festival, 222,
313.

Homa, 55, 313.


430 INDEX.
Hospitality, 203. Jalpa, 293.
H6tri, 135, 190. JAMADAGNI, 23.
H6u6, 144. Jana, 84, 86.
Janaca, 46, 69, 71, 346.
I. Janamfsayva, 37, 39, 40, 46, 72.

Idévatsara, 58. JANANTAPA, 43.
Tdvatvatsara, 58. JanaSrurTI, 84.
Tjas, 202. Jangama, 382.
Immolation of victims, 111, 239. | Jara, 397.

Allegorical immolation of | Jata copies of the Rig and Yajur

Braun, 33, 55, 61, 167, 168. vida, 21.
Incarnations. See Avatara. Jétddharis, 406.
InpRA, 28, &c., derivation of the | Jati, 287, 294, 396.


name, 50. Fourteen InpRAs,
115. Realm of InprA, 367.
InpRADyuMNA, 84, 86,
InpraprAmatI, 14, 15.
Inference, three kinds of, 240,
241.
Intellect, obstructions of, 247.
Esadhyaya, 59.
Esdvasya, 59, 91, 326.
Ishti, 318.
fSwara, 230, 244, 251, 381, 407.
fSwara crisuXa, 103, 234, 332.
Iswara gité, 355. See Bhagavad
gité.
fswara prasdda, 376.
Itihdsa, 11, 12, 67, 68. 94.


J.
Jipiwa, 37.
Jabélas, 17.
Jabala upanishad, 97.
Jagati metre, 35.
Jaunu, 137.
Jaicisnavya, 24].
Jarmini, 14, 17,227, &e.; 296,
&e.; 342; 361, 368. #
Jaina sect, 228, 329, 378, &e.


|


Jirucarha, 144,

Jina, 378, &c.; 390, &e.
Jiva, 381, 393, 407, 415.
Jivgja, 373.

Jivawa, 84.

Jivan mucti, 369, 376.
Jivasticéya, 385.
Jivaima, 268, 418.
Jiyictya, 137.

Jnyana, 415.

Jnydna varahiya, 384.
Jnyana yoga, 416.

Jung, 31.

Jupiter, the planet, 35.
Jytsh? ha, 200.

Jyotish, 59, 106,
Jyotishtoma, 60, 73.


L.


Lisuciyana, 296.

Lacshaha, 264.

Lacsumi, prayer to, 179.

Lacsumf nirivawa, 156, 198,

Laghu dipicé, 76.

Litivana, 100.

Liberation of the soul, 244, 246, 3
- 369, 376, 383.


INDEX.


Lic’arra, 314.

Light, invoked, 128, &c.
Linga, 198, 245.

Linga Sarira, 245, 372, 418.
Lingis, 198.

Lica, 386,

Lécacésa, 386.
LévXesut, 17, 144.
Lécéyaticas, 402, &c.
Lunar month, 200, &c.
Lunchitacéia, 381.


M.


Madana parijata, 118.

Madhava, 200, &e.

Minuava (fonirya, 53, 54, 196,
299, 300. His age, 30]. See
SivaSa Acuirya.

Mipuava péva. 263, 279.

Madhu, 200, &c.

Mapa, 334,

Mapuucn’Hanpas, 23, 33, 56,

Madhuparca, 206, 209.

Mapuus6pana SAnaswart, 13,
337.

Madhu vidya, 326.

Médhyamica, 391, 402.

Mapuyannina, 17, 54.

Médhyandina saec’ha, 54, 59, 63,
68, 71.

Médhyandina Satapat’ha, 60.

Maghé, 90.

Mégha, 108, 118, 187, 200—203,

Mahébhérata, 118.

Manivfva, lll.

Mahdbhiita, 392.

Mahdlayé, 186.

Mahénérayaha upanishad, 76.

ManiSina, 341. k

Mahésarga, 241.


431


Mahat, 242, 348, 407, 413.

Méhéwaras, 329, 380, 406, &e.

Manipisa, 46.

Manfpnara, 54, 59, 99.

Mairra, 78.

Maitrévaruha, 135, 190.

Mairrivafsi, 144.

Maitrayahi sacha, 78.

Maitréyahi upanishad, 78.

Maitraéyahiyas, 17.

Mairréya, 45.

Maitréya upanishad, 244.

Mairrfyi, 66, 68, 71, 347.

Mamari, 42.

Manana, 409.

Manas, 243, 271, 272, 418.

Mahdalas of the Rigvéda sanhité,
20.

MA4nvuirri.

Mahdica or Méhdicya upanishad,
11, 91,. 98.

MisbG6ckya, 15.

Mantras, 18, 19, 53, 54, 72, 307,
308.

Mantra Sdstra, 21.

Manu, see Menu.

Maraha, 397.

Marion, 23, 36.

Marriage ceremonies, 203, &c.
224.

Marudvidha, 137.

Maruts, 29, 39, 217.

Marurta, 40, 41.

Mashhara, 42.

Matrt gaha, 314.

Matsya puréha, 103, 118, 236,
242.

Méyé, 34, 242, 37, 407,

Miyamaya, 375. »

Maytic’ha mala, 299.


¢ -


432 INDEX.


Mépnitir’at, 1], 23, 56.

Mépuyirir’at, 24.

Meditation, religious, 361, &c.

Menu, 25. Race of, 40. The first
Menu, 60. Laws of Menu
cited, 11, 27, 92, 103, 130, 140,
188, 226, 236, 349.

Menwantaras, 186.

Méru, 43, 276.

Mésha, 202.

Metempsychosis, 239, 358.

Metre of the hymns in the Védas,
35.

Meya, 103.

Mimansa, 99, 295, &e.

Miméansé bhashya, 334.

Miménsé caustubha, 299.

Miménsé nydya viviéca, 299.

Mina, 201, 202.

Mind, an organ of perception and
action, 243.

Mitécshara, a commentary on the
Vrihad aranyaca, 62.

Mit hyapravritti, 382,

Mirra, 32, 35, 78.

Mléch’has, 314.

Moesha, 265, 383, 401, 407.

Moha, 290, 401.

Mohaniya, 384,

Monotheism of the Védas, 25, &c.
52, 196.

Months, 200, &e.

Moon, its origin, 154.

Mourning, 162, &e.

Mrigasivas, 201.

Mrityu, 68, 96.

Mucta, 382.

Muctacach’ha, 390.

Muctémbaras, 380.

Muctétma, 382.


Muctavasanas, 380.

Mucti, 121, 369, 376, 401.

Muhirta, 91, 109.

Mila pracriti, 242.

Muhdaca upanishad, 91, 93, 326.

Muslemans of India, borrow su-
perstitious ceremonies from the
Hindus, 222.

Mythology of the Védas, 28.


N.


Nisninfpisuf’Ha, 25.

Nabhas, 202.

Nabhasya, 202.

Néaca, 57.

Nacuicfras, 96, 97, 349.

Nacshatras, 200.

Nadavindu, 95.

Naenasit, 46.

Nia6si, 230, 236.

Naigama, 26.

Naimittica, 121.

Naishadhiya, 209.

Naiyéyica school, 261.

Némica, 384.

Néandana, 50.

Nandimuc’ha, 187.

Nirapa, 12, 40, 83, &c.

NirniSarya, 144, .

Nirivaksa, allegorical immola-
tion of, 10, 33, 35, 61.

NirivaXa purusna, 56,

Nirivawta Tirt’HA, 233, 234,
263, 337.

Narayana upanishad, 97.

Nirnivatfinpnra, 47.

Nasticas, 380, 390.

Nasticya, 417.

Nema, 315.

Nermada, 156, 157.


INDEX.


Néeshtri, 135, 190.
Nichyas, 38.
Nidarsana, 292.
Nigamana, 292.
Nighuhti, 25.
Nigrahast’ hana, 294.
Nihsaraha, 401.
Nihiréyas, 265, 401.
NinacasSf’na, 334.
Nilarudra upanishad, 95.
Nimba tree, 162.
Nimitta céraha, 412.
Niriswara sanc’hya, 236.
Nirjara, 383.
Nirneya, 293.
Nirneya sindhu, 180.
Niructa, 25, &e. 99.
Nirtpa, 397.
Nirvana, 401, 402.
Niti manjari, 101.
Nityi{nanpi$rama, 62.
Nityasiddha, 381.
Nivaha, 190.
Nrimédha, 73.
Nrisinna, 96.
Nrisinha puraha, 103.
Nrisinha tapaniya upanishad, 91,
96.
Nrisinha saraswati, 337.
Nuptial ceremonies, 224.
Nydya, 227, 237, 261, &e. Syl-
logism, 292, 330.
Nyéya lilévati, 263.
Nydya malé vistara, 300.
Nydya ratnamala, 299.
Nydya sancshépa, 263.
Nydya sangraha, 263.
Nyéya séra, 263.
Nyayavali didhiti, 300.


VOL. I.


433


0.


Obsequies, 155, &e. Twelve kinds
of, 180.

Obsolete dialect of the Védas, 316.

O’m, 130, 251, 344, 407.

Om tat sat, 210.

Organs, 243, 270, 356.

Orthodox systems of Hindu phi-
losophy, 227.


P.


Pacast’Himan, 24.

Pada copies of the Rigand Yajur
véda, 21.

Pada, 235.

Padart ha, 264, 272.

Padart ha dipica, 263.

Padayojanica, 335.

Padma puréha, 137.

Paina, 14.

Pain, three sorts of, 238, 239.

Paippaladi séc’hd, 18, 93.

Pala, 109..

Palasa, 130, 172, 318.

Panchagnividyé pracaraha, 326.

Pancha panchajanéh, 349.

Panchdla, 39, 42, 69.

Péncharétras, 329, 380, 413, &e.

PancuaSio’na, 103, 230, 231,
260, 349.

Panchavinia bréhmaha, 82.

Pifini, 22, 27.

Panjicé, 36, 83.

Pardéjayahétu, 294.

Paramahansa upanishad, 97.

Paraméhu, 347.

Péramérthica, 375.

Paramétma, 268.

Paramatma vidya, 326.


26


~—Pr.


434 INDEX,


Paramésh?hi, 27, 33, 39, 56.
Parfsara, 108, 200, 301, 327.
Pirisarya, 69, 144.
Parasica language, 315.
Parasréyas, 413.

Parasgu, 24.

Paragu rima 115.
Parcuasic’na, 144.
Paricshé, 264.

Paricsuirt, 37, 39.
Paridévana, 397.

Parimala, 333, 337.
Parivaha, 190.

Parivatsara, 58.

Parhéotaja, 115.


Pirt’Ha skrat’nt miSra, 299,


Parushti, 137.
Parvata, 40.
Paryanca vidya, 326.
Péaia, 407.

Pagu, 318, 407.


PéSupatas, 228, 329, 380, 406,


&e.
PaSupati, 406.
Pasupati Sastra, 406.
Pétaliputra, 367.
Pétanjala bhashya, 235.


PatansAui, 230, &c. 252, 361.


Patanjali sitra vritti, 236.
Par’nya, 18.
Pauréhicas, 403
Pauréhica sanc’hya, 236.
Pausha, 187.
Pausnyinai, 17.
Pautimisuf, 71.
Pautimisuya, 68.
Perception, 240.

P*hala, 290.

P’halguna, 200.


Philosophy, Hindu systems of,


227.
Pica, 315.
Prsavana, 40.
Pilu, 314.
Pihda, 119.
Pindéraca, 157.
Pihda upanishad, 95.
Pipraina, 18, 95.
Pisachas, 275.
Pitonhié, 134.
Pitris, 182, 369.
Pitrit médha, 56, 73.
Pitrt pacsha, 186.
Planets, sacrifice to the, 153.
Prayéea, 24.
Péotrt, 135, 190.
PraABHicaRA, 298.
Prabhécaras, 304.
Pracaranas, 262.
Pracnfras, 117, 204,
PricninaSina, 84.
Pricuinayéea, 85.
Prachyas, 38.
Pracriti, 242, 265, 338, 349, 407,
412, 413.
Pradésamétra, 343.
Pradhéna, 338, 409, 411.
Pradyumna, 415, 416.
Pragabhava, 288.
Prasinit’na, 108,


Prasirati, 26, &c. 52, &e. 74.


Abode of Prasfpati, 367.
Préjépatya sacrifice, 118.
Pramé, 289.

Praméha, 266, 302.
Praméya, 266.

Préha, 195, 338, 339, 355.

Prénagnihotra, $8.


> a


INDEX.


Pranagnihotra upanishad, 95.

Préna samvada or Praha vidya,
326.

Prapétaca, 60, 73, 80, 83, 89.

Prasna, 73.

Prasna upanishad,. 91, 94, 244,
326.

Prast’ha, 109.

Prast hana bhéda, 13, 19.

Pratarpana, 35, 53, 339,

Pratijnyad, 292.

Pratyaya, 395.

Pravaha, 190.

Pravinawa, 84.

Pravritti, 289, 382.

Prayojana, 291.

Prétyabhava, 290.

Priests, seventeen required at a
great solemnity, 322.

Prithivi, 75, 374.

Prit’nv, 137.

Priyamfpuna, 41.

Pudgala, 382, 386.

Pudgalasticdya, 385.

Piya, 122.

Punusna, 84, 85.

Pumas, 244.

Punarbhéga, 290.

Punarutpatti, 290.

Puréhas, 11, 12, 62, 67, 68, 94,
242,

Purigaya, 344,

Pirha vaindsicas, 393.

Purohita, 44.

Purusha, 48, 89, 244, 344, 411.

Purusha médha, 10, 55, 61, 309.

Purusha sicta, 167, 309.

Pirva bhadrapada, 200.

Pirva miménsd, 227, 295, 296,
&e.


Pirva pacsha, 301.
Purva tapaniya, 96.
Pérva valli, 96.
Péshan, 30, 32, 215.
Purra, 84.
Putrajiva, 134.


Q.
Qualities, 248, 279, &c. See
Guha.


R.

Racshoghna, 191.
Rinpad, 197.
Rédhaballabhi, \97.
Ricuavinanpa, 300.
Rahasya, 92.
Raja, 39.
Réja martahda, 235.
Rajas, 249.
Rajasiiya, 55, 60, 73.
Réja vartica, 234.
Rima, 110,111, Worshippers of

Rima, 197.
Rimacrisusa, 230, 234.
Rimacrisasa picsuira, 336.
Rémalingaecriti, 263.
Rima m6nen RAYA (Rammohun

Roy), 332.
Riminusa, 334, 406, 414.
Réménujas, 197.
Réma tapaniya upanishad, 97,
110.
Rima rirt’Ha, 335, 337.
RASA RANGA MALLA, 236,
Réhayaniyas, 18, 326.
Ranoanir’na, 334, 337.
RanGarisa picsnira, 337.
Raumaca language, 315.
Rich, 13, 89, 308.


436


Rice, used at the nuptial cere-
monies, 214,

Rig véda, 14, 19, &e. 309, &e.
Passage on the burning of wi-
dows, 116, 118, 119.

Rishi of a mantra, 21, &e. 56,
74, 81.

Rituals, 313, 314.

Rituvid, 46.

Rivers, holy, 137,

RéurpasSwa, 25.

Rémasi, 24.

Rudimental creation, 245.

Rupra, 31, 32, 141, 217, &e.

Ruprixi, 179.

Rudras, 32, 38, 75, 208.

Ripa, 396.

Ripa scandha, 394.


8.

Sabara bhashya, 297.

Sapara swimfi, 297, 298.

Sabda, 304.

Sabda, 403.

Sioanya, 15, 70, 144.

Sécalya 8ac’ha, 19.

SsoarGri1, 15.

Siokvana, 78.

Sae’has of the Védas, 14, &e.

Sichiguha, 42.

Sacraments, five great, 148, &c.
viz. Ist. Study of the Véda, 142,
&c. 2d. Sacrifice to the Dei-
ties, 148, &e. 3d. Sacrifice to
the Manes, 155, &. 4th. Sa-
crifice to the Spirits, 191, &e.
5th. Hospitality, 203, &c.

Séctas, 111, 197, &e.

Sacti, 197, 265, 415.

Sicya, 298, 390.


INDEX.


Sapinanpa, 336, 403. —
Sadhana, 382.

Sadhu, 384.

Sadhya, 382.

Sadhyas, 38, 167.
Sadrigya, 265.
Sadyuctimuctévali, 263.
Sicara, 349.
Sanapfva, 46,

Sahas, 202.

Sahasya, 202.
Sahétaja, 115.

Saivas, 111, 196, &e.
Salagréma, 156.
Samédhi, 121, 235.
Samagas, 17.

Saman, 13, 79, 308.
Samana, 195.
SimaSravas, 69.
Samavaya, 267, 288.
Sama vida, 79, &e.
Sémavédiya priests, 80,
Samba purana, 126.
Sambandha, 266.
Sambhavi, 403.

Sami, 162, 171, 217.
Samprasada, 345.
Samr@, samra@ya, 38.
Samvaha, 190.
Samwvara, 382.
Samvarga vidya, 326.
Samvarta, 40.
Samvatsara, 58, 91.
Samyacpravritti, 383,
Sanaca, 130, 144.
Sananpana, 144,
SanaSruta, 46.
Sanirana, 144,
SanatoumAra, 12, §3.
Sancalpa, 115, &e.


INDEX. 437


Sancara, 47, 59, 62, 76, 83, 88,
92, 93, 96, 104, 196, 298, &e.
332, &e.

Sancara miSra, 262.

Sancara vijaya, 104.

Sancarshaha, 415, 416.

Sano’na, 314,

Sanc’hyd, 229.

Séne’hya, system of philosophy,
228, &c.

Sane’ hya bhdshya, 233.

Sane’hya céricé, 229.

Séne’hya cawmudi, 234.

Sane’hya chandricd, 233.

Sanchya pravachana, 231, &e.
235.

Sane’hya sara, 231, 335.

Sanc’hya tatwa caumudi, 233.

Sino’uyfvana, 15, 100.

Sancshépa Sariraca, 335.

Sandhyd, 375.

Sifbrva, 413.

Séhdilya vidya, 326.

Sangraha, 234, 300.

Sanhité, 14, 18, of the Rig véda,
19, &. Of the White Yajur
véda, 54. Of the Black Yajur
vida, 72, &e. Of the Sima
véda, 82. Of the Atharvana
vida, 89, 92.

Sansivi, 72.

Sanjnyé scandha, 394.

Sannydsa upanishad, 95.

Sannyast, 117.

Sansaya, 291.

Sanscara, 286, 396.

Sanscéra scandha, 394,

Sanyoga, 266.

Sapinidlana, 183.

Sapta chitica, 190.


Sarada, 202.
Saraswati, 137, 152, 218.
Sérayt, 157.
Sarcariosuya, 84, 86.
Sarsa, 46.


Sértra stra sérértha chandrica,
334.

SarvasnyirMa Girt, 335.

Sarvajnyatwa, 409.

Sarvamédha, 56.

Sarva vaindSsicas, 393.

Sarvopanishatsara, 97.

Sirnvira, 40.

Séstra, 390.

Séstra dipicd, 298, 299.

Séstra siddhénta lésa sangraha,
337.

Saswati,

Sat, 33.

Satadru, 137.

Sarinica, 40.

Satapat’ ha brahmaha, 59, 62, 101.

Sarar6pi, 65.

Sati, 114, &e.

Sarrigir, 40.

Saturn, the planet, 155.

Satwa, 249.

Satwats, 38.

Saryaoima, 37, 95, 341.

Saryanavya, 43,

Saryavaga, 93.

Satya vidya, 326.

Saryayasnya, 84, 85.

Saugatas, 390.

Saunaca, 18, 23, 47, 93, 341.

Saunaciya sae’ha, 93.


Sauras, 196, 199.
Sauryanivya, 68,
Sauryivyawi, 95.
Sautramahi, 55, 60.
Sautrénticas, 391, &c.
Savitri, 30, 35, 217, 220..


Sivirr{, 31.

SAvya, 23.

Sivasicufirya, 19, 30, 36, 47,
74, 81, 83, 92,301. See Mi-


DHAVA (ouirya.
Scanda upanishad, 113.
Scandhas, 394, &e.
Seasons, six, 200.
Sectaries, Indian, 378, &c.
Self-immolation, 321.
Sfésuanica, 106.

Séwara sanc’hya, 236.

Seven steps, 218.

Shadayatana, 396.

Shadvinsa, 82.

Shodasa cala vidya, 326.

Siddhénta, 291, 301.

Siddhanta calpataru, 337.

Siman, 50.

Sinpuupwipa, 24,

Sisira, 200, 202.

Siri, 198.

Siva, 406.

Sivabhagavatas, 406.

Sivagama, 406.

Sivi, 25, 43, 95.

Sloca vartica, 300.

Smarana, 289.

Smriti, 302, 311, 349, 359.

Snava, 70.

Soca, 397.

Soma, 28, 73, 238, 318.

Soma, 31, 32; 74, 154, 183, 205,
210, 217.


INDEX. ® mY -


Sémaca, 46. ve
Somanir’na, 299.
SémaSusuman, 40.
Soul, 51, 244, 255,
STR, 408...) \Eowriaaiy
Sound, its perpetuity, 292, .
Sources of knowledge,
304,, 330. * ae
Sparia, 396.
Sp hota, 305.
Sraddhé, 119, 376. .
Sraddha, 164, 180, &e.
Sravana, 108.
Sravish#hé, 108, 109.
Sréyas, 401.
Sruti, 311.
Sthaévara, 382.
St hiti sthavaca, 286.
Sthila Sartra, 372, 418.
Subodhini, 334, 337.
Substances, nine, of the Nydya
system, 272.
Subtile frame, investing the
245, 372, 418.
Suca, 104, 144.
SucarMan, 17.
SuofSa, 94.
Sucha, 401.
Suchi, 202.
Sucra, 202.
Sticshma Sarira, 245, 372, 418. —
Sicta, 20, 89. -
Supas, 42, 46.
Suppua Gakapars, 197.
SupHanwa, 299.
Suearta, 390.
Sumantu, 14, 17, 18.
Sun, 30, 133, 134.
Sunaca, 93.


8


oul,


SUUT,
alah


INDEX. 439


SunaSér’na, 23.

Sundari tépani, 112.

Stinya, 347.

Surasui, 192, 204.

SurfSwaricuirya, 62.

Sérvi, 3).

SusnHapman, 46,

Susuiman, 24,

Sushmaha, 215.

Sushmiha, 43.

Sushumha, 154, 215.

Sra, 14.

Sitras of Buppnamunt, 390.
of Cafine, 262, &e.
of BiparivyaSa, 327,329.
of G6rama, 262, &e.
of Jaimrin1, 296, &e.
of PancuaS$io’Ha, 233.
of Paransaut, 235, &e.
of Vrinaspati, 405.

Sutwan, 45.

Suvrata, 108.

Swadhé, 34, 179.

Swahé, 165, 179.

Swanaya, 24.

Swar, 57, 417.

Swardj, 38.

Swarga, 52.

Swatantrya, 376.

Swati, 200.

SwayameBuu Bragma, 56.

SwaYAMPRACASANANDA SARAS-

wari, 337.

Swérackru, 54, 83.

Swétémbaras, 381.

SwfériSwarara, 79.

Swétéswatara Sac’hd, 17, 79.

Swétdswatara upanishad, 326.

Syéna yaga, 319.

Syllogism, 292, 330.


“we

Tad, 33.

Taittirtyacas, 17, 314.

Taittiriya sac’ha, 314.

Taittiriya sanhita, 47.

Taittiriya upanishad, 11, 16, 76,
91, 326.

Taittiriya Yajur véda, 35, 45, 62,
74, 97, 202.

Talavacaras, 18, 88.

Tamarasa, 315.

Tamas, 34, 249,

Tambila, 117.

Tahdya brahmana, 82.

Tanmatra, 242, 372.

Tanmatrasarga, 245.

Tantras, 21, 62, 111, 199, 349,
414,

Tépaniyas, 17.

Tapaniya upanishad, 11.

Tapas, 75, 383. A month, 108,
200, 202.

Tapasya, 200, &e.

Tarca, 292.

Tarcabhasa, 293.

Tarcabhasha, 263.

Tarcabhéshaé pracasa, 263.

Tarcabhasha sara manjari, 263.

Tarpana, 118.

Tatwa, 290, 408.

Tatwa caumudi, 233.

Tatwa samasa, 231, &e.

Tatwa vindu, 333.

Téjas, 249, 373, 415.

Téjovindu upanishad, 95.

Theistical Sdne’hya, 236.

Tila, 114.

Time, 277, 386.

Tirabhucti (Tirhtt), 367.

Tirinpira, 24,


440 INDEX.


Tittirt, 16. | Upédéna, 396, 412.

Tiwéré, 13. Upadésa sahasrt, 335.
Traipuriya upanishad, 112. Upédhi, 287.

Transmigrations of the soul, 358. | Upahéra, 408.

Trasapisyvu, 23, 24. Upamana, 303.

Trayyarusa, 23. Upamanyu, 84, 85.

Triad of gods, 126, 242. Upanaya, 292. :
Tricéhda mandana, 202. Upanishad, 19, 46, 53, 62, 76,
Trich, 308. 83, 92, 244, 325, &c.
Tripura upanishad, 112. Upavarsna, 332.

Tripuri upanishad, 112. Ushhih, 35, 36.

Trishtubh (metre), 35. USic, 24.

Trita, 28. USinara, 25, 39.

Trivédi, 13. Uttara, 301.

Trivrit, 216. Uttara curu, 38, 43.

Tura, 39, 72. Vitara grant ha, 308.
Twasniri, 32. Uttara madra, 38.


Uttara phélguni, 200.
U. Uttara tapaniya, 96.
Uo’na, 16, 17. Vitara valli, 96.
Ucuen’utsufa GANAPATI, 199. | Uvata, 54, 99.
Uct’hya, 75.


Udéharaha, 292. V.

Upamaya, 41. Vicu, 32.

Uddana, 195. Vacnacru, 70.
Upayanicuirnya, 262, 283. Vicuacouff, 144,

Udbhid, 320. Vicnespati, 230, 234, 262,
Udbhijja, 373. 332.

Uppiuaca, 37, 54, 83, &c. 341. | Vicrart, 108.

Uddésa, 264. Pada, 293.

Udgétri, 135. Vaibhashicas, 391, &e.
Udumbara, 321. VarpaArsut, 95.

Udvaha, 190. Vaisaviri, 144.

Ugana, 82. Vaihava, 157.

Uarastna, 40. Vaisae’ha, 118, 200, &e.
Uhagana, 81, 82. VarSampivyana, 14, 15.
Uhyagana, 82. Vaiséshica, 227, 228, 261, &c. :
Ujas, 202. Vaishnavas, 111, 196.
Upacdé$ara, 341. Vaiswadéva sacrifice, 118, 188.


Upacésala vidya, 326. VaiSwinaRa, 342,


ae


INDEX. 44]


Vaiswanara vidya, 326.

Vaitaraht, 177.

Vaitarahi dhénu, 177.

Vaiyacaraha bhiishaha, 263.

Vaivaswata, 145, 213.

Véjapéya, 55, 60, 73, 323.

Viyjaratna, 40.

Vajasanéya sanhité upanishad,
59.

Véjasanéyi Yajur véda, 16, 23,
54, &e. 72, &c. 314, 414,
Vajasanéyi brahmaha upanishad,

62.
Vajasanéyins, 326.
VisaSravasa, 96.
Vajins, 16, 72, 326.
Vajrastichi upanishad, 113.
Valéca, 351.
VaLuaBHa Aouirya, 196.
Valli upanishad, 96.
Vinapfva, 23, 51, 56.
Vémadévya hymn, 223.
Vamadivya vidya, 326.
Varaha, 157, 314.
Varéha avatara, 74.
Varaha calpa, 74.
Vaéréhasi (Benares), 367.
Varga, see Barga,
Varsha, 202.
Vartica, 262, 297.
Vartica tdtparya parisuddhi, 262.
Vartica tatparya ticd, 262.
Varu, 24.
Varuna, 30, 32, 35, 56, 58, 76,
&e. 138, 207, 213, 217, 367.
Varuhi upanishad, 76, 97.
Vasa, 39.
Vasanta, 200, 201.
Vasisuf’Ha, 23, 29, &c. 40, &c.
56, 193, 204.
VOL. I.


Pasumanas, 25.

Vasus, 32, 75, 208.

Védas, 9, &c. Consisting of parts
written at various times, 106,
309, 310. Portions liable to
the suspicion of modern origin,
110, 307. Genuineness and
antiquity of the Védas gene-
rally, 98, &e. Four Védas al-
luded to in some Upanishads;
67, 94. The Védas maintained to
be primeval, 306, 348. Prayers
on beginning a lecture of the
several Védas, 142, 189,

Védadipa, 23, 54, 59.

Vépamirra, 15.

Védané scandha, 394.

Védaniya, 384.

Védénta, 99, 100, 227, 296,
325, &e. 370.

Védénta calpa latica, 337.

Védanta calpataru, 333.

Védénta calpataru manjari, 333.

Védénta calpataru parimala, 333.

Védanta paribhashé, 335.

Védanta sara, 92, 336.

Védénta Sic’hamahi, 304, 336.

Védénta siddhaénta vindu, 337.

Védanta stitras, 327.

Védanta siitra muctévali, 334.

Védanta siitra vyde’ hyé chandricé,
334,

Vépavyisa, see Vvisa.

Véga, 286.

Végana, 82.

Véncatadri, 299.

Véncatagiri, 299.

Venus, the planet, 155,

Visninnv, 24,


| Vibhiti, 235.


Qu


442


Vipacpna, 70.

Viparsua, 46.

Vidéhas, 69.

Vidéha mucti, 370.

Vidhatr?, 191.

Vidhi, 407, 408.

Vidriti, 50.

Vidwan mané ranjini, 336.

Vidya nagara, 301.

Vinyinir’ua Buatta, 333.

Vipyiraxyva, 53, 63, 78, 79,96.

Vigana arnd, 82.

Vijaya vilasa, 14, 23.

Vijnydna, 391, 396, 409.

Visnyina suicsnu, 228, 230,
231, 235, 333.

Vijnydéna maya, 372.

Vijnyana scandha, 394.

Visnvinayécf, or Visnyinfs-
wara, 103,

Vipra, 120.

Virdj, 38, 52,
167, 344.

Virati (metre), 35.

Vinécuana, 41.

Virya, 415.

Visdc’hd, 200.

ViSata, 46.

Visésha, 288.

Vishaya, 290.

Visukxvu, 78,
the worship of his incarnations
in the Védas, 28,110. His three
strides, 138, 151.

Vishnu puradna, 14, 15, 103, 134,
236.

ViSwacarMAn, 40.

Viswadévas, 32, 38, 181, &e.

Viswajit, 320.

ViSwinirTRA, 23, 29, 56, &c. 309.


62, 64, 65, 68,


217. No trace of


INDEX.


ViSwanir’na, 262.
ViSwANnTARA, 46.


ViSwéSwaRSNANDA, 337.
Vitasta, 137. "e
Vivasanas, 380. ig
Vivaswat, 56. 7
Vivaha, 190. OF
Vépapvtva, 197.

Vrata, 408.


Vriddhi Sréddha, 187.

Vrihad érahyaca, 16, 32, 53, 61,
62-72, 91, 101, 326, 341, ‘&e.
360.

Vrihad dharma puréha, 108,

Vrinaprar’sa, 78.

Vrinsapvuct’Ha, 42.

Vrisaneir, 23.

Vrihan nérdyana upanishad, 76,
97.

Vrinaspart, 24, 35, 56, 78, 119,
154, 213.

Vrihati (metre), 35.

Vrihat pardsara, 108.

Vrisha, 201, 202.

Vrirra, 28.

Vrirracuna, 42.

Vrirranan, 28.

Vriiti, 331, 382.

Vritticdra, 297.

Vupina, 84, 86.

Vyvicurapip, 86.

Vyahritis, 27, 37, 127.

Vyana, 195.

Vyisa, 10, 22, 69, 104, 105,
120, 227, 228, 235, 327, &c.

VyisiSrama, 333.

Vyasa stitra vritti, 324.

Vyisa tirt’Ha, 83.

Vyatipéta, 186.

Vyavaharica, 375.


Tt


a lal


Ka


INDEX.


w.
Waters, prayers to them, 124,
125, 138, 139.
White Yajur véda, 16, 54, &e.
Widow, 114, &c.
Worlds, seven, 129.


¥..

Yaga, 318.
Yasnya, 33.
Yajnya, 13, 55, 61, 90, 112.
Yasnyapfva, 61.
Yajnyatantra sudhénidhi, 81.
Yisnyawaucya, 15, 56, 63, &e.

103, 127, &e.
Yajur vida, 10, 15, 54, &e.
Yajush, 13, 54, 308, 310.
Yana, 31, 96, 145, 213, 217.
Yamun{, 31, 32.
Yamuna, 42, 137, 157.


Yisoa, 15, 16.

Yati, 117.

Yatna, 285.

Yava, 183.

Yavana \anguage, 315.

Year, 58, 107.

Yoéga, 228, &c. 407, 408.

Yigachéras, 391.

Yaga Sastra, 230, 235, 246, 250,
251.

Yogasicsha upanishad, 95,

Yogasiddha, 381.

Yoga sitras, 235.

Yoga tattwa upanishad, 95.

Yaga vértica, 231, 235, 335.

Yoga vasisht ha, 327.

Yogi, 250.

Yoni grantha, 308.

YupuinSrausafi, 40.

Yuga, 106, &e.

Yugadyas, 186.


Yuvan i$wa, 25.


END OF VOL. I.


LONDON:


Printed by J. L. Cox and Sons, 75, Great Queen Street,
Lincoln’s-Inn Fields.


Saw -Bowdindera


Max Swhert


nde ctrharettvwke HP


BE ie MDZ PiatcseunysZentrun
taatsBibliothe! Digitale Bibliothek


Colebrooke, Henry T.,


Miscellaneous essays in two volumes


Bd 1


London (1837)


Acor. 4144-1
urn:nbn:de-bvb:12-bsb10250814-1
