Miscellaneous Essays, Vol. II
H. T. Colebrooke (1837)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Vol. II of the 1837 two-volume first edition of H. T. Colebrooke's Miscellaneous Essays (London: Wm. H. Allen). Public domain.

========================================================================

MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS.

VOL.  II.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


o


MISCELLANEOUS  ESSAYS


BY


H.  T.  COLEBROOKE.


IN  TWO  YOLUBfES.
VOL.  II,


LONDON:
Wm.  H. ALLEN and CO.,

LBADENHALI,  8TBBBT.

1837.


Digitized  by


Google


AllDOVbh  tlAKVAM)


Co\eV


Printed  by  J.  L.  Cox  and  Sows*  75*  Omt  Qomb  Straet*
Linoolii'f-Inn  Piddt.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTENTS  OF  VOLUME  II.


Page

I.  On the Sanscrit  and  Pr6cr)it  Languages. [From  the

Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.,  p.  199—  231.] 1

II.  Preface  to  the  Author's  Grammar  of  the  Sanscrit  Lan-

guage 35

List  of  SantcT^i  Grammars,  with  Commentaries,  Ice ... .  40

III.  Preface  to  the  Author's  edition  of  the  jimera  Cosha  ....  50
TV.  On Sanscrit  and  Prdcrtt  Poetry. [From  the  Asiatic

Researches,  vol.  x.,  p.  389— 474.] 62

V. Introductory Remarks,  prefixed to the edition of  the

Hitbpad^  published  at  Calcutta,  1804,  4to 166

VL  Examination  of  Indian  Classes. [From  the  Asiatic  Re-
searches, vol.  v.,  p.  53 — 67.]  177

VII.  Observations  on the  Sect  of  Jains, [From  the  Asiatic

Researches,  vol.  ix.,  p.  287—322.] 191

VIII.  On  the  Origin  and  peculiar  Tenets  of  certain  Muham-

medan  Sects.  [From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.,
p.  338— 344.] 225

IX.  Translation  of  one  of  the  Inscriptions  on  the  Pillar  at

Delhiy  called  the  L&t  of  FIrOz  Shah.  [From  the
Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.,  p.  179— 182.] 232

X.  On  Ancient  Monuments  containing  Sanscrtt  Inscriptions.

[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.,  p.  398 — 444.] . .  238

XI.  Inscriptions  upon  Rocks in South Bihdr. [From the

Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.,
p.201— 206.] 289

XII.  On  three  Grants  of  Land,  inscribed  on  copper,  found  at

Ujjayaniy  and  presented  by  Major  James  Tod  to  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society.  [From  the  Transactions  of  the
Royal  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  i.,  p.  230—239  and  p.  462—
466.] 297


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


VI  CONTENl-S.

Page

XIII.  On  Inscriptions  at  Temples  of  the  Jaina  Sect  in  Sooth

Bihar,  [From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  i.,  p.  520— 523.] 315

XIV.  On  the  Indian and  Arahian  Divisions  of  the  Zodiac.

[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.,  p.  323 — 376.]  321

XV.  On  the  Notion  of  the  Hindu  Astronomers  concerning

the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  and  Motions  of  the
Planets.  [From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xii.,
p.209-250.] 374

XVI.  Dissertation  on  the  Algehra  of  the  Hindus. [Prefixed

to  the  Author's  "  Algehra,  with  Arithmetic  and  Men-
suration, from  the  Sanscrit  of  Brahmeoupta  and
BhIscara,"  London,  1817. 4to.] 417


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


L

On  the  SANscRtx  and  PrAcrKt  Languages.


I  From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.  p.  199 — 231. Calcutta,
1801. 4to.]


In  a  treatise  on  rhetoric,  compiled  for  the  use  of  MA-
NiCYA  CHANDRA,  RajcL  of  Ttrahhucti  or  Tirhuty  a  brief
enumeration  of  languages  used  by  Hindu  poets  is  quoted
from  two  writers  on  the  art  of  poetry.  The  following  is  a
literal  translation  of  both  passages.

Sanscritay  Pracrtta,  Paisachi,  and  Magadhi,  are  in
short  the  four  paths  of  poetry.  The  gods,  &c.  speak
Sanscrita  ;  benevolent  genii,  Praanta  ;  wicked  demons,
Paisachi;  and  men  of  low  tribes  and  the  rest,  Magadhi,
But  sages  deem  Sanscrita  the  chief  of  these  four  lan-
guages. It  is  used  three  ways :  in  prose,  in  verse,  and
"  in  a  mixture  of  both.'^

Language,  again,  the  virtuous  have  declared  to  be
fourfold, Sanscrita  [or  the  polished  dialect],  Pracrita
[or  the  vulgar  dialect],  Apdbhrania  [or  jargon],  and
Misra  [or  mixed]. Sanscrita  is  the  speech  of  the  celes-
tials,  framed in grammatical institutes; Pracrtta  is
similar  to  it,  but  manifold  as  a  provincial  dialect,  and
otherwise ;  and  tliose  languages,  which  are  ungramma-
tical,  are  spoken  in  their  respective  districts."
The  Paisachi  seems  to  be  gibberish,  which  dramatic
poets  make  the  demons  speak,  when  they  bring  these  fan-
tastic beings  on  the  stage. The  mixture  of  languages
noticed  in  the  second  quotation,  is  that  which  is  employed
in  dramas,  as  is  expressly  said  by  the  same  author  in  a

VOL.  II.  B


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


2  ON  THE  SANSCrYt

subsequent  verse.  It  is  not,  then,  a  compound  language,
but  a  mixt  dialogue,  in  which  different  persons  of  the  drama
employ  different  idioms.  Both  the  passages  above-quoted
are  therefore  easily  reconciled.  They,  in  fact,  notice  only
three  tongues.  1.  Sanscrit ,  a  polished  dialect,  the  in-
flections of  vehich,  with  all  its  numerous  anomalies,  are
taught  in  grammatical  institutes.  This  the  dramatic  poets
put  into  the  mouths  of  gods  and  of  holy  personages.  2.
Pracrit,  consisting  of  provincial  dialects,  which  are  less
refined  and  have  a  more  imperfect  grammar.  In  dramas  it
is  spoken  by  women,  benevolent  genii,  &c.  3.  Mdgadhi,
or  Apabhransa,  a  jargon,  destitute  of  regular  granunar.
It  is  used  by  the  vulgar,  and  varies  in  different  districts.
The  poets  accordingly  introduce  into  the  dialogue  of  plays
a  provincial  jargon,  spoken  by  the  lowest  persons  of  the
drama.*

The  languages  of  India  are  all  comprehended  in  these
three  classes.  The  first  contains  Sanscrtty  a  most  pohshed
tongue,  which  was  gradually  refined  until  it  became  fixed
in  the  classic  writings  of  many  elegant  poets,  most  of  whom
are  supposed  to  have  flourished  in  the  century  preceding
the  Christian  era.  It  is  cultivated  by  learned  Hindus
throughout  India,  as  the  language  of  science  and  of  litera-
ture, and  as  the  repository  of  their  law,  civil  and  religious.


*  Sanscrita  is  the  passive  participle  of  a  compound  verb,  formed
by  prefixing  the  preposition  sam  to  the  crude  verb  crt^  and  by
interposing*  the  letter  s  when  this  compound  is  used  in  the  sense  of
embellishment.  Its  literal  meaning  then  is  ^'adorned;"  and  when
applied  to  a  language  it  signifies  "  polished."  Pr&cr^ta  is  a  similar
derivative  from  the  same  crude  verb,  with  pra  prefixed :  the  most
common  acceptation  of  this  word  is  "  outcast,  or  man  of  the  lowest
class ;"  as  applied  to  a  language  it  signifies  "  vulgar."  Apahhrama
is  derived  from  bhrai^  "  to  fall  down  :"  it  signifies  a  word,  or  dialect,
which  falls  off  from  correct  etymology.  Grammarians  use  Sanscr^ta
as  signifying  "  duly  formed  or  regularly  inflected ;"  and  Apahhrama
for  false  grammar.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


AND PRACRIT  LANGUAGES.  6

It  evidently  draws  its  origin  (and  some  steps  of  its  progress
may  even  now  be  traced)  from  a  primeval  tongue,  which
was  gradually  refined  in  vaiious  climates,  and  became
Sanscrit  in  India,  Pahlavi  in  Persia,  and  Greek  on  the
shores  of  the  Mediterranean.  Like  other  very  ancient
languages,  Sanscrit  abounds  in  inflections,  which  are,  how-
ever, more  anomalous  in  this  than  in  the  other  languages
here  alluded  to ;  and  which  are  even  more  so  in  the  obso-
lete dialect  of  the  Vidas^  than  in  the  polished  speech  of
the  classic  poets.  It  has  nearly  shared  the  fate  of  all
ancient  tongues,  and  is  now  become  almost  a  dead  lan-
guage ;  but  there  seems  no  good  reason  for  doubting  that
it  was  once  universally  spoken  in  India.  Its  name,  and
the  reputed  difficulty  of  its  grammar,  have  led  many  per-
sons to  imagine  that  it  has  been  refined  by  the  coticerted
efforts  of  a  few  priests,  who  set  themselves  about  inventing
a  new  language ;  not,  like  all  other  tongues,  by  the  gra-
dually improved  practice  of  good  writers  and  polite  speakers.
The  exquisitely  refined  system  by  which  the  grammar  of
Sanscrit  is  taught,  has  been  mistaken  for  the  refinement
of  the  language  itself.  The  rules  have  been  supposed  to
be  anterior  to  the  practice,  but  this  supposition  is  gratui-
tous. In  Sanscrit,  as  in  every  other  known  tongue,  gram-
marians have  not  invented  etymology,  but  have  only
contrived  rules  to  teach  what  was  already  established  by
approved  practice.

There  is  one  peculiarity  of  Sanscrit  compositions  which
may  also  have  suggested  the  opinion  that  it  could  never  be
a  spoken  language.  I  allude  to  what  might  be  termed  the
euphonical  orthography  of  Sanscrit.  It  consists  in  extend-
ing to  syntax  the  rules  for  the  permutation  of  letters  in
etymology.  Similar  rules  for  avoiding  incompatible  sounds
in  compound  terms  exist  in  all  languages ;  this  is  sometimes
effected  by  a  deviation  from  orthography  in  the  pronuncia-

B  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


4  ON  THE  SANSCRtr

tion  of  words ;  sometimes  by  altering  one  or  more  letters  to
make  the  spelling  correspond  with  the  pronunciation.  These
rules  have  been  more  profoundly  investigated  by  Hindu
grammarians  than  by  those  of  any  other  nation ;  and  they
have  completed  a  system  of  orthography  which  may  be
justly  termed  euphonical.  They  require  all  compound  terms
to  be  reduced  to  this  standard,  and  Sanscrit  authors,  it
may  be  observed,  delight  in  compounds  of  inordinate
length :  the  whole  sentence,  too,  or  even  whole  periods,
may,  at  the  pleasure  of  the  author,  be  combined  like  the
elements  of  a  single  word,  and  good  writers  generally  do
so.  In  common  speech  this  could  never  have  been  prac-
tised. None  but  well-known  compounds  would  be  used  by
any  speaker  who  wished  to  be  understood,  and  each  word
would  be  distinctly  articulated  independently  of  the  terms
which  precede  and  follow  it.  Such,  indeed,  is  the  present
practice  of  those  who  still  speak  the  Sanscrit  language  ;
and  they  deliver  themselves  with  such  fluency,  as  is  suffi-
cient to  prove  that  Sanscrit  may  have  been  spoken  in
former  times  with  as  much  facility  as  the  contemporary
dialects  of  the  Greek  language,  or  the  more  modem  dialects
of  the  Arabic  tongue.  I  shall  take  occasion  again  to  allude
to  this  topic,  after  explaining  at  large  what  are,  and  by
whom  were  composed,  those  grammatical  institutes,  in
which  the  Sanscrit  language  is  framed,  according  to  the
author  above-quoted  ;  or  by  which  (for  the  meaning  is  ill-
conveyed  by  a  literal  translation)  words  are  correctly  formed
and  inflected.

PAnini,  the  father  of  Sanscrit  grammar,  lived  in  so
remote  an  age,  that  he  ranks  among  those  ancient  sages
whose  fabulous  history  occupies  a  conspicuous  place  in  the
PuranaSy  or  Indian  theogonies.* The  name  is  a  patro-


•  Every  Purdna  treats  of  five  subjects :  the  creation  of  the  uni-
verse, its  progfress, and  the  renovation  of  worlds ;  the  genealogy  of


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


AND  pracrTt  languages.  5

nymic,  indicating  his  descent  from  Pan  in;  but,  according
to  the  Pauranica  legends,  he  was  grandson  of  D^vala,
an  inspired  legislator.  Whatever  may  be  the  true  history
of  PAnini,  to  him  the  Sutras,  or  succinct  aphorisms  of
grammar,  are  attributed  by  universal  consent:  his  system
is  grounded  on  a  profound  investigation  of  the  analogies  in
both  the  regular  and  the  anomalous  inflections  of  the
Sanscrit  language.  He  has  combined  those  analogies  in
a  very  artificial  manner ;  and  has  thus  compressed  a  most
copious  etymology  into  a  very  narrow  compass.  His  pre-
cepts are  indeed  numerous,*  but  they  have  been  framed
with  the  utmost  conciseness ;  and  this  great  brevity  is  the
result  of  very  ingenious  methods  which  have  been  contrived
for  this  end,  and  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  the  student's
memory.  In  PAnini's  system,  the  mutual  relation  of  all
the  parts  marks  that  it  must  have  been  completed  by  its
author :  it  certainly  bears  internal  evidence  of  its  having
been  accompUshed  by  a  single  effort,  and  even  the  correc-
tions which  are  needed  cannot  be  interwoven  with  the  text.
It  must  not  be  hence  inferred,  that  PAnini  was  unaided
by  the  labours  of  earlier  grammarians.  In  many  of  his
precepts  he  cites  the  authority  of  his  predece8sors,t  some-
times for  a  deviation  from  a  general  rule,  often  for  a  gram-
matical canon  which  has  universal  cogency.  He  has  even
employed  some  technical  terms  without  defining  them,
because,  as  his  commentators  remark,  those  terms  were
already  introduced  by  earlier  grammarians.^: None  of  the

gods  and  heroes ;  chronology,  accordiDg  to  a  fabulous  system  ;  and
heroic  history,  containing  the  achievements  ofderai-^ods  and  heroes.
Since  each  Purana  contains  a  cosmogony,  with  mythological  and
heroic  history,  the  works  which  bear  that  title  may  not  inaptly  be
compared  to  the  Grecian  theogonies.

•  Not  fewer  than  3,996.

t  Sacalya,  Garoya,CaSyapa,Galava,  Sacatayana,  and  others.

t  In  a  few  instances  he  quotes  former  grammars  to  refute  them.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


6  ON  THE  SANSCRIT

more  ancient  works,  however,  seem  to  be  now  extant:
being  superseded  by  his,  they  have  probably  been  disused
for  ages,  and  are  now  perhaps  totally  lost.  *

A  performance  such  as  the  Paniniya  grammar  must
inevitably  contain  many  errors.  The  task  of  correcting  its
inaccuracies  has  been  executed  by  CiTYAYANA,t  an  in-
spired saint  and  lawgiver,  whose  history,  like  that  of  all
the  Indian  sages,  is  involved  in  the  impenetrable  darkness
of  mythology.  His  annotations,  entitled  VarticciSy  restrict
those  among  the  Paniniya  rules  which  are  too  vague,
enlarge  others  which  are  too  hmited,  and  mark  numerous
exceptions  which  had  escaped  the  notice  of  PAnini
himself.

The  amended  rules  of  grammar  have  been  formed  into
memorial  verses  by  BnARTRlf-HARi,  whose  metrical  apho-
risms, entitled  Caricciy  have  almost  equal  authority  with
the  precepts  of  PAnini  and  emendations  of  CAtyayana.
If  the  popular  traditions  concerning  Bhartri-hari  be
well  founded,  he  lived  in  the  century  preceding  the  Chris-
tian era;:]:  for  he  is  supposed  to  be  the  same  with  the
brother  of  VicramAditya,  and  the  period  when  this
prince  reigned  at  Ujjayini  is  determined  by  the  date  of  the
Samvat  era.

The studied  brevity  of  the  Paniniya  Sutras  renders

•  Definitions  of  some  technical  terms,  together  \nih  grammatical
axioms,  are  also  cited  from  those  ancient  works  in  the  commentaries
on  Pacini.  They  are  inserted  in  a  compilation  entitled  Pnrihhdshdy
which  will  be  subsequently  noticed.  The  various  original  authorities
of  SanscrU  grammar,  as  enumerated  in  a  memorial  verse,  are  eight
in  number,  viz,  Indra,  Chandra,  Ca^acritsna,  Api^ali,  §aca-
fivANA,  Pacini,  Amera,  and  Jin^ndra.

t  This  name  likewise  is  a  patronymic.

X  A  beautiful  poem  has  been  composed  in  his  name,  containing
moral  reflections,  which  the  poet  supposes  him  to  make  on  the  dis-
cover\'  of  his  wife's  infidelity.  It  consists  of  either  three  or  four
SatacaSy  or  centuries  of  couplets.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


AND  PHACRIT  LANGUAGES.  7

them  in  the  highest  degree  obscure.  Even  with  the
knowledge  of  the  key  to  their  interpretation,  the  student
folds  them  ambiguous.  In  the  appUcation  of  them  when
understood,  he  discovers  many  seeming  contradictions;
and,  with  every  exertion  of  practised  memory,  he  must
experience  the  utmost  diflSculty  in  combining  rules  dis-
persed in  apparent  confusion  through  different  portions  of
PANiNfs  eight  lectures.  A  commentary  was  therefore
indispensably  requisite.  Many  were  composed  by  ancient
grammarians  to  elucidate  the  text  of  PAnini.  A  nK)6t
copious  one  on  the  emendations  of  his  rules  was  compiled
in  very  ancient  times  by  an  uncertain  author.  This  volu-
mmous  work,  known  by  the  title  of  Mahabkdshya,  or  the
great  commentary,  is  ascribed  to  Patanjali,  a  &bulous
personage,  to  whom  mythol(^  has  assigned  the  shape
of  a  serpent.  In  this  commentary  almost  every  rule  is
examined  at  great  length.  All  possible  interpretations
are  proposed :  and  the  true  sense  and  import  of  the  rule
are  deduced  through  a  tedious  train  of  argument,  in  which
all  foreseen  objections  are  considered  and  refuted,  and
the  wrong  interpretations  of  the  text,  with  all  the  argu-
ments which  can  be  invented  to  support  them,  are  obviated
or  exploded.

Voluminous  as  it  is,  the  Mahabhashya  has  not  exhausted
the  subject  on  which  it  treats.  Its  deficiencies  have  been
supplied  by  the  annotations  of  modem  grammarians.  The
most  celebrated  among  these  scholiasts  of  the  Bhashya  is
CAiYAf A,  a  learned  Cashmirian.  His  annotations  are
almost  equally  copious  with  the  commentary  itself.  Yet
they,  too,  are  loaded  by  numerous  glosses ;  among  which
the  old  and  new  Vivcaranas  are  most  esteemed.

The  difficulty  of  combining  the  dispersed  rules  of  gram-
mar, to  inflect  any  one  verb  or  noun  through  all  its  varia-
tions, renders  further  aid  necessary. This  seems  to  have


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


8  ON  THE  SANSCRjfx

been  anciently  afforded  in  vocabularies,  one  of  which  ex-
hibited the  verbs  classed  in  the  order  impUed  by  the
system  of  Panini,  the  other  contained  nouns  arranged
on  a  similar  plan.  Both  probably  cited  the  precepts
which  must  be  remembered  in  ccmjugating  and  declining
each  verb  and  noun.  A  catalogue  of  verbs,  classed  in
regular  order,  but  with  few  references  to  the  rules  of
etymology,  is  extant,  and  is  known  by  the  title  of  2)Aa-
tupaia.  It  may  be  considered  as  an  appendix  to  the
grammar  of  PAnini;  and  so  may  his  treatise  on  the
pronunciation  of  vocal  sounds,  and  the  treatise  of  YAsca
on  obsolete  words  and  acceptations  peculiar  to  the  Veda.
A  numerous  class  of  derivative  nouns,  to  which  he  has
only  alluded,  have  been  reduced  to  rule,  under  the  head
of  Unadi,  or  the  termination  u  &c. ;  and  the  precepts
respecting  the  gender  of  nouns  have  been,  in  like  manner,
arranged  in  SiitraSy  which  are  formed  on  the  same  prin-
ciples with  PAnini's  rules,  and  which  are  considered  as
almost  equally  ancient.  Another  supplement  to  his  gram-
mar is  entitled  Ganapaia,  and  contains  lists  of  words
comprehended  in  various  grammatical  rules,  under  the
designation  of  some  single  word,  with  the  term  "  &c."
annexed  to  it.  These  supplements  are  due  to  various
authors.  The  subject  of  gender  alone  has  been  treated  by
more  than  one  writer  reputed  to  be  inspired ;  namely,  by
CAtyAyana,  G6bhila,  and  others.

These  subsidiary  parts  of  the  Paniniya  grammar  do  not
require  a  laboured  commentary;  excepting  only  the  cata-
logue of  verbs,  which  does  need  annotation ;  and  which  is,
in  truth,  a  proper  groundwork  for  a  complete  review  of  all
the  rules  of  etymology  that  are  applicable  to  each  verb.*

•  The  number  of  verbal  roots  amounts  to  1,750  nearly;  exclusive
of  many  obsolete  words  omitted  in  the  Dhdtupdlay  but  noticed  m  the
Sutras  as  the  roots  of  certain  derivatives. The  crude  verbs,  however.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ iC


AND  PRAcRtT  LANGUAGES.  9

The  Vritti  nyam,  a  very  celebrated  work,  is,  I  believe,  a
commentary  of  this  sort.*  It  is  mentioned  by  Maitr£y a
RAcsHiTA,  the  author  of  the  Dhatu  pradipa,  as  the  work
chiefly  consulted  by  him  in  compiling  his  brief  annotations
on  the  Dhatupaia.  A  very  voluminous  commentary  on
the  catalogue  of  verbs,  was  compiled  under  the  patronage
of  Sayana,  minister  of  a  chieftain  named  Bucca  rAya  and
is  entitled  Madhavtya  vritti.  It  thoroughly  explains  the
signification  and  inflection  of  each  verb ;  but  at  the  same
time  enters  largely  into  scholastic  refinements  on  general
grammar.

Such  vast  works  as  the  Mahabhashya  and  its  schoUa,
with  the  voluminous  annotations  on  the  catalogue  of  verbs,
are  not  adapted  for  general  instruction.  A  conciser  com-
mentary must  have  been  always  requisite.  The  best  that
is  now  extant  is  entitled  the  Casica  vritti,  or  commentary
composed  at  VaraAasi.  The  author,  Jayaditya,  in  a
short  preface  explains  his  design  :  '  to  gather  the  essence
of  a  science  dispersed  in  the  early  commentaries,  in  the
Skashya,  in  copious  dictionaries  of  verbs  and  of  nouns,
and  in  other  works.'  He  has  well  fulfilled  the  task  which
he  undertook.  His  gloss  explains  in  perspicuous  language
the  meaning  and  application  of  each  rule :  he  adds  exam-
are  more  numerous,  because  many  rootR,  containing^  the  same  radical
letters,  are  variously  conjugated  in  different  senses.  The  whole  num-
ber of  crude  verbs  separately  noticed  in  the  catalog^ue  exceeds  three
thousand.  From  each  of  these  are  deduced  many  compound  verbs,
by  prefixing  one  or  more  prepositions  to  the  verbal  root.  Such  com-
pounds often  deviate  very  widely  in  their  signification,  and  some  even
in  their  inflections,  from  the  radical  verb.  The  derivative  verbs,
again,  are  numerous;  such  as  causals,  frequentatives,  £cc.  Hence
it  may  be  readily  perceived  how  copious  this  branch  of  grammar
must  Tie.

*  I  have  not  yet  had  an  opportunity  of  inspecting  either  this  or  its
gloss. It  has  been  described  to  me  as  a  commentary  on  the  Cdsicd

VT^iUi.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


10  ON THE  SANSCRIT

plesy  and  quotes^  in  their  proper  places^  the  necessary
emendations  from  the  Varticas  and  Bhashya,  Though
he  never  deviates  into  frivolous  disquisitions  nor  into  tedious
reasoning,  but  expounds  the  text  as  succinctly  as  could
consist  with  perspicuity,  his  work  is  nevertheless  volumi-
nous ;  and  yet,  copious  as  it  is,  the  commentaries  on  it,
and  the  annotations  on  its  commentaries,  are  still  more
voluminous.  Amongst  the  most  celebrated  is  the  Pada-
manjari  of  Haradatta  misra,  a  grammarian  whose
authority  is  respected  almost  equally  with  that  of  the  au-
thor on  whose  text  he  comments.  The  annotators  on  this,
again,  are  numerous ;  but  it  would  be  useless  to  insert  a
long  list  of  their  names,  or  of  the  titles  of  their  works.

Excellent  as  the  Casica  vritti  undoubtedly  is,  it  partakes
of  the  defects  which  have  been  imputed  to  PAnini's  text.
Following  the  same  oi-der  in  which  the  oiiginal  rules  are
arranged,  it  is  well  adapted  to  assist  the  student  in
acquiring  a  critical  knowledge  of  the  Sanscrit  tongue.
But  for  one  who  studies  the  rudiments  of  the  language  a
different  arrangement  is  requisite,  for  the  sake  of  bringing
into  one  view  the  rules  which  must  be  remembered  in  the
inflections  of  one  word,  and  those  which  must  be  combined
even  for  a  single  variation  of  a  single  term.  Such  a  gram-
mar has  been  compiled  within  a  few  centuries  past  by
RAmachandra,  an  eminent  grammarian.  It  is  entitled
Pracriya  caumudi.  The  rules  are  PAninTs,  and  the  expla-
nation of  them  is  abridged  from  the  ancient  commentaries ;
but  the  arrangement  is  wholly  different.  It  proceeds  from
the  elements  of  writing  to  definitions;  thence  to  ortho-
graphy: it  afterwards  exhibits  the  inflections  of  nouns
according  to  case,  number,  and  gender  ;  notices  the  inde-
clinables ;  and  proceeds  to  the  uses  of  the  cases.  It  sub-
joins the  rules  of  apposition,  by  which  compound  terms
are formed ; the etymology of  patronymics and other


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


AND  PrAcRIT languages.  11

derivatiyes  from  nouns ;  and  the  reduplication  of  particles,
&c.  In  the  second  part  it  treats  of  the  conjugation  of
verbs  arranged  in  ten  classes:  to  these  primitives  succeed
derivative  verbs,  formed  from  verbal  roots  or  from  nouns.
The  rules  concerning  different  voices  follow ;  they  are  suc-
ceeded by  precepts  regarding  the  use  of  the  tenses ;  and
the  work  concludes  with  the  etymology  of  verbal  nouns,
gerunds,  supines,  and  participles.  A  supplement  to  it  con-
tains the  anomalies  of  the  dialect  in  which  the  Veda  is
composed.

The  outline  of  PAnini's  arrangement  is  simple;  but
numerous  exceptions  and  frequent  digressions  have  involved
it  in  much  seeming  confusion.  The  two  first  lectures  (the
first  section  especially,  which  is  in  a  manner  the  key  of
the  whole  grammar)  contain  definitions ;  in  the  three  next
are  collected  the  affixes,  by  which  verbs  and  nouns  are
inflected.  Those  which  appertain  to  verbs  occupy  the
third  lecture :  the  fourth  and  fifth  contain  such  as  are
affixed  to  nouns.  The  remaining  three  lectures  treat  of
the  changes  which  roots  and  afiixes  undergo  in  special
cases,  or  by  general  rules  of  orthography,  and  which  are
all  effected  by  the  addition  or  by  the  substitution  of  one  or
more  elements.*  The  apparent  simplicity  of  the  design
vanishes  in  the  perplexity  of  the  structure.  The  endless
pursuit  of  exceptions  and  of  limitations  so  disjoins  the
general  precepts,  that  the  reader  cannot  keep  in  view  their
intended  connexion  and  mutual  relation.  He  wanders  in
an  intricate  maze,  and  the  clew  of  the  labyrinth  is  conti-
nually slipping  from  his  hands.

The  order  in  which  RAmachandra  has  delivered  the
rules  of  grammar  is  certainly  preferable  ;  but  the  Sutras  of
Pan  INI,  thus  detached  from  their  context,  are  wholly  unin-


* Even  the  expunging  of  a  letter  is  considered  as  the  substitution
of  a  blank.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


12  ON  THE  SANSCRlfx

telligible.  Without  the  commentator's  exposition,  they  are
indeed  what  Sir  William  Jones  has  somewhere  termed
them^  "  dark  as  the  darkest  oracle."  Even  with  the  aid
of  a  comment,  they  cannot  be  fully  undei^stood  until  they
are  perused  with  the  proper  context.  Notwithstanding  this
defect,  BHAff6ji  dIcshita,*  who  revised  the  Caumudiy
has  for  very  substantial  reasons  adhered  to  the  Paniniya
sittras.  That  able  grammarian  has  made  some  useful
changes  in  the  arrangement  of  the  Pracriya:  he  has
amended  the  explanation  of  the  rules,  which  was  in  many
places  incorrect  or  imperfect ;  he  has  remedied  many  omis-
sions, has  enlarged  the  examples,  and  has  noticed  the  most
important  instances  where  the  elder  grammarians  disagree,
or  where  classical  poets  have  deviated  from  the  -strict  rules
of  grammar.  This  excellent  work  is  entitled  Siddhanta
caumudi.  The  author  has  very  properly  followed  the
example  of  RAmachandra,  in  excluding  all  rules  that
are  peculiar  to  the  obsolete  dialect  of  the  Veda,  or  which
relate  to  accentuation ;  for  this  also  belongs  to  the  Veda
alone.  He  has  collected  them  in  an  appendix  to  the
Siddhanta  caumudi ;  and  has  subjoined,  in  a  second
appendix,  rules  concerning  the  gender  of  nouns.  The  other
supplements  of  PAnini's  grammar  are  interwoven  by  this
author  with  the  body  of  his  work.

The  Hindus  deUght  in  scholastic  disputation.  Their
grammarians  indulge  this  propensity  as  much  as  their
lawyers  and  their  sophists.f  BHAff6ji  dicshita  has
provided  an  ample  store  of  controversy  in  an  argumentative
commentary  on  his  own  grammar. This  work  is  entitled

•  Descendants  of  BHAff6jf  in  the  fifth  or  sixth  dep:ree  are,  I  am
told,  now  living  at  Benares.  He  must  have  flourished,  then,  between
one  and  two  centuries  ago.

t  Many  separate  treatises  on  different  branches  of  general  gram-
mar are  very  properly  considered  as  appertaining  to  the  science  of
logic.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


AND  pracrIt  languages.  13

Pranaha  man&ramd.  He  also  composed  a  very  voluminous
commentary  on  the  eight  lectures  of  PAnini,  and  gave  it
the  title  of  Sabda  caustubha.  The  only  portion  of  it  I
have  yet  seen  reaches  no  further  than  to  the  end  of  the
first  section  of  PAnini's  first  lecture.  But  this  is  so  diffu-
sive, that,  if  the  whole  have  been  executed  on  a  similar
plan,  i^  must  triple  the  ponderous  volume  of  the  Mdha-
bhashya  itself.  I  have  reason,  however,  for  doubting  that
it  was  ever  completed.

The  commentaries  on  the  Siddhanta  caumudi  and  Ma-
n&rama  are  very  numerous.  The  most  celebrated  shall  be
here  briefly  noticed.  1.  The  Tatwa  bSdhini  expounds  the
Siddhanta:  it  is  the  work  of  JnyAn6ndra  saraswatI,
an  ascetic,  and  the  pupil  of  Vaman^ndr  A  swamI.  2.  The
Sabdendu  kec'hara  is  another  commentary  on  BHAff 6ji's
grammar.  It  was  composed  by  a  successor,  if  not  a  de-
scendant, of  that  grammarian.  An  abridgment  of  it,
which  is  very  generally  studied,  is  the  work  of  NAg^Sa,
son  of  SivA  BHAff  A  and  pupil  of  Hari  dIcshita.  He
was  patronised,  as  appears  from  his  preface,  by  the  pro-
prietor of  Sringavera  pura.*  Though  called  an  abridg-
ment, this  Laghu  Sabdindu  is  a  voluminous  performance.
3.  The  Laghu  Sabdaratna  is  a  commentary  on  the  Man6-
rama  of  BHAff6ji  dIcshita,  by  the  author's  grandson,
Hari  d!cshita.  This  work  is  not  improperly  termed  an
abridgment,  since  it  is  short  in  comparison  with  most  other
commentaries  on  grammar.  A  larger  performance  on  the
same  topics,  and  with  the  same  title  of  Sabda  ratna,  was
composed  by  a  professor  of  this  school.  4.  BAla  sarman
Pagondiya,  who  is  either  fourth  or  fifth  in  succession
firom  BHAff6ji,  as  professor  of  grammar  at  Benares,  has
written  commentaries  on  the  Caustubha,  Sabda  ratna,  and

•  A  town  on  the  Gangfes,  marked  Singho9'e,  in  Rknnei/s  maps.
It  18  situated  above  IlaJidbad.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


14  ON  THE  SANSCRTt

Sabdendusec'hara,  His  father,  Baidy  an  At' ha  BHAffA,
largely  annotated  the  Paribhashendu  sec'hara  of  NAcfesA
BHAff  A,  which  is  an  argumentative  commentary  on  a
collection  of  grammatical  axioms  and  definitions  cited  by
the  glossarists  of  PAnini.  This  compilation,  entitled  Pa-
ribhasha,  has  also  furnished  the  text  for  other  controversial
performances  bearing  similar  titles.

While  so  many  commentaries  have  been  written  on  the
Siddhanta  caumudiy  the  Pracriya  caumudi  has  not  been
neglected.  The  schoUasts  of  this,  too,  are  numerous.  The
most  known  is  Crishna  pan6ita  ;  and  his  work  has
been  abridged  by  his  pupil  J  ay  ant  a,  who  has  given  the
title  of  Tatwa  chandra  to  a  very  excellent  compendium.*
On  the  other  hand,  CrIshna  pan6ita  has  had  the  fate
common  to  all  noted  grammarians,  since  his  work  has
employed  a  host  of  commentators  who  have  largely  com-
mented on  it.

The  Caumudisj  independently  even  of  their  numerous
commentaries,  have  been  found  too  vast  and  intricate  for
young  students.  Abridgments  of  the  Siddhanta  caumudi
have  been  therefore  attempted  by  several  authors  with
unequal  degrees  of  success.  Of  three  such  abridgments
one  only  seems  to  deserve  present  notice.  It  is  the
Madhya  caumudi,  and  is  accompanied  by  a  similar  com-
pendium of  annotations,  entitled  Madhya  manSramd.  The
name  indicates,  that  it  holds  a  middle  place  between  the
diffuse  original  and  the  jejune  abstracts  called  Laghu
caumudi,  &c.  It  contains  such  of  PAnini*s  rules  as  are
most  universal,  and  adds  to  each  a  short  but  perspicuous
exposition.  It  omits  only  the  least  common  exceptions  and
limitations.


*  Finished  by  him,  as  appears  from  a  postscript  to  the  book,  in  the
year  1687  of  the  Samvat  era.  Though  he  studied  at  Benares,  he
appears  to  have  been  born  on  the  banks  of  the  Tapadf  a  river  marked
Taptee  in  Rknnei.'s  map.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


AND  PEACRIT  LANGUAGES.  15

When  Sanscrit  was  the  language  of  Indian  courts,  and
was  cultivated  not  only  by  persons  who  devoted  themselves
to  religion  and  literature,  but  also  by  princes,  lawyers,
soldiers,  physicians,  and  scribes  (in  short,  by  the  first  three
tribes,  and  by  many  classes  included  in  the  foui-th),  an
easy  and  popular  grammar  must  have  been  needed  by
persons  who  coiJd  not  waste  the  best  years  of  their  hves  in
the  study  of  words.  Such  grammars  must  always  have
been  in  use;  those,  however,  which  are  now  studied  are  not,
I  believe,  of  very  ancient  date.  The  most  esteemed  is
the  Sdraswata,  together  with  its  commentary  named
Ckandrica.  It  seems  to  have  been  formed  on  one  of  the
Caumudis,  by  translating  PAnini's  rules  into  language
that  is  inteUigible  independently  of  the  gloss,  and  without
the  necessity  of  adverting  to  a  diflferent  context.

Another  popular  grammar,  which  is  in  high  repute  in
Bengal,  is  entitled  MugdhabSdhoy  and  is  accompanied  by
a  commentary.  It  is  the  work  of  V6PADfevA,  and  pro-
ceeds upon  a  plan  grounded  on  that  of  the  Caumudis ;  but
the  author  has  not  been  content  to  translate  the  rules  of
PAnini  and  to  adopt  his  technical  terms.  He  has,  on  the
contrary,  invented  new  terms  and  contrived  new  abbreviations.
The  same  author  likewise  composed  a  metrical  catalogue  of
verbsalphabeticallyarranged.  It  is  named  Cavicalpadrumay
and  is  intended  as  a  substitute  for  the  Dhdtupaia,

The  chief  inconvenience  attending  V6p  a  diva's  innova-
tion is,  that  commentaries  and  scholia,  written  to  elucidate
poems  and  works  of  science,  must  be  often  unintelligible  to
those  who  have  studied  only  his  grammar,  and  that  the
writings  of  his  scholars  must  be  equally  incomprehensible
(wherever  a  grammatical  subject  is  noticed)  to  the  students
of  the  Paniniya,  Accordingly  the  Pandits  of  Bengal  are
cut  off,  in  a  manner,  from  communication  on  grammatical
topics  with  the  learned  of  other  provinces  in  India. Even


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


16  ON  THE  SANSCRIT

etymological  dictionaries,  such  as  the  commentaries  on  the
metrical  vocabularies,  which  I  shall  next  proceed  to  men-
tion, must  be  unintelUgible  to  them.

It  appears  from  the  prefaces  of  many  different  gram-
matical treatises,  that  works  entitled  Dkatu  and  Noma
par  ay  ana  were  formerly  studied,  lliey  must  have  com-
prehended, as  their  title  implies,  "  the  whole  of  the  verbs
and  nouns"  appertaining  to  the  language ;  and,  since  they
are  mentioned  as  very  voluminous,  they  must  probably
have  contained  references  to  all  the  rules  applicable  to
every  single  verb  and  noun.  Haradatta's  explanation
of  the  title  confirms  this  notion.  But  it  does  not  appear
that  any  work  is  now  extant  under  this  title.  The  Dha-
tupdiay  with  its  commentaries,  supplies  the  place  of  the
Dhdtuparayana,  A  collection  of  dictionaries  and  voca-
bularies, in  like  manner,  supplies  the  want  of  the  Noma
pardyana.  These  then  may  be  noticed  in  this  place  as  a
branch  of  grammar.

The  best  and  most  esteemed  vocabulary  is  the  Amera
c6ska.  Even  the  bigotry  of  Sancara  AchArya  spared
this,  when  he  proscribed  the  other  works  of  Amera
sinha.* Like most  other Sanscrit  dictionaries, it  is

*  Amera  sinha  was  an  eminent  poet  and  one  of  the  nine  g;ems  (for
so  these  poets  were  called),  M'ho  were  the  ornament  of  Vicrama-
ditya's  court.  Unfortunately  he  held  the  tenets  of  a  heterodox  sect,
and  his  poems  are  said  to  have  perished  in  the  persecutions  fomented
hy  intolerant  philosophers  against  the  persons  and  writings  of  hoth
Jainas  and  Bauddhas.  The  persecution,  instigated  hy  Sancara
and  Udayana  acharya,  was  enforced,  perhaps  from  political  mo-
tives, by  princes  of  the  Vaishhava  and  ^iva  sects,  who  compelled  the
Bauodha  monarchs  to  retire  from  Hindustan,  and  to  content  them-
selves with  their  dominions  of  Ldsaia  and  Bhbta.  It  would  be  curi-
ous to  investigate  the  date  of  this  important  revolution.  The  present
conjecture,  (for  it  is  little  more  than  mere  conjecture)  is  partly
founded  upon  some  acknowledgments  made  by  PaiiSUts,  who  confess
that  ^ANGARA  and  Udayana  persecuted  the  heterodox  sects  and


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


AND  PRAcRtx  LANGUAGES.  17

arranged  in  verse  to  aid  the  memory.  Synonymous  words
are  collected  into  one  or  more  verses^  and  placed  in  fifteen
different  chapters,  which  treat  of  as  many  different  sub-
jects. The  sixteenth  contains  a  few  homonymous  terms,
arranged  alphabetically,  in  the  Indian  manner,  by  the
final  consonants.  The  seventeenth  chapter  is  a  pretty  full
catalc^e  of  indeclinables,  which  European  philologists
would  call  adverbs,  prepositions,  conjunctions,  and  inter-
jections, but  which  Sanscrit  grammarians  consider  as
indeclinable  nouns.  The  last  chapter  of  the  Amera  c6sha
is  a  treatise  on  the  gender  of  nouns.  Another  vocabulary
by  the  same  author  is  often  cited  by  his  conmientators,
under  the  title  of  Amera  mala.

Numerous  commentaries  have  been  written  on  the  Amera
cSsha. The  chief  object  of  them  is  to  explain  the  deriva-

proscribed  their  books ;  and  partly  on  the  evidence  of  the  engraved
plate  found  at  Mttdgagiri,  and  of  the  inscription  on  the  pillar  found
BtBeddl  (See  As.  Res.  vol.  i.  p.  123  and  133),  from  which  it  appears
that  D^vapIla  d£va  belonged  to  the  sect  of  Buodha,  and  that  he
reigned  over  Bengal  and  CarMla  as  well  as  Ldstda  and  Bh6ta,  and
had  successfully  invaded  Camboja^  after  traversing  as  a  conqueror  the
Vindhya  range  of  mountains.  His  descendants,  as  far  as  the  fourth
generation,  governed  a  no  less  extensive  empire;  as  appears  from  the
inscription  on  the  pillar  at  Bedal,  1  must  however  acknowledge,
that  this  last  mentioned  inscription  does  not  indicate  any  attachment
to  the  sect  of  Buddha.  This  may  be  accounted  for,  by  supposing  that
the  worshippers  of  CaKsHif  a  and  of  Rama,  or  whatever  other  sects
prevailed,  were  then  as  cordial  to  the  followers  of  Buddha,  as  they
now  are  towards  each  other.  The  king  and  his  minister  might  belong
to  different  sects.

Amkba  is  mentioned  in  an  inscription  at  Buddha  gayd  as  the
founder  of  a  temple  at  that  place.  (As.  Res.  vol.  i.  p.  284.)  This
circumstance  may  serve  to  explain  why  his  works  have  been  proscribed
with  peculiar  inveteracy,  as  it  is  acknowledged  by  many  Pa^ts  that
they  have  been. He  was  probably  a  zealous  sectarist.

This  is,  however,  by  no  means  certain :  and  BhInuj!  DIoshita,
in  his  commentary  on  the  Amera  cbsha^  denies  that  there  is  any  evi-
dence to  prove  that  the  author  belonged  to  the  sect  of  Jainas.

VOL.  II.  C


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


18  ON  THE  SANSCrYt

tions  of  the  nouns  and  to  supply  the  principal  deficiencies  ot
the  text.  Sanscrit  etymologists  scarcely  acknowledge  a
single  primitive  amongst  the  nouns.  When  unable  to  trace
an  etymology  which  may  be  consistent  with  the  acceptation
of  the  word,  they  are  content  to  derive  it,  according  to
grammatical  rules,  from  some  root  to  which  the  word  has
no  affinity  in  sense.  At  other  times  they  adopt  fanciliii
etymologies  from  Puranas  or  from  Tantras :  but,  in  gene-
ral, the  derivations  are  accurate  and  instructive.  The  best
known  among  these  commentaries  of  the  Amera  c6sha  is
the  Pada  chandricay  compiled  from  sixteen  older  com-*
mentaries  by  VkKhaspati,  sumamed  Mucuf  a,  or  at  full
length  Raya  MUcuf  a  mani.  It  appears  from  the  inci*
dental  mention  of  the  years  then  expired  of  astronomical  eras,
that  Mucuf  A  made  this  compilation  in  the  4532d  year  of  the
Cali  yug,  which  corresponds  with  A.  D.  1430.  Achyuta
jALLAcl  has  abridged  Mucuf  a's  commentary,  but  with*
out  acknowledgment ;  and  has  given  the  title  of  Vyac'hyi
pradtpa  to  his  compendium.  On  the  other  hand,  BhAn  ujf
DicsHiTA  has  revised  the  same  compilation,  and  has  cor*
rected  the  numerous  errors  of  Mucuf  a,  who  often  derives
words  from  roots  that  are  unknown  to  the  language,  or
according  to  rules  which  have  no  place  in  its  grammar.
BhAnujI  has  greatly  improved  the  plan  of  the  woA,  by
inserting  from  other  authorities  the  various  acceptations  of
words  exhibited  by  Amera  in  one  or  two  senses  only.
This  excellent  compilation  is  aititled  Vyac*hya  sudha.

The  Amera  cSsha,  as  has  been  already  hinted,  gives  a
very  incomplete  list  of  words  that  have  various  acceptations.
This  defect  is  well  supplied  by  the  Mediniy  a  dictionary  so
named  from  its  author,  M^dinIcar.  It  contains  words
that  bear  many  senses,  arranged  in  alphabetical  order  by
the  final  consonants ;  and  a  list  of  homonymous  indecUn-
ables  is  subjoined  to  it. A  similar  dictionary,  compiled  by


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


AND  prAcrYt  languages.  19

MAHifiwARA  and  entitled  VUwa  pracasa,  is  much  con-
sulted, though  it  be  very  defective,  as  has  been  justly
remarked  by  MiniNlcAR.  It  contains,  howeyer,  a  very
useful  appendix  on  words  spelt  more  than  one  way;  and
another  on  letters  which  are  liable  to  be  confounded,  such
as  V  and  b ;  and  another,  again,  on  the  gender  of  nouns.
These  subjects  are  not  separately  treated  by  MiniNfcAR ;
but  he  has,  on  the  other  hand,  specified  the  genders  with
great  care  in  the  body  of  the  work.  The  exact  age  of  the
Mcdini  is  not  certainly  known ;  but  it  is  older  than
Mucuf  a's  compilation,  since  it  is  quoted  by  this  author.

Am  era's  dictionary  does  not  contain  more  than  ten
thousand  different  words;  yet  the  Sanscrit  language  is
very  copious.  The  insertion  of  derivatives,  that  do  not  at
all  deviate  from  their  regular  and  obvious  import,  has  been
Tery  properly  deemed  superfluous.  Compound  epithets,
and  other  compound  terms,  in  which  the  Sanscrit  language
is  peculiarly  rich,  are  Ukewise  omitted  ;  excepting  such  as
are  especially  appropriated,  by  a  limited  acceptation,  either
as  titles  of  deities,  or  as  names  of  plants,  animals,  &c.  In
fiict,  compound  terms  are  formed  at  pleasure,  according  to
the  rules  of  grammar ;  and  must  generally  be  interpreted
in  strict  conformity  with  those  rules.  Technical  terms,  too,
are  mostly  excluded  from  genei-al  dictionaries  and  consigned
to  separate  nomenclatures.  The  Amera  c6sha,  then,  is
less  defective  than  might  be  inferred  from  the  small  num-
ber of  words  explained  in  it.  Still,  however,  it  needs  a
supplement.  The  H&ravali  may  be  used  as  such.  It  is  a
Yocabulary  of  uncommon  words,  compiled  by  Purush6t-
TAMA,  the  autiior  of  an  etymological  work,  and  also  of  a
httle  collection  of  monograms,  entitled  JScacshara.  His
HaravaH  was  compiled  by  him  under  the  patronage  of
DhrYtasinha.  It  is  noticed  by  MfeniNicAR,  andseems
to  be  likewise  anterior  to  the  Viswa.

c  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


20  ON  THE  SANSCRtT

The  remaining  deficiencies  of  the  Amera  cisha  ate  sup-
plied by  consulting  other  dictionaries  and  vocabularies;  such
as  HelAyudha's,  VAchespati's,  the  Dharani  cishay  or
some  other.  Smiscrtt  dictionaries  are  indeed  very  nume-
rous. Purush6ttama  and  MiDiNlcAR  name  the  Ut-
paliniy  Sabdarnava,  and  Sansaravarta,  as  works  considted
by  them.  Purush6ttama  adds  the  names  of  VAches-
PATi,  Vya6i,  and  Vicramaditya;  but  it  is  not  quite
clear  whether  he  mentions  them  as  the  authors  and  patrons
of  these,  or  of  other  dictionaries.  M&dinIcar  adds  a
fourth  vocabulary,  called  Namamala,  and  with  similar
obscurity  subjoins  the  celebrated  names  of  BhAguri,
Vararuchi,  SASwata,  B6pAlita,  and  Rantid^va.
He  then  proceeds  to  enumerate  the  dictionaries  of  Amera,
SubhAnga,  HelAyudha,  G6verdhana,  Rabhasa
pAla,  and  the  Ratna  c6sha;  with  the  vocabularies  of
RuDRAy  Dhananjaya,  and  GangAdhara;  as  also  the
DharaAi  cSsha^  Haravali,  Vrtkad  amara,  TricaAcla  seshuy
and  Ratnamala.  Many  of  these  are  cited  by  the  com-
mentators on  Amera  and  by  the  scholiasts  on  different
poems.  The  following  are  also  frequently  cited ;  some  as
etymologists,  the  rest  as  lexicographers :  SwAm!,  Durga,
Sarvadhara,VAman  A,  Chandra,  and  the  authors  of  the
Vaijayantij  Namanidhanay  Haima,  Vrthat-nighanii,  Sec.
To  this  list  might  be  added  the  Anecarf/ia  dhward  man--
jari,  Nanarfha,  and  other  vocabularies  of  homonymous
terms ;  the  DuAructi^  Bhdripraydga  c6sha,  and  other  lists
of  words  spelt  in  more  than  one  way ;  and  the  various
Nigkaniis  or  nomenclatures,  such  as  the  Dhanwantari-
nigharAa  and  Raja  nighaniay  which  contain  lists  of  the
materia  medica;  and  the  Nighanti  of  the  Fcrfa,  which
explains  obsolete  words  and  unusual  acceptations.*

•  The  Niructiy  as  explained  in  Sir  William  Jones's  treati0eon  the
literature  of  the  Hindus,  belongs  to  the  same  class  with  the  Nighaidi  of


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


AND  prAcrYt  languages.  21

Before  I  proceed  to  mention  other  languages  of  India,
it  may  be  proper  to  mention,  that  the  school  of  Benares
now  uses  the  Siddhanta  caumndi,  and  other  works  of
BnAffoji,  as  the  same  school  formerly  did  the  Caiica
vritti.  The  Pracriya  caumtidi,  with  its  commentaries,
maintains  its  ground  among  the  learned  of  Mifhila  or
Tirhiit,  In  both  places,  howeyer,  and  indeed  throughout
India,  the  Mahahhashya  continues  to  be  the  standard  of
Sanscrit  grammar:  it  is  therefore  studied  by  all  who  are
ambitious  of  acquiring  a  critical  knowledge  of  the  language.
The  Hancarica^  with  its  commentaries  by  H^lArAja  and
PunjarAja,  was  probably  in  use  with  a  school  that  once
flourished  at  Vjjayinij  but  it  does  not  seem  to  be  now
generally  studied  in  any  part  of  India.

The  second  class  of  Indian  languages  comprehends  the
written  dialects  which  are  now  used  in  the  intercourse  of
civil  Ufe,  and  which  are  cultivated  by  lettered  men.  The
author  of  a  passage  already  quoted  includes  all  such  dialects
under  the  general  denomination  of  Pracrit:  but  this  term,
is  commonly  restricted  to  one  language,  namely,  to  the
Saraswati  bdla  banif  or  the  speech  of  children  on  the
banks  of  the  SaraswatL*  There  is  reason  to  believe  that
ten  polished  dialects  formerly  prevailed  in  as  many  difiei-ent
civilized  nations,  who  occupied  all  the  fertile  provinces  of
Hindustan  and  the  Dacshin,  Evident  traces  of  them  still
exist.  They  shall  be  noticed  in  the  order  in  which  these
Hindu  nations  are  usually  enumerated.


the  Vida:  and  a  small  vocabulary  under  both  these  titles  is  commonly
annexed  to  the  R)tgvhda  to  complete  the  set  of  Upavidas,  There  is,
however,  a  much  larger  work  entitled  Niructi;  and  the  commentators
of  it  are  often  cited  upon  topics  of  general  grammar.  See  vol.  i.  p.  26.

•  The  term  will  bear  a  different  interpretation,  but  this  seems  to
be  the  most  probable  explanation  of  it.  The  other  (youthful  speech
of  Sari  SWAT  f)  is  generally  received.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


22  ON  TH£  SANSCBKt

Tlie  Saraswata  was  a  nation  which  occupied  the  banks
of  the  river  Sarastoati.  BrahmoAaSj  who  are  still  distin*
guished  by  the  name  of  their  nation,  inhabit  chiefly  the
Penjab  or  Panchanada,  west  of  the  river  fiom  which
they  take  their  appellation.  Their  original  language  may
have  once  prevailed  through  the  southern  and  western
parts  of  Hindustan  proper,  and  is  probably  the  idiom  to
which  the  name  of  Pracrit  is  generally  appropriated.  This
has  been  more  cultivated  than  any  other  among  the  dialects
which  will  be  here  enimierated,  and  it  occupies  a  principal
place  in  the  dialogue  of  moat  dramas.  Many  beautiful
poems  composed  wholly  in  this  language,  or  intermixed
with  stanzas  (^  pure  Sanscrit,  have  perpetuated  the  memory
of  it,  though  perhaps  it  have  long  ceased  to  be  a  vernacular
tongue.  Grammars  have  been  compiled  for  the  purpose  of
teaching  this  language  and  its  prosody,  and  several  treatises
of  rhetoric  have  been  written  to  illustrate  its  beauties.  The
Pracrita  manSrama  and  Pracnta  Pingala  are  instances
of  the  one,  and  the  Saraswaii  caniabharana  of  Bh6ja-
d£va,  may  be  named  as  an  example  of  the  other,  although
both  Sanscrit  and  Pracrit  idioms  furnish  die  examples
with  which  that  author  elucidates  his  precepts.  For  the
character  of  the  Pracrit  language  I  must  refer  the  reader
to  Sir  William  Jones's  remarks,  in  his  pre&ce  to  the
translation  of  the  Fatal  Ring.

The  Canyacubjas  possessed  a  great  empire,  the  metro-
polis of  which  was  the  ancient  city  of  Canyacubja  or  Can6f.
Theirs  seems  to  be  the  language  which  forms  the  ground-
work of  modem  Hindustani^  and  which  is  known  by  the
appellation  of  Hindi  or  Hindevi.  Two  dialects  of  it  may
be  easily  distinguished,  one  more  refined,  the  other  less  so.
To  this  last  the  name  of  Hindi  is  sometimes  restricted,
while  the  other  is  often  confounded  with  Pracrit,  Nume-
rous poems  have  been  composed  in  both  dialects,  not  only


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


AND  prAcrYt  languages.  23

he£are  the  Hindustani  was  ingrafted  on  the  Hindi  by  a
large  intermixtui'e  of  Persian,  but  also  in  very  modem  times,
byMuhammedan  as  well  as  Hindu  poets.  i><$Aratf  or  detached
<x)uplet8,  and  Cabits  or  stanzas,  in  the  Hindetn  dialect,
may  be  found  among  the  works  of  Muslem&n  authors :  it
will  be  sufficient  to  instance  those  of  Melic  Muhammeo
JaisI,  Muhammed  Afzel,  and  AmIbkhIn  AnjAm.
Most  poems  in  this  dialect  are,  however,  the  exclusive  pro-
duction of  Hindu  poets.*  On  examining  them,  the  affinity
of  HinA  with  the  Sanscrit  language  is  peculiarly  striking ;
and  no  person  acquainted  with  both  can  hesitate  in  affirm-
ing that  Hindi  is  chiefly  borrowed  from  Sanscrit.  Many
words,  of  which  the  etymology  shows  them  to  be  the  purest
Sanscrit f  are  received  unaltered ;  many  more  undergo  no
change  but  that  of  making  the  final  vowel  silent ;  a  stiU
greater  number  exhibits  no  other  difference  than  what  arises
from  the  uniform  permutation  of  certain  \eit&^ ;  the  rest,
too,  with  comparatively  few  exceptions,  may  be  easily  traced
to  a  Sanscrit  origin.  That  this  is  the  root  from  which
Hindi  has  sprung  (not  Hindi  the  dialect  whaice  Sanscrit
has  been  refined)  may  be  proved  by  etymology,  the  analogy
of  which  is  lost  in  Hindi  and  preserved  in  Sanscrit.  A  few
examples  will  render  this  evident.

*  Among  the  most  admired  specimens  of  Hindi  poetry,  the  seven
hundred  couplets  of  Bihar!  lal,  and  the  amatory  verses  of  Sender
and  of  Matiram,  are  conspicuous.  But  their  dialect  is  not  pure
Hindevty  since  they  sometimes  borrov  from  the  Persian  language.
SCndbr  wrote  his  poems  in  the  reign  of  ShahjkhIn,  and  seems  to
have  been  patronized  by  that  prince,  whom  he  praises  in  his  preface.
Bihar!  lal  flourished  at  the  court  of  Ambhir,  towards  the  begin-
ning of  the  sixteenth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  His  poems  were
arranged  in  their  present  order  for  the  use  of  the  unfortunate  prince
AzBM  Shah,  and  the  modern  edition  is  therefore  called  Azemshdki.
The  old  edition  has  been  elegantly  translated  into  SariscrU  verse  by
Hariprasada  Pa66ita,  under  the  patronage  of  Ch^t  Sinh,  when
Rdja  of  Benares,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


24  ON  THE  SANSCRTt

Crtya  signifies  action,  and  carma  act,  both  of  which  are
regularly  derived  from  the  root  crt  to  do.  They  have  been
adopted  into  Hindustani^  with  many  other  regular  deriva-
tives of  the  same  root;  (such,  for  example,  as  carana  [con-
tracted into  camii]  the  act  of  doing ;  carta  the  agent ;
carop/i  cause,  or  the  means  of  doing ;  carya  [c&rjf  caji\  the
thing  to  be  done,  and  the  intent  or  purpose  of  the  action.)
But  I  select  these  two  instances,  because  both  words  are
adopted  into  Hindustani  in  two  several  modes.  Thus  cria
signifies  action,  and  dria  expresses  one  metaphorical  sense  of
the  same  Sanscrit  word,  viz,  oath  or  ordeal.  Again,  drta-
caram  signifies  funeral  rites;  but  cam  is  the  most  usual
form  in  which  the  Samcrit  carma  is  exhibited  in  the  Hin-
dustani; and  it  thus  assumes  the  same  form  with  cam^
desire,  a  very  different  word  taken  firom  the  Sanscrit  deri-
vative of  the  root  cam,  to  seek.  Here  then  the  Hindustani
confounds  two  very  different  words  in  one  instance,  and
makes  two  words  out  of  one  in  the  other  instance.

Sat  Uterally  signifies  existent:  it  is  employed  in  the
acceptation  of  truth.  Satya,  a  regular  derivative  firom  it,
signifies  true ;  or,  employed  substantively,  truth.  The
correspondent  Hindi  word,  sach,  is  corrupted  from  the
Sanscrit  satya,  by  neglecting  the  final  vowel,  by  substitut-
ing j  for  y,  according  to  the  genius  of  the  Hindevi  dialect,
and  by  transforming  the  harsh  combination  tj  into  the  softer
sound  of  ch.  Here  then  is  obviously  traced  the  identity  of
the  Hindustani  sack,  and  Bengali  shotyo,  which  are  only
the  same  Sanscrit  word  satya  variously  pronounced.

Yuvan  signifies  young,  and  yauvana  youth.  The  first
makes  yuva  in  the  nominative  case :  this  is  adopted  into
Hindustani  with  the  usual  permutation  of  consonants,  and
becomes  JwJa,  as  yauvana  is  transformed  \nioj6ban.  The
same  word  has  been  less  corrupted  in  Persian  and  Latin,
where  it  stands  juwan  and  juvenis. In  many  inflections


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


AND  prXcrIt  languages.  25

the  root  of  yuvan  is  contracted  into  y4m :  the  pofisessive
case,  for  example,  forms  in  the  three  numbers,  yuruUf
yunSs,  jfunam.  Here,  then,  we  trace  the  origin  of  the
Latin  comparative  jtcnior ;  and  I  cannot  hesitate  in  refer-
ring to  these  Sanscrit  roots,  the  Welsh  jevangk,  and
Armorican  Jovan^,  as  well  as  the  Saxon  yeong,  and  finally
the  English  young.  This  analc^,  which  seems  evident
throngh  the  medium  of  the  Sanscrit  language,  is  wholly
obscured  in  Hindustani.

These  examples  might  be  easily  multiplied,  but  unprofit-
ably,  I  fear;  for,  after  proving  that  nine-tenths  of  the
Hindi  dialect  may  be  traced  back  to  the  Sanscrit  idiom,
there  yet  remains  the  difficulty  of  accounting  for  the
remaining  tenth,  which  is  perhaps  the  basis  of  the  Hindi
language.  Sir  William  Jones  thought  it  so;  and  he
thence  inferred,  that  the  pure  Hindi  was  primeval  in  Upper
India,  into  which  the  Sanscrit  was  introduced  by  con-
querors from  other  kingdoms  in  some  very  remote  age.*
This  opinion  I  do  not  mean  to  controvert.  I  only  contend,
that  where  similar  words  are  found  in  both  languages,  the
Hindi  has  borrowed  from  Sanscrit,  rather  than  the  Sanscrit
from  Hindi.  It  may  be  remarked  too,  that  in  most  coun-
tries the  progress  has  been  from  languages  rich  in  inflec-
tions, to  dialects  simple  in  their  structure.  In  modem
idioms,  auxiliary  verbs  and  appendant  particles  supply  the
place  of  numerous  inflections  of  the  root :  it  may,  for  this
reason,  be  doubted,  whether  the  present  structure  of  the
Hindi  tongue  be  not  a  modem  refinement.  But  the  ques-
tion, which  has  been  here  hinted  rather  than  discussed,  can
be  decided  only  by  a  carefril  examination  of  the  oldest
compositions  that  are  now  extant  in  the  Hindi  dialect.
Until  some  person  execute  this  task,  a  doubt  must  remain,


•  See  Sir  W.  Jones'  third  anniversary  discourse.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


26  ON THB SANSCRIT

whether  the  groundwork  of  Hindis  and  consequently  of
Hindustani^  be  wholly  distinct  from  that  of  Sanscrit.

On  the  subject  of  the  modem  dialect  of  Upper  India,
I  with  pleasure  refer  to  the  works  of  a  very  ingenious
member  of  this  society,  Mr.  Gilchrist,  whose  labours
have  now  made  it  easy  to  acquire  the  knowledge  of  an
elegant  language,  which  is  used  in  every  part  of  Hindustan
and  the  Dekhin,  which  is  the  common  vehicle  of  colloquial
intercourse  among  all  well-educated  natives,  and  among
the  illiterate  also,  in  many  provinces  of  India,  and  which  is
almost  every  where  intelligible  to  some  among  the  inhabi-
tants of  every  village.  The  dialects  which  will  be  next
noticed  are  of  more  limited  use.

Gauraf*  or  as  it  is  commonly  called  Bengalah,  or
Bengalif  is  the  language  spoken  in  the  provinces  of  which
the  ancient  city  pf  Gaur  was  once  the  capital.  It  still
prevails  in  all  the  provinces  of  Bengal,  excepting  perhaps
some  frontier  districts,  but  is  said  to  be  spoken  in  its
greatest  purity  in  the  eastern  parts  only ;  and,  as  there
spoken,  contains  few  words  which  are  not  evidently  derived
from  Sanscrit.  This  dialect  has  not  been  neglected  by.
learned  men.  Many  Sanscrit  poems  have  been  translated,
and  some  original  poems  have  been  composed  in  it :
learned  Hindus  in  Bengal  speak  it  almost  exclusively;


*  It  is  oeceesary  to  remark,  that  although  Oaura  be  the  name  of
Bengal^  yet  the  Brdhma^oif  who  bear  that  appellation,  are  not  inha*
bitantfl  of  Bengal  but  of  Hindustan  proper*  They  reside  chiefly  in
the  Subd  of  Delhi,  while  the  Brdhma^as  of  Bengal  are  avowed  colo-
nists from  Canbj.  It  is  difficult  to  account  for  this  contradiction.
The  Oawra  BrdhtnoAas  allege  a  tradition,  that  their  ancestors  mi-
grated in  the  days  of  the  PdMavas,  at  the  commencement  of  the
present  Caliguga.  Though  no  plausible  conjecture  can  be  founded
on  this  tradition,  yet  I  am  induced  to  retract  a  conjecture  formerly
hazarded  by  me,  that  the  Gar  of  our  maps  was  the  original  country
of  the  Gaura  priests.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


AND  prAcrIt  languages.  27

verbal  instruction  in  sciences  is  communicated  through  this
medium,  and  even  public  disputations  are  conducted  in
this  dialect.  Instead  of  writing  it  in  the  Devanagari,  as
the  Pracrit  and  Hindem  are  written,''^  the  inhabitants  of
Bengal  have  adopted  a  peculiar  character,  which  is  nothing
else  but  Devanagari,  difformed  for  the  sake  of  expeditious
writing.  Even  the  learned  amongst  them  employ  this
character  (or  the  Sanscrit  language,  the  pronunciation  of
which,  too,  they  in  Uke  manner  degrade  to  the  Bengali
standard.  The  labours  of  Mr.  Halheo  and  Mr.  For-
STER  have  already  rendered  a  knowledge  of  the  Bengali
dialect  accessible;  and  Mr.  Forster's  further  exertions
will  still  more  facilitate  the  acquisition  of  a  language
which  cannot  but  be  deemed  greatly  useful,  since  it  pre-
vails throughout  the  richest  and  most  valuable  porticm  of
the  British  possessions  in  India.

MaifAila,  or  Tirhutiya,  is  the  language  used  in  Mp-
i'kila  (that  is,  in  the  Sircar  of  TirhHit),  and  in  some  adjoin-
ing districts,  limited  however  by  the  rivers  CuH  (CauHci),
and  Gandkac  iGandhaci),  and  by  the  mountains  of  Nepal.
It  has  great  affinity  with  Bengali  ;  and  the  character  in
which  it  is  written  differs  little  from  that  which  is  employed
throughout  Bengal.  In  Tirhut^  too,  the  learned  write  San"
scrit  in  the  Tirhutiya  character,  and  pronounce  it  after
their  own  inelegant  manner.  As  the  dialect  of  Mit'hild
has  no  extensive  use,  and  does  not  appear  to  have  been  at

•  Pr6crU  and  Hi7^d4  books  are  commonly  written  in  the  DivanS-
gari  ;  but  a  corrupt  writing,  called  Ndgarf^  is  used  by  Hindus  in  all
common  transactions  where  Hindi  is  employed  by  them ;  and  a  still
more  corrupted  one,  wherein  vowels  are  for  the  most  part  omitted,  is
employed  by  bankers  and  others  in  mercantile  transactions.  I  must
here  confess  that  I  can  give  no  satisfactory  explanation  of  the
term.  The  common  etymology  of  N&gar'i  is  unsatisfactor}';  unless
Nagma  be  taken  as  the  name  of  some  particular  place  emphatically
<:aUed  the  city.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


28  ON  THE  SANSCRIT

any  time  cultivated  by  elegant  poets,  it  is  unnecessary  to
notice  it  further  in  this  place.

Utcala,  or  O  clradesa,  is  co-extensive  with  the  Suba  of
(yresa,  extending  from  Medinipur  to  Manacapattanoy  and
from  the  sea  to  Sammall-pur.  The  language  of  this  pro-
vince, and  the  character  in  v^hich  it  is  written,  are  both
called  Uriya,  So  far  as  a  judgment  can  be  formed  from
imperfect  specimens  of  this  language,  it  contains  many
Sanscrit  words  variously  corrupted,  vrith  some  Persian  and
Arabic  terms  borrowed  through  the  medium  of  Hindustaniy
and  with  others  of  doubtful  origin.  The  letters  are  evi-
dently taken  from  the  Devanagari;  and  the  Brahmens  of
this  province  use  the  Uriya  character  in  writing  the  San-
scrit language.  Its  deviations  from  the  Devanagari  may
be  explained,  from  the  practice  of  writing  on  palm  leaves
with  an  iron  style,  or  on  paper  with  a  pen  cut  from  a  por-
cupine's quill.  It  differs  in  this  respect  from  the  hand-
writing of  northern  tribes,  and  is  analogous  to  that  of  the
southern  inhabitants  of  the  peninsula.

The  five  Hindu  nations,  whose  peculiar  dialects  have
been  thus  briefly  noticed,  occupy  the  northern  and  eastern
portions  of  India;  they  are  denominated  the  five  Gaurs,
The  rest,  called  the  five  Dravirs,  inhabit  the  southern  and
western  parts  of  the  peninsula.  Some  PancHts,  indeed,
exclude  Carnaiay  and  substitute  Casmira;  but  others,
vrith  more  propriety,  omit  the  Caskmirian  tribe ;  and,  by
adding  the  Canaras  to  the  list  of  Dravirs,  avoid  the  incon-
sistency of  placing  a  northern  tribe  among  southern  nations.
There  is  reason,  too,  for  doubting  whether  Casmira  be
occupied  by  a  distinct  nation,  and  whether  the  inhabitants
of  it  be  not  rather  a  tribe  of  Canyacubjas.

Dravira  is  the  country  which  terminates  the  peninsula
of  India:  its  northern  limits  appear  to  lie  between  the
twelfth  and  thirteenth  degrees  of  north  latitude. The  lan-


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


AND  prAcrYt  languages.  29

guage  of  the  proviDce  is  the  Tamely  to  which  Europeans
have  given  the  name  of  Malabar^*  from  Malay-w&r,  a
province  of  JDravira.  They  have  similarly  corrupted  the
true  name  of  the  dialect  into  Tamul,  Tamulic,  and  Tamu-
lian^t  but  the  word,  as  pronounced  by  the  natives,  is
Tamla,  or  Tamalah  ;  and  this  seems  to  indicate  a  deri-
vation from  Tamray  or  Tamraparniy  a  river  of  note  which
waters  the  southern  MaChuray  situated  within  the  limits
otDravira.  The  provincial  dialect  is  written  in  a  character
which  is  greatly  corrupted  from  the  parent  Devayiagariy
but  which  nevertheless  is  used  by  the  Brakmens  oiDravira
in  writing  the  Sanscrit  language.  After  careftilly  inspect-
ing a  grammar  published  by  Mr.  Drummond  at  Bombay,
and  a  dictionary  by  missionaries  at  Madras,  I  can  venture
to  pronounce  that  the  Tamla  contains  many  SaTWcri^  words,
either  unaltered  or  Uttle  changed,  vnth  others  more  cor-
rupted, and  a  still  greater  number  of  doubtful  origin.

The  Maharashtra,  or  MahraHa,  is  the  language  of  a
nation  which  has  in  the  present  century  greatly  enlarged
its  ancient  limits.  If  any  inference  may  be  drawn  from  the
name  of  the  character  in  which  the  language  is  vmtten,
the  country  occupied  by  this  people  was  formerly  called
Mdru  ;J  for  the  peculiar  corruption  of  the  Devanagari,

*  A  learned  Brdhmen  of  Drdvira  positively  aMures  me,  that  the
dialect  of  Malabar,  though  confounded  by  Europeans  with  the  TdmeU
is  different  from  it,  and  is  not  the  language  to  which  Europeans  have
allotted  that  appellation.

t  The  Romish  and  Protestant  missionaries  who  have  published
dictionaries  and  grammars  of  this  dialect,  refer  to  another  language,
which  they  denominate  Grandam  and  Orandoniami.  It  appears  that
Sanscrit  is  meant,  and  the  term  thus  corrupted  by  them  is  Oranfhaf
a  volume  or  book.

t  Mentioned  in  the  royal  grant  preserved  at  a  famous  temple  in
CarMia.  See  As.  Rbs.  vol.  iii.  p.  48.  However,  the  Mahrattaa
themselves  affirm,  that  the  Mitru  character  was  introduced  amongst
them  from  the  island  of  Sildn,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


30  ON THE  SANSCRYt

which  is  employed  by  the  MtihkraslAras  in  common  trans^
Bctionsi  is  denominated  by  them  Mur,  Their  books^  it
must  be  ranarked,  are  commonly  written  in  Devanagari,
The  Mahraiia  nation  was  formerly  confined  to  a  moun-
tainous tract  situated  south  of  the  river  Nermada,  and
extending  to  the  province  of  C6can.  Their  language  is
now  more  widely  spread,  but  is  not  yet  become  the  yema-
cular  dialect  of  provinces  situated  far  beyond  the  ancient
bounds  of  their  country.  Like  other  Indian  tongues,  it
contains  much  pure  Sanscrit,  and  more  corruptions  of  that
language,  intermixed  with  words  bcmrowed  from  Persian
and  Arabic,  and  with  others  derived  from  an  unknown
source.  If  the  bards  of  Miiru  were  once  fiunous,  their
supposed  successors,  though  less  celebrated,  are  not  less
diligent.  The  MahraticLs  possess  many  poems  in  thrown
dialect,  either  translated  from  the  Sanscrit,  or  ordinal
compositions  in  honour  of  CrYshna,  RAma,  and  other  dei-
fied heroes.  Treatises  in  prose,  too,  on  subjects  of  logic
and  of  philosophy,  have  been  composed  in  the  MakraHa
dialect

CarMka,  or  Canata,  is  the  ancient  language  of  Car*
naiaca,  a  province  which  has  given  name  to  districts  on
both  coasts  of  the  peninsula.  This  dialect  still  prevails  in
the  intermediate  mountainous  tract,  but  seems  to  be  super-
seded by  other  provincial  tongues  on  the  eastern  coast  A
peculiar  character  formed  from  the  Devanagart,  but  like
the  Tamkif  much  corrupted  from  it  through  the  practice  of
writing  on  palm-leaves  mih  an  iron  style,  is  called  by  the
same  name  vnth  the  language  of  CanicUac,  Brahmens  of
this  tribe  have  assured  me  that  the  language  bears  the
same  afiinity  to  Sanscrit  as  other  dialects  of  the  Doeskin.
I  can  affirm,  too,  firom  their  conversation,  that  the  Canaras,
like  most  other  southern  tribes,  have  not  followed  the  ill
example  o(  Bengal  and  the  provinces  adjacent  to  it,  in  pro-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


AND  prXcrIt  languages.  31

noDDcing  the  Sanscrit  language  in  the  same  melegantman*
ner  with  their  own  provincial  dialects.

Tailanga,  THingah^  or  Tilanga,  is  at  once  the  name
cf  a  nation,  of  its  language,  and  of  the  diai*acter  in  which
that  language  is  written.  Though  the  province  of  Telingima
alone  retain  the  name  in  pubUshed  maps  of  India,  yet  the
adjacent  provinces  on  either  bank  of  the  CnshiML  and  G6d&~
vert,  and  those  situated  on  the  north-eastern  coast  of  the
peninsula,  are  undoubtedly  comprehended  within  the  an-
cient limits  of  Tilanga,  and  are  inhabited  chiefly  by  peojde
of  this  tribe.  The  language,  too,  is  widely  spread :  and
many  circumstances  indicate  that  the  Tailangas  formerly
occupied  a  very  extensive  tract,  in  which  they  still  consti-
tute the  principal  part  of  the  population.  The  character
in  which  they  write  their  own  language  is  taken  from
Devanagari,  and  the  Tailanga  Brahmens  employ  it  in
writing  the  Sanscrit  tongue,  from  which  the  Tailanga
idiom  is  said  to  have  borrowed  more  largely  than  other
dialects  used  in  the  south  of  India.  This  language  appears
to  have  been  cultivated  by  poets,  if  not  by  prose  writers ;
for  the  Tailangas  possess  many  compositions  in  their  own
provincial  dialect,  some  of  which  are  said  to  record  the
ancient  history  of  the  country.

The  province  of  Q&tjara*  does  not  appear  to  have  been
at  any  time  much  mcnre  extensive  than  the  modem  Guzrat,
although  BrahmaAaSy  distinguished  by  the  name  of  that
country,  be  now  spread  over  the  adjoining  provinces  on
both  sides  of  the  Nermada.  This  tribe  uses  a  language
den(Hninated  fix>m  their  own  appellation,  but  very  nearly
allied  to  the  Hindi  tongue,  while  the  character  in  which  it

*  The  limits  of  Giurjaray  as  here  indicated,  are  too  narrow.  It
seems  to  have  heen  co-extensive  with  the  ancient,  rather  than  the
modem  Quzrat^  and  to  have  included  the  whole,  or  the  greatest  part
of  €and€9h  and  Malwa,


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


32  ON  THE  SANSCRIt

is  written  conforms  almost  exactly  with  vulgar  Nagari.
Considering  the  situation  of  their  country^  and  the  analogy
of  language  and  writings  I  cannot  hesitate  in  thinking  that
the  Grufjaras  should  be  considered  as  the  fifth  northern
nation  of  India,  and  the  U'Ayas  should  be  ranked  among
the  tribes  of  the  JDacshin.

Brief  and  imperfect  as  is  this  account  of  the  Pracrtts  of
India,  I  must  be  still  more  concise  in  speaking  of  the  lan-
guages denominated  Magadhi  and  Apabhrania  in  the
passages  quoted  at  the  beginning  of  this  essay.  Under
these  names  are  comprehended  all  those  dialects  which,
together  with  the  Pracrtts  above-noticed,  are  generally
known  by  the  common  appellation  of  Bhasha^  or  speech.
This  term,  as  employed  by  all  philologists,  from  PAnini
down  to  tlie  present  professors  of  grammar,  does  indeed
signify  the  popular  dialect  of  Sanscrit,  in  contradistinction
to  the  obsolete  dialect  of  the  Veda  ;  but  in  common  accep-
tation, Bhakha  (for  so  the  word  is  pronounced  on  the
banks  of  the  Granges)  denotes  any  of  the  modem  vernacular
dialects  of  India,  especially  such  as  are  corrupted  firom
the  Sanscrit:  these  are  very  numerous.  After  excluding
mountaineers,  who  are  probably  aborigines  of  India,  and
whose  languages  have  certainly  no  affinity  with  Sanscrit^
there  yet  remain  in  the  mountains  and  islands  contiguous
to  India,  many  tribes  that  seem  to  be  degenerate  Hindus.
They  have  certainly  retained  some  traces  of  the  language
and  writing  which  their  ancestors  had  been  taught  to
employ.

Without  passing  the  limits  of  Hindustan,  it  would  be
easy  to  collect  a  copious  list  of  different  dialects  in  the
various  provinces  which  are  inhabited  by  the  ten  principal
Hindu  nations.  The  extensive  region  which  is  nearly
defined  by  the  banks  of  the  Saraswati  and  Ganga  on  the
north,  and  which  is  strictly  limited  by  the  shores  of  the


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


AND  prAcrKt  languages.  33

eastern  and  western  seas  towards  the  south,  contains  fifty-
seven  provinces  according  to  some  lists,  and  eighty-four
according  to  others.  Each  of  these  provinces  has  its
peculiar  dialect,  which  appears,  however,  in  most  instances,
to  be  a  variety  only  of  some  one  among  the  ten  principal
idioms.  Thus  Hindustani^  which  seems  to  be  the  lineal
descendant  of  the  Canyacubja,  comprises  numerous  dialects,
from  the  Ordu  zeban,  or  language  of  the  royal  camp  and
court,  to  the  barbarous  jargon  which  reciprocal  mistakes
have  introduced  among  European  gentlemen  and  their
native  servants.  The  same  tongue,  under  its  more  appro-
priate denomination  of  Hindi,  comprehends  many  dialects
strictly  local  and  provincial.  They  differ  in  the  proportion
of  Arabic,  Persian,  and  Sanscrit,  either  pure  or  slightly
corrupted,  which  they  contain ;  and  some  shades  of  differ-
ence may  be  also  found  in  the  pronunciation,  and  even  in
the  basis  of  each  dialect.

Not  being  sufficiently  conversant  with  all  these  idioms,
I  shall  only  mention  two,  which  are  well  known,  because
lyric  poets  have  employed  them  m  songs,  that  are  still  the
delight  of  natives  of  all  ranks.  I  allude  to  the  Penjaln
and  to  the  Brij-hhakha.  The  first  is  the  lanofuage  of
Panchanada,  or  Penjab,  a  province  watered  by  the  five
celebrated  rivers  which  fall  into  the  Sindhu.  The  songs
entitled  Khidls  and  Teppas,  which  are  no  doubt  familiar
to  all  who  have  a  taste  for  the  vocal  music  of  India,  are
composed  almost  exclusively  in  this  dialect ;  as  the  Dhur^
peds  and  regular  i2ag5  are  Hindi;  and  Rikhtah*,  in  the
language  of  the  court  of  Hindustan.

The  Brij'bhakha,  or  Vraja  bhasha,  is  the  dialect  sup-
posed to  have  been  anciently  spoken  among  the  peasants


•  The  author  of  the  Tazcareh  Shudrd  Hind  explains  Rckhtah  as
sig^nifying  a  poetry  composed  in  the  language  of  the  royal  court  of
Hindustan^  but  in  the  style  and  metre  of  Persian  poetry.
VOL.  II.  1>


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


34 ON  THE  SANSCRIT  AND  PRACRtt  LANGUAGES.

in  the  neighbourhood  of  Mafhura.  It  derives  its  name
from  the  cow-pens  {vrajd)  and  dairies  in  the  forest  of
Vrind&y  where  CrKshna  was  educated  among  the  wives
and  daughters  of  the  cowherds.  His  amorous  adventures
with  RAdhA  and  the  G6pis  furnish  the  subject  of  many
favourite  songs  in  this  dialect.  It  is  still  spoken  with
much  purity  throughout  a  great  part  of  the  AntarMd  or
D6ab,  and  in  some  districts  on  the  opposite  banks  of  the
Yamuna  and  Gangd.

To  these  cursory  observations  might  be  fitly  added  a
specimen  of  each  language,  and  of  the  character  in  which
it  is  written,  togethei*  with  a  Ust  of  the  most  common  terms
in  the  various  dialects  of  India,  compared  with  words  of
similar  sound  and  import  in  the  ancient  languages  of
Europe.  I  have,  indeed,  made  collections  for  this  purpose:
but  the  insertion  of  a  copious  list  would  exceed  the  Umits
of  a  desultory  essay.  For  this  reason,  and  because  the
collection  is  yet  incomplete,  I  suppress  it ;  and  shall  here
close  the  present  essay  abruptly,  with  the  intention  of
resuming  the  subject,  should  the  further  prosecution  of
these  enquiries  at  any  future  time  enable  me  to  furnish
the  information  called  for  by  this  Society,  concerning  the
number  of  Hinduwi  dialects,  and  the  countries  where  they
are  spoken.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


II.

Preface  to <A« Author's  ^Grammar  of  theS avscrIt
Language.'


[Calcutta,  1805.  Folio.]

Having  accepted  on  honourable  nomination  to  the  post
of  Professor  of  the  Sanscrit  Language  in  the  College  of
Fort  William,  early  after  the  foundation  of  that  useful  in-
stitution,  I  felt  it  incumbent  on  me  to  furnish,  through
the  press,  the  means  of  studying  a  language,  which  it
was  my  duty  to  make  known,  but  on  which  I  had  no  inten-
tion of  delivering  oral  instruction.

Among  other  imdertakings  adapted  to  this  purpose,  the
publication  of  a  Sanscrit  Grammar  was  commenced,  which
was  first  intended  to  be  brief  and  elementary,  but  of  which
the  design  has  been  enlarged  in  its  progress.  As  the  entire
work  will  exceed  the  bounds  of  a  single  volume,  a  conve-
nient break  has  been  chosen  to  close  the  first,  and  a  few
remarks  will  be  now  prefixed  to  it,  since  a  considerable
time  may  dapse  before  the  second  volume  be  completed.
I  have  the  less  scruple,  in  pausing  upon  this  work,  to  devote
my  attenticoi  to  other  duties,  because  the  deficient  part  of
it  may  be  supplied  by  the  grammai*s  which  Mr.  Forster
and  Mr.  Carey  will  severally  publish.

In  the  composition  of  this  grammar,  I  have  followed
the  system  taught  by  writers,  whose  works  are  considered
by  the  prevailing  sects  of  Hindus  to  be  sacred,  and  to
form  an  appendage  of  their  scriptures.  My  reasons  for
preferring  these  to  the  popular  or  profane  treatises  on
Grammar,  were  stated  in  an  essay  on  the  Sanscrit  lan-

D  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


36  PREFACE TO THE AUTHOR's GRAMMAR

guage  inserted  in  the  seventh  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Re-
searches.* I  adhere  to  the  opinion  there  expressed.  The
sacred  grammar  has  been  more  cultivated,  its  agreement
with  ancient  writings  and  classical  authors  has  been  more
carefully  verified,  than  any  other  grammar  of  the  language :
it  is  more  usually  cited,  and  moi'e  generally  understood  :
and,  as  finally  corrected  by  a  long  train  of  commentators,
it  is  more  accurate  and  complete.

The  arrangement,  indeed,  w  ill-adapted  to  &cilitate
study ;  both  in  the  original  work,  and  in  the  numerous
illustrations  of  it.  But  I  thought  it  practicable  to  frame  a
grammar  upon  the  same  system,  which  should  be  easily
intelligible  to  the  English  student  of  Sanscrit.  Without
believing  that  I  have  succeeded,  I  still  think  it  to  be
practicable :  and  the  difficulties  which  may  be  experienced
in  the  following  pages,  will  in  general  be  found  owing
merely  to  the  want  of  examples ;  which  have  been  omitted,
under  the  apprehension  of  rendering  the  work  too  voluminous.

An  improvement  which  has  been  recently  effected  in
the  types  of  the  Nagari  character,  by  reducing  their  size,
without  diminishing  their  distinctness,  has  removed  the
objection  to  ample  illustrations  by  examples :  and,  if  this
work  should  be  reprinted,  examples  of  every  rule  will
accordingly  be  inserted ;  and,  at  all  events,  they  will  be
retained  in  the  second  volume  of  this  grammar.

On  the  same  supposition  of  a  new  edition  of  this  first
volume,  I  should  be  desirous  of  altering  some  of  the
terms  adopted  by  me  in  place  of  technical  words  in  Sans-
crit grammar.  An  unwillingness  to  coin  new  words  in
English,  led  me  to  use  some  expressions,  which  are  not
sufficiently  precise ;  others  were  selected  by  me,  not  anti-
cipating objections  to  their  use,  which  have  since  occurred  :
and,  in  some  instances,  I  have  inadvertently  changed  an
appropriate  term  for  one  less  suitable. The  most  material

•  See  page  15  of  the  present  volume.

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


OF  THE  SANSCRTt LANGUAGE.  37

intended  changes  are  mentioned  in  the  margin  ;*  and  the
reader  is  requested  to  notice  them.

I  shall  be  likewise  glad  to  have  an  opportunity  of  insert-
ing the  original  rules  of  Sanscrit  Grampiar.  They  are
usually  committed  to  memory  by  native  students  of  the
language ;  and  are  cited  by  Sanscrit  authors,  in  words,
and  not  by  reference  to  their  place  or  their  import.  The
knowledge  of  them  is,  therefore,  material  to  the  student
of  Sanscrit :  and  they  are  framed,  like  the  aphorisms  of
other  sciences  among  the  Hindus,  with  studied  and  inge-
nious brevity.

The  author  of  these  grammatical  aphorisms  is  Panini.
His  rules,  with  the  annotations  of  CatyAyana  entitled
VarticaSf  confirmed  or  corrected  by  Patanjali  in  the
Mahabhashya,  constitute  the  standard  of  Sanscrit  gram-

*  Letters,  added  by  Sanscrit  grammarians,  as  marks,  but  which
are  not  sounded,  nor  retained  in  the  inflections,  are  called  by  them
Anuhandha  OT  It 'y  which,  in  this  grammar,  has  been  translated  mutei
but  the  circumstance  of  such  vowels  being  accented,  leads  to  the
inconsistency  of  speaking  of  accented  mute  voweb.  They  would  be
better  designated  by  the  word  indicatory,

A  class  of  derivative  verbs,  which  in  a  former  treatise  I  denomi-
nated FreqttentativeSy  has  been  here  named  Intensives,  On  considera-
tion, I  revert  to  the  first-mentioned  term.

Under  the  head  of  tenses,  I  have  used  the  word  Aorist  to  signify
indefinite  in  respect  to  a  species  of  time,  instead  of  indefinite  as  to
time  in  general :  the  name  of  Remote  past  is  not  sufficiently  descrip-
tive of  the  import  of  the  tense  to  which  it  has  been  assigned ;  and
several  others  are  open  to  a  similar  remark:  I  wish  therefore  to
change  the  names  of  the  tenses,  according  to  the  following  scheme.

1.  Present.

2.  Preterite  unperceived  (Remote  past)

3.  Crastine  future  (Absolute  future.)

4.  Indefinite  future  (Aorist  future.)

5.  Aorist  Isi.  (Imperative,  &c.)

6.  Pridian  past  (Absolute  past)

7.  Aorist  2d,  (Imperative,  &c.)

8.  Indefinite  past  (Aorist  past.)

9.  Conditional  (Conditional  future.)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


38  PREFACE TO THE  AUTHOR's  GRAMMAR

mar.  From  the  three  saints^  as  Hindu  grammarians  affect
to  call  them,  there  is  no  appeal.  Other  authorities  may  be
admitted,  where  they  are  silent :  but  a  deviation  even  by  a
classical  or  an  ancient  writer,  from  a  rule  in  which  they
concur,  is  deemed  either  a  poetical  license  or  a  privileged
barbarism.

The  works  of  these  sacred  writers,  with  the  notes  of
CAiYYAf  A  on  the  Mahabhashyay  interpreted  by  his  scho-
Uasts,  and  more  especially  the  perpetual  commentary  of
VAmana  on  PAnini's  aphorisms,  under  the  title  of  Casi'
cavrittiy  elucidated  by  the  copious  annotations  of  Hara-
datta  MisRA  in  the  Padamanjarty  are  the  basis  of  the
grammar  here  printed.  The  Siddhanta  caumudty  and
ManSrama  of  BHAff6ji,  with  their  commentaries,  have
been  frequently  consulted  by  me.  Much  use  has  also  been
made  of  the  Pracriya  caumudty  with  its  commentaries,  the
Prasada  and  Tatwa  chandra:  and  I  have  continually
referred  to  Maitr^ya,  MAdhava,  V6PADi:vA,  and  the
other  interpreters  of  Sanscrit  roots.  A  reader,  who  may
be  desirous  of  verifying  my  authorities,  should  be  apprized^
that  the  Casica  vrittiy  Siddhanta  caumudi,  and  Madha-
viya  vritti  have  been  my  chief  guides:  and  that  others,
besides  the  books  enumerated,  have  been  occasionally  con-
sulted ;  as  the  Ganaratna  mahSdadhiy  the  Vritti  sangraka,
and  the  commentators  of  the  Paribhashas;  and  sometimes,
though  rarely,  the  popular  grammars.

For  the  information  of  the  Sanscrit  student,  a  list  of
these  and  other  grammatical  works  will  be  subjoined,  in-
cluding many  treatises  which  have  not  been  used  for  this
grammar ;  but  none,  which  I  do  not  know  to  be  extant ;
and  few,  of  which  I  do  riot  actually  possess  complete  copies.
The  list  might  have  been  greatly  enlarged  by  adding  the
names  of  books  quoted  by  undoubted  authorities :  and  I
shall  only  remark,  in  regard  to  such  works,  that  the  earliest


Digitized  by  LjOOQ iC


OF  THE  SANSCrYt LANGUAGE.  39

grammaiians  are  expressly  stated  by  V6pADfevA,  to  have
been  Indra,  Chandra^  CASACRtTSNA,  Apisal!,  SAca-
TAYANA,  PAnini,  Amera^  and  Jainbndra.  Among
thesePAiiiNi  remains ;  and  some  of  the  others :  perhaps  all.

The  authorities,  which  have  been  mentioned  by  me,  as
generally  followed  in  this  grammar,  differ  materially  in
their  arrangement.  I  have  been  guided  sometimes  by  one,
sometimes  by  another,  as  seemed  best  adapted  to  the  two
objects  proposed,  conciseness  and  perspicuity.  I  am  ap-
prehensive, that,  in  the  pursuit  of  both  objects,  one  has
frequently  been  missed.  It  was,  however,  with  the  view
of  compressing  much  grammatical  information  in  a  small
compass,  that  paradigmas  have  been  multiplied,  but  ex-
hibited in  a  succinct  form ;  and  that  general  rules  only  are
usually  inserted  in  the  text,  while  exceptions  and  special
rules  are  placed  in  the  notes.

I  have  admitted  no  remarks  on  general  grammar,  though
suggested  by  the  numerous  pecuUarities  of  Sanscrit.  These,
with  the  observations  which  occur  on  a  comparison  of  the
ancient  language  of  India  with  those  of  Europe,  are  de-
ferred until  the  completion  of  the  work.

In  the  meantime,  one  singularity  of  the  Sanscrit  lan-
guage may  be  noticed :  its  admitting  both  the  ancient  and
the  modem  systems  of  grammatical  structure.  It  abounds
in  inflections  for  cases  and  genders ;  tenses  and  persons :  and
it  also  admits  a  simple  construction  of  indecUnable  nouns
vrith  prepositions,  and  of  participles  with  auxiliary  verbs.

This  remark  anticipates  on  a  part  of  the  grammar
reserved  for  the  second  volume,  in  which  composition  and
syntax  will  be  explained,  with  other  matters  indicated  in
the  note  subjomed  to  the  table  of  contents  of  the  first
volume.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


LisTo/*SANscRlfT  Grammars,  t/7iMCoMMENTARiEs,^c.


Siittra  by  Pan  INI :  rules  of  grammar  in  eight  books  en-
titled Ashiadhyaya ;  comprising  3,996  aphorisms.

Varticahy  CatyAyana,  amending  or  explaining  PAnini's
rules.

Mahabhashya  by  Patanjali,  interpreting  or  correcting
CAtyAyana's  annotations.

Mahabhashya pradipa  by  Caiyyat a,  annotating  Patan-
j  A  Li's  gloss.

Bhashya  pradip6dy6ta  by  NAgoji  BHAffA,  commenting
on  CAiYYAf  a's  notes.

Bhashya  pradipa  vivarana  by  IswarAnanda:  another
commentary  on  CAiYYAfA's  notes.

Casica  vritti  by  JayAditya  or  VAmana  jayAditya  :  a
perpetual  commentary  on  PAnini's  rules.

Padamanjari  byHARADATXA  miSra:  an  exposition  of
tlie  last  mentioned  work.

Nyasa  or  Casica  vritti  panjica  by  Jin^ndra:  another
exposition  of  the  same,*  with  explanatory  notes  by
Racshita.

Vritti  Sangraha  by  NAg6ji  bhatt a  :  a  concise  commen-
tary onPANiNi.

Bhasha  vritti  by  Purush6ttama  nfevA  :  a  commentary
on  PAnini's  rules  (omitting  those  which  are  peculiar
to  the  dialect  of  the  Vidas).

*  I  state  this  with  some  distrust,  not  having  yet  seen  the  book.
The  Nydsa  is  universally  cited;  and  the  Bbdhinydsa  is  frequently  so.
V^oPAoivA's  Cdvya  cdmadhcnu  quotes  the  Nydsa  of  JiNiNDRx  and

that  of  JlNiNDIlA  BUDDHl.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


LIST  OF  SANSCRtT GRAMMARS^ &C.  41

Bhasha  vrittyarfka  vivritti  by  SRtsuf  idh ara  ;  explaining
Purush6ttama's  commentary.

Sabda  caustubha  by  BHAff6ji  dIcshita,  consisting  of
scholia  on  PAnini  (left  incomplete  by  the  author).

Prabha  by  BaidyanIt'ha  pAyagunda,  also  named
BALAMBHAfiA;  a  commentary  on  the  Sabda  cau-
stubha.

Pracriya  caumudi  by  RAmachandra  AchArya  :  a
grammar  in  which  PAnini's  rules  are  used,  but  his  ar-
rangement changed.

Prasada  by  Viff'HALA  AchArya  ;  a  commentary  on  the
Pracriya  caumvdi.

Tatwa  chandra  by  Jayanta:  another  commentary  on
the  same,  abridged  from  one  by  CrIshna  ?an6ita.

Siddhanta  caumudi  hy  BHAffoji  dIcshit  a:  a  grammar
on  the  plan  of  the  Pracriya ;  but  more  correct  and  com-
plete.

Man6ramd  or  Prauclha  man&rama  by  the  same  author;
containing  notes  on  his  own  work.

Tatwa  bddkini  by  JnyAn^ndra  saraswatI  :  a  com-
mentary on  BHAff 6ji's  Siddhanta  caumudL

Sabdendu  sec'hara  by  NAg^sa  BHAff  a  (same  with  NA-
G6jiBHAffA):  another  commentary  on  the  S^ic^Aanto
caumudi.

Laghu  sabdendu  sec'hara :  an  abridgment  of  the  last.

Ckidast'kimala  by  BaidyanAt'ha  pAyagunda:  acom-
mentary  on  the  abridged  gloss  of  NAg^sa.

Sabdaratna  by  H ari  dIcshita  :  a  commentary  on  BuAf-
f6ji's  notes  on  the  Man6rama.  riT'  t»v!  ;.^^  i^jj.^

Laghu  sabdaratna :  an  abridgment  of  the  same.

JBhava  pracasica  hy  BaidyanAt'ha  pAyagunda:  an
exposition  of  H ARI  dIcshita's  commentary.

Madhya  caumudi  by  Barada  rAja  :  an  abridgment  of
the  Siddhanta  caumudi. There  is  also  a  Madhya  ma-


Digitized  by  (^OOQ iC


42  LIST  OF  sanscrKt  grammars,

n&rama; besides  other  abridgments  of  the  Siddhanta

itself,  as  the  Laghu  caumudiy  &c.
Paribhasha :  maxims  of  interpretation  from  ancient  gram-
marians, cited  in  the  Varticas  and  Bhashyaj  as  rules  for

interpreting  PAnini's  sdtras.
Paribhasha  vritti  by  SIra  d^va  : a  commentary  on  the

cited  maxims  of  interpretation.
Laghu  paribhasha  vritti  by  BhAscara  BHAff  a  :  a  suc-
cinct commentary  on  the  same.
Paribhasharfha  sangraha: another  commentary  on  the

same.
Chandrica  by  Swayampracasananda  : interpreting  the

last  mentioned  commentary.
PaHbhashendu  sec'hara  by  NAg^Sa BHAff  a: a brief

exposition  of  the  same  maxims.
Paribhdshendu  sec*hara  casica  by  Baid\  anAt'ha  pAya-

GUNDA,  commenting  the  gloss  of  NAofesA.
Carica :  metrical  rules  of  grammar,  cited  in  iJie  Mahabha-

shya,  Casica  vritti,  8cc.
Vacf/a pradipa  by Bhartrihari: metrical maxims

chiefly  on  the  philosophy  of  syntax. These  are  often

cited  under  the  name  of  Haricarica.
Vaiyacarana  bhushana  by  Con  6  a  BHAff  a: on  syntax

and  the  philosophy  of  grammatical  structure.
Bhushana sara  darpana  by  Hariballabha  :  a  commen-
tary on  the  work  last  mentioned.
Vaiyacarana  bhdshana  sara :  an  abridgment  of  the  same

work.
Laghu  bhushana  canti  by  Baidyanat'ha  pAyagunda  :

a  commeid^iry  on  that  abridgment.
Vaiyacarana  siddhanta  manjdsha  by  NAofe&A  BHAff  a:

on  syntax  and  the  philosophy  of  grammatical  structure.
Laghu  vaiyacarana  siddhanta  manjusha : an  abridgment

of  the  same.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


WITH  COMMENTARIES^ &C.  43

Qiia  by  BaidyanAt*ha  payagunda:  a  commentary  on
the  last  mentioned  abridgment.

Other  treatises  on  construction  logically  considered,
which  are  very  numerous,  are  omitted  as  belonging
more  properly  to  the  science  of  logic.

Ganapaia :  lists  of  words  comprehended  in  rules  of  gram-
mar, under  general  classes.

Ganaratna  mahSdadhi :  a  collection  of  such  lists,  with  a
commentary.

Dhatupaia  by  PAnini  :  the  roots  or  themes  systemati-
cally arranged,  with  their  indicatory  letters  and  their
interpretations.

Dhatupradipa  or  Tantrapradipa  by  Maitr^ya  rac-
SHiTA  :  an  illustration  of  the  list  of  roots,  with  exam-
ples of  their  inflections.

Madhamyavrittihy^kYh'SA  kcv{kKy\j  in  the  name  of
Madhava  AchArya:  a  copious  exposition  of  the
roots  with  their  derivatives.

The  Bhaiii  cavya,  a  poem  describing  the  adventures  of
RAma,  may  be  considered  as  a  grammatical  work,
having  been  purposely  written  for  a  practical  instruction
on  grammar. It  has  several  commentaries.

The  Sicsha  of  PAnini  and  Niructa  of  YAsca,  with  the
commentaries  on  the  Nighania  included  in  the  last,  are
there  omitted,  as  they  are  of  little  use,  except  in  the
reading  of  the  Vedas.  Treatises  on  particular  branches
of  etymology  are  also  omitted,  as  not  very  generally
consulted.  Such  is  the  Ya?i  luganta  sirSmani  on  the
formation  of  frequentative  verbs.

Numerous  other  works,  belonging  to  this  grammar,  have
not  been  ascertained  to  be  extant,  being  at  present
known  only  through  quotations  from  them  :  as  the  Por
niniya  mata  darpana  quoted  in  the  Prasada  ;  and  many
others  cited  in  the  Madhaviya  vrittu


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


44  LIST  OF  SANSCRlfx  GRAMMARS^

The  following  belong  to  other  Systems  of  Grammar.

Sdraswati  pracriya  by  Anubh6ti  swar^pAchArya  :
a  grammar  founded  on  seven  hundred  rules  or  apho-
rismsy  pretended  to  have  been  received  by  the  author
from  the  goddess  SaraswatI.  This  grammar  is  much
used  in  Hindustan  proper.

A  commentary  on  the  same  by  PunjarAja.

Another  by  MAHiBHAff  a.

Siddhanta  chandricd:  another  commentary  on  the  same
grammar.

Pada  c/iandricd:  another^  in  which  PAnini's  aphorisms
are  also  exhibited.

Haimavyacarana  by  H^machandra  or  H^MAstiRl.  A
Sanscrit  grammar  is  cited  under  this  title,  which  is
probably  the  same  with  H&machandra's  commentary
on  the  Sabdanitsasana,  entitled  Laghu  vritti ;  comprised
in  eight  books,  including  in  the  last  the  anomaUes  of
the  Pracrit  language  as  derived  from  the  Sanscrit.
(The  Camadhenu  cites  a  Sahddnusasana  by  Abhinava
SAcAf  Ayana  besides  H^masOri's  work.)  This  gram-
mar is  used  by  the  Jainas.

A  commentary,  without  the  author's  name,  is  annexed  to
Hi^MACHANDRA's  grammar.

Pracrita  man&rama:  an  abridged  commentary  on  the
Pracrtta  chandricd  of  Vararuchi  ;  showing  the  ano-
malies of  Prdcrit  formed  from  Sanscrit.

Cdtantra  or  CaJapa :  a  grammar,  of  which  the  rules  or
aphorisms  are  ascribed  to  the  god  CumAra.  It  is
much  used  in  Bengal.

Daurgasinhi:  a  commentary  on  the  above  by  Durga-
siNHA  ;  but  stated  in  the  introductory  couplet  to  be  the
work  of  Sarva  v  arm  an,  who  is  accordingly  cited  in
V6p  A  diva's  Cdmadhenu.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ iC


WITH COMMENTARIES, &C.  45

Catantra  vrttti  Hca  byDuRGASiNHA:  an  exposition  of

the  above  mentioned commentary. (The  Camadhenu

quotes  the  Durga  Hca  of  Durgagupta,  and  the  Ca-

tantra  vistara  o{Vab.dh AM ks A  misra.)
Catantra  panjica  by  Tril6chanadA.sa: a  commentary

on  the  same  grammar.
CbJopato^arTiat^a  by Raghunandana  AchArya  Sir6-

MANi :  another  commentary  on  the  same  grammar.
Catantra  chandrica:  another  commentary  on  the  same.
Chaitracuti  byVARARucHi:  another  on  the  same.
Vyac^hya  sara  by  HarirAma  chacravartI: another

commentary.
Vyac^hya  sara  by  RAmadAsa  :  another,  under  the  same

title.
Other  commentaries  on  the  same  granmiar  by  Sush6na

cavirAja,  RamAnAt'ha,  UmApati,  Culachandra,

and  MurAri.
Catantra  parisishia  by  SrIpatidatta  :  a  supplement  to

the  Catantra.
Parisishia  prabddha  by  G6piNAT'HA  :  a  commentary  on

the  above.
Parisishia  siddhanta  ratnacara  by  SivarAma  chacra-

vartI  :  another  on  the  same.
Catantra  gana  dhatu :  the  roots  or  themes  systematically

arranged  for  the  Catantra.
Man&rama  by  RamAnAt'ha  :  a  commentary  on  that  list

of  verbs.
Many  other  treatises  belong to  tliis  grammar; as  the

Catantra  Sliaicaraca  by  Rah  as  an  and!,  the  Catantra

Unadi  vritti  by  SivadAsa,  the  Catantra  chatushiaya

pradipay  Catantra  dhatughSsh&y  Catantra  sabda  mala,  &c.

Sancskiptasara byCRAMADifiwARA:  a  grammar,  corrected
by  JuMARANANoi  and  often  cited  under  the  title  of
Jaumara, This  grammar  is  in  use  in  Bengal.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


46  LIST  OF  sanscrYt  grammars,

A  commentary  on  the  above,  by  G6YicHANDRA.
Vyacara  dipica  by  NyAya  panchAnana:  an  exposition

of  G6YicHANDRA's  Commentary.
Another  exposition  of  the  same  commentary  by  VANsivA-

DANA.

Durgkaia  ghaiana :  another  commentary  on  the  Sancship-

tasara.
Other  commentaries  on  the  same  grammar,  by  different

authors,  as  G6pJila  chacravartI,  &c
A supplement to  JumabanandI's  corrections of the

Sancshiptasara  by  G6YicHANDRA.
Other  treatises  appertain  to  this  grammar,  as  SabdaghdiJuiy

DhatughSsha,  &c.

Mugdhab6dha  by  V6pad6va  :  a  grammar  of  the  Sanscrit
language,  much  studied  in  Bengcd.

A  commentary  by  the  author  of  the  grammar.

Another  by  DurgAdAsa,  entitled  Subddhini.

One  by  MiSra,  entitled  Ch'kaia.

Other  commentaries  by  RAmAnanda,  RAma  tarcavAg-
fsA,  Madhus6dana,  DfevioAsA,  RAmabhadra,
RAmaprasAda  tarcavAgIsa,  SrIballabhAchAr-
YA,  DayArAma  vAchespati,  Bh6lAnAt'ha,  CAr-
TicA siddhAnta,  RaticAnta tarcavagISa,  G6-

VINDA  rAmA,  &C.

MugdhabSdha  pariiishia  by  CA§!swara  :  a  supplement

to  the  MugdhabSdha.
Another  by  Nandacis6ra.
Camcaipadmma  by  V6PADfevA  :  an  alphabetical  catalogue

of  roots,  arranged  in  verse.
Cavya  camadhenu  by  the  same  author,  explaining  his  own

list  of  verbs.
Dhatu  dipica  by  DurgAdAsa: a  commentary  on  the

same  catalogue  of  verbs.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


WITH  COMMENTARIES,  &C.  47

Camcalpadrama  vyac'hya  by  RAma  nyItAlaj^cAra  :
another  commentary  on  the  same.

D'hatwratnavali  by  RAd'hAcbYshi^a  :  a  metrical  cata-
logue of  roots.

Cavirahasya  by  HelAyudh  a  :  exhibiting  in  verse  examples
of  the  most  common  verbs.

A  commentary  on  the  same.

SupadmahyP  ADM  AN  kBH  A  datta  :  a  grammar  of  Sans-
crit. It  is  in  use  in  some  parts  of  Bengal.

Sfupadma  nuwaranda  or  McLcaranda:  a  commentary  on  the
above,  by  Vishnu  mi£ra.

Other  commentaries  by  various  authors:  as  Candarpa

SIDDhAnTA,  CAfiisWARA,  SrIdHARA CHACRAVARTi,

RAmachandra,  &c.

Supadma  parisishia :  a  supplement  to  the  grammar.

Supadma  dhatupaia  by  PadmanAbha  datta:  a  list
of  themes  or  roots  for  the  author's  grammar,  called
Supadma.  The  same  author  added  other  appendages  to
his  grammar,  viz.  Paribhasha  and  Unadivritii.

Other  treatises  belong  to  this  grammar ;  as  the  Camwan
gana,  and  its  commentary  by  RAmacAnta.

Ratnamala  by Purush6ttama  : a grammar  used in

Camarupa.
Druta  h6dha  by  Bharatamalla  : a  grammar,  with  a

commentary  on  it  by  the  same  author. This  and  the

following  are  not  much  in  use.
Sudhaiub6dha  by  RAm^swara  :  another  grammar  with  a

commentary  by  the  author  himself.
Harinamamrita  by  JivAGH68HA  swAivii :  another,  with  a

commentary.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


48  LIST  OF  sanscrKt  grammars,

Chaitanyimrita :  another,  also  accompanied  by  a  com-
mentary.

Caricavalt  by  RAma  nArayana  :  a  grammar  in  verse.

Prabddha  pracasa  by  BalarAma  panchAnana  :  a
grammar.

Ritpamala  by  Vimala  saraswati;  another  grammar.

Jny&namrita  byCA§i§wARA  :  another.

AsubSdka,  Laghub6dhay  Sighrabddha,  Saramuta,  Divya,
Padavaliy  Ulca ;  and  many  other  grammars  by  various
authors.

Besides  Vararuchi's  Pracrita  pracasa  or  Chandrica,
and  BhAmaha's  commentary  entitled  Man&rama  vrttti
before-mentioned,  other  grammars  of  Pracrit  are  known  :
as  the  Pracrita  camadhenu,  Pracrita  lanceswara,  8cc.

Authorities  of  Sanscrit  grammar,  cited  in  books  which
have  been  used  for  the  present  volume,  but  not  otherwise
known,  nor  in  any  manner  ascertained  to  be  now  extant,
have  been  excluded  from  the  foregoing  list.  Many  of  them
could  not  be  confidently  referred  to  any  particular  system
of  grammar ;  and,  in  numerous  instances,  a  doubt  arises,
whether  the  same  work  be  not  quoted  under  different
names,  in  different  places :  sometimes,  under  the  title  of
the  book ;  at  other  times,  under  the  designation  of  the
author.  A  few  of  these  names,  which  occur  most  fre-
quently, will  be  here  enumerated,  with  a  notice  of  the  au-
thority by  which  they  are  quoted.

PAnini  himself  names  SAcalya,  GArgya,  CASyapa,
GAlava,  ApisALi,  SAcAfAvANA,  BhAradwAja,  As-
walAyana,  Sp'H6f Ayana,  and  ChAcravarmana.

The  Madhavtya  vrttti  quotes,  among  many  other  au-
thors, Chandra,  ApisalI,  SAcAfAYANA,  Atr^ya,
Dhanapala,  Causica,  PurushacAra,  SudhAcara,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


WITH  COMMENTARIBSy &C.  49

MaDHUSOdANA^ YAdAVA,  BhAgURI, ^RfBHADRA,  Sl-

vAD^vAy  RAmad£va  misra,  D&vAy  NANDi,  RAma,
BhIma, BH6jAy H^lArAja, SubhCti chandra,

P6rNA  CHANDRA,  YaJNTANArA YANA,  CaNWA,  SwAlif ,

CisAVA  swAMiy  Siva  swAm},  Dh^rta  swAmI,  CshIra
swAmI  (this  last  is  cited  in  the  Prasada  as  author  of  the
Cshira  tarangini).  The  Madhamya  likewise  frequently
cites  the  Taranginij  AbharaAa,  Sabdicahharana^  Samanta,
Pracriya  ratna  and  Pratipa.

The  Varticas  of  VyAghra  bh^ti  and  VyAghra
pAda  are  mentioned  by  many  authors;  and  so  is  the
Dkatu  parayana.  VbvAoiyA,  in  the  Camadhenu,  has
quoted  the  Panjica pradipa o{ Cv^ala  (belonging  perhaps
to  the  grammar  called  Catantra;)  and  the  Saratwati
canidbharana  (ascribed  by  some  to  Bh6ja  d^va).  The
Prasada  often  cites  the  Ramavyacaranaj  and  seems  to
name  V6pad6va  as  the  author  of  it.

The  following  are,  among  others,  noticed  in  the  Dhor-
tudipica  o{  Dv^Gk  dAsa,  viz.  BHAff  amalla,G6vinda
BHAffA,  Chaturbhuja,  Gadisinha,  G6vardhana,
and  Saramad£va.


VOL.  II.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


III.

Pbefacb  to  the  Author^s  Edition of  the  Ambra

c6sHA.


[Calcutta,  1808.  4to.]


The  compilation  of  a  Sanscrit  dictionary  having  been
undertaken  eariy  after  the  institution  of  the  collie  of
Fort  William,  it  was  at  the  same  time  thought  advisable
to  print,  in  Sanscrit  and  English,  the  work  which  has  been
chosen  for  the  basis  of  that  compilation,  as  well  for  the
sake  of  exhibiting  an  original  authority  to  which  reference
will  be  frequently  necessary,  as  with  the  view  of  furnishing
an  useful  vocabulary,  which  might  serve  until  an  ampler
dictionary  could  be  prepared  and  published.

The  celebrated  Amera  cSsha,  or  Vocabulary  of  Sanscrit
by  Amera  sin  ha,  is,  by  the  unanimous  sufirage  of  the
learned,  the  best  guide  to  the  acceptations  of  nouns  in
Sanscrit.  The  work  of  PJinini  on  etymology  is  rivalled
by  other  grammars,  some  of  which  have  even  obtained  the
preference  in  the  opinion  of  the  learned  of  particular  pro-
vinces ;  but  Amera's  vocabulary  has  prevailed  wherever
the  Sanscrit  language  is  cultivated,  and  the  numerous
other  vocabularies  which  remain,  are  consulted  only  where
Amera's  is  either  silent  or  defective.  It  has  employed  the
industry  of  innumerable  commentators,  while  none  of  the
others  (with  the  single  exception  of  HfeMACHANDRA's)
have  been  interpreted  even  by  one  annotator.  Such  decided
preference  for  the  Amera  c6sha,  and  the  consequent  fre-
quency of  quotations  from  it,  determined  the  selection  of
this  as  the  basis  of  an  alphabetical  dictionary,  and  sug-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PBEPACE  TO  THE  AMERA  c68HA.  51

gested  the  expedUency  of  ako  pubiishiiig  the  original  text
with  an  English  inCerpietation.

like  other  Tocabolaries  of  Sanscrit,  that  of  Amera  is
in  metre ;  and  a  considerable  degree  of  knowledge  of  the
hngcuige  becomes  requisite  to  discriminate  the  words  from
their  interpretations^  and  to  separate  them  from  contiguoas
t^rms  whidi  ^ttect  their  initials  and  finals.  On  this  ac-
count, and  to  adapt  the  work  to  the  nse  of  the  English
student,  the  worcte,  of  wfaieh  the  sense  is  exhibited,  are
disjoined  firom  their  interpretation  (which  is  included  be-
tween crotchets) ;  and  the  close  of  each  word  is  marked  by
a  roman  letter  over  it  indicating  the  gender  of  the  noun.
Where  a  letter  has  been  permuted  according  to  the  Seau-
crit  system  of  orthography,  a  dot  is  placed  under  the  line,
to  intimate  that  a  letter  is  there  altered  or  omitted :  and  a
marginal  note  is  added,  exhilnting  the  radical  final  of  the
noun,  or  its  initial,  in  every  instance  where  either  of  them
is  so  far  disguised  by  permutation  as  not  to  be  easily
recognized  upon  a  slight  knowledge  of  the  rudiments  of
the  language,  and  c^  its  orthography.  An  explanation  in
English  is  given  in  the  margin,  and  completed  when  ne-
cessary at  the  foot  of  the  page.  The  different  interpre-
tations proposed  by  the  several  commentators,  and  the
variations  in  orthography  remarked  by  them,  are  also
specified  in  the  same  place.

According  to  the  original  plan  of  the  present  publica-
tion, the  variations  in  the  reading  of  the  text  (for  which  a
carefiil  collation  has  been  made  of  several  copies  and  of
numerous  commentaries)  are  noticed  only  where  they  affect
the  interpretation  of  a  word  or  its  orthography.  It  was
not  at  first  intended  to  insert  those  differences  which  are
remarked  by  commentators  upon  other  authority,  and  not
upon  the  ground  of  any  variation  in  the  text  itself.  How-
ever, the  utility  of  indicating  such  differences  was  afler-

E  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


62  PRJBFACE  TO  THE  AUTHOR's  EPITION

wards  Uiought  to  counterbalaace  any  inconvenience  attend-
ing it;  and  after  some  progress  had  been  made  at  the
press,  this  and  other  additions  to  the  original  design  were
admitted,  which  have  rendered  a  supplement  necessary  to
supply  omissions  in  the  first  chapters,  and  complete  the
work  upon  an  uniform  plan.

To  avoid  too  great  an  increase  of  the  volume,  the  various
readings  and  interpretations  are  rather  hinted  than  fully  set
forth :  it  has  been  judged  sufficient  to  state  the  result,  as
the  notes  would  have  been  too  much  lengthened,  if  the
ground  of  disagreement  had  been  every  where  exhibited
and  explained.  For  the  same  reason,  authorities  have  not
been  cited  by  name.  The  mention  of  the  particular  com-
mentator in  each  instance  would  have  enlarged  the  notes,
with  very  little  advantage,  as  the  means  of  verifying  autho-
rities are  as  effectually  furnished  by  an  enumeration  of  the
works  which  have  been  employed  and  consulted.  They
are  as  follow :

I.  The  text  of  the  Amera  cdsha.

This  vocabulary,  comprised  in  three  books,  is  frequently
cited  under  the  title  of  Tricdn^a,*  sometimes  under  the
denomination  of  Abhidhdna  (nouns),  from  its  subject;
oflen  under  that  of  Amera  cSsha,  from  the  name  of  the
author.  The  commentators  are  indeed  unanimous  in  ascrib-
ing it  to  Amera  sin  ha.  He  appears  to  have  belonged  to
the  sect  of  Buddha  (though  this  be  denied  by  some  of
his  scholiasts),  and  is  reputed  to  have  lived  in  the  reign  of
VicramAditya  ;  and  he  is  expressly  named  among  the

*  I.  e.  the  Three  Books.  But  that  name  properly  appertains  to
a  more  ancient  vocabalary,  which  is  mentioned  by  the  commen-
taries on  the  Amera  cos/la^  among  the  works  from  which  this  is
supposed  to  have  been  compiled.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ iC


OF  THE  AMERA  c6sHA.  53

ornaments  of  the  court  of  Raja  Bh6ja,*  one  of  the  many
princes  to  whom  that  title  has  been  assigned.  If  this
mention  of  him  be  accurate,  he  must  have  lived  not  more
than  eight  hundred  years  ago;  for  a  poem  entitled  Subhd-
shita  ratna  sandSha,  by  a  Jaina  author  named  Amita-
GATi,  is  dated  in  the  year  1060  from  the  death  of  Vicra-
MADiTYA,  and  in  the  reign  of  Munja,  who  was  uncle  and
predecessor  of  RAjA  Bh6ja.  It,  however,  appears  incon-
sistent with  the  inscription  at  Buddha  gaya  which  is  dated
in  the  year  1005  of  the  era  of  VicramAditya,  and  in
which  mention  is  made  of  Amera  nfevA,  probably  the
same  with  the  author  of  the  vocabulary.  From  the  fre-
quent instances  of  anachronism,  both  in  sacred  and  profane
stoty  as  current  among  the  Hindus,  more  confidence  seems
due  to  the  inscription  than  to  any  popular  tales  concerning
Raj  A  Bh6ja  ;  and  the  Amera  cosha  may  be  considered
as  at  least  nine  hundred  years  old,  and  possibly  more
ancient.

It  is  intimated  in  the,  author's  own  preface  that  the  work
was  compiled  from  more  ancient  vocabularies:  his  com-
mentators instance  the  TricanAay-);  Utpalini,  Rabhasa
and  CAtyAyana,  as  frimishing  information  on  the  nouns,
xmd  VyA6i  and  Vararuchi  on  the  genders.  The  last
mentioned  of  these  authors  is  reputed  contemporary  with
VicramAditya,  and  consequently  with  Amera  sinha
himself.

The  copies  of  the  original  which  have  been  employed  in
the  correction  of  the  text,  in  the  present  pubUcation,  are,

1st.  A  transcript  made  for  my  use  from  an  ancient  cor-
rected copy  in  the  Tirhutiya  character,  and  collated  by
me  with  a  copy  in  Devanagari,  which  had  been  carefiiUy
examined  by  Sir  William  Jones. He  had  inserted  in  it

•  In  the  Bho;'a  prabandha.  t  See  a  preceding  note.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


64  PREFACE  TO  THE  AUTHOR's  EDITION

an  English  interpretation,  of  whidi  also  I  reserved  a  copy,
and  have  denyed  great  assistance  from  it  in  the  present
publication.

2d.  A  transcnpt  in  2>et9a«agaHcharacfeer,  with  a  commen-
tary and  notes  in  the  Canara  dialect  It  contains  immeioiis
passages,  which  axe  mmoticed  in  ibe  most  approved  com-
mentaries, and  which  are  accordingly  omitted  in  the  present
edition.

3d.  Another  copy  in  the  Divanagcari  character,  with  a
brief  and  imperfect  interpretation  in  Hindi.

4th.  A  copy  in  the  Bengal  character,  with  marginal
notes  explanatory  of  the  text.

5ih.  A  copy  in  duplicate,  accompanied  by  a  Scmscnt
commentary,  which  will  be  forthwith  mentioned  (that  of
RamASrama).  It  contains  a  few  passages  not  noticed  by
most  of  the  commentators.  They  have  been,  however,
retained  on  the  authority  of  this  schoUast.  A  like  remark
is  applicable  to  certain  other  passages  expounded  in  some
commentaries,  but  not  in  others.  All  such  have  been
retained,  where  the  auUiority  itsdf  has  been  deemed
good.

6th.  Recourse  has  been  oocasumally  had  to  otlier  copies
of  the  text  in  the  possession  of  natives,  whenever  it  has
been  thought  any  ways  requisite.

II.  Commentaries  on  the  Amera  c6ska.

1.  At  the  head  of  the  commentaries  whidi  have  been
used,  must  be  placed  that  of  RAta  MucufA,  (orVRYnAS-
PATi,  sumamed  RAya  Mucuf  a  mani).  This  work,  en-
tided  Padaehandrie&f  was  compiled,  as  the  author  himself
informs  us,  from  sixteen  earlier  commentaries,  to  many  of
which  he  repeatedly  refers ;  especially  those  of  CshIra
swAmI,  SubhOti,  Ha66a  chanora,  Calinga,  C6n-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


OF  THE  AMERA  c68HA.  55

cAf  A|  Sarvadhara,  and  the  Vyac'kjfamrita,  Ticasctr^
vanoa,  ^c*

Its  age  is  ascertained  from  the  incidental  mention  of  a
date^  viz.  1353  Saca,  or  4532  of  the  Cali  yuga,  correspond-*
ingto  A.D.  1431.

Though  the  derivations  in  Mucuf  a's  commentary  be
often  inaccurate,  and  other  errors  also  have  been  remarked
by  later  compilers,  its  authority  is  in  general  great ;  and
accordingly  it  has  been  carefully  consulted  under  every
article  of  the  present  work.

2.  Among  the  eariier  commentaries  named  by  RAya
MucufA,  that  of  CshIra  swImI  is  the  only  one,  which
has  been  examined  in  the  progress  of  this  comjnlation.  It
is  a  work  of  considerable  merit ;  and  is  still  in  general  use
in  some  provinces  of  India,  although  the  interpretations  not
unfrequently  differ  from  those  commonly  received.

3.  The  Vyac^hyasudhcLy  a  modem  commentary  by  RA-
masrama  or  by  BhAnudIcshita  (for  copies  differ  as  to
the  name  of  the  author),  is  the  work  of  a  granunarian  of  the
school  of  Benares.  He  continually  refers  to  RA  ya  m ucuf  a
and  to  SwAm!  ;  and  his  work  serves  to  confirm  their  scholia
where  accurate,  and  to  correct  them  where  erroneous.  It
has  been  consulted  at  every  line.

4.  The  Vya&hya  pradipaj  by  Achyuta  UpAdhyAya,
is  a  concise  and  accurate  exposition  of  the  text ;  but  adds
little  to  the  information  frunished  by  the  works  above-
mentioned. It  has  been,  however,  occasionally  consulted.

In  these  four  commentaries,  the  derivations  are  given

*  The  following  Dames  may  be  selected  from  Muouf  a's  quotatioDS,
to  complete  the  number  of  sixteen :  Mddhavi^  Mad/tu  mddhavi,  Sar-
v6nanda,  Abhinanda^  RXjADivA,  66verdhana,  DRlyi6A,  Bh6ja-
RAJA.  But  some  of  these  appear  to  be  separate  works,  rather  than
commentaries  on  the  Amera  cosha,  Muouf  a  occasionally  cites  the
most  celebrated  grammarians,  as  Pacini,  Jayaditta,  JinInora,
MAiTRivA,  Raoshita,  Purush6ttama,  Maduava,  &c.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


56  PREFACE  TO  THE  AUTHOR's  EDITION

according  to  PAif  iNi's  system.  lo  otheiB^  which  are  next
to  be  enumerated,  various  popular  grammars  are  followed
for  the  etymologies.  But,  as  the  derivations  of  the  words
are  not  included  in  the  plan  of  the  present  work,  being
reserved  for  a  place  in  the  intended  alphabetical  dictionary
of  Sanscrit,  those  commentaries  have  not  been  the  less
useful  in  regard  to  the  information  which  was  sought  in
them.

5.  The  commentary  of  Bharata  malla  (entitled
MugdhabSdhinz)  has  been  as  regularly  consulted  as  those
of  Mucuf  A  and  RAmASr  am  a.  It  is,  indeed,  a  very  excel-
lent work;  copious  and  clear,  and  particularly  full  upon
the  variations  of  orthography  according  to  different  readings
or  different  authorities :  the  etymologies  are  given  conform-
ably with  V6p  A  diva's  system  of  grammar.  The  author
flourished  in  the  middle  of  last  century.

6.  The  Sara  sundari,  by  Mat'hur&^a,  has  been  much
used.  It  is  perspicuous  and  abounds  in  quotations  from
other  commentaries,  and  is  therefore  a  copious  source  of
information  on  the  various  interpretations  and  readings  of
the  text.  The  Supadma  is  the  grammar  followed  in  the
derivations  stated  by  this  commentator.  Mat'hur6§a  is
author  likewise  of  a  vocabulary  in  verse,  entitled  Sabda-
ratnavaH^  arranged  in  the  same  order  with  the  Amera
cSsha,  and  which  might  serve  therefore  as  a  commentary
on  that  work.  It  was  compiled  under  the  patrcmage  of  a
Musleman  chieflain,  Murch'hA  khan,  whose  name  is  pre-
fixed to  it. The  auUior  wrote  not  more  than  150  years  ago.*

7.  The  Padarfha  CaumucU,  by  NarAyana  chacra-
vARTi,  is  another  commentary  of  considerable  merit,  which
has  been  ii-equently  consulted.  The  Calapa  is  the  grammar
followed  in  the  etymologies  here  exhibited.

*  His  work  coDtains  the  date  1588  .^co,  or  1666.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


OF  THE  AMERA  c6sHA.  57

8.  A  commentary  by  RamAnAt'h  a  vidyA  vJIchespati,
entitled  TricanAi  vivecay  is  peculiarly  copious  on  the  varia-
tions of  orthography,  and  is  otherwise  a  work  affording
much  useful  information.

9.  Another  commentary,  which  has  been  constantly  em-
ployed, is  that  by  Nl  L  A  c  a  Nf '  ha.  It  is  iuU  and  satisfactory
on  most  points  for  which  reference  is  usually  made  to  the
expositors  of  the  Amera  c6sha.

10.  The  commentary  of  RAmatarca  VAci^A  has  been
uniformly  consulted  throughout  the  work.  It  was  recom-
mended for  its  accuracy ;  but  has  furnished  little  informa-
tion, being  busied  chiefly  with  etymology.  This,  like  the
preceding,  follows  the  grammar  entitled  Calapa.

Other  commentaries  were  also  collected  for  occasional
reference  in  the  progress  of  this  work;  but  have  not  been
employed,  being  found  to  contain  no  information  which  was
not  also  furnished,  and  that  more  amply,  by  the  scholiasts
above  mentioned.

The  list  of  them  contained  in  the  subjoined  note  may
therefore  suflSce.*

III.  Sanscrit  dictionaries  and  vocabularies  by  other  authors.

Throughout  the  numerous  commentaries  on  the  Amera
c6sha,  the  text  itself  is  corrected  or  confirmed,  and  the
interpretations  and  remarks  of  the  commentators  supported,
by  reference  to  other  Sanscrit  vocabularies.  They  are  often
cited  by  the  scholiasts  for  the  emendation  of  the  text  in

•  Ckmmudi  by  Nayanananda  ;  TricdhSa  chintdmaM  by  Raghu-
nat'ha  ohacrayart!  ;  both  according  to  Pacini's  system  of  ety-
mology. Vaishamya  caumudi  by  Ramapresada  tarcIlancara;
Pada  manjarl  by  L6oanat'ha  ;  both  following  the  grammatical
system  of  the  Caldpa.  Pradipa  manjari  by  RamaSrama,  a  jejune
interpretation  of  the  text.  Vrthat  Mr&vali  by  Ram£§v7Ara.  Also
commentaries  by  GRfsHitADASAyTRiiiOOHANADASA,  Sundarananda,

VANADlVABHAffA, Vi^WANAT'hA,  G6paLA  OHACRAVARTfy  G6viN-
DANANDA,  RaHANAKDA,  Bh6lInIt'hA,  &C.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


68  PREFACE  TO  THE  AUTHOR's  EDITION

regard  to  the  geiKler  of  a  noun,  and  not  less  fnqaat&y  for
a  variation  of  orthography ,  or  for  a  diffieKnee  of  interpreta-
tion. The  authority  quoted  has  been  in  general  consulted^
before  any  use  has  been  made  of  the  quotations ;  or,  where
the  crigiaal  woik  cannot  now  be  procured,  the  agreement
of  commentators  has  been  admitted  as  authenticating  the
passage.  This  has  been  particularly  attended  to  in  the
chapter  containing  homonymous  words,  it  having  been
judged  usefiil  to  introduce  into  the  notes  of  that  chapter
the  numerous  additional  acceptations  stated  in  other  dic-
tionaries, and  understood  to  be  alluded  to  in  the  Amera
cAsha.

The  dictionaries  which  have  been  consulted  are,  1st  The
Mediniy  an  alphabetical  dictionary  of  homonymous  terms

by  M^DINiCARA.

2d.  The  Viiwa  pracasa  by  Mah&^wara  vaidya,  a
similar  dictionary,  but  less  accurate  and  not  so  well
arranged.  It  is  the  ground-work  of  tiie  Medirdj  which  is
an  improved  and  corrected  work  of  great  authority.  Both
are  very  frequently  cited  by  the  commentators.

3.  The  Haima,  a  dictionary  by  Hem  a  chandra,  in
two  parts ;  one  containing  synonyiiious  words  arranged  in
six  chapters ;  the  other  containing  homonymous  terms  in
alphabetical  order. Both  are  works  of  great  excellence.

4.  The  Abhidhana  ratnamala,  a  vocabulary  by  HelA-
Yi]  DH  A,  in  five  chapters ;  the  last  of  which  relates  to  words
having  many  acceptations.  It  is  too  concise  for  general
use,  but  is  sometimes  quoted.

6.  The  Dharani,  a  vocabulary  of  words  bearing  many
senses.  It  is  less  copious  than  the  Medini  and  Haima;
but  being  frequently  cited  by  commentators,  has  been
necessarily  consulted.

6.  The  TricanSa  sesha,  or  supplement  to  the  Amera
cSsha,  by  Purijsh6ttama  d6va.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


OF  THE  AMERA  c68HA.  59

7.  The  HiaraoaU  of  the  same  author.

The  last  of  these  two  supplements  to  Amera^  being  a
ooUeetion  of  uncommon  words,  has  not  been  much  employed
for  the  present  publication.  The  other  has  been  more  used.
Bctii  are  of  considerabk  authority.

The  reader  will  find  in  the  notes  a  list  of  other  dictiona-
ries quoted  by  the  commentators,  but  the  quotations  of
whidi  have  not  been  T^ified  1^  refarenoe  to  the  c^^inak,
as  these  have  not  been  procurable.*

WcMrks  under  the  title  of  Var^ctdesanaf  Dunritpa,  and
Uhadi,  have  indeed  been  procured ;  but  not  the  same  with
the  books  cited,  many  difierent  compilations  being  current
under  those  titles.  The  first  relates  to  words,  the  ortho-
graphy of  which  is  likely  to  be  mistaken  fi*om  a  confusion
of  similar  letters;  the  second  exhibits  words  which  are
spek  in  more  than  one  way ;  the  third  relates  to  a  certain
class  of  deriratives  separately  noticed  by  grammarians.

IV.  Grammatical  works.

Grammar  is  so  intimately  connected  with  the  subject  of
this  publication,  that  it  has  been  of  course  necessary  to
advert  to  the  virorks  of  grammarians.  But  as  they  are
r^ularly  cited  by  the  commentators,  it  is  needless  to  name
them  as  authorities,  since  nothing  will  be  found  to  have
been  taken  fi'om  this  source,  which  is  not  countenanced  by
some  passage  in  the  commentaries  on  the  Amera  cSsha.

V.  Treatises  on  the  roots  of  Sanscrit.

Verbs  not  being  exhibited  in  the  Amera  cdsha,  which  is
a  vocabulary  of  nouns  only,  the  treatises  of  MAiTsfiYA,

*  Amera  mdld^  Ambra  datta,  SabdAr^avay  S6ko(Ua,  Vaariia  disand,
Dwirupay  Un6di  cbsha,  Ratna  cdsha,  Ratna  moldy  RANTioivA,  Ru-
DRA,  VYA6iy  Rabhaea,  V6plL!TAy  Bhaouri,  Ajaya,  Vachbspati,
TarapIla,  Aru^adatta.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


60  PREFACE  TO  THE  AUTHOR's  EDITION

MAdhava,  and  others,  on  the  Sanscrit  roots,  though
furnishing  important  materials  towards  a  complete  dic-
tionary of  the  language,  have  been  very  little  employed  in
the  present  work  ;  and  a  particular  reference  to  them  was
unnecessary,  as  authority  vnll  be  found  in  the  commen-
taries on  Am  ERA,  for  any  thing  which  may  have  been
taken  from  those  treatises.

VI.  The  Scholia  of  classic  writings.

Passages  from  the  works  of  celebrated  writers  are  cited
by  the  commentators  on  the  Amera  cosha,  and  the  scho-
liasts of  classic  poems  frequently  quote  dictionaries  in  sup-
port of  their  interpretation  of  difficult  passages.  In  the
compilation  of  a  copious  Sanscrit  dictionary  ample  use
may  be  made  of  the  scholia.  They  have  been  employed
for  the  present  publication  so  far  only  as  they  are  expressly
cited  by  the  principal  commentaries  on  the  Amera  c6sha
itself.

Should  the  reader  be  desirous  of  verifying  the  authorities
upon  which  the  interpretation  and  notes  are  grounded,  he
will  in  general  find  the  information  sought  by  him  in  some
one  of  the  ten  commentaries  of  Amera,  which  have  been
before  named,  and  will  rai-ely  have  occasion  to  proceed
beyond  those  which  have  been  specified  as  the  works  re-
gularly consulted.

In  regard  to  plants  and  animals,  and  other  objects  of
natural  history,  noticed  in  different  chapters  of  this  voca-
bulary, and  especially  in  the  4th,  5th,  and  9th  chapters  of
the  second  book,  it  is  proper  to  observe,  that  the  ascertain-
ment of  them  generally  depends  on  the  correctness  of  the
corresponding  vernacular  names.  The  conmientators  seldom
furnish  any  description  or  other  means  of  ascertainment
besides  the  current  denomination  in  a  provincial  language.
A  view  of  the  animal,  or  an  examination  of  the  plant,  known


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


OF  THE  AMBRA  c6sHA.  61

to  the  vulgar  under  the  denomination,  enables  a  person
conversant  with  natural  history  to  determine  its  name
according  to  the  received  nomenclature  of  European  Botany
and  Zoology :  but  neither  my  enquiries,  nor  those  of  other
gentlemen,  who  have  liberally  communicated  the  informa-
tion collected  by  them,*  nor  the  previous  researches  of  Sir
William  Jones,  have  yet  discovered  all  the  plants  and
animals,  of  which  the  names  are  mentioned  by  the  com-
mentators on  the  Amera  c6sha;  and  even  in  regard  to
those  which  have  been  seen  by  us,  a  source  of  error  remains
in  the  inaccuracy  of  the  commentators  themselves,  as  is
proved  by  the  circumstance  of  their  frequent  disagreement
It  must  be  therefore  understood,  that  the  correspondence  of
the  Sanscrit  names  with  the  generic  and  specific  names  in
natural  history  is  in  many  instances  doubtful.  When  the
uncertainty  is  great,  it  has  usually  been  so  expressed ;  but
errors  may  exist  where  none  have  been  apprehended.

It  is  necessary  likewise  to  inform  the  reader,  that  many
of  the  plants,  and  some  animals  (especially  fish),  have  not
been  described  in  any  work  yet  published.  Of  such,  the
names  have  been  taken  from  the  manuscripts  of  Dr.  Rox-
burgh and  Dr.  F.  Buchanan.

Having  explained  the  plan  and  design  of  this  edition  of
the  Amera  c6sha,  I  have  only  further  to  state,'  that  the
delay  which  has  arisen  since  it  was  commenced  (now  more
than  five  years)  has  been  partly  occasioned  by  my  distance
trom  the  press  (the  work  being  printed  by  Mr.  Carey  at
Serampoor),  and  partly  by  avocations  which  have  retarded
the  progress  of  collating  the  different  copies  of  the  text  and
commentaries :  a  task,  the  labour  of  which  may  be  judged
by  those  who  have  been  engaged  in  similar  undertakings.

Calcutta,  December,  I8O7.

*  Drs.  Roxburgh,  F.  Buchanan,  and  W.  Hunter  :  and  Mr.
William  Carry.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


III.

Oh  SanscrYt  and  PrAcrKt  Poetry.


[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  x.  p.  389 — 474. Calcutto,
1808. 4to.]


The  design  of  the  present  essay  is  not  an  enumeration
of  the  poetical  compositions  cmrent  among  the  Hindus,
nor  an  examination  of  their  poetry  by  maxims  of  criticism
recognized  in  Europe,  or  by  rules  of  composition  taught  in
their  own  treatises  of  rhetoric ;  but  to  exhibit  the  laws  of
versification,  together  with  brief  notices  of  the  most  cele-
brated poems  in  which  these  have  been  exemplified.

An  mquiry  into  the  prosody  of  the  ancient  and  learned
language  of  India  will  not  be  deemed  an  unnece^rary
introduction  to  the  extracts  firom  Indian  poems,  which
may  be  occasionally  inserted  in  the  supplementary  volumes
of  Asiatic  Researches ;  and  our  transactions  record  more
than  one  instance  of  the  aid  which  was  derived  firom  a
knowledge  of  Sanscrit  prosody,  in  decyphering  passages
rendered  obscure  by  the  obsoleteness  of  the  character,  or
by  the  inaccuracy  of  the  transcripts.*  It  will  be  foxmd
similarly  usefiil  by  every  person  who  studies  that  language,
since  manuscripts  are  in  general  grossly  incorrect ;  and  a
familiarity  with  the  metre  will  fi-equently  assist  the  reader
in  restoring  the  text  where  it  has  been  corrupted.  Even  to
those  who  are  unacquainted  with  the  language,  a  concise
explanation  of  the  Indian  system  of  prosody  may  be  curious,
since  the  artifice  of  its  construction  is  pecuUar,  and  not

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  i.  p.  279;  vol.  ii.  p.  389.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  SANSCRtT  AND  PRACR!t  POETRY.  63

devoid  of  ingenuity ;  and  the  prosody  of  Sanscrit  will  be
finmd  to  be  richer  than  that  of  any  other  known  bmgostge,
in  variations  oi  metre,  regulated  either  by  quantity  or  by
number  of  syllables,  both  with  and  without  rhyme,  and
subject  to  laws  imposing  in  some  instances  rigid  restric-
tions, in  others  allowmg  ample  latitude,  i  am  prompted
by  these  amaderations  to  undertake  the  explanation  of
that  system,  premising  a  few  remarks  on  the  original  works
in  which  it  is  taught,  and  adding  notices  of  the  poems
from  which  examples  are  selected.

The  rules  of  prosody  are  contained  in  Siitrcu,  or  brief
aphorisms,  the  reputed  author  of  which  is  PingalanAoa,
a  fabulous  being,  represented  by  mythologists  in  the  shape
of  a  serpent ;  and  the  same  who,  under  the  title  of  Patan-
JALI,  is  the  supposed  author  of  the  Makabhashya,  or
great  commentary  on  grammar,  and  also  of  the  text  of
the  Y6ga  sastra  ,•*  and  to  whom  likewise  the  text  or  the
commentary  of  the  JyStish  annexed  to  the  Vedcisf  appears
to  be  attributed.  The  aphorisms  of  PingalAchArya,  as
he  is  sometimes  called,  on  the  prosody  of  Sanscrit  (exclu-
sive of  the  rules  in  Pracrtt  likewise  ascribed  to  him),  are
collected  into  eight  books,  the  first  of  which  allots  names,
or  rather  literal  marks,  to  feet  consisting  of  one,  two,  or
three  syllables.  The  second  book  teaches  the  manner,  in
which  passages  of  the  Vedas  are  measured.  The  third
explains  the  variations  in  the  subdivision  of  the  couplet
and  stanza.  The  fourth  treats  of  profane  poetry,  and
especially  of  verses,  in  which  the  number  of  syllable  J,  or
their  quantity,  is  not  uniform. The  fifth,  sixth,  and  se-


*  Or  Sdnc^hya  system  of  philosophy,  distinguished  from  that  of
Capila. [See  vol.  L  p.  235,  &c.]

t  In  the  subscription  to  the  only  copy  of  this  commentary  which  I
have  seen,  it  is  ascribed  to  SisHANlex;  but,  in  the  body  of  the
work,  the  commentator  calls  himself  S6mao A R A.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


64  ON  sanscrYt  and

venth|  exhibit  metres  of  that  sort  which  has  been  called
monoschematicy  or  uniform,  because  the  same  feet  recur
invariably  in  the  same  places.  The  eighth  and  last  book
serves  as  an  appendix  to  the  whole,  and  contains  rules  for
computing  all  the  possible  combinations  of  long  and  short
syllables  in  verses  of  any  length.

This  author  cites  earlier  writers  on  prosody,  whose  works
appear  to  have  been  lost:  such  as  Saitava,  Craush-
ficA,  Tan6in,  and  other  ancient  sages,  YAsca,CASya-
PA,  &c.

Pingala's  text  has  been  interpreted  by  various  com-
mentators; and,  among  others,  by  HelAyudha  BHAff  a,
author  of  an  excellent  gloss  entitled  Mrita  sanjivini.*  It
is  the  work  on  which  I  have  chiefly  reUed.  A  more  modem
commentary,  or  rather  a  paraphrase  in  verse,  by  NArA  y  an  a
BHAff  A  TAR  A,  Under  the  title  of  Vritt6ct%  ratna,  presents
the  singularity  of  being  interpreted  throughout  in  a  double
sense,  by  the  author  himself,  in  a  further  gloss  entitled
Partcsha.

The  Agni  puraAa  is  quoted  for  a  complete  system  of
prosody,t  founded  apparently  on  Pingala's  aphorisms;
but  which  serves  to  correct  or  to  supply  the  text  in  many
places ;  and  which  is  accordingly  used  for  that  purpose  by
commentators.  Original  treatises  likewise  have  been  com-
posed by  various  authors  ;|  and,  among  others,  by  the

*  I  possess  three  copies  of  it,  two  of  which  are  apparently  ancient;
but  they  have  no  dates.

t  It  is  stated  by  the  authors  who  quote  it  (NarXta^a  SRAff a  and
others),  to  he  an  extract  from  the  ^gni  purdha;  but  I  have  not  been
able  to  verify  its  place  in  that  Pur&ha.

I  Such  are  the  VdMhhdsha^,  VrtUa  derpaka,  VrtUa  caumudi,  and
Frttta  retndcaray  with  the  Ch^handb  manjari,  Ch*hando  m&ruMa^
Ch'handd  mdid,  Ch'^handb  niviti,  CK'handb  gbvindOy  and  several  tracts
under  the  title  of  f^r^tia-muctdvali,  besides  treatises  included  in  works
on  other  subjects.  For  example,  Vabahamihira'b  system  of  astro-
logy, which  contains  a  chapter  on  prosody.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


prAcrIt  poetry.  66

celebrated  poet  CAlidAsa.  In  a  short  treatise  entitled
Sruta  bSdha,  this  poet  teaches  the  laws  of  versification  in
the  very  metre  to  which  they  relate ;  and  has  thus  united
the  example  with  the  precept.  The  same  mode  has  been
idso  practised  by  many  other  writers  on  prosody;  and
in  particular,  by  Pinoala's  commentator  NArAyana
BHAffA;  and  by  the  authors  of  the  Vrltta  retnacara
and  Vritta  derpaAa.

CAlid Asa's  Sruta  h6dha  exhibits  only  the  most  com-
mon sorts  of  metre,  and  is  founded  on  Ping  a  la's  Pracrit
rules  of  prosody;  as  has  been  remarked  by  one  of  the
commentators*  on  the  Vritta  retnacara.

The  rules  generally  cited  under  the  title  of  Pracrit
Pingala,  have  been  explained  in  a  metrical  paraphrase,
teaching  the  construction  of  each  species  of  metre  in  a
stanza  of  the  same  measure,  and  subjoining  select  examples.
Tins  Pracrit  paraphrase,  entitled  Pingala  vritti,  is  quoted
under  the  name  of  HAMMiRA,f  who  is  celebrated  in  more
than  one  passage  given  as  examples  of  metre,  and  who
probably  patronized  the  author.  It  has  been  imitated  in  a
modem  Sanfcrit  treatise  on  Pracfit  prosody,  entitled  Vritta
niuctavali;%  and  has  been  copiously  explained  in  a  Sanscrit
commentary  named  Pingala  pracasa.%

Though  relative  to  Pracrit  prosody,  the  rules  are  appli-

The  VriUa  retndcara  of  CioARA  BHAffA,  with  its  commentaries  by

DlvICABA  BHAffA, NlRXVAilA  BHAffA,  EDd  HaRI  BHA80ARA, haS

been  the  most  consulted  for  the  present  treatise.  The  P^r^Ua  derpaiha^
which  relates  chiefly  to  Prdcrit  prosody,  has  been  also  much  em-
ployed.

*  DlvICARA  BHAffA.

t  In  the  commentary  on  the  Vr^tibcti  ratna.

t  The  author,  DuUoIdatta,  was  patronized  by  the  Hinddpati
princes  of  BundUc'h<md.  The  examples,  which  like  the  text  are
Smiscrit  in  Pr6cr^t  measure,  are  in  praise  of  these  chieftains.

§  By  ViSwabat'ha.

VOL.  II.  F


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


66  ON  sanscrYt  and

cable,  for  the  most  part,  to  Sanscrit  prosody  also:  since,
the  laws  of  versification  in  both  languages  are  nearly  the
same.

The  Pracrit,  here  meant,  is  the  language  usually  em-
ployed under  this  name  by  dramatic  writers ;  and  not,  in  a
more  general  sense  of  the  term,  any  regular  provincial
dialect  corrupted  from  Sanscrit.  Hj^machandba  in  his
grammar  of  Pracrtt,  declares  it  to  be  so  called  because  it
is  derived  from  Sanscrit.*

Accordingly  his  and  other  grammars  of  the  language
consist  of  rules  for  the  transformation  of  Sanscrit  words
into  the  derivative  tongue :  and  the  specimens  of  it  in  the
Indian  dramas,  as  well  as  in  the  books  of  the  Jains,
exhibit  few  words  which  may  not  be  traced  to  a  Sanscrit
origin.  This  is  equally  true  of  the  several  dialects  of
Pracrit:  viz.  Saurasini  or  language  o(  Surasina^-f  and
Magadhi  or  dialect  of  Mc^adha;i  which  according  to
grammarians,  who  give  rules  for  deducing  the  first  fix>m
Sanscrit,  and  the  second  from  the  first,  ^  or  both  finom
Sanscrit,  \\  are  dialects  nearly  allied  to  Pracrit,  and  r^u-
larly  formed  by  permutations,  for  which  the  rules  are  stated
by  them.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  Pais6cM  as  a
language,  (and  distinguished  fix>m  the  jargon  or  gibberish
which  either  dramatic  writers,  or  actors  exhibiting  their
dramas,  sometimes  put  into  the  mouths  of  demons);  for

*  ''  Pracr^ak  sanscr^iam  ;  iatrabhavam  UUa  6gatam  vd  pricr^tam."

t  CuLLtxoA  BBAff  A  (on  Mknu  2.  19.)  says,  tliat  6urasina  is  the
country  of  Mafhur6,

X  Cicaia  or  Bihdr.  But  it  does  not  appear,  that  either  this,  or  the
preceding  dialect,  is  now  spoken  in  the  country  from  which  it  takes
its  name. Specimens  of  hoth  are  frequent  in  the  Indian  dramas.

§  Vababuohi,  and  his  commentator  Bhamaha.

II  H^MAOHANDBA,  who,  after  stating  the  special  permutations  of
these  dialects  as  derived  from  SanscHty  observes  in  both  places,  that
the  rest  of  the  permutations  are  the  same  with  those  of  Frdcr^i.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.  67

the  grammarians  of  Pracrit  teach  the  manner  of  forming
the  Paii&chi*  from  the  dialect  called  Saurasini.f  That
remark  may  be  also  extended  to  Apabhrania,  as  a  fixed
bmguage  partaking  o(  Pracrit  and  Saurasim^  but  deducing
many  terms  immediately  from  the  Sanscrit  under  rules  of
permutation  pecuUar  to  itself. :{:

The  a£Bnity  of  these  dialects  of  Pracrit  to  the  Sanscrit
and  to  each  other  is  so  great,  that  they  reciprocally  borrow,
notwithstandmg  their  own  particular  rules,  terms  permuted
in  the  manner  of  other  dialects,  and  even  admit,  without
alteration,  words  inflected  according  to  the  Sanscrit
grammar.  §  They  may  be  therefore  considered  as  dialects
of  a  single  language,  the  Pracrit  or  derivative  tongue;
so  termed  with  reference  to  Sanscrit,  from  which  it  is
derived.

Besides  these  cognate  dialects,  the  dramatic  writers  in-
troduced other  languages  as  spoken  by  different  persons
of  the  drama.  Such,  according  to  the  enumeration  in  the
Sahitya  derpaAa^W  ^^^  ^  Dacshinaty&f%  or  language
used  in  the  south  of  India ;  the  Dravuli,  or  dialect  of  the
southern  extremity  of  the  peninsula;  the  Avantic&  (pro-
bably the  language  of  Malctva);**  the  Ardha  m&gadki,


•  Or  language  of  the  Pisdchas,  '*  Pisdchdndm  bhdshd  PaisdchV^
BhXmara  on  Vabaruohi.

t  Varabuohi  and  H£maohandba.  The  last  mentioned  author
notices  a  variation  of  this  dialect  under  the  name  of  ChiUicdpaiidchiy
which  differs  very  little  from  the  proper  Paiidchi.

{  It  b  taught  under  this  name  hy  H^machandra,  among  other
dialects  of  Prdcrtt  But  the  name  usually  signifies  ungrammatical
language.

§  H£machandra  ad  finem.  ||  Ch.  6.  [p.  180,  ed.  Calc]

^  Same  with  Vaidarbhk,  according  to  the  commentator  of  the
Sahitya  derpaHa,  The  country  of  Viderhha  is  said  to  be  the  modern
Berar  proper.

••  Avanti  is  another  name  of  UjjayanU

F  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


68  ON SANSCRtx  AND

distinguished  from  Magadhi  properly  so  called  ;^  the
Bahlicabhasha  (perhaps  the  langui^e  of  Bdlkk  in  the
Tnmsoxana) ;*  the  Maharashiri,  or  dialect  of  the  Mar--
haiias;  the  Prachya,  or  language  employed  in  the  east  of
India; t  the  Abkiri  and  Chandaliy  which,  from  their  names^
seem  to  be  dialects  used  by  herdsmen  and  by  persons  of  the
lowest  tribes ;  the  Sancara  iSacart)  and  Sabari,  concerning
which  nothing  satisfactory  can  be  at  present  suggested ;
and  generally  any  provincial  dialect.

It  is  not  to  be  supposed,  that  the  Pracrit  rules  of  pro-
sody, as  taught  by  Pingala,  are  suited  to  all  these
languages :  but  it  is  probable  that  they  were  framed  for
the  same  dialect  of  Pracrit,  in  which  they  are  composed;
and  they  are  applicable  to  those  cognate  dialects,  which
differ  much  less  fix)m  each  other  (being  very  easily  con-
founded), than  they  all  do  from  Sanscrit,  their  acknow-
ledged common  parent.  Generally  those  rules  may  be
considered  applicable  to  all  the  lai^uages  comprehended
under  the  designation  of  Pracrity%  as  derivative  from
Sanscrit;  and  certainly  so  to  the  vernacular  tongues  of
the  ten  nations  of  Hindus  now  inhabiting  India.  A  writer
on  Sanscrit  pro8ody§  pronounces  the  various  kinds  of  metre
to  be  admissible  in  the  provincial  languages,  and  has

*  Bdhlica  or  Bdhlica  (for  the  word  is  spelt  variously)  is  a  country
famous  for  the  breed  of  horses.  Amera»  2.  8.  45.  It  appears  to  be
situated  north  of  India,  beings  mentioned  in  enumerations  of  countries,
with  Turushca,  Ckasoy  Cdm^aykc,  (HiMAOHi^NOBA,  1.4. 25.  Tri*
c&Maushay  2.1.9.)

t  The  commentator  on  the  Sahitya  derpaka  (Rama  chaba:6a),
interprets  Prdchyiy  by  OauBXyh;  meaning,  no  doubt,  the  language
of  Bengal,  He  was  himself  a  native  of  this  province ;  and  his  work
is  modem,  being  dated  §dca  1622  (A.D.  1700).

X  At.  Res.,  vii.  p.  219.  [Page  21,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.]

§  Nabava^a  BHAffA  in  a  commentary  on  the  Frttla  retnacrn'a,
written  in  Samvat  1602  (A.D.  1546),


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  Poetry.  69

quoted  examples  in  those  of  Mtihar&shira,  GnrjarOf  and
Canyacubja.  The  last-mentioned,  which  is  the  same  with
the  old  Hindi,  as  is  demonstrated  by  this  specimen  of  it,
might  furnish  very  numerous  instances;  especially  the
Hindi  poetry  of  C^iAVA  dAsa,*  who  has  studiously  em-
ployed a  great  variety  of  metre.  Some  examples  will  ac-
cordingly be  quoted  from  the  most  distinguished  HtTidi
poets.  The  sacred  books  of  the  Sikhs^  composed  in  a
Pejtjubi  dialect,  which  is  undoubtedly  derived  from  the
ancient  Sarestoataff  abound  in  specimens  of  such  metre.
The  language  of  Mifkila,  and  its  kindred  tongue,  which
prevails  in  Bengal,  also  supply  proof  of  the  aptitude  of
Sanscrit  prosody :  and  the  same  is  probably  true  of  the
other  four  national  languages,  j:

Pingala's  rules  of  Sanscrit  prosody  are  expressed  with
singular  brevity.  The  artifice  by  which  this  has  been
effected  is  the  use  of  single  letters  to  denote  the  feet  or
the  syllables.  Thus  /,  the  initial  of  a  word  signifying  short
Qaghu),  indicates  a  short  syllable :  g,  for  a  similar  reason,^
intends  a  long  one.  The  combinations  of  these  two  letters
denote  the  several  dissyllables:  Ig  signifying  an  iambic;
gl  a  trochseus  or  choreus ;  gg  a  spondee ;  U  a  pyrrhichius.
The  letters  m.  y.  r.  s.  L  j.  bh.  and  n,  mark  all  the  trisylla-
bical  feet,  from  three  long  syllables  to  as  many  short.  A
Sanscrit  verse  is  generally  scanned  by  these  last-mentioned
feet,  with  the  addition  of  either  a  dissyllable  or  a  mono-

*  CoDtemporary  with  JBHANofR  and  Shah  JbhIn.

t  The  remaining  Sdreswata  Br&hmahas  inhabit  chiefly  the  Penj6b.

\  Those  of  DrStviaOy  CarUiaca,  TUinga,  and  OBra  or  USiya.  t
omit  Gaura.  The  BrShmahaa  bearing  this  national  designation-  are
settled  in  the  districts  around  Delhi :  but,  unless  theirs  be  the  lan-
guage of  MfU^hwr^^  it  is  not  easy  to  assign  to  them  a  particul^
national  tongue.

S  Being  the  initial  of  gurUy  long.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


70  ON  sanscrIt  and

Byllable  at  the  close  of  the  verse,  if  neoessary.  This  may
be  rendered  plain  by  an  example  taken  from  die  Greek  and
Latin  prosody.

Scanned  in  the  Indian  manner,  a  phaleucian  verse,
instead  of  a  spondee,  a  dactyl  and  three  trochees,  would
be  measmed  by  a  molossus,  an  anapeest,  an  amphibrachys
and  a  trochee ;  expressed  thus,  m.  s.  j.  g.  L  A  sapphic
verse  would  be  similarly  measured  by  a  cretic,  an  antibac*
chius,  an  amphibrachys  and  a  trochee ;  written  r.  t.j.  g.  L

To  avoid  the  too  frequent  use  of  uncommon  terms,  I
shall,  m  describing  the  different  sorts  of  Sanscrit  metre,
occasionally  adopt  a  mode  of  stating  the  measure  more
consonant  to  the  Greek  and  Latin  prosody,  in  which  the
iambic,  trochee,  and  spondee,  dactyl,  anapeest,  and  tri-
brachys,  are  the  only  feet  of  two  or  three  syllables  which
are  commonly  employed.

In  Pracrit  prosody  the  variety  of  feet  is  much  greater :
verses  being  scanned  by  feet  of  different  letigths,  from  two
matras  (two  short  syllables  or  one  long),  to  three,  four,
five,  and  even  six  matras  or  instants.  These  various
'  descriptions  of  feet  have  been  classed,  and  denominated,
by  the  writers  on  this  branch  of  prosody.

The  verse,  according  to  the  Sanscrit  system  of  prosody,
is  the  component  part  of  a  couplet,  stanza,  or  strophe,
commonly  named  a  sl6ca,  although  this  term  be  sometimes
restricted  to  one  sort  of  metre,  as  will  be  subsequently
shown  on  the  authority  of  CAlidAsa.  The  stanza  or
strophe  consists  usually  of  four  verses  denominated  pada  ;
or,  considered  as  a  couplet,  it  comprises  two  verses  subdi-
vided into  padas  or  measures.  Whether  it  be  deemed  a
stanza  or  a  couplet,  its  half,  called  ardhaslSca,  contains
usually  two  padas ;  and  in  general  the  pauses  of  the  sense
correspond  with  the  principal  pauses  of  the  metre,  which
are  accordingly  indicated  by  lines of  separation  at  the


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAckYt  poetry.  71

dose  of  the  il6ca  and  of  its  hemistich.  When  the  sense
is  suspended  to  the  close  of  a  second  ilSca,  the  double
stanza  is  denominated  yugma;  while  one,  comprising  a
greater  number  of  measures,  is  termed  ctdaca.  In  common
with  others,  I  have  sometimes  translated  il6ca  by  "  verse,"
or  by  "  couplet ;"  but,  in  prosody,  it  can  only  be  consi-
dered as  a  stanza,  though  the  pauses  are  not  always  very
perfectly  marked  until  the  close  of  the  first  half:  and,  in
conformity  to  the  Indian  system,  it  is  generally  treated  as
a  tetrastich,  though  some  kinds  of  regular  metre  have  uni-
form pauses,  which  might  permit  a  division  of  the  stanza
into  eight,  twelve,  and  even  sixteen  verses.

In  Pracrit  prosody,  a  greater  variety  is  admitted  in  the
length  of  the  stanza ;  some  species  of  metre  being  restricted
to  a  true  couplet,  and  others  extended  to  stanzas  of  six
and  even  sixteen  verses :  independently  of  pauses,  which,
being  usually  marked  by  rhyme,  would  justify  the  farther
subdivision  of  the  stanza  into  as  many  verses  as  there  are
pauses.  Even  in  Sanscrit  prosody,  instances  occur  of
stanzas  avowedly  comprising  a  greater  or  a  less  number  of
verses  than  four :  as  three,  five,  six,  &c.  But  these  are
merely  exceptions  to  the  general  rule.

Concerning  the  length  of  the  vowels  in  Sanscrit  verse,
since  none  are  ambiguous,  it  is  only  necessary  to  remark,
that  the  comparative  length  of  syllables  is  determined  by
the  allotment  of  one  instant  or  matra  to  a  short  syllable,
and  two  to  a  long  one ;  that  a  naturally  short  vowel  be-
comes long  in  prosody  when  it  is  followed  by  a  double  or
conjunct  consonant  ;*  and  that  the  last  syllable  of  a  verse

•  Or  by  the  nasal  termed  Anuswdra,  or  the  aspirate  Visarga,  By
poetical  license,  a  vowel  may  be  short  before  certain  eonjuncts  {viz,

H  and  ^ ;  as  also  ^  and  H)).  This  license  has  been  borrowed
from  PracrU  prosody,  by  the  rules  of  which  a  vowel  is  allowed  to


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


72  ON  sanscrIt  and

IS  either  long  or  short,  according  to  the  exigence  of  the
metre,*  whatever  may  be  its  natural  length.

Sanscrit  prosody  admits  two  sorts  of  metre.  One  go-
verned by  the  number  of  syllables ;  and  which  is  mostly
uniform  or  monoschematic  in  profane  poetry,  but  altogether
arbitrary  in  various  metrical  passages  of  the  Vedas.  The
other  is,  in  &ct,  measured  by  feet,  like  the  hexameters  of
Greek  and  Latin  :  but  only  one  sort  of  this  metre,  which
is  denominated  Arya,  is  acknowledged  to  be  so  regulated ;
while  another  sort  is  governed  by  the  number  of  syllabic
instants  or  matras.

I.  GanacJChandcLSf  or  metre  regulated  by  feet.

AryA  or  GAt'hA.

The  metre  named  Aryhj  or  in  Pracrtt,  Gaka,  from  the
Sanscrit  Gafha,  is  measured  by  feet  denominated  gana^
or  matragana,  which  are  equivalent  to  two  long  syllables
or  to  four  short :  it  is  described  as  a  couplet,  in  which  the
first  verse  contains  seven  and  a-half  feet ;  and  the  sixth  foot
must  consist  of  a  long  syllable  between  two  short,  or  else
of  four  short;  while  the  odd  feet  (1st,  3d,  5th,  and  7th)
must  never  be  amphibrachys.f In  the  second  verse  of  the

be  sometimes  short  before  any  conjunct,  or  before  the  nasal:  but
instances  of  this  license  occur  in  classical  poems  with  only  four
conjunctSy  as  abovementioned ;  and,  even  there,  emendations  of  the
text  have  been  proposed  by  critics  to  render  the  verse  conformable
to  the  general  laws  of  prosody.  (See  remarks  in  the  Durghtda
vriuiy  on  passages  of  MXgha's  poem  and  of  the  Cum&ra).

*  This  rule  of  prosody  is  applicable  to  any  verse  of  the  tetrastich :
but  it  is  considered  by  writers  on  rhetoric  inelegant  to  use  the
privilege  in  the  uneven  verses ;  and  they  thus  restrict  the  rule  to  the
close  of  the  stanza  and  of  its  half,  especially  in  the  more  rigid
species  of  regular  metre.

f  If  ihe  rule  be  violated,  the  metre  is  named  Gurvikl;  but  thi^
is  reprobated  by  writers  on  prosody.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.  73

couplet,  the  sixth  foot  (for  here  too  it  retains  that  name)
consists  of  a  single  short  syllable.  Consequently  the  pro-
portion of  syllabic  instants  in  the  long  and  short  verses  is
thirty  to  twenty-seven.*  The  same  metre  has,  with  some
propriety,  been  described  as  a  stanza  of  four  verses  :t  for
it  is  subdivided  by  its  pauses  into  towrpadas,  which  have
the  usual  privilege  of  giving  to  the  last  syllable,  whether
naturally  long  or  short,  the  length  required  by  the  metre.
The  pause  is  commonly  restricted  to  the  close  of  the  third
foot,  and  the  measure  is  in  this  case  denominated  Pafhya ;
but  if  the  pause  be  placed  otherwise  in  either  verse,  or  in
both  of  them,  the  metre  is  named  Viptdd.

A  particular  sort  of  this  measure,  deduced  fi-om  either
species  above  described,  is  called  Chapala ;  and  the  laws
of  its  construction  require,  that  the  second  and  fourth  feet
should  be  amphibrachys,  and  that  the  first  foot  should  be
either  a  spondee  or  an  anapeest,  and  the  fifth  a  dactyl  or
a  spondee.  The  first  verse  of  the  couplet,  the  second,  or
both,  may  be  constructed  accordmg  to  these  rigid  rules :
hence  three  varieties  of  this  sort  of  metre.

The  regular  Arya  consists  of  alternate  long  and  short
verses :  but,  if  the  short  verse  precede  the  long  one,  the
metre  is  called  Udgiti.  If  the  couplet  consist  of  two  long
verses,  it  is  named  Giti :  or  of  two  short  verses,  Upagitu
Another  sort  of  this  metre  is  named  Arya  giti:  it  is  con-
structed by  completing  the  eighth  foot  of  the  regular
Arya.X

This  measure  admits  therefore  of  eighty  principal  varia-
tions, deducible  fix)m  the  nine  sorts  abovementioned :  for
the  pause  may  be  placed  at  the  close  of  the  third  foot  in
either  verse  of  each  couplet,  in  both,  or  in  neither;  and


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  390.  f  PrUta  muctdvali,

X  It  may  be  varied  by  alternating^  a  long  and  a  short  verse,  or  a
short  and  a  long  one,  or  by  making  both  verses  long.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


74  ON  sanscrYt  and

either  verse,  both,  or  neither,  may  be  constructed  acccmling
to  the  strict  rules  of  the  Chapala  measure ;  and  the  verse
may  consist  of  seven  and  a-half,  or  of  eight  feet;  and
may  be  arranged  in  couplets  consisting  of  verses  alternately
long  and  short,  or  alternately  short  and  long,  or  else  uni-
formly long,  or  uniformly  short.

The  Arya  metre  is  very  frequently  employed  by  Indian
poets ;  but  works  of  great  length  in  this  measure  are  not
common.  It  is  oftener  intermixed  with  verses  of  other
kinds,  though  instances  do  occur  of  its  exclusive  use :
thus  the  first  and  fourth  cantos,  and  most  part  of  the
second  and  third,  in  the  poem  entitled  NalSdaya,  and  the
entire  work  of  G6verdhana,*  are  in  the  Arya  metre.
And  so  is  the  brief  text  of  the  Sanc'hya  philosophy  of
Capila,  as  taught  by  ISwaracrYshna  ;t  and  the  copious
treatise  of  astronomy  by  Brahmegupta.|

The  NalSdaya  abovementioned,  which  is  ascribed  to  the
celebrated  poet  CA  lid  As  a,  is  a  poem  in  four  cantos,  com-
prising 220  couplets  or  stanzas,§on  the  adventures  of  Nala
and  DamayantI  :  a  story  which  is  already  known  to  the
English  reader.||  In  this  singular  poem,  rhyme  and  alli-
teration are  combined  in  the  termination  of  the  verses:  for

*  Consisting  of  seven  hundred  (or  with  the  introduction  7^^)
stanzas  of  miscellaneous  poetry ;  and  entitled,  from  the  number  of
stanzas,  Sapta  satt,

i  Author  of  the  Carted  or  metrical  maxims  of  this  philosophy.
Sutras,  or  aphorisms  in  prose,  which  are  ascribed  to  Capila  himself,
are  extant :  but  the  work  of  f §wara  CrYsh^ a  is  studied  as  the  text
of  the  Sdnc^hpa,  (As.  Res.,  vol.  viii.  p.  466.)

I  Entitled  Brahmesp^huta  siddhdnta :  other  treatises,  bearing  the
same  or  a  similar  title,  are  works  of  different  authors.

§  Chiefly  Aryd,  with  a  few  anapaestic  stanzas  (  T^iaca),  and  a  still
smaller  number  of  iambics  and  trochaics  (Pramdni  and  SamdnQ

II  Translated  by  Mr.  Kinoerslev  of  Madras,  from  a  tale  in  the
provincial  language.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


peacrIt  poetry.  75

the  three  or  four  last  syllables  of  each  hemistich  within
the  stanza  are  the  same  in  somid  though  different  in  sense.
It  is  a  series  of  puns  on  a  pathetic  subject.

It  is  supposed  to  have  been  written  in  emulation  of  a

short  poem  (of  twenty-two  stanzas)  similarly  constructed,

but  with  less  repetition  of  each  rhyme ; and  entitled,  from

I  the  words  of  the  challenge  with  which  it  concludes,  Ghaia

carpara.

"  Thirsty  and  touching  water  to  be  sipped  from  the  hol-
low palms  of  my  hands,  I  swear  by  the  loves  of  sprightly
damsels,  that  I  will  carry  water  in  a  broken  pitcher  for
any  poet  by  whom  I  am  surpassed  in  rhymes."

However,  the  epic  poem  of  MAgha,  which  will  be  men-
tioned moi'e  particularly  under  the  next  head,  contains  a
specimen  of  similar  alliteration  and  rhyme  ;  the  last  four-
teen stanzas  of  the  sixth  canto  (descriptive  of  the  seasons)
being  constructed  with  like  terminations  to  each  half  of  the
stanza.  Instances  will  also  be  cited  from  BhAravi's
poem  hereafter  noticed.

The  following  example  of  a  species  of  the  Arya  metre
is  taken  from  the  preface  of  the  NaUdaya.

Arya  giti  (8  feet).

Asti  sa  raja  nite
RamakhyS,  y6  gatik  para  janite,

yasya  rarajd  'nite
ratnanijanah  kule  dharajani  Hi^

Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


76  ON  sanscrKt  and

<MrWM<l>sll'nd<HK<rfri'5n^|rO;M\MlHlHl

"  The  king  celebrated  under  the  name  of  RAm  a,*  exists,
who  is  conversant  with  the  supreme  ways  of  moral  con-
duct ;  in  whose  family,  exempt  from  calamity  and  enriched
with  the  gems  of  the  earth,  dependants  flourish/'  1.  5.

The  next  is  taken  from  DamayantI's  lamentation  on
finding  herself  deserted  by  her  husband  Nala.  It  is  in
the  same  species  of  metre.

26.  Tatraf  pade  vyaliriam,

at'ha  vibhrantam  vane  cha  devya,  'Unam

tanu^vrinde  vyalinam
tatin  dad^han£^  taya  *  spade  vyalinam,

27.  Vega-bala  *pdsitaya,
venya,  Bhaimi  yuta  lalapa  'sitaya.

*'  Nripa!  sorcaldpa  'sitaya
hatwa  Yin,  bandhavan  cUa  'pasi  taya.

28.  Sa  caVham  manc^vananam,
nyayavid!  acharasi  sevyamana-vananatn,

dhrita'sima  navananam,
daranam  tyagam,  anupama!  'nuvananam.

29.  Para'critam  etat  twenah  [tu  6nah]
smarami,  tan  na  smntd  'gi  me  tattwina,

dSsha^samiUitwena
pradHishaye  na  *tra  sambhrame  tat  twena! [twa,
ina!T

*  Rama  raja,  by  whose  commaDd  the  poem  was  composed.  So
the  commentators  remark :  but  it  remains  uncertain  who  he  was,  or
where  he  reigned.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRAcRJfT  POETRY.  77

TFTT  t

"  Then  the  princess  wandered  in  the  forest,  an  abode  of
serpents,  crowded  with  trees  which  resound  with  the  sweet
buzz  of  bees,  the  resort  of  flocks  of  birds.  With  her
dark  hair  dishevelled  through  her  haste,  BHAiMi  thus
lamented :  '  King !  thou  slayest  foes,  but  defendest  thy
kindred,  with  thy  quiver  and  thy  sword.  Unrivalled  in
excellence  and  conversant  with  morality,  how  hast  thou
practised  the  desertion  of  a  wife  proud  but  left  helpless  in  a
forest ;  thus  rendering  thyself  the  limit  of  praise  ?  But  I
consider  this  evil  to  be  the  act  of  another,  and  do  not
charge  thee  with  it :  I  do  not  blame  thee,  my  husband,
as  in  fault  for  this  terror.' "  3. 26—29.

In  the  passage  here  cited,  some  variations  in  the  read-
ing, and  greater  differences  in  the  interpretation  occur;
with  which  it  is,  however,  unnecessary  to  detain  the  reader.
After  consulting  several  scholia,  the  interpretation  which
appeared  preferable  has  been  selected.  The  same  mode
will  be  followed  in  subsequent  quotations  from  other  poems.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


78  ON  SANSCRtT  AND

II.  Matrach^kmidas,  or  metre  regulated  by  quantity.
1.  VaitAlIya.

Anotlier  sort  of  metre,  regulated  by  the  proportion  of
matras  or  syllabic  instants,  is  measured  by  the  time  of  the
syllables  exclusively;  without  noticing,  as  in  the  gana-
cVhandaSj  the  number  of  feet.  It  is  therefore  denominated
matracVhandaSy  and  the  chief  metre  of  this  kind  is  named
VaitaUya,  It  is  a  tetrastich,  or  strophe  of  four  verses,
the  first  and  third  containing  the  time  of  fourteen  short
syllables,  and  the  second  and  fourth  sixteen.  The  laws  of
its  construction  impose  that  each  verse  shall  end  in  a  cretic
and  iambic,  or  else  in  a  dactyl  and  spondee,*  or  by  bac-
chius.i-  In  regard  to  the  remaining  moments,  which  are
six  in  the  odd  verses,  and  eight  in  the  even  verses  of  the
strophe,  it  must  be  observed  as  a  general  rule,  that  neither
the  second  and  third,  nor  the  fourth  and  fifth  moments
should  be  combined  in  the  same  long  syllable ;  nor,  in  the
second  and  fourth  verses,  should  the  sixth  matra  be
combined  with  the  seventh.  That  general  rule  however
admits  of  exceptions,  and  the  name  of  the  metre  varies
accordingly.^

Although  the  Vaitaliya  regularly  consist  of  alternate

*  This  variety  of  the  metre  is  named  Apatdiicd,

t  Thus  augmented,  the  measure  is  called  Aiipach^handasica,  The
whole  of  the  last  canto  of  MIoha's  epic  poem  hereafter  mentioned  is
in  this  metre,  and  so  is  the  first  half  of  the  13th  canto  in  BrIravi's

t  In  the  even  verses  of  the  strophe,  if  the  fourth  and  fifth  moments
be  combined  in  one  long  syllable,  contrary  to  the  general  rule  above-
mentioned,  the  metre  is  named  Pr&chya  vr^tti:  or,  in  the  odd  verses,
if  the  second  and  third  moments  be  so  combined,  the  metre  is  deno-
minated Udkhya  vritH :  or  the  rule  may  be  violated  in  both  instances
at  the  same  time,  and  the  measure  then  takes  the  name  of  Pra^
vrittaca.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.  79

short  and  long  verses,  it  may  be  varied  by  making  the
stanza  consist  either  of  four  short  or  four  long  verses,  admit-
ting at  the  same  time  the  exception  just  now  hinted.*

The  following  is  an  example  of  a  stanza  composed  in  a
species  of  this  metre :

Vaitaliya  {Pravrtttacd).

Idam,  Bharata-vansa-bhubhritam,
srityatanif  sruti-mandrasayanamj

pavitram,  adkicam,  subhSdayam,
Vyasa-vactra-cafhitam,  Pravrittacam.

Listen  to  this  pure,  auspicious,  and  pleasing  liistory  of
the  kings  of  the  race  of  Bharata,  as  uttered  from  the
mouth  of  VyAsa."

Here,  as  in  most  of  the  examples  given  by  the  commen-
tator HelAyudha,  and  by  other  writers  on  prosody,  the
name  of  the  metre  occurs,  but  with  a  different  acceptation.
Where  the  stanza  has  the  appearance  of  being  a  quotation
(as  in  the  present  instance),  it  might  be  conjectured  that
the  denomination  of  the  measure  was  originally  assumed
from  the  example ;  and  this  conjecture  would  appear  pro-
bable, wherever  the  name  (as  is  frequently  the  case)  has
no  radical  meaning  connected  with  the  subject  of  metre.
But,  in  many  instances,  the  radical  interpretation  of  the
word  is  pertinent,  and  has  obviously  suggested  its  applica-
tion as  a  term  of  prosody ;  and  the  stanza,  which  is  given
as  an  example,  must  therefore  have  been  purposely  con-

*  A  tetrastich,  consisting  of  four  short  verses  of  the  sort  called
Prwr^Uaca,  is  named  Chdruhdsini:  and  one  comprising  four  long
Tcrses  of  that  description  is  termed  Apar&nticd,


Digitized  by  C^OOQ IC


80  ON  sanscrYt  and

structed  to  exhibit  the  metre  by  words  in  which  its  denomi-
nation is  included.  This  is  confirmed  by  the  circumstance
of  some  of  the  words  being  incompatible  with  the  measure
which  they  designate :  and,  in  such  cases,  the  author  apo-
loffies  on  that  ground  for  not  exhibiting  the  name  in  the
example.

The  Vaitaliya  metre  has  been  employed  by  some  of  the
most  eminent  poets;  for  instance,  in  the  epic  poem  of
MAgha,  the  sixteenth  canto  of  which  is  chiefly  in  this
measure,  as  the  twentieth  and  last  canto  is  in  that  species
of  it  which  is  called  AupacVhandasica,

The  work  here  mentioned  is  an  epic  poem,  the  subject  of
which  is  the  death  of  SiSupAla  slain  in  war  by  CrYshn  a  :
it  is  entitled  Siiupala  badha,  but  is  usually  cited  under  the
name  of  its  author,  whose  designation,  with  praises  of  his
family,  appears  in  the  concluding  stanzas  of  the  poem.
Yet,  if  tradition  may  be  trusted,  MAgha,  though  expressly
named  as  the  author,  was  the  patron,  not  the  poet.  As  the
subject  is  heroic,  and  even  the  unity  of  action  well  pre-
served, and  the  style  of  the  composition  elevated,  this  poem
is  entitled  to  the  name  of  epic.  But  the  Indian  taste  for
descriptive  poetry,  and  particularly  for  licentious  descrip-
tion, has  disfigured  even  this  work,  which  is  otherwise  not
undeserving  of  its  high  reputation.  The  two  first  cantos
and  the  last  eight  are  suitable  to  the  design  of  the  poem ;
but  the  intermediate  ten,  describing  the  journey  of  CrYshna
with  a  train  of  amorous  damsels,  fix)m  Dwaraca  to  Indra^
prasfha,  is  misplaced,  and  in  more  than  one  respect  ex-
ceptionable.

The  argument  of  the  poem  is  as  follows.  In  the  first
canto  NAreda,  commissioned  by  Indra,  visits  CrYshna
and  incites  him  to  war  with  his  cousin,  but  mortal  enemy,
SiSuPALA  king  of  the  Chedis.  In  the  second,  CrYshna
consults  with  his  uncle  and  brother,  whether  war  should  be


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


PRAcRtT  POETRY.  81

immediately  commenced,  or  he  should  first  assist  Yu-
DHisnf'HiRA  in  completing  a  solemn  sacrifice  which  had
been  appointed  by  him.  The  result  of  the  consultation  is
in  favour  of  the  latter  measure ;  and  accordingly,  in  the
third  canto,  CrYshna  depails  for  YuDHisHf'aiRA's  ca-
pital. In  the  thirteenth  he  arrives  and  is  welcomed  by  the
PAn6avas.  In  the  following  canto  the  sacrifice  is  begun;
and  in  the  next,  Si^upAla,  impatient  of  the  divine  honours
paid  to  CrYshna,  retires  with  his  partisans  from  the  place
of  sacrifice.  A  negociation  ensues,  which  is  however  inefiec^
tual,  and  both  armies  prepare  for  action.  This  occupies  two
cantos.  In  the  eighteenth  both  armies  issue  to  the  field  of
battle,  and  the  conflict  commences.  The  battle  continues
in  the  next  canto,  which  describes  the  discomfiture  and
slaughter  of  §i§upAla's  army.  In  the  last  canto,  the
^^9  grown  desperate,  dares  CrYshna  to  the  combat.
They  engage,  and  in  the  Indian  manner  fight  with  super-
natural weapons.  SiSupAla  assails  his  enemy  with  ser-
pents, which  the  other  destroys  by  means  of  gigantic  cranes.
The  king  has  recourse  to  igneous  arms,  which  CrYshna
extinguishes  by  a  neptunian  weapon.  The  combat  is  pro-
longed with  other  miraculous  arms,  and  finally  CrYshna
slays  SisupAla  with  an  arrow.

The  following  example  is  firom  a  speech  of  SiSupAla's
ambassador,  in  reply  to  a  discourse  of  SAtyaci,  brother
of  CrYshna,  at  an  interview  immediately  preceding  the
battle.


^R>slMlPid<§rii|^ri^tl^(?tl


VOL.  II.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


82  ON  sanscbYt  and

<iM<:5llM<l:M\yR4

<i^<ini^5indOr^M:

'^  A  low  man,  poor  in  understanding,  does  not  pereeiTe
his  own  advantage:  that  he  should  not  comprehend  it
when  shown  by  others,  is  surprising.  The  wise,  of  them-
selves, know  the  approach  of  danger,  or  they  put  trust  in
others:  but  a  foolish  man  does  not  believe  information
without  personal  experience.  The  proposal  which  I  made
to  thee,  CrYshna,  was  truly  for  thy  benefit:  the  generous
are  ready  to  advise  even  their  enemies  bent  on  their  destruc-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


pracrIt  poetry.  83

tion.  Peace  and  war  have  been  ofiered  at  the  same  time
by  me;  judging  their  respective  advantagesy  thou  wilt
choose  between  them.  Yet  good  advice  addressed  to  those
whose  miderstanding  is  astray,  becomes  vain,  hke  the
beams  of  the  cold  moon  directed  towards  lakes  eager  for
the  warm  rays  of  the  swi/' 16.  39 — 43.

Another  passage  of  the  same  poem  is  here  subjoined  as
a  specimen  of  a  different  species  of  this  metre.  It  is  the
opening  of  the  last  canto,  where  SiSupAla,  impatient  of
the  discomfiture  of  his  troops  and  those  of  his  aUies,  dares
CrYshna  to  single  combat.

AupacKhandasica.

f%^iji|iflNU|<vrFT:  \
^fi|rilRrdR5h*iM^M
3TrT^<l^ri^f<<KAJ<ir<  tl

Mu&ham  uIlasitcHtri-rec^ham  uchchair

bhidura'-hhrii'-yuga-'bhisha'Aan  dadhanahy
Samitav  iti  vicraman  amriskyan,

gcUabhir,  ahwata  Chedirai  Murarim.
**  Raising  his  head,  and  with  a  countenance  terrible  by
its  forked  brow  and  wrinkled  forehead,  the  king  of  the
ChediSf  impatient  of  the  prowess  thus  displayed  in  battle,
banished  fear,  and  challenged  the  foe  of  Mur a  to  the
fight" 20.  1.

A  fiirther  example  of  the  same  metre  is  the  second
stanza  of  the  following  extract  firom  the  Ciratarjuniya*  of
BharavI .  The  remaining  stanzas  exhibit  variety  of  mea-
sure, with  two  instances  of  smgular  alliteration.

*  Arjuna  and  the  mountaiDeer.  Cir&ta  is  the  name  of  a  tribe  of
mountaineers  considered  as  barbarians.

g2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


84  ON  SANSCRtT  AND

The  subject  of  that  celebrated  poem  is  Abjuna's  obtain-
ing celestial  arms  from  Siva,  Indra,  and  the  rest  of  the
gods,  to  be  employed  against  Dury6dhana.  It  is  by  a
rigid  observance  of  severe  ansterities  in  the  first  instance,
and  afterwards  by  his  prowess  in  a  conflict  with  Siva  (in
the  disguise  of  a  mountaineer),  that  Arj  una  prevails.  This
is  the  whole  subject  of  the  poem ;  which  is  ranked  with
the  Cumara  and  Raghu  of  CALiDAsA,theiVawA<KfAlya  of
Sfif  RARSHA,  and  MAgh  a's  epic  poem,  among  the  six  excel-
lent compositions  in  Sanscrit.  The  sixth  is  the  MeghadLta,
also  ascribed  to  CAlidAsa  ;  and,  on  account  of  its  excel-
lence, admitted  among  the  great  poems  {Mahacavya),  not-
withstanding its  brevity.

^^^X"!^^  I  r^  Mr)  <8|  I

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRAcRtx  POETRY.  86

^^'\  I W^:  fiy  IrliJrTTfrPfrn

* The  stanzas,  which  contain  alliteration,  are  here  copied
in  Roman  characters.

18.  Iha  duradhigamaih

cinchid  ivagamaih
satatam  asutaram

varnayantyantaram.
Amum  ativipinam

veda  digvyapinam
puruskam  iva  param

Padmay6nih  param.
20.  Sulabhaik  sada  nayavata  'yavata

nidhUguhyacadhipa-ramaih  paramaik
amuna  dhanaih  cshitibhnta  'tibhrtta
samatitya  bhatijagatijagatu
*  Then  Arjuna,  admiring  the  mountain  in  silent  asto-
nishment, was  respectfully  addressed  by  his  conductor,
Cut^ra's  attendant :  for  even  loquacity  is  becoming  in  its
season.

' "  This  mountain  with  its  snowy  peaks  rending  the  cloudy
sky  in  a  thousand  places,  is,  when  viewed,  able  to  remove
at  once  the  sins  of  man.  An  imperceptible  something
within  it,  the  wise  ever  demonstrate  to  exist  by  proofs
difficultly  apprehended.  But  BrahmA  alone  thoroughly
knows  this  vast  and  inaccessible  mountain,  as  he  alone


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


86  ON  sanscrKt  and

knows  the  supreme  soul.  With  its  lakes  overspread  by
the  bloom  of  lotus,  and  overshadowed  by  arbours  of  creep-
ing plants  whose  foliage  and  blossoms  are  enchanting,  the
pleasing  scenery  subdues  the  hearts  of  women  who  main-
tained their  steadiness  of  mind  even  in  the  company  of  a
lover.  By  this  happy  and  well  governed  mountain,  the
earth,  filled  with  gems  of  easy  acquisition  and  great  excel-
lence, delightful  to  the  god  of  riches,  seems  to  surpass  both
rival  worlds/"* 5.16—20.

2.  MItrAsamaca.

The  metre  denommated  Matrasamaca  consists  of  four
verses,  each  of  which  contains  the  quantity  of  sixteen  short
syllables;  and  in  which  the  last  syllable  must  be  a  long
one ;  and  the  ninth  syllabic  moment  must  be  in  general
detached  from  the  eighth  and  tenth,  and  be  exhibited  of
course  by  a  short  syllable :  if  the  twelfth  be  so  Ukewise,
the  metre  is  distinguished  by  another  name ;  or  if  the  fiflh
and  eighth  remain  short,  the  denomination  is  again  changed.
The  last  sort  of  metre  is  varied  by  deviating  from  the  rule
respectmg  the  ninth  moment ;  and  another  variety  exhibits
the  fifth,  eighth,  and  twelfth  moments  by  short  syllables  f.
These  five  varieties  of  the  metre  called  MatrasamcLca  may
be  variously  combmed  in  the  same  stanza;  and  in  that

*  The  first  and  fourth  stanzas,  in  this  quotation,  are  in  the  Dru~
tavilambita  metre,  and  the  fifth  in  the  Pramitdcshard;  which  will  be
both  noticed  under  a  subsequent  head.  The  third  is  in  an  uncommon
measure  named  Chandrica  or  Cshamd,

t  The  names  of  these  four  varieties  are  1st,  f^dnavdsicd,  which  exhi-
bits the  ninth  and  twelfth  moments  by  short  syllables,  and  the  fifteenth
and  sixteenth  by  a  long:  o^® '  the  rest  beingf  optional.  2dly,  Chitrdf
exhibiting  the  fifth,  eighth,  and  ninth,  by  short  syllables,  the  fifteenth
and  sixteenth  by  a  long  one.  3dly,  Upt^hitru,  the  fifth  and  eighth
short;  the  ninth  and  tenth  long;  also  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  long.
4thly,  Vislbca;  fifth,  eighth,  and  twelfth  short;  fifteenth  and  sixteenth
long;  and  the  rest  indeterminate.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.  87

case  the  measure  is  denominated  P&daculaca;  a  name
which  is  applied  with  greater  latitude  in  Pracrit  prosody,
to  daiote  a  tetrastich  wherdn  each  verse  contains  sixteen
moments,  without  any  other  restriction  as  to  the  number
and  place  of  the  long  and  short  syllables.

A  poem  inserted  in  the  first  volume  of  Asiatic  Researches*
is  a  specimen  of  the  variety  which  this  sort  of  metre  admits.
In  a  collection  of  tales  entitled  Vetala  panchavinsatif  the
author,  SivadAsa,  has  quoted  several  stanzas  of  that  poem
intermixed  with  others,  in  which  the  measure  is  still  more
varied :  and  I  may  here  remark,  that  the  introduction  of
rhyme  into  Sanscrit  verse  is  not  peculiar  to  this  anapeestic
metre:  Jayad^a  has  adopted  it  with  success  in  several
other  sorts  of  lyric  measure,  and  it  is  frequent  in  Sanscrit
poetry  composed  in  any  species  of  Pracrit  metre.

3.  GItyAryA.
Another  species  of  metre  regulated  by  quantity  is  named
Gityarya.  Like  the  preceding,  it  is  a  tetrastich,  in  which
each  verse  consists  of  sixteen  matras  or  moments,  but  all  ex-
pressed by  short  syllables.  In  other  words  the  stanza  con-
tains sixty-four  short  syllables  distributed  into  four  verses.
From  the  mixture  of  vei'ses  of  this  description  with  others
consisting  exclusively  of  long  syllables,  arises  another  metre,
distmguished  into  two  sorts,  according  as  the  first  couplet
in  the  stanza  consists  of  short  syllables  and  the  second  of
long ;  or,  conversely,  the  first  long  and  the  second  short-f
The  Gityarya  may  be  further  varied  by  making  the  last
syllable  of  each  couplet  long  and  all  the  rest  short ;  at  the

•  Page  35.

t  The  mixed  metre,  in  which  one  couplet  of  the  stanza  contains
short  syllables  and  the  other  long,  is  termed  Sic^hd  or  ChliSd.  If  the
first  couplet  contain  the  short  syllables,  it  is  denominated  .^o^A;  but
is  called  Sattmyd  or  Anan^ancfiSd,  when  the  first  couplet  consists  of
long  syllables.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


88  ON  sanscrYt  and

same  time  reducing  both  couplets  to  twenty-nine  moments ;
or  the  first  only  to  that  measm^,  and  the  second  to  thirty*
one;  or  the  first  couplet  to  thirty,  while  the  second  contains
thirty-two.*

4.  Pracrit  measures.

The  foregoing  are  all  comprehended  under  the  general
designation  of  Jati :  and  besides  these,  which  are  noticed
in  treatises  on  Sanscrit  prosody,  other  kinds  belonging  to
the  class  of  metre  regulated  by  quantity,  are  specified  by
writers  on  Pracrit  prosody.  They  enumerate  no  less  than
forty-two  kinds,  some  of  which  comprehend  many  species
and  varieties.  The  most  remarkable,  including  some  of
those  akeady  described  as  belonging  to  Sanscrit  prosody,
are  the  following,  of  which  instances  are  frequent  in
Pracrit y  and  which  are  also  sometimes  employed  in  Sans-
crit  poetry.

A  stanza  of  four  verses,  containing  alternately  thirteen
and  eleven  moments  (and  scanned  6+4  f  3  and  6+4+1),
is  named  either  2)($Aat  (S.  Dwipafha)  ot  S6raii'ha  (S.
Saurashh^a),  according  as  the  long  verse  precedes  the  short
one,  or  the  contrary.  This  metre,  of  which  no  less  than
twenty-thi*ee  species  bear  distinct  names  (from  forty-eight
short  syllables  to  twenty-three  long  and  two  short),  is  very
commonly  used  in  Hindi  poetry.  As  an  instance  of  it,  the
work  of  BihArilal  may  be  mentioned,  which  consists  of
seven  hundred  couplets  {sat  sdi)  all  in  this  measure.  It  is
a  collection  of  descriptive  poetry;  of  which  CrYshna,
sporting  with  RAdhA.  and  the  G6pis,  is  the  hero.  The
following  example  is  from  that  celebrated  author.

*  This  metre, concemiog  which  aatborities  disagree,  is  called
ChitcUcd  or  Oiulica;  or,  according  to  the  Fr^tta  retn6cara,  Atiruchird.
t  Corruptly  Dbhra.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  89

Macaracrita  GSpala  ce

cuASalajhalacata  cana,
Dhasyd  mandhiya  gaciha  samara :
AySAht  lasata  nisana.
The  dolphin-shaped  ring,  which  glitters  in  G6pAla'8
ear,  may  be  taken  for  the  symbol  of  Cupid  suspended  at
the  gate,  while  the  god  is  lodged  in  his  heart''

To  understand  this  stanza  it  must  be  remarked,  that
the  symbol  of  the  Indian  cupid  is  the  aquatic  animal
named  Macara  (which  has  in  the  Hindu  zodiac  the  place
of  Capricorn).  It  is  here  translated  dolphin,  without  how-
ever supposing  either  the  deliverer  of  ARioN,or  any  species
of  dolphin  (as  the  term  is  appropriated  in  systems  of  natural
history),  to  be  meant.

The  Gafha  or  Gaha  has  been  already  noticed  as  a
name  of  the  Arya  measure  in  Pracrit  prosody.  Including
under  this  as  a  general  designation  the  seven  species  of
it,  with  all  their  numerous  varieties,  it  is  no  uncommon
metre  in  Pracrit  poetry.  A  collection  of  amatory  verses
ascribed  to  the  famous  monarch  SalivAhana,  comprising
seven  hundred  stanzas,*  and  purporting  to  be  a  selection
from  many  thousands  by  the  same  author,  is  exclusively
in  metre  of  this  kind.  The  introductory  verse  intimates,
that

Seven  hundred  couplets  (gahas)  are  here  selected  out
of  ten  millions  of  el^ant  couplets  composed  by  the  poet
HAla.''

HAla  is  a  known  title  of  ^AlivAhana,  and  is  so  ex-
plained both  here  and  in  a  subsequent  passage  by  the

•  From  their  number,  entitled  Sat  s<^.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


90  ON  SANSCRYt  AMD

scholiast  GangAdhara  SHAffA.  It  is  not,  however,
probable,  that  he  really  composed  those  verses :  and  it
would  be  perhaps  too  much  to  conjecture,  that  the  true
author  of  them  was  patronized  by  that  monarch,  whose
existence  as  an  Indian  sovereign  has  been  brought  in
doubt.

The  metre  called  Mahara8hira(jn  Pracnt,  MarahaHa)  is
a  tetrastich,  of  which  each  verse  contains  twenty-nine  mo^r^,
scanned  by  one  foot  of  six,  and  five  of  four ;  with  a  termi-
nating trochee.  It  has  pauses  at  the .  eighteenth  and
twenty-ninth  matras.  This  measure  is  evidently  denominated
from  the  country  which  gives  name  to  the  Marahtxtia  na-
tion :  as  another  species,  beforementioned,  takes  its  design-
ation from  Saurashira  or  S6rai^ha.*  The  circumstance  is
remarkable.

Another  tetrastich,  which  it  is  requisite  to  notice,  is
denominated  Rdlh.  Each  verse  contains  twenty-four  mo-
tria:  and  this  species  of  metre  admits  twelve  varieties,
from  twenty-four  short  syllables  to  eleven  long  and  two
short,  bearing  distmct  names*

The  Shaipadica  {Pr.  CJChappda)  is  a  stanza  of  six
verses,  airanged  in  a  tetrastich  and  couplet;  the  first
termed  Cavya,  and  the  second  Ullala.  In  the  tetrastich,
each  verse  contains  twenty-four  moments  (scanned  2  +  five
times  4+2,  or  else  6  +  four  times  4+2)  with  a  pause  at
the  eleventh  moment ;  and  each  verse  of  the  couplet  con-
tains twenty-eight  moments,  with  a  pause  at  the  fifteenth.
The  varieties  are  extremely  numerous,  according  to  the

*  The  peninsula,  between  the  gulfs  of  Cambay  and  QUch.  The
name  remains,  but  the  boundaries  of  the  province  are  more  restricted
than  in  ancient  times.  It  still,  however,  includes  the  remains  of
CrYshi&a's  city  of  Dtodrcd  ;  the  celebrated  temple  of  S6man6t''ha
so  frequently  plundered  by  the  Muhammedans ;  and  the  mountain  of
Girandra,  held  sacred  by  the  Jainas  no  less  than  by  the  followers  of
the  Ftda.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRiCRtx  POEtBY.  91

namber  and  tbe  places  of  the  long  and  short  syllables*
No  fewer  than  forty-five  variations  of  the  tetrastich^  and
seventy-one  of  the  whole  stanza,  have  separate  names.
They  are  distinguished  by  the  number  of  short  and  long
syllables  (from  152  short  to  70  long  and  12  short  in  the
whole  stanza,  or  from  96  short  to  44  long  and  8  short
in  the  tetrastich).  The  following  example  is  extracted  from
the  Pingala  mritH.

Ch'happaa  or  Shaipadica.

Pindhiiu  diAha  sannaha;  baha  uppara  pac'hc'hara  dot,
Barulhu  samadiy  rana  dhaViu. Sand  Hammira  ba'dna  lai,
U3uu  naha  ;  paha  bhamau  ;  c'hagga  r'iu  Asa  hijhatdu.
Pac'hc'harapac'h&haray  'fhellipelli,  pabbaa  appar'du.
Hammira  cajja  Jajjdlla  bkaiia, cSfianala  mahu  maha

jaldu.
Sulatana  dsa  carabala  ddi,  tejji  caUvara,  dia  chaliiu.

Jajjala,  general  of  HammIra's  forces,  taking  the
field  against  the  Mtihammedan  emperor,  says  vauntingly :

"  I  put  on  strong  armour,  placing  barbs  on  my  horse,
and  taking  leave  of  kinsmen,  I  hasten  to  the  virar.  Hav-
mg  received  the  commands  of  my  master  HammIra,
I  fly  through  the  sky;  I  pursue  the  road;  I  flourish  my
scimitar  on  the  head  of  the  foe. Amid  the  bustle  of  horse


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


92  ON  SANSCRIT  ANO

and  foot  I  scale  mountains.  In  HammIra's  cause,  Jaj*^
JALA  declares.  The  fire  of  wrath  bums  within  me ;  laying
my  sword  on  the  head  of  the  Sultan,  and  abandoning  tHis
corporeal  fi*ame,  I  ascend  to  heaven."

The  emperor,  whose  death  was  thus  vainly  promised  to
HammIra  by  his  braggart  general,  must  have  been  Sul-
tAn  Muhammed  KhiDnI,  with  whom  he  is  stated  to
have  been  contemporary,  and  who  reigned  from  A.D.  1326
to  1351.*  HammIra  was  sovereign  of  Sacambhari,
which,  with  unfeigned  deference  for  the  opinion  of  Captain
WiLFORD  on  a  geographical  question,  I  still  think  to  be
Sambker  rf  and  for  this  simple  reason,  that  the  culinary
salt  brought  from  the  lakes  of  Sambher  is  named  in  Sans^
crity  Sacambhariya  lavana,  answering  to  the  Hindi  Sam-
bher  tiun.  It  is,  however,  proper  to  remark,  that  maps
exhibit  a  place  of  the  name  of  Sambhere  between  Ujjayani
and  Indor.

The  UtcaxiVha  is  a  stanza  of  six  verses,  each  comprising
eleven  moments  (scanned  4+4+3).  In  admits  eight
species  from  sixty-six  short  syllables  to  twenty-eight  long
and  ten  short.

The  Cunclalica  is  composed  of  one  stanza  of  the  metre
named  D6ha,  followed  by  another  in  the  measui-e  called
Il6la:  the  entire  stanza  consequently  comprises  eight
verses.  In  this  species  of  metre,  rhyme  and  alliteration
are  so  appropriate  ornaments,  that  it  admits  the  repetition
of  a  complete  hemistich  or  even  an  entire  verse :  as  in  the
following  example  extracted  from  the  Pingala  vrtttu

Cunckdica  or  Cun^l'ia.

Dh6lla  maria  Dhilli  maka,  muck'hia  Mech'ha  sarira,
Pura  Jajjalla  malla  bara,  chalia  bira  Hammira.

♦  As.  Rep.  vol.  ix.,  p.  192.  t  As.  Res.  vol.  vii.,  p.  511.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


PRAcRtT POETRY.  93

CkaRa  lira  HamnAra,  paa  bhara  metni  campai.
Diga  maga  Aaha  andhara  dhidi  sdraha  rahajhampau
Diga  maga  naha  andhara  ana. Ohurasanaca  6Ua
Davali,  damasi  vippac*hc'ha :  mam  Dhillt  maha  dhSlla.

Having  made  the  barbarians  feint  at  the  sound  of  the
dram  beaten  in  the  midst  of  Dhillt  and  preceded  by  Jaj-
JALA,  eminent  above  athlets,  the  heroHAMMfRA  advances;
and  as  the  hero  HammIra  advances,  the  earth  trembles
under  his  feet.  The  cloud  of  dust,  raised  by  the  march  of
his  multitudes,  obscures  the  chariot  of  the  sun.  Darkness
spreads  vrith  the  march  of  his  multitudes.  The  hostages
of  the  E^orasanian  are  slain;  the  foe  is  slaughtered,  and
the  drum  is  beat  in  the  midst  of  DhillV^

A  stanza  of  nine  verses,  composed  of  one  of  five  with  a
tetastrich  of  the  metre  called  D6ha  subjoined  to  it,  is
denominated  BaclAha.  Here  the  stanza  of  five  contains
three  verses  of  fifteen  moments  each,  with  two  of  twelve
and  eleven  interposed.  The  distribution  of  the  feet,  toge-
ther with  a  restriction  as  to  the  terminating  one,  varies  in
each  verse :  and  a  difference  in  the  regulation  of  the  feet
gives  rise  to  six  varieties  which  have  distinct  appellations.

The  Chatushpadica  (Pr.  Chaupaia  or  Chaupai)  is  a
stanza  of  sixteen  verses  distributed  into  four  tetrastichs,  in
which  each  verse  contains  thirty  moments  (scanned  seven


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


94  ON  sanscrYt  and

times  4+2),  and  terminated  by  a  long  syllable.  This  mea-
sure is  of  very  frequent  use  in  the  poetry  of  the  modem
languages.  The  Ramayana  of  TulaSIdAsa,  in  seven
cantos,  a  poem  held  in  great  estimation  by  Hindus  of  the
middle  tribes,  is  composed  chiefly  in  a  similar  metre  under
the  same  name  {Chaupai\  and  containing  the  same  num-
ber of  verses  (sixteen)  in  the  stanza.  It  alternates  with  the
D6ha,  and  very  rarely  gives  place  in  that  poem  to  any
other  metre.

In  this  metre  the  stanza  contains  the  greatest  number  of
verses  of  any  admitted  into  Pracrit  prosody.  The  other
measures  regulated  by  quantity  are  tetrastichs,  except  the
Ghaiia  and  certain  other  couplets  noticed  at  the  foot  of  the
page;*  some  of  which  might  have  been  ranked  with  more
propriety  under  the  next  head  of  uniform  metre.

One  other  measure  which  is  placed  in  this  class,  but
which  belongs  rather  to  another,  remains  to  be  noticed.
It  is  an  irregular  stanza  of  four  verses,  contdning  alter-
nately seventeen  and  eighteen  syllables,  with  no  regulation
of  their  length  or  of  the  quantity  of  the  verse  or  stanza*
It  is  termed  Gandhoy  or  in  Pracrit  Oandhana.

The  rest  of  the  Pracrit  metres  may  be  sought  in  the
synoptical  tables  subjoined  to  this  essay.

The  present  may  be  a  proper  place  for  noticing  a  class  of
poetry  which  has  been  even  more  cultivated  in  the  Pricrit
and  provincial  languages  than  in  Sanscrit.  I  allude  to
the  erotic  poetry  of  the  Hindus.

•  The  Ghattd  and  Ghattdnanda,  coDsistiug  of  two  verses  of  thirty-
one  mdtrds  each.  In  the  first  species  the  paases  are  after  the  tenth
and  eighteenth  mdtrds ;  in  the  other  after  the  eleventh  and  eighteenth;
There  is  also  a  slight  difference  in  the  distrihation  of  the  feet  (7
times  4+3  short;  and  6+3  times  3+5+6+3+3  short)  The  Dwi-
padicd  has  in  each  verse  twenty-eight  m^^  (6+  five  times  4+1  long).
The  Sie'ha  containing  the  like  ntunber,  the  Chanjd  with  forty-otie
m4irde  to  the  verse,  and  the  Mdld  with  forty-five,  are  cooplett ;  bat
the  feet  are  strictly  regulated.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


frAcrKt  poetry.  95

On  its  general  character  I  shall  briefly  observe^  that  it  is
free  fipom  the  grievous  defects  of  the  Hindi  poems  composed
in  the  style  and  metre  of  Persian  verse ;  but  it  wants  ele-
vation of  sentiment  and  simplicity  of  diction.  The  passion,
which  it  pictures,  is  sensual,  but  the  language  refined,  wtdi
some  tenderness  in  the  expression  and  in  the  tbooghts*
Among  the  most  celebrated  poems  in  this  class  may  be
mentioned  the  ChaurapanchaiiccLy  com^/ming  fifty  stanzas,
by  Chaura,  and  Amaru  sataca^  containing  twice  that
number,  by  Amaru.  The  first  is  supposed  to  be  uttered
by  the  poet  Chaura,  who,  being  detected  in  an  intrigue
with  a  king's  daughter,  and  condemned  to  death,  triumphs
in  the  recollection  of  his  successful  love.  The  other,  which
is  a  collection  of  uncomiected  stanzas  on  amatory  topics,  is
reputed  to  be  the  work  of  the  great  Sancara  Acharta,
oomposed  by  him  in  his  youth,  before  he  devoted  himself  to
the  study  of  <lieology.

Some  of  the  commentators  on  this  poem  have  attempted
to  explain  it  in  a  devout  and  mystical  sense,  on  the  same
principle  upon  which  Jayad^va's  lyric  poems  are  inter-
preted as  bearing  a  religious  meaning.  The  interpretation,
however,  is  too  strained  to  be  admitted ;  and  though
J  ATA  diva's  intention  may  have  been  devout,  and  his
meaning  spiritual,  Amaru,  or  whoever  was  the  true  author
of  the  work  bearing  this  name,  is  cleariy  the  lover  of  an
earthly  mistress.

The  most  singular  compositions  in  this  class  of  poetry,
and  for  which  chiefly  a  notice  of  it  has  been  here  intro-
duced, are  those  in  which  the  subject  is  treated  with  the
studied  arrangement  and  formal  precision  of  the  schools.
I  shall  instance  the  RasamanjaA  of  BhAnudatta  miSra
in  Sanscrit^  and  the  works  of  M atirAma  and  Sundara
in  Hindi. Mete  various  descriptions  of  lovers  and  mis-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


96  ON  SANSCRtT  AND

tresses  distinguished  by  temper,  age,  and  circumstances,
are  systematically  classed  and  logically  defined,  with  the
seriousness  and  elaborate  precision  of  scholastic  writers.
As  ridicule  was  not  intended,  these  poems  are  not  humorous
but  trifling :  and  I  should  not  have  dwelt  on  the  subject,
if  their  number,  and  the  recurrence  of  them  in  different  lan-
guages of  India,  were  not  evidence  that  the  national  taste
is  consulted  in  such  compositions.

III.  Varha  vritta ;  metre regulated  by  the  number  of
syllables.

The  next  sort  of  metre  is  that  which  is  measured  by  the
number  of  syllables ;  it  is  denominated  Acsharach'handas
or  Variia  vrttta,  in  contradistinction  to  the  preceding  kinds
which  are  regulated  by  quantity ;  and  it  may  be  subdivided
into  three  sorts,  according  as  the  verses  composing  the
stanza  are  all  similar,  or  the  alternate  alike,  or  all  dissi-
milar.

This  also  is  a  stanza  of  four  verses  (padas),  each  con-
taining an  equal  number  of  syllables,  the  length  of  which
is  regulated  by  special  rules.  The  number  of  syllables
varies  from  twenty-four  to  a  hundred  and  four,  in  each
strophe :  this  is,  from  six  to  twenty-six  in  each  verse.
There  are  indeed  names  in  Pracrit  prosody  for  verses  from
one  to  five  syllables,  and  instances  of  Sanscrit  verse  con-
taining a  higher  number  than  above  stated,  viz.  from
twenty-seven  to  one  less  than  a  thousand.  But  these  consti-
tute distinct  classes  of  metre.  Between  the  limits  first-men-
tioned, twenty-one  kinds  receive  different  appellations  appro-
priated to  the  number  of  syllables  contained  in  the  stanza.

Each  kind  comprehends  a  great  variety  of  possible
metres,  according  to  the  different  modes  in  which  long  and
short  syllables,  as  well  as  pauses,  may  be  distributed;  and


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRACRtT  POETRY.  97

since  the  four  quarters  of  each  stanza  may  be  either  all
alike,  or  only  the  alternate  similar,  or  all  different,  the
variety  of  possible  metres  is  almost  infinite.  Pingala,
however,  gives  directions  for  computing  the  number  of
species,  and  for  finding  their  places,  or  that  of  any  single
one,  in  a  regular  enumeration  of  them ;  or  conversely,  the
metre  of  any  species  of  which  the  place  is  assigned:  and
rules  have  been  given  even  for  calculating  the  space
which  would  be  requisite  for  writing  down  all  the  various
species.

In  the  first  class  or  kind,  wherein  the  verse  consists  of
six  syllables,  sixty-four  combinations  are  computed  on  the
syllables  of  each  verse ;  4,096*  on  those  of  the  half  stanza;
and  16,777,2liSt  on  the  twenty-four  syllables  which  con-
stitute the  complete  stanza  of  this  class.  In  the  last  of
the  twenty-one  kinds,  67,108,864  combinations  are  com-
puted on  twenty-six  syllables  within  each  verse;  nearly
4,503,621,000,000,000,  on  fifly-two  syllables;  and  more
than  20,282,388,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,  on  a
hundred  and  four  syllables  which  form  the  stanza. ;{:

The  different  sorts,  which  have  been  used  by  poets,  are
few  in  comparison  with  the  vast  multitude  of  possible
metres.  Still  they  are  too  numerous  to  be  all  described  at
full  length.  I  shall  therefore  select,  as  specimens,  those
sorts  of  metre  which  are  most  frequently  employed,  or

*  Fiz,  64  aniform  and  4,032  half  equal.

t  Viz.  64  uoiform,  4,032  half  equal,  and  16,773,120  unequal  or  dis-
similar.

X  A  mode  of  calculating  the  possible  varieties  of  metre  is  also  taught
in  the  HUdvaiiy  a  treatise  of  arithmetic  and  geometry,  by  BhIsoara.
This  truly  learned  astronomer  was  also  a  poet,  and  his  mathematical
works  are  composed  in  highly  polished  metre.  If  the  reader  figure
to  himself  Euclid  in  Alcaic  measure,  Diophantus  in  anapaests,  or
the  Almagest  versified  with  all  the  variety  of  Horatian  metre,  he  will
form  an  adequate  notion  of  this  incongruity.

VOL.  II.  H


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


98  ON  sanscrYt  and

which  require  particular  notice;  referring  for  the  rest  to  the
subjoined  tables,  in  which  the  various  kinds  are  succinctly
exhibited  by  single  letters  descriptive  of  feet  scann^  in  the
Indian  and  in  the  Latin  mode.

In  the  best  Sanscrit  poems,  as  those  of  CAlidAsa,
BhAravI,  SrIhabsha,  MAgha,  &c.  the  poet  usually
adheres  to  the  same,  or  at  least  to  similar  metre,  throughout
^;he  whole  of  the  canto;*  excepting  towards  the  close  of
it,  where  the  metre  is  usually  changed  in  the  last  two  or
three  stanzas,  apparently  with  the  intention  of  rendering
the  conclusion  more  impressive.  Sometimes,  indeed,  the
metre  is  more  irregular,  being  changed  several  times  within
the  same  canto,  or  even  altering  with  every  stanza.

The  BagJiava panclaviyay  by  CAviRAjA,t  is  an  instance
of  a  complete  poem,  every  canto  of  which  exhibits  variety
of  metre.  This  extraordinary  poem  is  composed  with
studied  ambiguity ;  so  that  it  may,  at  the  option  of  the
reader,  be  interpreted  as  relating  the  history  of  RAma  and
other  descendants  of  Dasarat'ha,  or  that  of  Yudhish-
f'HiRA  and  other  sons  of  PAn6u.  The  example  of  this
singular  style  of  composition  had  been  set  by  Subandhu
in  the  story  of  Vasavadatt&f  and  BANABHAff a  in  his
unfinished  work  entitled  CadambaA;  as  is  hinted  by  Ca-
virAja.  Both  these  works,  which  like  the  Ddsacumara
of  DANiSi^  are  prose  compositions  in  poetical  language,
and  therefore  reckoned  among  poems,  do  indeed  exhibit
continual  instances  of  terms  and  phrases  employed  in'  a
double  sense :  but  not,  like  the  Raghava  panAaviya^  two
distinct  stories  told  in  the  same  words.

*  Writers  on  rhetoric  (as  the  author  of  the  Sdhitpa  darpaha  and
others)  lay  it  down  as  a  maxim,  that  the  metre  and  style  should  in
general  he  uniform  in  each  canto :  hut  they  admit  occasional  devia-
tions in  regard  to  the  metre.

t  So  the  author  has  called  himself.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  99

The  foUowmg  passage  will  sufficiently  explain  the  man-
ner in  which  the  poem  is  composed.  The  first  stanza  is  of
the  mixed  sort  of  metre  named  Upajati^  which  will  be  im-
mediately described ;  the  second  is  in  one.  of  the  measures
composing  it,  termed  UpSndravajra.

60.  Matuh  iriyan  sandadhad  Indumatyah

ilaghyah  saratcala  iv6Aupancteh^
AsaUj  prajapalaruidcLCshabhavadj

Ajasya  chctcre  manasah  pram6dam.
51.  Vichitravvryasya  divan  gatasya

pituh  sa  rajyam  pratipadya  balyiy
Purim  AySdhyaniy  Dhritrashirabhadram^
sa  kastisSbham  suc^ham  adhyuvasa.
"  Having  the  beauty  of  his  mother  IndumatI, and
admirable  like  the  dewy  season  when  it  enjoys  the  beauty
of  the  stars,  he  (DaSarat'ha)  made  glad  the  mind  of
Aja*  by  his  skill  in  the  protection  of  the  people. Suc-
ceeding in  youth  to  the  kingdom  of  his  variously  valiant
father,  who  departed  for  heaven,  he  dwelt  happily  in  the

•  Aja  was  father,  and  iNDUMAxf  mother  of  DaIarat^ha.
h2

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


100  ON  sanscrKt  and

city  of  AySdhy&f  which  was  adorned  with  elephants  and
upheld  the  prosperity  of  his  realm."

Otherwise  interpreted  the  same  passage  signifies,

^'  Having  the  beauty  of  his  mother,  and  admirable  Uke
the  dewy  season  when  it  enjoys  the  beauty  of  the  stars  and
of  the  moon,  he  (PAn6u)  made  glad  the  heart  of  tl\e  unborn
god  by  his  skill  in  the  protection  of  creatures.  Succeeding
in  youth  to  the  kingdom  of  his  father  ViCHiTRAviRYA*
who  departed  for  heaven,  he  dwelt  happily  in  the  peaceful
city  of  HasHnapura  auspiciously  inhabited  by  DhrYta-
RAsHf  RA." 1.  50.  and  51.

To  proceed  with  the  subject.  'In  general  the  different
sorts  of  verse  which  are  contained  in  the  subjoined  synop-
tical table  of  uniform  metre,  are  used  singly,  and  the  stanza
is  consequently  regular :  but  some  of  the  species,  differing
little  from  each  other,  are  intermixed.  Thus  the  Indravajra^
measured  by  a  dactyl  between  two  epitrites  (third  and
second),  and  the  Upendravyray  which  begins  with  a  diiam-
bus,  may  be  mixed  in  the  same  stanza.  This  sort  of  mixt
metre  (an  example  of  which  has  been  just  now  exhibited)
is  denominated  Upajati:  it  of  course  admits  fourteen
variations  ;t  or,  with  the  regular  stanzas,  sixteen.  The
reUef  which  it  affords  firom  the  rigorous  laws  of  the  uniform
stanza,  renders  it  a  favourite  metre  with  the  best  poets.  It
has  been  much  employed  by  CAlidAsa,  in  whose  poem  on
the  birth  and  marriage  of  PArvatI,  three  out  of  the  seven
cantos  which  compose  it  are  in  this  metre;  as  are  eight
out  of  nineteen  in  his  heroic  poem  on  the  glory  of  the  race
of  Raghu.

The  last  mentioned  work,  which  is  entitled  Raghuvajisc^

*  ViCHiTBAvfRYA  was  husband  of  Plif^u's  mother.

t  They  have  distinct  names,  which  are  enumerated  in  the  Ch^han-
d6m&rtaii3ay  cited  by  the  commentator  on  the  Vr^Ha  Retndcara :  as
MaMprahhd  CanHmati,  &c.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.  101

and  is  among  the  mostBdmired  compositions  in  the  Sanscrit
tongue,  contains  the  history  of  RAma  and  of  his  predeces-
sors and  successors,  from  DiLiPA  father  of  Raghu,  to
AoNivBRN A  a  slothful  pnnce  who  was  succeeded  by  his
widow  and  posthumous  son.  The  first  eight  cantos  relate
chiefly  to  Raghu,  with  whose  history  that  of  his  father
DilIpa,  and  of  his  son  Aja,  is  nearly  connected.  The
next  eight  concern  RAma,  whose  story  is  in  like  manner
intimately  c(xmected  with  that  of  his  fitther  DaSarat'ha
and  of  his  sons  Cv&a  and  Lava.  The  three  concluding
cantos  regard  the  descendants  of  CuSa,  from  Atit'hi  to
Agniverna,  both  of  whom  are  noticed  at  considerable
length ;  each  being  the  subject  of  a  single  canto,  in  which
thdo*  characters  are  strongly  contrasted ;  while  the  inter-
mediate princes,  to  the  number  of  twenty,  are  crowded
into  the  intervening  canto,  which  is  little  else  than  a  dry
genealogy.

The  adventures  of  RAma  are  too  well  known  to  require
any  detailed  notice  in  this  place. The  poet  has  selected
the  chief  circumstances  of  his  story,  and  narrates  them
nearly  as  they  are  told  in  the  mythological  poems  and
theogonies,  but  with  far  greater  poetical  embellishments.
Indeed,  the  general  style  of  the  poems  esteemed  sacred  (not
excepting  from  this  censure  the  R&mayana  of  VAlmIci,)
is  flat,  difiuse,  and  no  less  deficient  in  ornament  than
abundant  in  repetitions; and  it  is  for  this  reason  that
examples  have  been  selected,  for  the  present  essay,  ex-
clusively fiom  the  celebrated  profane  poems. RAma's
achievements  have  been  sung  by  the  profane  as  frequently
as  by  the  sacred  poets. His  story  occupies  a  considerable
place  in  many  of  the  Pur  anas  y  and  is  the  sole  object  of
VAlmIci's  poem,  and  of  another  entitled  Adhyatma  Ra-
mayana,  which  is  ascribed  to  VyAsa. A  fragment  of  a
Ramayana,  attributed  to  BAUDuAvANAis  current  in  the
southern part  of  the  Indian peninsula; and  the great

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


102  ON  sanscrYt  and

philosophical  poem,  usually  cited  under  the  title  of  YSga
vasishi^ha,  is  a  part  of  a  Mamayana,  comprising  the  edu-
cation of  the  devout  hero.  Among  pro&ne  poems  on  the
same  subject,  the  Raghuvania  and  BhaHicavya  with  the
Raghavap&nAi'dya  beforemendoned,  are  the  most  esteemed
in  Sanscrit,  as  the  Ramayana  of  TulaSIdAsa  and  Rcarna-
cAandrica  of  C^^avadAsa  are  in  Hindi.  The  minor
poets,  who  have  employed  themselves  on  the  same  topic,
both  in  Sanscrit  and  in  the  Pracrit  and  provincial  dialects,
are  by  far  too  numerous  to  be  here  specified.

The  other  poem  of  CAlidAsa  abovementioned,  though
entitled  Cumara  sambhava  or  origin  of  CumAra  (who  is
son  of  PAbvatI),  closes  with  PArvatI's  wedding.  It  has
the  appearance  of  being  incomplete;  and  a  tradition  runs,
that  it  originally  consisted  of  twenty-two  books.  However,
it  relates  the  birth  of  the  goddess  as  daughter  of  mount
Himalaya,  and  celebrates  the  religious  austerities  by
which  she  gained  Siva  for  her  husband ;  after  Candarpa,
or  Cupid,  had  failed  in  inspiring  Siva  with  a  passion  for
her,  and  had  perished  (for  the  time)  by  the  fiery  wrath  of
the  god.  The  personages,  not  excepting  her  father,  the
sno¥^  mountain,  are  described  with  human  manners  and  the
human  form,  with  an  exact  observance  of  Indian  costume.

The  following  stanza  from  a  poem  in  mixed  language
upon  the  same  subject  (the  birth  of  CumAra),  is  selected
as  a  further  example  of  Upajati  metre,  and  as  a  specimen
of  the  manner  in  which  Sanscrit  and  Pracrit  are  some-
times intermixed.  It  is  quoted  for  that  purpose  in  tlie
Pingalavritti.

Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.  103

Balah  cunutrah;  sa  ch^ha-munAa-dhari. Upad-hina

hamu  eccornari.
Ahar-iiiiam  c^hai  visham  bhic*h&ri, Gatir  bhavitri
cila  ci  ham&ri.

Diviy  grieving  over  her  infant  son  CumAra  or  Scanda,
says,

'^  The  child  is  an  infant,  but  he  has  six  mouths  [to  be
fed]:  I  am  a  helpless,  solitary  female:  night  and  day  my
mendicant  husband  swallows  poison :  what  resource  is  there,
alas,  for  me?"

An  instance  of  the  same  measure  used  in  the  Sfarahaiia
(Maharaahira)  language  is  quoted  by  the  commentator  on
the  Vritta  retnacara.  It  appears,  however,  from  the
rhymes,  that  the  verse  is  there  subdivided  by  a  pause  after
the  fifth  syllable.

The  variety  of  the  Upajati  metre  is  increased  by  the
further  mixture  of  two  sorts  of  iambic  measure  named
Vajisasfha  and  Indravansa.  The  first  is  composed  of  a
choriambus  between  two  diiambi ;  in  the  second,  the  first
dissyllable  is  a  spondee  instead  of  an  iambic.  Instances  of
this  mixt  metre  occur  in  VALMici's  Ramdyana^  in  the
Sri  Bhagavata  purana,f  and  in  a  metaphysical  and  theo-
logical drama  entitled  PrabSdha  chandr6daya.%

The  follovnng  example  firom  the  drama  now  mentioned,
exhibits  the  combination  of  those  four  sorts  of  metre  in  a
single  stanza.

'i'Klui^ijn+yOPKt'M'ill  1

*  In  a  passage  of  the  Sundara  cdMa,

t  Book  10th.

X  AmoDg  the  persons  of  this  drama  are  the  passions  and  vices
(pride,  anger,  avarice,  &c.)  with  the  virtues  (as  pity  and  patience),
and  other  abstract  notions,  some  of  which  constitute  very  strange
personifications. The  author  was  GaiSHirA  PAifi6iTA.

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


104  ON  sanscrTt  and

Vidya-^abSdhSdaya-janma-'bhiimir,

VaranoA  mucti-puri  niratyaya
Atah  culSchchhedorTndhim  vidhitsur

niv(istum  atrecVhati  nityam  eva  sah.

"  VaraAasi,  the  indestructible  city  of  eternal  salTation^.is
the  native  land  of  science  and  intellect:  hence,  one  desirous
of  observing  the  precepts  by  which  a  continuance  of  fiunily
is  cut  off  [and  final  beatitude  obtained],  is  solicitous  to
dwell  there  continually."

The  same  term  (JJpajat%)y  as  descriptive  of  mixt  metre,
has  been  also  applied  to  the  intermixture  of  two  spondaic
measures  named  Vat6rmi  and  Salini;  which  are  very  simi-
lar, the  first  having  an  anapaest,  the  other  a  cretic,  bd;ween
a  dispondeus  and  second  epitritus,  with  a  pause  at  the
fourth  syllable.  Analogous  to  the  first  of  these  are  the
Rafh6ddhata  and  Swagata,  measured  by  an  anapsBst
preceded  by  two  trochees,  and  followed  in  the  one  by  two
iambics,  and  in  the  other  by  an  ionic.  These  and  the  pre*
ceding  are  metres  in  very  common  use  with  the  best  poets ;
and  instances  of  them  will  occur  in  subsequent  extracts,
chosen  for  the  sake  of  other  measures  with  which  they  are
joined.

The  several  sorts  of  metre  above  described  are,  like  the
two  last,  also  employed  separately :  for  instance,  the  first
cantos  of  the  Naiskadhtya  of  SrIhabsha,  and  Ciratar-
juniya  of  BhAravI,  as  well  as  that  of  the  epic  poem  of
MAgha,  are  in  the  iambic  measure  called  Vansasfha;
which  recurs  again  in  other  parts  of  the  same  poems ;  espe-
cially in  the  Cirata,  of  which  four  books  out  of  eighteen
are  in  this  measure.

The  first  of  the  works  just  now  mentioned  is  a  poem

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


pracrYt  poetry.  106

in  twenty-two  cantos,  on  the  marriage  of  Nala,  king  of
Nis/uidha,  and  DamayantI,  daughter  of  BhIma,  king  of
Viderbha.  It  is  a  favourite  poem  on  a  fevourite  subject ;
and  though  confessedly  not  free  from  faults,  is  by  many
esteemed  the  most  beautiful  composition  in  the  Sanscrit
language.  The  marriage  of  Nala  and  DamayantI,  his
loss  of  his  kingdom  by  gaming,  through  the  fraudulent
devices  of  Cali  disguised  in  the  human  form,  his  desertion
of  his  wife  and  his  transformation,  her  distresses,  her
discovery  of  him,  and  his  restoration  to  his  proper  form
and  to  his  throne,  are  related  in  another  poem  already
noticed  under  the  title  of  NalSdaya.  Their  adventures
likewise  constitute  an  episode  of  the  Mahabharatay*  and
are  the  subject  of  a  novel  in  prose  and  verse,  by  Trivi-
CRAMA  BHAff A,  cutitied  Nolackamp&f  or  Damayanti
cat^ha.  SrI HARSH a's  poem,  though  containing  much
beautiful  poetry  according  to  the  Indian  taste,  is  very
barren  of  incident.  It  brings  the  story  no  further  than  the
marriage  of  Nala  and  DamayantI,  and  the  description
of  their  mutual  affection  and  happiness,  which  continues
notwithstanding  the  machinations  of  CalL  The  romantic
and  interesting  adventures  subsequent  to  the  marriage,  as
told  in  the  NaUdaya^  are  here  wholly  omitted ;  while  the
poet,  with  a  degree  of  licentiousness,  which  is  but  too  well
accommodated  to  the  taste  of  his  countrymen,  indulges  in
glowing  descriptions  of  sensual  love.

The  following  example  of  Vamasfka  metre  is  from  the
intix)duction  of  the  Naishadhiya.  To  render  the  author's
meaning  intelligible,  it  may  be  necessary  to  premise,  that
the  mere  celebrating  of  Nala  and  DamayantI  is  reckoned

•  From  the  53d  to  the  79th  chapters  of  the  f^ana  parva.

t  A  composition,  in  which  prose  and  verse  are  intermixed,  is  called
Champu,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


106  ON  sanscrYt  and

sufficient  to  remore  the  taint  of  a  sinfiil  age>  and  is  so
declared  in  a  passage  of  the  Mahabkarata.

Vaniast'ha  metre.

Pavitram  atratanutejagad  yvge,

smrita,  rasa-cshalajmyeva  yat,  cafha;

Cafkam  na  sa  mad-giram,  avilam  api,
swasevinim  evUy  pavitrayishyati.

"  How  should  a  story,  which,  being  remembered,  purifies
the  world  in  the  present  age,  as  it  were  by  an  actual  ablu-^
tion,  fail  of  purifying  my  voice,  however  faulty,  when  em-
ployed on  this  narration/* 1.  3.

In  the  following  passage  from  BnARAvi's  Ciratarjuniya,
the  last  stanza  is  an  example  of  the  Malini  metre,  and  the
preceding  one  of  the  Pushpitagra;  which  will  be  noticed
further  on :  all  the  rest  are  in  ihe^Vaniasfha  measure.  It
is  the  close  of  a  reproachful  speech  of  DraupadI  to  her
eldest  husband,  YuDHiSHf 'hira,  inciting  him  to  break  the
compact  with  Dury6dhana,  by  which  the  PAn6avas
had  engaged  to  remain  twelve  years  in  exile.

M  Priori;  W>fHHIvnfr:  t|  ^\9"n


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRAcRtT  POETRY.  107

>i1*il<dl|wnilUl<^s«lRl'il-
HNr?!l^fNW(X^<^llr|ri;

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


108  ON  sanscrKt  and

"  I  do  not  comprehend  this  thy  prudence ;  for  opinions
are  indeed  various :  but  anguish  forces  itself  on  my  mind
when  considering  thy  extreme  distress.  Thou,  who  didst
formerly  repose  on  a  costly  couch,  and  wert  wakened  with
auspicious  praise  and  song,  now  sleepest  on  the  ground
strewed  with  pungent  grass,  and  art  roused  from thy


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  109

slumbers  by  the  dismal  bowlings  of  shakals.  Thy  feet,
which,  resting  on  a  footstool  adorned  with  precious  stones,
were  tinged  by  the  dust  of  the  blossoms  in  the  chaplets
worn  by  prostrate  mcmarchs,  now  tread  the  wilderness,
where  the  tips  of  sharp  grass  are  cropped  by  the  teeth  of
stags.  Thy  person,  O  king,  which  formerly  gained. beauty
by  feeding  on  the  blessed  remnant  of  the  feast  given  to
holy  men,  now  wastes  with  thy  glory,  while  thou  feedest
on  the  fruits  of  the  forest.  That  thou  art  reduced  to  this
condition  by  the  act  of  thy  enemies,  harrows  up  my  soul.
To  the  valiant,  whose  courage  is  unsubdued  by  the  foe,
misfortune  is  a  triumph.  Relinquishing  peace,  O  king,  be
active,  and  rouse  thy  energy  for  the  slaughter  of  thy  foes*
Placid  saints,  not  kings,  attain  perfection,  disanning  their
enemies  by  patience.  If  persons  such  as  thee,  whose  ho-
nour IS  their  wealth,  who  are  leaders  of  the  brave,  submit
to  such  insupportable  disgrace,  then  is  magnanimity  de-
stroyed without  resource.  If,  divested  of  courage,  thou
deem  submission  the  means  of  lasting  ease,  then  quit  thy
bow,  the  symbol  of  a  sovere^,  and  becoming  a  hermit,
feed  here  with  oblations  the  purifying  flame.  Adherence
to  the  compact  is  not  good  for  thee,  valiant  prince,  while
thy  foes  compass  thy  disgrace;  for  kings,  ambitious  of
victory,  scruple  not  the  use  of  stratagem  in  treating  with
enemies.  Thee,  who  by  force  of  ikte  and  time  art  now  sunk
in  the  deep  ocean'  of  calamity,  dull  with  diminished  splen-
dour, and  slow  to  enterprise,  may  fortune  again  attend,  as
thou  risest  like  the  sun  with  the  new  bom  day,  dispelling
hostile  gloom." 1.  37—46.

To  return  to  the  enumeration  of  analogous  sorts  of
metre.  A  true  spondaic  metre,  named  Vidyunmala,  con-
sisting of  four  spondees,  with  a  pause  in  the  middle  of  the
verse,  which  virtually  divides  the  tetrastich  into  a  stanza  of
eight,  is  often  mixed,  as  before  observed,  with  the  metre


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


110  ON  sanscrYt  and

termed  Gityarya,  contaimng  the  same  quantity  in  a  gneater
number  of  syllables.

Other  measures,  also  contaimng  the  same  quantity  but
in  a  greater  number  of  syllables,  occur  among  the  species
of  uniform  metre.  The  subjoined  note*  exhibits  several
species,  in  which  the  vei-se  is  divided  by  the  position  of  the
pauses  into  two  parts  equal  in  quantity,  and  some  of  them
equal  in  number  of  syllables.  Further  instances  are  also
stated  in  the  notes,  of  metre  containing  the  same  quantity
similarly  reducible  to  equal  feet.t  Some  of  the  species  of
metre  which  contain  a  greater  number  of  syllables,  are
reducible,  in  conformity  to  the  position  of  their  pauses,  to
this  class.  X

All  these  varieties  of  metre  have  a  great  analogy  to  the
Matrasanuica  and  other  species  before  described,  which
similarly  contain  the  quantity  of  sixteen  short  syllables  or
eight  long,  reducible  to  four  equal  feet.

Among  the  kinds  of  metre  described  at  the  foot  of  the
preceding  paragraphs,  the  DSdhacay  TSiaca,  and  Pra--
mitacshara  are  the  most  common.  A  stanza  in  the  ana-
peestic  measure  named  Prandtacshara,  in  which  each  verse
exhibits  alliteration  at  its  close,  has  been  already  quoted

*  Rttcmavafi  or  Champacamald,  composed  of  alternate  dactyls  and
spondees ;  Mattd,  measured  by  three  spondees  with  four  short  sylla-
bles before  the  last;  Pa^va^  containing  a  spondee  and  dactyl,  and
an  anapaest  and  spondee ;  Bhramaravilasitd,  measured  by  two  spon-
dees, four  short  syllables  and  an  anapaest;  Jdlbddhatagatd,  composed
of  alternate  amphibrachys  and  anapaests;  and  several  other  species,  as
Ckmima  vichiira,  Mahiguiia  nicara,  Cudmala  dantif  Lakmdy  &c.

t  DddhacGf  composed  of  three  dactyls  and  a  spondee ;  Tdtaca,  con-
taining four  anapaests ;  Pramitdcshard,  measured  by  three  anapaests
with  an  amphibrachys  for  the  second  foot ;  Mold,  a  species  of  Chan^
dravartd,  and  some  others.

X  Thus  MaUdcriSd  combines  two  simple  kinds,  the  VidyunmSUd  and
Chandravartd,  So  Crmmchapadd  is  composed  of  two  species  before-
mentioned,  the  Ckampacamdld  and  MMgttha,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.  Ill

Scorn  the  fifth  canto  of  the  Ciratarjumya  of  BhAravI.
The  spedmen  of  anapaestic  measure  TSiaeay  which  will  be
here  cited  from  the  close  of  the  NalSdaya,  is  a  further
instance  of  alliteration  introduced  into  every  stanza  of  this
singular  poem.

T6fACA,

Arisanhatir  asya  vaneshu  sucham

padam  hpadam  apad  am&  'padami.
Suc^hadan  cha  yafhaiva  janaya  Harim
yatam  ayatamaya  tarn  ayata  Ma.

'^  The  luckless  and  despondent  crowd  of  his  foes  found
in  the  forests  a  calamitous  place  of  sorrow ;  and  prosperity
was  constant  to  him,  who  gave  happiness  to  a  sincerely
affectionate  people,  as  she  clings  to  Hari,  who  blesses  the
guileless." 4.  46.

It  has  been  before  said,  that,  in  several  sorts  of  metre,
the  pauses  would  justify  the  division  of  the  stanza  into  a
greater  number  of  verses  than  four,  and  instances  have
been  shown,  where  either  the  number  of  syllables,  or  the
quantity,  would  be  the  same  in  each  verse  of  a  stanza  of
eight,  twelve,  or  even  sixteen  short  verses.  In  the  follow-
ing species  of  metre,  the  verses  of  the  stanza,  subdivided
according  to  the  pauses,  are  unequal.

The  SardMavicriAitay  a  very  common  metre,  of  which
examples  occur  in  the  former  volumes  of  Asiatic  Re-
searches,'*^ is  a  tetrastich,  in  which  the  verse  consists  of

•  Vol.  i.  p.  279.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


112  ON  sanscrYt  and

nineteen  syllables  divided  by  the  pause  intd  portions  ol
twelve  and  seven  syllables  respectively.  The  iidlowing
instance  of  this  metre  is  irom  the  close  of  the  first  book  of
MAgha's  epic  poem;  where  NArbdAi  having  delivered
a  message  from  Indra,  inciting  CrYshna  to  war  with
SiSupAla,  king  of  the  ChediSj  departs,  leaving  the  hero
highly  incensed  against  his  kinsman  and  enemy.

O'm  ityuctaveUS  ^fha  iamgina,  iti

vyahritya  vachan,  nabhas
Tasminn  utpatite  purah  mra-munav

inddh  sriyam  bibhrati,
Satrdnam  aniiam  vinasa-pisunah,

cruddhasya  Chaidyam  prati,
Vyimniva,  bhticuii  cVhaUna,  vadatie
cctus  chacar'  aspadam.
^'  While  the  divine  sage,  having  delivered  this  discourse,
ascended  the  sky,  bearing  on  his  fi*ont  the  radiance  of  the
moon ;  the  hero,  armed  vnth  a  bow,  uttered  an  expression
of  assent ;  and  the  frown,  which  found  place  on  his  brow
wreakfiil  against  the  prince  of  the  Chedis,  was  as  a  portent
in  the  heavens,  foretokening  destruction  of  his  foes/'  1.  75.
The  MaTidacranta,  which  is  the  metre  in  which  the
Migkaduta  is  composed, has  pauses  subdividing  each
verse  of  seventeen  syllables  into  three  portions,  containing
four,  six,  and  seven  syllables  respectively :  viz.  two  spon-
dees ;  two  pyrriiichii  and  an  iambic ;  a  cretic,  trochee,  and
spondee. The  Harini  diflfers  from  the  preceding  in  trans-


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


pracrIt  poetry.  113

posing  the  first  and  second  portions  of  the  verse,  and  mak-
ing the  third  consist  of  an  anapoest  between  two  iambics.
An  instance  of  it  will  be  subsequently  exhibited.

The  example  of  the  first  mentioned  metre,  here  inserted,
is  fit>m  the  Megha  duta.  This  elegant  little  poem,  attri-
buted as  before  observed  to  CAlidAsa,  and  comprising  no
more  than  116  stanzas,  supposes  a  Yacsha  or  attendant  of
Cuv6ra  to  have  been  separated  fi-om  a  beloved  wife  by  an
imprecation  of  the  god  Cuv6ra,  who  was  irritated  by  the
n^ligence  of  the  attendant,  in  sufiering  thejcelestial  garden
to  be  trodden  down  by  Indra's  elephant.  The  distracted
demigod,  banished  firom  heaven  to  the  earth,  where  he
takes  his  abode  on  a  hill  on  which  RAma  once  sojourned,*
entreats  a  passing  cloud  to  convey  an  affectionate  message
to  his  wife.

Mandacranta  metre.

>5lMiri|c=liM«t.fdy^MchW*.MMMl'i:  1

'5(l«HI*riMN<iirv^JjUl'1Nii^«iMct,|Hltl
^di^M  W^  PMSlKUM^M'SlXrM'y  I'M  I:

*  Called  Ramagiri.
VOL.  II.  I

Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


114  ON  sanscrIt  and

6.  Jatam  vanse,  bhuvana'-vidite,  pmhcaravartacanam^
Janami  tioam^  pr<icriti''purtishan,camariipamfMagh6nah,
Tend  'rt'hitwan,  twat/i,  vidki-vasad  durabandhur,  gato


Yachnya  mSgka  varam  adhigune,  nadhame  labdliacama.
7.  Santaptanan  twam  asi  iaranan ;  tat,  paySda,  priyayah

Sandesam  me  hara,  dhanapati^crddha-visUshitasya.

Gantavya  te  vasatir  Alaca  nama  yacsheiwaranam.

VahySdyana-st'hita'Hara-siraS'chandrica'^hauta-har-
V mya.

"  I  know  thee  sprung  from  the  celebrated  race  of  dilu-
vian  clouds,  a  minister  of  Indra,  who  dost  assume  any
form  at  pleasure:  to  thee  I  become  an  humble  suitor,  being
separated  by  the  power  of  fate  from  my  beloved  spouse :  a
request  preferred  in  vain  to  the  noble  is  better  than  success-
fill  solicitation  to  the  vile.  Thou  art  the  refiige  to  the  in-
flamed :  therefore  do  thou,  O  cloud,  convey  to  my  beloved
a  message  from  me  who  am  banished  by  the  wrath  of  the
god  of  riches.  Thou  must  repair  to  Alaca  the  abode  of  the
lord  of  Yacskas,  a  palace  of  which  the  walls  are  whitened  by
the  moonbeams  from  the  crescent  on  the  head  of  Siva,
who  seems  fixed  in  the  grove  without." 6  and  7.

The  Sic'harim,  also  a  common  metre,  distributes  seven-
teen syllables  into  portions  of  six  and  eleven :  an  iambic
and  two  spondees  in  the  one,  and  a  tribrachys,  anapaest,
dactyl,  and  iambic  in  the  other.  This  is  the  metre  of  the
Ananda  lahart,  a  hymn  of  which  SancarAchArya  is  the
reputed  author,  and  which  is  addressed  to  Si v A,  the  oacti
or  energy  of  Siva  or  MahAd^va.  It  comprises  a  hun-
dred stanzas  of  orthodox  poetry  held  in  great  estimation  by
the  devout  followers  of  Sancara:  the  devotional  poetry
of  the  Hindus  does  not  usually  employ  metre  of  so  high  an
order.

Examples  of  this  measure  will  be  shown  in  a  subsequent


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRACRtx  POETRY.  115

extract  firom  a  work  of  a  very  different  kind :  a  drama^
by  Bbavabu^jti  entitled  Malati  madhava.

The  Malinij  consistmg  of  fifteen  syllables,  places  two
tiribrachys  and  a  spondee  in  the  one  subdivided  portion  of
the  verse,  and  a  cretic,  trochee,  and  spondee,  in  the  other.
An  instance  of  it  occurs  in  a  former  extract  fi-om  the  Cira-
tarjufAya.  The  following  example  of  this  metre  is  from
the  drama  abovementioned.  The  passage  is  descriptive  of
a  love-sick  maid.

Malini  metre.

ir1^'1'=l«*r«Ti^<^,|rri:^nfl^:  Tl

PaHmrtdita'-mrtnali'-ndanam  angam  ;  pi'ovrittih
Cafham  api  parivara-prart^hanabhih  criyasu.
Calayati  cha  himanidr  nishcalancasya  lacshmim
Abhinava-cari'danta^chchhida'cantah  capdlah .
"  Her  person  is  weary  like  bruised  threads  of  a  lotos ;
scarcely  can  the  earnest  entreaties  of  her  attendants  incite
her  to  any  exertion ;  her  cheek,  pale  as  new  wrought  ivory^
emulates  the  beauty  of  a  spotless  moon." 1.  22.

The  Praharshintf  containing  thirteen  syllables,  separates
a  molossus  fi*om  two  pyrrhichii,  as  many  trochees,  and  a
spondee.  An  example  of  it  will  be  shown  in  a  subsequent
extract  from  Bhavabh6ti's  drama.

The  RtLchira,  with  the  same  number  of  syllables,  dis-
joins two  iambics  from  two  pyrrhichii,  a  trochee,  and  cretic.
The  opening  stanza  of  the  Bhatticavya  may  serve  as  an
instance  of  this  metre*  The  poem  bearing  that  title  is  on
the  subject  of  the  adventures  of  RAma  :  it  is  comprised  in

I  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


116  ON  sanscrTt  and

twenty-two  cantos.  Being  composed  purposely  for  the
practical  illustration  of  grammar,  it  exhibits  a  studied
variety  of  diction,  in  which  words  anomalously  inflected  are
most  frequent.  The  style,  however,  is  neither  obscure  nor
inelegant;  and  the  poem  is  reckoned  among  the  classical
compositions  in  the  Sanscrit  language.  The  autiior  was
BhartrYh ARi :  not,  as  might  be  supposed  from  the  name,
the  celebrated  brother  of  VicramAditya  ;  but  a  gram-
marian and  poet,  who  was  son  of  SrIdhara  swAmI,  as
we  are  informed  by  one  of  his  scholiasts,  VidyAvin6de.

Ruchira  metre.

^:1  m1  r^  ^  v^  ^  ^  :^trnT:

Abhiin  nrtpS,  mbudha-sac^hahy  parantapah,

SrutantcitS,  Dasarafha  ityudahritahj
ChiAair  varamy  bhuva7ia'hita'chch'haUna,yam

Sanatanah  pitaram  upagamat  swayam.
"  He,  whom  the  eternal  chose  for  a  father,  that  he  might
benefit  the  world  [in  a  human  form],  was  a  king,  a  friend
of  the  gods,  a  discomfiter  of  foes,  and  versed  in  science  :
his  name  was  Dasarat'ha.  He  was  a  prince  eminent  for
his  virtues." 1.  1.

The  Suvadaiia  distributes  twenty  syllables  in  three  por-
tions of  the  verse:  one  containing  two  spondees  and  a
bacchius;  the  second  four  short  syllables  and  an  anapaest;
the  third  a  spondee,  pyrrhichius,  and  iambic.  The  Srag-
dharif  a  very  common  metre,  differs  frx)m  it  only  in  the  third
portion  of  the  verse,  which  contains  a  trochee,  spondee,  and


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  117

baocbius :  but  here  the  number  of  syllables  in  every  sub-
division is  equal :  viz.  seven.  In  all  the  other  instances
above  described,  the  subdivisions  of  the  regular  verses  were
unequal.

The  following  sorts  of  metre,  which  are  usually  em-
ployed, have  no  pauses  but  at  the  close  of  the  verse.  The
Druta  vilambita  contains  in  each  verse  two  anapaests  pre-
ceded by  three  short  syllables  and  a  long  one,  and  followed
by  an  iambic.  Instances  of  this  measure  have  been  already
cited  in  an  extract  from  the  Ciratarjuniya,  The  Sragoini
is  measured  by  a  trochee,  spondee,  and  iambic  repeated ;
as  Ae  Bhujangaprayata  is  by  a  similar  repetition  of  an
iambic,  trochee,  and  spondee.  Both  sorts  of  metre  are  of
frequent  occurrence  in  classic  poems.

The  Vamntatilacay  which  consists  of  a  spondee,  iambic,
tribrachys,  dactyl,  trochee,  and  spondee,  is  one  of  the
metres  in  most  general  use.  It  commonly  occurs  as  a
change  from  other  metre.  But  the  whole  fifth  canto  of
Magha's  poem  is  in  this  measure.  The  Chaura  pancka-
sica,  a  short  poem  before  described,  is  in  the  same  metre,
and  so  is  a  pathetic  elegy  on  the  death  of  a  beloved  wife
which  occurs  in  the  Bhamani  vilasa,  a  collection  of  mis-
cellaneous poetry  by  JagannAt'ha  Panclita  raja.  It
begins  thus :

Vasantatilaca.

"  Since  fate,  alas !  is  become  adverse,  and  the  gem  of
kindred  is  departed  towards  heaven,  to  whom,  O  my  soul.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


118  ON  sanscrIt  and

wilt  thou  tell  thy  grief? and  who  will  appease  thy  anguish
with  refreshing  words?"

The  following  passage  irom  some  Hindi  poem,  is  quoted
in  NArayana  BHAff  a's  commentary  on  the  Vritta  ret-
nacara  as  a  specimen  of  this  metre  in  the  Canyacubja
dialect.

Candarpa-r&pa  jala  tin  tumha  linha,  CrUhAa  !

L6c6pacama  hama  Am,  hahu-ptra,  ch*h6ri.
Jan  bheiicain  viraha-pira  nasaii  meA,

Yain  hhanti  ddti  pai'hat,  caki  bata,  G6pi,*
*^  CrIshna,  since  thou  didst  assume  the  form  of  Cupid,
I  have  neglected  worldly  afiairs,  sufiering  much  anxiety.
Relieve  by  thy  presence  the  pain  of  separation  which  I
endure.  Such  was  the  message,  with  which  the  G6pi  dis-
patched her  embassadress.''

V.  Sl6ca  or  Vactra.
The  most  common  Sanscrit  metre  is  the  stanza  of  four
verses  containing  eight  syllables  each,  and  denominated
irom  the  name  of  the  class,  Anushhibh.  Several  species
of  it  have  been  described.  Two  very  simple  kinds  of  it
occur,  consisting  of  iambic,  or  trochaic  feet  exclusively :+

•  Short  vowels,  when  final,  are  so  faintly  soutaded,  that  they  are
usually  omitted  in  writing  the  provincial  languages  of  India  in  Roman
character.  But  they  have  been  here  preserved  at  the  close  of  words  ;
being  necessary,  as  in  Sanscr%  for  correctly  exhibiting  the  metre.

t  The  first  termed  FramdnU  the  other  SamdnU  Considered  as  a
species  of  uniform  metre,  the  first  is  also  named  Nagoiwafupi^i  or


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


PRACRtT POETRY.  119

the  rest  are  included  in  one  general  designation.*  But
several  analogous  species  are  comprehended  under  the
denomination  of  Vactra.  Here  the  laws  of  the  metre,
leaving  only  the  first  and  eighth  syllables  indeterminate,
require  either  a  bacchius  or  an  amphibrachysf  before  the
eighth  syllable,  and  forbid  an  anapaest  or  tribrachys  after
the  first;  as  also  in  the  second  and  fourth  verses  of  the
stanza,  an  amphimacer.  A  variety  of  this  metre  introduces
a  tribrachys  before  the  eighth  syllable  in  the  first  and  third
verses,  and  a  bacchius  in  the  second  and  fourth |.  And
another  sort,§  which  admits  five  varieties,  requires  the
penultimate  syllable  to  be  short  in  the  second  and  fourth
verses;  and  introduces  before  the  eighth  syllable  of  the
first  and  third  verses,  a  dactyl,  anapaest,  tribrachys,  amphi-
macer, or  molossus.

The  metre  which  is  most  in  use,  is  one  of  the  species
now  described,  in  which  the  number  of  syllables  is  deter-
minate (viz.  eight),  but  the  quantity  variable.  CAlidAsa
appropriates  to  this  metre  the  term  Sl6ca  (abbreviated  from
Anuskiubh  slSca);  and  directs,  that  the  fifth  syllable  of
each  verse  be  short,  the  sixth  long,  and  the  seventh  alter-
nately long  and  short.  The  mythological  poems  under  the
title  of  Purana,  and  the  metrical  treatises  on  law  and  other
sciences,  are  almost  entirely  composed  in  this  easy  verse ;
with  a  sparing  intermixture  of  other  analogous  sorts,  and
with  the  stiU  rarer  introduction  of  other  kinds  of  metre.

Mataliicdf  and  the  second  is  denominated  Mallicd,  There  is  also  a
regular  measure  which  alternates  trochees  and  iambics,  and  is  deno-
minated MdnawtcdcfiSd :  and  another,  named  Chitrapaddf  consisting
of  two  dactyls  and  a  spondee.

•  Vitdna.

t  The  metre  is  named  Pafhyd  when  an  amphibrachys  is  intro-
duced in  the  second  and  fourth  verses;  some  say  in  the  first  and
third.

t  Chapald.  h  ripuld.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


120  ON  sanscrKt  and

The  varieties  of  the  Anushiubh  ilSca  which  most  frequently
occur,  make  the  fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  syllables  of  the
first  and  third  verse  all  long  or  all  short;  or  else  the  fifth
long  with  the  sixth  and  seventh  short.  Thus  varied,  it  is  much
used  by  the  best  poets.  CAlidAsa  has  employed  it  in  the
second  and  sixth  cantos  of  his  poem  entitled  Cumara  mm»
bhava,  and  in  the  first,  fourth,  and  several  others  of  the
Raghuvania.  The  second  and  nineteenth  cantos  of  MA-
gha's  poem  are  in  this  metre,  and  so  is  the  eleventh  of
the  Ciratarjuniya,

The  examples  here  subjoined  are  from  MAgha's  poem.
One  passage  is  part  of  a  speech  of  BalarAma  to  CrIsh-
KA,  urging  him  to  the  immediate  conmiencement  of  hosti-
lities against  SiSupAla  :  the  other  is  extracted  firomUi>-
dhava's  reply,  dissuading  CrYshna  from  instant  war,  and
advising  his  previous  compliance  with  YuDHisufniRA's
invitation  to  assist  at  a  solemn  sacrifice  which  the  king  was
on  the  point  of  celebratmg  at  Indraprasfha.

3Mch^ir<uiwr«-yJirii^uiiMchir<uii  i


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRACUjfx  POETRY.  121

ri^l>s(«lPl<c|j^^*tcf)^5ychir<U|:  'n^M'n

BalarAma  speaks.  '*  A  proved  enemy^  and  a  tried  friend^
are  most  to  be  regarded ;  for  they  are  known  by  their  actions :
others,  presumed  to  be  so,  from  temper  or  affinity,  may  be
fomid  in  the  end  to  be  friend  or  foe.  Peace  may  be  main-
tained with  a  natural  enemy,  who  confers  benefits;  not  with
a  presumptive  firiend,  who  commits  outrages ;  kindness  or
injury,  is  the  proper  test  of  both.  The  king  of  the  Chedis
was  offended,  O  Hari,  by  the  seizure  of  RucminI;  for  -
woman  is  the  chief  cause,  that  the  tree  of  discord  takes  root.
Whilst  thou  wert  engaged  in  subduing  the  offspring  of  the
earth,  he  besieged  this  city,  as  darkness  encircles  the  skirts
of  Meru  while  the  sun  is  remote.  To  hint,  that  he  ravished


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


122  ON  SANSCRIT  AND

the  wife  of  Vabhru  is  enough :  the  narratioD  of  crimes  is
too  disgustful.  Thus  aggrieved  by  thee,  and  having  much
injured  us,  the  son  of  Srutasravas  is  an  enemy  demon-
strated by  deeds.  The  man  who  is  negligent,  while  an
enraged  foe  meditates  aggressions,  sleeps  in  the  wind  with
fire  under  his  arm.  What  forbearing  man,  who  would
cheerfully  dissemble  a  slight  and  single  injury,  can  patiently
endure  repeated  wrongs  ?  At  other  times,  patience  becomes
a  man ;  and  pudency,  a  woman :  but  valour  befits  the  in-
sulted warrior ;  as  modesty  should  be  laid  aside  by  a  woman
in  the  nuptial  bed.  Whoever  lives  (may  none  so  live!)
tortured  by  the  pain  of  insults  from  his  enemy,  would  that
he  had  never  been  bom,  vainly  giving  his  mother  anguish.
Dust,  which,  kicked  by  the  foot  of  the  traveller,  rises  and
settles  on  his  head,  is  less  contemptible  than  the  dastard,
who  is  contented  under  wrongs."  2.  36 — ^46.
Uddhava,  in  reply,  addressed  to  CrKshna  :


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRAcRtT  POETRY.  123

rfl5^IMI^«Tj<|^|^:5R^5lHcriMdlM«=lri;  1
•riMriirM^T|:HlbHc(|I)chMi4.fi|r|:^nT:  tl  1  o  (^Tl

"  The  just  king  and  his  kinsmen,  relying  on  thee  for  an
associate  capable  of  sustaining  the  heaviest  burden,  are
willing  to  undertake  the  task  of  a  solemn  sacrifice.  Even
to  enemies,  who  court  them,  the  magnanimous  show  kind-
ness ;  as  rivers  convey  to  the  ocean  the  rival  torrents  from
the  mountakis.  Violence,  used  against  foes  by  the  strong,
is  at  length  successful ;  but  friends,  once  offended,  are  not
easily  reconciled  even  by  compliances.  Thou  thinkest,  that  the
slatighter  of  the  foe  will  most  gi*atify  the  inhabitants  of
heaven ;  but  far  better  is  it  to  present  offerings,  which  are
desired  by  the  deities  who  devour  oblations.  What  the
virtuous  offer,  under  the  name  of  ambrosia,  in  flames,  whose
tongues  are  holy  prayers,  was  the  splendid  ornament  of  the
ocean  churned  by  the  mountain  Mandara.  The  promise
made  by  thee  to  thy  father's  venerable  sister,  to  forgive  her
son  a  hundred  offences,  should  be  strictly  observed.  Let
the  intellect  of  a  good  man  be  sharp  without  wounding ;
let  his  actions  be  vigorous,  but  conciUatory ;  let  his  mind
be  warm  without  inflaming:  and  let  his  word,  when  he
speaks,  be  rigidly  maintained.  Before  the  appointed  hour,
even  thou  art  not  able  to  destroy  the  tyrant,  on  whom  thy-
self conferred  that  boon ;  no  more  than  the  sun  can  pre-
maturely close  the  day,  which  he  himself  enlightens."  2.
103—110.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


124  ON  sanscrYt  and

V.  Compound  metre.

Instances  of  compound  metre  have  been  already  exhibited
mider  the  designation  of  Upajati,  consisting  of  two  kinds  of
simple  metre  variously  combined :  two  of  these  combina-
tions are  repeated  under  the  head  of  half  equal  metre,  mtb
the  contrasted  names  of  Ac* hyanad  and  Vipcaritac'hr/anaci.
Other  species  of  metre  belonging  to  this  class  are  in  use
among  eminent  poets :  particularly  the  Pushpitagra  and
Aparavactra,  In  the  first,  both  verses  are  terminated  by
two  trochees  and  a  spondee,  and  begin  with  four  short
syllables,  one  verse  interposing  a  pyrrhichius,  and  the  other
a  dactyl.  In  the  next  species,  both  verses  are  terminated
by  three  iambics,  and  begin  like  the  preceding  with  four
short  syllables;  but  one  verse  interposes  a  single  short
syllable,  and  the  other  a  trochee.

Examples  of  the  first  of  these  mixed  measures  are  very
common.  One  instance  has  been  already  exhibited  in  a
quotation  from  the  first  canto  of  BhAravI's  poem  of
Arjuna  and  the  mQuntaineer.  The  whole  tenth  canto  of
the  same  poem,  and  the  seventh  of  M Achats  death  of
^isupAla,  are  in  this  mixt  metre.  The  second  is  less
common :  but  an  instance  occurs  in  the  eighteenth  canto  of
the  Cirataijuniya,

The  close  of  the  ninth  canto  of  CAlidAsa's  Raghu-
vansa,  exhibiting  a  variety  of  metre,  in  which  two  of  the
species  now  mentioned  are  included,  is  here  cited,  for  the
sake  of  these  and  other  species  which  have  been  before
described.  The  subject  is  Dasarat'ha's  hunt,  in  which
he  slew  the  hermit's  son:  a  story  well  known  to  the  readers
of  the  RamayaAa.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


PRAcRtx POETRY.  126


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  127

5lllM<V^ssc|^-iHVrH^I^<in(l:  tl  t\9tl


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


126  ON  sanscrKt  and

<IHI^rr1chR<d^|chl''JR*N'«-

H:dMd:^t»nri*JMrd:Sa^  tl  tRXi
f<«Mi||H^(rWc<MrMy3|itl|chl-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  127

sillM<Mssc|^cii^VfH'i||^<intr:  Tl  t\9*n


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


128  ON  SANSCRtT  AND

'*  Thus  did  the  chase,  like  an  artM  mistress^  allure  the
kingy  forgetful  of  all  other  business,  and  leaving  to  his
ministers  the  burthen  of  the  state,  while  his  passion  grew
by  indulgence.

**  The  king,  without  his  retinue,  passed  the  night  in  some
sequestered  spot,  reposing  on  a  bed  of  leaves  and  blossoms,
and  enlightened  by  the  flame  of  wild  herbs.  At  dawn,
being  awakened  by  the  flapping  of  his  elephant's  ears  in
place  of  the  royal  drums,  he  delighted  in  listening  to  the
sweet  and  auspicious  tones  of  chirping  birds.

**  One  day,  pursuing  an  antelope,  and  outstripping  his  at-
tendants, he  arrived,  with  his  horse  foaming  with  fatigue,  on
the  bank  of  the  Tamasa,  a  stream  frequented  by  the  devout.
In  its  waters  a  deep  sound,  caused  by  the  filling  of  a  vase,
was  mistaken  by  the  king  for  the  grumbling  of  an  elephant,
and  he  directed  an  arrow  towards  the  spot  whence  the
sound  proceeded.  By  this  forbidden  act*  DaSarat'ha
transgressed :  for  even  the  wise,  when  blinded  by  passion,
deviate  into  the  pathless  waste.  '  Ah  father !'  was  the
piteous  cry  which  issued :  and  the  king,  anxious,  sought
its  cause  among  the  reeds.  He  found  the  vase,  and  near
it  a  hermit's  son  pierced  by  his  arrow,  and  he  stood  amazed
as  if  internally  wounded.  The  king,  of  glorious  lineage,
who  had  already  alighted  from  his  horse,  eagerly  inquired
the  parentage  of  the  youth ;  who,  resting  on  the  vase,  with
feeble  accents  said  '  he  was  the  son  of  a  hermit,  but  no
priest.'  Instructed  by  him,  the  king  conveyed  the  wounded
youth  to  his  bUnd  parents :  and  to  them,  as  they  approached

*  The  royal  and  military  tribe  is  prohibited  from  killiDg  elephants
unless  in  battle.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRjlCRlfT  POETRY.  129

tbeir  only  son^  he  related  his  mistaken  deed.  The  unhappy
pair,  lamenting,  conjured  the  king  to  draw  the  arrow  from
the  breast  of  their  wounded  son.  The  youth  was  dead.
The  aged  hermit  ratifying  his  curse  with  tears  instead  of
water  for  a  libation,  pronounced  this  imprecation  on  the
king :  ^  In  thy  extreme  age  thou  shalt  reach  thy  fated
time,  with  grief  Uke  mine  for  a  beloved  son.'  While  he
spoke,  as  it  were  a  serpent  assailing  first  and  then  discharg-
ing fatal  Tenom,  Cauj^alya's  lord,  conscious  of  the  first
ofience,  addressed  him  thus :  '  Thy  curse  has  fallen  like  a
boon  on  me,  who  have  not  seen  the  beauteous  countenance
of  offspring ;  as  fire,  fed  with  fuel,  fertilizes  the  soil  which
it  bums.'  The  king  then  said,  '  For  me,  who  merciless
deserves  death  at  thy  hands,  what  are  thy  commands?'
The  holy  hermit  asked  fuel  for  the  funeral  pile ;  he  and  his
wife  resolving  to  follow  their  son  in  death.  The  king,
whose  attendants  were  now  arrived,  promptly  fulfilled  hb
command,  and  remained  dejected,  bearing  with  him  the
hermit's  curse,  a  cause  of  his  future  destruction,  as  the
ocean  embraces  the  devouring  fire.  Again  the  king  ad-
dressed him.  '  Wise  hermit !  what  shall  this  shameless
criminal,  who  deserves  death  from  ihee,  now  perform.'
He  desired  the  funeral  fiame  to  be  duly  lighted :  and  the
king  presented  the  fire  for  him,  and  his  wife  and  son.

"  The  chief  of  the  race  of  R  aghu,  attended  by  his  army,
now  returned  to  his  palace,  dejected,  bearing  in  his  mind
the  heavy  imprecation  of  the  saint,  as  tl^  ocean  holds
within  itself  the  fire  of  destruction." 9.  74 — 89.

This  extract  exhibits, besides  two  stanzas  of  Pttshpitagra^
and  as  many  of  Sundari  metre,  f  both  belonging  to  the
present  head,  and  one,  of  which  an  example  was  promised

•  75  and  ^6,  t  77  and  79,  most  properly  the  last,

VOL.  II.  K


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


130  ON  SANSCRtT  AND

in  this  place,*  several  others  which  have  been  before  ex-
emplifiedyf  and  two  which  are  less  common.:|:

A  singular  species  of  variable  metre  is  mentioned  by
writers  on  prosody,  who  describe  it  as  a  stanza  in  which
the  verses  increase  in  arithmetical  progression.  In  the
instance  exhibited  by  them  the  four  verses  of  the  stanza
increase  regularly  from  eight  to  twenty  syllables.  Varieties
of  it  are  noticed  in  which  the  prc^ression  is  not  regular,
the  short  verse  exchanging  places  with  the  second,  third,
or  fourth.  The  quantity  of  the  syllables  is  in  general  in-
determinate; but  varieties  are  stated  in  which  the  verse
consists  of  short  syllables,  either  ending  or  beginning  with  a
spondee,  or  both  ending  and  beginning  with  spondees.

A  class  of  metre  which  admits  an  inordinate  length  of
the  verse,  is  known  under  the  general  designation  of  Danr-
Aaca.  The  verse  may  consist  of  any  number  of  syllables,
from  twenty-seven  to  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine ;  and
the  specific  name  varies  accordingly.  §  The  construction  of
the  metre  requires  that  the  first  six  syllables  be  short,  and
the  remainder  of  the  verse  be  composed  of  cretic  feet ;  or,
instead  of  the  cretic  foot,  the  bacchius.  These  two  kinds
of  metre  are  distinguished  by  different  names.  A  verse
consisting  of  any  number  of  anapaests  within  the  limitation
abovementioned,  is  also  comprehended  under  this  general
designation ;  as  are  verses  of  similar  length  consisting  exclu-
sively of  iambic  or  trochaic  feet.  They  have  their  peculiar
denominations.

Examples  of  these  extravs^antly  long  verses  are  to  be

•  Sw6gata  78.

t  Vasanta  Hlaca  81 — 87  and  Upindrnvajra  88.  Rttchird  89.
t  Manjiibhdshini  74  (P.  T.  D.  3  I.)  and  Mattamayitra  80  (2  S  +  T.
I.D.S.)

§  For  example,  Ariia  which  comprises  ten  feet ;  Ar^ava  eleven ;
Vydla  twelve ;  JkniUa  nineteen,  &e.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


PRAcRtT POETRY.  131

found  in  the  works  of  the  poet  VAn  a.  It  is  unnecessary  to
insert  any  specimen  of  them  in  this  place,  as  an  example  will
occur  in  a  subsequent  quotation  from  BnAVABHiOTi'sdrama.

That  class  of  metre,  which  is  termed  half  equal,  because
the  alternate  verses  are  alike,  comprises  various  sorts,  which
appear  to  be  compounded  of  two  simple  kinds  with  an
appropriate  number  of  syllables  of  a  determinate  quantity.

Another  class,  in  which  every  verse  of  the  stanza  is  dif-
ferent, appears  more  complex.  But,  here  also,  the  quantity
as  well  as  the  number  of  syllables  being  regulated,  the
stanza  is  in  fact  composed  of  four  kinds  of  uniform  metre.

The  most  common  metre  of  this  class  is  that  called
Udgata.  Here  the  number  of  syllables  in  each  verse,  as
well  as  their  quantity,  differs ;  the  first  verse  comprising  an
anapaest,  iambic,  tribrachys,  and  trochee;  the  second,  a
tribrachys  and  anapaest  with  two  iambics;  the  third,  a
trochee,  tribrachys,  and  two  anapaests;*  and  the  fourth,
an  anapaest,  iambic,  and  pyrrhichius  with  three  iambics.

The  twelfth  canto  of  the  Ciratarjuniya  is  in  this  metre ;
and  so  is  the  fifteenth  canto  of  MAgha's  epic  poem.  It
begins  thus :

*'  But  the  king  of  the  Chedis  was  impatient  of  the  ho-
nours which  the  son  of  Pandu  commanded  to  be  shown  in
that  assembly  to  the  foe  of  Madhu;  for  the  mind  of  the
proud  is  envious  of  the  prosperity  of  others."

*  Or  the  third  verse  may  consist  of  a  trochee  and  dactyl,  with  two
anapttsts ;  or  of  two  trochees,  with  two  anapsests :  and  the  metre  is
denominated,  in  the  first  instance,  Saurabhacd;  in  the  second,
Lalita.

k2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


132  ON  sanscrYt  and

Other  kinds  of  metre,  in  which  every  verse  of  the  stanza
differs  in  the  number  and  quantity  of  syllables,  are  com-
prehended mider  the  general  name  of  Gafha;  under  which
also  some  writers  on  prosody*  include  any  sort  of  metre
not  described  by  Pingala,  or  not  distinguished  by  a  spe-
cific appellation.  The  same  denomination  is  appUcable
also  to  stanzas  consisting  of  any  number  of  verses  other
than  four,  f  An  instance  of  a  stanza  of  six  verses  has  been
remarked  in  the  Mahabharata,  and  another  example  occurs
at  the  beginning  of  MIgha's  poem.:|:

Dwidha  crttatnia,  dm  ayam  divacarS  ?
Vidh&ma-rdchih,  dm  ayam  hutasanah  ?
Gatan  tiraschinam  andru-sarafhih.
Prasiddham  drddhwajwalanam  havirbhujah,
PatatyadhS  dhama-visari  sarvatah.
dm  etad?  ityaculam  icshitamjanaih.

•  HelIyudha  and  NarIta^a  tIrI.

t  DivicARA  on  the  Vr^tta  retn&cara.

X  It  is  cited  by  DivIcara  BHAffA  as  an  instance  of  a  stanza  of
six.  Yet  the  scholiasts  of  the  poem  omit  the  two  first  verses  and
read  the  stanza  as  a  tetrastich.  One  commentator,  however,  does
remark,  that  copies  of  the  poem  exhibit  the  additional  verses ;  and
another  commentator  has  joined  them  with  two  more  verses  in  a
separate  stanza.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


PRAcRlfT  POETRY.  133

NAreda  descending  from  the  heavens  to  visit  CrIshna,
is  thus  described :

"  '  Is  this  the  sun  self-parted  into  two  orbs  ?  Is  it  fire
shining  with  light  divested  of  smoke?  The  motion  of  the
luminary  whose  charioteer  has  no  legs,  is  distinguished  by
its  curvature ;  the  ascent  of  flame  is  a  known  property  of
fire.  Then  what  is  this,  which  descends  diffusing  light
around  V  Thus  was  the  sight  contemplated  with  wonder
by  the  people." Magha  1.  2.

VI.  Prose ;  and  Verse  mixed  with  Prose.

I  follow  the  example  of  Sanscrit  writers  on  prosody,  in
proceeding  to  notice  the  different  species  of  prose.  They
discriminate  three,  and  even  four  sorts,  under  distinct
names.  1st.  Simple  prose,  admitting  no  compound  terms.
It  is  denominated  Muctaca.  This  is  little  used  in  polished
compositions ;  unless  in  the  familiar  dialogue  of  dramas.
It  must  undoubtedly  have  been  the  coUoquial  style  at  the
period  when  Sanscrit  was  a  spoken  language.  2d.  Prose,
in  which  compound  terms  are  sparingly  admitted.  It  is
called  Culaca.  This  and  the  preceding  sort,  are  by  some
considered  as  varieties  of  a  single  species  named  Chdn/iica.
It  is  of  course  a  common  style  of  composition ;  and  when
polished,  is  the  most  elegant  as  it  is  the  chastest.  But  it
does  not  command  the  admiration  of  Hindu  readers.  3d.
Prose,  abounding  in  compound  words.  It  bears  the  appel-
lation of  Utcalica  praya.  Examples  of  it  exhibit  com-
pounds of  the  most  inordinate  length :  and  a  single  word
exceeding  a  hundred  syllables  is  not  unprecedented.  This
extravagant  style  of  composition  being  suitable  to  the  taste
of  the  Indian  learned,  is  common  in  the  most  elaborate
works  of  their  favourite  authors.  4th.  Prose,  modulated  so
as  frequently  to  exhibit  portions  of  verse.  It  is  named
Vrittagandhi. It  will occur  without  study, and  evea


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


134  ON  sanscrKt  and

against  design^  in  elevated  compositions,  and  may  be
expected  in  the  works  of  the  best  writers.

Some  of  the  most  elegant  and  highly  wrought  works  in
prose  are  reckoned  among  poems,  as  already  intimated,  in
like  manner  as  the  "  TeUmaque"  of  F£n£lon  and  "  Tod
Abels"  of  Gessneb.  The  most  celebrated  are  the  Vasa-
vadatta  of  Subandhu,  iheDasa  cumara  of  DanSI,  and
the  Cadambari  of  VAn  A.

The  first  of  these  is  a  short  romance,  of  which  the  story
is  simply  this.  CANDARPAcfeTU,  a  yomig  and  valiant
prince,  son  of  ChintAmani  king  of  Cusumapura,*  saw
in  a  dream  a  beautiful  maiden,  of  whom  he  became  despe-
rately enamoured.  Impressed  with  the  beUef,  that  a  per-
son, such  as  seen  by  him  in  his  dream,  had  a  real  exist-
ence, he  resolves  to  travel  in  search  of  her,  and  departs,
attended  only  by  his  confidant  Macaranda.  While  re-
posing under  a  tree  in  a  forest  at  the  foot  of  the  Vindhya
mountains,  where  they  halted,  Macaranda  overhears
two  birds  conversing,  and  from  their  discourse  he  learns
that  the  princess  VAsavadattA,  having  rejected  all  the
suitors  who  had  been  assembled  by  the  king  her  fether
for  her  to  make  choice  of  a  husband,  had  seen  Candar-
PAc^TU  in  a  dream,  in  which  she  had  even  dreamt  his
name.  Her  confidant,  TamAlicA,  sent  by  her  in  search
of  the  prince,  was  arrived  in  the  same  forest,  and  is  dis-
covered there  by  M  agar  an  da  .  She  delivers  to  the  prince
a  letter  fi^m  the  princess,  and  conducts  him  to  the  king's
palace.  He  obtains  fi-om  the  princess  the  avowal  of  her
love ;  and  her  confidant,  CalAvatI,  reveals  to  the  prince
the  violence  of  her  passion.

The  lovers  depart  together: but,  passing  through  the


*  Same  with  Fdtalipttra  or  Pdtali  pittra ;  the  ancient  Palibothra,
now  Patna, As.  Res.,  vol.  iv.,  p.  11.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAciiTt  poetry.  135

foresty  he  loses  her  in  the  night.  After  long  and  unsuc-
cessful search,  in  the  course  of  which  he  reaches  the  shore
of  the  sea,  the  prince,  grown  desperate  through  grief,
resolves  on  death.  But  at  the  moment  when  he  was  about
to  cast  himself  into  the  sea,  he  hears  a  voice  from  heaven,
which  promises  to  him  the  recovery  of  his  mistress,  and
indicates  the  means.  After  some  time,  Candarpacetu
finds  a  marble  statue,  the  precise  resemblance  of  VAsava-
DATTi.  It  proves  to  be  her ;  and  she  quits  her  marble
form  and  regains  animation.  She  recounts  the  circum-
stances under  which  she  was  transformed  into  stone.

Having  thus  fortunately  recovered  his  beloved  princess,
the  prince  proceeds  to  his  city,  where  they  pass  many
years  in  uninterrupted  happiness.

This  story,  told  in  elegant  language,  and  intermixed
with  many  flowery  descriptions  in  a  poetical  style,  is  the
VAsavadattA  of  SuBANDHU.  There  is  an  allusion,
however,  in  BnAVABHtiTi's  drama,*  to  another  tale,  of
VAsavadattA's  having  been  promised  by  her  father  to
the  kingSANjAYA,  and  giving  herself  in  marriage  to  Uda-
YANA.  I  am  unable  to  reconcile  this  contradiction  other-
wise than  by  admittmg  an  identity  of  name  and  difference
of  story.  But  no  other  trace  has  been  yet  found  of  the
story  to  which  BhavabhiOti  has  alluded.

In  the  work  above  described,  as  in  various  compositions
of  the  same  kind,  the  occasional  introduction  of  a  stanza,
or  even  several,  either  in  the  preface  or  in  the  body  of  the
work,  does  not  take  them  out  of  the  class  of  prose.  But
other  works  exist,  in  which  more  frequent  introduction  of
verse  makes  of  these  a  class  apart.  It  bears  the  name  of
Champd :  and  of  this  kind  is  the  Nala  champii  of  Trivi-
CRAM  A  before  mentioned. This  style  of  composition  is  not


*  Malad  mddhava. Act  2d.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


136  ON  sanscrYt  and

without  example  in  European  literature.  The  ^  Voyage
de  Bachaumont  et  de  la  Chapelle/'  which  is  the  most
known,  if  not  the  first  instance  of  it  in  French,  has  found
imitators  in  that  and  in  other  languages.  The  Sanscrit
inventor  of  it  has  been  equally  fortunate ;  and  a  numerous
list  may  be  collected  of  works  expressly  entitled  Champii.*

The  Indian  dramas  are  also  instances  of  the  mixture
of  prose  and  verse ;  and,  as  already  mentioned,  they  like-
wise intermixed  a  variety  of  dialects.  Our  own  language
exhibits  too  many  instances  of  the  first  to  render  it  neces-
sary to  cite  any  example  in  explanation  of  the  transition
fi'om  verse  to  prose.  In  regard  to  mixture  of  languages,
the  Italian  theatre  presents  instances  quite  parallel  in  the
comedies  of  Angelo  Beolco  sumamed  Ruzanti  :t  with
this  difference,  however,  that  the  dramas  of  Ruzanti  and
his  imitators  are  rustic  farces,  while  the  Indian  dramatists
intermingle  various  dialects  in  their  serious  compositions.

Notwithstanding  this  defect,  which  may  indeed  be  easily
removed  by  reading  the  Pracrit  speeches  in  a  Sanscrit
version,  the  theatre  of  the  Hindus  is  the  most  pleasing
part  of  their  polite  literature,  and  the  best  suited  to  the
European  taste.  The  reason  probably  is,  that  authors  are
restrained  more  within  the  bounds  of  poetic  probability
when  composing  for  exhibition  before  an  audience,  than
in  writing  for  private  perusal  or  even  for  pubUc  recital.

The  Sacuntala  by  CA  lid  As  a,  which  certainly  is  no  un-
favourable specimen  of  the  Indian  theatre,  will  sufficiently
justify  what  has  been  here  asserted.  I  shall  conclude  this
essay  with  a  short  extract  firom  Bhavabh^tI's  unrivalled
drama,  entitled  Malati  madhava ;  prefixing  a  concise  argu-
ment of  the  play,  the  fable  of  which  is  of  pure  invention.


*  As  the  Nrisinha  champii,  Gan^i  champu,  Vrtnd&vana  champu,
&c.  t  Walker's  Memoir  on  Italian  tragedy.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  pobtry.  137

*  BhOrivasu,  minister  of  the  king  of  Padmavatiy  and
DivARATA  in  the  service  of  the  king  of  Viderbha,  had
agreed,  when  their  children  were  yet  infants,  to  cement  a
long  subsisting  friendship,  by  the  intermarriage  of  MAlat!,
daughter  of  the  first,  with  MAdhava,  son  of  the  latter.
The  king  having  indicated  an  intention  to  propose  a  match
between  Bh6rivasu's  daughter  and  his  own  favourite
Nandana,  who  was  both  old  and  ugly,  the  minister  is
apprehensive  of  giving  offence  to  the  king  by  refusing  the
match;  and  the  two  fnends  concert  a  plan  with  an  old
priestess,  who  has  their  confidence,  to  throw  the  young
people  in  each  other's  way,  and  to  connive  at  a  stolen
marriage.  In  pursuance  of  this  scheme,  MAdhava  is
sent  to  finish  his  studies  at  the  city  of  Padmavati,  under
the  care  of  the  old  priestess  CAmandac!.  By  her  con-
trivance, and  with  the  aid  of  MAlatI's  foster  sister  La-
vANOicA,  the  young  people  meet  and  become  mutually
enamoured.  It  is  at  this  period  of  the  story,  immediately
after  their  first  interview,  that  the  play  opens.  The  first
scene,  which  is  between  the  old  priestess  and  her  female
pupil  Aval6citA,  in  a  very  natural  manner  introduces  an
intimation  of  the  previous  events,  and  prepares  the  appear-
ance of  other  chai*acters,  and  particularly  a  former  pupil
of  the  same  priestess  named  SaudAmin!,  who  has  now
arrived  at  supernatural  power  by  religious  austerities ;  a
circumstance  which  her  successor  Aval6citA  has  learnt
firomCAPALACUN6ALA,  the  female  pupil  of  a  tremendous
magician,  AGH6RAGHANf  a,  who  frequents  the  temple  of
the  dreadfiil  goddess  near  the  cemetery  of  the  city.

'  The  business  of  the  play  commences ;  and  MAdhava,
his  companion  Macaranda,  and  servant  Calahansa,
^pear  upon  the  scene.  MAdhava  relates  the  circum-
stances of  the  interview  vrith  MAlat!,  and  acknowledges
himself  deeply  smitten. His  attendant  produces  a  picture


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


138  ON  sanscr¥t  and

which  MAlat!  had  drawn  of  MAdhava,  and  which  had
come  into  his  hands  from  one  of  her  female  attendants.
In  return  MAdhava  delineates  the  likeness  of  MAlatI
on  the  same  tablet,  and  writes  mider  it  an  impassioned
stanza. It  is  restored;  and  bemg  in  the  sequel  brought
back  to  MAlatI,  their  mutual  passion,  encouraged  by
their  respective  confidants,  is  naturally  increased. This
incident  furnishes  matter  for  several  scenes. Meantime,
the  king  had  made  the  long  expected  demand;  and  the  .
niinister  has  returned  an  answer  that  ''  the  king  may  dis-
pose of  his  daughter  as  he  pleases." The  intelligence
reaching  the  lovers  throws  them  into  despair. Another
interview  in  a  public  garden  takes  place  by  the  contrivance
of  CAm  ANDAcl. At  this  moment  a  cry  of  terror  announces
that  a  tremendous  tiger  has  issued  from  the  temple  of  Siva  :
an  instant  aftery  Nandana's  youthful  sister,  Madayan-
TicA,  is  reported  to  be  in  imminent  danger. Then  MA-
dhava's  companion,  Macaranda,  is  seen  rushing  to  her
rescue. He  has  killed  the  tiger. He  is  himself  wounded.
This  passes  behind  the  scenes. Mada  yanticA,  saved  by
the  valour  of  Macaranda,  appears  on  the  stage.  'The
gallant  youth  is  brought  in  insensible. By  the  care  of  the
women  he  revives:  and  MadayanticA,  of  course,  falls
in  love  with  her  deliverer. The  preparations  for  MAlatI's
wedding  with  N  and  an  a  are  announced. The  women  are
called  away. MAdhava  in  despair  resolves  to  sell  his
living  fiesh  for  food  to  the  ghosts  and  malignant  spirits,  as
his  only  resource  to  purchase  the  accomplishment  of  his
wish. He  accordingly  goes  at  night to the  cemetery.
Previous  to  his  appearance  there,  CapAlacundalA,  in  a
short  soliloquy,  has  hinted  the  magician's  design  of  offer-
ing a  human  sacrifice  at  the  shrine  of  the  dreadful  goddess,
and  selectmg  a  beautiful  woman  for  the  victim. MAdhava
appears  as  a  vendor  of  human  fiesh ;  offering,  but  in  vain.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  139

to  the  ghosts  and  demons  the  flesh  off  his  limbs  as  the
purchase  of  the  accomplishment  of  his  wish.  He  hears
a  cry  of  distress  and  thinks  he  recognizes  the  voice  of
MAlatI .  The  scene  opens,  and  she  is  discovered  dressed
as  a  victim,  and  the  magician  and  sorceress  preparing  for
the  sacrifice.  They  proceed  to  their  dreadful  preparatives.
MAdhava  rushes  forward  to  her  rescue :  she  flies  to  his
arms.  Voices  are  heard  as  of  persons  in  search  of  MA-
latI.  MAdhava,  placing  her  in  safety,  encounters  the
magician.  They  quit  the  stage  fighting.  The  event  of  the
combat  is  announced  by  the  sorceress,  who  vows  ven-
geance against  MAdhava  for  slaying  the  magician,  her
preceptor.'

The  &ble  of  the  play  would  have  been  perhaps  more
judiciously  arranged  if  this  very  theatrical  situation  had
been  introduced  nearer  to  the  close  of  the  drama.  Bha-
vabhi6ti  has  placed  it  so  early  as  the  fifth  act.  The
remaining  five  (for  the  play  is  in  ten  acts)  have  less
interest

*  MAlatI,  who  had  been  stolen  by  the  magician,  while
asleep,  being  now  restored  to  her  fiiends,  the  preparations
for  her  wedding  with  Nandana  are  continued.  By  con-
trivance of  the  old  priestess,  who  advised  that  she  should
put  on  her  wedding  dress  at  a  particular  temple,  Maca-
RANDA  assimies  that  dress,  and  is  carried  in  procession,
in  place  of  MAlatI,  to  the  house  of  Nandana.  Dis-
gusted with  the  masculine  appearance  of  the  pretended
bride,  and  offended  by  the  rude  reception  given  to  him,
Nandana,  to  have  no  further  communication  with  his
bride,  vows  and  consigns  her  to  his  sister's  care.  This,
of  course,  produces  an  interview  between  the  lovers,  in
which  Macaranda  discovera  himself  to  his  mistress,  and
she  consents  to  accompany  him  to  the  place  of  MAlatI's
concealment. The friends  accordingly  assemble  at  the


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


140  ON  sanscrYt  and

garden  of  the  temple :  but  the  sorceress,  CapAlacun-
6alA,  watches  an  opportunity  when  MAlatI  is  unpro-
tected, and  carries  her  off  in  a  flying  car.  The  distress  of
her  lover  and  friends  is  well  depicted :  and,  when  reduced
to  despair,  being  hopeless  of  recovering  her,  they  are  hap-
pily reUeved  by  the  arrival  of  SaudAminI,  the  former
pupil  of  the  priestess.  She  has  rescued  MAlat!  from
the  hands  of  the  sorceress,  and  now  restores  her  to  her
despairing  lover.  The  play  concludes  vnth  a  double  wed-
ding.'

From  this  sketch  of  the  story  it  mil  be  readily  perceived,
that  the  subject  is  not  ill  suited  to  the  stage  :  and  making
allowance  for  the  beUef  of  the  Hindus  in  magic  and  super-
natural powers,  attainable  by  worship  of  evil  beings  as  well
as  of  beneficent  deities,  the  story  would  not  even  carry  the
appearance  of  improbability  to  an  Indian  audience.  Set^
ting  aside  this  consideration,  it  is  certainly  conducted  with
art ;  and  notwithstanding  some  defects  in  the  fable,  the
interest  upon  the  whole  is  not  ill  preserved.  The  incidents
are  striking ;  the  intrigue  well  managed.  As  to  the  style,
it  is  of  the  highest  order  of  Sanscrit  composition ;  and  the
poetry,  according  to  the  Indian  taste,  is  beautifrd.

I  shall  now  close  this  essay  vrith  the  promised  extract
from  the  play  here  described.  It  contains  an  example,
among  other  kinds  of  metre,  of  the  DaA&ica  or  long
stanza,  and  is  selected  more  on  this  account  than  as  a
fiiir  specimen  of  the  drama.  This  disadvantage  attends  all
the  quotations  of  the  present  essay.  To  which  another
may  be  added :  that  of  a  prose  translation,  which  never
conveys  a  just  notion  of  the  original  verse.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


pbacbIt  poetry.  141

Extract  from  Malati  madhava. Act  6.
MAdhava  continnes  to  wander  in  the  cemetery.

**  Human  flesh  to  be  sold :  unwounded,  real  flesh  from  the
members  of  a  man. Take  it. Take  it."*

'  How  rapidly  the  Paisachas  flee,  quitting  their  terrific
forms. Alas  !  the  weakness  of  these  beings.'

He  walks  about.

'The  road  of  this  cemetery  is  involved  in  darkness.
Here  is  before  me  ''  the  river  that  bounds  it ;  and  tremen-
dous is  the  roaring  of  the  stream,  breaking  away  the  bank,
while  its  waters  are  embarrassed  among  the  fragments  of
skulls,  and  its  shores  resound  horribly  with  the  howUng  of
shakals  and  the  cry  of  owls  screeching  amidst  the  conti-
guous woods."t

Behind  the  scenes.

*  Ah !  unpitying  father,  the  person  whom  thou  wouldst
make  the  instrument  of  conciliating  the  king's  mind,  now
perishes.'

MAdh., listening  with  anxiety.^ *^  I  hear  a  sound

•  Anushhihh.

t  ^rcUtla  vicriSita,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


142  ON  sanscrYt  and

piercing  as  the  eagle's  cry,  and  penetrating  my  soul  as  a
voice  but  too  well  known.  My  heart  feels  rent  within
me ;  my  limbs  fail ;  I  can  scarcely  stand.  What  means
this?''*

^'  That  piteous  sound  issued  from  the  temple  of  C arAlA.
Is  it  not  the  resort  of  the  wicked  ?  a  place  for  such  deeds  ?t
Be  it  what  it  may,  I  will  look."

He  walks  round.

The  scene  opens;  and  discovers  CAf»ALACUN6ALJl  and
AcHORAGHANfA^  engaged  in  worshipping  the  idol:
and  MiLATf  dressed  as  a  victim.

MAl.]  *Ah  unpitying  father!  the  person  whom  thou
wouldst  make  the  instrument  of  conciliating  the  king's
mindy  now  perishes.  Ah  fond  mother  !  thou  too  art  slain
by  the  evil  sport  of  fate.  Ah  venerable  priestess !  who
lived  but  for  MalatI,  whose  every  effort  was  for  my
prosperity,  thou  hast  been  taught  by  thy  fondness  a  lasting

•  Manddcrdntd.
t  Vactra.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.  143

sorrow.  Ah  gentle  LavangicA  !  I  have  been  shown  to
thee  but  as  in  a  dream.'*

MAdh.]  '  Surely  it  is  she. Then  I  find  her  living.'

CapAlaci3n6alA  worshipping  the  idol  CarAlA.]  *  I
bow  to  thee,  divine  ChAmun6A.'

**  I  revere  thy  sport,  which  delights  the  happy  court  of
Siva,  while  the  globe  of  the  earth,  sinking  under  the
weight  of  ihy  stamping  foot,  depresses  the  shell  of  the
tc»rtoise  and  shakes  one  portion  of  the  universe,  whence  the
ocean  retires  vnthin  a  deep  abyss  that  rivals  hell."t

*'  May  thy  vehement  dance  contribute  to  our  success  and
satisfaction ;  amidst  the  praise  of  attendant  spirits,  astonished
by  the  loud  laugh  issuing  from  thy  necklace  of  heads  which
are  animated  by  the  immortalizing  liquid  that  drops  from  the
moon  in  thy  crest,  fractured  by  the  nails  of  the  elephant's
hide  roimd  thy  waist,  swinging  to  the  violence  of  thy  ges-
tures :  while  mountains  are  overthrown  by  the  jerk  of  thy
arm,  terrible  for  the  flashes  of  empoisoned  flame  which
issue  from  the  expanded  heads  of  hissing  serpents  closely
entwined.  The  regions  of  space  meantime  are  contracted,
as  within  a  circle  marked  by  a  flaming  brand,  by  the  roll-

•  The  PrdcrVt  original  of  this  passage,  though  prose,  is  too  beau-
tiful  to  be  omitted.

*  Hi  t^a  niccarun'a !  4s6  d&n'i  n'ar^udar-chittirdhdbaiiran'an  jan6
bibajjaT.  Hd  amba  sin^hamaii-hra^  !  turn  api  hadasi  d^bba  dubbila-
sid^na.  Hi  Miladimaft-jivid^,  mama  call^'a-eihan^ccarsuha-saitlar
bbdbdr^,  bhaftvadi !  chirassa  jdnabiddsi  ducc'ham  sin^h^n'a.  Hi  pVa
sahi  Lavaugi'^ !  sivina-ivasara-m^tta  dansan'i  aham  d^  sambutti.*

t  Sdrdiiiavicrldita,


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


144  ON  SANSCRtx  AND

ing  of  thy  head  terrific  for  the  wide  flame  of  thy  eye  red  as
raging  fire.  The  stars  are  scattered  by  the  flag  that  waves
at  the  extremity  of  the  vast  skeleton  which  thou  bearest.
And  the  three-eyed  god  exults  in  the  close  embrace  of
GaurI,  frightened  by  the  cries  of  ghosts  and  spirits  trium-
phant/'*

They  both  how  before  the  idol.

MAdh.] '  Ah  !  what  neglect/

'^  The  timid  maid,  clad  as  a  victim  in  clothes  and  gar-
lands stained  with  a  sanguine  die,  and  exposed  to  the  view

*  The  original  stanza  is  in  Da^uLaca  metre,  of  the  species  denomi-
natedProcAito  and  SinhavicrdrUa.  The  verse  contains  eighteen  feet
(2  Tr.  16  C.)  or  fifty-four  syllables,  and  the  stanza  comprises  216
syllables.

rT>i.siJi>nirwi<npHiRbin<iciWiK4f^^-

Hiri<0-<«i"<^M4^iRirii^ivrtti ^ssc^.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.  146

of  these  wicked  and  accursed  magicians,  like  a  fawn  before
wolves,  is  in  the  jaws  of  death  ;  unhappy  daughter  of  the
happy  Bh^rivasu.  Alas !  that  such  should  be  the  relent-
less course  of  fete."*

CapAl.]  *^  Now,  pretty  maid,  think  on  him  who  was
thy  beloved. Cruel  death  hastens  towards  thee."+

MAlatS.]  *  Beloved  MAdhava  !  remember  me  when  I
am  gone.  That  person  is  not  dead  who  is  cherished  in  the
memory  of  a  lover.'

CapAl.]  *Ah!  enamoured  of  MAdhava  she  will  be-
come a  feithful  dove.  However  that  be,  no  time  should  be
lost.*

A6h6r.  lifting  the  sword.^  "  Divine  ChAmun6A!
accept  this  victim  vowed  in  prayer  and  now  offered  to
thee."t

•  idrd(Ua  vicrUlita.

t  FraharshiM,
X  PraharshiHi.


^ft^T^^Tl%f^rriH3RqTpn  Tl


VOL.  II.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


146  ON SANSCRtT  AND

MAdh.  rushing  forward,  raises  MAlatI  in  his  arms.]
'  Wicked  magician !  thou  art  slain.'

CapAl.]  '  Avaunt  villain.  Art  thou  not  so?'
MAl.]  *  Save  me,  prince!'  She  embraces  MAdhava.
MAdh.]  '  Fear  nothing.  "  Thy  friend  is  before  thee,  who
banishing  terror  in  the  moment  of  death,  has  proved  his
affection  by  the  efforts  of  despair.  Cease  thy  trembling.
This  wicked  wretch  shall  soon  feel  the  retribution  of  his
crime  on  his  own  head.'"*

Agh6r.]  '  Ah!  who  is  he  that  dares  to  interrupt  us?'
CapAl.]  *  Venerable  Sir!  he  is  her  lover ;  he  is  MA-
dhava, son  of  CAmandacS's  friend,  and  a  vender  of  hu-
man flesh.'

MAdh.  in  tears.]  'How  is  this?  auspicious  maid !'
MAl.  sighing.]  '  I  know  not,  Prince ! I  was  sleepily
on  the  terrace. I  awoke  here. But  how  came  you  in  this
place  r

MAdh.  blushing.]  "  Urged  by  the  eager  wish  that  I
may  be  blessed  with  thy  hand,  I  came  to  this  abode  of
death  to  sell  myself  to  the  ghosts.  I  heard  thy  weeping.  I
came  hither."t


•  Hariri.


t  Vasanta  tilaca.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.  147

MAl.]  ^  Alas !  for  my  sake  wert  thou  wandering  regard-
less of  thyself! '

MAdh.]  '  Indeed,  it  is  an  opportune  chance.'

"  Having  happily  saved  my  beloved  from  the  sword  of
this  murderer,  like  the  moon's  orb  from  the  mouth  of  de-
vouring RahUf  how  is  my  mind  distracted  with  doubt,
mehed  with  pity,  agitated  with  wonder,  inflamed  with
anger,  and  bursting  vrith  joy."*

Aoh6r.]  *  Ah !  thou  Brahmen  boy !  '*  Like  a  stag
drawn  by  pity  for  his  doe,  whom  a  tiger  has  seized,  thou
seekest  thy  own  destruction,  approaching  me  engaged  in
the  worship  of  this  place  of  human  sacrifice. Wretch  ! I

WTRTf'lHiHMUMI'MM\riiJirT-

*  ^dida  vicricUta.

<HW«*in|ct,^^dct,vu|^||ti5y^r>fftfq-W5n^

t  ^rdUa  mcriSUta,

L 2


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


148  ON  sanscbKt  and

will  first  gratify  the  great  mother  of  beings  with  thy  blood
flowing  from  a  headless  trunk/'

MAdh.]  'Thou  worst  of  sinful  wretches!  "  How
couldst  thou  attempt  to  deprive  the  triple  world  of  its  rarest
gem,  and  the  universe  of  its  greatest  excellence,  to  bereave
the  people  of  light,  to  drive  the  kindred  to  desperation,  to
humble  love,  to  make  vision  vain,  and  render  the  worid  a
miserable  waste!"*

*  Ah  wicked  wretch  !  "  Hast  thou  dared  to  lift  a  weapon
against  that  tender  form,  which  even  shrunk  from  the  blow
of  light  blossoms  thrown  in  merry  mood  by  playful  dam-
sels. This  arm  shall  light  on  thy  head  like  the  sudden  club

of  YAMA."t

Agh6r.]  '  Strike,  villain ! Art  thou  not  such?'

MAl. to  MAdh.]  'Be  pacified,  dearMAnHAVA! The

•  Sic'hariM.

^i|55nifflWeh«IHr^R!V||(j«M«tR|r|:tl

t  A  very  uncommon  metre  named  Avitafha  or  Narcutacii,

<=l4rNc|V<|^ri'lric|5iN4JMR:IMri:


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrKt  poetry.  149

cruel  man  is  desperate. Abstain  from  this  needless  ha-
zard.'

CapAl.  to  Agh6r.]  '  Venerable  Sir,  be  on  your  guard.
Kill  the  wretch.'

MAdh.  and  A6h6r.,  addressing  the  women.^  *'  Take
courage.  The  wretch  is  slain.  Was  it  ever  seen  that  the
lion,  whose  sharp  fangs  are  fitted  to  lacerate  the  front  of
the  elephant,  was  foiled  in  fight  with  deer?"*

A  noise  behind  the  scenes. They  listen.

'  Ho !  ye  guards  who  seek  MAlatI.  The  venerable  and
unerringCAMANDAcS  encourages  BhiOriv  Asu  and  instructs
you  to  beset  the  temple  of  CarAlA.  She  says  this  strange
and  horrid  deed  can  proceed  from  none  but  A6h6ra-
OHANf  a;  nor  can  aught  else,  but  a  sacrifice  to  CarAlA,
be  conjectured.'

CApal.]  '  We  are  surrounded.'

A6h6r.]  '  Now  is  the  moment  which  calls  for  courage.'

MAl.]  *  Oh  father !  Oh  venerable  mother ! '

MAdh.]  *  Tis  resolved.  I  will  place  MAlatI  in  safety
with  her  friends,  and  slay  this  wicked  sorcerer.'

MAoH.  condticts  MAlatS  to  the  other  side,  and  returns

towards  AGH6RA6HANf  a.

A6h6r.]  '  Ah  wretch !  *'  My  sword  shall  even  now
cut  thee  to  pieces,  ringing  against  the  joints  of  thy  bones,

*  Fasanta  tilaca.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


150  ON  sanscrYt  and

passing  with  instantaneous  rapidity  through  thy  tough
muscles^  and  playing  unresisted  in  thy  flesh  like  moist
clay."*

They  fight. The  scene  closes.

•  kd'hariM.

^<lf^AiRl«Mrdct,«U|r4iI<Ai<c|<:


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRAcBtr  POETBY.  161

SYNOPTICAL  TABLES

OP

INDIAN  PROSODY.


Feet  used  in  Sanscrit  Prosody.

Trisyllabic.

At. M0LO88U8.  M.

y.  w Baoohius.  B.

Ji. —  »^  —  Grbtious  or  Amphimacbr.  C,
«& V* w  — Anapjbstus.  a.

T. w  ANTIBAO0HlU8,PALlMBA00HIU8yOrHTPOBA00HIUS.H.

</. w  —  w  Amphibbaoht8  or  Sooliu8.  So.
Bb. —  wo  Daotylus.  D.
iV.  V w w  Tbibbaohys.  Tb.

MoN()STLLABIC.
L.  w Bbbvis. Br.  G. — Lonous. L.


Feet  used  in  Pracrit  Prosody.

1  c.  One  MdtT&  or  CM, Sara:  Brbvis  w  Bb.

2  c.  Two  Miirds  or  Calis.
H6ra:  Lonous  — L.

Supriiya:  Pyrbhiohius  or  Pbbiambu8.  w w  P.

3  c.  Three  M6ir6s  or  Calas,

T6la:  Tboghjius  — T.
Dwaja:  Iambus  w  — I.
T%k8ava:  Tbibbaohys  o ^ v  Tb.
Haya :  4  c.  M6trds  or  Colds.

Carina:  Spondaus 8.

Taifbdhara:  Soolius  w  —  w  So.

Hatta:  Anapastus  >j ^  —  A.

Charafta:  Daotylus —  ^  o  D.

Fipra:  Pbooblbusmatious  ^ ^ « ^  Pb..


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


152


ON  SANSCBtx  AND


Indrdsana :  5  c.  Five  Mdtrds  or  Ckilds.

Cbbticus  C,  Bacohius  B.,  Pjbon  P-«.,  &c.
Sarijjai  6  c.  Six  Mdtrds  or  Colds.

MoLOssus  M.  &c.


Metre  of  the  Vedas  ;  regulated  by  the  number  of  syllables.

Seven  classes  subdivided  into  eight  orders.

CLASSES.

Anush-  Trish"

Gdyatrl.  Ushiiih. tubh.  Vr^hati.  Pancti. tubh.  Jagatu

Arshi 24 28 32 36 40 44  48

Daivf 1 2 3 4 6 6  7 .

ooAfluri 15 14 13 12 IJ 10  9

g  Prijipaty^  ..8 12 16 20 24 28  32

P  Yajnsh ....  6 7 8 9 10 11  12

gstoan 12 14 16 18 20 22  24

Rlfch 18 21 24 27 30 33  36

Bvihmi  ....36 42 48 64 60 66  72


Distribution  of  the  Syllables  in  Triplets,  Tetrastichs,  ^c.

I.  GAyATRI.  III.  ANUSHf  UBH.

l.Tripdd 8x3=24 1.  Chatushpdd 8x4=32

2.  Chatushpdd 6x4=24  2.  Tripdd  (8+12x2),  viz.  12+8

aPidanivrfT. 7X3=21  +12,  or  12+12+8,  or  8+12

4.  AtipidanivrYt  .  .6+8+7=21  +12=32.

S.N^f 9+9+6=24  IV.  VbihatS.

6.VArdhf 6+9+9=24 i.  chatushpdd 9x4=36

7.  Vardhamini ..6+7+8=21 2 8x2+10x2=36

8.  Pratishf^hi.... 8+7+6=21 3 8x3+12 =36

9.  DwipAdvirdj ....12+8=20  \,P(U'hyd..  8+8+12+8=36
10.  Tripkdviraj 11x3=33  %  Nymcusdriki {ScandUgtivd

or  Crr6w*Aa<0,  8+12+8+8

II.  USHNIH.  5«36

1.  TripAd  (12+8x2).  3.  Uparishtddvf^hati,  8x3+12

l.Cacubh 8+12+8=28  =36.

2.  Pura  UsMih . .  12+8+8=28  4. TurastddoT^haHU-^'^y. 3=36

3.  Par6shMh  . . .  .8+8+12=28  4.  Mah^vrthatf  (Sat6vrthatf),  12
2.Chatu8hpdd 7X4=28  x3=36.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


frAcrYt  poetry. 163

V.  pancti.  ^t  ,;••;•••• '■^^■^'/^'t

3.  Pat'hyi 8x5=40

l.Chatoshpid (12x2+8x2). 4  j ^ 8x6=48

1.  SKoA-p...  12+8+12+8=40  ^

or 8+12+8+12=40  VI.  TRISHfuBH.

2.^«<4rflr-jt>.. 8+8+12+12=40 1.  Jy6ti8hmati 11+8x4=43

3.Pnw<<ira-jj.l2+12+8+8=40 2.  Jagatl 12+8x4=44

4.  Fhtdra-p.  8+ 12+ 12 + 8=40  Purast&djybtishmaii  ..11(12)

6.&fM/<ira.jj.l2+8+8+12=40  +8x3.

2.  1.  AcshfrrapmcH .  ..5x4=20  Madhy&,%-\'%^U  (12)  +8+8

2.  Jlpasahpancti .  ..5x2=10  Q^amAMrf  ..8+8+8+8+11

3.  Padapancti 5  x  5=25  (12).


Deficient  and  exvberant  Metre.

1.  Sancumatf  =5+ax3,ex.  (Giyatri)  5+6x3=23.

2.  Cacodmatf  =6+ax3.

3.  Pipflica  madhyi  =(Tripid)  =many  +  few  +  many,  ex.  8+4+8.

4.  Yavamadhyi  =  (Tripid)=  iew  +  many  +  few,  ex.  8+10+8.

5.  Nirrft  =a— 1,  ex.(Gayatri)24— 1=23.

6.  Bhurij  =a  +  1,  ex.  (GAyatrf)24+l=25.

7.  Virdj  =a^2,  ex.  (G^yatri)  8+8+6=22.

8.  Swarij  =a+2,  ex.  (Giyatrf)  8+8+10=26.*


1.  GaAavntta  of  Sanscrit  Prosody,  and  Matr&writta  of
Pracrit  Prosody  ;  regulated  by  quantity.

1.  Iryi  or  Ga£h&y  Pr.  Gak&.  Each  verse  ends  in  L.

30+27=57  c.  Pause  in  Ist  verse  before  7th  ft.

Odd  verse :  30  c.  =7i  ft.  (6th=  if  Pr.  But  if  6th  ft.  be  Pr.,  then

Sc.  or  Pr.).  pause  after  1st  syllable.
Even  verse :  27  c.=7i  ft.  (6tb=  Pause  in  2d  verse  before  5th  ft.

Br.).  if  Pr.

•  If  there  be  room  to  doubt  whether  the  metre  be  reduced  from
the  next  above,  or  raised  from  the  next  below,  the  first  verse  deter-
mines the  question ;  for  it  is  referred  to  the  class  to  which  the  first
verse  or pdda  belongs.  If  this  do  not  suffice,  the  metre  is  referred
to  that  class,  which  is  sacred  to  the  deity,  to  whom  the  prayer  is
addressed.  Should  this  also  be  insufficient,  other  rules  of  selection
have  been  provided.  Sometimes  the  metre  is  eked  out  by  substituting
iya  or  uva  for  correspondent  vowels.  This  in  particular,  appears  to
be  practised  in  the  Sdmaveda.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


1C4


ON  sanscrYt  and


16  Species:  Pat'hyd:  Pause
after  3d  ft.  (3+4j=7i  ft.  and  12
+18+12+ 15  =  57  c).  VipM:
Pause  placed  othenrise.  Heace
Adttfipuldy  ulntjfttvifnUd  and  Ubha-
yampuld,  with  1st  verse,  2d,  or
both,  irregularly  divided  by  the
pause.  Chapald  1st  f.  S.  or  A.
2d  Sc.  3d  S.  4th  8c.  5th  8.  or  D.
6th  8c.  or  Pr.  (in  the  short  verse,
Bb.),  7th  8.  D.  A.  or  Pe.  Hence
MuchachapeUdf  Jaghanya  chapald
and  Mahachapaidf  with  1st,  2d
or  both  verses  so  constructed.
Therefore  Aryd  +  3  Chapaldsx
Pafhyd+3  Fipulds=:\6  species.

Variations:  Arydf  1st  verse
10,800.  2d  verse  6,400.  Chapaid
1st  verse  32,  2d  verse  16.

In  Prto^<  prosody,  27  species :
from  27  L.  +  3  Be.=30  syll.  to
XL.  and55BB.=56syll.

Specific  varieties.  Cutmd  con-
taining 1  Sc.  Culat'hd,  2  Sc.
r^df  many  Sc.  Ra^tSd^  no  Sc.
Ourvi^  Sc.  1st,  3d,  5th  or  7th
ft.  But  this  is  against  rule :
which  excludes  amphibrachys
from  the  odd  feet.

2.  Ud^Ui  or  Fiydt'hd,  Pr.  Ft-
^iA4. 27+30=57  c.  viz.  12+15+
12+18.

3.  UpagUiy  Pr.  Odhu.  27+27
=54  c.  viz.  12+15+12+15.

4.  GUi  or  UdgdChd,  Pr.  Ug-
gdhd.  30+30=60  c.  viz.  12+18
+12+18.

5.  ArgdgUi  or  Chandhaca^  Pr.
Scandha.  32+32=64  c.


8  ft.  complete.  (3+5ts8  ft.«nd
12+20+ 12+20=64  c.

Species  16  {PaChyd,  &c.),  va-
riations of  each  verse  10,800.

In  Prdcrit  prosody,  28  species
frt>m  28  L.  £c  8  Bb.  to  1 L.  and  62
Bb.

6.Chandricd,SangUi  or  Gdl'hM,
Fr.Odhint  30+32^  62  c.  viz.  12
+18+12+20.

7.Sug{ti,0TParigUt,  Pr.Sinhini,
32+30=62  c.  viz.  12+20+12+
18.

Also

6.  SangUi,  32+29=61  c.
Aryd(7j  ft.)  +  L.  in  both  verses.

7.  SugUi,  32+27=59  c.
L.  in  first  verse  only.

8.  Prt^Ui,  30+29=59  c.
+  L.  in  second  verse  only.

9.  AnugUi,  27+32=59  c.
Reverse  of  Sugfti.

10.  ManfugUi,  29+30=59  c.
Reverse  of  Pragfti.

11.  Fi^/i,  29+29=58  c.
Upagiti  +  L.  in  both  verses.

12.  GidrugUiy  29+32=61  c.
Reverse  of  Sanglti.

13.  Vailari,  32+30=62  c.
Ary^gfti — L.  in  last  verse.

14.  Lalitdy  30+32=62  c.
^L.  in  first  verse.

15.  Pramadd,  29^+27=56  c.
Upagiti  +  L.  in  first  verse.

16.  Chandricdy  27+29=56  c.
+  L.  in  last  verse.

All  these  kinds  admit  16  spe-
cies as  above :  viz.  Pa^hyd,  &c.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.


155


IL Jlkra  vritta  or  Matra  cVhaiidaSy  of  Sanscrit
Prosody.

1.  VAlTALfTA,  56  to  68  c.

l.Vaitaiiya,  14+16+14+16
=60  c.

End  in  C.  +  I.
Short  syllables  by  pairs  (even
verses  not  to  begin  with
2Tr.)

2.  Ipaidlica,  End  in  D.  &  S.

3.  Aupach^handasicay  16+18
+16+18=68c.  End  in  C.
&B.

Each  kind  admits  8  yarieties

of  the  short  verse  and  13

of  the  long ;  from  3  long

syll.  to  6  short  beginning

the  one,  and  from  4  long

syU.  to  1  long  and  6  short  in

the  other.
Also  the  following  species  un-
der each  kind.

1.  I>acshiMntic6,  begin  with  I.
Comprising  2  varieties  of
the  odd  verses.
I.  I.  (or  Tr.);  and  4  of
the  even  verses.  I.  B,  (or
Pa.  2d  or  4th  or  5  Br.)

2.  Udichya  VT^UOy  odd  verses
begin  with  I.

3.  Fr&chya  vr^tta^  even  verses,
C.  orP«.4..

4.  Pravr^Uacay  the  two  pre-
ceding combined.

5.  Apar&niic&y  16  x  4  =  64
c.  (Pr&ch.y

6.  Ck&ruhdsini,  14x4  =  56c.
(Udich).

2.  Matra  samaca,  16  (4  x  4)
X  4=64  c.  End  8.  or  A.  Be-
gin 8.  A.  D.  or  Pb.


1.  Bi^i^  samaca,  2d  a  S.  A.
or  D.  3d  ft  A.

2.  nmca,  2d  Sc.or  Pb.  3d  8.
or  D.

3.  Fdnavdsicdy  2d  8.  A.  or  D.
3d  8c.  or  Pr.

4.  C^itrd,  2d  8c.  or  Pr.  3d
A.  Sc.  or  Pr.

5.  Upachitrd,  2d.  8.  A.  or  D.
3d  8.  or  D.

6.  PaddculacOy  the  above  in-
termixed.

The  1st  species  admits  24  va-
rieties ;  the  2d,  32 ;  and  the
3  next,  48  each.  The  va-
riations of  the  last  species
very  numerous.

3.  QiTY Iky  1  or  Achaladhr^H,  16
X4.  All  short  syllables.

4,  Dwio'ha^6ioa  ;  or  Couplet
1.  ^c'hd  or  ChUuld,  32  Br.  +

16  L.
Two  species :  JybtishfUt  verse

32  Br.  2d  16  L.
Saumyd  or  AnangacriSld  1st

verse  16  L.  2d  32  Br.
Also  1  Sic'M  30  +  32  ^G^2  c.

Ist  Verse  28  Br.  +  L.  2d  30

Br.  +  L.

2.  C'hanjdy  32+30=62  c.
1st  30  Br. +  L.  2d  28  Br.
+  L.

3.  Chidica or  Atiruchird  29
+29=58  c.  27  Br.  +  L.

Also  3  a6/k7<i  29+31=60  c.
1st  Verse  27  Br.  +  L.  2d  29
Br.  + L.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


166


ON  sanscrYt  and


IIL  MatrL  vritta  of  Pracrit  prosody  continued  from

Table  I.

S.D6h6,  8. Dwipat'hd,  13+
ll-(-13H-ll=48c.
3  ft,  vi«.  odd  verse  6-|-4  +  3;

even  verse  6-|-4-|-l.
23  species  from  23  L.  +2  Br.  to

48  Br.

9.  Utcach'h^  Pr.  Uccach'hd,
11x6=66  c.

6  verses,  3  ft  each,  44-4+3.
8  species,  from  66  Br.  to  28  L.

+10  Br.

10.  R6li  OTlMi,  24x4=96  c.
Pause  11  +  13.  Usually  end  in  L.
12  species,  from  12  L.  to  24  Br.

ll.Gandhd,  Pr.  Oandh&na,  17
+18+17+18=70  Syll.

12.  Gbatnsbpadd  or  Chatusb-
padicd,  Pr.  ChUupdiay  ChdUpdU^
30x4x4=480  c.
16  verses:  7tft.4x7+L.

13.  Ohaft'a  &  GhaffiDanda,31
x2=62c.l0  +  8  +  13=4x7+
3  Br.  or  11+7+13=6+3x3+
54.4+3+2+2  Br.

14.  Shafpada  or  Shafpadidl,
Pr.  Ch'happdit,  96  +  56  =  152  c.

Civya  24  (11  +  13  =  6 +4x 4
+2  Br.)+4=96,  Ullala  28  (15
+ 13)  X  2=56.  Varieties  of  the
Tetrastich  45,  from  96  Br.  to  44
L.+8  Br.  Varieties  of  the  whole
staDza  71  >  from  70  L.+12  Br. to
152  Br.

15.  Prajjafica,  Vr.Peyjatid,  16
X  4=64  c.  4  ft  End  in  Sc.

16.  Atiliha  A  tiling,  Fr.Jtild,
16x4=64  c.  No  Sc.  End  in  P.

17.  PAdiculaca,  Pr.  CulapdH,
16x  4=64  c.  6+4x2+2  L.

18.  Raddd  stanza  of  nine=116


C.  VIZ.


lst=15  c.=4  ft  viz.  3+4+

4+4.  End  in  Sc.  or  Pr.
2d=l2  c.=4  ft.  End  in  Pr.
3d=15c.  End  in  D.
4th=l  I  c.  =3  ft.  End  in  Tr.
5th=15c.  EndinD.
6th  to  9th=D6hd  as  before.
Five  species.

19.  Padmdvatf,  Pr.Ptfttf?*^,  32
X  4=128  c.  8  ft  noSc.

20.  Con'd'alica, Pr.  CtMalid,
stanza  of  eight=142  c.
D6hd  +  R61d  or  C^vya.

21.  Gagan'^ngan^  25x4=100
c.  20  syll.  viz.  5  L.  £c  15  Br.  End

in  I.

22.  Dwipadf  or  Dwipada,28x
2=56  c.  61  ft.  viz.  6+4+5+L.

23.C'hanji,41x2=82c.
10  ft  viz.  9  Pr.  +  C.

24.  gic'hd,  28x2=56  c.
7  ft.  viz.  6  Pr.  +  Sc.  See  San-
scrit metre.

25.  Mdli,  45x2=90  c.
Ilftviz.4x9+c. +S.
Also  25.  MdU  45+27=72  c.
1st  verse  as  above,  2d  verse  Arjfd.

26.  Ghfidicala,  Vx.CktUuMy  29
X2=58c.  Half  the  D6hd+5.

37.  Saurtbhf  i-a,  Pr.  S^ra^'ha,
ll+13+ll+13=48c.
Reverse  of  the  D6hd.

28.  Hdcali,  14x4=56  c.
3i  ft  viz.  4  X  3  +  L.  (syll.  11  or
10).  ft  D.  Pr.  or  A.  sometimes
S.  Not  end  in  P.  S.

29.  Madbubh^va,  8x4=32  c.
2  ft.  End  in  Sc.

30.Abhfra,  11x4=44  c.
7  +  Sc.  orD.  +1.  +  Sc.orSc.+
Tr.  +Sc.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


pbAcbYt  poetby.


167


31.  Dan'd'acala,  32  x  4=128  c.
4x4+6+2  -H  8or  10  +8  -H  14.
End  in  L.

32.  Dfpaca,  10  x  4=40  c.
4-|-5+Br,  usually  eud  in  Sc.

33.  SinhAvakSca,  Pr.  Sinh6Utb
16x4=64  c.

4  ft  A.  or  Pb.  but  end  in  A.
34.Plavangam^  FT.Paranffamd,
21 X  4=84  c
6x3-fl.  Beg^inwithL.

35.LlUTati,  24  or  less  x4=
%  or  less.  6  ft  or  less :  not  end
in  A.

36.  HarigftA,  28x4=112  c.
5-1-6-1-  5  X  3  -h  L.  Should  begin
with  Pb.  and  end  in  8.

37.  Tribhangf,  32  x  4=  128c.
8  ft.  No  Sc.  End  in  L.

38.  Durmila  or  Durmilicd,  32
X  4=128  c.

10+8H-14.ft.  8.

39.  Hfra  or  Hfraca,  23x4=
92  c.

4fk.  viz.6  X  3  H-  6.  ft.6BB.  or  1
L.  with4BB.  EndinL.

40.  Jaladhara  or  Jalaharan'd,
32  X  4=128  c.

Pauses  10+8-1-6+8.  ft  8.  Gene-
rally Pb.  End  in  A.

41.  Madanagriha  or  Madana-


har^  40x4=160  c.
10+8+14+8=40.

42.  Mah^r^hfra, Pr.  Mara-
haitoy  29x4=1 16  c.
10+8+11+  or6+4x5+L.+
Bb.

Also  the  following  kinds :

43.  Ruchirti,  30  X  4  =  120  c.
71  ft.  end  in  L.

44.  Calici,  14  X  4=56  c.
Pauses  8+6.

45.  VAsan'a,  20  X  4=80  c.

4  ft.  End  in  C.  Pause  before  the
last

46.  Chaur61a,  16  +  14  +  16+
14=60  c.  ft.  A.  or  Pb.

47.  Jhalland,  37x4  =  148  c.
7t  ft  5x7+L.  Pauses  10+10+
10+7.

48.  Ashdd'ha,  12  +7+12+7=
38  c.

49.Milavf,  16+12+16+12=
56  c.

Long  verse  4  ft. ,  short  verse  end
in  L.

50.Matti,20x4=80c.

5  ft  no  Sc.

51.  Rasamala,  24  x  4=96  c.

6  ft.

52.  Avalambaca,  13x4  =  52.
3  ft.  4  X  2  +  5.  End  in  L.


IV.  Metre  regulated  by  number  of  syllables.


Vactba.  8x4=32  syll.

2  ft  between  2  syll.  The  spe-
cies vary  in  the  2d  ft  or  3d
place.
1.  Simple  Vacira.
L.  or  Bb.  +  M.  &c.  (except
Tb.  &  a.  and,  in  the  even
verse,  C.)  +  B.  +  L.  or  Bb.
Therefore  1st  4th  &  8th  syll.


either  long  or  short.  5th  short.
6th  and  7th  long.  Either  2d  or
3d  long.

Variations  of  the  Ist  verse  24;

of  the  2d  20.
2.  Pm'hyd.

1st  verse  as  above; 2d  with

Sc.  for  2d  ft. Hence  7th  syll.

short.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


168


ON  sanscrYt  and


3.  ViparUa  pafh^d.

The  preceding  transposed.

4.  Chapald,

Ist  verse  with  Te.  for  2d  ft.
Therefore  6th  and  7th  syll.
short.

5.  Fipuid.

2d  verse  (some  say  Ist,  others
all)  with  7th  syll.  short.
Therefore  2d  ft  D.  Sc.  H.  or
Tr.


5  or  7  species:  Bha-vipM,
1st  verse  (some  say  either)
with  D.  for  2d  ft.  Ba^puld^
with  C.  for  2d  ft  Na-vtpuid,
2d  ft.  Tr.  Ta-vipuld,  2d  ft.
H.  Ma-vipuid,  2d  ft.  M.  Ya-
vipuld,  8  ft.  B.  JorvipM,  2d
ft.  Sc.
No  instance  occurs  with  an  ana-
piest  for  the  2d  ft.  or  3d
place.


V.  Acshara  ch'handas  or  VarAa  vrttta.  Metre  regulated
by  number  and  quantity.

Regular  or  uniform  metre;  the  stanza  being  composed  of
equal  and  similar  verses.  From  one  to  five  syllables  in
the  verse,  or  from  four  to  twenty  in  the  stanza.

IV.  PRATisHf'HA. 4x4x16*

1.  CanyA,  or  Tim'a,  Pr.  7¥fi-
n6,  m.  ^.=z2  S.  2.  Ob^',  or
Hirici,  r.  /.=2  T.  3.  NagAlicii,
Lagilicd,  Nagdnf,  or  Nagdnici,
Pr.  Nagdnld,  or  NagStni^  j\  ^.=
21.  4.  Satf,  ».y.=P.I.
V.  SuPRATiSHf  HA  5x4=20.
1.  Panctiy  Acsharapancti,  or
Hansa,  bh.  2^.=D.  S.  2.  Sam-
m6h4,  m.  2  ^.e=M.  S.  3.  UirU
tabandba,  or  Hdrl,  2  g,L2  g,  or
1 2  ^.ssS.  B.  4.  Priyi,  2  /.  r.=a
A.  I.  5.  Yamaca,  Pr.  Jamaca^  n.
2  /.=P.  Tr.


I.  UctI  or  Uct'ha. 1  x  4=4.

1.  §rf,^.=L.  2Mahf,  /.=Br.
II. AtyuctI. 2x4=8.

1.  Strf,  orCama,  2  ^.=5.  2.
Rati,  or  Mahf,  /.^.=I.  3  SiLru,
g.  /.=T.  4.  Madhu,  Pr.  Mahu,
2  /.=P.

III.  Madhya. 3x4=12.

1.  Narf,  or  Tdlf,  m.  =  M.2
§afif,  Pr.  Sasi,  y.=B.  3.  Priy^
Pr.  F^;  or  MrYgi,  r.  =  C.  4.
Raman'f,  or  Raman'^  ^.^A.  5.
Panch^la,  or  P^nchdla,  t.  =  H.
6.  MrYg^ndra,  Pr.  Malnda,  j,^=^
Sc.  7.  Mandara,  M.=D.  8.  Ga-
malf,  or  Camala,  n.^TB.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


prAcrIt  poetry.


169


From  six  to  twenty^syUahles  in  the  Verse.

n2^  =  3PS.  9.  Camala,2/
n  r  =2  P  2 1.  10.  Hansapadi,  2
^m9  =  2STI.  lJ.Mdtangf,m
2  /  f»  sr  S  T  I  S.  12.  RambhA,
n/^m  =  2P2S.

IV.  VRlfHATi  9x4=36.
1.  Halamuc'hi,  (3  +  6),  rn  #

=  C  H-  2  P  I.  2.  BhujagaSi-
Sosrfta,  (7  +  2),  2  It  f»  =  2  P
A  +  S.  3.  Bhadricd,  rn  r =2
T  A  I.  4.  Mahdlacshmf ,  3  r  =
T  8  B  I.  5.  SiraDgf,  or  Sinigl,
n  y *=  2  P  S  A.  6.  Pdvitra,  Pr.
FdyiUd,  f»M.  «  =  2 8  P  A.  ^.
Gamald,  2  »  «  =  3  P  A.  8.
Bimba,  n  8  y=  P  Tb.  T  8.  9.
T6mara,  «  2  /  =  A  I  P  T.  10.
Rdpam^lf,  rm  =  3  8  M.  11.
Man'imadbya  or  Manlbandha,
M.  r  *  =  D  2  T  I.  12.  Bhujan-
gasangat^y  «y  r  =  A3  I.

V.  Pancti  10x4=40.

1.  §uddhavirijy  m  «/  ^  =  S
T  3  I.  2.  Paoava,  (5+5)  m  n
y  g  =i  S  D  -^  A  8  or  m  n  J  sf^
8  D  +  A  I.  3.  Mayiirasarin'l,  r
y  r  ^  =  4  T  8.  4.  Matta,  (4  +
6),  m  M.  *y  =  2  8  +  2  P  8.  5.
Upast'hita,  (2+8)  i  2jg  =  8  +
2  A  I.  6.  Rucmavatf  or  Champa-
cam^a  (5+  5§)  6^.  ti»  «y  D  8  +
DS.  7*  Mandrama,  nrjg^^Y
4  I.  8.  8anyucta,  P.  Sanfutd,  s  2
y^=P  2T  2 1.  9.  8Arayatf,  3  bh.
^  =  2  D  T  I.  10.  8ii8ham^  *y
*A.^  =  S  ASA.  11.  Amrlta-
matf ,  or  AmrYtagati,  nj ng^s^V
A  P  A.  12.  Hansf,  (4  +  6),  m
bh.  mg^2B  Tr.  8.  13.  Chd-
rumuc'hf ,  nyM.^  =  PA8A.
14.  Chandramuc'hf,  t  n  bh,  g=i
8P2A.


I.  GAyatrI.  6x4=24.

1.  Tanamadhy^  *  y.s=8P8.
2.  Vidyall^c'h^  or  g^sha,  Pr.
SUd,  2  m=3  S.  3.  SaSivadaD^
or  Chaurans^  n  ^=2  P8.  4.
Vasumatf,  t  s=zSFL  5.  Va-
niU,  or  Tilaca,  Pr.  Dilid,  2  *=
2  A.  6.  Y6dha,  or  Dwiyddhf,
Pr.  Vijbha,  2  r  =T  8  I.  7.  Cha-
turans^  Pr.  Chauvansd,  n  g=z2
P  S.  8.  Mant'h^a,  or  Ctunttr
vatara,  (half  of  the  Sdranga),  2
/  =  8  I  T.  9.  Sanc'handrf,  or
86martijf,  (half  of  the  Bhujan'^
gaprayaia),2yz=z\  T  8.  10.  Md-
latf,  8amd]ati,  VasaDta,  or  Cd-
minfcdnta,  2/=!  P  T.  11.  Da-
maDaca,  2  n=3  P.

II.  UsHNiH  7x4=28.

1.  Comdralaliti,  (2+  5)^*^
=  1  +  Tb.  8.  2.  Madal^c'hd,
f»  *  ^=  8  D  8.  3.  HansamdW,
*  r^=  A  T  8.  4.  Madhumatf,
2  n  ^  =  2  P  A.  5.  8amdDic4,
rgU=ZT  C,  6.  Savdsa,  n  /  /
=  2  P  D.  7.  Carahanchd,  n  s  I
=  2  P8c.  8.  gfrshd,  Pr.  5i5ii,
2m^=2SM.

III.  ANusHfuBH  8x4=
32.

1.  Chitrapad^  2  bh.  2y  =  2
D  8.  2.  Vidyunmald,  Pr.  Bij-
jkmdld,  (4  +  4t)2m2y  =  2
8  +  28.  3.  Man'avaca,  or  Ma-
n'avac^rfd'a,  (4  +  4t)M.  t  lgz=
TI+TI.  4.  Hansaruta,  mn
2  ^  +  8  D  B.  5.  Pramdn'ici,
Nagaswardpin'f,  or  Matallic^yr
/y:=4  I.  6.  Saminic^  or  Mal-
lici,  r/y  /=4T.  7.  Vitina,
>  *  2  ^=2  I  T  8. 8.  Tungii,  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


160


ON  sanscrYt  and


VI. TRISHfUBH  11X4=

44.

1.  Indravajrd,  2  ij2  ^  =  81
D  T  S.  2.  Up^ndravajrA,y  t  j  2
^  =  2  I  D  T  8.  3.  Upajdti,  or
Ac'hyiDacf,  (14  species).  The
two  foregoing  intermisped.  4.  D6-
d'haca,  Baodhu  or  Nllaswartipa,
3  6A.  2  ^  =  3  D  S.  5.  Sdlinl,
(4H-7t),  w2<2^=2S  +  C
T  S.  6.  Vdt6rmf,  (4  +  7t),  m
*A.  <  2  ^  =  2  S  +  A  T  8.  7.
Bhramaravilasita,  (4  -f  7  t),  ^
M.  n  /  ^  =  2  8  H-  2  P  A.  8.
Rat'h6ddhaU,  r  »  r  /  ^  =  2  T
A  2  I.  9.  Swdgata,  r  »  ftA.  2  ^
=  2  T  A  P  S.  10.  Vrfntd  or
Vrftta,  (4H-7t),  2ntf2^=:3
PAS.  11.  Sy^nicd,  orSr^n'ic^
rjrlg^^TC.  12.Sumuc'hf,
(6+6t),  n2y/^  =  PAH-2A.
13.  Bhadridl,  2nr  lg=2  P  A  2
I.  14.  Maueticamdla,  ^rf,  Anu-
cdli  or  Cudmaladanti,  (5  -f  6),
M.<n2^  =  DS-|-2PS.  15
Upast'hiti,^  *  t  2  g=l  Tb.  8  T  S
16.  Upachitra  or  Vi^^shicd,  3s  I
^  ss  3  A  I.  17.  Capurushajani-
a,  2  »r2y  =  2PA  IS.  18.
Anavasitd,  n  g  bh.  2  g^2  PS
D  8.  19.  M6faoaca,  t  2  j  Ig
=  8  3  A.  20.  M^afim&l^  3  m
2  y  =  4  8  M.  21.  Damanaca,
r»/y=4PA.  22.  MadindhiL,
f»  5/2^  =  8  2X8.

VII.  jAGATi  12x4=48.

1.  Van^ast'ha  or  Vaniast'ha-
vila,yo'r  =  2IT  31.  2.  In-
dravaii6i,2o>  =  SlT3I.  3.
Upajdti,  the  two  foregoing  inter-
micced.  4.  T6f aca,  4^  =  4  A.
5.  Drutavilambita,  n  2  W.  r  =
P  I  2  A  1. 6.  §rfputa  or  Puta,


(8  +  4),  2nmy  =  3PS  +  T
8.  7.  Jaldddhatagati,  (6  +  6),
y^y*  =  IPI  -hIPI.  8.  Ta.
ta  or  Lalitii,  2«mr  =  3P2S
I.  9.  CusumavichitrA,  (6  +  6),
»y»j^  =  2PS+  2  P  S.  10.
ChanchalacshicA,  Pramuditava-
dan^  Mand4cinf,  Gaurf  or  Pra-
bhi,  (7  +  5),2  n2r  =  2PA  +
BI.  11.  Bbujangapraydta,  Ay
=  I  T  8  I  T  8.  12.  Sragvin'f  or
Lacshmfdhara,  4r=s:T8lTS
I.  13.  Pramiticsbard,  sj2sss
A  Sc.  2  A.  14.  Ciint6tpAd'a  or
Jaladbaramdli,  (4  +  8),  m  hh.  s
f»  =  2S  -|-2P2SorW.  t»  «m
=  D  3  D  2  8.  15.  VaiSwAdevf,
(5+7).  2m2y=:MS  +  T8
B.  16.  Navamilin'i,  (8  +  4),
nyiA.sr  =  2P2T+P8.  17-
Cbandravartma,  (4  +  8t)i  •^  »
M.*  =  2T  +  PDA.  18.  Pri-
yamvad^  n  bh.jr=z  P  I  P  3  I.
19.  Man'irodli,  (6  +  6),  <  i^  <  y
=  8  P  8  +  8  P  8.  20.  Lalita,  t
bh.jr=S  I  P  3  I.  21.  Ujjwalf,
2»M.r  =  3PT2I.  22.  Mi-
latl  or  Varatanu,  (6  +  7),  »  ^J
r  =  PA+A2I.  23.  Tamarasa
or  Lalitapada,  »  2y  y =2  P  2  D
8.  24.  Laland,  (5+7)  bh.m2s
=D8  +DT  lorbh.tns^D
8  +  2  P  A.  25.  Drutapada,  u
bh.ng^FlSFS.  26.  Vidyi-
dhara,  (4  +  8),  4  m  =  28+  4
8.  27.  SaraDga,  4«=8ITSl
T.  28.  Maucticaddma,  4y  x=  I
P  T  I  P  T.  29.  M6daca,  4  bh.
5=  4  D.  30.  Taralanayanf,  4  n
=  6  P.

VIII.  AtuagatI,  13  X
4=52.

I.  Praharsbin'I,  (3+10)mwy
r<7=M  +2P2TS. 2.  Ru.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


PBAcRtT POETRY.


161


cLird,  or  Atinichir^  (4+9)/ 6A.
*y^  =  2  I  +  2  P  T  C.  3.  Mat-
tamaydra,  or  Mdy^  (4  +  9)  m
t  y  sg=2  8-l-T  I  D  S.  4.  Gaurf ,
2  n  2  r^=3  P  T  8  B.  6.  Man-
jubh^hin'ly  Prab6dhiU^  Sunan-
dini,  or  Canacaprabhd  sj  sjsr=
A  I  4-  P  3  I.  6.  Chandric^
Csham^  Utpalinf,  or  Cotllagati,
(7-1-6)  2  n2<^=P  A  +  T8
I.  7*  Calabaosa,  Chitravatl,  or
SinhanAda,  s  j  2s  g  =P  2  T  P
D8.  3.  Chancharicdvalf,  ym2
r^=I2SCT8.  9.  Chan-
dral^c'hd,  (6  +  7)»5r5^^==2
P  I  -h  2  T  M.  10.  Vidyut,  (6
-|-7)n«2/^=2PI-|-SI
G.  11.  MrYg^ndramac'ha,  91  2/
r  ^  =  P  A  P  2  T  8.  12.  Tira-
ca,  4*^=3  APS.  13.  Cal^
canda,  or  Canda  4  ^  /  :=  B  I  T
SIT.  14.  Pancajdvalf,  or  Pan-
civalf,  M.  n  2y  /  =  D2  P  2  D.

15.  Chan'd'f ,  2n2*^  =  4PDS.

16.  Prabbivatf,  (4+9)  t  bh.  sj  g
=S  I  +  2  P  T  C.

IX.  SaccarI, 14x4  =

66.

].  Asamb^ha,  (5  +  9)  tn  <  n
«2^=MS  +  2PAS.  2.
Aparijit^  (7  -I-  7)  2  n  r  *  /  ^=
2PA  +  IAIor*»  rslgzs,
P  T  A I A  I.  3.  Praharan'acalitts
or  Called,  (7  +-7)  2nbh.nlg:=z
2  P  A  +  2  P  A.  4.  Vasantati-
laca,  8inh6nnat^  Uddbarsbin'f,
Madbamddhavf,  or  §6bhd7ad ,  t
hh.2j2g  =  8lFlFT8.  5.
L6\i,  or  A161^  a  +  7)msm  bh,
2g=8  D  S  +  8  D  8.  6.  Indu-
vadand,  or  Varasundarf,  bh,jsn
2g^  T  PT  PT  P  8.  7.  Nadf,
a+1)2ntj2g=^  2PA  +
D  T  S.  8.  Lacsbmi,  m  s  t  bh,
VOL.  II.


2^=:8D8TDS.  9.Supavitra,
(8  +  6)  4  n  2^  =  4  P -1-2  PS.
10.  Madbyacsham^  (4-|-  10)  or
Cut'il^  (4  +  6+4)  mbh.  ny2
^=528-|-3P  +  28.  11.  Prama-
di,  njbh.jlg^=2  P  2  T  P  T  I.
12.  Manjarf,  (5+9)  sj  sg  I  g=i
P  2  T  P  T  S  T.  13.  Cumarf,  (8
+  6)ny^^.j2^=2P2TP
T  8.  14.  Suc^aara,  nrnr  Igsss.
P2IP3I.  15.  V&antf,  t»<nm
2yr=28DA2S.  16.  Ndndf-
muc'hf,  (7  +  7)  2  »  2  t  2^  =  3
PS  IT  8.  17.  Chacra,orCba-
crapdta,  bh.  3  n  /^=  T  5  P  I.  18.
Lfldpavatf,  (4  -I-  10)  4  t»  2  ^  =  2
8  +  58.  19.  Natagati,  4  n  2  ^
=6  P  +  8.  20.  C6pavatf,  bh,  m
*</y  =  D8DSTI.

X.  AxifiACCARi  15x4=

60.

1.  Cbandrtlvart^(7+8t)  4  n  5=
2PTb.+PTb.A,  2,Mdld,or8raj.
(6  +  9)  4  f»  *  =  2  Tb,  +  2  Tb.
A.  3.  Man'igun'anicara,  (8  +
7)  4  f»  *  =  4  P  +  2  P  A.  4.
Mdlinf,  or  Nandfmuc'bf,  (8
+  7)2nf»2y  =  3PS+CT
8.  5,  Chandral^c'bd,  (7  +  8)
fur  f»2y  =  28B  +  8IT8.
6.  Camacrld'd,  Lflac'btia,  or  Si-
brangicd  and  Sarangaca,  5  m  ss
6  8  M.  7.  Prabbadraca,  or  Su-
bbadraca  and  Suc^sara,  (7  +  8
njbhj  rr=z2FC  +  P  3  I.  8.
El^  (5  +  10)  *  y  2  n  y  =  A  I
+  4  I  T.  9.  Upamilinf,  (8  +
7)  2  n  <  M.  r  =  3  P  T  +  8  A  I.
10,  Vipinatilaca,  ft  ^  n  2  r  =s  2
PITB.T8I.  11.  Cbitrd,  3  m
2y  =  3  8  M  ITS.  12.  Tun'-
aca,  or  Chdmara,  (8  L  7  Bb.  =
23  c.)  =  6  T  C.  13.  Bbramari-
vali,  5  «  =  5  A.  14.  Manahansa,
M


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


162


ON  sanscrKt  and


*2yW.r  =  AIP2T2I.  15.
§arabba,  or  Safiicald,  4  »  +  tf  =£
6  P  A.  16.  Niiipila,  ftA.y*nr
r=DIPlP2I.  17.Ut8iira,r»
2iA.r  =  2T3AT.  IS.Hansa,
(8+7)  «2yry«2PD3T8,

XI.  AsHfi,  16x4=64.

1.  Rtshabhagajavilasita,  or  Ga-
jaturangavilasita,  (7-f  9)  bh,r3n
^  =  D2T  +  3PA. 2.  Vdn'-
inf ,  nj  bh.jrg=2  P  2  T  P  2  T  S.
3.  C  hitra,  Chitrasanga,  Atisun-
dara  or  Chancbald  (double  So-
m6nicd)rjrjrl:=8T, 4.  Pan-
ohacbdmaray  Nirdcha,  or  Nard-
cba,  (double  Pramanicd),  J  rjr
jg  =  8  T.  5.  Dhf  ralalita,  hh,  r  n
r»^D2TP2TA. 6.Cba.
gati,  Nfla,  Llld  or  A§wagati,  5
M.  ^  =  4  D  T  I. 7.  Chacita  (8
•\-S)bh.8mtng  =  DA8-^8  D
A. 8.  Madanalalit^,  (4  +  6  +  6)
mftA.7»wny=2S+2PI+SPI.
9.  Pravaralalita, mnsr ff=l  2 8
2  P 1 T  8.  10.  Ganid'aruta,  nj  bh.
y^^=2P2TPTSI. ll.Sai-
iMkic'U,  (16or5  +  6  +  5)  *A.r
n2*A.^==D2T3AorDT+T
P  T  +  I  A. 12.  Varayuvati,  bh.
ry2«^=tD2TS2PA. 13.
Brahmerdpaca,  (double  Vidytm-
mdld)  5  m  ^  =  8  8. 14.  Acbala-
dhrYta,  or  Gity&rya,  5nl=SF.
15.  PfDanitamb^,  (4+5+7) m  t
y  msg^2  8+D 8  +8  D  S.  16.
YauvanamattA,  (5+11)  bh.Sms
^=D8+3SDS.

XII.  ATYA8Hfl,17x4=

68.

1.  Sic'harin'f,  (6+11)  yt»«*
M./^=I28  +  2PIDI.  2.
Prlt'hwi,  (8  +  9) / sjsylg^l
P2I  +  TR.T8L 3.  Van^apa-


trapatita,  or  Vaniapatra,  (10  +
^)bh.rnbh. n  lg=D  2  T  A  +  2
PA.  4.Harin'f,(6+4+7or4+
6  +  7)  «*»»^*/^=2P  1  +  28
+  IAT.  5.  Mandiicrintd,  (4+6
+7)mW.n2«2^=2S+2PI
+  C  T  S.  6.  Narcufaca,  or
Nardbafaca  (7+10),or  Avitat'ha
(I7t),  ny^A.  2//^=  Tr.  21  +
Tr.  T  I  A.  7.  C6cilaca,  (7  +  6
+  4:  or  8  +  5  +  4t)=TB.  2  1  +
PIP+TI.  8.  Hari, (6+4+7)
2nmr#/y=3P  +  2S+IAI.

9.  Ctotd,  or  Crttnti,  (4+6+7)  jf
M.nr  */ y=I  8 +  2PI+1 A 1.

10.  Cbitral^c'hi,  or  AtiSayanf,
(10  +  7)2*y  W.y2^  =  2A2I
+  Tr.  T  S-  11.  MdlWhara,  or
VanamiUdbara,  nsjsylg^i
P  2  I  Tb.  T  H  I.  12.  U&nnfi,  (4
+6+7) mbh.nmg  lg=2  8+2
PI+8BI.

XIII. DHRtTI, 18x4  =

72.

1.  Cusumitalati  v^lliti,  (5+6
+7)  m  *  n  3y = M  S+2  P  I+C
T  S.  2.  MabdmAlicd,  Niricba,
Lat^  Vanamild,  (10+8t)  2  «  4
r  =s3PT8  +IT8I.  3.8a-
dhi, (6+6+6)ymn*< «=I 2  8
+2  PI+  8  P  I.  4.  Harm'apluta,
(8+5+5)  t»*2y^A.r  =  ST2I
+A  1+ A  I.  5.  ASwagati,  5  bh.
#=s5DA.  6.  Chitral^c'hi,  (4+
7+7)t»2«2*m  =  ST  +  PTB.
8  +  1  T  M.  7-  Bbramarapada,
W.r3nm=D2T3P  AS.  8,
g^dtilalalita,  (12  +  6)fhsj»t8
=S  D  2  T  A  +  8  P  I.  9.  &r.
d^  (12+6)  tn$j8r  m=S  D  2
TA+T28.  10.  C^sara, (4+7
+7)  m  M.  n  y  2  r  =2  S+2  P  A
+  8IC.  11.  Nandana,  (U  +
7)  njbh.  y  2  r=2  P  T  D  1+21


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


prAcrYt  poetry.


163


C.  12.  Ghitns^  Ghitral^e'hi,
(4+7+7)  t»  M.  n3  y=2  S -f  2
P  A  +  C  T  S.  13.  Chala,  4+7
+7)  t»  bh.  nj  bh.  r=2  S+2  P  A
+1 A  I.  14.  Vibudhapriya,  (8+
10t)r*2y  hh.r^2T2\  +
P2T21.  15.Manjfra,2mM.
m«tR=:3SDSD2S.  IG.Crfd-
4chandra,6y=I  TPITPITP.
17.  Charcharf ,  r  s  2j  bh.  r=T  D
ID2T2I.

XIV.  AtidhrKti,  19  X
4^76.

1.  ^rdilayicrf dita,  or  ^^b^dla,
(I2+7)t?i*y*2^^  =  8D2T
A  +  S  I  C.  2.  M^g^havisp'har-
jha,  or  VUmita,  (6+6+7)  9  m
ii*2ry=I2S+2PI+CTS.
3.  Ptachachlbnara,  2  n-^-  alter-
nate^ ^Tr.  P  7  I.  4.  Pushpa-
d^^^a^(5  +  7  +  7)  «»  *  «  *2r^=
MS+2PA+CTS.  6.  BimM,
(5+ 7  +  7)  w <  n*2  <^=M  S+2
PA+HSI.  6.  Ch'hdyi,  (6+6
+7  or  12  +  7)y  mn8bh,tff  =  l
28 +2  PI  +0  81,  7.  Maca.
randic^ (6+6+7) jf  mn  s  2jg
=:I2S+2PI  +  IAI.  8.8i^
mndratati,  (8+4  +7)^  9J  s  t  bh.
^=1  P  2  l+P  1+8  I  A.  9.8ii.
«8^  (7  +  7  +  5)f»r*^.nyii^
=  MTe  +  2PA+DI.  10.
Manlmanjari,  y  hh.  nyj g^l
S2PA2T2I.  11.  Chandra.
m£l^  or  Chandra,  (10  +  9)  3  nj
2«/=i6f  +  D3P.  12.  Dha-
iraUnca,  or  Dhavala,  6  »  ^  =  8  P
A.  13.  8ambhu,  (7+6+6)  s  t  y
^2«»^=ASA8A3S.

XV.  CrIti,  20x4«80.

1.  Soradaaa,  (7+74-«)wir  M.
nybh.  /^=2SB+2  P  A+8  P  f.
2.  Vr¥tt%  or  Oaiijkica,  rj  rj  rj


^/cclOT.  3.  §6bh4,  (6  +  7  +
7)yt»2n2*2^=l28+2PA
+T  8  B.  4  Giiick,  or  OfU,  s  2
J  bh.  r  s  /^exA  IP2T2IAI.

XVI.  PracrTti,  21x4

=84.

1.  Sragdhari,  (7  +  7  +  7)  w»r
M.n3y  =  2SB  +  2PA  +
T  S  B.  2.  8alilanidhi,  Sarasf,
8iddhacay  §a6ivadana,  or  Dhr¥-
taSrf,  nj  bh.  3/ r  =2  P  T  D  1+
2A2I.  3.  Nar^ndra,  6A.  r  2  fi  2
^•5^=D2T3P2DS.

XVII.  AcRtTi,  22x4=

88.

1.  Bhadraca,(10  +  12)  M.  r  f»
rnrny=D  2  TA+TTE.2T  A.

2.  Madir^  or  Lalitk,  Tbh.g:=S
DTI.  3.  Hansf,  (8+14)  2  m2
^4  »  2^=4  8+6  PS.

XVIII.  VicrIti,  23x4
=92.

1.  Aiiwalalita,  or  Adritanayi,
(11  +  12)  nJ  bh.j  bh.J  bh.  Ig^
2  P  T  D  I  +  I  Tb.  T  D  I.  2.
MatUUsrld'^  or  Vdjiv^hana,  (8+
15)2m<4n/y=4S+6PA.  3.
Sundarf ,  (7  +  6  +  10)  2  #  M.  *  <
2j  =  AP8+2PS  +  2D.  4.
M^tl,  or  Madamatt^  7  bh.2y
=7  D  8.  6.  Chitrapada,  7  bh.  I
^=7DI.  Mallic^7y/^  =  IP
T  T  P  T  I  P  T  I  A.

XIX.  SancrKti,  24  X  4

=96.
1.  Timwf,(5  +7  +12  or  12+12)
bh.t  n  #  2  M.  ny=D  8+2  P  A+2
D2P8. 2.  Darmild,8  9s3  8  A.

3.  Cirita,  8  M.=8  D.  4.  Jdna-
cf,8r=TSlTSIT8IT8I.
6.  Madbiwls7y^=  I P  T  I PT
IPTIP8.

M 2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


164


ON  BANBCB^fT  AND


XX. ATlCRlfTI, 26  X  4
100.
].  CrauiichpadB,(6  +  5  +  8  +

+  4  P  +  2  P  A. 2.  §ambhu,  8


XXI.  UTCHtTi,  26x4 «
104.

1.  BbujaDgavijrtmbhita,  (B  -f
11  +7)2m<3»r*'/^=4S  +
4PA-I-IAI.  2.  Apavdha,(9
^-6-f  6  +5)  m6n*2^  =  SD2
p  4-  3  P-i-3  P4-A  S.  3.  Gaurf,
8m2^  =  13  S.


From  27  to  999  syllables  in  the  verse.
DAir6A0A, 27x4=108  to  999x4 4.  Mattain^taDgalfldcara,  9  &c.  r

=9  he.  C.

5.  SinhavicrdDta,  2n  10  &c.  r.

6.  Cusumastavaca,  9  &c.  «  ^  9
&C.A.

7.  Anang^as'^c'haray  /y  /^  £cc«s=
15  &c.  I.

8.  A§6camanjarf , r  J  &c.  =  15
&C.T.

AUo  SXl6ra,  2^8»«  =  S12
PA.


=3,996.

1 .  Ghan'd'avrYsht'iprayitay  2  n
7r=2TE.7C.

2  Prachita,  2  «  8  &c.  r.
325  species  from  9  to  333  feet,
viz. 2d  Arn'^  2  n  8  r. 3d  Ar-
n'ava,  2  «  9  r. 4th  Vydla,  2  n  10
r. 5th  Jfmtita,  2  »  11  r&c.
Or  3.  Prachita,  2  »  7  &c.y  =  2

Tb.  7&C.B.


VL  Half  equal  Metre;  the  stanza  being  composed  of  equal

and  similar  couplets ;  but  the  couplets ^  of  dissimilar  verses.

1.  Upachitra,  {Upajdti  -|-  Td-
marasa)  Ist  3  verse  3  «  /y  =  3  A
I. 2d3JA.2^  =  3D8.


2.  Drutamadhy^  {Dbdkaca  +
Tdmartua).  Ist  3  M.  2  ^  =  3  D
S. 2dn2yj^=:2P2DS.

3.  V^gavatf,  ( t^^acAiVra— pe-
nult Br.  in  Ist  verse).  1st  3s ff
=2  A  PS. 2d3JA.2y=3DS.

4.  Bhadravir^j  (species  of  Au-
pach^handasica)  1st  tj  r  ^=:S  P
2TS.  2dm*j2^=SD2TS.

5.  C^tumatf,  1st  sjsg^aAl
Tb.  S.  2dJ^.rn2^  =  T.  21
Tb.  S.

6.  Ac'hytoacl  (  UpajdH  viz,  al«
temate Jndravtyra and Upenr


some  say  one  verse
Indravajra,  three  Uphndnwajm.)
1st  (and  3d)  2  tj  2  ^=S  I  D  T  S.
2d  (and  4th,  some  say  3d)y  <y-|-2
^=2IDTS.

7.  Viparftdc'hy^nacf  {the  con-
verse of  the  preceding)  Utj  tj  2
g=2lDTS.  2d2  tj2 ff=zSl
DTS.

8.  Harin'aplati  {Druktvilam'
bita —  one  syllable)  1st  3  ^  /^  ss
3AI.2d«2JA.r=PI2Ar.

9.  Aparavactra( species  of  Fat-
taiigaoT  Ehadricd  +  MdUufy  1st
2nr/y  =  2PA2I.  2d»2jr
+P2A2I.

10.  Pusbpitigri  (species of


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


PRiCBYx  POETRY.


165


AupacKhandasica).  1st  2  n  r  jf
=  3P2T8.  2d»2yr^=2P
D2TS.

1 1 .  Yavamatf , Ist  r  Jrj^^S
T. 2djrjr^  =  5IB.

12.  §ic'hA. 1st  28/^=  7  Tb.
L2d30/^=:7TB.PI.

13.  C'hanji,  Ist  30  /y  =  7  Tr.
P.2d28/^  =  7TR.I.


14.  Laliti,  lstr*/y=2T2
I. 2d5nJ^=ATB.2l.

15.  Caumudf.  {Bhadricd  +
Chanchaidcshicd  3).  Ist  2  »  r  /  ^
=  Tb.  P3L  2d  2n2r=3P
TSI.

16.  MaDJasaorabha  (Mdlati  +
Man^hdshiM)  1st  n  2  j  r  :=
2PT3I.  2d*^*j^=AIP3L


VII.  Unequal  Metre;  the  stanza  being  composed  of
dissimilar  verses.


1.  Udgat^  1st  verse  sjsl^sz
A  I  Tr.  T.2d  n  tj  ^=Tb.  A  2
I.  3d^A.ny/^  =  T  Tr.  2A.
Mhsjsjg:=^Kl  P3I.

2  varieties :  viz»  Sawrabhacay  3d
yer8ernM.^=TD2  A.  LaUta^
3dver8e2»2*  =  2TR.  2A.

2.  Upast'hitaprachopita,  Ist
verse  m  sj  bh,  2^r=sS  D  2  T  D  8.
2d  *ny  r^r=A2P2TS.  3d2»*
=3PA.  4th3nyy  =  6  PDS.
2 varieties:  viz.  Vardkam&nay  3d
ver8e2n*2fi«  =  3P  A3PA;
§uddhavir6lr¥shabhaf  3d  verse  t

yr  =  8  A2I.


3.  Padachaturordha,  increasing
in  arithmetical  progression  from
8  to  20  syll.  viz.  1st  verse  8,  2.d
12.  3d  16.  4th  20.
6  species :  viz.  ApiSd,  End  in  S.
Rest  Br.  PratydpiSa,  Begin  with
8  or  begin  and  end  with  8.  Man-
jari  or  Calicd,  1st  and  2d  verses
transposed  12+8  +  16  +  20.
LavaHf  1st  and  3d  transposed  16
+  12  +  8  +  20.  Amr^iadhdrd,
1st  and  4th  transposed  20+12+
+16+8.


VIII.  Supplement,  under  the  denomination  of  GAt'hA.

1.  Stanzas  comprising  four  un-
equal verses,  constituting  a  metre
not  described  by  writers  on  pro-
sody.

2.  Stanzas  comprising  more  or
fewer  verses  than  four ;  viz.  three,
five,  six,  &c.


3.  Any  metre  not  specified  by

PlNGALA.

4.  Metre  not  specified  by  any
writer  on  prosody.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


V.

Intboductory  Remarks,

Prefixed  to  the  Edition  of  the  HiT6pAD&SAy

Pablished  at  Calcutta,  1804. 4to.


To  promote  and  &cilitate  the  study  of  the  anci^it  and
learned  language  of  India,  in  the  College  of  Fort  William,
it  has  been  judged  requisite  to  print  a  few  short  and  easy
compositions  in  the  original  Sanscrit.  The  first  work
chosen  for  this  purpose,  and  inserted  in  the  present  volume,
under  its  title  of  HitSpadeia,  or  '  Salutary  Instruction,'
had  been  translated  by  Mr.  Wilkins,  and  by  the  late  Sir
William  Jones,  as  the  text  of  a  very  ancient  collecti<»i
of  apologues,  familiarly  known,  in  the  numerous  versions
of  it,  under  the  name  of  '  Fables  of  Pilpay/  The  great
advantage,  which  may  be  derived  by  students,  firom  con-
sulting correct  translations,  at  their  first  acquaintance  with
Sanscrit  literature,  has  indicated  this  work  as  the  fittest  for
selection ;  although  it  be  not  strictly  the  original  text,  trom
which  those  beautiful  and  celebrated  apologues  were  trans-
ferred into  the  languages  of  Persia,  and  of  the  West,

In  the  concluding  line  of  the  poetical  preface  to  the
Hit&padesay  it  is  expressly  declared  to  have  been  drawn
fh)m  the  Panchatantra  and  other  writings.  The  book,
thus  mentioned  as  the  chief  source,  from  which  that  col-
lection of  fables  was  taken,  is  divided  into  five  chapters,  as
its  name  imports  :  it  consists,  like  the  Hit6padesa,  of  apo-
logues, recited  by  a  learned  Brahman  named  Vishnu  sar-
M  AN,  for  the  instruction  of  his  pupils,  the  sons  of  an  Indian


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS,  &C.  167

monarch ;  but  it  contains  a  greater  yariety  of  fables,  and
a  more  copious  dialogue,  than  the  work,  which  has  been
chiefly  compiled  from  it;  and,  on  comparison  with  the
Persian  translations  now  extant,  it  ii  found  to  agree  with
them  more  nearly,  than  that  compilation,  both  in  the  order,
and  the  manner  in  which  the  tales  are  related.

To  compare  them,  it  has  been  first  necessary  to  excliKie
all  the  additions,  which  have  been  made  by  translators.
These  have  been  explained  by  Abu'lfazl,  with  the  history
of  the  publication  itself  in  the  preface  to  hi^  own  version,
entitled  Ayitr  danish  ;  and  by  Hxjsain  WAez,  in  the  in-
troduction to  the  Anwari  Suhaili

They  recite  from  Abu'lmala's  preface  to  his  translation
of  the  Calilak  u  Damnah,  that  Barz^yah,  an  eminent
and  learned  physician,  being  purposely  sent  into  Hindustan
by  NtisHf  rvAn,  king  of  Persia,  brought  a  transcript  of
this  with  other  books,  which  were  preserved  among  the  best
guarded  treasures  of  the  kings  of  India :  and  it  was  imme-
diately translated  into  Pehlem,  hr  the  gratification  of  tiie
Persian  monarch,  under  the  superintendence  of  his  minister

BUZERCHUMIHR.

From  this  version  in  PehletA,  by  Buzerchumihr,  or
by  Barzuyah,  (and  which  is  said  to  have  borne  the  title
of  Hy$n&yim  nwnehf  Jawidan  khird,  and  testament  of
Sushenk,)  the  book  was  translated  into  the  Arabic  language
by  JmamABu'LHASAN  Abdullah  benu'l  Mukaffa,  in
obedience  to  the  commands  of  Abu'ljafeb  Manser,
second  khalif  of  the  house  of  AbbAs.  From  AraUc,  it
was  restored  into  Persian,  by  direction  of  Abo'l  Hasan
Nasrv'ddIn  Ahmed,  a  prince  of  the  race  of  SAmAn;
and  was  clothed  in  verse  by  the  poet  R^dacI,  for  Sultan
Mahm^d  SabactagIn.  It  was  a^ain  translated  into
prose,,  from  the  Arabic  of  Abdullah,  by  desire  o(  Abu%
muzafr  BaurAm  shAh, son  of  Sultan  MasaCd,  a  de-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


168  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS

scendantof  iSieZ^a/i  Mahm(jd  o[  Ghazna:  and  thisversiony
the  author  of  which  was  Abu'lmala  Nasrullah^  is
the  same  which  has  been  since  current  under  the  title  of
Calilah  u  Damnah.  It  underwent  a  revidon,  and  received
the  embellishment  of  flowery  language  from  Hus  ainWAez
CAshafI,  at  the  suggestion  of  Amir  Shaikh  Ahmed,
sumamedSuHAiLi,  a  chieftain  commanding  under  jSufton
HusAiN  Minzk,  of  the  house  of  Taim6e;  and  this  highly
polished  version  is  named  irom  the  author's  patrcm  Anwari
Suhaili.  It  was  lastly  revised,  and  put  into  plainer,  but
elegant  language,  by  Abu'lf  azl,  in  obedience  to  the  orders
of  the  Emperor  Ac  bar.

This  amended  translation  comprises  sixteen  chapters;
ten  of  which,  as  Abu'lfazl  states  in  his  preface,  were
taken  firom  the  Hindi  original  entitled  Caratac  and
Dawanac;  and  six  were  added  by  Buzerchumihr,
namely,  the  four  last,  containing  stories  recited  by  the
Brahman  BIdpAi,  in  answer  to  the  questions  of  the  King
DAbishlIm  ;  and  the  two  first, consisting  of  a  prefece  by
Buzerchumihr,  with  an  introduction  by  Barz^yah.
Both  these  introductory  chapters  had  been  omitted  by
HusAiN  WAez,  as  foreign  to  the  original  work :  but  he
substituted  a  different  beginning,  and  made  other  additions,
some  of  which  are  indicated  by  him,  and  the  rest  are  pointed
out  by  Abu'lfazl;  who  has  nevertheless  retained  them,
as  appendages  not  devoid  of  use,  and  therefore  admissible
in  a  composition  intended  solely  to  convey  moral  instruction.
The  whole  of  the  dramatic  part,  including  all  the  dialogue
between  DAbishlIm,  king  of  India,  and  BIdpAi  or
Pi  LP  A  I,  a  Brahman  of  Sarandip,  as  well  as  the  finding  of
Hushenk's  legacy,  (firom  both  which  the  work  itself  has
derived  two  of  the  names,  by  which  it  has  been  most  fi^
quently  distinguished ;)  appears  to  have  been  added  by  the
translators,  although  the  appellations  of  the  king,  and  of


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


TO  THE  HlTbVADk&Af  &C.  169

the  philosopher,  are  stated  to  be  of  Indian  origin."*  For
Abu'lfazl  has  inserted  the  story  at  the  close  of  the  second
chapter ;  after  expressly  declaring^  in  one  place,  that  the
substance  of  the  work  begins  with  the  third ;  and  in  another,
that  the  two  first  were  added  by  the  author  of  the  Pehlevi
translation.

Setting  apart  then  the  dramatic  introduction,  in  which
the  Persian  differs  from  both  the  Panchatantra  and  the
Hit6padisa^  and  beginning  the  comparison  from  the  third
chapter  of  the  Calilah  u  Damnahj  it  is  found,  that  the  fable
of  the  oxf  and  lion,  with  all  the  subsequent  dialogue  be-
tween the  shakals  Carciaca  and  Damanaca^  constituting
the  first  chapter  of  the  Panchatantra,  corresponds  with  the
Persian  imitation;  excepting,  however,  a  few  transpositions,
and  the  omission  of  some  apologues,  as  well  as  the  insertion
of  others.

Thus  the  fable  of  '  The  Ape  and  the  Carpenter's  wedge,'
which  is  first  in  both  works,  is  immediately  followed,  in  the
Panchatcmtra,  by  that  of  *  The  Shakal  and  the  drum ;'  but
the  Persian  translators  have  here  introduced  a  different
apologue.  They  have  placed  the  story  of  '  The  Thief  and
the  Mendicant,'  with  others  included  in  it,  immediately  after


*  HusAiN  Waez  and  Abu'li^azl  explain  Bidpdi,  as  equivalent  to
the  "Persian  term  Hacimmehrb6n ;  and,  according  to  the  ingenious
conjecture  of  Sir  William  Jones,  that  appellation  is  corrupted  from
the  Sanscrit  Vaidya  priya.  The  name  of  DIbishlIm,  interpreted
Pddshah  buzurgy  or  great  King,  has  not  so  striking  a  resemblance  to
any  Sanscrtt  term  of  the  same  signification.  Pilpai  appears  to  be
Persian ;  and  in  some  copies  of  the  Anwari  Sukaili  (for  the  passage
is  wanting  in  others),  it  is  mentioned  to  have  been  translated  from  the
Hindi  HasHpdt;  which,  in  Sanscrit^  bears  the  same  meaning,  viz^
elephant's  foot

t  The  Persian  name,  Shanzehdk  (for  so  the  word  should  be  read,
and  not,  as  written  in  many  copies,  Shuierbah),  is  evidently  formed  on
the  Sanscr^  name  for  this  oz,  Sanfwaca.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


170  INTRODUCTORY  RBMARXd

that  of  '  The  Fox  and  the  dram ;'  but  the  Panchatanira
int^poses  another  tale,  the  omission  of  which,  however,
induces  no  imputation  on  the  good  taste  of  the  translators.
They  have  next  substituted  two  fiibles,  ('  The  Sparrow,  the
Ha^,  and  the  Sea,'  and  'The  Reformed  Tyrant;')  for  a
story  of  a  wheelwright's  marriage  vnth  a  king's  daughter.

The  next  three  fables  are  alike  in  the  Scmtcrit  and  Per-
sian ;  but  two,  whidi  follow  (viz. '  The  Louse  and  the  Bug,'
and  'The  Blue  Shakal,')  are  omitted  by  the  translatcHB ;  who
have  evinced  their  judgment  in  the  rejection  of  the  first.

The  fable  of 'The  Three  Fish,' is  placed  next  by  the  Per-
sian authors,  and  is  followed  by  five  others,  wiiich  do  not
occur  in  the  Pcmchatantartu  These  are  succeeded  by  three
more,  which  are  placed  by  the  Semscrit  author,  immednteiy
after  the  faUe  of '  The  Blue  Shakal,' and  before  diat  of '  The
Three  Fish.'

Here  the  Panchatantra  introduces  a  story  of  an  elephant,
whose  death  was  procured  through  the  means  of  a  gad-fly,
by  birds  whom  he  had  aggrieved.  But  it  has  been  omitted
in  the  Persian,  and  so  has  the  next  foble,  of '  The  Lion  and
the  Leopard.'

Tlie  remaining  apologues,  belonging  to  the  first  chapter,
are  aUke  in  both  works ;  excepting  that  of  '  The  Grardener,
the  Bear,  and  the  Fly,'  which  is  inserted  last  but  one,  in
the  Persian  translation ;  but  which  does  not  occur  in  the
Panchatcmira.

Many  of  these  fables  are  also  found  in  the  Hit6padSia,  but
arranged  in  quite  a  different  order,  being  interspersed  with
others,  through  the  three  last  diapters  of  that  compilation.

Witholit  further  particularizing  the  variations  of  the  Per-
sian from  the  Sanscrit ^  it  may  be  sufficient  to  say,  that  the
five  chapters  of  the  Panchatanira  agree,  in  the  subject,  and
in  the  general  arrangement  of  the  fables,  with  the  third,
fifth,  sixth,  seventh,  eighth,  and  ninth,  chapters  of  the  Ayiar


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


TO  THE  HIT6pAd66a,  &C.  171

(UniMk :  and  that  more  than  half  of  the  fMes,  contaiaed  ia
that  part  of  the  Persian  woric,  which  purports  to  faaite  been
derived  firom  the  Indian  text»  ccnxeBponda  exactly  to  similar
apokgnes  in  the  Sa$ucrit.  In  most  instances  of  omission,
a  reason  may  be  eaoly  conjectured  finr  the  rejection  of  the
original  stories:  and  those,  which  have  been  substituted
br  Aem,  as  wdl  as  the  few  contained  in  the  remaining
chapters,  which  are  not  avowedly  additional,  may  have  been
taken  by  the  first  translator,  either  from  other  Indian  works,
(for  Bar2Ctah  is  stated  to  have  brought  more  than  one
book  firom  jBindust&n;)  or,  though  not  acknoidedged  by
him,  may  have  been  drawn  fit)m  different  sources.  It  pro-
bably was  more  his  design  to  present  to  the  King  of  Persia
a  pleasing  collection  of  apologues,  flian  a  strictly  iaidifiil
translation  of  a  single  Indian  work.

This  collection  of  faUes  has  been  translated  more  fire-
quently,  and  into  a  greater  variety  of  languages,  than  any
other  composition  not  sacred ;  and,  although  the  earliest
paraphrase,  in  Pehledj  be  now  lost,  its  Arabic  version  is
extant,  or  lately  was  so ;  and  may  be  easily  verified  through
the  translations  made  into  more  than  one  language,  upon
the  Arabic  text.

It  is  unnecessary  to  speak  of  another  Aralnc  version  said
to  have  been  taken  from  the  original  text  of  a  pretended
king  of  India  named  Isam ,  three  hundred  years  before  the
time  of  Albxandsr  ;  or  to  mention  that  made  from  the
testament  of  Hushenk  (entitled  Jawid&n  khird)y  by
Hasan,  son  of  Suhail,  Minister  of  al  MamCn,  the
seventh  khalifoi  the  AbbaA  dynasty.  For  both  these  pre-
tended versions  are  probably  the  same  with  Abdi^llah's,
but  erroneously  ascribed  to  other  authors.

From  his  Arabic  text,  a  Greek  translation,  entitled  Ste-
phanites  and  Ichnelates,  was  completed,  seven  hundred
years  ago,  by  Simeo  Sethus,  for  the  Emperor  Alexius


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


172  INTRODUCTORY REMARKS

CoMNENUs.  One  in  Syriac,  under  the  title  of  CalaUeg
and  Damnagf  is  probably  taken  from  the  Arabic,  though
purporting  to  be  derived  immediately  from  the  Indian  text
The  Turkish  versions  (for  there  are  more  than  one)  have
been  derived  mediately  or  immediately  from  the  Arabic;
and  several  Latin  and  Italian  translations  have  been  drawn
from  the  Greek  of  Sethus  ;  not  to  mention  another  Latin
one  from  the  Hebrew,  nor  the  Grerman  and  Spanish  versions
from  the  Latin  and  the  Italian.  AU  these,  as  well  as  the
French  translations  of  Oaulmin,  David  Said,  Oalland
and  Cardonne,  from  the  Persian  Calilah  u  Damndhy
and  from  the  Turkish  Humaydn  nameh  and  Anwari  Suhaili,
as  also  the  English  version  from  the  French,  appear  to  have
been  compared  with  considerable  attention  by  various  per-
sons :  but,  excepting  two  unfaithful  imitations  in  Latin  and
Italian,  the  general  correspondence  of  the  rest  seems  to  be
acknowledged."*

We  may  conclude,  therefore,  that  the  Persian  Calilah  u
Damnahf  and  Aycar  danishy  exhibit  a  sufficiently  exact
representation  of  the  Arabic  translation  from  the  Pehlevi;
and  that,  after  rejecting  avowed  additions,  we  ought  to  find
there  a  near  resemblance  to  the  Indian  original.  From  a
careful  collation  of  both  Sanscrit  works  with  the  genuine
parts  of  the  Persian  translation,  it  is  evident,  as  has  been
already  shown,  that  the  Panchatantra  corresponds  best
with  them  :  and  there  can  be  little  hesitation  in  pronouncing
this  to  be  the  original  text  of  the  work,  which  was  procured
from  India  by  N^jsIhIrvAn  more  than  twelve  hundred
years  ago.


•  See  Bibliotheca  Grseca  of  Fabricius,  vol.  vi.  p.  460,  and  vol.  x.
p.  324;  Biblioth^ue  Orientale  of  d'Herbelot,  pp.  118,  206,  245,  399.
and  456;  Works  of  Sir  W.  Jones,  vol.  vi.p.  4;  and  As.  Res.  vol.  i.
p.  429;  also  Wilkins's  Heetopades,  preface,  p.  xiii.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


TO  THE  HlT6PAD6§Ay 8CC.  173

This  fkct  is  not  without  importance  in  the  general  history
x)f  Indian  literature ;  since  it  may  serve  to  establish  the
greater  antiquity  of  authors  who  are  quoted  in  the  Pancha-
tantra ;  and  amongst  others,  that  of  the  celebrated  astro-
loger VarAha  MiHiRAy  who  is  cited  by  name  in  one
passage  of  the  first  chapter.

The  HitApadiiaj  containing  nearly  the  same  fables  told
more  concisely  and  in  a  different  order,  has  been  translated
into  Persian,  in  comparatively  recent  times,  by  MaularA
TAju'ddIn,  who  entitled  it  Muferrehu^lhdiib;  and  who
does  not  appear,  from  his  preface,  to  have  been  aware,  that
the  work,  translated  by  him,  was  any  way  connected  vrith
the  CaHlah  u  Damnah.

This,  as  well  as  the  iStncK  version  of  it,  by  J/ItBehAdur
Al!,  which  has  been  printed  for  the  use  of  the  College  of
Fort  William,  and  which  is  entitled  Akhlaki  Hindi,  may
afford  some  help  to  a  student,  reading  the  Hitiptzdeia,  for
his  first  exercise  in  the  Sanscrit  language.  He  will  find
still  more  effectual  assistance  in  the  English  translations  by
Sir  William  Jones  and  Mr.  Wilkins:  and,  for  this
advantage,  no  less  than  for  its  easy  style,  the  HitSpadSsa
has  the  first  place  in  the  present  collection  of  Sanscrit
works.

The  second  place  in  it  has  been  allotted  to  a  short  story
in  verse,  which  is  abridged  fix>m  a  celebrated  poem  of
DAN6rs.  This  distinguished  poet,  famous  above  all  other
Indian  bards  for  the  sweetness  of  his  language,  and  there-
fore ranked  by  Calidasa  himself  (if  tradition  may  be  cre-
dited) next  to  the  fathers  of  Indian  poetry,  VAlmIci  and
y yAsa,  composed  a  pleasing  story  in  harmonious  verse,
under  the  title  of  Daia  cum&ra  charita,  or  '  Adventures  of
the  Ten  Youths.'  It  is  divided  into  two  parts :  the  first
comprising  five  chapters,  and  ending  ynih  the  marriage  of
the  principal  hero; the  other  containing,  through  eight


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


174  INTBODUCTORY RBMAKK8

more  cbaptersy  the  adventures  of  the  same  prinee  and  his
nine  companions*  The  first  part  has  been  abridged  bj
more  than  one  author;  among  others,  by  VinIyaca  in
about  two  hundred  couplets  collected  into  tiiree  sections;
and  by  Aptayya,  in  as  many  sections,  and  nearly  the
same  number  of  couplets.  This  abridgment,  beii^  com-
posed in  easy,  correct,  and  smooth  language,  ia  prderable
to  the  other,  and  has  been  sheeted  for  its  merits  m  those
req)ects ;  though  the  stoiy  be  toU  with  too  great  concise-
ness to  preserve  much  interest.

Concenui^  the  author  of  this  epitome,  or  argument,
of  Da ir 6i'8  poem,  no  information  has  been  yet  obtained.
He  calls  himself  a  counsellor  and  minister,  and  was  pro-
bably in  the  serrice  of  some  Hindu  Sofa,

The  present  volume  ends  with  three  Satcuxu  or  centuries
of  verses  by  BhartsY  hari«  They  were  recommended
for  selection,  partly  by  their  prevailing  moral  tendency,
though  some  passages  be  fiur  firom  unexoeptionaUe ;  and
partly  as  a  fit  specimen  of  polished  jSonsm^  verse.  The
poetical  beauties,  vfbich  are  most  admired  by  the  Hindu
learned,  and  which  are  inculcated  by  their  writers  on
rhetoric,  are  scattered  in  diese  couplets  of  Bh  artrY  hari,
with  a  more  sparing  hand  than  in  most  of  the  laboured
performances  of  Indian  poets :  and,  firom  this  cause,  his
poetry  is  less  obscure  than  theirs.

These  Satacas  are  ascribed  by  the  unanimous  consent  of
the  learned,  to  BhartrI  hari,  the  brother  of  Vicra-
mIditya.  He  is  also  the  reputed  an&or  of  a  gram-
matical treatise*  It  is  possible,  perhaps  it  might  be  said
probable,  that  these  may  have  been  composed  by  a  di^
fi^rent  person  in  his  name.  But  it  is  dear  firom  the  first
couplet  of  the  Niti  satacay  that  they  have  been  written
dther  in  the  real,  or  in  the  assumed  character  of  BhartrY


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


^O  THE  HIT6PADiSAy  8CC.  175

HARiy  since  that  couplet  alludea  to  a  drcumstance  con-
spicuous in  the  traditional  story  of  his  life.

The  authentic  history  of  BhartrY  hari,  is  too  in-
timately blended  -with  that  of  ancient  India,  and  inyolves
questions  of  too  great  intricacy,  to  be  stated,  or  discussed,
in  this  preface.  It  remains  only  to  say  a  few  words  respect-
ing the  inresent  edition  of  the  three  works  which  have  been
here  mentioned.

The  editor,  Mr.  Caret,  undertook  the  publication,  on  a
suggestion  fiom  the  Council  of  the  College  of  Fort  William,
and  under  the  patronage  of  Government.  He  has,  at  the
same  time,  risked  a  larger  edition  than  was  required  for  the
College,  in  the  expectation  of  encouragement  from  the
public.

In  printing  the  Hitipcuieia,  six  manuscript  copies  were
collated.  They  were  found  to  differ  much,  in  the  quotation
of  whole  passages,  as  well  as  in  the  reading  of  single  words.
Either  the  reading  most  suitable  to  the  context,  or  that
which  was  found  in  the  greatest  number  of  copies,  has  been
selected,  according  as  circumstances  have  dictated  the  pro-
priety of  following  one  rule  or  the  other.

The  abridgment  of  the  Dasa  cumara  has  been  printed
from  a  single  copy:  and  the  Satacas  of  BhartrY  hari,
from  three  manuscripts ;  every  one  of  which  vms  incom-
plete: but  the  deficiencies  did  not  occur  in  the  same


With  the  last  Sataca^  the  style  of  which  is,  in  general,
less  dear  than  that  of  the  preceding,  the  scholia  have  been
printed.  They  will  serve  to  make  the  reader  acquainted
with  the  manner  of  Sanscrit  commentators :  and  owing  to
the  peculiar  difficulties  of  the  language,  the  student  will
find  it  long  necessary,  and  always  useful,  to  consult  the
conmientaries,  while  perusing  Sanscrit  compositions. To


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


176  INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS.

lessen  one  of  those  difficulties,  which  arises  from  the  fre*
quent  permutation  of  letters  at  the  beginning  and  close  of
words,  the  editor  has  marked,  by  a  dot  under  the  syllable,
places  where  the  elision  of  a  letter  is  found,  or  any  other
permutation,  that  is  not  obvious.

In  this  first  attempt  to  employ  the  press  in  multiplying
copies  of  Scmscrit  books  with  the  Divanagari  character,  it
will  be  no  matter  of  surprise,  nor  any  cause  of  imputation
on  the  editor's  diligence,  that  the  table  of  corrections  should
be  large.  The  whole  volume  has  been  carefully  examined
by  several  Pandits ;  and  there  is  reason  to  beUeve,  that  no
error  of  consequence  can  have  escaped  their  notice.

Calcutta,  \7tk  September  1804.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


VI.
Enumeration  of  Indian  Classes.


[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  v.  p.  63 — 67. Calcutta,
1798. 4to.]


The  permanent  separation  of  classes,  with  hereditary
professions  assigned  to  each,  is  among  the  most  remarkable
institations  of  India;  and,  though  now  less  rigidly  main-
tained than  heretofore,  must  still  engage  attention.  On
the  subject  of  the  mixed  classes,  Sanscrit  authorities,  in
some  instances,  disi^ee:  classes  mentioned  by  one,  are
omitted  by  another;  and  texts  differ  on  the  professions
assigned  to  some  tribes.  A  comparison  of  several  autho-
rities, with  a  few  observations  on  the  subdivisions  of  classes,
may  tend  to  elucidate  this  subject,  in  which  there  is  some
intricacy.

One  of  the  authorities  I  shall  use,  is  the  Jatimidaj  or
Oarland  of  Classes ;  an  extract  from  the  Rudra  yamala
tantroy  which  in  some  instances  corresponds  better  with
usage,  and  received  opinions,  than  the  ordinances  of  Menu,
and  the  great  Dharma purana.*  On  more  important  points
its  authority  could  not  be  compared  with  the  Dharmasastra  ;
but,  on  the  subject  of  clai9ses,  it  may  be  admitted ;  for  the
Tantras  form  a  branch  of  literature  highly  esteemed,  though
at  present  much  neglected.f Their  fabulous  origin  derives

•  The  texts  are  cited  in  the  Ftvdddr^vd  sStu,  from  the  Vr^hdd
dharma  pwdAa.  This  name  I  therefore  retain ;  although  I  cannot
learn  that  such  a  pur6^  exists,  or  to  what  treatise  the  quotatioi^
refers  under  that  name. [See  vol.  i.  p.  103  of  the  present  work.]

t  [See  vol.  i.  p.  199  of  the  present  work.]

VOL.  II.  N


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


178  ENUMERATION  OF

them  from  revelations  of  Siva  to  PARVATf,  confirmed  by
Vishnu,  and  therefore  called  Agama,  fix>m  the  initials  of
three  words  in  a  verse  of  the  TSdala  tantra.

*'  Coming  from  the  mouth  of  Siva,  heard  by  the  moun-
"  tain-bom  goddess,  admitted  by  the  son  of  Vasud6va,  it
"  is  thence  called  Agama"

Thirty-six  are  mentioned  for  the  nmnber  of  mixed  classes ;
but,  according  to  some  opinions,  that  number  includes  the
fourth  original  tribe,  or  all  the  original  tribes,  according
to  other  authorities:  yet  the  text  quoted  from  the  great
Dharma  puraiia,  in  the  digest  of  which  a  versicm  was  trans-
lated by  Mr.  Halheb,  name  thirty-nine  mixed  classes;
and  the  Jatimala  gives  distinct  names  for  a  greater  number.

On  the  four  original  tribes  it  may  suffice,  in  this  place,
to  quote  the  Jdtimala,  where  the  distinction  of  BrahmaAaSf
according  to  the  ten  countries  to  which  their  ancestors  be-
longed, is  noticed :  that  distinction,  is  still  maintained.

'^  In  the  first  creation,  by  BrahmA,  BrahmaAas  pro-*
''  ceeded,  with  the  Veday  fix>m  the  mouth  of  BrahmJL.
**  From  his  arms  Cshatriyas  sprung;  so  from  his  thigh,
^*  VaUym;  ftom  his  foot  Sybra$  were  produced :  all  with
'*  their  females.

''  The  Lord  of  creation  vievring  them,  said,  '  What  shall
" '  be  your  occupations  V  They  replied,  '  We  are  not  our
''  own  masters,  oh,  God !  command  us  what  to  undertake/

''  Viewing  and  comparing  their  labours,  he  made  the
'^  first  tribe  superior  over  the  rest.  As  the  first  had  great
''  inclLpation  for  the  divine  sciences,  (Brahme  vSda^)  there-
''  fore  he  was  BrahmaAa.  The  protector  ftaax  ill  (cshayate)
''  was  Cshatriya.  Him  whose  profession  (veia)  consists  in
''  commerce,  which  promotes  the  success  of  wars,  for  the
'^  protection  of  himself  and  of  mankind,  and  in  husbandry,
''  and  attendance  on  cattle,  he  called  Vaisya.  The  other
'^  should  voluntarily  serve  the  three  tribes,  and  therefore


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  179

''  he  became  a  §{ulra :  be  should  humble  himeelf  at  their
*'  feet."

And  in  another  place :

"  A  chief  of  the  twicer-bom  tribe  was  brought  by  Vishnu's
"  eagle  from  Saca  dvApa:  thus  have  Saea  duApa  Br&hma^
"  iia$  become  known  in  Jambu  dwfpa.

''  In  Jambu  dvbipay  BrahmaAa$  are  reckoned  tenfold ;
"  Sareswatay  Cimyaculya,  GavAa^  MaifhUay  Utcakiy  Drh-
**  viAiy  Mah&roihiray  Tailangay  Oujjaray  and  C&itniray  re-
'^  siding  in  the  several  countries  whence  they  are  named.*

"  Their  sons  and  grandsons,  are  considered  as  Cmya^
^'  cvbja  priests,  and  so  forth.  Their  posterity,  descending
''  from  Menu,  also  inhabit  the  southern  regions :  others
*^  reside  in  AngOy  Banga,  and  Calinga;  some  in  Cama^
'*  rUpa  and  OStra,  Others  are  inhabitants  of  Sumbhadeia:
*'  and  twice*bom  men,  brought  by  former  princes,  have
**  been  established  in  MaAiy  MagadhUy  Varindray  Ch6lay
"  SweHuigr&may  Chinay  C6Za,  Saca,  and  Berbera"f

*  These  several  countries  are,  Sdrestoata,  probably  the  region
watered  by  the  river  Sersutty,  as  it  is  marked  in  maps ;  nnless  it  be  a
part  of  Bengal,  named  from  the  branch  of  the  Bh&gkrat^ki,  vhiok  is
distinguished  by  this  appellation ;  Cdnyacubfa  or  Canqf;  Gau3a^  pro-
bably the  western  Gdr,  and  not  the  Oawr  of  Bengal  ;(*)  Mit^hila,  or
l^rabhuctif  corrupted  into  Tirhut;  Utcala,  said  to  be  situated  near
the  celebrated  temple  of  JagawMha;  Dr&vida^  pronounced  Dravira;
possibly  the  country  described  by  that  name,  as  a  maritime  region
south  of  Car^aia,  (As.  Res.  vol.  ii.  p.  1 1?) ;  Mahdrdshtray  or  MarhaHa;
Telingay  or  Telingdna;  Gujjara^  or  Ouzrat;  Casm^^a,  or  Cdshmir.

t  Anga  includes  Bh6galpur,  Benga,  or  Bengal  Proper,  is  a  part
only  of  the  Suba.  VarMtraj  the  tract  of  inundation  north  of  the
Ganges,  is  a  part  of  the  present  Zila  oi  Bajeshdhi,^  Calinga  is  watered
by  the  Goddveri^  (As.  Res.  vol.  iii.  p.  48.)  Cdmardpa,  an  ancient  em-
pire, is  become  a  province  of  Asdm,  Odra  I  understand  to  be  Orisa
Proper.  RaBa  (if  that  be  the  true  reading)  is  well  known  as  the
country  west  of  the  Bhd^irafha.  Magadha,  or  MagadhOy  is  Bahar
Proper.  CJihla  is  part  of  Bisrhhum.  Another  region  of  this  name  is
mentioned  in  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  iii.  p.  48.  Swer^agrdmay
•  [See  the  note  at  page  87  of  the  present  volume.]
N 2


K


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


180  ENUMEBATION  OF

I  shall  proceed^  without  further  preface,  to  enumerate
the  principal  mixed  classes,  which  have  sprung  from  inter-
marriages of  the  original  tribes.

1.  Mirdhabhishicta^  from  a  BrahmaAa  by  a  girl  of  the
Cshatriya  class ;  his  duty  is  the  teaching  of  military  exer-
cises. The  same  origin  is  ascribed  in  the  great  Dharma
puraAa  to  the  Cumbhacaray*  or  potter,  and  Tantr<wayay^:
or  weaver:  but  the  Tantravayay  according  to  theJia^moZa,
sprung  from  two  mixed  classes;  for  he  was  begotten  by  a
man  of  the  Mambandha  on  a  woman  of  the  MaMcara
tribe.

2.  Ambashi^haf  or  Vaidya,%  whose  profession  is  the
science  of  medicine,  was  bom  of  a  Vaisya  woman,  by  a
man  of  the  sacerdotal  class.  The  same  ori^  is  given  by
the  Dharma puraAa  to  the  Cam(xcara,\\  or  brazier,  and  to
the  SaTufhacarUf^  or  worker  in  shells.  These  c^ain  are
stated,  in  the  tanira,  as  springing  from  the  intermarriages
of  mixed  classes ;  the  Cansacara  from  the  Tamraciiita  and
the  Sanc*hacara;  also  named  Satu^hadareca,  from  the
Rajaputra  and  Gandhica:  for  Rqjaputra  not  only  denotes
Cshatriyas  as  sons  of  kings,  but  is  also  the  name  of  a
mixed  class,  and  of  a  tribe  of  fabulous  origin.

Jtudra  yamala  tantra :  "  The  origin  of  JRqjaputras  is
''  from  the  Vaisya  on  the  daughter  of  an  Ambashi'ha.
''  Again,  thousands  of  others  sprung  from  ihe  foreheads  of
**  cows  kept  to  supply  oblations."

3.  Nishada,  or  Parasava,  whose  profession  is  catching
fish,  was  bom  of  a  Siidra  woman  by  a  man  of  a  sacerdotal
class. The  name  is  given  to  the  issue  of  a  l^al  marriage

vulgalarly  Sunarffau,  is  situated  east  of  Dacca.  China  is  a  portion
of  the  present  Chinese  empire.  On  the  rest  I  can  offer  no  conjecture.
6dca  and  Berbera,  here  mentioned,  must  differ  from  the  Dwipa,  and
the  region  situated  between  the  Cu^  and  6anc^ha  dw^ipat.

•  Vulgarly,  Ciimdr. f  Vulgarly,  T6nn, I  Vulgarly,  Baidya.

§  Vulgarly,  Cascrd,  ||  Vulgarly  Sac'hira.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  181

between  a  Brahmana  and  a  woman  of  the  Siidra  tribe.  It
should  seem  that  the  issue  of  other  legal  marriages  in  dif-
ferent ranks,  were  described  by  the  names  of  mixed  classes
springing  from  intercourse  between  the  several  tribes.  This,
however,  is  liable  to  some  question ;  and  since  such  mar-
riages are  considered  as  illegal  in  the  present  age,  it  is  not
material  to  pursue  the  inquiry.

According  to  the  Dharma  puranay  from  the  same  origin
with  the  Nishada  springs  the  Varajivi,  or  astrologer.  In
the  tantray  that  origin  is  given  to  the  Brahme-siidray  whose
profession  is  to  make  chairs  or  stools  used  on  some  religious
occasions.  Under  the  name  of  Varajim*  is  described  a
class  springing  from  the  G&pa  and  Tantravaya,  and  em-
ployed in  cultivating  betel.  The  profession  of  astrology,
or,  at  least,  that  of  making  almanacks,  is  assigned  in  the
tantruy  to  degraded  Brahmanas.

*'  Brahmanas,  felling  from  their  tribe,  became  kinsmen
''  of  the  twice-born  class :  to  them  is  assigned  the  profession
"  of  ascertaining  the  lunar  and  solar  days."

4.  Mahishya  is  a  son  of  a  Cshatriya  by  a  woman  of  the
Vaiiya  tribe.  His  profession  is  music,  astronomy,  and
attendance  on  cattle.

6.  Ugra  was  bom  of  a  S&dra  woman  by  a  man  of  the
military  class.  His  profession,  according  to  Menu,  is
killing  or  confining  such  animals  as  Uve  in  holes:  but,
according  to  the  tantray  he  is  an  encomiast  or  bard.  The
same  origin  is  attributed  to  the  Napita^;  or  barber ;  and  to
the  Maudojcay  or  confectioner.  In  the  tantra,  the  Napita
is  said  to  be  bom  of  a  Cuverina  woman  by  a  man  of  the
Patticara  class.

6.  CaranaX  from  a  Vaiiyay  by  a  woman  of  the  ^udra

•  Vulgarly,  Baraiya.  f  Vulgariy,  N6,ya  or  Ndi.

X  Vulgarly,  Curaiu


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


182  ENUMERATION  OF

clasSy  is  an  attendant  on  princes,  or  secretary.  The  appel-
lation of  Cayasfka*  is  in  general  considered  as  synonymous
with  Carana;  and  accordingly  the  CaraAa  tribe  commonly
assumes  the  name  of  CaydsVka:  but  the  Cicgazfhan  of
Bengal  have  pretensions  to  be  considered  as  true  Sidr<M$,
which  the  Jatimala  seems  to  authorize ;  for  the  origin  of  the
CaycLsfha  is  there  mentioned,  before  the  subject  of  mixed
tribes  is  introduced,  immediately  after  describing  the  Ct6pa
as  a  true  Sitdra.

One,  named  Bhutidatta^  was  noticed  for  his  domestic
assiduity  ;t  therefore  the  rank  diCayatt'ha  was  by  BriLh-
tnanas  assigned  to  him.  From  him  sprung  three  sons,
Chitrangadaf  Chitrasina^  and  Chitragupta:  they  were
employed  in  attendance  on  princes.

The  Dliarma  pur&Aa  assigns  the  same  origin  to  the
TambuUf  or  betel-seller,  and  to  the  Tanlica,  or  areca-
seller,  as  to  the  Caraia.

The  six  before  enumerated  are  b^otten  in  the  direct
order  of  the  classes.  Six  are  begotten  in  the  inverse
order,

7.  SutOy  begotten  by  a  Cshatriya  on  a  woman  of  the
priestly  class.  His  occupation  is  managing  horses  and
driving  cars.  The  same  origin  is  given,  m  the  puranay
to  the  MalacaraX  or  florist ;  but  he  sprung  from  the  Car-
macara  and  Tallica  classes,  if  the  authority  of  the  tantra
prevails.

8.  Mitgadhay  bom  of  a  Cshatriya  girl,  by  a  man  of  the
commercial  class,  has,  according  to  the  sastra,  the  profes-
sion of  travelling  with  merchandize ;  but,  according  to  the
puraAa  and  tantra,  is  an  encomiast. From  parents  of  those


•  Vulgarly,  Cdit,

t  Literally,  Staying  at  home,  {cdyt  sanst'hitah,)  whence  the  etymo-
logy of  CayasCha,  %  Mdti,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  183

classes  sprung  the  G6pa^  if  the  pur  ana  may  be  believed;
but  the  tantra  describes  the  G6pa  as  a  true  S{uira,  and
names  GSpyimf  a  mixed  class,  using  the  same  profes-
mmy  and  springmg  from  the  Tantravaya  and  Miaiibandha
tribes.

9  and  10.  Vaidiha  and  Aydgava.  The  occupaticm  of
the  first,  bom  of  a  BrahnuiM  by  a  man  of  the  commercial
class,  is  waiting  on  women :  the  second,  bom  of  a  Vaisya
woman  by  a  man  of  the  servile  class,  has  the  profession  of
a  carpenter.

1  h  Cshattri,  or  Cshatta,  sprung  from  a  servile  man  by
a  woman  of  the  military  class,  is  employed  in  killing  and
confining  such  animals  as  live  in  holes.  The  same  origin
is  ascribed  by  the  purana  to  the  Carmacara,  or  smith,  and
Dasa^  or  mariner.  The  one  is  mentioned  in  the  tantra
without  specifying  the  classes  from  which  he  sprung ;  and
the  other  has  a  different  origin,  according  to  the  i&stra  and
tantra.

All  authorities  concur  in  deriving  the  ChaAclala  from  a
S6dra  father  and  BrahmaM  moth^.  His  profession  is
carrying  out  corpses,  and  executing  criminals ;  and  officiate
ing  in  other  abject  employments  for  the  public  service.

A  third  set  of  Indian  classes  originate  from  the  inter-
marriages of  the  first  and  second  set:  a  few  only  have
been  named  by  Menu;  and,  excepting  the  Abhiray  or
milkman,  they  are  not  noticed  by  the  other  authorities
io  which  I  refer.  But  the  pur&na  names  other  classes  of
this  set.

A  fourth  set  is  derived  from  intercourse  between  the
several  classes  of  the  second :  of  these  also  few  have  been
named  by  Menu  ;  and  one  only  of  the  fifth  set,  spring-
ing fix>m  intermarriages  of  the  second  and  third ;  and

•  06p.  i  66ari&-6bp.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


184  ENUMERATION  OF

another  of  the  sixth  set,  derived  fix)in  intercourse  between
classes  of  the  second  and  fourth.  Menu  adds  to  these
tribes  four  sons  of  outcasts.

The  tantra  enumerates  many  other  classes^  which  must
be  placed  in  lower  sets^*  and  ascribes  a  different  origin  to
some  of  the  tribes  in  the  third  and  fourth  sets.  To  pursue
a  verbose  comparison  would  be  tedious^  and  of  Uttle  use ;
perhaps,  of  none;  for  I  suspect  that  their  origin  is  fanciful ;
and,  except  the  mixed  classes  named  by  Menu,  that  the
rest  are  terms  for  professions  rather  than  tribes ;  and  they
should  be  considered  as  denoting  companies  of  artisans,
rather  than  distinct  races.  The  mode  in  which  Am  era
sinha  mentions  the  mixed  classes  and  the  professions  of
artisans,  seems  to  support  this  conjecture.

However,  the  Jatimala  expressly  states  the  number  of
forty-two  mixed  classes,  springing  fix)m  the  intercourse
of  a  man  of  inferior,  with  a  woman  of  superior  class.
Though,  like  other  mixed  classes,  they  are  included  under
the  general  denomination  of  Sudra,  they  are  considered  as
most  abject,  and  most  of  them  now  experience  the  same
contemptuous  treatment  as  the  abject  mixed  classes  men-
tioned by  Menu.  According  to  the  Rvdra  yamalay  the
domestic  priests  of  twenty  of  these  tribes  are  degraded.
"  Avoid,"  says  the  tantra,  "  the  touch  of  the  Chanclala,
"  and  other  abject  classes;  and  of  those  who  eat  the  flesh
"  of  kine,  often  utter  forbidden  words,  and  perform  none  of
**  the  prescribed  ceremonies ;  they  are  called  MUcVha,
"  and  going  to  the  region  of  Yavana,  have  been  named

Yavaruis.

"  These  seven,  the  Rajaca,  Carmacara,  Naia,  Barucla,
**  Caiverta,  and  Medabhilla,  are  the  last  tribes.  Whoever
*'  associates  with  them,  undoubtedly  falls  from  his  class ;
"  whoever  bathes  or  drinks  in  wells  or  pools  which  they
*'  have  caused  to  be  made,  must  be  purified  by  the  five


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  185

**  productions  of  kine ;  whoever  approaches  their  women,
'^  is  doubtless  degraded  from  his  rank.

**  For  women  of  the  Naia  and  Capala  claBses,  for  pro-
'*  stitutesi  and  for  women  of  the  Rajaca  and  Napita  tribes,
^*  a  man  should  willingly  make  oblations,  but  by  no  means
"  dally  with  them/*

I  may  here  remark,  that,  according  to  the  Rudra  yamala,
the  Naia  and  Naiaca  are  distinct ;  but  the  professions  are
not  discriminated  in  that  tantra.  If  their  distinct  occupa-
tions, as  dancers  and  actors,  are  accurately  applied,  dramas
are  of  very  early  date.

The  Punclraca  and  Paiiasiitracaray  or  feeder  of  silk-
worms, and  silk-twister,  deserve  notice;  for  it  has  been
said,  that  silk  was  the  produce  of  China  solely  until  the
reign  of  the  Greek  Emperor  Justinian,  and  that  the  laws
of  China  jealously  guarded  the  exclusive  production.  The
frequent  mention  of  silk  in  the  most  ancient  Sanscrit  books
would  not  fully  disprove  that  opinion ;  but  the  mention  of
an  Indian  class,  whose  occupation  it  is  to  attend  silk-worms,
may  be  admitted  as  proof,  if  the  antiquity  of  the  tantra  be
not  questioned.  I  am  informed,  that  the  tantras  collectively
are  noticed  in  very  ancient  compositions ;  but,  as  they  are
very  numerous,  they  must  have  been  composed  at  different
periods ;  and  the  tantra  which  I  quote,  might  be  thought
OMnparatively  modem.  However,  it  may  be  presumed  that
the  Rudra  yamala  is  among  the  most  authentic,  and,  by
a  natural  inference,  among  the  most  ancient;  since  it  is
named  in  the  Durga  mehattwa  where  the  principal  tantras
are  enumerated.*

*  Tho8  enumerated/*  Colt  tantra,  M^indrndid^Tdrd,  NHrv/t^  tantra,
Serva  sdran,  Bira  tantra,  Sin^drchana,  Bhdia  tantra,  Uddesan  and
Cdlicd  calpa,  Bhairavi  tantra,  and  Bhairavi  calpa,  Tbdala,  Mdtr^-
bhcdannca,  Maya  tantra,  Bircswara,  Viiwas&ra,  Samayd-tantra,  Brah-
ma-ydmala- tantra,  Rudra-ydmala-tantra,  Sancu-ydmala-tantra,  Gdya-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


•  186  ENUMERATION  OF

In  the  comparative  tablet  to  which  I  have  referred,  the
classes  are  named,  with  their  origin,  and  the  particular  pro-
fessions assigned  to  them.  How  far  every  person  is  bound,
by  original  institutions,  to  adhere  rigidly  to  the  profession
of  his  class,  may  merit  some  enquiry.  Lawyers  have  largely
discussed  the  texts  of  law  concerning  this  subject,  and  some
difference  of  opinion  occurs  in  their  writings.  This,  how-
ever, is  not  the  place  for  entering  into  such  disquisitions.
I  shall  therefore  bri^y  state  what  appears  to  be  the  best
established  opinion,  as  deduced  from  the  texts  of  Menu,
and  other  legal  authorities.

The  regular  means  of  subsistence  for  a  Brahmaha^  are
assisting  to  sacrifice,  teaching  the  VidaSy  and  receiving
gifts ;  for  a  Cshatriyaf  bearing  arms ;  for  a  Fat^a,  mer-
chandize, attending  on  cattle,  and  agriculture ;  for  a  ^udra,
servile  attendance  on  the  higher  classes.  The  most  com-
mendable are,  respectively  for  the  four  classes,  teaching  the
Veda,  defending  the  people,  commerce,  or  keeping  herds
or  flocks,  and  servile  att^idance  on  learned  and  virtuous
priests.

A  BrakmaAay  unable  to  subnst  by  his  own  duties,  may
live  by  those  of  a  soldier :  if  he  cannot  get  a  subsistence  by
either  of  these  employments,  he  may  apply  to  tillage,  and
attendance  on  cattle,  or  gain  a  competence  by  traffic,
avoiding  certain  commodities.  A  Cshatriya,  in  distress,
may  subsist  by  all  these  means;  but  he  must  not  have
recourse  to  the  highest  functions.  In  seasons  of  distress,
a  further  latitude  is  given.  The  practice  of  medicine,  and
other  learned  professions,  painting  and  other  arts,  work  for
wages,  menial  service,  alms,  and  usury,  are  am<Hig  the

tfi^afUrOt  Cdiicdcula  servaswa,  Cui6r^uway  YhgifA-imOray  and  the
TofUra  Mekishamardifii.  These  are  here  oniyersally  known,  Oh
BHAiRAvf,  greatest  of  souls!  And  many  are  the  Umtraa  uttered  by
Sambhu."


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  187

modes  of  subsistence  allowed  to  the  Brahimana  and  C$ha^
triya.  A  Vaiiyaj  unable  to  subsist  by  hia  own  duties^
may  descend  to  the  servile  acts  of  a  Siidra.  And  a  Sudra,
not  finding  employment  by  waiting  on  men  of  the  higher
classes,  may  subsist  by  handicrafts ;  principally  following
those  mechanical  occupations,  as  joinery  and  masonry;
and  practical  arts,  as  painting  and  writing;  by  following
of  which  he  may  serve  men  of  superior  classes:  and,
although  a  man  of  a  lower  tribe  is  in  general  restricted
from  the  acts  of  a  higher  class,  the  Sudra  is  expressly  per-
mitted to  become  a  trader  or  a  husbandman.

Besides  the  particular  occupations  assigned  to  each  of
the  mixed  classes,  they  have  the  alternative  of  following
that  profession  which  regularly  belongs  to  the  class  fit>m
which  they  derive  their  origin  on  the  mother's  side :  those,
at  least,  have  such  an  opticm,  who  are  bom  in  the  direct
order  of  the  tribes,  as  the  M^Lrdhabhishicta,  Ambashi^ha,
and  others.  The  mixed  classes  are  also  permitted  to  sub-
sist by  any  of  the  duties  of  a  Sddra ;  that  is,  by  a  mmiial
service,  by  handicrafts,  by  commerce,  or  by  agriculture.

Hence  it  appears  that  almost  every  occupation,  though
regularly  it  be  the  profession  of  a  particular  class,  is  open
to  most  other  tribes ;  and  that  the  Umitations,  bx  firom
being  rigorous,  do,  in  &ct,  reserve  only  one  peculiar  pro-
fession,  that  of  the  JBrahmaAa,  which  consists  in  teaching
the  Veda,  and  officiating  at  religious  ceremonies.

The  classes  are  sufficisitly  numerous ;  but  the  subdivi-
moDB  of  them  have  fiother  multiplied  distractions  to  an
endless  variety.  The  subordinate  distinctions  may  be  best
exemplified  from  the  Brakmana  and  Cayasfha,  because
some  of  the  appellations,  by  which  the  different  races  are
distinguished^  will  be  femiliar  to  many  readers.

The  Brahma'nas  of  Bengal  are  descended  from  five
priests,  invited  from  Canyacubja,  by  AniSwARA,  king  of


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


188  ENUMERATION  OF

Gauruy  who  is  said  to  have  reigned  about  nine  hundred
years  after  Christ.  These  were  BHAffA  NArAyana,
of  the  family  of  Sandila,  a  son  of  CaSyapa  ;  Dacsha,
also  a  descendant  of  CaI^yapa;  V^dagarva^  of  the
family  of  Vatsa  ;  Chandra,  of  the  &mily  of  Saverna,
a  son  of  CaSyapa;  and  Sai  Hersha,  a  descendant  of
Bharadwaja.

From  these  ancestors  have  branched  no  fewer  than  a
hundred  and  fifty-six  families,  of  which  the  precedence
was  fixed  by  BallAla  stN  a,  who  reigned  in  the  eleventh
century  of  the  Christian  sera.  One  hundred  of  these  fami-
Ues  settled  in  Varendra^  and  fifty-six  in  Rara.  They  are
now  dispersed  throughout  Bengal,  but  retain  the  family
distinctions  fixed  BallAla  s£na.  IThey  are  denominated
from  the  families  to  which  their  five  progenitors  belonged,
and  are  still  considered  as  Canyacubja  BrahmaAas.

At  the  period  when  these  priests  were  invited  by  the  king
of  Gaura^  some  Sareswata  Brahmamis,  and  a  few  Vaidicas,
resided  in  Bengal.  Of  the  Brahmanas  of  Sarestoata,  none
are  now  found  in  Bengal ;  but  five  families  of  Vaidicas  are
extant,  and  are  admitted  to  intermarry  with  the  BrahmaAas
of  Rara.

Among  the  BrakmaAas  of  Varendraj  eight  families  have
pre-eminence,  and  eight  hold  the  second  rank.* Among


•  ViE§NDRA  BbIhMA^AS.

CuLfNA  8.

Maitra.

Bhima,

Rudra-F6^m.

Sanifommif

or

or

Cdli.

Sandifdl.

Ldhari.

Bhadun.

SadhU'V6sfi8i.

Bhadara,

The  last  was  admitted  by  election  of  the  other  seven.
§UDHA  6r6tbiya  8.
CAsufA  ^r6trita  84.
The  names  of  these  92  families  seldom  occur  in  common  intercourse.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDIAN  CLASSES.  189

those  o{  Rcsray  six  hold  the  first  rank.*  The  distinctive
appellations  of  the  several  families  are  borne  by  those  of
the  first  rank ;  but  in  most  of  the  other  fiunilies  they  are
disused ;  and  iennanj  or  serma^  the  addition  common  to
the  ivhole  tribe  of  BrahmaAas,  is  assumed.  For  this  prac-
tice,  the  priests  of  Bengal  are  censured  by  the  Brahmamu
otMifhila,  and  other  countries,  where  that  title  is  only
used  on  important  occasions,  and  in  religious  ceremonies.

In  MifhUa  the  additions  are  fewer,  though  distinct  fami-
lies are  more  numerous;  no  more  than  three  surnames  are
in  use  in  that  district,  T'hacura,  Misraj  and  Ojha ;  each
appropriated  to  many  families.

The  Cayasfhas  of  Bengal  claim  descent  from  five  Cayor
sfhas  who  attended  the  priests  invited  from  Canyacuhja.
Their  descendants  branched  into  eighty-three  families;  and
their  precedence  was  fixed  by  the  same  prince  BallAla
s£na,  who  also  adjusted  the  family  rank  of  other  classes.

In  Benga  and  DacshiAa  Bara,  three  families  of  Cayor
sfhas  have  pre-eminence ;  eight  hold  the  second  rank.f  The


•  RarIyA  BBAHMAilAS.

CulIna  6.
Muc'kuHy  GangulL  C6njeiala.

vulgarly,  Muc'hefya.

QMsh61a.  BandyagaH^  ChataU^

vulgarly,  Banojt  vulgarly,  Chatoji,

§b6tbita  50.
The  names  of  these  50  families  seldom  occur  in  common  intercourse.

t  Catast'has  of  DAosHiiiA  RIba  and  Benoa.
CulIna  3.
OUiha  Fasuy  Mitra.

yx\g.B6se.

SaNM AULIOA  8.

Di.  Datuu  Cora,  Palita.

Sena.  Sinha.  D&sa,  Guha.

Mau-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


190  ENUMERATION  OF  INDIAN  CLASSES.

Caya$fhas  of  inferior  rank  generally  aasame  the  addition  of
Da$a,  common  to  the  tribe  of  Siuircu,  in  the  same  manner
as  other  dasses  have  similar  titles  common  to  the  whole
tribe.  The  regular  addition  to  the  name  of  a  Cskatriya  is
Verman  ;  to  that  of  a  Vaisya^  Gupta ;  bnt  the  general  title
otJDeva  is  commonly  assumed;  and^  with  a  feminine  ter-
nation,  is  also  borne  by  women  of  other  tribes.

The  distmction  of  families  are  important  in  regulating
intermarriages.  Genealogy  is  made  a  particular  study;
and  the  greatest  attention  is  given  to  regulate  the  alliance
according  to  established  rules,  particularly  in  the  first  mar-
riage of  the  eldest  son.  The  principal  pdnts  to  be  observed
are,  not  to  marry  within  the  prohibited  degrees ;  nor  in  a
fiimily  known  by  its  name  to  be  of  the  same  primitive
stock;  nor  in  one  of  inferior  rank;  nor  even  in  an  in-
ferior branch  of  an  equal  one;  for  within  some  families
gradations  are  established.  Thus,  among  the  CuHna  of  the
Cayasfhas^  the  rank  has  been  counted  from  thirteen  de-
grees; and  in  every  generation,  so  long  as  the  marriage
has  been  properly  assorted,  one  degree  has  been  added  to
the  rank.  But,  should  a  marriage  be  contracted  in  a  family
of  a  lower  d^ee,  an  entire  forfeiture  of  such  rank  would
be  incurred.


Maulioa  72.

Guhan.

Gana,

Heda.

Huhin.

Naga.

Bhadre.

Soma.

Pui.

Rjidra.

Pdia.

AdUya.

Chandra.

Sdnya,  or  Sain.

Suin,  Sfc.

Sy&ma,  Sfc.

Ttja,  Sfc.

Ch6ci,^c.

The  others  are

omitted  for  the  sake  of  brevity;

their  names  seldom

occur  in  common  intercourse

u

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


VII.

Obsebvations  an  the  Sect  0/ Jains.


[From  the  Asiatic  Researches^  vol.  ix.  p.  287 — 322. Calcutta,
I8O7. 4to.]


The  informatioii  collected  by  Miyor  Mackenzie,
coDcerning  a  religious  sect  hitherto  so  imperfectly  known
as  that  of  the  JcAnas,  and  which  has  been  even  confounded
with  one  more  numerous  and  more  widely  spread  (the  sect
of  BunDH  a)i  may  furnish  the  ground  of  fiirtber  researches,
fit>m  which  an  exact  knowledge  of  the  tenets  and  practice
of  a  very  remarkable  order  of  people  may  be  ultimately
expected.  What  Major  Mackenzie  has  communi-
cated to  the  Society,  comes  from  a  most  authentic  source ;
the  declarations  of  two  principal  jmests  of  the  Jairuu
themselves.  It  is  supported  by  similar  information,  pro-
cured from  a  like  source,  by  Dr.  F.  Buchanan,  during  his
journey  in  Mysore,  in  the  year  following  the  reduction  of
SeriTigapatam.  Haying  the  permission  of  Dr»  Bucha-
nan to  use  the  extracts,  which  I  had  his  leave  to  make
from  the  journal  kept  by  him  during  that  journey,  I  have
inserted,  in  the  preceding  article,  the  information  received
by  him  from  priests  of  the  Jaina  sect.

I  am  enabled  to  corroborate  both  statements,  from  con-
versation with  Jaina  priests,  and  from  books  in  my  pos-
session, written  by  authors  of  the  Jaina  persuasion.  Some
of  those  volumes  were  procured  for  me  at  Benares;  others
were  obtained  from  the  present  Jaoat  s£t,  at  Morshed&r
bid,  who,  havmg  changed  his  religion,  to  adopt  the  wor-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


192  OBSERVATIONS  ON

ship  of  Vishnu,  forwarded  to  me,  at  my  request,  such
books  of  his  former  faith  as  were  yet  within  his  reach.

It  appears,  from  the  concurrent  result  of  all  the  inquiries
which  have  been  made,  that  the  Jainas  constitute  a  sect
of  Hindus,  differing,  indeed,  from  the  rest  in  some  very
important  tenets;  but  following,  in  other  respects,  a  similar
practice,  and  maintaining  like  opinions  and  observances.

The  essential  character  of  the  Hindu  institutions  is  the
distribution  of  the  people  into  four  great  tribes.  This  is
considered  by  themselves  to  be  the  marked  point  which  se-
parates them  from  MUcVhas  or  Barbarians.  The  Jainas^
it  is  found,  admit  the  same  division  into  four  tribes,  and
perform  like  religious  ceremonies,  termed  sanscaras,  from
the  birth  of  a  male  to  his  marriage.  They  observe  similar
fasts,  and  practise,  still  more  strictly,  the  recaved  maxims
for  refraining  from  injury  to  any  sentient  being.  They  ap-
pear to  recognise  as  subordinate  deities,  some,  if  not  all,
of  the  gods  of  the  prevailing  sects ;  but  do  not  worship,  in
particular,  the  five  principal  gods  of  those  sects ;  or  any
one  of  them  by  preference ;  nor  address  prayers,  or  per-
form sacrifice,  to  the  sun,  or  to  fire:  and  they  differ  from
the  rest  of  the  Hindus,  in  assigning  the  highest  place  to
certain  deified  saints,  who,  according  to  their  creed,  have
successively  become  superior  gods.  Another  point  in
which  they  materially  disagree  is  the  rejection  of  the
Vidas,  the  divine  authority  of  which  they  deny;  condemn-
ing, at  the  same  time,  the  practice  of  sacrifices,  and  the
other  ceremonies  which  the  followers  of  the  V6das  per-
form, to  obtain  specific  promised  consequences,  in  this
world  or  in  the  next.

In  this  respect  the  Jainas  resemble  the  Bauddhas  or
Saugatas,  who  equally  deny  the  divine  authority  of  the
VeAis;  and  who  similarly  worship  certain  pre-eminent
saints,  admitting  likewise,  as  subordinate  deities,  nearly


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.  193

the  whole  pantheon  of  the  orthodox  Hindus.  They  differ,
mdeed^  in  regard  to  the  history  of  the  personages  whom
they  have  deified;  and  it  may  be  hence  concluded,  that
they  have  had  distinct  founders;  but  the  original  notion
seems  to  have  been  the  same.  In  fact,  this  remarkable
tenet,  fix)m  which  the  Jainas  and  Bauddhas  derive  their
most  conspicuous  peculiarities,  is  not  entirely  unknown  to
the  orthodox  Hindus.  The  followers  of  the  Vedizs,  accord-
ing to  the  theology,  which  is  explained  in  the  Vedanta,
considering  the  human  soul  as  a  portion  of  the  divine  and
universal  mind,  believe,  that  it  is  capable  of  perfect  union
with  the  divine  essence :  and  the  writers  on  the  VedantCf
not  only  affirm,  that  this  union  and  identity  are  attained
through  a  knowledge  of  God,  as  by  them  taught;  but
have  hinted,  that  by  such  means  the  particular  soul  be-
comes God,  even  to  the  actual  attainment  of  supremacy .'*''

So  far  the  followers  of  the  Vedas  do  not  virtually  dis-
agree with  the  Jaincis  and  Bauddhas.  But  they  have  not,
like  those  sects,  framed  a  mythology  upon  the  supposed
history  of  the  persons,  who  have  successively  attained  divi-*
nity ;  nor  have  they  taken  these  for  the  objects  of  national
worship.  All  three  sects  agree  in  their  belief  of  transmi-
gration. But  the  Jainas  are  distinguished  from  the  rest
by  their  admission  of  no  opinions,  as  they  themselves  af-
firm, which  are  not  founded  on  perception,  or  on  proof
drawn  from  that,  or  from  testimony.

It  does  not,  however,  appear,  that  they  really  withhold
belief  from  pretended  revelations :  and  the  doctrines  which
characterize  the  sect,  are  not  confined  to  a  single  tenet ;
but  form  an  assemblage  of  mythological  and  metaphysical
ideas  found  among  other  sects,  joined  to  many  visionary
and  fantastic  notions  of  their  own.

*  Vr^had  drafiyaca  upanishad.

VOL.  II.  o


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


194  OBSERVATIONS  ON

Their  belief  in  the  eternity  of  matter^  and  perpetuity  of
Uie  world,  ia  common  to  ihe  Sanc^hya  philosophy,  from
which  it  was,  perhaps,  immediately  taken.  Their  descrip-
tion of  the  world  has  much  analogy  to  that  which  is  given
in  the  PwraAoij  or  Indian  theogonies:  but  the  scheme  has
been  rendered  still  more  extrayagant.  Their  precaution  to
avoid  injuring  any  being,  is  a  practice  inculcated  in  the
(Hrthodox  religion,  but  which  has  been  carried  by  them  to
a  ludicrous  extreme.'*.

In  their  notbns  of  the  soul,  and  of  its  union  with  body,
and  of  retributicni  for  good  and  evil,  some  analogy  is  like-
wise observable.  The  Jainas  conceive  the  soul  (Jwa)  to
have  been  eternally  united  to  a  very  subtil  material  body,
or  rather  to  two  such  bodies,  one  of  which  is  invariable,
and  consists  (if  I  rightly  apprehend  their  metaphysical
notions)  of  the  powers  of  the  mind ;  the  other  is  variable,
and  is  composed  of  its  pas»ons  and  affections :  (this,  at
least,  is  what  I  understand  them  to  mean  by  the  taijma
and  darmana  sariras).  The  soul,  so  embodied,  becomes^
in  its  successive  transmigrations,  united  with  a  grosser  body
denominated  <iudaricaf  which  retains  a  definite  form,  as
man  and  other  mundane  beings ;  or  it  is  joined  with  a
purer  essence,  varying  in  its  appearance  at  pleasure,,  as  the
gods  and  genii.  This  last  is  termed  fxdcarica.  They  dis-
tinguish a  fifth  sort  of  body,  under  the  name  of  aharicoy
which  they  explain  as  a  minute  form,  issuing  from  the  head
of  a  meditative  sage,  to  consult  an  omniscient  saint;  and  re-
tumii^  with  the  desired  information  to  the  person  whence
that  form  issued,  or  rather  fix^m  which  it  was  elongated ;
for  they  suppose  the  communication  not  to  have  been  in-
terrupted.


*  Jaina  priests  usually  bear  a  broom  adapted  to  sweep  insects  out
of  their  way;  lest  they  should  tread  on  the  minutest  being.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


TflE JAlKS.  195

The  soul  is  never  completely  separated  from  matter,
mitil  it  obtain  a  final  release  from  corporeal  sufferaBce,  by
deification,  through  a  perfect  disengagement  fi*om  good
and  evil,  in  the  person  of  a  beatified  saint.  Intermediately
it  receives  retribotion  for  the  benefits  or  injuries  ascribable
to  it  in  hs  actttti  or  precedent  state,  according  to  a  strict
principle  of  retaliation,  receiving  pleasure  or  pain  from  the
same  individual,  who,  in  a  present  or  former  state,  was
either  benefitted  or  aggrieved.

Major  Mackcnzib's  information  confirms  that  which
I  had  also  recdved,  concerning  the  distribution  of  these
sectaries  into  clei^  and  laity.  In  Hindusthn  the  JaiiMs
are  usually  called  Syaufas;  but  distingui^  themselves
into  SfavacoB  and  Yatis.  The  laity  (termed  Sraoatd)  in-
cludes persons  of  various  tribes,  as,  indeed,  is  the  case  with
Hindus  of  other  sects :  but,  on  this  ^e  of  India,  the
Jainos  are  mostly  of  the  Vaisya  class.'*''  The  orthodox
Hindus  have  a  secular,  as  well  as  a  regular,  clergy :  a
JBr&hmaAa,  fUlowing  the  practice  of  officiating  at  the  ce*
liemonies  of  his  religion,  without  quitting  the  order  of  a
householder,  may  be  considered  as  belonging  to  the  secu-
lar clergy ;  one  who  follows  a  worldly  profession,  (that  of
husbandry  for  example,)  appertains  to  the  laity;  and  so  do
people  of  other  tribes:  but  per^oiis,  who  have  passed  into
the  several  orders  of  devotion,  may  be  reckoned  to  consti^
tute  the  regular  clergy.  The  Jainas  have,  in  like  manner,
priests  who  have  entered  into  an  order  of  devotion ;  and
also  employ  Br&hmaAas  at  their  ceremonies ;  and,  for
want  of  Br&kmanas  of  their  own  fisdth,  they  even  have  re-
course to  the  secular  dei^  of  the  orthodox  sect.  This
subject  is  sufficiently  explained  by  Major  Mackenzie

*  I  onderstand  that  their  Vaisya  e\ns9  includes  ei|phty-four  tribes :
of  whom  the  most  oomioon  tfe  those  denominated  Osw6ly  Agnrw&l,
Pariwdr,  and  C^kandewdi,

O 2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


196  OBSERVATIONS  ON

and  Dr.  Buchanan;  I  shall^  however,  add,  for  the  sake
of  a  subsequent  remark,  that  the  Jamas  apply  the  terms
Yati  and  Sramaiia,  (in  Pracrit  and  Hindi  written  Sa-
mana,)  to  a  person  who  has  devoted  himself  to  reiligious
contemplation  and  austerity;  and  the  sect  of  Buddha
uses  the  word  SramaAa  for  the  same  meaning.  It  cannot
be  doubted,  that  the  Sammonacodom  of  Stam,  is  merely  a
corruption  of  the  words  Sramaiia  Gautama,  the  holy  Gau-
tama or  Buddha.*

Having  been  here  led  to  a  comparison  of  the  Indian
sects  which  follow  the  precepts  of  the  VedaSf  with  those
which  reject  their  authority,  I  judge  it  necessary  to  notice
an  opinion,  which  has  been  advanced,  on  the  relative  anti-
quity of  those  religions ;  and  especially  the  asserted  prio-
rity of  the  Bauddhas  before  the  BrahmoAas.

In  the  first  place,  it  may  be  proper  to  remark,  that  the
earliest  accounts  of  India,  by  the  Greeks  who  visit^  the
country,  describe  its  inhabitants  as  distributed  into  sepa-
rate tribes.'!'  Consequently,  a  sect  which,  like  the  modem
Bauddhas,  has  no^  distinction  of  cast,  could  not  have  been
then  the  most  prevalent  in  India.

It  is  indeed  possible  that  the  followers  of  Buddha  may,
like  the  Jainas,  have  retained  the  distribution  into  four
tribes,  so  long  as  they  continued  in  Hindustan.  But  in
that  case,  they  must  have  been  a  sect  of  Hindus ;  and  the
question,  which  is  most  ancient,  the  Brahmana  or  the
Bauddhttj  becomes  a  solecism.

If  it  be  admitted  that  the  Bauddhas  are  originally  a
sect  of  Hindus,  it  may  be  next  questioned  whether  that,  or
any  of  the  religious  systems  now  established,  be  the  most

•  See  As.  Res.  vol.  vii.  p.  415.

t  Seven  tribes  are  enomerated :  but  it  is  not  diffionlt  to  reconcile
the  distributions  which  are  stated  by  Abbian  and  Stbabo,  with  the
present  distribution  into  four  classes.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.  197

ancient  I  have,  on  a  former  occasion,*  indicated  the
notions  which  I  entertain  on  this  point.  According  to  the
hypothesis  which  I  then  hinted,  the  earliest  Indian  sect  of
which  we  have  any  present  distinct  knowledge,  is  that  of
the  followers  of  the  practical  Vedas,  who  worshipped  the
sun,  fire,  and  the  elements ;  and  who  believed  the  efficacy
of  sacrifices,  for  the  accomplishment  of  present  and  of
future  purposcfs.  It  may  be  supposed  that  the  refined
doctrine  of  the  Vedantisy  or  followers  of  the  theological
and  argumentative  part  of  the  Vedas,  is  of  later  date  :  and
it  does  not  seem  improbable  that  the  sects  of  J  in  a  and  of
Buddha  are  still  more  modem.  But  I  apprehend  that
the  VaishnavaSf  meaning  particularly  the  worshippers  of
RAma  and  of  CRYsHNA,t  may  be  subsequent  to  those
sects,  and  that  the  Saivcut  also  are  of  more  recent  date.

I  state  it  as  an  hypothesis,  because  I  am  not  at  present
able  to  support  the  whole  of  this  position  on  grounds  which
may  appear  quite  satisfactory  to  others ;  nor  by  evidence
which  may  entirely  convince  them. Some  arguments  will,

•  As.  Res.  vol.  viii.  p.  474.  [vol.  i.  pp.  110,  111 ,  of  the  present  work.]
t  In  explanation  of  a  remark  contained  in  a  former  essay  [vol.  i.
p.  1 10,  &c.  of  the  present  work]  I  take  this  occasion  of  adding,  that  the
mere  mention  of  RIma  or  of  CRisniiA,  in  a  passage  of  the  Vidasy
without  any  indication  of  peculiar  reverence,  would  not  authorize  a
presumption  against  the  genuineness  of  that  passage,  on  my  hypo-
thesis ;  nor,  admitting  its  authenticity,  furnish  an  argument  against
that  system.  I  suppose  hoth  heroes  to  have  been  known  characters
in  ancient  fabulous  history;  but  conjecture,  that,  on  the  same  basis,
new  fables  have  been  constructed,  elevating  those  personages  to  the
rank  of  gods.  On  this  supposition,  the  simple  mention  of  them  in  ge-
nuine portions  of  the  Vcdas^  particularly  in  that  part  of  it  which  is
entitled  Brdhmana^  would  not  appear  surprising.  Accordingly^
CrYsh^a,  son  of  D£vAof,  is  actually  named  in  the  Ch'Mndogya
upanishad  (towards  the  close  of  the  3d  Chapter,)  as  having  received
theological  information  from  Ghora,  a  descendant  of  Anoirab.
This  passage,  which  had  escaped  my  notice,  was  indicated  to  mc  by
Mr.  Speke,  from  the  Persian  translation  of  the' Upanishad.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


198  OBSERVATIONS ON

however,  be  advanced,  to  show  that  the  supposition  is  not
gratuitous.

The  long  sought  history  of  Cd$hmir,  which  in  the  origin
nal  Sancdfritf  was  presented  to  the  emperor  Acber,  as  re-
lated by  Ab<jVFazil  in  the  Ayin  Aoberi,*  and  of  which
a  Persian  translation  exists,  more  ample  than  Ab^VFa*
zil's  brief  abstract,  has  been  at  length  recovered  in  the  ori-
ginal language.f  A  fuller  account  of  this  book  vnll  be
hereafter  submitted  to  the  society:  the  fNres^  occasion  for
the  mention  of  it,  is  a  passage  which  was  cited  by  Da.
BucHANAN,:|:  from  the  English  translation  of  the  Ayin
Acberi,  for  an  import  which  is  not  supported  by  the  Per-
sian or  Sanscrit  text.

The  author,  afler  briefly  noticing  the  colony  established
in  Ccuihmir  by  C  as  yap  a,  and  hinting  a  succession  of  kings
to  the  time  of  the  Curu$  and  Pamiavaf,  opens  his  detailed
history,  and  list  of  princes,  with  Q6narda,  a  contempo-
rary of  YuDHisHt'HiRA.  He  describes  A£6ca  (who  was
twelfth  in  succession  from  66n abda,)  and  his  son  J  al6ca,
and  grandson  DAm6dar a,  as  devout  worshippers  of  Siva  ;
and  Jal6oa,  in  particular,  as  a  conqueror  of  the  MUck*has,
or  barbarians.  DAm6dara,  according  to  this  history^  was
succeeded  by  three  kings  of  the  race  of  Turushca ;  and
they  were  followed  by  a  BSdhisatwa^  who  wrested  the
empire  from  them  by  the  aid  of  SAcyasinha,  and  intro-
duced the  religion  of  Buddha  into  Cashmir.,  He  reigned
a  hundred  years;  and  the  next  sovereign  was  Abhi-
mantu,  who  destroyed  the  Bauddhas^  and  reestablished
the  doctrines  of  the  NUa  pwrd'Aa. This  account  is  so  far


•  Vol.  ii.  p.  178.

t  The  «opy  which  I  possess,  belonged  to  a  Brdhmanaf  who  died
some  months  ago  (1805)  in  Calcutta. I  obtiuncd  it  from  his  heirs.
X  As.  Res.  vol.  vi.  p,  165.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.  199

fixun  proving  the  priority  of  the  Bauddkas^  that  it  directly
avers  the  contrary.

From  the  legendary  tales  C(Hieeming  the  last  Buddha,
currrent  in  all  the  countries,  in  which  his  sect  now  flou-
rishes ;*  and  upon  the  authority  of  a  life  of  Buddha  in
the  Sament  language,  under  the  title  of  LaKta  'purana^
which  was  procured  by  Maj(»r  Knox,  during  his  public
mission  in  Nepali  it  can  be  affirmed,  that  the  story  of
Gautama  Buddha  has  been  engrafted  on  the  heroic  his-
tory of  the  lunar  and  solar  races,  received  by  the  orthodox
Hindus ;  an  evident  sign,  that  his  sect  is  subsequent  to
that,  in  which  this  fabulous  history  is  original.

The  same  remaric  is  applicable  to  thet7atit£»,  with  whom
the  legendary  story  of  their  saints  also  seems  to  be  en-
grafted on  the  faurbmc  tales  of  the  orthodox  sect.  Suffi-
cient indication  of  this  will  appear,  in  the  passages  which
will  be  subsequently  cited  from  the  writings  of  the  JairMs.

Considerable  weight  might  be  allowed  to  an  argument
deduced  from  the  aggravated  extravagance  of  the  fictions
admitted  by  the  sects  of  Jina  and  Buddha.  The  my-
tholi^  of  the  orthodox  Hindus,  their  present  chronolc^
adapted  to  astronomical  periods,  their  legendary  tales,
their  mystical  allegories,  are  abundantly  extravagant.  But
the  Jaincts  and  Baiuddhas  surpass  them  in  monstrous  ex-
a^erations  of  the  same  kind.  In  this  rivalship  of  absurd
fiction,  it  would  not  be  unreasonable  to  pronounce  that  to
be  most  modem,  which  has  outgone  the  rest.

The  greater  antiquity  of  the  religion  of  the  Vidas  ]&  also
rendered  probable,  from  the  prevalence  of  a  similar  worship
of  the  sun  and  of  fire  in  ancient  Persia.  Nothing  forbids
the  supposition,  that  a  religious  worship,  which  was  th^re
established  in  times  of  antiquity,  may  have  also  existed

•  Tachard,  Voyage  de  Siam, LALouBkaE,  Royaume  de  Siam.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


200  OBSERVATIONS ON

from  a  remote  period  in  the  country  between  the  Ganges
and  the  Indus.

The  testimony  of  the  Greeks  preponderates  greatly  for
the  early  prevalence  of  the  sect,  from  which  the  present
orthodox  Hindus  are  derived.  Arrian,  having  said  that
the  Br(ichmane8  were  the  sages  or  learned  among  the  In-
dians,* mentions  them  under  the  latter  designation  i<rofirau)
as  a  distinct  tribe,  ^  which,  though  inferior  to  the  others  in
number,  is  superior  in  rank  and  estimation :  bound  to  no
bodily  work,  nor  contributing  any  thing  from  labour  to  the
public  use ;  in  short,  no  duty  is  imposed  on  that  tribe,  but
that  of  sacrificing  to  the  gods,  for  the  common  benefit  of
the  Indians ;  and,  when  any  one  celebrates  a  private  sacri-
fice, a  person  of  that  class  becomes  his  guide ;  as  if  the
sacrifices  would  not  else  be  acceptable  to  the  gods.'f

Here,  as  well  as  in  the  sequel  of  the  passage,  the  priests
of  a  religion  consonant  to  the  Vcdasy  are  well  described :
and  what  is  said,  is  suitable  to  them ;  but  to  no  other  sect,
which  is  known  to  have  at  any  time  prevailed  in  India.

A  similar  description  is  more  succinctly  given  by  Str  a  bo,^
'  It  is  said,  that  the  Indiain  multitude  is  divided  into  seven
classes;  and  that  the  philosophers  are  first  in  rank,  but
fewest  in  number*  They  are  employed,  respectively,  for
private  benefit,  by  those  who  are  sacrificing  or  worshipping,
&c.'t

In  another  place  he  states,  on  the  authority  of  Mega-
sTHENEs,  'two  classcs  of  philosophcrs  or  priests;  the
Brachmanes  and  Germanes:  but  the  Brackmanes  are  best

vi.  16.

el  Ip^treu  tla-t, tc,  t.  A. Abbian.  Indic,  c.  11.

I  4fno-i  in  rirm  'UiSt  xXiihi  fi$  I'jrru  fii^nitvi^H<r^att  xai  x^mrvi  fttf
revi  f>t>i6o-cfovi  U9Xh  "'*  t.  A. Strab.  xv.  c.  1.  (p.  703.  cd.  Casaub.)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


THB  JAINS.  201

esteemed,  because  they  are  most  consistent  in  their  doc-'
trine.'  *  The  author  then  proceeds  to  describe  their  manner^
and  opinions :  the  whole  pass^e  is  highly  deserving  of  atten-
tion,  and  will  be  found,  on  consideration,  to  be  more  suitable
to  the  orthodox  Hindus,  than  to  the  Bauddhas  or  Jaituu :
particulariy  towards  the  dose  of  his  account  of  the  Brack-
manes,  where  he  says, '  In  many  things  they  agree  with  the
Greeks ;  for  they  affirm,  that  the  world  was  produced  and  is
perishable;  and  that  it  is  spherical :  that  God,  governing  it
as  well  as  framing  it,  pervades  the  whole :  that  the  principles
of  all  things  are  various;  but  water  is  the  principle  of  the
construction  of  the  world :  that,  besides  the  four  elements,
there  is  a  fifth  nature,  whence  heaven  and  the  stars:  that
the  earth  is  placed  in  the  centre  of  all.  Such  and  many
other  things  are  affirmed  of  reproduction,  and  of  the  soul.
Like  Plato,  they  devise  fables  concerning  the  immortality
of  the  soul,  and  the  judgment  in  the  infernal  i-egions ;  and
other  similar  notions.  Tiiese  things  are  said  of  the  Brack"
mamesJ'

Strabo  notices  likewise  another  order  of  people  opposed
to  the  Brcu:kmanesj  and  caHXeA  Pramrus :  he  characterizes
them  as  '  contentious  cavillers,  who  ridiculed  the  Brack--
manes  for  their  study  of  physiolc^  and  astronomy.'f

Philostratus,  in  the  life  of  Apollonius,  speaks  of
the  Brackmanes  as  worshipping  the  sun.  '  By  day  they
pray  to  the  sun  respecting  the  seasons,  which  he  governs,
that  he  would  send  them  in  due  time;  and  that  India
might  thrive :  and,  in  the  evening,  they  intreat  the  solar

rtvi  fUf  B^aj^ft^fUf  xttXUy  r»vit*Tt^fuifmi*  x,  r.  A.  Strab.  xv.  c.  1.
pag.  712.

rt9tn  Kttl  IXtyxTtKtvi. «.  t.  A. SxRAB.  1.  c.  pag,  718.  719,


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


202  OBSERVATIONS  ON

ray  not  to  be  impatient  of  night,  and  to  remain  as  con-
ducted from  them/*

Pliny  and  SoLiNuef  also  describe  the  Grymnosophists
contemplating  the  sun :  and  Hieroclbs,  as  'Cited  by  Ste-^
VHX19VS  of  Byzantium,%  expressly  declares  the  ^rocAmanes
to  be  particularly  devoted  to  the  sun.

This  wcHTship)  which  distinguishes  the  orthodox  Hindus,
does  not  seem  to  have  been  at  any  time  practised  by  the
rival  sects  of  Jina  and  Buddha.

PoRPHYRius,  treating  of  a  class  of  religious  men,  anuxig
the  Indians,  whom  the  Oreeks  were  accustomed  to  call
Gymnatophists,  mentions  two  orders  of  than;  one,  the
Brachmanes ;  the  other,  the  SamatUBans :  *  the  Brachmanes
recdve  religious  knowledge,  Uke  the  priesthood,  in  right  of
birth;  but  the  ScmujouBCMs  are  select,  and  consist  of  persons
choosing  to  prosecute  divine  studies/  He  adds,  on  the
authority  of  Bardbsanes,  that  *  a]l  the  Brachmanes  are
of  one  race ;  for  they  are  all  descended  from  one  father  and
one  mother.  But  the  Samanceans  are  not  of  their  race ;
being  selected  from  the  whole  nation  of  Indians^  as  before
mentioned.  The  Brachman  is  subject  to  no  domination,
and  contributes  nothing  to  others.'^

In  this  passage,  the  Brachman,  as  an  hereditary  ordar
of  priesthood,  is  contrasted  with  another  religious  order ;  to
which  persons  of  various  tribes  were  admissible :  and  the
Samanmans,  who  are  obviously  the  same  with  the  Germants
of  Strabo^  were  doubtless  Sannyasis;  but  may  have  be-

*  Mi^'  ifci^af  fi,h  tw  nXidt  inr^  r«y  w^Afr,  ».  r.  A. Hb.  iii.  cap.  4.
t  Plin.,  lib.  vii.  c.  2. Solin.  i.  52.

Xira  Ka^MctoifAUeiv. Stbphan.  de  Urbibus,  ad  vocem  Bracbmancs.
§  PoRPH.  flfe  jUstincntia^  lib.  iv.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  203

longed  to  any  of  the  Beets  of  Hindus.  The  name  seems  to
bear  some  affinity  to  the  SrcmamSi  or  ascetics  of  the  Jainas
Bsid  BauddAas,

Clbmsns  Albxandrinus  does  indeed  hint,  that  all
the  JBrachmanes  revered  their  wise  men  as  deities  ;*  and  in
another  place,  be  describes  them  as  worshipping  Hekoules
and  PAN.f  But  the  following  passage  from  Clemens  is
most  in  point.  Having  said,  that  philosophy  flourished
anciently  among  the  barbarians,  and  afterwards  was  intro*
duced  among  the  Greeks,  he  instances  the  prophets  of  the
Egyptians,  the  Chaldees  of  the  Assyrians ;  the  Druids  of
the  Gauls  (Galatae) ;  the  Samaneeans  of  the  Bactrians ;
the  philosophers  of  the  Celts;  the  Magi  of  the  Persians;
the  Gymnosophists  of  the  Indians:  and  proceeds  thus:-^
'  They  are  of  two  kinds,  some  called  SarmaneSy  others
Brackmmes.  Among  the  Sarmanesy  those  called  Allohii,%
neither  inhabit  towns,  not  have  houses ;  they  lure  clad  with
the  baik  of  trees,  and  eat  acorns,  and  drink  water  with
their  hands.  They  know  not  marriage,  nor  procreation  of
children ;  like  those  now  called  JSncrtitetai  (chaste).  There
are  hkewise,  am<mg  the  Indians,  persons  obeying  the  pre*
cepts  of  BuTTA,  whom  they  worship  as  a  god,  on  account
of  his  extreme  veoerableness/l

Here,  to  my  apprehension,  the  followers  of  Bupdha  are

•  K«i>*i  i^iirtf,  «kc. Sirom.  Jib,  i.  c.  15,  p.  130.  ed.  Sylb.
t  Siram,  lib.  iit  c.  7.  p»  194.  ed  Sylb.
t  8ame  with  the  Hylolni  of  BtrAbo.

tut?^$Vf^tHt*  n,al  rm  l^tymimf  ti  AXXofi§9$  iri6ray»^vifMfiy  •vri  woXUi
Wmvviv,  «vrt  riyH  iX*0'<'>  iifi^Mt  it  ufiftiffvrrect  f  A«<«r$,  km}  uK^ii^iKC
p-tr6vrrctiy  mi  vioi^  reu^  jC^(n  ^Ifuvif  6v  ytifccf,  •v  Tatio^ditav  la-artf,
iWl^  oi  tuf  *Eyx^»ni^Ai  xaXdvfcifot .  ihi  il  rii  him*  oi  rtTi  B«vrla  xu-
$ifH99t  ^ei^ttyyihfJkaa-i$'  'o$  iC  VTi^6«A«y  ai^v«Ti)T«(  %U  &<«»  rtrtfiiKan.
Strom,  lib.  i.  c.  15.  p.  131.  ed.  Sylb.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


204  OBSERVATIONS  ON

clearly  distinguished  from  the  Brachmanes  and  Sarmanes.^
The  latter,  called  Germanes  by  Strabo,  and  SanumcBans
by  PoBPHYRius,  are  the  ascetics  of  a  different  religion;
and  may  have  belonged  to  the  sect  of  Jin  a,  or  to  another.
The  Brachmanes  are  apparently  those  who  are  described
by  Philostratus  and  Hierocles,  as  worshipping  the
sun;  and,  by  Strabo  and  by  Arrian,  as  performing
sacrifices  for  the  common  benefit  of  the  nation,  as  well  as
for  individuals. The  religion  which  they  practised,  was
80  far  conformable  with  the  precepts  of  the  Ved/xs:  and
their  doctrine  and  observances,  their  manners  and  opinions,
as  noticed  by  the  authors  above  cited,  agree  with  no  other
religious  institutions  known  in  India,  but  the  orthodox  sect.
In  short,  the  Brahma'Aas  are  distinctly  mentioned  by  Greek
authors  as  the  first  of  the  tribes  or  casts,  into  which  the
Indian  nation  was  then,  as  now,  divided. They  are  ex-
pressly discriminated  firom  the  sect  of  Buddha  by  one
ancient  author,  and  from  the  Sarmanesy  or  SamaruBans,
(ascetics  of  various  tribes)  by  others. They  are  described
by  more  than  one  authority,  as  worshipping  the  sun,  as
performing  sacrifices,  and  as  denying  the  eternity  of  the
world,  and  maintaining  other  tenets  incompatible  with  the
supposition  that  the  sects  of  Buddha  or  Jina  could  be
meant. Their  manners  and  doctrine,  as  described  by  tliese
authors,  are  quite  conformable  with  the  notions  and  prac-
tice of  the  orthodox  Hindus. It  may  therefore  be  con-
fidently inferred,  that  the  followers  of  the  Vedas  flourished
in  India  when  it  was  visited  by  the  Greeks  under  Alex-
ander :  and  continued  to  flourish  from  the  time  of  Me-
GASTHENES,  who  described  them  in  the  fourth  century
before  Christ,  to  that  of  PorphyrIus,  who  speaks  of

*  The  passage  has  been  interpreted  differently;  as  if  Clemens
said,  that  the  Allobii  were  those  who  worshipped  Butta.  (See
MoREBi,  Art.  Samancens*) The  text  is  ambiguous.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  205

them,  on  later  authority,  in  the  third  century  after
Christ.

I  have  thus  stated,  as  briefly  as  the  nature  of  the  subject
permitted,  a  few  of  the  facts  and  reasons  by  which  the
opinion,  that  the  religion  and  institutions  of  the  orthodox
Hindus  are  more  modem  than  the  doctrines  of  Jin  a  and
of  Buddha,  may,  as  I  think,  be  successfully  resisted.  I
have  not  undertaken  a  formal  refutation  of  it,  and  have,
therefore,  passed  unnoticed,  objections  which  are  founded
on  misapprehension.

It  is  only  necessary  to  remark,  that  the  past  prevalence
of  either  of  those  sects  in  particular  places,  with  its  subse-
quent persecution  there  by  the  worshippers  of  Siva,  or  of
Vishnu,  is  no  proof  of  its  general  priority.  Hindustan
proper  was  the  early  seat  of  the  Hindu  religion,  and  the
acknowledged  cradle  of  both  the  sects  in  question.  They
were  foreigners  in  the  Peninsula  of  India ;  and  admitting,
as  a  fact,  (what  need  not,  however,  be  conceded,)  that  the
orthodox  Hindus  had  not  been  previously  settled  in  the
Cariiaiaca  and  other  districts,  in  which  the  Jainas  or  the
Bauddhas  have  flourished,  it  cannot  be  thence  concluded,
that  the  follower^  of  the  Vedas  did  not  precede  them  in
other  provinces.

It  may  be  proper  to  add,  that  the  establishment  of  par-
ticular sects  among  the  Hindus  who  acknowledge  the
Vedasy  does  not  affect  the  general  question  of  relative
antiquity.  The  special  doctrines  introduced  by  Sancara
Acharya,  by  RAmAnuja,  and  by  MAdhavAcharya,
and  of  course  the  origin. of  the  sects  which  receive  those
doctrines,  may  be  referred,  with  precision,  to  the  periods
when  their  authors  lived :  but  the  religion  in  which  they
are  sectaries,  has  undoubtedly  a  much  earlier  origin.

To  revert  to  the  immediate  object  of  these  observations,
which  is  that  of  explaining  and  supporting  the  information


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


206  OBSERVATIONS  ON

commnnicated  by  Major  Mackenzie  :  I  shall^  for  that
purpose,  state  the  substance  of  a  few  passages  from  a  work
of  great  authority  among  the  JainaSf  entitled  Calpa  9titra,
and  from  a  vocabulary  of  the  Sanscrit  language  by  an
author  of  the  Jaina  sect.

The  AbMdh&na  chmt&maM,  a  vocabulary  ct  synonymous
terms,  by  H^machandra  AchAbya,  is  divided  into  six
chapters  (caiiAis,)  the  contents  of  which  me  thus  stated-
in  the  author's  prefece.  '  The  superior  deities  {Deva-
dhidcvas)  are  noticed  in  the  first  chapter ;  the  gods  (Devas)
in  the  second ;  men  in  the  third ;  beings  furnished  with  one
or  more  senses  in  the  fourth ;  the  infernal  regions  in  the
fifth ;  and  terms  of  general  use  in  the  sittfa/  '  The  earth/
observes  this  author,  '  water,  fire,  air^  and  trees,  have  a
single  organ  or  sense  {indriya);  worms,  ants,  spiders,  and
the  like,  have  two,  three,  or  four  senses;  elephants,  pea^
cocks,  fish,  and  other  beings  movmg  on  the  earth,  in  the
sky,  or  in  water,  are  furnished  with  five  senses :  and  so  Bsre
gods  and  ro^,  and  the  inhabitants  of  hell/

The  first  chi^ter  begins  with  the  synonyma  of  a  Jina  or
deified  saint:  among  whieh  the  most  common  are  Athat^
Jiniiwaraj  Tirfha$icaTa  or  Tirfkacara:  others,  viz.  Jinay
Sarvqjnya,  and  Bhagavat,  occur  also  in  the  dictionary  of
Amer  A  as  terms  for  a  Jina  or  Buddha;  but  it  is  deserving
of  remark,  that  neither  Bvddkaj  nor  Sugata,  is  stated  by
HfiMACHANDRA  among  these  synonyma.  In  the  subse-
qu^it  chapter,  however,  on  the  subject  of  inferior  gods,
after  noticing  the  gods  of  Hindu  mylliology,  (Indra  and
the  rest,  including  BrahmA,  &c.)  he  states  the  synonyma
of  a  Bttddhoy  Sugata,  or  BSdhisatwa;  and  afWwards
specifies  seven  such,  viz.  VipaSyI,  Sic'hI,  VISwanna,
CucucH^HANnA,  CAnchana,  and  CAsyapa,*  expressly

•  Two  of  these  names  occur  in  Captain  Mahony's  and  Mr.  Join-
ville's  lists  of  ftre  Buddhas. As.  Res.  to!,  vii.  p.  32  and  414.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  207

meDiioning  as  the  seventh  Buddha,  Sacyasinha,  also
named  SfiRvABT'HAsiDDHAy  son  of  Suddh6dana  and
MayA,  a  kinsman  of  the  sun,  from  the  race  of  Gautama.

In  the  first  chapter,  after  stating  the  general  terms  for  a
Ji$ui  or  Arhatf  the  author  proceeds  to  enmnerale  twenty-
four  Arhatgj  who  have  appeared  in  the  present  Awxsarfi^
age:  and  afterwards  observes,  that  exceptmg  Munisu*
VRATA  and  N6mi,  who  sprung  from  the  race  of  Hari,
the  remaining  twenty^wo  Jinas  were  bom  in  the  line  of
IcsHwAcu.*  The  fathers  and  mothers  of  the  several
Jinc»  are  then  mentioned ;  their  attendants ;  their  standards
or  characteristics;  and  the  complexions  with  which  they
are  figured  or  described*

The  author  next  enumerates  twenty-four  Jinas  who  have
appeared  in  the  past  UtsarpiM  period;  and  twenty-four
others  who  will  appear  in  the  fritnre  age :  and,  through  the
remainder  of  the  first  book,  explains  terras  relative  to  the
Jaina  rdigion.

The  names  of  the  Jituisf  are  specified  in  Major  Mac-
kenzie's communication.t  Wherever  those  names  agree
with  HiMACHANDRA's  enumeration,  I  have  added  no  re-
mark ;  but  where  a  differaice  occurs  I  have  noticed  it,  add-
ing in  the  margin  the  name  exhibited  in  the  Sanscrit  text.

I  shall  here  subjoin  the  information  gathered  from
H£machandra's  vocabulary,  and  from  the  Culpa  sikra
and  other  authorities,  rdative  to  the  Jinas  belonging  to  the
present  pmod.  They  appear  to  be  the  deified  saints,  who
are  now  worshipped  by  the  Jaina  sect*  They  are  all
figured  in  the  same  contemplative  posture,  with  little  varia-

*  I  understand  that  the  Jainas  have  a  mythological  poem  entitled
Harivansa  purd'hOy  different  from  the  Harivansa  of  the  orthodox.
Their  losHvirXou,  likewise,  is  a  different  person ;  and  the  name  is
said  to  be  a  title  of  their  first  Jina,  Rishabha  nivA.

t  [In  the  Asiatic  Researches,  toK  ix.  p.  244,  &c.]


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


208  OBSERVATIONS ON

tion  in  their  appearance,  besides  a  difFerence  of  complexion :
but  the  several  Jinas  have  distinguishing  marks  or  charac-
teristic signs,  which  are  usually  engraved  on  the  pedestals
pf  their  images,  to  discriminate  them.

1.  RIsHABHA,  or  VbYshabha,  of  the  race  of  Icsh-
wAcUy  was  son  of  NAbhi  by  Marud&va:  he  is  figured
of  a  yellow  or  golden  complexion ;  and  has  a  bull  for  his
characteristic.  His  stature,  as  is  pretended,  was  500  poles
(dhanush ;)  and  the  duration  of  his  life,  8,400,000,  great
years  (purva  varsha.)  According  to  the  Calpa  sdtra,  as
interpreted  by  the  commentator,  he  was  bom  at  CSiala  or
Ay6dhya  (whence  he  is  named  CauSalica),  towards  the
latter  part  of  the  third  age.  He  was  tha  first  king,  first
anchoret,  and  first  saint ;  and  is  therefore  entitled  Pra-
fhama  Raja,  Prafhama  £hicskacaraf  Prafhama  Jina,
and  Prafhama  TvrVhancara.  At  the  time  of  his  inaugu-
ration as  king,  his  age  was  2,000,000  years.  He  reigned
6,300,000  years ;  and  then  resigned  his  empire  to  his  sons:
and  having  employed  100,000  years  in  passing  through
the  several  stages  of  austerity  and  sanctity,  departed  from
this  world  on  the  summit  of  a  mountain,  named  AsAiapada.
The  date  of  his  apotheosis  was  3  years  and  8i  months
before  the  end  of  the  third  age,  at  the  precise  interval  of
one  whole  age  before  the  deification  of  the  last  Jina.

2.  Ajita  was  son  of  JitaSatru  by  VijayA:  of  the
same  race  with  the  first  Jina,  and  represented  as  of  the
like  complexion;  with  an  elephant  for  his  distinguishing
mark.  His  stature  was  450  poles;  and  his  hfe  extended  to
7,200,000  great  years.  His  deification  took  place  in  the
fourth  age,  when  fifty  lacshas  of  cr6rs  of  oceans  of  years
had  elapsed  out  of  the  tenth  cr6r  of  crSrs,*


•  The  divisions  of  time  have  been  noticed  by  Major  Maokenzib,
As.  Res.  vol.  ix.  p.  257>  and  will  be  further  explained.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.  209

3.  Sambhava  was  son  of  JitAri  by  S^nA;  of  the
same  race  and  complexion  with  the  preceding;  distin-
guished by  a  horse ;  his  stature  was  400  poles ;  he  lived
6,000,000  years ;  and  he  was  deified  30  lacshas  of  cr6rs  of
sagaras  after  the  second  Jina.

4.  Abhinandana  was  son  of  Sambara  by  Sid-
dhArt'hA  :  he  has  an  ape  for  his  peculiar  sign.  His  sta-
ture was  300  poles ;  and  his  life  reached  to  5,000,000  years.
His  apotheosis  was  later  by  10  lacshas  of  cr6rs  of  sagaras
than  the  foregoing.

6.  SuMATi  was  son  of  M&gha  by  MangalA:  he
has  a  curlew  for  his  characteristic.  His  life  endured
4,000,000  years,  and  his  deification  was  nine  lacshas  of
cr6rs  of  sagaras  after  the  fourth  Jina.

6.  Padmaprabha  was  son  of  SrIdhara  by  SusImA;
of  the  same  race  with  the  preceding,  but  described  of  a
red  complexion.  He  has  a  lotos  for  his  mark  :  and  lived
3,000,000  years,  being  200  poles  in  stature.  He  was  dei-
fied 90,000  crdrs  of  sagaras  after  the  fifth  Jina.

7.  SupArswa  was  son  of  PRATisnt 'ha  by  PRlx'Hwi  ;
of  the  same  line  with  the  foregoing,  but  represented  with
a  golden  complexion;  his  sign  is  the  figure  called  Swastica.

He  lived 2,000,000  years; and  was  deified
—  9,000  crSrs  of  sagaras  subsequent  to  the  sixth
I  Jina.


8.  Chandraprabha  was  son  of  MahAs£na  by
LacshmanA;  of  the  same  race  with  the  last,  but  figured
with  a  fair  complexion :  his  sign  is  the  moon :  his  stature
was  160  poles,  and  he  lived  1,000,000  years ;  and  his  apo-
theosis took  place  900  cr6rs  of  sagaras  later  than  the  se-
venth Jina.

9.  Pushpadanta,  also  named  Suvidhi,  was  son  of
SupRiYA  by  RAmA  :  of  the  same  line  with  the  preceding,

VOL.  II.  p


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


n.  complexion :


210  OBSERVATIONS ON

and  described  of  a  similar  complexion :  his  mark-  is  a
marine  monster  (macara):  his  stature  was  100  poles,
and  the  duration  of  his  life  200,000  years.  He  was  deified
90  cr6rs  of  sagaras  after  the  eighth  Jina.

10.  SItala  was  son  of  DRt6HABAT*HA  byNANDA:  of
the  same  race,  and  represented  with  a  golden  complexion  :
his  characteristic  is  the  mark  called  Srivatsa.
His  stature  was  90  poles  ;  and  his  life  100,000
great  years;  his  deification  dates  9  cr6rs
sagaras  later  than  the  preceding.

11.  Sr^yAn  (SfifeYAs)  or  Sr£:yAn§a,  was  son  of
Vishnu  by  VishnA  ;  of  the  same  race,  and  with  a  similar
complexion;  having  a  rhinoceros  for  his  sign.  He  was
80  poles  in  stature,  and  lived  8,400,000  common  years.
His  apotheosis  took  place  more  than  100  sagaras  of  years
before  the  close  of  the  fourth  age.

12.  VAsup^JYA  was  son  of  Vasup6jya  by  JayA  :  of
the  same  race,  and  represented  with  a  red  complexion,
having  a  buffalo  for  his  mark;  and  he  was  70  poles  high,
lived  7,200,000  years,  and  was  deified  later  by  64  sagaras
than  the  eleventh  Jina.

13.  ViMALA  was  son  of  CrKtavarman  by  SyAmA  ;  of
the  same  race :  described  of  a  golden  complexion,  having
a  boar  for  his  characteristic ;  he  was  60  poles  high,  lived
6,000,000  years,  and  was  deified  30  sagaras  later  than
the  twelfth  Jiruz.

14.  Ananta,  also  named  Anantajit,  was  son  of
SiNH AS&NA  by  Suya^Ah.  He  has  a  falcon  for  his  sign ;
his  stature  was  50  poles,  the  duration  of  his  life  3,000,000
years,  and  his  apotheosis  9  sagaras  after  the  preceding.

15.  Dharma  was  son  of  BhAnu  by  SuvratA  ;  cha-
racterised by  the  thunderbolt:  he  was  45  poles  in  stature,
and  Hved  1,000,000  years :  he  was  defied  4  sagaras  later
than  the  foregoing.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.


211


16.  SAnti  was  son  of  ViiwAsfeNA  by  Achira,  having
an  antelope  for  his  sign ;  he  was  40  poles  high,  lived
100,000  years,  and  was  deified  2  sagaras  subsequent  to
the  last  mentioned."*^

17.  Cunt'hu  was  son  of  S6ra,  by  &Ri ;  he  has  a
goat  for  his  mark ;  his  height  was  35  poles,  and  his  life
95,000  years.  His  apotheosis  is  dated  in  the  lost  palya  of
the  fourth  age.

18.  Ara  was  son  of  Sun  a  rs  an  a  by  Dfevi :  charac-
terised by  the  figure  called  Nandavarta :


:i\


his  stature  was  30  poles,  his  Ufe  84,000  years,  and  his  dei-
fication 1,000  cr6rs  of  years  before  the  next  Jina.

19.  Malli  was  son  of  Cumbha  by  PrabhavatI;  of
the  same  race  with  the  preceding ;  and  represented  of  a
blue  complexion ;  having  a  jar  for  his  characteristic ;  he
was  25  poles  high,  and  Uved  55,000  years ;  and  was  dei-
fied 6,584,000  years  before  the  close  of  the  fourth  age.

20.  Munisuvrata,  also  named  Suvrata,  or  Muni,
was  son  of  Sumitra  by  PadmA,  sprung  from  the  race
called  HarivanSa;  represented  with  a  black  complexion,
having  a  tortoise  for  his  sign :  his  height  was  20  poles,  and
his  life  extended  to  30,000  years.  His  apotheosis  is  dated
1,184,000  years  before  the  end  of  the  fourth  age.

•  The  life  of  this  Jina  is  the  subject  of  a  separate  work  entitled
Sanii  purd^.

p2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


212  OBSERVATIONS ON

21.  NiMi  was  son  of  Vijaya  by  ViprA  ;  of  the  race
of  IcsHwAcu  :  figured  with  a  golden  complexion;  having
for  his  mark  a  blue  water-lily  {nilStpala);  his  stature  was
15  poles ;  his  life  10,000  years  ;  and  his  deification  took
place  584,000  years  before  the  expiration  of  the  fourth
age.

22.  N^Mi,  also  called  ARisnf  an^mi,  was  son  of  the
king  Samudrajaya  by  SivA;  of  the  line  denominated
Harivansa  ;  described  as  of  a  black  complexion,  having
a  conch  for  his  sign.  According  to  the  Calpa  sutra,  he
was  bom  at  S&riyapura ;  and,  when  300  years  of  age,  en-
tered on  the  practice  of  austerity.  He  employed  700  years
in  passing  through  the  several  stages  of  sanctity;  and,
having  attained  tjie  age  of  1,000  years,  departed  fi'om  this
world  at  Ujjinta,  which  is  described  as  the  peak  of  a
mountain,  the  same,  according  to  the  commentator,  with
Giranara.*  The  date  of  this  event  is  84,000  years  before
the  close  of  the  fourth  age.

23.  PArSwa  (or  PArswanAt'ha)  was  son  of  the  king
ASwAsfeNA  by  VAmA,  or  BAmAd^vI  ;  of  the  race  of
IcsHwAcu  ;  figured  with  a  blue  complexion,  having  a
serpent  for  his  characteristic.  The  life  of  this  celebrated
Jin  A,  who  was  perhaps  the  real  founder  of  the  sect,  is  the
subject  of  a  poem  entitled  Parswanafha  charitra.  Ac-
cording to  the  Calpa  sutraj  he  was  bom  at  Banarasi;^
and  commenced  his  series  of  religious  austerities  at  thirty
yeare  of  age ;  and  having  completed  them  in  70  years,  and
having  consequently  attained  the  age  of  100, years,  he  died
on  Mount  Sammeya  or  Samet.% This  happened  precisely

•  1  understand  this  to  be  a  mountain  situated  in  the  west  of  India;
and  much  visited  by  pilgrims.

t  BhUupurGy  in  the  suburbs  of  Benares,  is  esteemed  holy,  as  the
place  of  his  nativity.

J  Samet  sichara,  called  in  Major  Rennbi/s  map  Parsonaut^  is


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


THE JAINS.  213

250  years  before  the  apotheosis  of  the  next  Jina  :  being
stated  by  the  author  of  the  Calpa  sutra  at  1,230  years
before  the  date  of  that  book.

24.  VabdhamAna,  also  named  VIra,  MAHivfBA,
&c.  and  sumamed  Charama  tirfhcLcrity  or  last  of  the
Jinns:  emphatically  called  S  ram  an  a,  or  the  saint.  He  is
reckoned  son  of  SiddhArt'ha  by  TrisalA;  and  is  de-
scribed of  a  golden  complexion,  having  a  Uon  for  his
symbol.

The  subject  of  the  Calpa  siitra,  before  cited,  is  the  hfe
and  institutions  of  this  Jina.  I  shall  here  state  an  ab-
stract of  his  history  as  there  given,  premising  that  the
work,  like  other  religious  books  of  the  Jainas,  is  composed
in  the  Pracrit  called  Magadhi;  and  that  the  Sanscrit
language  is  used  by  the  Jainas  for  translations,  or  for
commentaries,  on  account  of  the  great  obscurity  of  the
Pracrit  tongue.*

According  to  this  authority,  the  last  Tirt*hancara,  quit-
ting the  state  of  a  deity,  and  relinquishing  the  longevity  of  a
god,  to  obtain  immortality  as  a  saint,  was  incarnate  towards
the  close  of  the  fourth  age,  (now  past,)  when  75  years  and
8  k  months  of  it  remained.  He  was  at  first  conceived  by
DevAnandA,  wife  of  RYshabhadatta,  a  Brahmana  in-
habiting Brahmanacunda  gr&ma  a  dty  of  Bharata  varsha,
in  Jamhu  dmpa.  The  conception  was  announced  to  her  by

situated  among  the  hills  between  Bihdr  and  Bengal,  Its  holiness  is
great  in  the  estimation  of  the  Jainas :  and  it  is  said  to  be  visited  by
pilgrims  from  the  remotest  provinces  of  India.

•  This  TrdcrUy  which  does  not  differ  much  from  the  language  intro-
duced by  dramatic  poets  into  their  writings,  and  assigned  by  them  to
the  female  persons  in  their  dramas,  is  formed  from  Sanscrit,  I  once
conjectured  it  to  have  been  formerly  the  colloquial  dialect  of  the
Sdrastoata  Brdhmens  [p.  21  of  the  present  volume] ;  but  this  conjecture
has  not  been  confirmed  by  further  researches.  I  believe  it  to  be  the
same  language  with  th^  Pdli  of  Ceylon,


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


214  OBSERVATIONS  ON

dreams.  Indra,*  or  Sacra,  who  is  the  presiding  deity
on  the  south  of  Meru,  and  abides  in  the  first  range  of
celestial  regions,  called  Saudharma,  being  apprized  of  Ma-
hAyIra's  incarnation,  prostrated  himself,  and  worshipped
the  fiiture  saint ;  but  reflecting  that  no  great  personage
was  ever  bom  in  an  indigent  and  mendicant  family,  as  that
of  a  BrahmaAay  Indra  commanded  his  chief  attendant
Harinaigum^sh!,  to  remove  the  fetus  from  the  womb
of  D^vAnandA  to  that  of  TrisalA,  wife  of  Sid-
dhArt'ha,  a  prince  of  the  race  of  IcshwAcu,  and  of  the
Caiyapa  family.  This  was  accordingly  executed  ;  and  the
new  conception  was  announced  to  TriSalA  by  dreams;
which  were  expounded  by  soothsayers,  as  foreboding  the
birth  of  a  future  Jhia,  In  due  time,  he  was  bom ;  and
his  birth  celebrated  with  great  rejoicings.

His  father  gave  him  the  name  of  VardhamAna.  But
he  is  also  known  by  two  other  names,  Sramana  and
MahAvIra.  His  father  has  similarly  three  appellations,
SiddhArt*ha,  SreyAnSa,  and  YaSasw!;  and  his  mother
Ukewise  has  three  titles,  TrisalA,  Vid6hadinnA,  and
PRfTicARiNf.  His  paternal  uncle  was  SupAr§wa,  his
elder  brother,  Nandivardhana,  his  sister  (mother  of
JamAli)  SudarSanA.  His  wife  was  Yas6dA,  by  whom
he  had  a  daughter,  (who  became  wife  of  JamAli,)  named
An6jja  and  PriyadarSanA.  His  grand-daughter  was
called  SfesHAVATi  and  Ya§6vat!.

His  father  and  mother  died  when  he  was  twenty-eight
years  of  age ;  and  he  afterwards  continued  two  years  with
his  elder  brother:  after  the  second  year  he  renounced
worldly  pursuits,  and  departed  amidst  the  applauses  of
gods  and  men,  to  practise  austerities. The  progress  of  his

*  The  Jainas  admit  numerous  In  drab  ;  but  some  of  the  attributes,
stated  in  this  place  by  the  Calpa  sUtra^  belong  to  the  Indra  of  the
Indian  mythology.  ,


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  215

devout  exercises,  and  of  his  attainment  of  divine  knowledge^
is  related  at  great  length.  Finally,  he  became  an  ArhcU,
or  Jiriaj  being  worthy  of  universal  adoration,  and  having
subdued  all  passions;*  being  Ukewise  omniscient  and  all-
seeing:  and  thus,  at  the  age  of  seventy-two  years,  he
became  exempt  from  all  pain  for  ever.  This  event  is  stated
to  have  happened  at  the  court  of  king  HastipAla,  in  the
city  of  Pawapari  or  PapapuA  ;-);  and  is  dated  three  years
and  eight  and  a-half  months  before  the  close  of  the  fourth
age,  (called  Duh&hama  suc^hama)  in  the  great  period  named
avasarpinu  The  author  of  the  Calpa  sdtra  mentions,  in
several  places,  that,  when  he  wrote,  980  years  had  elapsed
since  this  apotheosis.;}:  Accordmg  to  tradition,  the  death
of  the  last  Jina  happened  more  than  two  thousand  four
hundred  years  since;  and  the  Calpa sutra  appears,  therefore,
to  have  been  composed  about  fifteen  hundred  years  ago.§

The  several  Jinas  are  described  as  attended  by  numerous
followers,  distributed  into  classes,  under  a  few  chief  disci-
ples, entitled  Ganadliarasj  or  Ganadhipas.  The  last  Jina
had  nine  such  classes  of  followers,  under  eleven  disciples.
Indrabh^ti,  AoNiBHtJTi,  VAyubh6ti,  Vyacta,  Su-
dharma,Manditaputra,Mauryaputba,Acampita,


*  So  the  commentator  expounds  both  terms.

t  Near  Rdjagrtha,  in  Bikdr.  Tt  is  accordingly  a  place  of  sanctity.
Other  holy  places,  which  have  been  mentioned  to  me,  are  Champdpuri,
near  Bhagalpdr,  Chancb'dvtUi  distant  ten  miles  from  Benares,  and  the
ancient  city  Hastindpura  in  Hindustan:  also  l^atnmja^a,  said  to  be
situated  in  the  west  of  India.

I  Samanassa  bhagavau  MAHAsfRAssA  jdra  duhc'ha  hfnassa  nava-
b^sa  say^Vn  bicwantii'n  dasamassaya  b^a  sayassa  ayam  asf  im^  sam-
bach'hare  cal^  gach'hal'.  "  Nine  hundred  years  have  passed  since
the  adorable  MahabIra  became  exempt  from  pain ;  and  of  the  tenth
century  of  years,  eighty  are  the  time  which  is  now  elapsed."

§  The  most  ancient  copy  in  my  possession,  and  the  oldest  one  which
I  have  seen,  is  dated  in  1614  samvat :  it  is  nearly  250  years  old.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


216  OBSERVATIONS  ON

AchalabhrAtA^  MfevARYA,  PbabhAsa.  Nine  of  these
disciples  died  with  MahavIra  ;  and  two  of  them,  Indra-
bh6ti  and  Sudharma,  survived  him,  and  subsequently
attained  beatitude.  The  Calpa  sdtra  adds,  that  all  ascetics,
or  candidates  for  holiness,  were  pupils  in  succession  from
SuDHARMA,  none  of  the  others  having  left  successors.
The  author  then  proceeds  to  trace  the  succession  fix)m
SuDHARMA  to  the  different  sac'haSf  or  orders  of  priests,
many  of  which  appear  still  to  exist.  This  enumeration  dis-
proves the  list  communicated  to  Majw  Mackenzie  by
the  head  priest  of  Belligola.

The  ages  and  periods  which  have  been  more  than  once
alluded  to  in  the  foregoing  account  of  the  Jamas^  are
briefly  explained  in  H6maciiandra's  vocabulary.  In  the
second  chapter,  which  relates  to  the  heavens  and  the  gods,
&c.  the  author,  speaking  of  time,  observes,  that  it  is  distin-
guished into  Avasatjpvht  and  Utsarpini,  adding  that  the
whole  period  is  completed  by  twenty  c6iis  of  cSiis  of  «a-
garas;  or  2,000,000,000,000,000  oceans  of  years.  I  do
not  find  that  he  any  where  explains  the  space  of  time
denominated  sagara,  or  ocean.  But  I  understand  it  to  be
an  extravagant  estimate  of  the  time,  which  would  elapse,
before  a  vast  cavity  filled  with  chopped  hairs  could  be
emptied,  at  the  rate  of  one  piece  of  hair  in  a  century :
the  time  requisite  to  enter  such  a  cavity,  measured  by  a
ySjana  every  way,  is  ^palya;  and  that  repeated  ten  c6ii8
of  cSiis  of  times,*  is  dis&gara.

Each  of  the  periods  above-mentioned,  is  stated  by
H&MACHANDRA,  Rs  Comprising  sixaras;  the  names  and
duration  of  which  agree  with  the  information  communicated
to  Major  Mackenzie  :  In  the  one,  or  the  declining  period,
they  pass  from  the  extreme  feUcity  {ecanta  suc'ha)  through

•  1,000,000,000,000,000 /?a(ya*=oue  samara,  ov  sdgardpama.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  217

intermediate  gradations^  to  extreme  misery  {icanta  duhc'ka).
In  the  other^  or  rising  period,  they  ascend,  in  the  same
order,  from  misery  to  felicity.  During  the  three  first  ages
of  one  period,  mortals  lived  for  one,  two,  or  three  palyas;
their  stature  was  one,  two,  or  three  leagues  {gavydtis);
and  they  subsisted  on  the  fruit  of  miraculous  trees ;  which
yielded  spontaneously  food,  apparel,  ornaments,  garlands,
habitation,  nurture,  light,  musical  instruments,  and  house-
hold utensils.  In  the  fourth  age,  men  lived  ten  miUions  of
years ;  and  their  stature  was  500  poles  {dhanush) :  in  the
fifth  age,  the  life  of  man  is  a  hundred  years :  and  the  Umit
of  his  stature,  seven  cubits :  in  the  sixth,  he  is  reduced  to
sixteen  years,  and  the  height  of  one  cubit  In  the  next
period,  this  succession  of  ages  is  reversed,  and  afterwards
they  recommence  as  before.

Here  we  cannot  but  observe,  that  the  Jainas  are  still
more  extravagant  in  their  inventions  than  the  prevailing
sects  of  Hindus,  absurd  as  these  are  in  their  fables.

In  his  third  chapter,  H^machandra,  having  stated  the
terms  for  paramount  and  tributary. princes,  mentions  the
twelve  ChacravartUf  and  adds  the  patronymics  and  origin
of  them.  Bharata  is  sumamed  Arshabhi,  or  son  of
RYshabha;  Maohavan  isson  of  Vijaya;  and  San  at-
cumAra,  of  AswAs^NA.  SAnti,  Cunt'hu,  and  Ara
are  the  Jiruis  so  named.  Sagara  is  described  as  son  of
Sumitra;  SuBHiJMA  isentitledCARTAviRYA;  PADMAis
said  to  be  son  of  Padm6ttara  ;  Harish&na  of  Hari  ;
Jaya  of  Vijaya  ;  Brahmadatta  of  Brahme  ;  and  all
are  declared  to  have  sprung  from  the  race  of  Icshw Acu.

A  Ust  follows,  which,  like  the  preceding,  agrees  nearly
with  the  information  communicated  to  Major  Mackenzie.
It  consists  of  nine  persons,  entitled  VasudevtiSf  and  CmA-
lias.  Here  TRiPRYsHf 'u  a  is  mentioned  with  the  patronymic
PrAjApatya;  DwiPRtsnf'HA  is  said  to  have  sprung  from


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


218  OBSERVATIONS  ON

Brahme;  Swayambh^  is  expressly  called  a  son  of
Rudra;  and  PuRUSH6TTAMAy  of  S6ma,  or  the  moon.
PuRUSHAsiNHA  is  sumamed  Saivi,  or  son  of  Siva  ;  Pu-
RUSHAPUN^ARicA,  is  «aid  to  have  sprung  from  MahA-
SiRAs.  Datta  is  termed  son  of  Agnisinha;  NArayana
has  the  patronymic  DAIarat'hi  (which  belongs  to  RAma-
chandra):  and  CrYshna  is  described  as  sprung  from

VASUDfevA.

Nine  other  persons  are  next  mentioned^  under  the  desig-
nati(»i  of  Sucla  bcdas,  viz.  1.  Achala,  2.  Vijaya,  3.
Bhadra^  4.  SuPRABHA,  5.  SudarSana,  6.  Ananda>
7.  Nandana^  8.  Padma,  9.  RAma.

They  are  followed  by  a  list  of  nine  foes  of  Vishnu:
it  corresponds  nearly  with  one  of  the  lists  noticed  by
Major  Mackenzie,  viz.  1.  ASwagrIva,  2.  TAraca^
3.  M&RACA,  4.  Madhu,  5.  Nisumbha,  6.  Bali,  7.
PrahlAda.  8.  The  king  of  Lanca  (RAvana).  9.  The
king  of  Magadha  (JarAsandha).

It  is  observed,  that,  with  the  Jinas,  these  complete  the
number  of  sixty-three  eminent  personages,  viz.  24  Jinasy
12  Chacravartis,  9  VasudevaSf  9  Baktdevas,  and  9  Prativor
sudevas.

It  appears  from  the  information  procured  by  Major
Mackenzie,  that  all  these  appertain  to  the  heroic  history
of  the  Jaina  writers.  Most  of  them  are  also  well  known  to
the  orthodox  Hindus,  and  are  the  principal  personages  in
the  PurancLs.

H&MACHANDRA  Subsequently  notices  many  names  of
princes,  familiar  to  the  Hindus  of  other  sects.  He  begins
with  Prit'hu  son  of  VfeNA,  whom  he  terms  the  first  king:
and  goes  on  to  MAndhAtA,  HariSchandra,  Bharata
son  of  DusHY  ANTA,  &c.  Towards  the  end  of  his  enumera-
tion of  conspicuous  princes,  he  mentions  Carna,  king  of
Champa  find  Anga ;  HAla  or  SAlivAhanaj  and  CumA-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  219

rapAla^  sumamed  Ch aulucya,  a  royal  saint,  who  seems,
from  the  title  of  Paramaxhataj  to  have  been  a  Jaxna^  and
apparently  the  only  one  in  that  enumeration*

In  a  subsequent  part  of  the  same  chapter,  H£ma-
CHANDRA,  (who  was  himself  a  theologian  of  his  sect,  and
author  of  hymns  to  Jin  a,*)  mentions  and  discriminates  the
various  sects;  viz.  1st,  Arhatoui^  or  Jainas.  2dly,  SaugaUUj
or  BauddhcLSy  and,  3dly,  six  philosophical  schools,  viz.
1st.  Naiyayica;  2d.  Y6ga;  3d.  C  a  pi  las  Smcfhya;  4th.
Vaiseshica;  6th.  Varhaspatya,  or  Nastica;  and  6th.  Char'
vaca,  or  LScayata,  The  two  last  are  reputed  atheistical,
as  denying  a  future  state  and  a  providence.  If  those  be
omitted,  and  the  two  Mimansas  inserted,  we  have  the  six
schemes  of  philosophy  familiar  to  the  Indian  circle  of  the
sciences.

The  fourth  chapter  of  H£machandra's  vocabulary  re-
lates to  earth  and  animals.  Here  the  author  mentions  the
distinctions  of  countries  which  appear  to  be  adopted  by  the
Jcdnas ;  viz,  the  regions  (parsha)  named  Bharata^  Aira-
vatOy  and  Videha,  to  which  he  adds  Curu;  noticing  also
other  distinctions  ^miliar  to  the  Hmdus  of  other  sects,  but
explaining  some  of  them  according  to  the  ideas  of  the
Jainas.  *  Aryavarta/  he  observes,  '  is  the  native  land  of
Jiruis,  Chacrisy  and  Arddhachacris,  situated  between  the
Vindhya  and  Himadri  mountains.'  This  remark  confines
the  theatre  of  Jaina  history,  reUgious  and  heroic,  virithin
the  limits  of  Hindustan  proper.

A  passage  in  BhAscara's  treatise  on  the  sphere,  will
suggest  further  observations  concerning  the  opinions  of  the
Jainas  on  the  divisions  of  the  earth.  Having  noticed,  for
the  purpose  of  confuting  it,  a  notion  maintained  by  the


•  A  commentary  on  these  hymns  is  dated  in  haca  1214  (A. D.  1292);
hut  how  much  earlier  H£machandra  lived,  is  not  yet  ascertained.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


220  OBSERVATIONS  ON

Bauddhas  (whom  some  of  the  commentators,  as  usual
among  orthodox  Hindus,  confound  with  the  Jainm^  res-
pecting the  descent  or  fall  of  the  earth  in  space ;  he  says,*
'  the  naked  sectaries  and  the  rest  affirm,  that  two  suns,
two  moons,  and  two  sets  of  stars,  appear  alternately:
against  them  I  allege  this  reasoning.  How  absurd  is  the
notion  which  you  have  formed  of  duplicate  suns,  moons,
and  stars ;  when  you  see  the  revolution  of  the  polar  fish.*+

The  commentators  j:  agree  that  the  Jaincts  are  here
meant :  and  one  of  them  remarks,  that  they  are  described
as  *  naked  sectaries,  &c.'  because  the  class  of  Digambaras
is  a  principal  one  among  these  people.

It  is  true  that  the  Jainas  do  entertain  the  preposterous
notion  here  attributed  to  them  :  and  it  is  also  tme,  that  the
Digambarasj  among  the  Jainas^  are  distinguished  from
the  Suclambaras,  not  merely  by  the  white  dress  of  the  one,
and  the  nakedness  (or  else  the  tawny  apparel)  of  the  other;
but  also  by  some  particular  tenets  and  diversity  of  doctrine.
— However,  both  concur  in  the  same  ideas  regarding  the
eaiih  and  planets,  which  shall  be  forthwith  stated,  from  the
authority  of  Jaina  books ;  after  remarking,  by  the  way,
that  ascetics  of  the  orthodox  sect,  in  the  last  stage  of
exaltation,  when  they  become  Paramahansa,  also  disuse
clothing.

The  world,  which  according  to  the  Jaiims,  is  eternal,  is
figured  by  them  as  a  spindle  resting  on  half  of  another;  or,
as  they  describe  it,  three  cups,  of  which  the  lowest  is
inverted ;  and  the  uppermost  meets  at  its  circumference  the
middle  one.  They  also  represent  the  world  by  comparison
to  a  woman  with  her  arms  akimbo.  § Her  waist,  or  accord-

•  Gbl&dhydya,  §  3.  v.  8  &  10.  t  Urea  minor.

I  LAosHMfolsA,  MuNf^wARA,  and  the  F'dsandhMshya.
§  The  Sangraha^i  ratna  and  Lbcandb  Sutras  both  in  Fr6crity  are  the
authorities  here  used.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


THE  JAINS.  221

ing  to  the  description  first  mentioned  ^  the  meeting  of  the
lower  cups,  is  the  earth.  The  spindle  above,  answering  to
the  superior  portion  of  the  woman's  person,  is  the  abode  of
the  gods ;  and  the  inferior  part  of  the  figure  comprehends
the  infernal  r^ons.  The  earth,  which  they  suppose  to  be
a  flat  surface,  is  bounded  by  a  circle,  of  which  the  diameter
is  one  raju.*  The  lower  spindle  comprises  seven  tiers  of
inferior  earths  or  hells,  at  the  distance  of  a  raju  from  each
other,  and  its  base  is  measured  by  seven  rajus.  These
seven  hells  are  Ratna  prabha,  ^arcara  prabha,  Balue&
prabha,  Panca  prabha^  Dhuma  prabha,  Tama  prabha^
Tamatama  prabha.  The  upper  spindle  is  also  seven  rajus
high;  and  its  greatest  breadth  is  five  rajus.  Its  summit,
which  is  4,500,000  ydjanas  wide,  is  the  abode  of  the  deified
saints :  beneath  that  are  five  Vimanas,  or  abodes  of  gods :
of  which  the  centre  one  is  named  Sarvarfhasiddfia :  it  is
encompassed  by  the  regions  Aparqjita,  Jayanta,  Vaija-
yanta,  and  Vijaya.  Next,  at  the  distance  of  one  rqju
from  the  summit,  follow  nine  tiers  of  worlds,  representing
a  necklace  (graiveyaca),  and  inhabited  by  gods,  denomi-
nated, from  their  conceited  pretensions  to  supremacy.  Aha-
mindra.  These  nine  regions  are,  Aditya,  Pritincara,
Sdmanasa,  Sumanasa,  Suvisala,  Sarvatdbhadra,  ManS-
rama,  Supravaddha,  and  Sudarsana.

Under  these  regions  are  twelve  (the  Digambaras  say
sixteen)  other  regions,  in  eight  tiers,  from  one  to  five  rajus
above  the  earth.  They  are  filled  with  Vimanas,  or  abodes
of  various  classes  of  gods,  called  by  the  general  name  of
Calpavasis.  These  worlds,  reckoning  firom  that  nearest
the  earth,  are, Saudhama  and  liana;  Sanatcumara  and


•  This  is  explained  to  be  a  measure  of  space,  through  which  the
gods  are  able  to  travel  in  six  months,  at  the  rate  of  2,057,152  yqfanas,
(of  2,000  crosa  each,)  in  the  twinkling  of  an  eye.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


222  OBSERVATIONS ON

Mahendra;  Brahme ;  Lantaca;  Sucra;  Sakasrara;  Ana-
ta  and  Pranata ;  Arana  and  Achyuta,

The  sect  of  Jina  distinguish  four  classes  of  deities^  the
VaimanicaSf  Bhuvanapatis,  JydtisMs,  and  Vyantaras.
The  last  comprises  eight  orders  of  demigods  or  spirits,
admitted  by  the  Hindus  in  general,  as  the  Raeshasas,
PiiachaSf  Ciimaras,  &c.  supposed  to  range  over  the  earth.
The  preceding  class  (JyStishisX  comprehends  five  orders
of  luminaries ;  suns,  moons,  planets,  constdlations,  and
stars,  of  which  more  hereafter.  The  Vaimanicas  belong  to
the  various  Vimanas,  in  the  twelve  regions,  or  worids,
inhabited  by  gods.  The  class  of  BhmanctpaH  includes
ten  orders,  entitled  Amracumiaray  Nagacwncaray  &c.;  each
governed  by  two  Indras.  All  these  gods  are  mortal,  ex-
cept, perhaps,  the  luminaries.

The  earth  consists  of  numerous  distinct  omtinents,  in
concentric  circles,  separated  by  seas  forming  rings  between
them.  The  first  circle  is  Jambu  dvnpa^  with  the  mountain
Sudarsa  Meru  in  the  centre.  It  is  encompassed  by  a  ring
containing  the  salt  ocean;  beyond  which  is  the  zmie,
named  Dhatuci  dwtpa;  similarly  surrounded  by  a  black
ocean.  This  is  again  encircled  by  Pnshcara  dunpa ;  of
which  only  the  first  half  is  accessible  to  mankind :  being
separated  itom  the  remoter  half,  by  an  impassable  range  of
mountains,  denominated  Manush6ttara  parvata.  Dhatur
d  dtdpa  contains  two  mountains,  similar  to  Sumeru,  named
Vijanga  and  Achala  ;  and  Pushcara  contains  two  others,
called  Mandira  and  Vidyunmali.

The  diameter  of  Jambu  dwipa  being  100,000  great  yA-
janca^  if  the  190th  part  be  taken,  or  626A,  we  have  the
breadth  of  Bharata  varsha,  which  occupies  the  southern
segment  of  the  circle. Airavata  is  a  similar  northern  s^-

*  Each  great  yijana  contains  2,000  cos.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


THE JAINS.  223

ment.  A  band  (33648  ySjanas  wide)  across  the  circle,
with  Sudaria  Mem  in  the  middle  of  it,  is  Vidiha  varsha,
divided  by  Meru  (or  by  four  peaks  like  elephant's  teeth,  at
the  four  comers  of  that  vast  mountain)  into  east  and  west
Videha.  These  three  regions,  Bharata,  Airavata,  and
Videhcy  are  inhabited  by  men  who  practise  religious  duties.
They  are  denominated  Camuibhiimiy  and  appear  to  be  iur-
nished  with  distinct  sets  of  Tirthancaras,  or  saints  entitled
Jina.  The  intermediate  regions  north  and  south  of  Meru,
are  bounded  by  four  chains  of  mountains ;  and  intersected
by  two  others:  in  such  a  manner,  that  the  ranges  of
mountains,  and  the  intermediate  vallies,  increase  in  breadth
progressively.  Thus  Himavat  is  twice  as  broad  as  Bha-^
rata  varsha  (or  1052^) ;  the  valley  beyond  it  is  double  its
breadth  (2105  •^);  the  mountain  Mah&himavat  is  twice
as  much  (4210  Ig) ;  its  valley  is  again  double  (8421  jV)  ;
and  the  mountain  Nishadha  has  twice  that  breadth  (16842
^).  The  vallies  between  these  mountains,  and  between
similar  ranges  reckoned  from  Airavata  (viz.  Sic'hari,
Rucmiy  and  Nthi)  are  inhabited  by  giants  (Yugala),  and
are  denominated  BhSgabhiimi.  From  either  extremity  of
the  two  ranges  of  mountains  named  Himavat  and  S'tc'Aari,
a  pair  of  tusks  project  over  the  sea ;  each  divided  into
seven  countries  denominated  ^n/ara  dtmpas.  There  are  con-
sequently fifty-six  such  ;  which  are  called  CubhSgabhiimi,
being  the  abode  of  evil  doers.  None  of  these  regions  suffer
a  periodical  destruction ;  except  Bharata  and  Airavata,
which  are  depopulated,  and  again  peopled  at  the  close  of
the  great  periods  before-mentioned.

We  come  now  to  the  immediate  purpose  for  which  these
notions  of  the  Jainas  have  been  here  explained.  They
conceive  the  setting  and  rising  of  stars  and  planets  to  be
caused  by  the  mountain  Sumeru :  and  suppose  three  times


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


224  OBSERVATIONS ON THE JAINS.

the  period  of  a  planet's  appearance  to  be  requisite  for  it  to
pass  round  Sumeruj  and  I'etum  to  the  place  whence  it
emerges.  Accordingly  they  allot  two  suns^  as  many
moonsy  and  an  equal  number  of  each  planet^  star,  and  con-
stellation, to  Jambu  dmpa;  and  imagine  that  these  appear,
on  alternate  days,  south  and  north  of  Meru.  They  simi-
larly allot  twice  that  number  to  the  salt  ocean ;  six  times
as  many  to  Dhatua.  dwipa  ;  21  times  as  many,  or  42  of
each,  to  the  CalSdadhi;  and  72  of  each  to  Pushcara
dwipa.

It  is  this  notion,  applied  to  the  earth  which  we  inhabit,
that  BhAscara  refutes.  His  ai^ument  is  thus  explained
by  his  commentators.

*  The  star  close  to  the  north  pole,  with  those  near  it  to
the  east  and  west,  form  a  constellation  figured  by  the  In-
dian astronomers  as  a  fish.  In  the  beginning  of  the  night
(supposing  the  sun  to  be  near  Bharani  or  Musca),  the  fish's
tail  is  towards  the  west,  and  his  head  towards  the  east ;
but  at  the  close  of  the  night,  the  fish's  tail,  having  made  a
half  revolution,  is  towards  the  east,  and  his  head  towards
the  west :  and  since  the  sun,  when  rising  and  setting,  is
in  a  line  with  the  fish's  tail,  there  is  but  one  sun ;  not
two.'  This  explanation  is  given  by  MunIIwara  and
LacshmIdAsa.  But  the  Vasana  bhashya  reverses  the
fish ;  placing  his  head  towards  the  west  at  sun-set,  when
the  sun  is  near  Bharani,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


VIII.
On  ^^6  Origin  and  Peculiar  Tenets  of  certain

MUUAMMEDAN  SeCTS.


[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.  p.  338— .344.
Calcutta  1801.  4to.]


The  BSkrahs,  numerous  in  the  provinces  of  the  Indian
peninsula,  but  found  also  in  most  of  the  great  cities  of
Hindustan,  are  conspicuous  by  their  peculiar  customs  ;
such,  for  example,  as  that  of  wearing  at  their  orisons  an
appropriate  dress,  which  they  daily  wash  with  their  own
hands.  Their  disposition  for  trade  to  the  exclusion  of
-every  other  mode  of  livelihood,  and  the  government  of
their  tribe  by  a  hierarchy,  are  further  peculiarities,  which
Jiave  rendered  them  an  object  of  inquiry,  as  a  singular
sect.

Researches  made  by  myself,  among  others,  were  long
unsuccessful.  My  informers  confounded  this  tribe  with
the  Ismailiyahs,  with  the  AU-ilahiyahs,  and  even  with  the
unchaste  sect  of  Cheragh-^ush.  Concerning  their  origin,
the  information  received  was  equally  erroneous  with  that
regarding  their  tenets.  But  at  length  a  learned  Sayyad
referred  me  to  the  Myalisu^lmimdrdn  composed  by  N6r-
ULLAH  of  Sh&steTy  a  zealous  Shi&h,  who  suffered  for  his
religious  opinicms  in  the  reign  or  JEHANciR.  In  the  pas-
sage, which  will  be  forthwith  cited  irom  that  work,  the
B6hrahs  are  described  by  the  author  as  natives  of  Guj-
rat,  converted  to  the  Muhammedan  religion  about  three
hundred  years  before  his  time,  or  five  centuries  ago.

To  that  passage  I  shall  subjoin  extracts  fit>m  the  same

VOL.  II.  Q


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


226  ON  THE  ORIGIN  AND  PECULIAR  TENETS

worky  contaiDing  an  account  of  similar  tribes,  with  some  of
which  the  B6hrahs  may,  perhaps,  have  been  sometimes  con-
founded. Cionceming  the  Ismailiyahs,  for  whom  they  have
been  actually  mistaken,  it  must  be  remembered,  that  these
form  a  sect  of  ShiAhs,  who  take  their  distinctive  appellation
from  IsMAtL,  eldest  son  and  nominated  successor  of  Imam
JAfbr,  sumamed  Sadik.  They  consider  IsmAIl  as  the
true  heir  of  the  Imamet,  and  do  not  acknowledge  the  legal
succession  of  his  brother  Mtsk  and  of  the  five  last  Imams.
This  sect  flourished  under  the  Egyptian  dynasty  of  kka-
/(/s  founded  by  Muhammed  Mahad!,  who  claimed  de-
scent from  the  Imam  IsmAIl  himself.  It  was  also  con-
spicuous under  a  dynasty  of  princes  of  this  sect,  the  first  of
whom,  Hasan  Sabah,  founded  a  principality  in  Irak.*
The  sect  may  still  exist  in  Syria;  but  it  does  not  seem  to
be  at  present  known  in  the  Indian  portion  of  Asia.

The  AU'ilahiyahs  on  the  contrary,  are  become  nume-
rous in  India.  This  sect  is  mentioned  by  the  author  of  the
D&bistan,  as  prevalent  in  his  time,  only  at  UzMl,  or  Azbal,
in  the  mountainous  tract  near  Khata*  It  now  prevails,
according  to  information  which  I  have  recdved,  in  a  part  of
the  dominions  of  NawAb  NizAmu'l-molc.  The  singular
tenets  of  this  heretical  sect  are  thus  stated  by  Mohsen
FANi.  "  The  AlUilahiyahs  hold,  that  celestial  spirits,
which  cannot  otherwise  be  known  to  mankind,  have  fi^
quently  appeared  in  palpable  shapes.  God  himself  has
been  manifested  in  the  human  form,  but  especially  in  the
person  of  AlI  MurtezA,  whose  image,  being  that  of  Atf
Ullah,  or  ALf  God,  these  sectaries  deem  it  lawfrd  to
worship. They  believe  in  the  metempsychosis;  and,  like

*  See  the  DdbistSn  of  MuUd  Mohsen  Fan!  ;  imd  D'Hbbbblot's
Bibliothiqw  Orieniale*  If  the  indostrioas  BShrahs  and  the  remorse-
less **  assassins  "  had  really  arisen  out  of  the  same  sect,  it  woald  be  a
new  fact  in  the  history  of  the  human  mind.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


OF  CERTAIN  MUHAMMEDAN  SECTS.  227

others  who  maintain  that  doctrine,  abstain  from  fleshmeat.
Th^  imagine,  that  AlI  MurtezA,  when  he  quitted  this
earth,  returned  to  the  sun,  which  is  the  same  with  himself;
and  hence  they  call  the  sun  AlI  Ullah.  This  sect  does
not  admit  the  authenticity  of  the  Korhuy  as  it  is  now
extant:  some  pretending,  that  it  is  a  forgery  of  Ab6becb%
Omar's,  and  OthmAn's;  others  condemning  it,  simply
because  it  was  edited  by  the  last  mentioned  khaUf.  The
members  of  this  sect  appear  to  vary  in  regard  to  some
points  of  doctrine ;  but  the  leading  and  universal  tenet  of
this  sect  is,  that,  in  every  age  of  the  w<H'Id,  Grod  is  mani-
fested in  the  pansons  of  prophets  and  of  saints ;  for  instance,
he  was  Adam,  and  afterwards  Ahmed  and  AiA :  and  in
like  manner  these  sectaries  believe  in  the  transmigration  of
God  into  the  persons  of  the  Imams,  Some  of  them  affirm,
that  the  manifestation  of  the  divine  being,  in  this  age  of
the  world,  was  AlI  Ullah;  and  after  him,  his  glorious
posterity:  and  they  consider  Mu hammed  as  a  prophet
sent  byALi  Ullah.  When  God,  say  they,  perceived
Muh  ammed's  insufficiency,  he  himself  assumed  the  human
form  for  the  purpose  of  assisting  the  prophet/**

It  does  not  appear  from  any  satisfactory  information,  that
the  B6krahs  agree  with  either  of  these  sects,  in  deifying
Al) ,  or  in  contesting  the  legal  succea»on  of  the  six  last
Imams.  On  the  contrary,  the  tribe  is  acknowledged  to
consist  of  orthodox  Sunnisy  and  of  true  Shi&ks;  but  mostly
of  the  last  mentiooed  sect  These  and  other  known  cir*
cumstances  corroborate  the  following  account  of  that  tribe,
as  giv^d  by  N^rullah  of  Sh^ter,  in  the  work  before
mentioned.

"  The  B6hr4xhs  are  a  tribe  of  the  faithful,  which  is  settled
chiefly  at  Ahmedabad  and  its  environs. Their  salvation  in

*  See  the  DdbistdUy  from  which  this  account  is  ahstracted.
q2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


228  ON  THE  ORIGIN  AND  PECULIAR  TENETS

the  bosom  of  religion  took  place  about  three  hundred  years
ago^  at  the  call  of  a  virtuous  and  learned  man^  whose  name
was  Mull  A  AlI,  and  whose  tomb  is  still  seen  at  the  city
of  Cambayat.

^^  The  conversion  of  this  people  was  thus  conducted  by  him :
As  the  mhabitants  of  Gujrat  were  pagans^  and  were  guided
by  an  aged  priest^  a  recreant,  in  whom  they  had  a  ^eat
confidence,  and  whose  disciples  they  were ;  the  missionary
judged  it  expedient,  first  to  offer  himself  as  a  pupil  to  the
priest;  and  after  convincing  him  by  irrefragable  proofs,
and  making  him  participate  in  the  declaration  of  faith,  then
to  undertake  the  conversion  of  others.  He  accordingly
passed  some  years  in  attendance  on  that  priest,  learnt  his
language,  studied  his  sciences,  and  became  conversant  with
his  books.  By  degrees  he  opened  the  articles  of  the  faith
to  the  enlightened  priest,  and  persuaded  him  to  become
Musleman.  Some  of  his  people  changed  their  religion  in
concert  vnth  their  old  instructor.  The  circumstance  of  the
priest's  conversion  being  made  known  to  the  principal
minister  of  the  king  of  that  country,  he  visited  the  priest,
adopted  habits  of  obedience  towards  him,  and  became  a
Muslem,  But  for  a  long  time,  the  minister,  the  priest,  and
the  rest  of  the  converts,  dissembled  their  faith,  and  sought
to  keep  it  concealed,  through  dread  of  the  king.

"  At  length  the  intelligence  of  the  minister's  conversion
reached  the  monarch.  One  day  he  repaired  to  his  house,
and,  finding  him  in  the  humble  posture  of  prayer,  was
incensed  against  him.  The  minister  knew  the  motive  of
the  king's  visit,  and  perceived  that  his  anger  arose  firom
the  suspicion  that  he  was^reciting  prayers  and  performing
adoration.  With  presence  of  mind,  inspired  by  divine
providence,  he  immediately  pretended  that  his  prostrations
were  occasioned  by  the  sight  of  a  serpent,  which  appeared
in  the  comer  of  the  room,  and  against  which  he  was


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


OF  CERTAIN  MUHAMMEDAN  SECTS.  229

employing  incantations.  The  king  cast  his  eyes  towards
the  comer  of  the  apartment,  and  it  so  happened  that  there
Jie  saw  a  serpent ;  the  minister's  excuse  appeared  credible,
and  the  king's  suspicions  were  lulled.

*  After  a  time,  the  kmg  himself  secretly  became  a  con-
vert to  the  Musleman  faith ;  but  dissembled  the  state  of  his
mind,  for  reasons  of  state.  Yet,  at  the  point  of  death,  he
ordered,  by  his  will,  that  his  corpse  should  not  be  burnt,
according  to  the  customs  of  the  pagans.

"  Subsequently  to  his  decease,  when  SultAn  Zefer,
one  of  the  trusty  nobles  oi  Sultan  FiatzSHAH,  sovereign
o{  Dehliy  conquered  the  province  of  Gujrat;  some  learned
men,  who  accompanied  him,  used  ailments  to  make  the
people  embrace  the  faith,  according  to  the  doctrines  of
such  as  revere  the  traditions.*  Hence  it  happened,  that
some  of  the  tribe  of  BShrahs  became  members  of  the  sect
of  the  SunneL

'^  The  party  which  retains  the  Imamiyek  tenets,  compre--
hends  nearly  two  thousand  families.  They  always  have  a
pious  learned  man  amongst  them,  who  expounds  cases  of
law  according  to  the  doctrines  of  the  Imamiyehs.  Most  of
them  subsist  by  commerce  and  mechanical  trades;  as  is
indicated  by  the  name  of  B6hrahy  which  signifies  mer-
chant, in  the  dialect  of  Gujrat.  They  transmit  the  fifth
part  of  their  gains  to  the  Sayyads  of  Medinek ;  and  pay
their  regular  eleemosynary  contributions  to  the  chief  of
their  learned,  who  distributes  the  alms  among  the  poor  of
the  sect.  These  people,  great  and  small,  are  honest,  pious,
and  temperate.  They  always  suffer  much  persecution  (for
the  crime  of  bearing  affection  towards  the  holy  family)
fi-om  the  wicked  murderers,+  who  are  invested  with  public
authority ;  and  they  are  ever  involved  in  the  difficulties  of
concealment.


The  Smmis,  or  orthodox  sect.  t  The  orthodox.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


230  ON  THE  ORIGIN  AND  PECULIAR  TENETS

''  The  §adikitfak$  are  a  tribe  of  the  faithful  Hindtatan^
pious  men,  and  disciples  of  Sayyad  CABfRu'oDf n,  who
derived  his  descent  from  IsmAIl,  son  of  Imam  JIfeb*
Tins  tribe  is  denominated  Sadikiyahs,  by  rtBSoa  of  the
sincere  [sculik']  call  of  that  Sayyad.  Althou^  that  appel-
lation have,  according  to  received  notions,  a  seeming  rela-
tion to  Ab^becr,  whose  paitisans  gave  him  this  title;  yet
it  is  probable  that  the  sect  assumed  that  appellation  for  the
sake  of  concealment.  However,  no  adviali^  ever  accrues
to  them  from  it.  On  the  contrary,  the  arrogant  adubitants
of  Hindy  who  are  Hinduis,  being  retainers  of  the  son  of
the  impious  Hind,*  have  discovered  their  attachment  to
the  sect  of  Shidhs,  and  have  revived  against  them  the
calumnies  which  five  hundred  years  before  they  broached
against  the  Ismailiyahs.  They  maliciously  charge  them
with  impiety ;  such,  indeed,  is  their  ancient  practice.  They
violate  justice,  and  labour  to  extirpate  this  harmless  tribe.
In  short,  ihey  cast  the  stone  of  calumny  on  the  roof  of  the
name  and  reputation  of  this  wretched  people,  and  have  no
fear  of  God,  nor  awe  of  his  Prophetf

''  In  short,  nearly  thirty  thousand  persons  of  this  sect
are  settled  in  provinces  o(  Hindustan,  such  as  Mtdtm,
L&h6r,  Dehliy  and  Gtyrat.  Most  of  them  subsist  by  com-
merce. They  pay  the  fifth  part  of  their  gains  to  the
descendants  of  Sayyad  CABfB,  who  are  their  priests;
and  both  preceptor  and  pupil,  priests  and  laymen,  all  are
zealous  Shidhs.  God  avert  evil  from  them,  and  make  the
wiles  of  their  foes  recoil!

'*  The  Hazarehs  of  Cabul  are  an  innumerable  tribe,  who
reside  in  Cabul,  Ghazntn,  and  Kandahar. Many  of  them

*  Meaning  HindI  the  mother  of  Moaviytbh.

t  The  author  proceeds  in  a  strain  of  invective  against  the  Sunnis;
especially  against  Mulld  Abdullah  of  Ldh6r,  who  hore  the  title  of
the  Makhd6mu'l-mulc. This,  heing  superfluous,  is  here  omitted.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


OF  CERTAIN MUHAMMEDAN  SECTS.  231

are  SM&hsy  and  adherents  of  the  hdy  fiunily.  At  present,
among  the  chiefs  of  the  StA&hs^  is  Mirza  ShAdmAn,  with
whom  the  faithful  are  weU  pleased,  and  of  whose  incursions
the  Khargis*  of  C&bvl  and  Ghaznin  bitterly  complain.

"  The  Bal6ch  of  Sind;  many  of  these  are  devoted
Shiahs.  They  call  themselves,  and  are  called  by  all  the
fidthful,  AlI's  friends.  Sayyad  RAji6  of  Bokhara  exerted
himself  in  the  guidance  of  this  tribe;  his  descendants
remain  among  them,  and  are  occupied  with  the  concerns
of  the  sect.''


*  The  word  is  here  used  as  a  term  of  reproach;  for  its  origin,  as
the  appellation  of  a  sect,  see  D'Hsbbblot's  BibHothi^  OrimUUe.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


IX.

Translation  of  one  of  the  Inscriptioiis  on  the  Pillar  at
Delhi,  called  the  Lot  of  ¥lntz  ShAh.

[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  vii.  p.  179—182.
Calcutta  1801. 4to.]

SanscrIt  Inscription.*

^  0  3priciiHri4rM«iiH^'i'5ri:wt'yr'j«(dM^


•  See  Plate  i.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


•J


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


4^


i:
•  »


1


Dig zed  by


Googi


TRANSLATION  OF  AN  INSCRIPTION,  &C.


233


)ct,|c||4^bri?|^^^c|r?l'ilM=l<^KiP|V|.

ir^fadn=i< cRwteF^^miR

Samvat  1220  vaiiac^ha  sudi 15  sacarnhhari  bkupati
srimad  villa  dev&tmaja  snmad  visala  devasya.

Avindhyitd  ahimadrer  vircichita-vijayas  ttrfha-yatron

prasangad  udgrivishupraharta  nripatishu  vinamat  can'

dharishu  prasannah

ary  aver  tarn  yafharfhampunar  api  critavan  mUchcVha^

vichcVhedanabhir  devah  sacambharindrS  jagati  vija-

yate  visalah  cshMipalah.

Briiti  samprati  bahujata  tilacah  sacambhari  bhdpatih

irimad  vigraha  raja  esha  vijayt  santdnajan  atmanak

asmabhih  caradam  vyadhayi  himavad-vindhyantaralam

bhtivah  sisha-swicaranaya mastu  bhavat&m  tuiySga-

iunyam  manah.

AmbhS  ndma  ripu-priya-nayanaySkpratyarfhi-dantan'

tare  pratyacskani  trinani  vaibhava-milat  cashiam  yasas

tavacam

margS  IScorviruddka  eva  vijanah  simyam  man6  md-

wisham  srimad  vigraha  rajadeva  bhavatah  prapte  pra-

yanStsave

Ltla-mandira'sSdareshu  bhavatuswanteshu  vamabhruvam


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


234  TRANSLATION  OF  AN  INSCRIPTION

satr{tAan  nanu  vigraha  cshitipate  nyayyai  cha  vcuas

tava

ianca  va  purushSttamasya  bhavatS  nasty  eva  vcaran

nidher  nirmafhy&pahrita''ir%yah  cimu  bhavdn  cr6d6  na

nidrayitah.

Samvatiri  vicram&dUya  1220  vaiicufha  sudi  15  gtarau

lic'hitamidam

pratyacsham  gau^nwaya-'cayasfharmahava'putra'^-'
patina  atra  samayi  maha-mantri  rajaputra  himal''
lacsha'Aapalah.

Verbal  Translation.

''  In  the  year  1220,  on  the  15th  day  <^  the  biigbt  half
of  the  month  Vaisac^hay  [this  moniiment]  of  the  fortunate
VtsALA  Di^TA,  0on  of  tte  fertonate  V£lla  D^va,*"  king
f£  SaoambhaA.

"  As  far  as  Vindhya ,  f  as  fieur  as  Himadriff  having  achieved
conquest  in  the  course  of  travelling  to  holy  places ;  resent-
ful to  haughty  kings,  and  indulgent  to  those  whose  necks
are  humbled ;  making  Aryavertarf  once  more  what  its  name
signifies,  by  causing  the  barbarians  to  be  exterminated ;  V i-
SALA  DkvAf  supreme  ruler  of  oacambhaAyX  and  sovereign
of  the  earth,  is  victorious  in  the  world.

'^  This  conqueror,  the  fortunate  Vigraha  RAja,§  king  of

*  Colonel  Polier's  transcript  exhibited  Am illa;  the  present  copy
may  be  read  either  Av£lla  or  V£lla.

t  The  J^indhya  hills  form  the  range  which  passes  through  the
provinces  of  Bahdr,  Bendres,  &c.  Hirnddri,  the  mountain  of  snow,
(called  Himavat  in  the  next  verse,)  is  the  Imaus  and  Emodus  of  an-
cient geographers.  Arydverta  signifies  the  land  of  virtue,  or  **  inha-
bited  by  respectable  men  J* See  Menu,  Ch.  ii.  v.  22.

t  ^ambhari  is  the  modern  §dmbhar,  famous  for  its  salt  lakes.
It  is  situated  at  the  distance  of  about  thirty  miles  west  of  Jeypur»

§  Whether  Vigraha  Raja  and  VIsala  D^va  be  names  of  the
same  person,  or  of  different  princes,  it  is  impossible  to  determine
from  the  tenor  of  the  inscription,  without  other  information.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  THE PILLAR  AT  DELHI.  235

SacamhhoAj  moet  eminent  of  the  tribe  which  sprang  from
the  arms^  [of  BbahmAJ  now  addresses  his  own  descen*-
dants :  '  By  us  the  region  of  the  earth  between  Himavat
^  and  Vindhya  has  been  made  tnbatary ;  let  not  your
'  minds  be  void  of  exertion  to  subdue  the  remainder/

"  Tears  are  evident  in  the  eyes  of  thy  enemy's  consort ;
blades  of  grass  are  perceived  between  thy  adversary's
teeth  ;t  thy  fame  is  predominant  throughout  space ;  the
minds  of  thy  foes  are  void  [of  hope] ;  their  route  is  the
desert  where  men  are  hindered  from  passing;  O  Vigraha
RAja  D£va,  in  the  jubilee  occasioned  by  thy  march.

'*  May  thy  abode,  O  Vigraha,  sovereign  of  the  earth,
be  fixed,  as  in  reason  it  ought,  in  the  bosoms  (akin  to  the
fwmflkwi  of  daUiance)  of  the  women  with  beautiftil  eye-
brows, who  were  mmxtied  to  thy  enemies.  There  is  no
doubt  of  thy  being  the  highest  of  embodied  soiik^  Ditbt
thou  not  sleep  in  the  lap  of  SrI,  whom  thou  didst  seize
from  the  ocean,  having  churned  it?§

"  In  the  year  fix)m  the  fortunate VicrA'maditya  1220||
on  Thursday  the  15th  day  of  the  bright  half  of  the  month

*  The  transcript  of  the  inscription  exhibits  v6ham^ia  tilacahy  as
it  was  also  read  in  the  former  fac  simile:  Serv6ru  TRiv^of  advises
me  to  read  it  bahufdta  tilacah,  and  I  accede  to  his  emendation.  [See
the  note  in  the  following  page.]

t  This  alludes  to  the  Indian  custom  of  biting  a  Made  of  grass  as  a
token  of  submission,  and  of  asking  4]uarter.

{  SRRy6Bn  explains  this  very  obscure  passage  otherwise:  ''  there  is
(t.  e.  there  should  be)  no  doubt  or  hesitation  in  the  mind  of  thee,  who
art  the  highest  of  embodied  souls  (^PvrttshdUaima)^^^

§  PuRnsH6TTAMA  is  a  title  of  ViSHiru.  With  reference  to  this
term,  the  author  of  the  inscription  asks,  '*  Art  thou  sot  ViSHiru
himself?  Art  thou  not  he  who  slept  in  the  arms  of  LAcsHvf  P"
The  legend  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean  is  well  known.

II  In  the  present  copy  the  date  is  very  distinct ;  and  proves  to  be
1220;  not  123  as  was  suspected  by  Sir  William  Jones.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


236  TRANSLATION  OF  AN  INSCRIPTION

Vaisac'ha^  this  was  written  in  the  presence  of  * . • . .

by  SrIpati,  the  son  of  MJIhava,  a

Cayasfha  of  a  family  in  OauSa :  at  this  time  the  fortu-
nate Lacshana  pAla,  B,Rqjaputraf  is  prime  minister.


"  Siva  the  terrible, and  the  miiversal  monarch."


There  are  on  the  same  page,  some  short  inscriptions,
which  I  cannot  decypher.  One  of  them,  however,  is  partly
legible,  and  appears  to  be  in  the  Hindustani  language.
It  contains  the  name  of  Sultan  IbrAhIm,  and  wishes
him  a  long  life.


Note  to  t/ie preceding  TuAiishATioji.
[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.  p.  453. Calcutta,  I8O7.  4to.]

A  passage  in  the  preface  of  the  Samgadhara  pad--
dhatif  and  another  in  the  body  of  that  work,  whidi  were
first  indicated  by  Capt.  WiLFORD,t  show,  that  a  term,
contained  in  the  inscription  on  the  column  at  Delhiy  for
whidi  I  proposed  to  substitute,  with  the  advice  of  the
PanStit  who  assisted  me,  the  word  '  hahujata*  as  a  con-
jectural emendation,  must  be  read  '  chdhumanay  or  '  clwr
luLvana ;'  being  the  name  of  the  tribe  to  which  the  prince,
there  mentioned,  belonged,  and  which  is  well  known  at
this  day  under  the  appellation  of  Chauhan.  In  the  preface,
^Arngadhara  describes  himself  as  second  in  descent
from  Raghud&va,  a  priest  attending  on  HammIra  king  of
*Sacambhari,  of  the  tribe  of  Ch'duh&n,  Chahuvan,  or  Bahw
vana  (for  the  name  is  variously  spelt  in  different  copies).
The  work  itself  is  a  compilation  of  miscellaneous  poetry

*  This  part  of  the  inscription  is  not  legihle.
t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  189.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  THE  PILLAR  OF DELHI. .  237

aiTEDged  under  distinct  heads ;  and  one  chapter  (the  73d)
is  devoted  to  the  admission  of  stanzas  concerning  indivi-
du^  princes.  Among  them  two  stanzas  occur,  which  are
there  cited  as  an  inscription  on  a  royal  column  of  stone,
erected  as  a  sacrificial  pillar  ;*  and  which,  on  comparison,
are  found  to  be  the  same  with  the  two  first  of  the  stanzas,
on  the  pillar  at  Delhi.  Several  copies  of  the  Sam^adhara
paddhati  have  been  collated,  in  aU  of  which,  the  term  in
question  is  written  Bahuvana.  Comparing  this  with  the
preface  of  the  same  compilation,  and  with  the  inscription
itself,  we  may  be  allowed  to  conjecture,  that  Chahuvana
is  the  correct  reading :  the  Nagari  letters  ^  and  ^  b^g
very  liable  to  be  confounded.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


X.

On  Ancient  Monuments,  containing  SansceIt
Inscriptions.

[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  voL  ix.  p*  398 — 444.
Calcutta  1807. 4to.]

In  the  scarcity  of  authentic  materials  for  the  ancient,
and  even  for  the  modem,  history  of  the  Hindu  race,  im-
portance is  justly  attached  to  all  genuine  monuments,  and
especially  inscriptions  on  stone  and  metal,  which  are  occa-
sionally discovered  through  various  accidents.  If  these  be
carefully  preserved  and  diligently  examined,  and  the  fects
ascertained  from  them,  be  judiciously  employed  towards
elucidating  the  scattered  information,  which  can  be  yjet
collected  from  the  remains  of  Indian  literature,  a  satisfac-
tory progress  may  be  finally  made  in  investigating  the  his-
tory of  the  Hindus.  That  the  dynasties  of  princes  who
have  reigned  paramount  in  India,  or  the  line  of  chieftains
who  have  ruled  over  particular  tracts,  will  be  verified  ;  or
that  the  events  of  war,  or  the  effects  of  poUcy,  during  a
series  of  ages,  will  be  developed ;  is  an  expectation  which
I  neither  entertain,  nor  wish  to  excite.  But  the  state  of
manners,  and  the  prevalence  of  particular  doctrines,  at  dif-
ferent periods,  may  be  deduced  from  a  diligent  perusal  of
the  writings  of  authors,  whose  age  is  ascertained ;  and  the
contrast  of  different  results,  for  various  and  distant  periods,
may  furnish  a  distinct  outline  of  the  progress  of  opinions.
A  brief  history  of  the  nation  itself,  rather  than  of  its  go-
vernment, will  be  thus  sketched ;  but  if  unable  to  revive
the  memory  of  great  political  events,  we  may  at  least  be
content  to  know  what  has  been  the  state  of  arts,  of  sciences,
of  mannei's,  in  remote  ages,  among  this  very  ancient  and
early  civiliz^  people;  and  to  learn  what  has  been  the  suc-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS,  &C.  239

oeasioii  of  doctrines,  religious  and  philosophical,  which  have
prevailed  in  a  nation  ingenious  yet  prone  to  superstition.

Unf(»rtunately,  writers  have  seldom  given  the  dates  of
their  compositions;  and  the  Hindu's  love  of  fable,  and
distaste  for  sober  narrative,  have  been  as  unfiiendly  to  the
biography  of  authors,  as  to  the  history  of  princes.  The
lives  of  few  celebrated  persons  have  been  written;  and
those  which  have  been  composed,  exhibit  the  same  foodr
ness  for  improbable  fiction  which  pervades  the  mytho-
logical works  of  the  Hindus.  The  age  of  an  author  must
be,  therefore,  sought  from  circumstances  mentioned  in  his
writings:  and  none  more  frequently  affords  the  desired
information,  than  the  author's  notice  of  his  patron ;  who
generally  is  either  the  sovereign  of  the  country,  or  some
person  standing  in  such  relation  to  the  court,  as  gives
occasion  to  mention  the  name  of  the  reigning  prince.  Thus
every  ancient  monument  which  fixes  the  date  of  a  reign,
or  determines  the  period  of  a  particular  dynasty,  tends  to
the  ascertainhient  of  the  age  of  writers  who  flourished  in
that  reign  or  under  that  dynasty :  and  convei*sely,  wher-
ever dates  can  be,  with  confidence,  deduced  immediately
fiom  an  author's  works,  these  may  frimish  historical  infor-
mation, and  assist  the  explanation  of  ancient  monuments.

On  this  account  the  preservation  and  study  of  old  in-*
scriptions  may  be  earnestly  recommended.  It  is  not  on  a
first  or  cursory  examination,  that  the  utility  of  any  par-
ticular mcmument  for  the  illustration  of  the  civil  or  literary
history  of  the  country  can  be  certainly  determined.  Even
those  which  at  first  sight  appear  uninteresting,  may  be
afterwards  found  to  bear  strongly  on  an  important  point.
Instances  might  be  brought  from  the  few  inscriptions  which
have  been  already  published.  But  it  is  not  my  present
purpose  to  enter  on  an  examination  of  published  monu-
ments, but  to  urge  the  communication  of  every  inscription


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


240  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

which  may  be  hereafter  discovered  ;  at  the  same  time  that
I  lay  before  the  Society  copies  and  translations  of  those
which  have  been  recently  communicated  from  various  parts
of  India.

It  is  a  subject  for  regret,  that  the  originals  of  which
versions  have  before  been  made  public,  are  not  deposited
where  they  might  be  accessible  to  persons  engaged  in  re-
searches into  Indian  literature  and  antiquities :  but  much
more  so,  that  ancient  monuments,  which  there  is  reason  to
consider  as  important,  have  been  removed  to  Europe  before
they  had  been  sufficiently  examined,  or  before  they  were
accurately  copied  and  translated.  I  may  specify^  with
particular  regret,  the  plate  of  copper  found  at  Benares,
and  noticed  by  Capt.  Wilford  in  the  ninth  volume  of
Asiatic  Researdies  (p.  108) ;  and  still  more  a  plate  which
has  been  mentioned  to  me  by  a  learned  PaAS&t,  (who
assured  me  that  he  v^as  employed  in  decyphering  it),"*  and
which  appears,  from  a  copy  in  his  possession,  to  have  con-
tained a  grant  of  land  by  the  celebrated  Jatachandra,
when  a  young  prince  associated  to  the  empire  of  his  father;
fix)m  this  information  it  seems  to  have  been  particularly
valuable,  on  account  of  the  genealogy  comprised  in  it.

Translations  might  indeed  be  made  ftom  the  PwiAifs
copy  of  the  last-mentioned  plate,  and  from  one  taken  by
a  learned  native  in  Capt.  Wilford's  service,  from  the
plate  discovered  at  Benares.  But  my  experience  of  the
necessity  of  collating  the  copies  made  by  the  best  PaticlitSf
from  inscriptions  in  ancient  or  unusual  character,  discou-
rages me  firom  placing  impUcit  confidence  in  their  trans-
cripts ;  and  the  originals  are  at  present  beyond  reach  of


*  Sbrv6ru  TRiviof;  the  same  who  assisted  me  in  decyphering
the  copy  of  an  inscription  on  Fir6z  Shah's  pillar  at  Delhi.  As.
Hes.  vol.  vii.  p.  180.  [page  232  of  the  present  volume.]


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCrYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  241

reference,  having  been  conveyed  to  Europe  to  be  there
buried  in  some  public  museum  or  private  collection.

Tlie  only  am^ds,  which  could  be  now  made  for  the
removal  of  those  interesting  monuments,  would  be  the
publication  of  copies  correctly  made  in  fac  simile.  From
such  transcripts,  provided  they  be  executed  with  great  care,
the  text  may  be  decyphered  and  translated.  An  exact
copy  of  the  Sanscrit  inscription  on  the  stone  at  Cintra  in
Portugal,  enabled  Mr.WiLKiNs  to  ascertain  the  date  and
scope  of  that  inscription ;  as  well  as  the  names,  which  it
contains."*  Similar  copies  of  other  inscriptions  would,  in
like  manner,  furnish  oriental  scholars  with  the  means  of
ascertaining  their  purport ;  and  the  publication  of  fac
similes  may,  for  this  purpose,  be  recommended  to  those
who  are  in  possession  of  the  originals.

I  now  proceed  to  describe,  and  so  far  as  I  have  suc-
ceeded in  decyphering  them,  to  explain,  the  several  in-
scriptions on  ancient  monuments  in  stone  and  copper,
which  have  been  lately  presented  to  the  Asiatic  Society.

I.  Inscription  on  a  Plate  of  Copper  found  in  the  district

of  TiPURA.

Towards  the  end  of  1803,  a  plate  of  copper  was  dis-
covered in  digging  earth  for  the  repair  of  the  highway
through  the  Manamati  hills  in  the  district  of  Tipura,  It
was  carried  to  Mr.  Eliot,  magistrate  of  the  district ;  and
by  him  communicated  to  the  Asiatic  Society.  On  exa-
mination, it  has  been  found  to  contain  an  inscription  decla-
ratory of  a  grant  of  land,  dated  near  600  years  ago.

The  plate  measures  eleven  inches  in  height  and  nine  in
breadth,  and  is  engraved  on  one  surface  only. The  sides

•  Mlrphy's  Travels  in  Portug^al,  p.  277*
VOL. II.  R


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


242  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

have  a  gentle  curvature ;  and,  at  top,  is  an  abrupt  bend,
allowing  room  to  a  figure  coarsely  delineated,  and  appcH
rently  intended  to  represexit  a  temple.  The  character
agrees  ^nearly  wiA  that  now  in  use  in  Bengal:  but  some
of  the  letters  bear  a  closer  resemblaxu^e  to  the  writing  of

The  following  is  an  exact  copy  of  the  inscription  in
Nagari  letters,  as  decyphered  by  the  aid  of  several  Paii-
Aits.  A  literal  translation  is  subjoined ;  and  a  fac  simile
of  the  original  is  exhibited  in  the  annexed  plate.f

dfHKJi<*lc^c|nn?ch^lRdM:


*  There  is  reason  to  suppose  the  writings  as  well  as  the  language
of  Bengal^  to  be  originally  the  same  with  the  TirMiii^:  altered,  in
coarse  of  time,  since  the  separation  which  has  been  the  conseqaence
of  a  colony  of  Cdnyacubja  Brdhmens  settling  in  Bengal

t  See  Plate  ii.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


.^<r


Digitized  by  LjOOQ I


CONTAINING  «ANSCRtT  INSCKIPTIONS.  243

ri^lHKrjMH^;qi1rK^nVTT:^<Mif»Hit

^4v^^<*H^^rci<x:nmr5h^c(it^^>nfrr  \


s2


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


244  ON ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

f^i|^<^c^jjur(^iU^iH<t.'^H  |U|;

Translation.

1.  "In  that*  eminent  and  spotless  family,  was  born,  an
ornament  of  the  learned,  renowned  throughout  the  world,
endowed  with  science,  and  practising  good  deeds,  the  cele-
brated, happy,  and  venerable  Hfe6i  ;t  in  whose  pure  mind,
virtue  ever  ranges,  like  a  swan  in  the  limpid  lake.

2.  "  From  him  sprung  the  happy  chief  of  ministers,  who
exhibits  the  joys  of  unsullied  glory;  a  spotless  moon
among  mortals,  and  at  sight  of  whom  the  hare-spotted
luminaryt  appears  swoln  [with  envy],  and  distempered  with
alternate  increase  and  wane.

*  This  use  of  the  pronoun  indicates  the  conspicuousness  of  the
object ;  as  if  sufficiently  known  without  further  designation.

t  Here,  as  well  as  with  the  subsequent  names,  the  particle  iva
is  subjoined  without  changing  the  preceding  vowel.  This  is  con-
trary to  the  rules  of  the  language,  and  emendations  have  been
accordingly  proposed :  but  I  shall  not  disturb  the  text

{  The  moon  is  named  §aiiny  from  a  fancied  resemblance  of  its
spots  to  a  leveret.  Tahdits^  to  whom  I  showed  maps  of  the  moon,
copied  ft'om  Hevblius  and  Riooiolus,  fixed  upon  the  Loca  Palu-
dosa  and  Mons  Porphyrites,  or  KbplkrOs  and  Arista  rohus,  for  the
spots,  which,  they  think,  exhibit  the^imilitude  of  a  hare.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  245

3.  "  That  venerable  officer,*  ever  relying  on  holy  virtue8,t
is  eminently  conversant  with  well  guided  morals,  and  con-
spicuous for  the  observance  of  practical  duties.

4.  *'  Himself  an  ocean  of  generosity  and  meditation,  yet
thirsting  to  taste,  by  practice  of  austerity,  that  which  alone
confines  the  fleeting  thoughts ;%  sympathising  with  other
living  beings,  an  unrivalled  theatre  of  virtue,  practising
good  deeds,  and,  in  private,  only  a  contemplative  saint,
this  auspicious  Dha6i  alone  rose,  as  a  luminary  of  joy
above  the  earth.

6.  "  Superior  to  the  world  was  the  deUght  of  this  pre-emi-
nent sovereign  of  the  earth,  thehappyRANABANCA  malla»
whose  officer^  he  was ;  for  the  deity  who  has  a  hundred
eyes  II  is  obscured,  even  in  his  own  abode,  by  the  dazzling
glories  of  that  [monarch],  which  traverse  the  three  worlds,
in  all  directions.

6.  "  May  the  twenty  rfr6iww1[  of  land,  in  the  village  of
Ijac^hafiBaj  granted  to  him  by  that  generous  prince,  con-
tinue as  long  as  sun  and  moon  endure,  yielding  the  ample

*  The  term  is  Akoanibandhica,  which  the  PaMiis  are  disposed  to
explain  as  signifying;  **  a  general  commanding  cavalry."  Other  inter-
pretations may  he  suggested :  the  word  is  an  unusual  one.

t  Thisy  as  indeed  the  whole  of  the  verse,  is  ohscure,  and  admits
of  various  interpretations.  In  this  place,  more  than  one  reading  has
been  proposed.

t  Here  again  the  sense  is  obscure ;  and  more  than  one  reading  may
be  proposed.  The  praise  is  evidently  grounded  on  the  union  of  prac-
tical virtues,  with  religious  contemplation.

§  Aswanibandhica,

It  Indra.

If  A  measure  of  land,  still  used  in  the  eastern  parts  of  Bengal,
originally  as  much  as  might  be  sown  with  one  dr^a  of  seed :  for  a
drb^  is  a  measure  of  capacity.  (As.  Res.,  vol.  v.  p.  96.)  The
dr6^y  vulgarly  called  dun^  varies  in  different  districts.  It  may,
however,  be  reckoned  nearly  equivalent  to  eight  btghas^  or  two  acres
and  two-thirds.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


246  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

hanrest  of  unsullied  praise;  for  it  is  land  secure  from
invasion,  delightful,  lik^a  pleasant  painting,  and  i^pears
like  a  crest  in  the  assemblage  of  cities.

7«  ''  This  land,  with  definite  boundaries,  has  been  given
by  the  liberal  prince  himself,  the  range  of  whose  glory
therefore  extends,  as  is  fit,  in  all  directions.

8.  '*  O  future  kings ;  understand  this  inscription  on  cop-
per, by  which  that  officer*  humbly  now  solicits  you:
this  land  should  be  preserved ;  nor  is  the  permanence  of
the  realm  consistent  with  the  slightest  injury :  a  shame  on
avarice !  That  land  is,  as  it  were,  a  widow,  the  sovereign
of  which  is  despised  [for  his  covetousness].

9.  '' Although  this  excellence  of  the  descendants  [of  that
prince]  which  is  guarded  by  their  natural  virtues,  be  suffi-
ciaitly  apparent,  yet  does  MiniNi,  ui^ed  by  the  multitude
of  the  good  qualities  of  that  unsulUed  race,  thus  make  it
known.f

**  Years  expired  of  the  Saca  king  1141 ;%  dated  in  the
seventeenth  year  of  Ranabanca  malla,  SrImat  Hari-
cAla  d£va,§  or  expressed  in  numerals,  Samva^\,  17 ;  on
the  29th  of  the  Sun's  being  in  the  balance/'

*  Jswanibandhica.

t  This  inscription  appears  not  to  be  a  grant  by  the  sovereign ;
bat  a  memorial  of  the  grant  recorded  by  the  possessor,  who  most
have  been  the  heir  of  the  grantee,  and  who  seems  to  acknowledge  in
this  place  the  liberality  of  the  grantor's  successors  continuing  the  land
to  him.

X  Corresponding  to  A.D.  1219.

§  This  prince  is  probably  a  different  person  from  the  grantor  named
in  the  fifth  verse.

II  Here  Samvat  is  used  for  the  year  of  the  king's  reign.  See  re-
marks, towards  the  close  of  this  paper,  on  an  inscription  found  at
Amgdchh^  in  DifU^pur.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


.1


t


Digitized  by


Google


I


\


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCrIt  INSCRIPTIONS.  247


II.  Inscription  an  a  Plate  of  Copper  found  in  the  district

0/*OORAKHPUR.

A  PLATE  of  copper,  containing  an  inscription  in  the  San-
scrit language,  declaratory  of  a  grant  of  land,  but  without
date,  was  lately  found  in  the  district  of  Gorakhpur,  near
the  river  called  the  little  Gandhac.  It  was  brought  to  Mr.
John  Ahmuty,  magistrate  of  the  district,  and  by  him
communicated  to  Captain  Wilfo a  d,  who  has  presented  it
to  the  Asiatic  Society.

The  plate,  which  is  16^  inches  long,  and  12^  broad,
is  engraved  on  one  face  only.  The  lines,  of  which  there
are  24,  nm  in  the  length  of  the  plate ;  and  on  the  left  side
is  a  curvature,  on  which  a  semi-circular  appendage  is
riveted,  containing  a  flat  button  representing  the  impression
of  a  seal.  The  figure  is  very  imperfect,  but  seems  to  be
intended  for  some  animal.

With  the  plate  itself.  Captain  Wilfo rd  communicated
a  copy  of  its  contents  as  decyphered  by  a  Paiiclit  in  his
service.  On  carefully  comparing  it  with  the  original,  I
found  all  the  essential  passages,  as  well  as  the  names,
correctly  given :  a  few  alterations,  which  this  comparison
showed  to  be  necessary,  have  been  made  mih  the  concur-
rence of  several  PanAits  from  Tirhitty  who  assisted  me  in
collating  it.  I  preferred  the  aid  of  PanAits  of  that  pro-
vince, because  the  peculiarities  of  the  characters  where
they  differ  widely,  as  they  do  in  many  instances,  from
common  Devanagari,  make  a  nearer  approach  to  the
Tirhutiya  letters  than  to  any  other  now  in  use.  The  whole
inscription  is  indeed  remarkable  for  the  uncommon  form  of
the  consonants,  and  the  very  unusual  manner  in  which  the
vowels  are  marked.  On  this  account  an  exact  copy  of  the
original  in  fac  simile  will  be  subjoined  ;*  as  well  as  a  correct

•  See  Plate  iii.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


248  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

transcript  in  modern  Devanagart  letters. The  following
version  is  as  literal  as  the  difference  of  idiom  permits.

Translation.

1.  "  Salutation  to  the  God,  who  is  manifested  in  va-
rious forms,  from  earth  to  tlie  performer  of  a  sacrifice,*
who  is  an  universal  soul,  to  be  apprehended  only  by
contemplation  of  saints ;  and  who  pervades  all.

2.  "  Salutation  to  the  unborn  God,t  who  makes  the
world's  production,  its  continuance,  and  ultimate  de-
struction; and  the  recollection  of  whom  serves  as  a
vessel  of  transport  across  the  ocean  of  mundane  ills.

3.  "  Salutation  be  to  the  husband  of  LacshmI;  to  him
who  reposes  on  S&s ha  as  on  a  couch;  to  him  who  is
Vishnu  extracting  the  thorns  of  the  three  worlds;  to
him  who  appears  in  every  shape.?

4.  "  Salutation  be  to  the  blessed  foot  of  PARVATi,§
which  destroyed  the  demon  Mahisha,  by  whom  all
had  been  overcome;  and  which  gives  felicity  to  the
world.

6,  "  Surrounded  by  groves  of  lofty  canes,||  inaccessi--
ble  through  the  range  of  edifices  on  the  hill's  summit;
encompassed  by  a  deep  ditch,  in  which  fountains  spring;
secure  by  impassable  defence  from  dread  of  foes,  a

•  Siva,  manifested  in  eight  material  forms:  viz.  Earth,  Water,
Fire,  Air,  Ether,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  the  person  who  performs
a  sacrifice.

t  Brahma  the  creator,  himself  not  created,  and  therefore  termed
unborn.

t  ViSH^u,  who  reposes  on  the  serpent  Ananta  or  ^tsJia  ;  and  who
has  been  incarnate  in  various  shapes,  to  relieve  the  world  from  op-
pressors.

§  BhavanI  or  DuRoX  slew  MahishIsura.  The  legend  is  well
known.

II  Bamboos  (Bambusa  arundinacea  and  other  species).

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRIt  INSCRIPTIONS.  249

6.  royal  abode  there  is  named  Vijeyapura/^yN}nch  is  situated
on  the  declivity  of  the  northern  mountain,  where  the
pain  of  regret  is  unknown,  and  every  gratification  is
found.

7.  '*  There  reigned  the  fortunate  DharmAditya,
like  another  BSdhimtwa,  a  mighty  and  prosperous
prince,  whose  glory  spread  over  the  four  seas. His

8.  son  was  jAYADiTYA,t  adorable  like  the  moon,  the
fortune  of  the  world,  like  the  tree  which  bears  every
desired  fruit,  and  satisfying  thirst  like  a  deep  lake :

9.  humble,  though  a  king ;  though  young,  prudent  and
averse  from  amorous  passion ;  though  liberally  bestow-
ing all,  yet  ever  receiving  the  best  result  of  all.

10.  **  His  minister,  learned,  intelligent,  and  van-
quisher of  foes,  the  son  of  a  mighty  chieftain  and
counsellor  CatTAciRTi,  was  the  fortunate  MadAli,|

*  The  place  here  described  may  be  f^ijey^pur,  on  the  Dorthem
declivity  of  the  Ftndhya  hills,  a  few  miles  from  the  temple  of
Findhyd'Vdsini  near  Mrzdpur  on  the  Ganges.  It  is  the  ancient  resi-
dence of  a  family,  which  claims  descent  from  the  former  sovereigns
of  Benares ;  and  is  still  the  abode  of  the  head  of  that  family.  But  the
terms  of  the  text,  UttaTogiri  catace,  rather  seem  to  signify  *  declivity
of  the  northern  mountain,'  than  *  nprthem  declivity  of  the  mountain ;'
and  that  interpretation  points  to  the  range  of  snowy  mouptains,  instead
of  Fmdhya  which  is  reckoned  a  tropical  range.

t  The  name  of  JAviniTTA,  is  known  as  the  patron  of  certain
authors,  who  flourished  at  C6i\;  and  who  are  considered  as  ancient
writers*  He  is  mentioned  in  the  title  of  the  F'amana  caiicdy  aod  even
termed  the  author  of  that  grammatical  work.  I  shall  not  undertake
to  determine  whether  this  be  the  same  person.  ■

%  The  names,  being  uncommon,  are,  in  this  instance,  doubtful.
§rtmadali  is  clearly  given  as  the  name  of  the  minister:  and  either  the
whole  of  it  may  be  his  name ;  or  it  may  be  resolved  into  6rhn(U  Alt,
or  into  6fi  Maddli,  The  latter  is  most  agreeable  to  the  prevailing
practice  of  prefixing  ^ri  to  a  proper  name.  In  this  inscription,  the
auspicious  syllable  is  prefixed  to  the  names  of  the  two  kings  first
mentioned ;  but  is  not  added  to  the  names  of  the  writers  of  it,  who  are
noticed  towards  the  close,  (v.  20  &  22.)

Crtla-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


250  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

11.  whose  pleasing  counsels  obtained  a  ready  hearii^y  and  i

who  was  by  nature  eager  for  the  reduction  of  raemied.*

12.  ^^  The  village  of  lhimmadumaj'\  obtained  by
him  from  the  royal  favour^  and  rich  in  tillage,  dwell-
ings, and  cattle,  has  been  assigned  by  him  to  DurgA^  %

13.  "  The  opulence  of  the  good,  who  put  their  trust
in  the  great,  is,  indeed,  beneficial  to  others :  the  clouds
gather  water  firom  the  sea,  and  shower  it  down  on  the

14.  growing  crop.  Rare  indeed  are  those  Uberal  persons,
who  distinguish  not  between  their  own  dependants  and
strangers :  how  many  are  the  all-productive  trees  even
in  the  celestial  .grove  ?  §

15.  ''  Do  not  imagine,  father,  that,  in  the  sinful  age,
a  general  equality  prevails :  the  sovereign  defends  the
earth,  but  a  weak  individual  guards  not  even  his  house.  ||

16.  Birth  and  death,  success  and  misfortune,  are  perpe-
tually passing:  why  not,  therefore,  protect  another's

17.  glory  like  one's  own? He,  who  bestows  fertile  land

Critacirti  may  signify  '  of  established  fame :'  but,  if  taken  as  an
epithet,  it  leaves  no  other  term  which  can  be  assumed  as  the  name  of
the  minister's  father.

*  The  text  exhibits  Pracr^H  parabaddhftcccshO,  Though  a  very
unsatisfactory  reading,  it  is  here  preserved,  and  has  been  translated  in
the  most  probable  sense  which  I  am  able  to  suggest  for  it

t  A  village  of  this  name  is  situated  in  the  district  of  Aliahdbdd,
within  twenty  miles  of  Bijeypur  on  the  Ganges.  But  the  name  is
not  uncommon :  and  may  belong  to  some  place  nearer  to  the  northern
mountains.

t  Jayaditta's  minister,  Madali,  appears  to  have  assigned  this
village  for  general  charitable  uses,  by  consecrating  it  to  the  goddess
DuRoI.  Such  at  least  seem  to  be  the  most  consistent  reading  and
interpretation  of  the  text.

§  Indra's  garden  called  Naadana;  in  which  five  celestial  trees  are
placed,  termed  Calpadmmaf  Parijdtay  &o.  The  Calpadruma  yields,
as  its  fruit,  every  thing  which  is  desired.

II  The  intention  of  this  and  the  following  lines  is  to  deprecate  the
resumption  of  the  grant.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRIt  INSCRIPTIONS.  251

fiumtshed  with  the  means  of  agriculture^  mounts  a

.  celestial  vehicle,  and  ascends  to  heaven,  gladdening

18.  his  progenitors. But  he,  who  foolishly  resumes  land

allotted  to  gods  or  priests,  assuredly  causes  his  ances*

^tors  to  iaU  to  hell,  even  though  they  had  previously

attained  heaven.

19.  "  Sprung  from  a  very  pure  race,  respectful  towards
gods,  priests,  spiritual  parents,  and.the  king,  a  generous

20.  founder  of  temples,  who  has  dug  many  ponds ;  by  the
tenderness  of  his  disposition  an  image  of  Sugata,*  a
treasure  of  virtues,  with  subdued  organs,  wise,  and
averse  from  unpleasing  discourse:  such  was  the  Ca-

21.  ycw^AaNAoADATTA.  By  him  was  composed  with  great
devoutness,  this  praise  of  the  minister ;  in  apt  measure
and  pleasing  verse,  elegantf  and  apposite.

22.  *'  The  last  three  verses  were  written  by  his
younger  brother  VidyAdatta  ;  for  he  himself  was
fearful  of  proclaiming  his  own  virtues.

23.  *^  Rich  and  fertile  is  the  village,  obtained  through


^  From  this  comparison  to  Suoata  or  Buddha,  as  well  as  a  pre-
vious comparison  to  a  BbdhistUwaf  it  may  be  inferred  that  the  author,
if  not  himself  a  follower  of  the  sect  of  Buddha,  was  at  least  more
amicably  disposed  towards  that  sect  than  modem  orthodox  Hindus
appear  to  be.

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  inform  the  reader,  that  the  last  Buddha
was  conspicuous  for  his  tender,  compassionate  disposition.  The  my-
thology of  the  sect  of  Buddha  peoples  heaven  with  Bbdhisatwas;
'  and,  from  this  class  of  beings,  the  Buddhas  are  selected.  Gautama
Buddha  was  a  Bodhisahoa  under  the  name  of  Sw^TAoiru,  before
he  was  incarnate  as  SiddhIrt'ha  son  of  §uddh6dana.

t  The  text  exhibits  Surha  crttasobhd;  which  must  be  amended  by
reading  either  SwaHia  or  SuvaHia*  The  last  is  preferable  as  giving
the  most  correct  metre :  either  way  the  meaning  is  rendered  '  elegant,
as  gold,'  or  by  *  well  selected  words :'  for  suimr^n  or  swarda  signifies
gold ;  and  may  be  resolved  into  two  words,  su  well,  and  varna  or  arka
a  letter  or  syllable*


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


252  ON  ANCIENT MONUMENTS

the  king's  fevour  as  an  endowment  for  subsistftnce,
and  still  more  productive  is  this  other  villi^  for  vir-
tuous men."*

^4MiwiMi|*^WM*^+d«MirM^'iH:  tin
m \KH\i\i)H\K^r\ ^^rl^jpT:  tl=^tl

^HkV^tflf<t4^'lMfdT>j[ftftra?qT?  tlv9Tl


•  The  last  line  is  very  obscure.  If  it  have  been  rightly  decyphered
and  explained,  it  may  allude  to  some  other  grant  held  by  the  Raji^s
minister,  for  his  own  subsistence.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRtx  INSCRIPTIONS.  263


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


264  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

♦iiMWrd*l:«J.M'm^JuiPlfvrTM*^r^HPiiL4^R4Kl
<WWMKc^«An^*1c*<'lchHHI<J^ird^^c|rn  1

III, Inscription,  on  three  Plates  of  Brass  found  at
Chitradu&o.

A  GRANT  of  land^  engraved  on  three  plates  of  brass,
which  were  found  at  Chitradurg  in  the  year  1800,  and  a
fac  simile  of  a  similar  grant  found  at  the  same  place,  have
been  presented  by  Major  C  Mackenzie  to  the  Asiatic
Society.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRIt  INSCRIPTIONS.  265

The  plates^  which  i4>pear  to  be  very  similar  in  both
grants,  may  be  described  from  that>  of  which  the  original
has  been  received.  They  are  nearly  seven  inches  wide  and
as  many  high,  but  surmounted  by  an  arch  of  two  inches
in  height.  The  two  exterior  plates  have  been  engraved  on
the  inner  side  only :  the  middle  one  is  so  on  both  feces.
At  the  edge  is  a  rim,  half  a  line  thick,  by  which  the
inscription  is  soured  from  being  effaced  by  the  rubbing
of  the  plates.  They  are  held  together  by  a  brass  ring,
on  which  is  a  seal  of  the  same  metal  representing  a  boar.
The  engraved  surfaces  have  some  appearance  of  having
been  once  gilt.

The  language  is  Sariscnt,  excepting  the  description  of
the  lands,  which  is  in  the  Canara  dialect.  The  whole
inscription  is  in  JDivanagaH  characters :  but  some  of  the
letters  are  formed  in  a  very  unusual  manner.  It  contains
a  grant  by  the  king  of  Vidyanagar  (pronounced  Bija-
nagar\  formeriy  the  capital  of  CarAai(ica :  and  is  dated
litUe  more  than  four  hundred  years  ago.  Grants,  by  kings
of  this  dynasty,  are  not  uncommon  in  the  JDekhin ;  and
may  be  of  use  in  determining  the  dates  of  their  several
reigns.  These  princes  were  enlightened  patrons  of  science :
especially  Harihara  and  Bucc A  rAta  sons  of  Sangama
the  founder  of  the  dynasty.

Major  Mackenzie  forwarded  a  translation  of  this
inscription  made  by  his  interpreter  Cavelly  Boria.
The  original  is,  in  some  instances,  read  differentiy  by  the
PahRits  whom  I  have  consulted:  not,  however,  making
any  change  in  the  purport,  nor  in  any  material  passage.
The  following  translation  is  conformable  to  their  interpre-
tation :  and  the  copy,  which  is  subjoined,  exhibits  the  text
as  read  by  them.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


256  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS


Translation.


1.  Salutation  to  GanMa.  I  bow  to  dambhu,
graced  with  the  beautiful  moon  crowning  his  lofty
head;  himself  the  pillar,  which  upholds  the  origin  of

2.  the  three  worlds.*  May  he,  whose  head  is  like  an
elephant's,  the  son  of  HARA,t  the  cause  of  uninter-
rupted supremacy,  the  giver  of  boons,  and  the  luminary

3.  which  dispels  darkness, ;{:  preserve  us.  May  the  auspi-
cious primeval  boar,  §  by  whom  closely  embraced,  the
earth  exults,  grant  us  vast  prosperity.

4.  '^  The  ambrosial  moon,  brother  of  the  goddess
Rama,  is  the  offspring  of  the  milky  ocean,||  having  a
common  origin  with  the  gem  Catistubha,  the  all-pro-

6.  ductive  tree  and  the  ever  beneficent  cow.  In  the  lunar
race  was  bom  a  king  named  Yadu,^  by  a  descendant
of  whom  [CrYshna]  son  of  Vasud&va,  the  earth  has

6.  been  protected. In  his  line  arose  a  king  named  San-

*  Siva,  or  MahId^va,  is  figged  with  the  moon  as  a  crest.  Accord-
ing^ to  mythology,  he  upholds  the  creator.

This,  and  the  two  following  stanzas,  seem  to  he  the  same  whicK
are  found,  hut  in  a  different  order,  at  the  heginning  of  the  inscrip-
tion on  the  plates  preserved  at  the  temple  of  Conjeveram :  (As.  Res.,
vol.  iii.  p.  39.)  with  some  difference,  however,  in  the  reading  and  in-
terpretation.

t  GAii£§A,  figured  with  an  elephant's  head,  reckoned  son  of  Hara
or  MahIdIva  and  of  his  wife  Parvat!.

t  The  original  is  here  inaccurate :  it  exhibits  Ta^as  iivra  iimira
gihirb;  which  means  nothing,  and  in  which  a  syllahle  is  deficient  for
the  metre.  In  the  fac  simile  of  another  grant,  the  same  passage  is
correctly  written  Varadas  Hvra  timira  mihirb,

§  The  incarnation  of  Visniru,  as  a  boar,  who  upheld  the  earth
eabmerged  by  the  ocean,  is  well  known  to  all  who  are  conversant
with  Indian  mytholog^y.

11  The  story  of  the  churning  of  the  ocean  is  familiar  to  every  one.

IT  Yadu,  the  celebrated  ancestor  of  CrYshAa,  was  of  the  lunar


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRIt  INBCITIPTIONS.  257

GAM  A,*  v^ho  abounded  in  weighty  virtues,  and  shunned
the  society  of  the  widced.

7.  ^*  This  king  had  [five]  sons,  Habihara,  Campa,
BuccarAta  who  was  soverdgn  of  the  earth,t  MA-

RAPA  and  MUDGAPA.

8.  ''Among  these  five  graceful  princes,  the  most
celebrated  was  Bucca,  sovereign  of  the  earth,  conspi-
cuous for  valour,  as  Arjuna  among  the  PAn6avas.

9.  Therefore,  did  BuccarAya,  fierce  in  battle,  become  a
fortunate  prince,  applying  his  left  shoulder  j:  to  uphold
the  burden  of  the  mighty  elephants  posted  at  the  quar-
10.  ters  of  the  world.  When  his  army,  in  warUke  array,
performed  evolutions  on  the  fi'ontier  of  his  dominions,
the  Turashcas  felt  their  mouths  parched ;  the  CSncana,
terrified,  apprehended  impending  death ;  the  Andhras
fled,  in  consternation,  to  the  caverns;  the  Gurjaras
trembled;  the  CambSjas  lost  their  firmness;  and  the
Calingas  were  quickly  discomfited.^

*The  pretensions  of  Sanoama  to  be  descended  from  the  lunar
line  of  CshiUriyas  or  Chandraoamis  are  here  asserted.

t  The  names  of  three  of  these  princes,  as  well  as  of  their  father,
occur  in  the  writings  of  MIdhava  IchIrya,  and  of  his  brother
Saya^a  IchIrya,  who  were  priests  and  counsellors  of  those  mo-
narchs.

Harihara  RIja,  and  Buggana  RIja  or  Buooa  rIya,  are  named
in  MIdhava's  commentary  on  the  Vidas,  and  Campa  is  mentioned
in  his  grammatical  works.

t  The  text  appears  to  exhibit  the  negative  of  dacshiiia  right
At  the  eight  principal  points  of  the  compass,  elephants  uphold  the
world.

§  This  verse  is  extremely  inaccurate  in  the  original:  it  has  been
corrected  with  the  aid  of  the  fac  simile  of  another  grant  beforemen-
tioned.  It  begins  Yasybddhaya  yuddhi  puddha  rangi^  which  is  un-
meaning and  contains  too  many  syllables  for  the  metre.  It  should
be,  as  in  the  other  inscription,  Ytuifbdyad  yuddha  range.  A  syllable
VOL.  II.  S


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


258  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

11.  ''He  was  a  conspicuous  monarchy  splendid,  and
a  supreme  ruler  of  kings,  but  acting  towards  disobe-
dient princes,  as  the  king  of  birds  towards  serpents :
12.  embraced  by  the  concubines  of  kings,  destroying  hos-
tile chiefs,  defending  the  heroes  of  Hindd  raya^  en-
dowed with  knowledge  and  other  qualities.*

13.  ''  By  that  victorious  king  was  Vidyd  nagari  made
a  permanent  metropolis;  a  fortunate  city^  which  is
adapted  to  promote  universal  conquestf

14.  ''  OaurAmbicA  became  his  queen;  a  princess
respectable  for  her  virtues ;  as  Ram  A  the  beloved  wife

16.of  CrYshna;  as  GaurI,  of  Siva; as  SachI, of

16.Indra;  as  Saraswat!,  of  BrahmA  ;  as  Ch'hAyA,

of  S^RYA.;}: By  the  charms  of  her  graceful  gaiety,

is  wanting  in  ThirushcSht  written  TushcdlL  Two  were  deficient  in
Bhaya  bftara  bharitah^  expressed  Bhava  bharitah.  Both  inscriptions
write  Cdmbhofdh  for  C6mbi>jah.  In  one,  Sapari  is  erroneously  put  for
Sapadi.

Air  the  names  of  nations,  which  occur  in  this  place,  have  been  re-
peatedly explained.

•  These  stanzas  are  very  obscure :  and  I  am  not  confident,  that
they  are  rightly  translated.  Hindk  r6ya  seems  to  be  similar  to  the
HindkpaH  of  Btmdelc^hand :  for  so  the  goyernment  of  that  country  was
denominated  under  the  chiefs,  who  ruled  it  in  the  last  and  in  the  pre-
ceding century.

The  stanzas  appear  to  be  similar  to  two  in  the  grant  preserved  at
Conjeveram :  viz.  25th  and  26th.  (As.  Res.,  vol.  iii.  p.  470  But  there
is  some  difference  in  reading  as  well  as  interpretation.

t  Vi^d  nagari  signifies  the  city  of  science.  Fkbishtah  was  mis-
taken, when  he  affirmed,  that  it  was  founded  by  RXjI  BbllXi.  nfio
and  named  after  his  son  Bfjl  ray.  (Scott's  History  of  Dekhan,
Intr.  p.  xi.)  It  is  believed  to  have  been  founded  by  the  two  brothers
Harihara  and  Bucca  raya.

}  The  gods  and  goddesses,  to  whom  the  happy  couple  is  here  com*
pared,  are  mentioned  in  the  text  by  titles,  some  of  which  are  uncom-
mon ;  and  have  been  therefore  changed,  in  the  translation,  to  others


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCrYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  250

she  obscured  TiL6TTAMi  ;*  by  her  happy  fidelity  to
her  husband,  she  excited  the  envy  of  ANAS^rA^f

17.  '^  This  liberal  prince,  pre-eminent  among  kings,

begot,  on  that  divine  princess,;]:  a  son  named  Hari*

18.  HARA :  who  is  become  a  protector  of  the  good  and

punisher  of  the  wicked ;  who  has  obtained  his  wish,

with  the  wise :  who  is  enviable,  and  is  devoted  to  the

godHARlHARA.

19.  "  The  tree  of  virtue  thrives  by  water  poured  with
his  donations  ;^  while  he  shines  with  the  ^lendid  glory
of  sixteen  kinds  of  gift.H

20.  "  In  the  year  1317  fH  and,  of  the  cycle,  Dhata;
in  the  month  of  Magha,  and  light  fortnight;  on  the  day

21.  of  full  moon ;  under  the  asterism  sacred  to  the  Pitru
(Magha) ;  on  Sunday ;  upon  the  bank  of  the  rivet
Tungabhadra,  which  is  adorned  by  the  mountain  H6'

22.  nuidiia  ;  in  the  presence  of  the  auspicious  deity,  Vi-
RtjpAcsH  A  ;**  the  valiant  HARiHARA,tt revered  among

more  generally  known. Rama  is  probably  intended  for  RadhX  as  a
representative  of  Lacshm!.

In  the  original,  Saraswat!  is  called  VIM;  bnt  the  fac  simile  of
the  other  inscription  exhibits  SavitrI.  ^aoh!  is,  in  the  original,
erroneously  written  §achi  ;  sndjdma  occurs  at  the  beginning  of  the
verse  for  noma.

•  Til6ttama  is  the  name  of  a  nj^ph  celebrated  for  her  beauty.

t  Ana8(jya  18  wife  of  Atri,  and  distinguished  for  conjugal  affec-
tion. The  name  signifies  unenvious.

{  The  princess  is  here  termed  GaurI,  which  is  a  title  of  PlRVATf ;
and  which  conveys  an  allusion  to  her  own  name  GaurImbioa.

§  Solemn  donations  are  ratified  by  pouring  water  into  the  hand  of
the  donee.

II  Sixteen  meritorious  gifts  are  enumerated  in  treatises  on  dona-
tion.

IT  Corresponding  to  A.D.  1395.

##  A  title  of  Siva.

ft  The  difference  of  idiom  makes  it  necessary  to  transpose,  in  the
translation,  some  of  the  verses  of  the  original.

s  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


260  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

mortals^  liberal  in  his  gifts  of  land,  and  especially  atten- ,
24.  live  to  venerable  priests,  has  graciously  given,  with  gold
22.  and  with  a  libation  of  water,  to  the  auspicious  descen-
23.dant  of  BhIeadwAja  and  follower  of  the  JRigve-

da,  the  wise  VishnudIcshita  PAff  abardhI,  son  of

24.  VAcHESPATi  sumamed  Bhila  ;  and  to  the  learned
AnantadIcshita  son  of  RAMABHAff a,  a  descen-

25.  dant  of  VAsisnf'HA  and  follower  of  Apastamba's
28.  Yajw^vida,  inhabitant  of  JRuchangi  (a  place  known  to

have  been  visited  by  the  PaAdavcus),  the  fertile  and  all-

25.  productive  village  of  Madenahalli,  also  named  Hari-

26.  harapuray  situated  in  the  midst  of  Bhilichedra,  east  of

27.  the  village  called  Arisicery  south  of  GandicehaUi,  west
of  PaUavacaia, and  north  of  Bhudihalli,  a  place  to

29.be  honoured  by  all;  marked  on  the  four  sides  by
distinct  boundaries;  tc^ether  with  its  treasures,-  and
hidden  deposits,  its  stones,  and  every  thing  which  it

30.  does  or  may  contain ;  abounding  with  objects  pleasing
to  the  eye ;  fit  to  be  enjoyed  by  two  persons ;  graced
with  elegant  trees;  furnished  with  wells,  cisterns,
ponds  and  banks ;  to  be  successively  possessed  by  the

31.  sons,  grandsons  and  other  descendants  [of  the  grantees],
as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endui'e,  subject  to  be

32.  mortgaged,  sold,  or  any  way  disposed  of;  a  village
visited  by  assiduous  and  gentle  priests  and  attendants,
and  by  various  wise  persons,  who  are  conversant  with
holy  rites,  and  surpass  in  voice  melodious  birds."*

•  Some  parte  of  this  long*  passage  are  obscure  and  doubtful.  The
last  stanza,  with  two  preceding,  omitting  one,  (that  is  the  29th,  30th,
and  32d)  appears  to  be  the  same  with  three  which  occur  in  the
grant  preserved  at  Conjeveram^  viz.  43d,  44th,  and  45th.  fAs.  Res.,
vol.  iii,  p.  51.)  But  there  are  some  variations  between  the  reading
of  them  in  this  inscription,  and  in  the  copy  of  the  Conjeveram
plates,  from  which  Sir  W.  Jones  made  his  version  of  that  grant:
and,  in  a  few  instances,  the  interpretation  which  I  have  adopted
differs  from  his.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  2&t

A  particular  description  of  the  bounds  of  the  village,
and  its  land-marks,  is  next  inserted  in  the  Canara  lan-
guage* After  which  the  patent  proceeds  thus :

'^  This  patent  is  of  the  king  Harihara,  the  sole  unal-
terable tree  of  beneficence,  magnanimous,  and  whose  sweet
strains  compose  this  royal  grant.  By  his  command  this
patent  has  been  firamed,  expressed  in  due  form,  in  the
sacred  tongue,*

'^  The  boundaries  of  the  village  on  aU  iddes,  have  been
stated  in  the  provincial  dialect.

'^  Of  original  gift  or  confirmation  of  it,  confirmation  is
superior  to  gift ;  by  generous  grants  a  man  obtains  hea-
ven ;  by  confirmation  of  them,  an  unperishable  abode ;  for
the  confirmation  of  another's  donation  is  twice  as  merito-
rious as  a  gift  made  by  himself;  and  his  own  munificence
is  rendered  firuitless  by  resumption  of  another's  grants.  He
who  resumes  land,  whether  bestowed  by  himself  or  by
another,  is  bom  an  insect  in  ordure  for  sixty  thousand
years.  In  this  world  is  one  only  sister  of  all  kings,  namely
land,  which  has  been  confared  on  priests  :t  she  must  not
be  enjoyed  nor  espoused.^!  This  general  maxim  of  duty
for  kings,  should  be  strictly  observed  by  you  in  all  times ;
so  RAmachandra  eamesdy  conjures  all  future  sove-
reigns.§

*  This  passage  may  indicate  the  artist's  name^  Y1^id£va.

t  The  terms  may  signify  "  fully  granted  away,  or  properly  be-
stowed."

{  In  mythology,  as  well  as  in  figurative  language,  the  earth  is  wife
of  the  sovereign.  With  an  allusion  to  this  idea,  land,  which  has  been
granted  away,  is  here  called  the  king'is  sister :  and  his  seizure  of  such
land  is  pronounced  incestuous.

The  expression  which  has  been  translated  espoused  (caraffrahyd^
literally,  *  to  be  taken  by  the  hand ')»  will  also  signify  *  subjected  to
taxation : '  for  cara  signifies  tax  as  well  as  hand.

§  This  appears  to  be  a  quotation  from  some  poem  (a  PvrdiM  or
the  Rdmdyaha), The  whole  of  the  concluding  part  of  the  inscription


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


262  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

"  h&i  VieCpAcsua  ; or  the  auspicious  deity  with  uu-
even  eyes."*

*ll<Ml^i4M^fd^^KIW^^Mrl:  tlv9Tl

(comprised  in  five  stanzas)  seems  to  be  the  same  with  the  close  of
the  grant  on  plates  of  copper  preserxed  at  Conjeveram.  See  As.  Res.,
vol.  iii.  p.  53.

*  This  signature  is  in  C6n<ira  letters.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCftYx  INSCRIPTIONS.  263

^R^^jR^chH>v^^:M|u<j<^H|^i^^^s|^;^^^;t^

<iviiRi>iir^'iW'i<MviKi<}wiir^<i  "5<)^Ti


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


264  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

«Mr^'i'?i<^5M<MirH'M5«MiMr<i(i)n^  i

«lRl«in'l>sll'S|IMW*i|J«Kc|Wi|ir4j^  \

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  266

Mfri*1lilWHKo^|ri4<^r<^<ir3rV  1
tl


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


266  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

IV.  Another  and  similar  Inscription  found  ai  the  same

place.
With  a  fac  simile  of  the  foregoing  inscription^  Major
Mackenzie  communicated  the  copy  of  another  inscription
found  also  at  Chitradvrg  and  in  the  same  year.  The  whole
of  the  introductory  part,  containing  the  name  of  the  prince,
and  his  genealogy,  is  word  for  word  the  same  in  both
grants :  excepting  a  few  places,  where  the  variations  are


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRtT  INSCRIPTIONS.  267

evidently  owing  to  mistakes  of  the  artist,  by  whom  the
plates  were  engraved.  I  have  consequently  derived  much
assistance  bom  this  fac  simile  in  decyphering  the  original
inscription  before  described.

The  grant,  here  noticed,  is  by  the  same  prince,  and
dated  in  Saca  1213 ;  only  four  years  anterior  to  the  one
before  translated.  I  think  it,  therefore,  imnecessary  to
complete  the  decyphering  of  it,  or  to  insert  a  copy  or
translation  merely  for  the  name  and  description  of  the
lands  granted,  or  the  designations  of  the  persons  on  whom
they  were  bestowed.

Concerning  the  similarity  of  the  grants,  it  may  be  re-
marked, that  this  circumstance  is  not  a  sufficient  ground
of  distrust;  for  it  cannot  be  thought  extraordinary,  that  a
set  form  of  introduction  to  patents  should  have  been  in  use;
or  that  grants,  made  within  the  space  of  four  years,  by  the
same  person,  should  be  alike.  I  must  acknowledge,  how-
ever, that  the  inaccuracies  of  the  original  have  impressed
me  with  some  doubt  of  the  genuineness  of  the  preceding
grant  I  do  not,  however,  suspect  it  to  be  a  modem
forgery :  but  I  apprehend,  that  it  may  have  been  fabricated
while  the  upper  Cariiaiaca  continued  under  the  sole  domi-
nation of  Hindu  princes.  Still  it  may  not  be  without  its
use,  as  an  historical  monument:  since  it  may  be  fairly
presumed,  that  the  introductory  part  is  copied  from  a  more
ancient  monument ;  perhaps  from  that,  with  which  it  has
been  now  collated.

V.  Inscription  on  a  stone  found  at  Curug6d£  in  the
district  of  Adoni.*
Another  ancient  monument,  for  the  communication  of
which  the  Asiatic  Society  is  indebted  to  the  same  gentle-
man, whose  zeal  for  literary  research,  and  indefatigable


Adavanu


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


268  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

industry  in  the  prosecution  of  inquiries,  cannot  be  too  much
praised,  was  found  by  him  in  the  upper  Carniiaca  in  1801,
and  has  been  presented  to  the  Asiatic  Society,  with  the
following  account  of  its  discovery  and  of  the  inscription
which  it  contains.

'  The  accompanying  stone  was  found  at  CurugSde,  four-
teen miles  north  of  BaUari,  not  far  from  the  Tungabhadra,
among  the  ruins  of  the  ancient  town  at  the  foot  of  the  Durg ;
and  was  removed  thence,  in  March,  1801,  with  the  con-
sent of  the  principal  inhabitants,  under  the  impression,
that  this  specimen  of  ancient  characters,  with  which  it  is
covered,  would  be  a  desirable  acquisition  to  gentlemen  who
cultivate  the  study  of  Hindu  literature.

'  The  inscription  is  chiefly  written  in  the  ancient  Canara
language  much  mixed  with  Sanscrit f  of  which  some  of  the
SlScas  or  stanzas  are  exclusively  composed.  It  commences
with  the  invocation  of  Sambhu  (Siva),  and  after  intro-
ducing the  grant,  date,  and  description  of  the  lands,  con-
cludes with  several  slScas  usually  added  as  a  formula  in
confirmation  of  such  donations.

'  A  few  of  the  stanzas,  said  to  be  written  in  the  Procri^  lan-
guage, could  not  be  understood  by  the  Sastris  and  PaAclits
at  TripUcane,  who  explamed  the  greatest  part  of  the  in-
scription to  my  Brahmens:  by  their  united  efforts  and
knowledge,  the  accompanying  translation  was  given,  in
which  I  have  every  confidence  after  the  experience  I  have
had  of  the  fidelity  of  other  translations  by  the  same  hands
(some  of  which  are  already  communicated).

'  The  mscription  is  useful  as  an  historical  record,  if  the
Raja  Racshamalla,  mentioned  here,  be  the  same  with
the  sovereign  of  the  same  name,  mentioned  in  a  history  of
Mysorej  who  flourished  about  the  eighth  century;  thus
agreeing  in  date  nearly  with  the  monimient.

*  The  beauty  of  the  character  was  also  a  strong  motive


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  sanscrIt  inscriftions. 269

for  removing  it,  as  an  appropriate  offering  to  a  Society,
whose  labours  have  been  so  successfully  employed  in  illus-
trating the  interesting  remains  of  Hindu  antiquity ;  and  a
permanent  specimen  of  a  character  which  appears  hitherto
to  have  escaped  much  notice.

^  The  common  Cimara  language  and  character  are  used
by  the  natives  of  all  those  countries  extending  firom  Coxm--
hatorej*  north  to  Balkeej\  near  JBeder,  and  within  the
parallels  from  the  eastern  GhS^s  to  the  western,  compre-
hending the  modem  provinces  of  Mysore^X  Sera,%  upper
JBednare,\\  Soonda^^  Goa,  Adoni,  Bachore^**  Canow/,+t
the  Ddab  of  the  Kishna  and  Tungabhadra,  and  a  consi-
derable part  of  the  modem  Suhahs  of  JBeder  and  Bijapur,
as  far  as  the  source  of  the  Kishna  at  least.  Its  limits  and
point  of  junction  with  the  McAraHas  may  be  yet  ascertained
with  more  precimon ;  but  in  1797,  I  had  the  opportunity
of  observing,  that  the  junction  of  the  three  languages,
Telinga,  MahraHa,  and  Canara,  took  place  somewhere
about  Beder.

*  Besides  the  common  character  and  language,  another
appears  to  have  been  used,  denominated  at  present  the
Halla  or  ancient  CanarOf  in  which  this  inscription  is
written  :  it  has  gone  so  much  into  disuse,  that  it  was  with
some  difficulty  I  could  get  people  to  read  it  An  alphabet
will  be  yet  communicated ;  as  several  books  and  ancient
inscriptions  are  written  in  this  character:  and  the  remaining
literature  of  the  Jains  in  Balaghai,  appearing  to  be  pre-
served in  it,  affords  additional  motives  for  pointing  it  out
to  the  attention  of  the  learned,  as  probably  affording  means
of  extending  the  field  of  knowledge  of  Hindu  literature.

*  Some  of  the  inscriptions,  at  Canara  and  Salset,  appear

*  Otyamutdr,  t  PhdlacU  %  Mehisdr.  §  Sird.

II  Bedniir,  IT  Stmdd,  ••  Rachiir.  ft  Candmitr.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


270  ON ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

to  be  written  in  this  character;  and  many  monuments  of
the  kind,  dispersed  over  the  upper  Camatic,  hold  out  the
prospect  of  fiirther  information.

'  Among  several  manuscripts  in  CanarOf  five,  relating
to  the  Jain  religion  and  customs,  are  in  my  possession.

^  The  name  of  Cavellt  Boeia,  a  JBr&hmen,  who  was
highly  instrumental  in  forwarding  and  facilitating  the  inves*
tigations  carried  on  in  Mysore  and  the  NizanCs  dominions,
is  inscribed  on  the  edge  of  this  stone,  as  a  small  tribute  to
the  zeal  and  fideUty  of  a  native  who  evinced  a  gaiius  supe-
rior to  the  common  prejudices  of  the  natives.  He  first
suggested  the  idea  of  removing  the  stone  to  scnne  place
where  it  could  be  usefiil  to  European  literature ;  and,  by  his
conciliatory  manner,  obtained  the  concurrence  and  assistance
of  the  natives  for  that  purpose/

The  stone,  sent  by  Major  Mackenzie,  with  the  fore-
going account  of  the  discovery  of  it,  is  nearly  five  feet  high,
and  three  wide,  and  about  ten  inches  thick.  The  firont  is
covered  with  writing  in  large  characters,  above  which  is  a
representation  of  the  Unga  in  the  form  usual  in  temples :  it
is  surmounted  by  a  sun  and  crescent ;  and  near  it  stands  a
bull,  intended  perhaps  for  the  bull  called  Nafidi,  a  con-
stant attendant  of  ^ivA  :  this  is  followed  by  the  figure  of  a
smaller  animal,  of  similar  form.  The  back  of  the  stone  is
half  covered  with  writing.

The  translation,  mentioned  by  Major  Mackenzie,  is
here  subjoined.  Not  being  acquainted  with  the  character
in  which  tiie  original  is  vnitten,  I  have  not  collated  the
version ;  and  have  therefore  used  no  fi'eedom  with  it,  except
that  of  substituting,  in  many  places,  English  words  for
Sanscrit,  which  the  translator  had  preserved.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING SANSCrIt INSCRIPTIONS.  271


Translation.

"  Adoration  be  to  the  auspicious  Swayambhu
nAt'ha,  or  Self-existent  Protector.

1.  "  I  prostrate  myself  before  Sambhu  :  whose  glorious
head  is  adorned  with  the  resplendent  moon ;  and  who  is
the  chief  prop  of  the  foundation  of  the  three  worlds.*

2.  "  May  Swayambhu  be  propitious:  he,  who  won
immortal  renown;  who  grants  the  wishes  of  those  that
earnestly  intreat  him ;  who  pervades  the  universe ;  the  So-
vereign Lord  of  Deities ;  who  destroyed  the  state  and  arro-
gance of  the  demons ;  who  enjoyed  the  delightful  embraces
of  PArvatI,  to  whom  the  learned  prostrate  themselves :
the  God  above  all  gods.

3.  ^^  I  prostrate  myself  before  Sambhu;  whose  un-
quenchable blaze  consumed  the  magnificent  Tripura;
whose  food  is  the  nectar  dropping  from  the  beams  of  the
moon ;  who  rejoiced  in  the  sacrifice  of  heads  by  the  Lord
of  Racshasas  ,•+  whose  fiace  is  adorned  with  smiles,  when
he  enjoys  the  embraces  of  Ga uai.

(The  foregoing  stanzas  are  Sanscrit :  the  fourth,  which  is
Pracrii,  is  unexplained.  Those  which  follow,  are  in  Canara.)

5.  ^^  By  the  consort  of  Divf,  whose  divinity  is  adored,
the  spouse  of  PArvatI,  resplendent  with  the  glorious
light  of  gems  reflected  firom  the  crowns  of  the  Lords  of
Gods  and  demons  whose  heads  lay  prostrate  at  his  feet ;
with  a  fitoe  ever  lighted  up  with  smiles ;  he  is  the  self-
existent  deity:  may  the  wealth,  and  the  stations  of  his
saints,  be  ever  granted  to  us.

*  This  is  the  same  stanza,  which  begins  the  two  inscriptions  found
at  Oiitradurg,  and  which  likewise  occurs  in  a  grant  in  the  possession
of  a  Brahmen  at  Nandigul;  and  in  that  preserved  at  Conjeveram,

t RiVAi^A.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


272  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

6.  ^'The  beams  of  whose  sight,  like  the  frequent  waving
of  the  lotus  flower,  flash  reflected  from  the  numerous
crowns  of  glorious  kings,  of  the  chief  of  Gods,  of  the
King  of  Kings,  and  of  the  Lord  of  Demons ;  who  exists
in  all  things,  in  all  elements,  in  water,  air,  earth,  ether,  and
fire,  in  the  sun  and  moon :  the  renowned  deity  manifested
in  eight  forms ;  ^ambhu  ;  may  he  grant  our  ardent
prayers.

7.  '^  Cheerfully  I  bow  to  §ambhu  in  the  lotus  of  the
heart;  to  him  who  increases  and  gives  life  to  all;  who
holds  supreme  command  over  all ;  who,  through  his  three
divine  attributes,  created  and  animated  fourteen  worlds;
who  ever  resides  in  the  minds  of  his  saints."

(The  two  next  stanzas  have  not  been  explained.  The
following  is  in  HaUa  Canard).

10.  '^  For  ever  be  propitious  to  S6m£$wara  DivADi,
son  of  the  fortunate  Bhuvana  malla  vIra,  the  pro-
tector of  the  world,  the  chief  sovereign  of  kings,  the  pre-
eminent monarch,  a  man  of  superior  virtue,  a  distinguished
pei*sonage  of  the  noble  race,  the  ornament  of  the  Chaluca
tribe,  whose  state  be  increased  progressively  in  this  world,
so  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  endure ;  who  reigns  in  the
city  of  Calyauy  enjoying  every  happiness  and  good  fortune,
vrith  the  converse  of  good  men  and  every  other  pleasure.
In  this  country  of  CunlaUxdesa,*  a  land  renowned  for
beauty  and  for  manly  strength  over  all  the  sea-girt  earth,
is  situated  Condavipattan,  placed  as  the  beauty  spot  on
the  human  face ;  a  city  favoured  by  the  goddess  of  pros-
perity; as  a  nos^ay  of  elegant  flowers  adorning  the
tresses  of  the  beauteous  goddess  of  the  earth.

11.  '^  How  is  this  favoured  land?  In  its  towns  are  nume-

*  Cuntaia  dSsa,  the  ancient  name  of  the  province  in  which  Curu-
gbde  is  situated ;  part  of  the  BdUM  or  Adoni  District.  (Note  by  Major
Maokbnzie.)


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  273

rous  groves  of  mango ;  plantations  of  luxuriant  betel  and
fields  of  rice :  in  every  town  are  channels  of  water^  and
wells^  opulent  men  and  beautiful  women ;  in  every  town
are  temples  of  the  Gods  and  of  the  saints :  in  every  town
are  men  blessed  with  vigour  and  every  virtue.

12.  "  In  its  centre,  is  the  mighty  hill  of  Ciirugdde  durgy
like  the  fastnesses*  of  heaven,  ever  famed,  rearing  aloft  its
top  crowned  with  fortresses ;  in  height  and  compass  sur-
passing all  the  strong  hills  on  the  right  or  left.

13.  **  This  CurugSde  was  established  as  the  capital  of
his  dominions  by  the  king  of  CuntdUiy  who  was  the  foe  of
the  king  of  Ch6la  ;t  who  terrified  the  Gurjara;  who  is  the
instrument  to  destroy  the  plants  of  Madru;  who  put  Pati-
dya  to  flight.  Is  it  possible  for  the  king  of  snakes,  though
possessed  of  a  thousand  tongues,  to  praise  sufficiently  the
beauty  of  this  city  ?

14.  "  What  is  the  description  of  the  delightful  gardens
that  encompass  the  city?  They  are  gardens  wherein  are
found  the  tilaCy  the  tamal^  the  palm,  the  plantain,  the
Mimusops,  the  trumpet-flower,  the  tremulous  fig-tree,  the
citron,  the  Oleander,  Mesua,  and  Cassia,  the  cotton-tree,
the  Carambola  and  Pcederia,  the  mango,  Butea,  and  fra-
grant Nalica;  and  various  trees,  that  flourish  and  produce
through  all  seasons  as  in  the  garden  Nmdana:  these  sur-
rounded this  city  of  CurogSdeJ'

(The  fifteenth  stanza  is  unexplained.)

16.  ^*  In  the  city  of  Curugddef  the  residence  of  the  god-

•  The  poet  indulges  his  fancy  in  describing  this  favoured  cfo^^y ;
but,  in  fact,  it  is  only  about  250  feet  high,  and  no  ways  remarkable
for  strength. (Note  by  Major  Mackenzie.)

t  Qibla  dcMy The  modern  Tanjore  country.

Gurjara^ Guzarat.

Madni, Madura  and  Trichinopoly.

Pandya Marawar  and  Tinevelly. M.

VOL.  II.  T


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


274  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

dess  of  prosperity,  where  are  numerous  temples  of  worship,
fertile  lands,  happy  spouses,  friendly  intercourse,  a  favour-
able government,  every  sacred  decoration  and  zealous  de-
votion in  the  service  of  Siva  ;

17.  "  The  Lord  of  that  city,  a  warrior  unrivalled,  whose
name  was  RacsuAmalla,  whose  breast  is  tinged  with
the  saffron  communicated  from  the  bosom  of  beauty,  whose
renown  is  ever  praised  over  the  whole  world.*'

(The  eighteenth  stanza  is  in  Pracrtt,  and  not  explained.)

19.  "  This  Raja  RacshAmalla,  prince  of  the  earth,
bom  of  so  renowned  a  race  of  sovereigns,  was  happily  pos-
sessed of  valor,  of  victory,  and  of  wealth.

20.  *' For  the  king  RacshAmalla,  who  was  lord  of
riches  and  a  devout  worshipper  of  Siva,  had  for  his  con-
sort S6mal  d£v1,  and  begot  a  son  named  N£rungala
RAjA,  husband  to  the  goddess  of  renown,  the  bestower  of
wealth  on  the  distressed,  on  the  learned,  and  on  the  unfor-
tunate, to  the  utmost  extent  of  their  wishes.

21.  "  To  NfeRUNGALA  RAjA  and  to  his  wife  Pacsha-
lA  Dfevi  (the  source  of  all  virtues),  were  happily  bom
two  sons,  named  ImAdi  RacshAmalla  and  S6ma-
bhupAla,  whose  renown,  like  the  sky,  overspread  the
whole  earth.

22.  "What  is  the  description  of  the  eldest  of  these
princes?  ImAdi  (or  the  second)  RacshAmalla  RAjA,
the  successor  of  the  former,  seated  on  the  excellent  throne,
attended  by  many  mighty  elephants,  in  colour  like  the
Chamari*  mled  the  whole  kingdom  under  one  umbrella,
possessing  the  wonderful  power,  like  Chinna  g6vinda,
of  feeding  tigers  and  sheep  in  the  same  fold.

23.  "  The  king  RacshAmalla  acquired  great  power:
his  mighty  splendor  and  good  fortune  were  such  as  drew

•  Bos  gnmnieiis.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ iC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  275

the  applause  of  the  whole  admiring  world.  The  globe  was
filled  with  the  light  of  his  reputation.  The  beauty  of  his
person  is  worthy  of  the  praise  even  of  Cupid,  the  God
famed  for  beauty.  He  was  the  destroyer  of  sin ;  eminent
above  foreign  kings,  and  in  bal^tle  he  was  as  Vishnu.

24.  "  May  MeItu  [Siva]  graciously  bestow  eternal
wealth  and  prosperity  of  empire,  on  the  king  RacshA-
MALLA,  among  all  his  chief  saints.

^'  During  the  gradual  increase  of  the  empire  of  RacshA-
MALLA  extending  from  the  north,  all  around,  even  to  the
north,  his  servant  and  worshipper,  a  descendant  of  Ca-
iiTAPA^s  race,  manner  of  the  affairs  of  TalgarA  amarI,
invested  with  full  authority;  equal  in  knowledge  to  Yu-
gandhar,  the  sun  to  enlighten  the  caste  of  Vajinasa,  [as
the  sun  enlightens  the  sky] ;  chief  of  ministers,  bom  by  the
blessing  of  the  god  Swatambhu,  the  source  of  wealth,
was  BAbarAju."

(Several  lines  follow  giving  an  account  of  the  ancestors
of  BAbarAj^,  which  have  not  been  translated.)

^^  Such  is  BAbarAjiO,  who  built  a  temple  to  the  god
Swatambh6  nivi,  while  he  was  managing  the  affairs
of  his  sovereign  lord,  the  nughty  king,  the  great  Rac-
shAmalla,  whose  god  was  the  self-existent  deity.

*^  The  praise  of  the  priests  of  the  temple.

"  They  were  learned  in  the  sacred  ceremonies  of  holy
devotion,  in  self-restadnt,  in  austere  fast,  appropriate  studies,
alms,  remembrance,  nlence,  religious  practice,  and  the
worship  of  &iva.

^^  They  were  devout  in  performing  the  ceremonies  of  the
worship  of  the  gods  of  the  family.  Among  them  was  one
named  BAlaSiva  AchArta,  unequalled  for  a  good  or
happy  genius.  To  this  famous  BAlaSiva  AchArya  was
granted  this  gift  with  water  poured  into  his  hands.

t  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


276  ON ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

^'  The  charitable  donation  of  lands  given  to  the  good
SwAYAMBHU  in  the  year  of  ^IlivAhan  1095*  in  the  Vi-
jaya  year  of  the  cycle,  and  on  the  30th  of  the  month  Mar-
gasira,  on  Monday,  in  the  time  of  an  eclipse  of  the  sun.'*

(It  appears  unnecessary  to  insert  the  description  of  the
lands.)

"  Also  Chinna  g6vinda  sItara  gundi,  king  of
the  city  of  BhSgavati,  equal  to  the  sovereign  of  JBhaHal,
who  was  acknowledged  for  ever  by  the  excellent  VIracA-
lId^iva,  the  mighty  king  of  the  earth  named  ImAdi  Rac-
shAmalla  DfevA.  In  the  year  of  SAlivAhan  1103,t  of
the  cycle  Plava,  and  on  the  16th  of  Carticay  on  Monday,
in  the  gracious  time  of  the  moon's  eclipse,  at  the  time
when  he  made  over  in  alms  THpura  Agraharamy  granted
under  DARAptjRBAC  to  BAla^iva  d^va,  who  repaired
all  the  buildings  of  Swatambhu  nivA,  who  is  distin-
guished for  knowledge  of  the  pure  VcdaSy  and  of  other
religious  institutions  and  pcustoms  of  the  worshippers  of
Siva,  and  for  charity  in  feeding  the  coor.'c

(The  sequel  of  the  inscription  is  likewise  omitted :  it
relates  to  a  further  grant  made  by  the  widow  of  BAb  arAj^j,
at  the  time  of  her  burning  herself  with  the  corpse  of  her
husband.  The  concluding  part  of  it  was  left  untranslated,
being  stated  to  be  illegible.)

The  eclipses,  mentioned  in  these  grants,  do  not  appear
reconcileable  with  their  dates.  According  to  the  table  of
ecHpses  calculated  by  Pingre,^  the  solar  ectipses,  which
occurred  in  1172  and  1173,  fell  on  27th  January  and  23d
June,  1172,  and  12th  June,  1173;  and  the  lunar  eclipses
1 ■ ■  ■  -

•  Answering  to  A.D.  1173.

t  Corresponding  toA.D.  1181.

X  Published  in  Vart  de  verifier  les  dates;  and  inserted  in  Play-
fair's  System  of  Chronology.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING iSANSCRtx INSCRIPTIONS.  2T7

in  1180  and  1181,  were  on  the  13th  February  and  7th
August  1180,  and  22d  December,  1181.  None  of  these
approach  to  the  dates  of  Margasira  or  Agrahayana  1095
and  Cartica  1103.  Unless,  then,  the  era  of  SAlivIh  an  A
have  been  counted  differently  in  the  peninsula  of  India,
from  the  mode  in  which  it  is  now  reckoned,  and  on  which
the  comparison  of  it  with  the  Christian  era  is  grounded,  it
seems  difficult  to  account  for  this  disagreement  of  the  dates
and  eclipses  in  any  other  way,  than  by  impeaching  the  in-
scription, the  authenticity  of  which  there  is  not  otherwise
any  reas<Hi  to  question.

VI. Inscription  on  a  Stone  found  at  Kurrah.

Having  learnt  from  Captain  C.  Stewart  (a  Member  of
this  Society),  that  an  inscription  had  been  remarked  by  him
in  the  gateway  of  the  fort  of  Kurrah  {Khard)^  I  obtained,
through  the  assistance  of  Major  Lennon,  then  stationed
in  the  vicinity  of  that  place,  the  stone  itself  which  con-
tains the  inscription.  It  now  belongs  to  the  Asiatic  So-
ciety.

The  inscription  is  very  short ;  contains  the  date  1093
Samvatf  the  name  of  the  prince,  as  also  names  of  several
places ;  and  is  written  in  a  very  legible  character :  yet  all
my  endeavours  to  arrive  at  any  explanation  of  it  have  been
unsuccessful.  Whether  it  be  only  a  fragment  of  an  in-
scription (for  the  stone  is  very  narrow),*  or  the  inscription
have  been  inaccurately  engraved  (and  this  also  is  counte-
nanced by  its  appearance),  I  shall  not  take  upon  myself
to  determine.  At  present,  I  can  only  translate  the  first
six,  out  of  sixteen  lines,  which  run  thus :  "  Samvat  1093,1c

*  Its  height  is  four  feet  nine  inches,  but  it  is  only  nine  inches  wide.
t  Corresponding  to  A.D.  1037.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


278


ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS


on  the  first  day  of  the  light  fortnight  of  AshoAha.  This
day,  at  this  auspicious  Ccia^  the  great  and  emment  prince
YaSahpAla^j:  in  the  realm  of  CauAamhay  and  village  of
Payahasa^  commands^  that .**


TlHHlRilird^8||


•  It  may  be  worth  remarking,  that  the  inscription  discovered  at
Sdrandt^ha  near  Benares^  dated  ten  years  antecedent  to  this,  relates
to  a  family  of  princes  whose  names  had  a  similar  termination.  As.
Res.,  vol.  V.  p.  133.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRIt  INSCRIPTIONS.  279

VII.  Inscription  on  a  Plate  of  Copper  found  in  the  district
o^DinAjpur.

Id  the  beginning  of  the  present  year  (1806),  a  plate  of
copper  was  found  at  Amgach'hi  in  Sultanjmr,  by  a  pea-
sant, dicing  earth  for  the  repair  of  a  road  near  his  cottage.
He  delivered  it  to  the  nearest  police  officer,  by  whom  it
was  conveyed  to  the  magistrate,  Mr.  J.  Pattle  :  and  by
him  forwarded  for  communication  to  the  Asiatic  Society.
Amgach^hi,  though  now  a  small  village,  is  described  as
exhibiting  the  appearance  of  having  formerly  been  a  consi-
derable place.  Remains  of  old  masonry  are  found  there ;
and  numerous  ponds  are  remarked  in  the  vicmity  of  that
and  of  the  adjacent  villages.  It  is  situated  at  the  distance
of  about  fourteen  miles  from  Budal;  where  an  ancient  pillar
stands,  of  which  a  description  (as  well  as  the  insmption,
which  is  read  on  it),  was  published  in  the  first  volume  of
Asiatic  Researches  (p.  131).

The  plate  is  very  large,  being  fourteen  inches  high  and
thirteen  broad.  It  is  surmounted  by  a  highly  wrought
ornament  of  brass,  fixed  on  the  upper  part,  and  advanced
some  distance  on  the  plate  so  as  to  occasion  a  considerable
break  in  the  upper  lines.  The  superior  surface  is  covered
with  writing  in  very  close  lines  and  crowded  characters.
The  inscription  is  completed  on  the  inferior  surface,  which
contains  sixteen  Unes  (the  upper  surface  having  no  less  than
thirty-three).  The  character  is  ancient  Devanagari ;  and
the  language  Sanscrit :  but  so  great  a  part  of  the  inscription
is  obliterated  (some  portion  of  every  line  being  illegible),
that  it  is  difficult  to  discover  the  purport  of  the  inscription.
After  wasting  much  time  in  endeavouring  to  decypher  the
whole  of  it,  I  have  been  able  only  to  ascertain  the  name  of
the  grantor,  and  a  part  of  his  genealogy ;  with  the  date


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


280  ON  ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

of  the  grants  which  unfortunately  is  reckoned  only  by  the
reign,  without  any  reference  to  a  known  era.

The  ornament  affixed  to  the  plate,  and  representing  a
seal,  contains  a  single  line  of  writing,  which  is  distinctly
read,  ^Rf  VigrahapAla  ntvA.  This  name  as  of  the
grantor,  is  found  at  the  close  of  the  inscription ;  and  it  oc-
euro  more  than  once  in  the  body  of  the  patent.  Among  his
ancestors  and  predecessoro,  the  following  names  are  dis-
tinctly legible.

The  firet  prince  mentioned  is  L6cAPiLA,  and  after  him
Dh  armapAla.  The  next  name  has  not  been  decyphered :
but  the  following  one  is  JayapAla,  succeeded  by  DivA-
pAla. Two  or  three  subsequent  names  are  yet  undecy-

phered:*  they  are  followed  by  RAjapAla, pAlad^va,

and  subsequently  MAnf pAla  d^ya,  NayapAla  and  again
VigrahapAla  dIsya.

So  far  as  a  glimpse  has  been  yet  obtained  of  the  purport
of  the  inscription,  it  seems  to  be  a  grant  by  VigrahapAla
Div  a,  in  the  making  of  which  NayapAla  likewise  appears
to  have  had  some  share.  It  is  dated  Samvatf  12,  on  the
9th  day  of  Chaitra.

The  use  of  the  word  Samvat  (which  properly  signifies  a
year)  to  denote  the  year  of  the  king*s  reign,  and  not  that  of
VicramAditya's  era,  merits  particular  notice.  In  the
inscription  on  the  plates  found  at  MongiryX  containing  a
grant  of  land  by  a  prince  who  appears  to  be  of  the  same
family,  the  date  was  read  by  Mr.  Wilkins,  Samvat  33 ;
which  was  supposed  both  by  him  and  by  Sir  W.  Jones
to  intend  the  era  of  VicramAditya.^ I  have  always

•  One  seems  to  be  NlRAYAifA;  perhaps  NlBAYAi^APALA.
t  The  original  seems  to  exhibit  Samat:  but  this  must  be  intended
for  Sambat  or  Samvat,

J  As.  Res.,  vol.  i.  p,  123.  §  Ibid.  p.  130.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


CONTAINING  SANSCRYt  INSCRIPTIONS.  281

entertained  doubts  of  that  interpretation:  and,  among  other
reasons  for  hesitating,  one  has  been  the  improbability,  which
to  my  apprehension  exists,  that  the  era  should  have  been
in  use,  and  denoted  by  the  same  abbreviated  term,  so  early
after  the  time  at  which  it  commences.  Eras  by  which
nations  have  continued  to  reckon  for  a  series  of  ages,  have
not  usually  been  introduced  until  a  considerable  time  after
the  event  from  which  they  are  counted:  and,  when  first
introduced,  have  been  designated  by  some  more  definite
term  than  one  merely  signifying  a  year.  But  the  word
Samvat  (abbreviated  from  Samvatsara  a  year,)  being  in
that  inscription  prefixed  to  a  low  numeral,  and  not  ex«
pressly  restricted,  as  is  usual  where  VicramAditya's  era
is  meant,  was  more  likely  to  intend  the  year  of  the  reignmg
king  (though  Sir  W.  Jones  thought  otherwise,*)  than  that
of  a  period  reckoned  from  the  birth,  or  the  accession,  or
the  demise  of  another  monarch.  It  appeared  to  me  like^
wise,  as  to  Captain  Wilford,  on  examining  the  fac  simile
of  the  inscription  in  question,f  that  the  character,  which
stands  in  the  place  of  the  t  of  Samvat,  resembled  more
nearly  the  numeral  1.  The  date  might  therefore  be  133
instead  of  33.  I  inclined,  however,  to  believe  the  lower
number  to  have  been  rightly  read  by  Mr.  Wilkins  on  the
original  plate:  and  consequently  supposed  it  to  be  the
date  of  the  reign  of  D^vapAla,  the  prince  who  made  the
grant.  The  date  of  the  An^dch'hi  plate,  which  must  be
referred  to  the  reign  of  the  grantor  VigrahapAla,  seems
strongly  to  corroborate  this  opinion.

The  present  inscription,  though  yet  imperfectly  decy-
phered,  appears  to  be  useful  towards  ascertaining  the  age


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  i.  p.  142.

t  Plates  i.  and  ii.  in  the  Ist.  vol.  of  As.  Res.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


282  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS

of  the  MonffT  grant  The  names  of  DhermapAla  and
Di^yApA.LA  occur  in  both  inscriptions;  as  that  of  RAja-
PALA  does,  on  the  pillar  at  JBudal,  as  well  as  on  the
Amgach'hi  plate.  Some  of  these  names  are  also  found  in
the  hst  of  princes  enumerated  in  the  At/in  cLcheri*  as  having
reigned  in  Bengal  before  BallAlasSna.  The  authority  of
AbiO'lfazl,  on  Hindu  history,  is  indeed  not  great:  but
the  inscription  on  the  statue  of  Buddha,  which  was  found
at  Saranafha^  near  BenareSy-);  proves,  that  a  family  of
princes,  whose  names  terminated  in  paUiy  did  reign  over
GavAa  in  Bengal,  near  eight  hundred  years  ago :  and  this
is  consistent  vnth  the  period  to  which  that  dynasty  is
brought  down  by  Astj^LPAZL;  namely,  the  middle  of  the
eleventh  century  of  the  Christian  era.  It  appears  also,  from
the  same  inscription  found  at  Saranafhay  that  these  princes
were  worshippers  of  Buddha,  a  circumstance  which  agi-ees
with  the  indications  of  that  faith  in  the  Mon^  grant,  as
translated  by  Mr.  Wilkins.  The  name  of  Mah!pAla,
mentioned  as  king  of  GauSa  in  the  SaranaVha  inscription,
occurs  likewise  in  the  AmgacVhi  plate ;  and  if  it  be  rea-
sonable to  beUeve,  that  the  same  person  is  intended  in  both
instances,  it  will  be  right  to  infer,  that  the  grant  contained
on  the  plate  found  at  AmgacKhi  is  nearly  eight  hundred
years  old ;  and  that  the  plate  found  at  Mon^r  is  more
ancient  by  two  or  three  centuries.  This  reduces  the  age  of
the  Mongir  grant  to  the  eighth  or  ninth  century  of  the
Christian  era ;  which  I  cannot  but  think  more  probable,
than  the  opinion  of  its  being  anterior  to  the  birth  of
Christ.

•  Vol.  ii.  p.  26.  t  As.  Res.,  vol.  v.  p.  133.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  SANSCRKt  INSCRIPTIONS.  283

VIIL  Inscriptions  on  Plates  of  Copper  at  Nidigal  and

GOUJDA.

To  the  foregoing  description  of  several  monuments,  which
have  been  presented  to  the  Asiatic  Society,  I  shall  add  a
brief  notice  of  two  other  inscriptions,  of  which  copies  have
been  received.

Mention  has  been  already  made  of  a  grant  of  land,  in-
scribed on  five  plates  of  copper,  seen  at  Nidigal,  in  the
year  1801.  It  was  in  the  possession  of  a  Brahmana  resid-
ing at  that  place :  and  a  copy  of  it  was  taken  by  Major
Mackenzie,  which  has  been  communicated  by  him  to  the
Society.  The  grant  appears  to  be  from  the  second  Bucca
rAjA,  who  was  third  in  succession  from  the  first  prince  of
that  name,  and  grandson  of  the  king  by  whom  the  grants
beforementioned  were  made.  If  the  date  have  been  cor-
rectly decyphered  from  the  copy  of  this  inscription,  it  is  of
the  year  1331  Saca,  corresponding  to  A.  D.  1409.

Another  inscription,  commimicated  by  Major  Mac-
kenzie, purports  to  be  a  grant  by  Janam^jaya,  the
celebrated  monarch  who  reigned  in  India  at  the  commence-
ment of  the  present  age  or  Galiyuga.  It  is  in  the  hands  of
the  Brahmens  or  priests  of  Goujda  Agraharam  in  Btdndr;
and  was,  with  some  reluctance,  entrusted  by  them  to  Major
Mackenzie,  who  himself  took  from  it  a  copy  in  fac  simile,
the  exactness  of  which  is  demonstrated  by  the  &cility  with
which  the  inscription  may  be  decyphered  ftom  that  copy.
The  original  is  described  as  contained  in  three  plates  of
copper,  fastened  together  by  a  ring,  on  which  is  the  repre-
sentation of  a  seal,  bearing  the  figure  of  a  boar  with  a  sun
and  crescent.  The  purport  of  the  inscription,  for  I  think
it  needless  to  make  a  complete  version  of  it,  is  that  '  Ja-
NAMfijAYAy  son  of  ParIcshit,  r  mouarch  reigning  at
Hastinapura,  made  a  progress  to  the  south,  and  to  other


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


284  ON ANCIENT  MONUMENTS

quarters,  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  all  countries  under
his  domination ;  and  performed  a  sacrifice  for  the  destruc-
tion of  serpents,  in  presence  of  the  god  (or  idol)  Hari-
DRA,  at  the  confluence  of  the  rivers  Tungahkadra  and
Haridi'a,  at  the  time  of  a  partial  eclipse  of  the  sun,  which
fell  on  a  Sunday,  in  the  month  of  Chaitra,  when  the  sun
was  entering  the  northern  hemisphere ;  the  moon  being  in
the  Nacshatra  Astoim.'*

Having  completed  the  sacrifice,  the  king  bestowed  gold
and  lands  on  certain  Brahmaiias  of  Gautamagrama :
whose  names  and  designations  are  stated  at  full  length,
with  the  description  and  limits  of  the  lands  granted.  The
inscription  concludes  with  two  verses ;  the  same  with  two
of  those  which  occur  in  the  plates  found  at  Chitradurg  ;t
and  in  those  preserved  at  Conjeveram.'Jl,

If  reliance  might  be  placed  on  this  as  an  ancient  and
authentic  monument,  its  importance,  in  the  confirmation  of
a  leading  point  of  Indian  history,  would  be  obvious  and
great.  Major  Mackenzie,  in  communicating  the  copy
of  it,  expresses  a  doubt  of  its  authenticity ;  but  remarks,
that  it  can  be  no  modem  forgery,  for  the  people  them-

*  Sach  is  the  deduction  from  the  text,  which  states  a  half  eclipse
of  the  son  in  Chaitra,  on  the  sun's  entrance  into  the  Uttardya^  or
northern  path^  at  the  moment  of  Vyaiipata  (which  imports  new  moon
on  a  Sunday  in  any  one  of  the  undermentioned  NacsJuUraSy  viz.  Ji-
winiy  §rava^dy  DhanUhVhdy  Ardrdy  AiUshCy  and  Mrigakiras:  the  first
of  which  is  the  only  one  compatible  with  the  month). The  words  of

the  text  are  Chaitramdsi  crishfui  [should  be  crishim]  pacshc  so

caraha  lUtar&yaha  san vyatipdta  nimittc  surya

parvaM  ardha  grdsa  grihita  [should  be  grWUa]  samac  [should  h%
samayS  ]

In  the  places  marked  with  dots,  the  letters  are  wanting  in  the
original.

t  See  pages  261  and  266  of  this  volume.

X  As.  Res.,  vol.  iii.  p.  52.  The  verses  are  those  numbered  50
and  54.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


CONTAINING SANSCrKt INSCRIPTIONS.  285

selves  cannot  read  the  inscription.  I  concur  with  Major
Mackenzie  both  in  distrusting  the  genuineness  of  this
monument ;  and  in  thinking  that  it  is  no  recent  fabri-
cation.

Numerous  and  gross  errors  of  grammar  and  orthography,*
which  can  neither  be  explained  by  a  gradual  change  of  lan-
guage, nor  be  referred  to  the  mistakes  of  a  transcriber  or
engraver,  but  are  the  evident  fruit  of  ignorance  in  the  per-
son who  first  penned  the  inscription  in  NagaA  characters,
would  furnish  reason  for  discrediting  this  monument,  were
it  otherwise  liable  to  no  suspicion.  But,  when  to  this  cir-
cumstance are  added  the  improbability  of  the  copper-plates
having  been  preserved  during  several  thousand  years,  and
the  distrust  with  which  any  ancient  monument  must  be
received,  where  its  present  possessor,  or  his  ancestor,  may
have  had  claims  under  the  grant  recorded  in  it,  there  can
be  little  hesitation  in  considering  this  grant  of  Janam&-
j  AY  A  as  unauthentic  ;  independently  of  any  argument  de-
duced from  the  character,  which  is  not  perhaps  suflSciently
antique ;  or  from  the  astronomical  data  in  tiiis  inscription,
which,  however  consistenit  with  Indian  notions  of  astro-
nomy and  chronology,  will  hardly  bear  the  test  of  a  criti-
cal examination.


•  For  example  samd^  for  samayc  (t1*i^  for  ^^^)  a  palpable

error  obviously  arising  from  the  blunder  of  an  ignorant  amanuensis
writing  from  dictation.  The  mistake  occurs  more  than  once ;  and
can  be  accounted  for  in  no  other  manner:  the  syllables  i  and  ye,
being  alike  in  sound,  though  dissimilar  in  form;  and  the  blunder
being  such  as  no  person  acquainted  with  the  rudiments  of  the  Sans-
cr^t  language  could  have  committed.  Other  instances  have  been
remarked,  alnost  equally  strong :  as  Paricshiti  for  Pofticshit :  cha-
cravrarUi  for  chacravarttL  Short  vowels  for  long,  and  vice  vers&,  in
repeated  instances;  the  dental  for  the  palatal  s;  and  numerous  other
errors  of  spelling ;  besides  faults  of  grammar  and  style.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


286  ON ANCIENT MONUIIBNTS

IX.  A  grant  of  Land  by  JAYACHANDRA^iZo/a  of  CanCj*

It  may  be  proper  to  notice  further,  in  this  place,  the
inscription  of  which  mention  was  made  at  the  beginning  of
this  essay,  as  having  been  decyphered  by  a  Pa'AStit  (Seb-
voRU  TRivfiDi)  who  communicated  to  me  a  copy  of  it,
with  the  information,  that  the  original  has  been  conveyed
to  England  by  the  gentleman  in  whose  possession  it  was
seen  by  him.  According  to  that  copy,  the  genealogy  of
the  pnnce,  who  made  the  grant  recorded  in  the  inscrip-
tions, is  as  follows :

1.  SrIpAla,  a  prince  of  the  solar  race.

2.  His  son  MahIchandra.

3.  SrIchandra  d£va,  son  of  the  last  mentioned  ;  ac-
quired, by  his  own  strength,  the  realm  of  Gadhipura  or
Canyacuhja  (Candj);  visited  Casi  and  other  holy  places;
and  repeatedly  gave  away  in  alms,  his  own  weight  in  gold.
He  appears  to  have  been  the  first  king  of  CanSjy  in  this
family.

4.  MadanapAla  d&va,  son  and  successor  of  SrI-
chandra.

5.  GoVINDA  CHANDRA,  SOn  of  MaDANApAlA.

6.  VijAYA  CHANDRA  D&VA,  (the  samc  with  Jaya
CHAND,)  son  of  G6viNDA  CHANDRA;  is  Stated  in  the
inscription  as  issuing  his  commands  to  all  public  officers,
and  to  the  inhabitants  of  Naguli  assembled  at  DcvapaU
Upaiiana,  enjoining  them  to  observe  and  obey  his  patent ;
which  is  recited  as  a  grant  of  land  to  two  BrakmanaSy  con-
ferred by  him  on  the  day  of  full  moon  in  Magha  1220,*
subsequeiitly  to  his  inauguration  as  Yuvaraja  or  desig-
nated successor  and  associate  in  the  empire.  The  inscrip-
tion concludes  by  quoting,  from  a  Pura'/uif  four  stanzas  to

•  Corresponding  to  A.D.  1164.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


CONTAINING  sanscrIt  inscriptionb. 287

deprecate  the  resumption  of  the  grant :  and  by  a  signature
importing  "  this  copper  was  engraved  by  JayapAla."

Without  having  seen  the  original,  no  opinion  can  be
offered  on  the  probable  genuineness  of  this  monument.
But  it  will  be  observed,  that  the  inscription  is  consistent
with  chronology;  for  Jaya  chand,  who  is  described  in
the  Aytn  Acheri^  as  supreme  monarch  of  India,  havmg
the  seat  of  his  empire  at  Can6j,  is  there  mentioned  as  the
ally  of  SHEHAsuDDiN  in  the  war  with  PrKt^havIrAja
or  Pit'h6rA,  about  the  year  of  the  Hejra  668,  or  A.  D.
1192  :  twenty-eight  years  after  the  date  of  this  grant.

Remarks.

A  few  observations  on  the  general  subject  under  conside-
ration will  terminate  this  essay.

Most  of  the  ancient  monuments,  which  have  been  yet
discovered,  contain  royal  grants  of  land ;  framed,  com-
monly, in  exact  conformity  to  the  rules  delivered  by  Hindu
writers  who  have  treated  of  this  subject.  +  That  durable
memorials  have  been  usually  framed  to  record  other  events
or  circumstances,  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose ;  and  this
consideration  is  sufficient  to  explain  the  comparative  fre-
quency of  monuments  which  recite  royal  grants.  It  was
the  interest,  too,  of  persons  holding  possession  under  such
grants,  to  be  careful  in  the  preservation  of  the  evidence  of
their  right.  But  this  circumstance,  while  it  accounts  for
the  greater  frequency  of  monuments  of  this  description,
suggests  a  reason  for  particular  caution  in  admitting  their
genuineness.  Grants  may  have  been  forged  in  support  of
an  occupant's  right,  or  of  a  claimant's  pretensions. It  will

•  Gladwin's  Translation,  vol.  ii.  p.  119.

t  As.  Res.,  vol.  iii.  p.  50. Digest  of  Hindu  law,  vol.  ii.  p.  278.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


288  ON ANCIENT MONUMENTS,  8CC.

be,  therefore,  proper  to  bring  a  considerable  portion  of  dis-
trust and  jealousy  to  the  examination  of  any  inscription  on
stone  or  metal,  alleged  to  be  ancient,  and  now  possessed
by  persons  who  have  any  claims  or  pretensions  under  the
grant  which  it  contains.  But  no  such  cause  of  jealousy
exists,  where  the  monument  in  question  favours  no  one's
pretensions,  and  especially  where  it  is  accidentally  dis-
covered after  being  long  buried.  It  is,  indeed,  possible,
that  such  a  monument,  though  now  casually  found,  may
have  been  originally  a  forgery.  But  even  where  that  may
be  suspected,  the  historical  uses  of  a  monument  fabricated
so  much  nearer  to  the  times  to  which  it  assumes  to  belong,
will  not  be  entirely  superseded.  The  necessity  of  rendering
the  forged  grant  credible,  would  compel  a  fabricator  to
adhere  to  history,  and  conform  to  established  notions :
and  the  tradition,  which  prevailed  in  his  time,  and  by
which  he  must  be  guided,  would  probably  be  so  much
nearer  to  the  truth,  as  it  was  less  remote  from  the  period
which  it  concerned.

In  the  present  state  of  researches  into  Indian  antiqui-
ties, the  caution  here  suggested  appears  to  be  that  which
it  is  most  requisite  to  observe.  When  a  greater  number
of  monuments  shall  have  been  examined  and  compared,
more  rules  of  criticism  may  be  devised ;  and  will,  at  the
same  time,  become  particularly  requisite,  should  the  prac-
tice arise  of  purchasing  ancient  monuments ;  or  of  giving
rewards  for  the  discovery  of  them.  At  present  no  temp-
tation exists  for  modem  fabrications,  and  little  caution  is
therefore  necessary  to  avoid  imposition.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


XL
Inscriptions  upon  Rocks  in  South  Bihak.*

[From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
vol.  L  p.  201—206.]

Dr.  Buchanan  Hamilton,  while  engaged  in  statis-
tical researches  in  the  provinces  subject  to  the  govemment
of  Bengal,  gave  attention  to  the  antiquities  of  the  country,
as  to  other  scientific  objects,  which  he  had  the  opportunity
of  investigating.  His  reports,  comprising  the  result  of  his
inquiries,  are  deposited  in  the  Library  and  Museum  of  the
East-India  Company:  and,  at  his  instance,  the  Court  of
Directors  have  sanctioned  a  Uberal  communication  of  the
information  contained  in  them,  to  this  Society.  Among  the
antiquities  collected  by  him,  there  are  many  fac-similes  of
inscriptions.  I  purpose  submitting  to  the  Society  explana-
tions of  such  among  them  as  are  interesting :  and  I  now
present  the  translation  of  one,  which  appears  curious.

It  is  an  inscription  upon  a  rock,  denominated,  from  an
idol  delineated  on  it,  Tarachdndiy  in  the  vicinity  of  Sahasram^
in  South  Bihar ;  and  contains  the  protest  of  a  chieftain,
named  PratApa  dhavala  d£va,  bearing  the  title  of
Nayacay  and  that  of  Raja  otJapila,  against  an  usurpation
of  two  villages  by  certaAn  Brahmanas  in  his  neighbourhood,
under  colour  of  a  grant,  surreptitiously  obtained  through
corruption  of  his  ofiicers,  from  the  Raja  of  Gadhinagara
or  Canyacubja  (CanSj),  who  was  the  celebrated  Vijaya
CHANDRA.  Its  date  is  1229  Samvat,  corresponding  to
A.D.1173.


•  Read  at  a  public  meeting  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Decem-
ber 4, 1824.

VOL.  II.  U


■  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


290  INSCRIPTIONS  UPON ROCKS

In  Dr.  Buchanan  Hamilton's  collection^  there  are
copies  of  two  other  inscriptions  upon  rocks,  in  the  neigh-
bourhoody  exhibiting  the  name  of  the  same  chieftain,  in
conjonction  with  many  of  his  kindred  in  the  one;  and
followed  by  a  long  series  of  his  successors  in  the  other.  I
observe  little  else  interesting  in  them,  besides  the  names
and  the  dates.

The  site  of  the  principal  inscription  is  thus  described  by
Dr.  Buchanan  Hamilton.  '  In  a  narrow  passage,
which  separates  the  northern  end  of  the  hills  from  the  great
mass,  and  through  which  the  road  leads  from  Sahasram  to
Rautasghar,  is  a  place  where  Tarachandi  is  worshipped.
The  image  is  carved  on  a  ledge  of  rock ;  and  is  so  small,
and  ^o  besmeared  with  oil  and  red  lead,  that  I  am  not  sure
of  its  form.  It  seems,  however,  to  represent  a  woman
sitting  on  a  man's  knee ;  but  not  in  the  form  usual  in
Bihar f  which  is  called  Hara-gauru  Adjacent  to  the
image,  a  cavity  in  the  rock  has  been  enlarged  by  one  or
two  pillars  in  front,  supporting  a  roof,  so  as  to  form  a  shed,
to  which  the  priest,  and  a  man  who  sells  offerings  and
refreshments  for  votaries  and  passengers,  daily  repair.  A
few  persons  assemble  in  the  month  of  Sravan.  But  the
chief  profit  arises  from  passengers ;  who  are  very  numerous :
and  all  who  can  afford,  give  something.  The  priest  is  a
Sannyasi.  Above  the  shed,  the  Moslemans  have  erected
a  small  mosque,  in  order  to  show  the  triumph  of  the  faith :
but  it  is  quite  neglected.  The  image  is  usually  attributed
to  the  Cher 6s:  and  many  small  heaps  between  the  place
and  Sahasfam,  are  said  to  be  njuns  of  buildings  erected  by
the  same  people.  But  a  long  inscription,  carved  on  the
rock  within  the  shed,  refers  toVijAYA  chandra,  sove-
reign of  Can6j.'

That  inscription  was  strangely  mismterpreted by  the
PaAclita  attached  to  the  survey  on  which  Dr.  Buchanan


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


IN  SOUTH  BIHAR.  291

Hamilton  was  engaged.  The  PahAita  supposed  the
chieftain,  PratApa  dhavala,  to  premise  an  intention  of
commemorating  his  descendants;  and  to  proceed  to  the
mention  of  Vijaya  chandra,  proprietor  of  Can6j ;  and
oATRUGHNAySonoftheii/aAara/a:  whence  Dr.  Hamilton
inferred,  that  Vijaya  chandra  was  son  of  PratApa
DHAVALA.  Dr.  Hamilton  observes,  indeed,  that  others
gave  a  totally  different  interpretation:  considering  it  as
'  an  advertisement  from  PratApa  dhavala,  that  he  will
not  obey  an  order  for  giving  up  two  villages,  which,  he
alleges,  had  been  procured  by  corruption  from  the  officers
of  Vijaya  chandra,  king  of  Can6j.'

The  oriental  scholar,  upon  inspection  of  the  fac-simile,
vnll  have  no  difficulty  in  perceiving  that  the  latter  vms  the
right  interpretation ;  and  it  is,  therefore,  needless  to  pursue
remarks  which  were  built  upon  the  Panclita's  grossly
erroneous  translation.

The  style  of  the  protest  is  singular  ;  and,  on  that  ac-
count alone,  I  should  have  thought  it  very  deserving  of
notice.  It  serves,  however,  at  the  same  time  to  show,  that
the  paramount  dominion  of  Canyacuhja  extended  to  the
mountains  of  South  Bihar :  and  it  presents  an  instance  of
the  characteristic  turbulence  of  Indian  feudatories.

The  second  inscription,  bearing  the  name  of  the  same
chieftain,  Nayaca  PratApa  dhavala  nfevA,  vrith  the
date  1219,  (A.D.  1163)  Saturday,  4th  Jyaishi'ha  badi,
and  underneath  the  name  of  his  brother,  the  prince  Tri-
BHUVANA  DHAVALA,  the  priucc's  vrifc  SuLHi,  and  another
female  S6MALf,  and  two  sons  LacshmyAditya  and  Pad-
mAditya  ;  exhibits  a  rude  figure  of  a  goddess  T6talA
Dfivi,  attributed  to  the  femily  priest  ViSwar^jpa.  On  the
other  side  of  the  figure  are  the  names  of  five  daughters,
and,  at  the  foot  of  it,  six  sons  of  the  Nayaca.  These  are
Varcu,  Satrughna,  BiRABALA,  Sahasa  dhavala,

u  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


292  INSCRIPTIONS  UPON  ROCKS

YAMi-cARTicfeYA  and  SAntayatna  d^va.  Beneath
are  names  of  CayasfhaSy  Yajnyadhara,  and  VidyA-
dhara,  sons  of  CusumahAra;  the  treasurer  D^varAja^
and  the  door-keeper  (pratihara)  Tishala.

The  site  of  this  inscription  is  described  by  Dr.  Bucha-
nan Hamilton  :  *  Where  the  Tutrahi,  a  branch  of  the
Kudura  river,  falls  down  the  hills  of  Tilofhu,  is  a  holy
place,  sacred  to  the  goddess  T6talA.  The  recess,  into
which  this  stream  falls,  is  about  half  a  mile  deep  ;  and  ter-
minates in  a  magnificent,  abrupt  rock,  somewhat  in  the
shape  of  a  horseshoe,  and  from  180  to  250  feet  high.  In
the  centre  is  a  deep  pool,  at  all  times  filled  with  water,  and
which  receives  the  stream,  that  falls  from  a  gap  in  this
immense  precipice.  This  gap  maybe  thirty  feet  wide;  and
the  perpendicular  height  there,  180  feet.

'  The  image  is  said  to  have  been  placed  by  the  Cher6s,
about  eighteen  centuries  ago ;  and,  in  fact,  resembles  one
of  the  images  very  common  in  the  works  attributed  to  that
people  in  Bihar.  But  this  antiquity  is  by  no  means  con-
firmed by  the  inscription,  the  date  of  which  is  evidently  in
Samvat  1389,  or  A.D.  1332.

^  In  another  inscription  it  is  said,  that  the  faipily  priest  of
a  neighbouring  prince,  PratApa  dhavala,  had,  in  A.D.
1158,  made  the  image  of  the  goddess:  alluding  evidently
to  a  rude  figure,  carved  on  rock,  and  now  totally  neglected.

'  The  image  now  worshipped  is,  as  usual,  a  slab  carved
in  relief,  and  represents  a  female  with  many  arms,  killing
a  man  springing  from  the  neck  of  a  buffalo.*  It  is  placed
on  the  highest  ledge  of  the  sloping  part  of  the  rock,  imme-
diately under  the  waterfall.  From  two  to  three  hundred
votaries,  at  different  times  in  the  month  of  Sravany  go  to
the  place,  to  pray.'

•  It  figures  MAniSHASUitA,  vulg.  Bhainsdmry  shin  by  BhavInI.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


IN  SOUTH  BIHAR.


293


The  third  inscnption  is  upon  a  rock  at  Bandughata,  on
the  S6ne  river,  opposite  to  Japikt,  which  was  the  chieftain's
principality.  The  date  assigned  to  Maha  nripati  (i.  e.
Maharaja)  PratApa  dhavala,  besides  the  number  of
twenty-one  years  (apparently  the  duration  of  his  reign,  as
chief  of  Japila),  is,  in  the  fac-simile,  written  2219  Sam-
vat;  but  the  first  digit  being  clearly  wrong,  it  must  be  cor-
rected to  1219,  or  1229 :  most  likely  the  latter.  No  date
is  assigned  to  his  predecessor  Udata  dhavala  ;  nor  to
the  Ime  of  his  successors,  beginning  with  Vicrama,  who
is  perhaps  the  same  with  Varcu  (the  first  among  his  sons,
named  in  the  second  inscription,)  and  who  appears  fix)m
the  epithet  of  vijayin,  '  victorious,'  to  have  been  the
reigning  prince,  when  his  name  was  here  set  down.  The
I'est  must  have  been  subsequently,  firom  time  to  time,
added;  and  the  first  among  them  is  Sahasa  dhavala,
perhaps  the  fourth  son  of  PratApa  dhavala,  mentioned
in  the  second  inscription.

Above  all  this,  there  have  been  inscribed,  at  a  much  later
period,  other  names,  viz.  ^Maharaja  Nyunat  rai  or
Nyunta  rAya,  who  went  to  heaven  (surapura,  i.  e.  the
city  of  the  gods)  in  the  year  1643  Samvat;'  and  '  Maha'
raja  PratApa  rAya,  or  PratApa  rudra,  who  went  to
heaven  in  the  year  1663  SamvatJ

In  another  part  of  the  inscription,  there  occurs  the  name
o{ Maharaja  MAnasinha,  with  the  dates  of  1662  and
1663  Samvat ;  and  lower  down,  a  string  of  three  names,
JlfaAaro/a  CansarAja,  PratApa  dhavala  d^va,  and
Madana  sinha.  Between  the  two  last,  there  is  inter*
posed  the  date  of  1624  Samvat,

The  name  of  PratApa  appears  then  to  have  been  of
frequent  recurrence.  The  family,  which  yet  possesses  the
principality  of  Bilonjoy  the  representative  of  which,  when
visited by Dr.  Hamilton, was Raja  Bh6panAt'ha


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


294  INSCRIPTIONS  UPON  BOCKS

sA,  claims  descent  from  PratApa  dhavala,  chief  of  Ja-
pila.

Japila  is  a  large  estate  south  of  Rautas  {RShitaswa),
in  the  district  of  Ramaghar.  But  the  territories  of  the
ancient  chieftain  seem  to  have  extended  beyond  its  present
Umits,  and  to  have  reached  the  vicinity  of  Sahasram.

These  inscriptions  have  no  other  chronological  value,
but  as  they  corroborate  the  date  of  one  possessing  more
historical  interest^  noticed  in  the  Researches  of  the  Asiatic
Society  of  Bengal  (vol.  ix.  p.  441).*  It  records  a  grant  of
land,  by  the  same  Rya  of  Cdnyacubjaf  Vuaya  Chan-
dra ;  and,  as  usual,  recites  the  names  of  his  ancestors,
tracing  his  genealogy  through  no  less  than  six  generations.
The  original  was  said  to  have  been  transmitted  to  Grreat
Britain  by  the  late  Sir  John  Murray  M'Gregor  ;  but
I  am  unable  to  say  where  it  has  been  deposited.f  It
would  be  an  acceptable  communication,  as  semng  to
authenticate  the  history  of  a  prince  among  the  most  conspi-
cuous in  the  annals  of  his  country ;  on  which  he  inflicted
the  same  calamity  which  Count  Julian  did  on  Spain,  by
assisting  a  Musleman  conquest  of  it,  in  revenge  for  the

*  [See  page  286  of  the  present  volume.]

t  It  appears  from  an  inscription  (a  grant  on  plates  of  copper)
published,  with  a  translation,  in  the  fifteenth  volume  of  Asiatic  Re-
searches (p.  447),  that  Jayaohandra  was  son  of  Vuayaohandra  ;
and  that  there  has  been  a  mistake  in  considering  Vijayachandra
and  Jayachand  to  be  equivalent  Sanscrit  and  Hindi  appellations  of
the  same  individual.  The  error  originated  with  the p(^t  Sebv6bu
TRivini,  who  communicated  a  copy  of  the  inscription  noticed  in
the  ninth  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Researches  [see  pages  240  and  286  of
the  present  volume],  as  relative  to  Jayachand,  whom  he  identified
(erroneously,  as  now  appears)  with  Vuayaohandra.

The  series  of  princes  who  reigned  at  Gddhipura  or  Cdnyacuhja^
ancestors  of  Ja  yaohandra,  is  now  completely  and  accurately  deter-
mined ;  and  the  reading  of  the  inscription  in  question  ceases  to  be  a
matter  of  any  interest.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


IN  SOUTH  BIHAR.  295

abduction  of  his  daughter.*  The  analogy  indeed  is  not
quite  complete ;  for  it  was  seduction  of  a  daughter  which
Count  Julian  sought  to  revenge.

Concerning  the  inscripticm  at  Tarackandiy  of  which  a
translation  is  here  presented,  it  is  to  be  remarked,  that  the
denunciation  or  protest,  which  it  records,  is  first  expressed
in  verse,t  and  is  then  repeated  in  prose.  This  repetition
has  much  assisted  the  decyphering  of  it,  and  the  correction
of  some  errors,  either  of  the  original,  or  of  the  copy.  A
few  explanatory  notes  will  be  found  annexed.

Translation  of  the  Inscription  at  Tarachandi.

"  PratApa  dhavala,  wholly  divine  (deva),  possessor
of  happily  risen  and  celebrated  glory,  addresses  his  own
race.  In  these  villages,  contiguous  to  CaJahancli,^  that
contemptible  ill  copper^  [grant],  which  has  been  obtained
by  fitiud  and  bribery,  from  the  thievish  slaves  of  the  sove-
reign of  GadhinagarOfW  by  priests  sprung  from  Suvalluhala :  If
there  is  no  ground  of  faith  to  be  put  therein  by  the  people
around.  Not  a  bit  of  land,  so  much  as  a  needle's  point
might  pierce,  is  theirs.

"  Samvat  1229. Jyeshiha  hadi  3d,  Wednesday.

*  Transactions  of  the  Roj'al  Asiatic  Society,  vol.  L  p.  147.
t  In  two  stanzas  of  Fdsnnta  tilaca  metre.

I  CalahMU;  written  CalahahStiy  with  a  long  vowel,  in  the  prose
paraphrase.

§  The  text  exhibits,  in  two  places,  cuiamhra:  which,  I  conjecture,
should  be  cU'tdmra,  from  cu,  ill,  and  tdmrOy  copper ;  alluding  to  a
grant  inscribed,  as  usual,  upon  copper.  There  may  be  an  allusion  to
Cutdmboy  the  name  of  a  district  in  that  vicinity.

II  GadhtnagarUy  the  same  with  Gadkipura,  is  identified  with  Cdnya-
cutja. — See  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  441,  [p.  286  of  the  present  volume.]

IF  Suvalluhala;  written  Swalluhaniya  in  the  prose  paraphrase;  it
appears  to  be  the  designation  of  the  BrdhmaihaSt  who  had  obtained
the  grant  of  land  in  question.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


296  INSCRIPTIONS  UPON  ROCKS,  &C.

"  The  feet  of  the  sovereign  of  Japila,  the  great  chief-
tain,  the  fortunate  PratApa  dhavala  d6va,  declare  the
truth  to  his  sons,  grandsons,  and  other  descendants  sprung
of  his  race :  this  ill  copper  [grant]  of  the  villages  of  CcUa-
hoAdi  and  Badayita,  obtained  by  fraud  and  bribery,  from
the  thievish  slaves  of  the  fortunate  Vijata  chandra,
the  king,  sovereign  of  Canyacubja^  by  SwMuhamya
folks :  no  faith  is  to  be  put  therein.  Those  priests  are
every  veay  libertines.  Not  so  much  land,  as  might  be
pierced  by  a  needle's  point,  is  theirs.  Ejiowing  this,  you
will  take  the  share  of  produce  and  other  dues;  or
destroy.

''  [Signature]  of  the  great  Rajaputra  (king's  son),
the  fortunate  ^atrughna."


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


XII.

On  Three  Grants  of  Land,  inscribed  on  Copper,  found
at  UjjAYANi,  and  presented  by  Major  James  Tod  to
the  Royal  Asiatic  Society.*

[From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society^
vol.  i.  p.  230—239,  and  462—466.]

The  translations,  ivhich  accompanied  the  Sanscrit  mr-
scriptions  on  copper,  presented  to  the  Society  by  Major  Tod,
having  been  made  through  the  medium  of  an  interpreter,  I
have  thought  it  right  to  reexamine  the  originals,  at  the
same  time  that  I  undertook  the  decyphering  of  a  third
inscription,  likewise  presented  by  Major  Tod,  but  unac-
companied by  a  translation.

Neither  of  the  three  inscriptions  in  question  is  complete.
They  had  originally  consisted  of  a  pair  of  plates  in  each
instance :  as  is  evident,  both  from  the  contents,  and  from
the  very  appearance ;  for  they  exhibit  holes,  through  which
rings  were  no  doubt  passed  to  hold  the  plates  together.  In
one  instance,  it  is  the  last  of  the  pair,  which  has  been  pre-
served. In  the  two  others,  the  first  of  each  remains,  and
the  last  has  been  lost.  Enough,  however,  subsists,  in  these
fragments  of  inscriptions,  to  render  them  usefrd  historical
documents ;  as  is  amply  shown  in  the  very  interesting  com-
ments on  them  which  Major  Tod  has  communicated.

I  now  lay  before  the  Sodety  a  transcript  of  the  contents
of  each  plate,  as  read  by  me;  and  copies,  fee-simile,  of  the
originals.  My  own  translations  follow ;  and  notes  will  be
found  annexed.

*  Read  at  a  public  meeting  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Decem-
ber 4, 1824.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


298  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

On  collating  the  fac-simile  with  the  transcript,  the
leaiTied  reader  will  observe  that  errors  (for  engravers  are
not  less  apt,  than  ordinary  copyists,  to  commit  blunders)
have  been  in  several  places  corrected.  Where  the  mistake
and  requisite  correction  seem  quite  obvious,  I  have  in
general  thought  it  needless  to  add  a  remark.  But,
wherever  it  has  appeared  necessary  to  give  a  reason  for
an  emendation,  an  explanatory  note  is  subjoined.

All  these  inscriptic»is  are  grants  of  land,  recorded  upon
copper,  conformably  with  the  usage  of  the  Hindus,  and
the  direction  of  the  law,  which  enjoins,  that  such  grahts
should  either  be  ¥nritten  upon  silk,  or  inscribed  upon  copper,^

One  of  these  grants  or  patents,  records  a  donation  of
land  made  by  the  reigning  sovereign  of  D/uira,  on  the
anniversary  of  the  death  of  his  father  and  predecesscH*,  in
1191  of  the  Satnvat  era;  omfirmed  by  the  prince  his  son,
at  the  time  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,  in  Sravana  1200
Samvat.  It  appears  from  calculation  that  a  lunar  eclipse
did  occur  at  the  time;  viz.  on  the  16th  of  July  A.  D.  1144,
about  9k  P-M.  apparent  time,  at  Ujjayanu

This  date,  so  authenticated,  becomes  a  fixed  point,
whence  the  period,  in  which  the  dynasty  of  sovereigns  cS
Dhara  flourished,  nmy  be  satisfactorily  computed.  The
series  of  four  princes,  whose  names  are  found  in  these  patents,
two  of  them  anterior  to  A.  D.  1134  (\\90  Samvai\  and
two  of  them  subsequent  to  that  date,  (for  the  anniversary
of  Nara  varma's  funeral  rites  in  1191,  determines  his
demise  in  1190  Samvat;)  may  be  taken  to  extend  fT<Mn  the
latter  part  of  the  eleventh  century  of  the  Christian  era  to
near  the  dose  of  the  twelfth.  It  is  carried  retrospectively,
through  a  line  of  three  more  princes,  to  Sindhu,  grand-
father of  Raja  Bh6ja,  by  the  marble  at  Madlmcara  ghoTy
and  other  evidence ;  as  shown  by  Major  Ton.

•  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,  vol.  ii.  p.  278. As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  60.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


^  BMnvounjoMis  litko^rrKphAf.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  299

The  earliest  of  the  three  patents  inscribed  upon  copper,
which  were  procured  by  Major  Tod  at  Ujjayani,  bears  the
date  of  3d  Magha  sudi  1 192  Samvat,  answering  to  January
A.  D.  1137.  It  has  the  signatuie  of  YAg6vARMA  d&va,
who,  in  the  preceding  year,  1191  Samvatf  had  made  a
donation  of  land  on  the  anniversary  of  the  demise  of  his
father  Nara  varma  dI:va,  which  was  confirmed  (appa-
rently in  Ya§6varma'8  life-time),  by  his  son  Lacshm!
VARMA  DfevA,  in  1200  Samvat:  as  above  noticed.  The
latest  of  the  three  grants  is  by  his  successor  Jaya  varma
D^vAy  and  being  incomplete,  exhibits  no  date.  Both  these
patents  agree  in  deducing  the  line  of  succession  from  Uda-
yAditya  d£va,  predecessor  of  Nara  varma.  There  is
consequently  this  series  perfectly  authenticated :
UdayAditya  dI:va

I

Nara  varma  d&va

I

Yas6varma  DfeVA
Jaya  varma  d£va. LacshmI  varma  DJ§(VA.

No.  I.
A  Grant  of  Land  ijiscribed  on  Copper,  found  at  Vjjayani.^

•  See  Plate  iv.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


300  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

'=I<^^<AIW ^^T^TCfS MIMlR^il W^^

M  <*l^  i  ?ft  2n5t^  ^^  ?fr  t^raw  ^-

t^<U^\rlM  fc^T  >TH%  3T^5J  f%VR  ^if^-

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


FOUND  AT  VJJAYANI.  301


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


302  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OP  LAND

"  Om  !  Well  be  it ! Augpicioug  victory  and  elevation.i

"  Victorious  is  he,  whose  hair  is  the  etherial  expanse;^
who,  for  creation,  supports  with  his  head  that  lunar  line '
which  is  a  type  of  the  germ  in  the  seed  of  the  universe.

"  May  the  matted  locks  of  love's  foe,*  reddened  by  the
lightning's  ring  that  flashes  at  the  period  of  the  world's  end,
spread  for  you  nightless^  prosperity.

"  The  great  prince,^  resplendent  with  the  decoration  of

^  Both  this  and  the  following  inscription  begin  alike,  and  contain
several  other  parallel  passages.  There  are  gross  errors  in  both ;  but
one  has  helped  to  correct  the  other.

'  VT6HAo£dA,  a  title  of  §iva,  whose  hair  is  the  atmosphere.

'  The  crescent,  which  is  Diva's  crest.

*  SmararIti  ,  a  title  of  ^iva.  He  is  represented  with  his  hair  clot-
ted and  matted  in  a  long  braid  rolled  round  his  head,  in  the  manner  in
which  ascetics  wear  their's. Hair  in  that  state  has  a  tawny  hue.

^  Nightless,  endless :  eternal.

*  Mahdcumdra :  a  royal  youth,  a  young  prince.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANJ.  303

five  great  titlefl,^  ^inth  which  he  is  thoroughly  and  excellently
embued  and  poBsessed,  the  fortunate  LacshmI  vabma
D&yA,  son^  of  his  Majesty^^  the  great  king,  soyereign,  and
supreme  lord,  the  fortunate  YAi6  varma  DivA,  son  of
Nara  varma  Dl^vAy  son  of  Udayaditya  D^vAy  ac-
quaints the  Paiicudla^^  and  people,  Brahmcdag  and  others,
inhabiting  BaSduda  ^ama^^  dependant  on  SurasaAi,  and
UfhavaAaca  grama^^  appertaining  to  7^^a-^rarna-j9ra-
sadica,^^  both  ^tuated  in  the  twelve  great  districts ^^  held
by  royal  patent ;  be  it  known  unto  you  :  Whereas,  at  the
fortunate  Dhara,^  the  great  king,  sovereign,  sup-erne  lord,
the  fortunate  Ya§6  varma  nfevA,  upon  the  anniversary^^
of  the  great  king,  the  fortunate  Nara  varma  d^va,  which

^  I  am  not  entirely  confident  of  the  meaning  of  this  passage.

B  PdddnudhydtOy  an  ordinary  periphrasis  for  son  and  successor :
literally,  "  whose  feet  are  meditated,  t.  e.  revered,  hy "

'The  additions  are  those  usually  home  hy  sovereign  princes  among
the  Hindus.  Bhattdraca  answers  to  the  title  of  majesty.  Adhir&ja
is  a  sovereign  or  superior  prince,  ^ly  signifying  fortunate  or  auspi-
cious, is  prefixed  to  every  name.

Varman  is  the  customary  designation  of  a  Rdjaputra ;  as  ^rman
is  of  a  Brdhmaiha,  The  term  enters  into  composition  in  the  names
of  many  of  this  family.

***  Patiacila  is  prohahly  the  Patiail  of  the  moderns.  The  term
occurs  again  lower  down ;  and  also  in  the  next  grant  (No.  2).

"  Pronounce  Bar^iud^dm.  SurdsaM  appears  to  he  the  district,  or
province,  in  which  it  is  situated.

"  Perhaps  Ughavan  rather  than  Ut^havan,

"  This  seems  to  be  the  name  of  a  district.

^*  An  apanage,  comprising  twelve  great  districts.  Mahdndwddakacor
ma^ulala  seems  to  have  been  held  hy  this  prince,  under  a  royal  grant
from  his  father.  He  did  not  become  his  successor :  for  Java  varma  is,
in  another  inscription,  named  immediately  after  Ya§6  varma;  and
was  reigning  sovereign.

"  Dhdrd  was  the  capital  of  this  dynasty.

'^  Anniversary  of  the  death.  It  appears,  therefore,  that  Nara
VARMA  died  in  1190  Samvat.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


304  ON  THBEE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

took  place  on  the  8th  of  Cartica  kidi,  years  eleven  hun-
d]*ed  and  ninety-one  elapsed  since  Vicram  a,  having  bathed
with  waters  of  holy  places,  having  satisfied  gods,  saints,
men  and  ancestors  with  oblations/7  having  worshipped  the
holy  BhawAnIpati,^^  having  sacrificed  to  fire  offerings  of
samt,  sacrificial  grass,  sesamum  and  boiled  rice,^^  having
presented  an  arghya^  to  the  sun,  having  thrice  perambu-
lated Capila,'^^  seeing  the  vanity  of  the  world,  deeming  life
a  tremulous  drop  of  water  on  the  leaf  of  a  lotus,  and  reck-
oning wealth  despicable : — ^As  it  is  said :

'^  This  sovereignty  of  the  earth  totters  with  the  stormy
blast  ;^  the  enjoyment  of  a  realm  is  sweet  but  for  an  in-
stant ;  the  breath  of  man  is  like  a  drop  on  the  tip  of  a  blade
of  grass :  virtue  is  the  greatest  firiend  in  the  journey  of  the
other  world. —

*'  Considering  this,  did  grant  by  patent,  preceded  by  gift
of  water,^  for  as  long  as  the  sun  and  moon  shall  endure,

*^  The  allusion  is  to  the  five  great  sacraments,  which  a  Hindu  is
hound  to  perform. — See  Menu,  iii,  67*

'"  BHAWANfpATT  is  a  title  of  §iva,  hushand  of  BnAwlNf,  In  the
following  inscription,  the  name  again  occurs  in  a  similar  manner,  with
the  further  designation  of  VarIvara  ourcj.

^  The  dhuti,  or  burnt  offering ;  consisting  of  boiled  rice,  with  tila
(Sesamum  orientale),  cuia  (Poa  cynosuroides),  and  sanU  ( Adenanthera
or  Prosopis  aculeata).

^  An  arghya  is  a  libation  or  oblation,  in  a  conch,  or  vessel  of  a
particular  form,  approaching  to  that  of  a  boat.-^As.  Res.,  toI.  vii.
p.  291.

'^  Capild  probably  is  fire,  personified  as  a  female  goddess.

^Abhra  is  a  cloud;  and  vdia^  wind:  whence  vdidbhrOf  a  windy
cloud.  Or  abhra  may  signify  the  etherial  fluid  {dc6ia).  The  stanza
is  repeated  in  the  next  inscription.

^  A  requisite  formality  in  a  donation  of  land. — See  Digest  of  Hindu
Law,  vol.  ii.  p.  276. Treatises  on  Law  of  Inheritance,  p.  258;


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  305

nnio iheAvasat'kica'^*  the  fortunate  Vana  pAla,-^  son  of
the  fortunate  Vi§war6pa,  grandson  of  the  fortunate  Ma-
HiRA«5  swAmI|  a  venerable  Brahmana  of  Carnata  in  the
south,  who  studies  two  vtda^  and  appertains  to  the  Aswa-
layavjoP  sac'hay  sprung  from  the  race  of  BhAradwAja,*^
and  tracing  a  triple  line  of  descent,  Bharadwaja,  Angi-
rasa,  and  Varhaspatyay^  settled  at  Adrelavaddhavari-
sfhdna,^  the  aforesaid  Baclauda  grama  and  Ut*havaAaca
grama,  with  their  trees,  fields  and  habitations,'^  together

**  Erroneously  written  Avasfhica  in  the  text.  Its  derivation  is
from  dvasat^haf  a  house  :  and  it  bears  reference  to  the  householder's
consecrated  fire  {gdrhapatya),  H  ela  yudh a ,  author  of  the  Brdhma^
sarvaswa,  has,  in  the  epigraph  of  his  work,  the  title  of  Avasat^hica
mahd  dhannddhyacsha*

**•  On  a  reperusal  of  the  grant  No.  1,  it  appears  probable  that  the
grantee's  name  was  DhanapIla  instead  of  Vanapala.  Throughout
the  inscription,  the  letter  V(  has  for  the  most  part  the  appearance  of  ^

the  detached  stroke  being  defaced :  and  DhanapIla  is  doubtless
the  more  ordinary  name.

^  This  probably  should  be  Mthiray  which  is  a  name  of  the  sun.

*•  Dwivid  ia  one  who  studies  two  vidas:  as  Trividy  one  who  studies
three.

^  The  text  exhibits  Aildyana;  doubtless  for  Aswaldyanay  by  which
name  one  of  the  sdc^hds  of  the  vSda  is  distinguished.  A^walayana
is  author  of  a  collection  of  aphorisms  on  religious  rites  (Culpa  siUra).

"  Gotra,  descent  from  an  ancient  sage  (Rtshi)^  whence  the  family
name  is  derived.  There  are  four  such  great  families  of  Brdhmaiias ;
comprehending  numerous  divisions.

®  Pravara,  lineage  traced  to  more  of  the  ancient  sages.  The  dis-
tinction between  yotra  Bud  pravara  is  not  very  clear.  Madhava  on
the  Mhndnsdf  2,  1,9,  names  these  very  three  families  as  constituting
z.gbtra:  and  gives  it  as  an  example  of  pravara,

^  This,  which  seems  to  be  the  name  of  a  country,  is  differently
written  in  the  next  inscription.  Perhaps  it  may  be  a  branch  of  the
gotrUy  or  family,  from  which  the  donatory  derived  his  descent

'^  Mdkiy  signifies  field ;  and  cula,  abode.  The  passage  may  admit
a  different  interpretation.

VOL.  II.  X


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


306  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

with  hidden  treasure,  and  deposits,  and  adorned  with  ponds,
wells  and  lakes.

''  On  the  15th  ot^avaika  sudi  in  the  year  1200,  at  the
time  of  an  eclipse  of  the  moon,^  for  our  father's  welfare,
we  have  again  granted  those  two  villages  by  patent  with
the  previous  gifl  of  water ;  therefore  all  inhabitants  of
both  villages,  as  well  the  Pa^acUa  and  other  people,  as
husbandmen,  bmg  strictly  observant  of  his  commands,
must  pay  unto  him  all  dues  as  they  arise,  tax,  money-rent,
share  of  produce,^  and  the  rest.

**  Considering  the  fruit  of  this  meritorious  act  as  common,
Aiture  princes,  sprung  of  our  race,  and  others,  should
respect  and  maintain  this  virtuous  donation  accordingly.^

'^  By  many  kings,  Sagaba  as  well  as  others,  the  earth
has  been  possessed.  Whose-soever  has  been  the  land,  his
has  then  been  the  fruit^

**  He,  who  resumes  land,  whether  given  by  himself,  or
granted  by  others,  is  regenerated  a  worm  in  ordure,  for
60,000  years.36

M&la  implies,  (as  I  learn  from  Major  Tod),  according'  to  the  ac-
ceptation of  the  country,  land  not  artificially  irrigated,  bat  watered
only  by  rain  and  dew.

**  An  eclipse  of  the  moon  appears,  from  calculation,  to  have  taken
place  at  the  time  here  assigned  to  it:  viz,  16th  July  1144;  as  in  the
preceding  year,  28th  July  1143. — Art  de  verifier  les  Bates,  vol.  i.
p.  73.

^  Hirakyaf  gold :  rent  in  money.

Bh6ga  bMga;  in  another  place,  hh6g6bhbga;  share  of  produce,  rent
in  kind.

»♦  This  stanza,  a  little  varied,  recurs  in  the  third  grant  (No.  3).

«»  This  also  recurs  in  the  same  (No.  3);  and  is  likewise  found  in  a
grant  translated  by  Sir  William  Jonbs. — As.  Res.,  vol.  i.  p.  365,
St.  1.

«6  A  quotation.— See  *  Digest  of  Hindu  Law,'  vol.  ii.  p.28l,  and  As.
Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  63. Also,  vol.  i.  p.  366;  and  vol.  viii.  p.  419.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


9ii.^Mi^iyif>^


":•%■■


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  307

Rama  BH  ADR  A  again  and  again  exhorts  all  these  future

rulers  of  the  earth  :  this  universal  bridge  of  virtue "^

(The  remainder,  upon  another  plate,  is  wanting.)


No.  2.


A  Grant  of  Land,  inscribed  on  Copper,  found  at
Ujjayanu*

fWST  M<*1>^<  5fr  >i<'S|lR<'S|^«=IMI<l-
^"^T 'ft ^i^ii^^cmK^f^v^iH tHTT


37  The  remainder  of  the  stanza  (which  may  be  easily  supplied  from
the  other  inscriptions:  see  the  next  grant;  and  As.  Res.,  vol.  i.  p.  365,
St.  3,  and  vol.  iii.  p.  53,  and  vol.  viii.  p.  419)  was  probably  followed  in
the  second  plate,  by  further  quotations,  deprecating  the  resumption  of
the  gift  by  future  sovereigns :  and  to  which  was  subjoined  the  sign
manual,  with  the  names  of  attesting  officers;  as  in  the  accompan3ring
grant  by  YaS6  varma  (No.  3).

The  bridge  of  virtue,  which  signifies  "  the  maxim  of  duty,"  bears
an  allusion  to  Rama's  bridge,  to  cross  the  sea  to  Lancd,

•  See  Plate  v.

x2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


308  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

TT3nfVTT3r M<^N< ^fWsdilc^uf^^^

^CRc^Td TfrT  STJTfft  f^^Tt  H*vM*i I  -
WMf fn^r  iTKTT3T  -  -  -  -

"  Om  !  Well  be  it !  Auspicious  victory  and  elevation !
"  Virtuous  is  he,  whose  hair  is  the  etherial  expanse ;
who,  for  creation,  suppoils  with  his  head  that  lunar  line

Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  309

which  is  a  type  of  the  germ  contaiued  in  the  seed  of  the
universe.

"  May  the  matted  locks  of  love's  foe,  reddened  by  the
lightning's  ring,  that  flashes  at  the  period  of  the  vv^orlds'
end,  spread  for  you  nightless  prosperity.*

"  From  his  abode  at  the  auspicious  Bard/tamanapura,
his  Majesty,  the  great  king,  sovereign,  and  supreme  lord,
the  fortunate  Java  varma  d^va,  whom  victory  attends,
son  of  Yas6  varma  d^iva,  son  of  Nara  varma
d6va,  son  of  Udayaditya  d^va,  acquaints  all  king's
officers,  Brahmanas  and  others,  and  the  Paiiacila  and
people,  &c.  inhabiting  the  village  of  MdyambSiaca  which
appertains  to  the  thiity-six  villages  of  Vata:"^  Be  it  known
unto  you  :  Whereas  we,  sojourning  at  Chandrapurt^  having
bathed,  having  worshipped  the  holy,  beneficent  and  ado-
rable BhawAnIpati  : —

Considering  the  world's  vanity :
for

This  sovereignty  of  the  earth  totters  with  the  stormy
blast;  the  enjoyment  of  a  realm  is  sweet  but  for  an  in-
stant ;  the  breath  of  man  is  hke  a  drop  of  water  on  the
tip  of  a  blade  of  grass:  virtue  is  the  greatest  friend  in  the
journey  of  the  other  world. —

"  Having  gained  prosperity,  which  is  the  receptacle  of  the
skips  and  bounds^  of  a  revolving  world,  whoever  give  not
donations,  repentance  is  their  chief  reward. —

"  Reflecting  on  the  perishable  nature  of  the  world,  prefer-

'  These  two  stanzas  occur  also  in  the  preceding  inscription.

'  Vatorc'hidaca'Shat'trimati ;  thirty-six  villages  of  Vata:  for  it
should  probably  be  read  c'heiaca  (which  signifies  a  village)  instead  of
c'Mdaca.

«  F'alg&gra'dhdTd-dhdrd :  an  allusion  is  probably  intended  to  Dhdrd
the  seat  of  government  of  this  dynasty.  f^al(j[a  signifies  a  leap;  and
dhdra^  a  horse^s  pace.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


310  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

.  ling  unseen  (spiritual)  fruit,  [do  grant]  to  be  fully  pos-
sessedy  so  long  as  moon  and  sun,  sea  and  earth,  endure

[unto sprung  firom  the  race]  of  BhAradwAja^

settled  at  Adriya  Iambi  davari  sfhana,  situated

within  the  southern  region,  at  JRqja  brahma  pwri "

(The  remainder,  insaibed  on  a  separate  plate,  is  wanting.)

No.  3.
A  grant  of  Land  inscribed  on  Copper ^  found  at  Ujjayanu*

•MIHM^ W^MI rJurafrT Jft^  TT^:


^  The  grantee  was  either  the  same  person,  or  one  of  the  same
family,  as  in  the  preceding  grant;  for  the  designations  are  identical,
so  far  as  this  reaches.

•  See  plate  vi.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


K';k,K*9i^nc^


Digitized  by


Googfe


;  N


Digitized  by  LjOOQIC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  311

f-lwfMMpHMrriAHrHdlheRt'nJnnVf:

g^:  ^TT^fl*Tt  t%^t^  ^  tl
3^  ?ft  ^TJR  ?^t1^  ?^^  ?ft  4^Ntf|^  -
'tJI^JT^'ftrtl


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


312  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND

•T

3Tfq-  -a  9fr:  a

(The  beginning,  inscribed  upon  another  plate,  is  wanting).

"  In  respect  of  two  portions  *  of  Brahmana's  allowance,
by  exchange  for  two  portions  allotted  to  the  attendant  of
the  temple  and  the  reader,  to  be  held  as  assigned  for  the
anniversary  of  the  auspicious  M6mala  D£yl  ;^  and  in
respect  of  seventeen  nivartana^  of  land,  with  eleven
ploughs  of  land,  assigned  to  both  persons  in  a  partition
of  Vtcarica  grama  ;*  the  whole  of  the  aforesaid  little  Vain-
ganapadra  grama^  also  a  moiety  of  Viccarica  grama
within  the  proper  bounds,  extending  to  the  grass  and  pas-
ture, with  trees,  fields  and  habitations,  with  money-rent,
and  share  of  produce,  with  superior  taxes,  and  including
all  dues  ;  for  increase  of  merit  and  fame  of  my  mother,  of
my  father,  and  of  myself,  are  granted  by  patent,  with  the

'  For  want  of  the  first  plate  of  this  patent,  the  beginning  of  the
second  is  very  obscure;  and,  perhaps,  not  rightly  intelligible,  without
divining  what  has  gone  before.  I  have  endeavoured  to  make  sense
of  it,  but  am  far  from  confident  of  having  succeeded.

*  M6mala  oivf  was  not  improbably  the  name  of  Ya§6  varma's
mother;  and  the  anniversary  is  that  of  her  obsequies:  as  in  the  pre-
ceding patent  for  a  g^rant  on  the  anniversary  of  the  obsequies  of
Ya§6  varma's  father.  Else  it  may  be  the  annual  festival  of  an  idol
of  that  name.

3  Nivartana  is  a  land-measure  containing  400  square  poles  of  ten
cubits  each,  according  to  the  LildvntU See  Algebra  of  the  Hindus.

♦  The  name  is  written  ricaricdgrdma  in  one  place;  and  F'iccaricd
ffrdma  in  another.

Major  ToD  observes  that  the  ancient  name  of  Burhdnpura  is  Cart-
grama.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


FOUND  AT  UJJAYANI.  313

previous  gift  of  water.  Aware  of  this,  and  obedient  to
his  commands,  they  must  pay  all  due  share  of  produce,
taxes,  money-rent,  &c.  to  them  both.

*'  Considering  the  fruit  of  this  meritorious  act  as  common,
future  princes,  sprung  of  our  race,  and  others,  should  res-
pect and  maintain  this  virtuous  donation,  as  by  us  given.

"  And  it  is  said, — By  many  Kings,  Sagara  as  well  as
others,  the  earth  has  been  possessed.  Whose-soever  has
been  the  land,  his  has  then  been  the  fruit.

*'  The  gifts,  which  have  been  here  granted  by  former
princes,  producing  virtue,  wealth,  and  fame,  are  unsullied
reflections. What  honest  man  would  resume  them  ?

*'  This  donation  ought  to  be  approved  by  those  who  exem-
pUfy  the  hereditary  liberality  of  our  race,  and  by  others.
The  flash  of  lightning  from  Lacshm!  swoln  with  the  rain-
drop,* is  gift;  and  the  fruit  is  preservation  of  another's
fame.

'^  RA.MABHADRA  again  and  againexhorts  all  those  future
rulers  of  the  earth :  this  universal  bridge  of  virtue  for
princes  is  to  be  preserved  by  you  from  time  to  time.

"  Considering  therefore  prosperity  to  be  a  quivering  drop
of  water  on  the  leaf  of  a  lotus ;  and  the  life  of  man  is  such ;
and  all  this  is  many  ways^  exemplified ;  men  therefore
should  not  abridge  the  fame  of  others.

''  Samvat  1192, 3d  of  Magha  badi  (dark  half) ;  witness

*  I  have  here  hazarded  a  conjectural  emendation ;  being  unable  to
make  sense  of  the  text,  as  it  stands.  Perhaps  the  transcriber  had
erroneously  written  tundaid  for  timdild;  and  the  engraver,  by  mistake,
transformed  it  into  the  unmeaning  vandald,  which  the  text  exhibits.
LACSHMf  is  here  characterized  as  a  thunder-cloud  pregnant  with  fer-
tilizing rain.

G  Chanudhd,  in  the  text,  is  an  evident  mistake;  it  should  un-
doubtedly be  bahitdhd.  Several  other  gross  errors  in  this  inscription
have  been  corrected;  too  obviously  necessary  to  require  special
notice :  as  a  short  vowel  for  a  long  one,  and  vice  versd.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


314  ON  THREE  GRANTS  OF  LAND, 8CC.

the  venerable  purShita,  V  Am  an  a;  the  venerable  swami,
PiFRusHoTTAMA  ;  the  prime  minister  and  king's  son,  D6-
VADHARA  ;  and  others.

*^  Auspiciousness  and  great  prosperity.
R.
''This  is  the  sign  manual  of  the  fortunate  YAji6vARMA
DfevA."

Adhi.  Sri.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


XIII.


On  Inscriptions  at  Temples  of  the  Jaina  Sect  in
South  BihAr.*


[From  the  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,
vol.  i.  p.  520—623.]


As  connected  with  the  subject  of  an  essay  on  the  Srawacs
or  JainaSff  read  at  a  former  meeting,  I  lay  before  the
Society  copies  of  inscripticms  fomid  by  Dr.  Buchanan
Hamilton  in  South  Bihar.  Though  not  ancient,  they
may  be  ccHisidered  to  be  of  some  importance,  as  confirm-
ing the  prevalence  of  a  Jaina  tradition  relative  to  the  site
of  the  spot  v^here  the  last  of  the  Jinas  terminated  his
earthly  existence,  and  as  identifying  the  first  of  his  disci-
ples with  Gautama,  whose  death  and  apotheosis  took
place,  according  to  current  belief,  in  Xhe  same  neighbour-
hood.

In  the  Calpa  sdtra  and  in  other  books  of  the  Jainas,
the  first  of  MahAvIra's  disciples  is  mentioned  under  the
name  of  Inora  bh^ti  :  but,  in  the  inscription,  under  that
of  Gautama  swAm!.  The  names  of  the  other  ten  pre-
cisely agree  :  whence  it  is  to  be  concluded,  the  Gautama,
first  of  one  list,  is  the  same  with  Indra  bh^ti,  first  of
the  other.

It  is  certainly  probable,  as  remarked  by  Dr.  Hamilton
and  Major  Delamaine,  that  the  Gautama  of  the  Jainas
and  of  the  Bauddhas  is  the  same  personage :  and  this

*  Read  at  a  Public  Meeting  of  the  Royal  Asiatic  Society,  Novem*
ber  I8th,  1826.

t  By  Major  Jambs  Delamaine.  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Asiatic
Society,  vol.  i.  p.  413—438.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


316  ON  INSCRIPTIONS  AT  TEMPLES

leads  to  the  further  surmise,  that  both  these  sects  are
branches  of  one  stock.  Aecording  to  the  Jai7ia$,  only  one
of  MahAvIra's  eleven  disciples  left  spiritual  successors:
that  is,  the  entire  succession  of  Jaina  priests  is  derived
from  one  individual^  Sudharma  swAm!.  Two  only  out
of  eleven  survived  MahavIra,  viz.  Indrabh^ti  and
Sudharma:*  the  first,  identified  with  Gautama  swAm!,
has  no  spiritual  successors  in  the  Jaina  sect.  The  proper
inference  seems  to  be,  that  the  followers  of  this  surviving
disciple  are  not  of  the  sect  of  Jina^  rather  than  that  there
have  been  none.  Gautama's  followers  constitute  the
sect  otBauddha,  with  tenets  in  many  respects  analogous
to  those  of  the  Jainas,  or  followers  of  Sudharma,  but
with  a  mythology  or  fabulous  history  of  deified  saints
quite  different.  Both  have  adopted  the  Hindu  Pantheon,
or  assemblage  of  subordinate  deities;  both  disclaim  the
authority  of  the  vedas ;  and  both  elevate  their  pre-eminent
saints  to  divine  supremacy.

In  a  short  essay  on  their  philosophical  opinions,  which
will  be  likewise  submitted  to  the  Society,  it  will  be  shown
that  a  considerable  difference  of  doctrine  subsists  on  various
points ;  but  hardly  more  between  the  two  sects,  than  be-
tween the  divers  branches  of  the  single  sect  otBauddha.

It  deserves  remark,  that  the  Bavddhas  and  the  Jairias
agree  in  placing  within  the  Umits  of  the  same  province,
South  Bihar,  and  its  immediate  vicinity,  the  locaUty  of
the  death  and  apotheosis  of  the  last  Buddha,  as  of  the
last  Jina,  and  of  his  predecessor  and  his  eldest  and  fa-
vourite disciple.  Both  religions  have  preserved  for  their
sacred  language  the  same  dialect,  the  Pali  or  Pracrtt,
closely  resembling  the  Magadhi  or  vernacular  tongue  of
Magadha  (South  Bihar). Between  those  dialects  {Pali

•  Page  216  of  the  present  volume.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


OF  THE  JAINA  SECT  IN  SOUTH  BIhAr.  317

and  Pracrit)  there  is  but  a  shade  of  difference,*  and  they
are  often  confounded  under  a  single  name.

The  traditional  chronology  of  tlie  two  sects  assigns  nearly
the  same  period  to  their  Gautama  respectively:  for,
according  to  the  Bauddhas,  the  apotheosis  of  Gautama
BUDDHA  took  place  643  years  before  the  beginning  of  the
Christian  era ;  and  according  to  the  Jainas,  the  apotheosis
of  MAHAviBA,  Gautama  sw A mI's  teacher,  was  somewhat
earUer,  viz,  about  600  years  before  the  Christian  era.
The  lapse  of  little  more  than  half  a  century  is  scarcely  too
great  for  the  interval  between  the  death  of  a  preceptor  and
of  his  pupil ;  or  not  so  much  too  great  as  to  amount  to
anachronism.

Without  ^elymg  much  upon  a  similarity  of  name,  it  may
yet  not  be  foreign  to  remark,  that  the  Buddha,  who  pre-
ceded Gautama  buddha,  was  CAsyapa  :  and  that
MahAvIra,  the  preceptor  of  Gautama  swAm!,  was  of
the  race  of  CaSyapa.

I  take  PAr§wanAt'ha  to  have  been  the  foundei*  of  the
sect  of  Jainas,  which  was  confirmed  and  thoroughly  esta-
blished by  MahAvIra  and  his  disciple  Sudharma  ;  by
whom,  and  by  his  followers,  both  MahAvIra  and  his  pre-
decessor PAbSwanAt'ha  have  been  venerated  as  deified
saints  (Jinas),  and  are  so  worshipped  by  the  sect  to  this  day,

A  schism,  however,  seems  to  have  taken  place,  after
MAHAviRA,  whose  elder  disciple,  Indra  bh^ti,  also
named  Gautama  swAmI,  was  by  some  of  his  followers
raised  to  the  rank  of  a  deified  saint,  under  the  synonymous
designation  of  Buddha;  (for  Jinn  and  Buddha  bear  the
same  meaning,  according  to  both  Buddhists  and  Jainas).
The  preceding  Buddha,  according  to  this  branch  of  the
sect,  was  CAsyapa,  who  is  not  improbably  the  same  with

•  BuRNOUF  et  Lassen,  Essai  sitrlr  Pdliy  p.  154.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


318  ON  INSCRIPTIONS  AT  TEMPLES

Srcmaia  VardhamAna  MAnAvfRA,  son  (bom  of  tbe
wife)  of  SiddhArt'ha,  a  Sitryavansi  prince  of  the  Ca-
syapa  race.

It  is  to  be  observed,  without,  however,  attaching  much
weight  to  this  coincidence,  that  the  name  of  SiddhArt'h a
is  common  to  MAHAvfRA's  father  and  to  Gautama
BUDDHA,  whom  I  suppose  to  be  the  same  with  the  Jina^s
disciple,  Oautama  swAmI.

The  appeOative  Gautama  is  unquestionably  a  patronymic
(derived  from  66tama),  however  SAcya  sinha  may  have
come  by  it,  whether  as  descendant  of  that  lineage,  nearer
or  remoter,  or  for  whatever  other  cause.  His  predecessor
among  Buddkas  is,  in  like  manner,  designated  by  a  patro*
nymic  as  above  noticed,  viz.  CASyapa.

The  name  of  Oautama  occurs  also  as  an  appellative  in
other  instances  besides  that  of  the  sixth  Buddha,  or  of  the
twenty-fourth  Jina's  eldest  disciple.  One  of  the  legislators
of  the  Hindus  is  Oautama,  whose  aphorisms  of  law  are
extant.*

The  gentile  name  of  the  last  Buddha  has  prevailed  in
China  and  Japan,  where  he  is  best  known  under  the  desig-
nation of  SAcYA.  His  appellation  of  Oautama  remains
current  in  countries  bordering  upon  India.

Inscription  at  NAKHAUR.t


*  Preface  to  two  Treatises  on  the  Hindu  Law  of  Inheritance,  p.  z.
t  See  Plate  vii.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


.Gocde


OF  THE  JAINA  SECT IN  SOUTH  BIHAr.  319

''  In  the  year  1686  Samvat,  on  the  15th  day  of  Vaisac^ha
sudi,  the  lotus  of  Gautama  swAmI's  feet  was  here  placed
by  NiHAL6  mother  of  !tha.  (H^haccur),  SangrAma  g6-
VARDHANA  dAsa,  Bon  of  ^Aa.  TuLAsi  dAsa^  son  of
^a.  ViMALA  nAsAy  of  the  race  of  Ch&para  and  lineage
of  [^Bharata  Chacravarti*s]  prime  councillor :  the  fortunate
Jina-rAja  stRi,  the  venerable  guide  of  the  great  Oha-
ratara  tribe,  being  present

The  same  pious  family,  which  is  here  recorded  for  erect-
ing, or  more  probably  restoring,  the  representation  of
Gautama  swAmI's  feet  at  NaJchaur,  is  in  like  manner
commemorated  by  three  inscriptions,  bearing  date  six  years
later  (piz.  1692  Samvat),*  for  the  like  pious  office  of
erecting  images  of  the  feet  of  MahAvIra  and  of  his  eleven
disciples,  at  Patoapuri,  which,  or  its  vicinity,  is  in  those
inscriptions  stated  to  be  the  site  of  that  saint's  extinction
(nirvaiia)  or  translation  to  bliss.

The  same  names  recur,  with  those  of  many  other  persons,
inhabitants  (as  this  family  was)  of  the  town  of  Bihar,
where  a  numerous  congregation  of  Jainas  seems  to  have
then  dwelt ;  and  with  the  same  additions  and  designations
more  fully  set  forth :  whence  it  appears,  that  the  designa-
tion of  "  descendant  of  a  prime  councillor"  bears  reference
to  a  supposed  descent  from  the  prime  minister  of  the
universal  or  paramount  sovereign,  Bharata,  son  of  the
first  Jina  RYshabha.

*  The  largest  of  those  inscriptions  names  likewise  the  reigning
Emperor,  8hah  Jbhan.

Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


320  ON  INSCRIPTIONS  AT  JAINA  TEMPLES.

SangrAma  and  G6vardhana,  here  joined  as  an  ap-
pellation of  one  person,  are  in  those  inscriptions  separated
as  names  of  two  brothers,  sons  of  TuLAsi  dAsa  and  his
wife  NiHAL6.  In  other  respects,  the  inscriptions  confirm
and  explain  each  other.  *

•  Copies  of  those  at  Pdtoaptifi  were  not  taken  in  fac-simile,  but
are  merely  transcripts.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


XIV.

On  the  Indian  and  Arabian  Divisions  of  the
Zodiac.


FFroin  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  ix.  p.  323 — 376. Calcutta,  1807-

4to.]


The  researches,  of  which  the  result  is  here  laid  before
the  Asiatic  Society,  were  undertaken  for  the  purpose  of
ascertaining  correctly  the  particular  stars,  which  give  names
to  the  Indian  divisions  of  the  zodiac.  The  inquiry  has,  at
intervals,  been  relinquished  and  resumed:  it  was  indeed
attended  with  considerable  difficulties.  None  of  the  native
astronomers,  whom  I  consulted,  were  able  to  point  out,  in
the  heavens,  all  the  asterisms  for  which  they  had  names :
it  became,  therefore,  necessary  to  recur  to  their  books,  in
which  the  positions  of  the  principal  stars  are  given.  Here
a  fresh  difficulty  arose  from  the  real  or  the  seeming  dis-
agreement of  the  place  of  a  star,  with  the  division  of  the
zodiac,  to  which  it  was  referred ;  and  I  was  led  from  the
consideration  of  this  and  of  other  apparent  contradictions,
to  compare  carefully  the  places  assigned  by  the  Hindus  to
their  nacshatras,  with  the  positions  of  the  lunar  mansions,
as  determined  by  the  Arabian  astronomers.  After  repeated
examination  of  this  subject,  with  the  aid  afforded  by  the
labours  of  those  who  have  preceded  me  in  the  same  in-
quiry, I  now  venture  to  offer  to  the  perusal  of  the  Asiatic
Society  the  following  remarks,  with  the  hope  that  they
will  be  found  to  contain  a  correct  ascertainment  of  the  stars

VOL.  II.  Y


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


322  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

by  which  the  Hindus  have  been  long  accustomed  to  trace
the  moon's  path.

The  question,  which  I  proposed  to  myself  for  investi-
gation,  appeared  to  me  important,  and  deserving  of  the
labour  bestowed  upon  it,  as  obviously  essential  towards  a
knowledge  of  Indian  astronomy,  and  as  tending  to  deter-
mine another  question;  namely,  whether  the  Indian  and
Arabian  divisions  of  the  zodiac  had  a  common  origin.  Sir
William  Jones  thought  that  they  had  not;  I  incline  to
the  contrary  opinion.  The  coincidence  appears  to  me  too
exact,  in  most  instances,  to  be  the  effect  of  chance  :  in
others,  the  differences  are  only  such  as  to  authorize  the  re-
mark, that  the  nation,  which  borrowed  from  the  other,  has
not  copied  with  servility.  I  apprehend  that  it  must  have
been  the  Arabs  who  adopted  (with  slight  variations)  a  divi-
sion of  the  zodiac  famiUar  to  the  Hindus.  This,  at  least,
seems  to  be  more  probable  than  the  supposition,  that  the
Indians  received  their  system  from  the  Arabians:  we  know,
that  the  Hindus  have  preserved  the  memory  of  a  former
situation  of  the  Colures,  compared  to  constellations,  which
mark  divisions  of  the  zodiac  in  their  astronomy ;  but  no
similar  trace  remains  of  the  use  of  the  lunar  mansions,  as
divisions  of  the  zodiac,  among  the  Arabs,  in  so  very  remote
times.

It  will  be  found,  that  I  differ  much  from  Sir  William
Jones  in  regard  to  the  stars  constituting  the  asterisms  of
Indian  astronomy.  On  this,  it  may  be  sufficient  to  remind
the  reader,  that  Sir  William  Jones  stated  only  a  con-
jecture foimded  on  a  consideration  of  the  figure  of  the
nacshatra  and  the  number  of  its  stars,  compared  with
those  actually  situated  near  the  division  of  the  ecUptic,  \jd
which  the  nacshatra  gives  name.  He  was  not  apprized
that  the  Hindus  themselves  place  some  of  these  constella-
tions far  out  of  the  limits  of  the  zodiac.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


age  322.


1

2

3

' 28

Names  of  the  Nacshatras

Aswini.

Bhara^.

Cr^tticd.

^^^mvoii.

Presiding  deities  or  regents  of  >
each  asterism j

The
Jswins.

Yama.

Fire.

PrajI'
pati.  I^shan.

The  figures  of  the  Nacshairas^
according  to  SrIpati,  &c.  . .  j

A  horse's
head.

The
Ydni.

A  razor
or  knife.

A  WII66KC

Ctrrin^t

abor.

T  heir  figures  according  to  other  >
authors j

A  tem-T"
pie.*

Number  of  stars  according  to\
SrIpati,  &c f

3

3

6

5 i

Other  numbers  assigned  by  dif- ' .
ferent  authorities

2f

^-

Relative  situation  of  the  prin-  -j
cipal  star ;  according  to  the  i

N.

S.

S.

E.

Place  of  the  star  in  Gths  of  de-  \
grees  firom  the  origin  of  the  f
l^acshaira;  according  to  the  l
same J

48

40

65

57 >

Its  place,  in  degrees,  from  the\
origin  of  the  Ecliptic )

8°

20°

37°  30^

49°  30^5

I^SO'

Its  distance  from  the  Ecliptic  . .

10°  N.

12°  N.

5°N.

^'^S. "

Place  of  the  star  in  dep^es,-j
measured  on  the  Ecliptic,  ac-  >
cording  to  Brahmboupta  . .  J

&>

20°

37^28'

49°  28^  t]

°
>

Distance  from  the  Ecliptic

\(yN.

12°  N.

4°3l'N.

4°3ys.'

Place  in  degrees  measured  on*^
the  Ecliptic,  according  to  the  >
Siddhdnta  iir&mahi J

8°

20°

37°  28'

49°  28^  I

Distance  from  the  Ecliptic

10<>N.

12°  N.

4»30'N.

4°  30^8.

Place  in  degrees  measured  on"j
the Ecliptic, according to  >
the  Graha  Idphava J

8o

21°

38°

49°

1°

Distance  from  the  Ecliptic

10°N.

12°  N.

5°N.

5°  8.

True longitude  according  to\
the  Siddhdnta  sdrvabhauma .  /

12«4(K

25°  8'

39°  2'

480  9^

»°50'

True  latitude ...••.....

10«>5(KN.

12°5yN.

4°44'N.

4°  40^8.

Star  supposed  to  be  meant

•  Arietis.

Musca.

„Tauri.
Pleiades.

•  Tauri.

Aldeba-

ran.

Pis-
am.

Digitized  by


GooglF


Digitized  by


Goode


k  i


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  323

I  shall  examine  the  several  nacshatras  and  lunar  man-
sions in  their  order ;  previously  quoting  from  the  Hindu
astronomers,  the  positions  assigned  to  the  principal  star,
teimed  the  ySgatara,  This,  according  to  Brahmegupta,
(as  cited  by  LacshmIdAsa  in  his  commentary  on  the  SirS-
mani,)  or  according  to  the  Brahme  siddkanta  (cited  by
Bh6dhara,  is  the  brightest  star  of  each  cluster.  But
the  Surya  siddkanta  specifies  the  relative  situation  of  the
YSgatara  in  respect  of  the  other  stars ;  and  that  does  not
always  agree  with  the  position  of  the  most  conspicuous
star.

The  number  of  stars  in  each  astensm,  and  the  figure
under  which  the  asterism  is  represented,  are  specified  hy
Hindu  astronomers:  particularly  by  SfifpATi  in  the
JRatnamala.  These,  with  the  positions  of  the  stars  rela-
tively to  the  ecliptic,  are  exhibited  in  the  annexed  table.
It  contains  the  whole  purport  of  many  obscure  and  almost
enigmatical  verses,  of  which  a  verbal  translation  would  be
nearly  as  unintelligible  to  the  EngUsh  reader  as  the  original
text.  ,

The  authorities,  on  which  I  have  chiefly  relied,  because
they  are  universally  received  by  Indian  astronomers,  are  the
Sitrya  sidd/ianta,  Sir6maAiy  and  Graha  lagkava.  They
have  been  carefully  examined,  comparing  at  the  same  time
several  commentaries.  The  Ratnamala  of  SrIpati  is
cited  for  the  figures  of  the  asterisms ;  and  the  same  passage
had  been  noticed  by  Sir  William  Jones.*  It  agrees
nearly  with  the  text  of  VASisnf 'h  a  cited  by  MunIsw  ara,
and  is  confirmed  in  most  instances  by  the  Muhdrta  chinta-
mani.  The  same  authority,  confirmed  with  rare  exceptions
by  Vasish'Pha,  SAcalya,  and  the  Ahharaiiay  is  quoted
for  the  number  of  stars  in  each  asterism. The  works  of


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  294.
y2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


324  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

Brahmegupta  have  not  been  accessible  to  me :  but  the
Marickiy  an  excellent  commentary  on  the  Siddkanta  HrS-
maniy  by  MunISwara^  adduces  irom  that  author  a  state-
ment of  the  positions  of  the  stars ;  and  remarks,  that  it
is  founded  on  the  Brahme  siddkanta,  contained  in  the
Vishnvdherm6ttara.*  Accordingly,  I  have  found  the  same
passage  in  the  Brahme  siddhanta,  and  verified  it  by  the
gloss  entitled  Vasana  ;  and  I,  therefore,  use  the  quotation
without  distrust.  Later  authorities,  whose  statements  coin-
cide exactly  with  some  of  the  preceding  (as  CamalAcara
in  the  Tatwavivecd)  would  be  needlessly  inserted  :  but  one
(MuNiSwARA  in  the  Siddhanta  sarvabkauma),  exhibiting
thg  position  of  the  stars  differently,  is  quoted  in  the  an-
nexed table.

The  manner  of  observing  the  places  of  the  stars  is  not
explained  in  the  original  works  first  cited.  The  Surya
siddhanta  only  hints  briefly, '  that  the  astronomer  should
frame  a  sphere,  and  examine  the  apparent  longitude  and
latitude,  f'  Commentators,:]:  remarking  on  this  passage,
describe  the  manner  of  making  the  observs^tion :  and  the  same
description  occurs,  with  little  variation,  in  commentaries  on
the  Sir6mani.%  They  direct  a  spherical  instrument  (GS-
layantrci)  to  be  constructed,  according  to  instructions  con-
tained in  a  subsequent  part  of  the  text.  This,  as  will  be
hereafter  shewn,  is  precisely  an  armillary  sphere.  An  ad-
ditional circle  graduated  for  degrees  and  minutes,  is  di-
rected to  be  suspended  on  the  pins  of  the  axis  as  pivots.


*  Another  Brahme  siddhdnta  is  entitled  the  S&calya  sanhUd,  The
author  of  the  Marichiy  therefore,  distin^shes  the  one  to  which  he
refers.

f  Sp*hutavicshipa  and  Sp'hutadhruvaca ;  which  will  he  explained
further  on.

X  Ranganat'ha  and  Bh^dhara.

§  In  the  Vasana  bhashya  and  in  the  Marichi,


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  325

It  is  named  Vedhavalaya  or  intersecting  circle,  and  appears
to  be  a  circle  of  declination.  After  noticing  this  addition
to  the  instrument,  the  instructions  proceed  to  the  rectifying
of  the  GSlayantra,  or  armillary  sphere,  which  is  to  be
placed,  so  that  the  axis  shall  point  to  the  pole,  and  the
horizon  be  true  by  a  water-level.

The  instrument  being  thus  placed,  the  observer  is  in-
structed to  look  at  the  star  Revati  through  a  sight  fitted
to  an  orifice  at  the  centre  of  the  sphere;  and  having
found  the  star,  to  adjust  by  it  the  end  of  the  sign  Pisces
on  the  ecliptic.  The  observer  is  then  to  look,  through  the
sight,  at  the  y6ga  star  of  Aswini^  or  at  some  other  pro-
posed object ;  and  to  bring  the  moveable  circle  of  decli-
nation over  it.  The  distance  in  degrees,  from  the  inter-
section of  this  circle  and  ecUptic,  to  the  end  of  Mina  or
Pisces,  is  its  longitude  {dhruvaca)  in  degrees;  and  the
number  of  degrees  on  the  moveable  circle  of  declination,
from  the  same  intersection  to  the  place  of  the  star,  is  its
latitude  (vicskepa)  north  or  south.*

The  commentatorsf  further  remark,  that  *  the  latitude,
so  found,  is  (sp^huia)  apparent,  being  the  place  intercepted
between  the  star  and  the  ecliptic,  on  a  circle  passing
through  the  poles ;  but  the  true  latitude  {(zsp'huia)  is  found
on  a  circle  hung  upon  the  poles  of  the  celestial  sphere,  as
directed  in  another  place.'  The  longitude,  found  as  above
directed,  is,  in  Uke  manner,  the  space  intercepted  between
the  origin  of  the  ecliptic  and  a  circle  of  declination  passing

*  Father  P^tau,  and,  after  him,  B  a  illy,  for  reasons  stated  by
them  (Uranol.  Dissert  2.  2.  Ast  Anc.  p.  428.),  are  of  opinion,  that
the  ancient  astronomers  referred  stars  to  the  equator ;  and  that  Eu-
DOXU8  and  Hipparohus  must  be  so  understood,  when  speaking  of  the
longitudes  of  stars.  Perhaps  the  Greek  astronomers,  like  the  Hindus,
reckoned  longitudes  upon  the  ecliptic  intersected  hy  circles  of  decli-
nation, in  the  manner  which  has  heen  here  explained.

t  BhOphara  is  the  most  explicit  on  this  point.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


326  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

through  the  star :  difFeringy  consequently^  from  the  troe
longitude.  The  same  commentators  add,  that  the  longh
tudes  and  latitudes,  exhibited  in  the  text,  are  of  the  de-
scription thus  explained :  and  those,  which  are  stated  m
the  Siirya  siddhanta,  are  expressly  affirmed  to  be  adapted
to  the  time  when  the  equinox  did  not  differ  from  the  origin
of  the  ecliptic  in  the  beginning  of  Mesha.

It  is  obvious,  that,  if  the  commentators  have  rightly
understood  the  text  of  their  authors,  the  latitudes  and  lon-
gitudes there  given,  require  correction.  It  will  indeed
appear,  in  the  progress  of  this  inquiry,  that  the  positions
of  stars  distant  from  the  ecUptic,  as  there  given,  do  not
exactly  correspond  with  the  true  latitudes  and  longitudes
of  the  stars  supposed  to  be  intended :  and  the  disagree-
ment may  be  accoimted  for,  by  the  circumstance  of  the
observations  having  been  made  in  the  manner  above  de-
scribed.

Another  mode  of  observation  is  taught  in  the  SiddhiaUa
sundara,  cited  and  expounded  by  the  author  of  the  Sid-
dhanta  sarvabhauma.  *  A  tube,  adapted  to  the  summit  of  a
gnomon,  is  directed  towards  the  star  on  the  meridian :  and
the  Une  of  the  tube,  pointed  to  the  star,  is  prolonged  by  a
thread  to  the  ground.  The  line  from  the  summit  of  the
gnomon  to  the  base  is  the  hypotenuse ;  the  height  of  the
gnomon  is  the  perpendicular ;  and  its  distance  frt>m  the
extremity  of  the  thread  is  the  base  of  the  triangle.  There-
fore, as  the  hypotenuse  is  to  its  base,  so  is  the  radius  to  a
base,  from  which  the  sine  of  the  angle,  and  consequently
the  angle  itself,  are  known.  If  it  exceed  the  latitude,  the
declination  is  south ;  or,  if  the  contrary,  it  is  north.  The
right  ascension  of  the  star  is  ascertained  by  calculation
fi^m  the  hour  of  the  night,  and  from  the  right  ascension  of
the  sun  for  that  time.  The  declination  of  the  correspond-
ing point  of  the  ecliptic  being  found,  the  sum  or  difference


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  327

of  the  decUnations,  according  as  they  are  of  the  same  or  of
different  denominations^  is  the  distance  of  the  star  from  the
ecliptic.  The  longitude  of  the  same  point  is  computed ;
and  from  these  elements,  with  the  actual  precession  of  the
equinox,  may  be  calculated  the  true  longitude  of  the  star ;
as  also  its  latitude  on  a  circle  passing  through  the  poles  of
the  ecUptic.'

Such,  if  I  have  rightly  comprehended  the  meaning  in  a
single  and  not  vary  accurate  copy  of  the  text,  is  the  purport  of
the  directions  given  in  the  Siddhanta  smidara  and  sarvor
bhaumu:  the  only  works  in  which  the  true  latitudes  and  lon-
gitudes of  the  stars  are  attempted  to  be  given.  All  the  rest
exhibit  the  longitude  of  the  star's  circle  of  declination,  and
its  distance  from  the  ecliptic  measured  on  that  circle.

I  suppose  the  original  observations,  of  which  the  result
is  copied  from  Brahmegupta  and  the  Sdrya  siddhanta^
with  little  variation,  by  successive  authors,  to  have  been
made  about  the  time,  when  the  vernal  equinox  was  near
the  first  degree  of  Mesha,*  The  pole  then  was  nearly
seventeen  degi-ees  and  a  quarter  from  its  present  position,
and  stood  a  little  beyond  the  star  near  the  ear  of  the
Cameleopard.  On  this  supposition  it  will  be  accordingly
foimd,  that  the  assigned  places  of  the  nacshatras  are  easily,
reconcileable  to  the  positions  of  stars  likely  to  be  meant

I  shall  here  remark,  that  the  notion  of  a  polar  star,  com-
mon to  the  Indian  and  Grecian  celestial  spheres,  implies
considerable  antiquity.  It  cannot  have  been  taken  from
our  present  pole-star  (aUrsse  minoris),  which,  as  Mons.
B  A  ILLY  has  observed,^  was  remote  from  the  pole,  when

•  Brahmegupta  wrote  soon  after  that  period;  and  the  Sdrya
siddh6nta  is  probably  a  work  of  nearly  the  same  age.  Mr.  Bbntlbt
considers  it  as  more  modem  (As.  Res.,  toI.  vi.) :  it  certainly  cannot
be  more  ancient ;  for  the  equinox  must  have  past  the  beginning  of
Misha^  or  have  been  near  it,  when  that  work  was  composed.

t  Astronomic  A  ncienne,  p.  511.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


328  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

EuDOxus  described  ihe  sphere;  at  which  tune,  according
to  the  quotation  of  Hipparchus,  there  was  a  star  situated
at  the  pole  of  the  world.*  Bailly  conjectures,  as  the
intermediate  stars  of  the  sixth  magnitude  are  too  small  to
have  designated  the  pole,  that  u  Draconis  was  the  star
meant  by  Eudoxus,  which  had  been  at  its  greatest  ap-
proximation to  the  pole,  Uttle  more  than  four  degrees  from
it,  about  1326  years  before  Christ.  It  must  have  been
distant,  between  seven  and  eight  degrees  of  a  great  circle,
when  EuDOxus  wrote.  Possibly  the  great  star  in  the
Dragon  (a  Draconis),  which  is  situated  very  near  to  the
circle  described  by  the  north  pole  round  the  pole  of  the
ecUptic,  had  been  previously  designated  as  the  polar  star.
It  was  within  one  d^ree  of  the  north  pole  about  2836  years
hetore  Christ.  As  we  know,  that  the  idea  could  not  be
taken  from  the  star  in  the  tail  of  Ursa  minor,  we  are  forced
to  choose  between  Bailly's  conjecture  or  the  supposition
of  a  still  greater  antiquity.  I  should,  therefore,  be  inclined
to  extend  to  the  Indian  sphere,  his  conjecture  respecting
that  of  EuDoxTJS.

I  shall  now  proceed  to  compare  the  nacshatras  with  the
manzils  of  the  moon,  or  lunar  mansions.

I.  Aswini,  now  the  first  nacshatra,  but  anciently  the  last
but  one,  probably  obtamed  its  present  situation  at  the  head
of  the  Indian  asterisms,  when  the  beginning  of  the  zodiac
vms  referred  to  the  first  degree  of  Mesha,  or  the  Ram,  on
the  Hindu  sphere.  As  measuring  a  portion  of  the  zodiac,
it  occupies  the  first  13^  2(/  of  MSsha:  and  its  beginning
follows  immediately  after  the  principal  star  in  the  last
nacshatra  {Revdtt),  reckoned,  by  some  exactly,  by  others
nearly,  opposite  to  the  very  conspicuous  one,  which  forms
the  fourteenth  asterism. Considered  as  a  constellation,

*  HippABCHUS,  Comment  on  Aratus,  lib.  i.  p.  179.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  329

Asvoini  comprises  three  stars  figured  as  a  horse's  head;
and  the  principal,  which  is  also  the  northern  one,  is  stated
by  all  ancient  authorities,  in  10^  N.  and  8^  E.  from  the
beginning  of  Misha.

The  first  manzil,  or  lunar  mansion,  according  to  the
Arabs,  is  entitled  Shercaan,  (by  the  Persians  corruptly
called,  as  in  the  oblique  case,  Sheraiain),  and  comprises
two  stars  of  the  third  magnitude  on  the  head  of  Aries,  in
lat.  6^  36'  and  T"  SV  N.,  and  long.  26^  13'  and  27*^  7'.*
With  the  addition  of  a  third,  also  in  the  head  of  the  Ram,
the  asterism  is  denominated  Ashrat.  The  bright  star  of
the  second  or  third  magnitude  which  is  out  of  the  figure  of
the  Ram,  according  to  Uluoh  beg,  but  on  the  nose
according  to  Hipparchus  cited  by  this  author  from  Pto-
lemy, is  determined  Natih:  it  is  placed  in  lat.  9®  30'  N.
and  long.  1*0^  43',  and  is  apparently  the  same  with  the
principal  star  in  the  Indian  asterism;  for  Mtjhammed  of
Tizin,  in  his  table  of  declination  and  right  ascension,  ex-
pressly terms  it  the  first  star  of  the  Sheraiain.f

MBXiypaA^ts,  consulted  by  me,  have  concurred  in  point-
ing to  the  three  bright  stars  in  the  head  of  Aries  (apwad  7)
for  the  Indian  constellation  Ahvini.  The  first  star  of
Aries  (a)  was  also  shown  to  Dr.  Huntes,  at  Ujjayinij
for  the  principal  one  in  this  asterism;  and  Mr.  Davis j:
states  the  other  two,  as  those  which  were  pointed  out  to
him  by  a  skilfiil  native  astronomer,  for  the  stars  that  dis-
tinguish Astoini.  The  same  three  stars,  but  with  the  addi-
tion of  three  others,  were  indicated  to  Le  Gentil,  for  this
constellation.  § I  entertain,  therefore,  no  doubt,  that  Sir

•  Hydb's  Uluoh  beg,  p.  68.

t  Hyde's  Com.  on  Uluoh  bbo's  tablen,  p.  97..

I  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  226.

h  M^m.  Acad.  Scien.,  1772,  P.  ii.,  p.  209.  *


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


330  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ABABIAN

William  Jones*  was  right  in  placing  the  three  stare  of
Aswird  in,  and  near,  the  head  of  the  Ram ;  and  it  is  evident,
that  the  first  nacshatra  of  the  Hindus  is  here  rightly  deter-
mined, in  exact  conformity  with  the  first  lunar  mansion  of  the
Arabs ;  although  the  longitude  of  a  Arietis  exceed,  by  half  a
degree,  that  which  is  deduced,  for  the  end  of  Astoini,  from  the
supposed  situation  of  the  Virgin's  spike  opposite  to  the  be-
ginning of  this  fuicshatra;  and  although  its  circle  of  decli-
nation be  13^  instead  of  8^  from  the  principal  star  in  Rivafi,
II.  Bharani,  the  second  Indian  asterism,  comprises
three  stars  figured  by  the  Y6nt  or  pudendtan  muliebre:  and
all  ancient  authorities  concur  in  placing  the  principal
and  southern  star  of  this  nacshatra  in  12^  N.  The  second
manzily  entitled  Butain,  is  placed  by  Ulugh  BEof  in
lat.  1^  12'  and  3^  12^;  and  this  cannot  possibly  be  recon-
ciled with  the  Hindu  constellation.  But  Mu hammed  of
TisAn^X  assigns  to  the  bright  star  oi  Butain  a  declination
of  23®  N.  exceeding  by  nearly  2®  the  decUnation  allotted
by  him  to  Natih,  or  his  first  star  in  Sheraiain.  This
agrees  with  the  difierence  between  the  principal  stars  of
Aswini  and  Bharani;  and  it  may  be  inferred,  that  some
among  the  Muhammedan  astronomere  have  concurred  with
the  Hindus,  in  referring  the  second  constellation  to  stars
that  form  Musca.  There  were  no  good  grounds  for  sup-
posing Bharani  to  correspond  with  three  stars  on  the  tail
of  the  Ram  ;§  and  I  have  no  doubt,  that  the  stars,  which
compose  this  nacshatra,  have  been  rightly  indicated  to  me,
as  three  in  Musca,  forming  a  triangle  almost  equilateral :
their  brightness,  and  their  equal  distance  fiom  the  first  and
third  asterisms,  corroborate  this  opinion,  which  will  be
confirmed  by  showing,  as  will  be  done  in  the  progress  of


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  298.  t  Hydk,  p.  61.

J  See  Hyde's  Commentary,  p.  97. §  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p-  298.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  331

this  comparison,  that  the  nacshatras  are  not  restricted  to
the  limits  of  the  zodiac.

III.  Crittica,  now  the  third,  but  formerly  the  first,
Tuicshatra,  consists  of  six  stars  figured  as  a  knife  or  razor,
and  the  principal  and  southern  star  is  placed  in  4i^  or  5^  N.
and  in  65  sixths  of  degrees  (or  10^  50 )  from  its  own  com-
mencement, according  to  the  5^rya  siddhantOy  or  37^  28' to
38^  firom  the  beginning  of  Mesha,  according  to  the  Sid-
dhanta  HrSmani,  and  Graha  laghava,  respectively.  This
longitude  of  the  circle  of  declination  corresponds  nearly
with  that  of  the  bright  star  in  the  Pleiades,  which  is  40^  of
longitude  distant  from  the  principal  star  oiRevati.

The  stars  indicated  by  Ultjoh  beg  for  Thwrayyk,  also
correspond  exactly  with  the  Pleiades;  and  these  were
pointed  out  to  the  Jesuit  missicHiaries,*  as  they  have  since
been  to  every  other  inquirer,  for  the  third  nacshatra.  If
any  doubt  existed.  Mythology  might  assist  in  determining
the  question;  for  the  Cntiicas  are  six  nymphs,  who  nursed
ScANDA,  the  god  of  war,  named  fi'om  these,  his  foster
mothers,  CJLRTiciYA  or  ShanmItura.

IV.  We  retain  on  our  celestial  globes  the  Arabic  name
of  the  fourth  lunar  mansion  Debaran  (or  with  the  article,
Aldebaran):  appUed  by  us,  however,  exclusively  to  the
bright  star  called  the  Buirs-eye ;  and  which  is  unquestion-
ably the  same  with  the  principal  and  eastern  star  o(R6hiiii,
placed  in  4^®  or  5**  S.  and  49^**  E.  by  the  Hindu  writers
on  Astronomy.  This  nacshatraj  figured  as  a  wheeled  car-
riage, comprises'five  stars,  out  of  the  seven  which  the  Greeks
named  the  Hyades.  The  Arabs,  however,  like  the  Hindus,
reckon  five  stars  only  in  the  asterism;  and  Sir  William
Jones  rightly  supposed  them  to  be  in  the  head  and  neck
of  the  Bull ;  they  probably  Bie  apyis  Tauri,  agreeably  to
Mons.  Bailly's  conjecture.f

*  Costard's  Hist,  of  Astr.,  p.  51. Bailly's  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  131
t  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  129.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


332  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

Hindu  astronomers  define  a  point  in  this  constellation,
of  some  importance  in  their  fancifiil  astrology.  According
to  the  Sdrya  siddkanta,  when  a  planet  is  in  the  7th  de-
gree of  Vrisha  (Taurus)  and  has  more  than  two  degrees
of  south  latitude,  or,  as  commentators  expound  the  pas-
sage, 2^  4(y ;  the  planet  is  said  to  cut  the  cart  of  RShini.
This  is  denominated  iacaiabheda,  or  the  section  of  the
wain.  Lalla  and  the  Graha  laghava  give  nearly  the
same  definition ;  and  it  is  added  in  the  work  last  men-
tioned, that,  when  Mars,  Saturn,  and  the  Moon,  are  in
that  position  (which  occurs,  in  regard  to  the  moon,  when
the  node  is  eight  nacshatras  distant  firom  Puruxrvasu,  and
might  happen  in  regard  to  the  rest  during  another  tfuga\
the  world  is  involved  in  great  calamity.  Accordingly,  the
puraAas  contain  a  legendary  story  of  DaI^arat'ha's  dis-
suading Saturn  fix>m  so  traversing  the  constellation  i2(5Aini.

V.  Mrtgasiras,  the  fifth  nacshatra,  represented  by  an
antelope's  head,  contains  three  stars ;  the  same  which  con-
stitute the  fifth  lunar  mansion  Hakah ;  for  the  distance  of
10^  S.  assigned  to  the  northern  star  of  this  nacshat7*a,  will
agree  vrith  no  other  but  one  of  the  three  in  the  head  of
Orion.  The  difference  of  longitude  (24''  to  26^"*)  from
Crittica  corresponds  with  su£Bcient  exactness ;  and  so  does
the  longitude  of  its  circle  of  declination  (62^  to  63^)  fix>m
the  end  of  Revati;  since  the  true  longitude  of  x  Orionis,
fi-om  the  principal  star  in  Revati  ii  Piscium),  is  63  i®.  It
v^s  a  mistake  to  suppose  this  asterism  to  comprise  stars  in
the  feet  of  Qemini,  or  in  the  Gralaxy.*

VI.  ArdrcLy  the  sixth  Tiacshatra,  consists  of  a  single
bright  star,  described  as  a  gem,  and  placed  in  9^  S.  by
one  authority,  but  in  11**  by  others,  and  at  the  distance  of
4^**  to  4®  in  longitude  fix)m  the  last  asterism.  This  indi-
cates the  star  in  the  shoulder  of  Orion  (a  Orionis);  not,  as

•  As.  Res.,  voL  ii.  p.  298.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THB  ZODIAC.  333

was  conjectured  by  Sir  Willam  Jones,  the  star  in  the
knee  of  Pollux.*

The  sixth  lunar  mansion  is  named  by  the  Arabs,  Han&h ;
and  comprises  two  stars  in  the  feet  of  the  second  Twin,
according  to  Ulugh  beg,  though  others  make  it  to  be
his  shoulder.f  Muhammed  of  Tizin  allots  five  stars  to
this  constellation ;  and  the  Kamiis,  among  various  mean-
ings of  Han&hy  says,  that  it  is  a  name  for  five  stars  in  the
left  arm  of  Orion ;  remarking,  also,  that  the  lunar  man-
sion is  named  Tahayi^  comprising  three  stars  called
Tahyat.  Either  way,  however,  the  Indian  and  Arabian
asterisms  appear  in  this  instance  irreconcileable.

VII.  The  seventh  nacshatray  entitled  PtmarvagUj  and
represented  by  a  house,  or,  according  to  a  Sanscrit  work
cited  by  Sir  William  Jones,;}:  a  bow,  is  stated  by  astro-
nomers as  including  four  stars,  among  which  the  principal
and  eastern  one  is  30^  or  32^  firom  the  fifth  asterism ;  but
placed  by  all  authorities  in  6^  N.  This  agrees  with
(j3  Gteminorum)  one  of  the  two  stars  in  the  heads  of  the
Twins,  which  together  constitute  the  seventh  lunar  mansion
jZiraA,  accordingto  Muhammed  of  T&s  and  Muhammed
of  Tizin  and  other  Arabian  authorities.^

It  appears  fit)m  a  rule  of  Sanscrit  grammar,||  that  Pu-
noTvasUy  as  a  name  for  a  constellation,  is  properly  dual,
implying,  as  it  may  be  supposed,  two  stars.  On  this
ground,  a  conjecture  may  be  raised,  that  Punarvasu  ori-
ginally comprised  two  stars,  though  four  are  now  assigned
to  it.  Accordingly,  that  number  is  retained  in  the  Sacalya
sanhita.

It  may  be  fiirther  observed,  that  the  seventh  lunar

♦  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  298. t  Hydk,  Com.  p.  7  and  44.
X  As.  Res.,  voL  ii.  p. 295.  §  Hyde  on  Uluoh  bbo,  p.  43.

Pli^iNi,  1.  ii.  63.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


334  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

mansion  of  the  Arabs  is  named  ZiroA  ul  ased  according  to
jAUHARf  and  others  cited  by  Hyde;*  and  that  iheKamus
makes  this  term  to  be  the  name  of  eight  stars  in  the  form
of  a  bow.

Upon  the  whole^  the  agreement  of  the  Indian  and  Ara-
Uan  constellations  is  here  apparent,  notwithstanding  a
variation  in  the  nmnber  of  the  stars ;  and  I  conclude,  that
Punarvagu  comprises,  conformably  with  Sir  William
Jones's  supposition,t  stars  in  the  heads  of  the  twins;
viz.  a,  fi,  Geminorum ;  and  which  were  indicated  to  Dr.
Hunter  by  a  Hindu  astronomer  at  Ujjayini:  to  which,
perhaps,  0  and  t  may  be  added  to  complete  the  number  of
four,

VIIL  Pushya,  the  eighth  asterism,  is  described  as  an
arrow ;  and  consists  of  three  stars,  the  chief  of  which,
being  also  the  middlemost,  has  no  latitude,  and  is  12^  or
13^  distant  from  the  seventh  asterism,  being  placed  by
Hindu  astronomers  in  106®  of  longitude.  This  is  evidently
3^Cancri ;  and  does  not  differ  widely  from  the  eighth  lunar
mansion  Nethrah,  which,  according  to  Ulugh  beg  and
others,  j:  consists  of  two  stars,  including  the  nebula  of
Cancer.  The  Indian  constellation  comprises  two  other
stars,  besides  i  Cancri,  which  are  perhaps  y  and  0  of  the
same  constellaticm ;  and  Sir  William  Jones's  conjecture,
that  it  consists  of  stars  .in  the  body  and  claws  of  Cancer,
was  not  fax  from  the  truth.

IX.  The  ninth  asterism,  AsUsha^  contains  five  stars
figured  as  a  potter's  wheel,  and  of  which  the  principal
or  eastern  one  is  placed  in  7®  S.,  and  according  to  different
tables,  lO?"",  108^  or  109«,  E.  This  appears  to  be  intended
for  the  bright  star  in  the  southern  claw  of  Cancer  (  a  Cancri),

•  Com.  on  Uluoh  beo,  p.  44.  f  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  299.

X  Hyde's  Com.,  p.  45.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


1»IV18IONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  335

and  cannot  be  reconciled  with  the  lunar  mansion  Tarf  or
Tarfahj  which  comprises  two  stars*  near  the  lion's  eye;
the  northernmost  being  placed  by  Muhammed  of  Tlzrtit
in  24"^  of  N.  declination,  f  The  Jesuit  missionaries,  if
rightly  quoted  by  Costa  rd^  made  AiUsha  correspond
with  the  bright  stars  in  the  heads  of  Castor  and  Pollux,
together  with  Procyon.  This  is  evidently  erroneous.  Sir
William  Jones's  supposition  that  AiUsha  might  answer
to  the  face  and  name  of  Leo,  nearly  concurs  with  the
Arabian  determination  of  this  lunar  mansion,  but  disagrees
with  the  place  assigned  to  the  stars  by  Hindu  astronomers.
B A  ILLY  committed  the  same  mistake,  when  he  affirmed,
that  AiUsha  is  the  lion's  head.§

X.  The  tenth  asterism,  Magha,  contains,  like  the  last,
five  stars ;  but  which  are  figured  as  a  house.  The  princi-
pal or  southern  one  has  no  latitude ;  and,  according  to  all
authorities,  has  129^  longitude.  This  is  evidently  Regulus
(a  Leonis) :  which  is  exactly  1291°  distant  from  the  last  star
in  Rhati.

According  to  the  Jesuits  cited  by  Costard,  Magha
answers  to  the  Lion's  mane  and  heart;  and  the  tenth
lunar  mansion  of  the  Arabians,  Jebhahy  comprises  three
(some  say  four)  stars,  nearly  in  the  longitude  of  the  Uon's
heart.||  In  this  instance,  therefore,  the  Indian  and  Arabian
divisions  of  the  zodiac  coincide :  and  it  is  owing  to  an
oversight,  that  Sir  William  Jones  states  the  nacshatra
as  composed  of  stars  in  the  lion's  leg  and  haunch.  It
appears  to  consist  oiayiri  and  y  Leonis.

XI.  Two  stars,  constituting  the  eleventh  nacshatra^  or
preceding  P'halguni,  which  is  represented  by  a  couch  or

•  Hyde's  Com.,  p.  8.  t  Hyde's  Cora.,  p.  101.

X  Hist,  of  Astr.,  p.  51.  §  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  328.

II  Hyde's  Uluoh  beg,  p. 74,  and  Com.,  p.  4G.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


336  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

bedstead,  are  determined  by  the  place  of  the  chief  star
(the  Dorihemmost  according  to  the  Sdrya  siddhanta)  in  12''
N.  and  144'' E.  or,  according  to  Brahmegupta,  the
SirimaAi  and  the  Graha  laghava  147«  or  148''  E.  They
are  probably  i  and  6  Leonis :  the  same  which  form  the
lunar  mansion  Zuhrah  or  Khertan,*

It  may  be  conjectured,  that  Brahmeoupta  and  BhAs-
CARA  selected  the  southern  for  the  principal  star ;  while
the  SUtrya  siddhanta  took  the  northern:  hence  the  latitude,
stated  by  those  several  Hindu  authorities,  is  the  mean
between  both  stars ;  and  the  difference  of  longitude,  com-
pared to  the  preceding  and  subsequent  asterisms,  may  be
exactly  reconciled  upon  this  supposition.

XII.  Two  other  stars,  constituting  the  twelfth  Tuicshatra,
or  following  P'halguni,  which  is  Ukewise  figured  as  a  bed,
are  ascertained  by  the  place  of  one  of  them  (the  northern-
most) 13''  N.  and  166"  E.  This  mdicates  0  Leonis;  the
same  which  singly  constitutes  the  Arabian  lunar  mansion
Serfahff  though  Muhammed  of  Tizin  seems  to  hint
that  it  consists  of  more  than  one  star.;]:  By  an  error  re-
garding the  origin  of  the  ecliptic  on  the  Indian  sphere.  Sir
William  Jones  refers  to  the  preceding  nacshatra,  the
principal  star  of  this  asterism.

XIII.  Hasta,  the  thirteenth  nacshatra,  has  the  name
and  figure  of  a  hand ;  and  is  suitably  made  to  contain
five  stars.  The  principal  one,  towards  the  west,  next  to
the  north-western  star,  is  placed  according  to  all  authori-
ties in  IP  and  170**  E.  This  can  only  belong  to  the  con-
stellation Corvus :  and  accordingly  five  stars  in  that  con-
stellation (afiyit  Corvi),  have  been  pointed  out  to  me  by
Hindu  astronomers  for  this  nacshatra.

•  Hydk'sUluoh  beg,  p.  76,  and  Cora., p.  47.
t  Hyde's  Ulugh  beg,  p.  78,  and  Com.,  p.  47.
:  Hyde,  p.  102.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  337

Aivwa,  the  thirteenth  lunar  mansion  of  the  Arabs^  is
described  as  containing  the  same  number  of  stars,  situated
under  yirgp,  and  so  disposed  as  to  resemble  the  letter  Alif.
They  are  placed  by  Ulugh  beg  in  the  wing.*

In  this  instance  the  Indian  and  Arabian  divisions  of  the
zodiac  have  nothing  in  common  but  the  number  of  stars
and  their  agreement  of  longitude.  It  appears,  however,
from  a  passage  cited  from  S^pi  by  HYDE^f  that  the  Arabs
have  also  considered  the  constellation  of  Corvus  as  a  man-
sion of  the  moon.

XIV.  The  fourteenth  nacshatra,  figured  as  a  pearl,  is  a
single  star  named  Chitra.  It  is  placed  by  the  Sdrya
siddhanta  in  2^  S.  and  180^  E.,  and  by  Brahmegupta,
the  Sir6mani  and  Graha  laghava,  in  If®  or  2^  S.  and
183o  E.  This  agrees  with  the  Virgin's  spike  (<«  Virginis ;)
and  Hindu  astronomers  have  always  pointed  out  that  star
for  Chitra.  The  same  star  constitutes  the  fourteenth  lunar
mansion  of  the  Arabs,  named  from  it  Simac  ul  aazU.  Le
Gentil's  conjecture,  j:  that  the  fourteenth  nocsia^a  com-
prises the  two  stars  3^  and  t  Virginis,  was  entirely  erroneous.
And  Mons.  Baillt  was  equaUy  incorrect  in  placing  $
Virginis  in  the  middle  of  this  asterism.§

XV.  Another  single  star  constitutes  the  fifteenth  ncuy
shatra,  Swati,  represented  by  a  coral  bead.  The  Sdrya
siddhanta^  Brahmegupta,  the  Sir6mam  and  Graha
laghava,  concur  in  placing  it  in  37®  N.  They  differ  one
degree  in  the  longitude  of  its  circle  of  declination ;  three  of
these  authorities  making  it  199%  and  the  other  198®.

The  only  conspicuous  star,  nearly  in  the  situation  thus
assigned  to  Swati,  (and  the  Indian  astronomers  would
hardly  travel  so  far  frx>m  the  zodiac  to  seek  an  obscure

*  Htdb*8  Ulugh  bbo,  p.  80.  t  Com.,  p.  82.

t  Bailly  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  227.  §  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  227.

VOL.  II.  Z


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


338  ON THE INDIAN AND ARAD1AN

star ;)  is  Arctunis,  33°  N.  of  the  ecliptic  in  tlie  circle  of
declination,  and  198°  E.  (rom  the  principal  star  of  RevcUi.
I  am  therefore  disposed  to  believe,  that  Swati  has  been
rightly  indicated  to  me  by  a  native  astronomer  who  pointed
out  Arcturus  for  this  nacshatra.  The  longitude,  stated  by
MuNi^wARA  {viz.  H°  less  than  Chitra)  indicates  the  same
star :  but,  if  greater  reliance  be  placed  on  his  latitudes,  the
star  intended  may  be  t  Bootis.  At  all  events,  Moos.
Bailly  mistook,  when  he  asserted,  on  the  authority  of  Lb
Gentil,  that  the  fifteenth  nacshatra  is  marked  by  a  Vir-
ginis ;  and  that  this  star  is  situated  at  the  begionhig  of  the
nacshatra.*

The  Indian  asterism  totally  disagrees  with  the  lunar
mansion  Ghafr,  consisting  of  three  stars  in  the  Virgin's
foot,  according  to  Ulugh  B£6,t  but  in,  or  near,  the
balance,  according  to  others.

XVI.  Fiiic'Aa,  the  sixteenth  nacshatra^  c<H)8i8ts  of
four  stars  described  as  a  festoon.  Authorities  difier  little
as  to  the  situation  of  the  principal  and  northernmost  star :
placing  it  in  F,  1°  20',  or  P  30'  S.,  and  in  212%  212^  6'  or
213^  E.  The  latitude  seems  to  indicate  the  bright  star  in
the  southern  Scale  (a  Librae),  though  the  longitude  dis-
agree :  for  this  suggests  a  remote  star  (possibly  »  Librse).  I
apprehend  the  first  to  be  nearest  the  truth;  and  hence
conclude  the  four  stars  to  be  a  y  i  Librae  and  y  Scorpii.

The  sixteenth  lunar  mansion,  named  Zubanah  or  Ztiba-
niyah,  is  according  toMuHAMMBDof  Tizin,t  the  bright
star  in  the  northern  Scale  (fi  Librae),  which  Sir  William
JoNBs  supposed  to  be  the  fifteenth  nacshatra.

Father  Souciet,  by  whom  Corona  Borealis  is  stated

•  Astr.  Ind.,  p.  139  and  22?.
t  Hyde,  p.  82,  and  Com.,  p.  50.
t  Hydb,  Com.,  p.  104.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  339

for  the  asterism  VUac'ha,  is  censured  by  Sir  William
JoNBSy  under  an  impression,  that  all  the  nacsAatras  must
be  sought  within  the  zodiac.  The  information^  received  by
Father  Souciet,  does  appear  to  have  been  erroneous ;  but
the  Sfune  mistake  was  committed  by  a  native  astronomer,
who  showed  to  me  the  same  constellation  for  Vtsac^ha;
and  the  nacshatras  are  certainly  not  restricted  to  the  neigh-
bourhood of  the  ecliptic.

XVII.  Four  stars,  (or,  according  to  a  different  readmg,
three,)  described  as  a  row  of  oblations,  that  is,  in  a  right
line,  constitute  the  seventeenth  nacshatra  named  Anu-
radha.  Here  also,  authorities  differ  little  as  to  the  situa-
tion of  the  chief  and  middlemost  star;  which  is  placed  in  3^,
or  2^  or  1^  45'  S.,  and  in  224*>  or  224^  5'  E.  This  must  in-
tend the  starnearthehead  of  the  Scorpion  (3^  Scorpionis) ;  and
the  asterism  probably  comprises  fii^r  and  p  Scorpionis.

The  seventeenth  lunar  mansion  of  the  Arabs  called  IcHl
or  IcUlu'ljebhah,  contains  four  (some  say  three,  and  others
six,*)  stars  lyii^  in  a  straight  line.  Those  assigned  by
Ulugh  BBGf  for  this  mansion,  sie  fiivw  Scorpionis.

Here  the  Indian  and  Arabian  divisions  appear  to  c(»icur
exactly ;  and  Sir  William  Jones,!  as  well  as  the  mis-
sionaries cited  by  Costabd,§  have  apparently  understood
the  same  stars;  though  the  latter  extend  the  nacshatra  to
the  constellation  Serpentarius.

XVIII.  Jyishi'ha,  the  eighteenth  nacshatra,  comprises
three  stars  figured  as  a  ring.  In  regard  to  this,  also,
authorities  are  nearly  agreed  in  the  position  of  the  prin-
cipal and  middlemost  star,  placed  in  4®,  3i*^,  or  3*^  S.,  and
in  229%  229^  6',  or  230*^  E.  This  position  clearly  indicates
Antares  or  the  ScorpicHi's  heart  (a  Scorpionis) ;  which  is

•  Hyde,  Com.,  p.  51.  t  Hydb,  p.  87.

t  As.  Res.,  ii.  p.  299.  §  Hist  Astr.,  p.  51.

z2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


340  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

also  the  eighteenth  lunar  mansion,  named  Kalb  or  Kalinin
Vakrab.  The  three  stars  of  the  Indian  asterism  may  be
a  a  and  t  Scorpionis.

XIX.  The  nineteenth  asterism,  Mdla,  represented  by  a
lion's  tail,  contains  eleven  stars,  of  which  the  characteristic
one,  the  easternmost,  is  placed  in  9^,  8i^,  or  8^  S.,  and  in
241^  or  242*^  E.  Although  the  latitude  of  v  Scorpionis  be
five  degrees  too  great,  there  seems  little  doubt  that  either
that  or  the  star  east  of  it,  marked  y,  must  be  intended ;  and
this  determination  agrees  with  the  eighteenth  lunar  mansion
of  the  Arabs  called  Shaulah,  consisting  of  two  stars  near  the
Scorpion's  sting.  The  Hindu  asterism  probably  includes  all
the  stars  placed  by  us  in  the  Scorpion's  tail, viz.  $  fA  (nO  lu
X  u  and  y  Scorpionis.

XX.  The  twentieth  nacshatrGf  entitled  preceding  Asha-
ciha^  figured  as  an  elephant's  tooth,  or  as  a  couch,  consists
of  two  stai*s,  of  which  the  most  northern  one  is  placed  in
6i^,  67%  or  6«  S.,  and  254<»  or  266*^  E.  This  suits  with  i
Sagitt&rii,  which  is  also  one  of  the  stars  of  the  twentieth
lunar  mansion  caUed  Naaim.  It  consists  of  four,  or,  ac-
cording to  some  authorities,  of  eight  stars.  The  Indian
asterism  seemingly  comprises  i  and  e  Sagittarii.

XXI.  Two  stars  constitute  the  twenty-first  asterism,
named  the  subsequent  AshaSLha^  which  is  represented  by  a
couch  or  by  an  elephant's  tooth.  The  principal  star,  which
also  is  the  most  northerly  one,  is  placed  in  6®  S.,  and  260®,
or  261°  E.  This  agrees  with  a  star  in  the  body  of  Sagit-
tarius (t  Sagittarii),  and  the  other  star  is  perhaps  the  one
marked  (.

The  twenty-first  lunar  mansion  of  the  Arabians,  named
BaMahf  comprises  six  stars,  two  of  which  are  placed  by
MuHAMMED  of  Tiziu  in  declination  21^  and  16°.  One
of  these  must  be  a  star  in  the  head  of  Sagittarius.  Some
authors,  on  the  contrary,  describe  the  lunar  mansion  as


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  341

destitute  of  stars.*  At  all  events^  the  Hindu  and  Arabian
divisions  appear,  in  this  instance^  to  be  but  imperfectly  re-
concileable.

XXII.  Three  stars^  figured  as  a  triangle,  or  as  the  nut
of  the  floating  Trapa,  form  the  twenty-second  asterism,
named  Abhijit;  v^hich,  in  the  modem  Indian  astronomy,
does  not  occupy  an  equal  portion  of  the  ecliptic  v^ith  the
other  nacshatrasy  but  is  carved  out  of  the  contiguous  divi-
sions. Its  place  (meaning  that  of  its  brightest  star)  is  very
remote  from  the  zodiac ;  being  in  60®  or  62*^  N.  The  lon-
gitude of  its  circle  of  declination,  according  to  different
authorities,  is  265''»  266®  4(y,  or  268®.  Probably  the
bright  star  in  the  Lyre  is  meant.  It  was  shewn  to  Dr.
Hunter,  at  Ujjayini  for  the  chief  star  in  Abhijit;  and
the  same  was  pointed  out  to  me  for  the  asterism,  by  a
Hindu  astronomer  at  this  place.

The  Arabian  lunar  mansion  Zabih,  consists  of  two  stars
(some  reckon  four+)  in  the  horns  of  Capricorn,  totally  dis-
agreeing vnth  the  Indian  ncLcshatra,

XXIIL  Sravana,  the  twenty-third  nacsfuitra,  repre-
sented by  three  footsteps,  contains  three  stars,  of  which
one,  the  middlemost,  is  by  all  authorities  placed  in  30®  N.,
but  they  differ  as  to  its  longitude ;  the  Siirya  siddhanta
placing  it  in  280® ;  Brabmegupta  and  the  Sirdmani,  in
278®;  and  the  Graka  laghava  in  276®.  The  assigned
latitude  indicates  the  bright  star  in  the  Eagle,  whence  the
three  may  be  inferred  to  be  a  0  and  y  Aquilse.

The  twenty-third  mansion  of  the  moon,  called  by  the
Arabs  Bala,  consists  of  two  stars  in  the  left;  hand  of  Aqua-
rius. C!onsequently  the  Arabian  and  Hindu  divisions  are
here  at  variance.

*  Hyde,  Com.  on  Uluoh  beo,  p.  9.

t  Ulugh  BEG)  p.  94,  and  Hyde's  Com.,  p.  54.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


342  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

XXIV.  Dhanishi'ka,  the  twenty-fourth  asterism,  is  re-
presented by  a  drum  or  tabor.  It  comprises  four  stars,  one
of  which  (the  westernmost)  is  placed  in  36^  N.,  and  ac-
cording to  the  Siirya  siddhantay  Brahmeoupta  and
the  SirSmaAiy  in  290^  E.,  though  the  Graha  laghava  state
286^  only.  This  longitude  of  the  circle  of  declination,  and
the  distance  of  the  star  on  it  from  the  ecliptic,  indicate  the
Dolphin ;  and  the  four  stars  probably  are  a  0  y  and  i  Del-
phini.  The  same  constellation  is  mentioned  by  the  Jesuit
missionaries  as  corresponding  to  Dhanish^ha  ;*  and  there
can  be  little  doubt  that  the  ascertainment  is  correct  The
longitude  stated  by  MunISwara,  {viz.  294°  120  supports
the  conclusion,  though  his  latitude  (26°  260  be  too  small.
To  determine  accurately  the  position  of  this  Tuxcshatra  is
important,  as  the  solstitial  colure,' according  to  the  ancient
astronomers,  passed  through  the  extremity  of  it,  and  through
the  middle  oi  AiUsha.

The  twenty-fourth  mansion,  called  by  the  Arabs  S^md^
comprises  two  stars  in  Aquarius  (0  and  I  Aquarii);  totally
disagreeing  with  the  Hindu  division.

XXV.  Satabhishay  the  twenty-fifth  nacshatra,  is  a  dus-
ter of  a  hundred  stars  figured  by  a  circle.  The  jHrincipal
one,  or  brightest,  has  no  latitude ;  or  only  a  third,  or  at  the
utmost  half,  a  degree  of  south  latitude ;  and  all  the  tables
concur  in  placing  it  in  long.  320°*  This  will  suit  best  with
X  Aquarii.  These  hundred  stars  may  be  sought  in  the
stream  firom  the  Jar,  where  Sir  William  Jones  places
the  nacshatra;  and  in  the  right  1^  of  Aquarius.

AkhhiyaJi,  the  twenty-fifth  lunar  mansion,  is  stated  to
consist  of  three  stars  only,  which  seem  to  be  the  three  in
the  wrist  of  the  right  hand  of  Aquarius.t  However,  it  ap-
pears from  Ulugh beg's  tables,  as  well  as  firom  Mu-

•  Costard,  p.  81.  f  Hyde's  Com.,  p.  55.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  343

HAMMED  of  Ti^iAn^Sy  that  four  stars  are  assigned  to  this
mansioii.*

The  Hindu  and  Arabian  asterisms  differ  here  less
widely  than  in  the  instances  lately  noticed:  and  a  passage,
cited  by  Hyde  from  FiR^ziBlDi,  even  intimates  the  cir-
cular figure  of  the  constellation.t

XXVI.  The  twenty-sixth  of  the  Indian  asterisms,  called
the  preceding  Bhadrapadaf  consists  of  two  stars  repre-
sented by  a  couch  or  bed,  or  else  by  a  double-headed
figure ;  one  of  which  is  placed  by  Hindu  astrcmomers  in
24^  N.,  and  325^  or  326^  E,  The  only  conspicuous  star,
nearly  in  that  situation,  is  the  bright  star  in  Pegasus  (a  Pe-
gasi)  ;  and  the  other  may  be  the  nearest  considerable  star
in  the  same  constellation  (^  Pegasi.)  I  should  have  consi-
dered fi  Pegasi  to  be  the  second  star  of  this  nacshatra^
were  not  its  y6ga  or  chief  star  expressly  said  to  be  the  most
northerly.  Mukaddim,  the  twenty-sixth  lunar  mansion,
consists  of  the  two  brightest  stars  in  Pegasus  {a  and  fi  %)  ;
and  thus  the  two  divisions  of  the  zodiac  nearly  concur.

XXVII.  Two  other  stars  constitute  the  twenty-seventh
lunar  mansion  named  the  subsequent  Bhadrapada,  They
are  figured  as  a  twin,  or  person  with  a  double  face,  or  else
as  a  couch.  The  position  of  one  of  them  (the  most  northeriy)
is  staled  in  26"*  or  2V  N.,  and  337^  E.  I  suppose  the
bright  star  in  the  head  of  Andromeda  to  be  meant ;  and  the
other  star  to  be  the  one  in  the  extremity  of  the  wing  of
Pegasus  (y  Pegasi).  This  agrees  exactly  with  the  twenty-
seventh  lunar  mansion  of  the  Arabians,  called  Muakkher.
For  Ulugh  beg  assigns  those  stars  to  it  §

XXVIII.  The  last  of  the  twenty-eight  asterisms  is
named  Bevati,  and  comprises  thirty-two  stars  figured  as

*  Hydb,  p.  99,  and  Com.,  p.  95,  t  Com.,  p.  10.

X  Hyde's  Uluoh  bbo,  p.  53,  and  Com.,  p.  34.
§  Hyde,  p.  53,  and  Com.,  p.  34  and  35.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


344  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

a  tabor.  All  authorities  agree  that  the  principal  star,
which  should  be  the  southernmost,  has  no  latitude,  and
two  of  them  assert  no  longitude ;  but  some  make  it  ten
minutes  short  of  the  origin  of  the  ediptic,  viz.  369®  dff.
This  clearly  marks  the  star  on  the  ecUptic  in  the  string  of
the  Fishes  ((  Piscium  );  and  the  ascertainment  of  it  is  im-
portant in  regard  to  the  adjustment  of  the  Hindu  sphere.

The  Arabic  name  of  the  28th  mansion,  Rishhy  signifying
a  cord,  seems  to  indicate  a  star  nearly  in  the  same  position.
But  the  constellation,  as  described  by  JauharI  cited  by
GoLius,  consists  of  a  multitude  of  stars  in  the  shape  of  a
fish,  and  termed  Betnu'lhiit ;  in  the  navel  of  which  is  the
lunar  mansion :  and  M uhammed  of  TisAn^  with  some
others,  also  makes  this  lunar  mansion  to  be  the  same  with
Betnu^lh'ktf  which  appears,  however,  to  be  the  bright  star
in  the  girdle  of  Andromeda  (j3  Andromedse) ;  though  others
describe  it  as  the  northern  Fish,  extending,  however,  to  the
horns  of  the  Ram.*  The  lunar  mansion  and  Indian  aste-
rism  are,  therefore,  not  reconcileable  in  this  last  instance.

The  result  of  the  comparison  shows,  I  hope  satisfactorily,
that  the  Indian  asterisms,  which  mark  the  divisions  of  the
ecUptic,  generally  consist  of  nearly  the  same  stars,  which
constitute  the  lunar  mansions  of  the  Arabians :  but,  in  a
few  instances,  they  essentially  differ.  The  Hindus  have
likewise  adopted  the  division  of  the  ecliptic  and  zodiac  into
twelve  s%ns  or  constellations,  agreeing  in  figure  and  de-
signation with  those  of  the  Greeks ;  and  differing  merely
in  the  place  of  the  constellations,  which  are  carried  on
the  Indian  sphere  a  few  degrees  further  west  than  on  the
Grecian.  That  the  Hindus  took  the  hint  of  this  mode  of
dividing  the  ecliptic  from  the  Greeks,  is  not  perhaps  alto-
gether improbable ;  but,  if  such  be  the  origin  of  it,  they

♦  Hyde's  Com.,  p.  10,  35,  and  96.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  345

have  not  implicitly  received  the  arrangement  suggested  to
them,  but  have  reconciled  and  adapted  it  to  their  own  an-
cient distribution  of  the  ecliptic  into  twenty-seven  parts.*

In  like  manner^  they  may  have  either  received  or  given
the  hint  of  an  armillary  sphere  as  an  instrument  for  astro-
nomical observation :  but  certainly  they  have  not  copied
the  instrument  which  was  described  by  Ptolemy,  for  the
construction  differs  considerably.

In  the  Arabic  epitome  of  the  Almagest  entitled  Tahriru'l-
mejestiff  the  armillary  sphere  {Zat  ul  haUc)  is  thus  de-
scribed. ^'  Two  equal  circles  are  placed  at  right  angles ;
the  one  representing  the  ecliptic,  the  other  the  solstitial
colure.  Two  pins  pass  through  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic ;
and  two  other  pins  are  placed  on  the  poles  of  the  equator.
On  the  two  first  pins  are  suspended  a  couple  of  circles,
moving  the  one  vnthin,  the  other  without,  the  first  men-
tioned circles,  and  representing  two  secondaries  of  the
ecliptic.  On  the  two  other  pins  a  circle  is  placed,  which
encompasses  the  whole  instrument,  and  within  which  the
different  circles  turn ;  it  represents  the  meridian.  Within
the  inner  secondary  of  the  ecliptic  a  circle  is  fitted  to  it,  in
the  same  plane,  and  turning  in  it.  This  is  adapted  to
measure  latitudes.  To  this  internal  circle,  two  apertures,
or  sights,  opposite  to  each  other,  and  without  its  plane,
are  adapted,  like  the  sights  of  an  instrument  for  altitudes.
The  armillary  sphere  is  complete  when  consisting  of  these
six  circles. The  ecUptic  and  secondaries  are  to  be  gra-

♦  According  to  the  longitude  of  the  three  brightest  stars  of  Aries,
as  stated  by  Ptolemy,  viz.  \0**  40',  7°  40',  and  6°  40^,  (I  quote  from
an  Arabic  epitome  of  the  Almagest) ;  the  origin  of  the  ecliptic,  in  the
Greek  book  which  is  most  likely  to  have  become  known  in  India,  is
6^  20'  from  the  star  which  the  Hindus  have  selected  to  mark  the
commencement  of  the  ecliptic.

t  By  the  celebrated  NAsfRuoofN  T^sl ;  from  the  Arabic  version
of  Is'hak  bkn  HoNAiN,  which  was  revised  by  Thabit.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


346  ON THE  INDIAN  AND ARABIAN

dnated  as  minutely  as  may  be  practicable.  It  is  best  to
place  both  secondaries,  as  by  some  directed,  wtthm  Ae
ecliptic  (instead  of  placing  one  of  them  mdbont  it),  that
the  complete  revidiitMm  of  &e  crater  secondary  may  not
be  obrtmcted  by  the  pins  at  the  poles  of  the  equator.  The
Meridian,  likewise,  should  be  doubled,  or  made  to  consist
of  two  circles ;  the  external  one  graduated,  and  the  internal
one  moving  within  it.  Thus  the  pole  may  be  adjusted  at
its  proper  elevation  above  the  horizon  of  any  place.  The
instrument  so  constructed  consists  of  seven  circles.

^^  It  is  remarked,  that  when  the  circle  representing  the
meridian,  is  placed  in  the  plane  of  the  true  meridian,  so
that  it  cuts  the  plane  of  the  horizon  at  right  angles,  and
one  of  the  poles  of  the  equator  is  elevated  above  the  hori-
zon conformably  with  the  latitude  of  the  place ;  then  the
motions  of  all  the  circles  round  the  poles  represent  the
motions  of  the  universe.

"  After  rectifying  the  meridian,  if  it  be  wished  to  ob-
serve the  sun  and  moon  together,  the  outer  secondary  of
the  ecliptic  must  be  made  to  intersect  the  ecliptic  at  the
sun's  place  for  that  time:  and  the  solstitial  colure  must  be
moved  until  the  place  of  intersection  be  opposite  to  the  sun.
Both  circles  are  thus  adjusted  to  their  true  places;  or  if
any  other  object  but  the  sun,  be  observed,  .the  colure  is
turned,  until  the  object  be  seen  in  its  proper  place,  on  that
secondary  referred  to  the  ecliptic :  the  circle  representing
the  ecliptic  being  at  the  same  time  in  the  plane  of  the
true  ecliptic  and  in  its  proper  situation.  Afterwards,  the
inner  secondary  is  turned  towards  the  moon  (or  to  any  star
intended  to  be  observed),  and  the  smaller  circle  within  it,
bearing  the  two  sights,  is  turned,  until  the  moon  (or  to
any  star  intended  to  be  observed),  and  the  smaller  circle
within  it,  bearing  the  two  sights,  is  turned,  until  the  moon
be  seen  in  the  line  of  the  apertures. The  intersection  of  the


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  347

secondary  circle  and  ecliptic  is  the  place  of  the  moon  in
longitude ;  and  the  arc  of  the  secondary,  between  the  aper-
ture and  the  ecliptic,  is  the  latitude  of  the  moon  on  either
side  (north  or  south)."

The  same  instnimeat,  as  described  by  Montucla  from
the  text  of  Ptolemy  (1.  3.  c.  2.*),  connsts  of  six  ctrdea:
first,  a  large  circle  representing  the  meridian ;  next,  four
circles  united  together,  representing  the  equator,  ecliptic
and  two  colures,  and  turning  within  the  first  circle  on  the
poles  of  the  equator ;  lastly,  a  circle  turning  on  the  poles
of  the  ecliptic,  furnished  with  sights  and  nearly  touching,
on  its  concave  side,  the  circumference  of  the  ecliptic.

The  armiUary  sphere,  described  by  the  Arabian  epi-
tomiser,  differs,  therefore,  firom  Ptolemy's,  in  omitting
the  equator  and  equinoctial  colure,  and  adding  an  inner
secondary  of  the  ecliptic,  which,  as  well  as  the  meridian,
is  doubled.

According  to  Lalande,  the  astrolabe  of  Ptolemy,
fi'om  which  Tycho  Brahb  derived  his  equatorial  armil-
lary,  consisted  only  of  four  circles :  two  placed  at  right
angles  to  represent  the  ecliptic  and  solstitial  colure;  a
third  turning  on  the  poles  of  the  ecliptic  and  serving  to
mark  longitudes ;  and  a  fourth,  within  the  other  three,  fur-
nished with  sights  to  observe  celestial  objects  and  iheasure
their  latitudes  and  longitudes.t

Whether  the  ancient  Greeks  had  any  more  complicated
instrument  formed  on  similar  principles,  and  applicable  to
astronomical  observations,  is  perhaps  uncertain.  We  have
no  detailed  description  of  the  instrument  which  Archi-
medes is  said  to  have  devised  to  represent  the  phenomena
and  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies ; nor  any  sufficient

•  HLst.  des  Math^m.,  i.  p.  301.
t  Lalandb  Afltron.,  i.  13.  (§  2279).


Digitized  byCjOOQlC


348  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

hint  of  its  construction  ;*  nor  does  Cicero's  account  of
the  sphere  exhibited  by  PosiDONiusf  suggest  a  distinct
notion  of  its  structure.

Among  the  Arabs,  no  addition  is  at  present  known  to
have  been  made  to  the  armillary  sphere,  between  the  period
when  the  Almagest  was  translated,]:  and  the  time  of  Air
HAZEN,  who  wrote  a  treatise  of  optics,  in  which  a  more
complicated  instrument  than  that  of  Ptolemy,  is  de-
scribed. Alhazen's  armillary  sphere  is  stated  to  have
been  the  prototype  of  Tycho  Brahe's;§  but  neither  the

*  If  Claudian's  epigram  on  the  subject  of  it  was  founded  upon  any
authority,  the  instrument  must  have  been  a  sort  of  orrery,  enclosed  in
glass.

Vide  Claud,  epigr.  18.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qusest.  i.  25.  De  Nat  Deor.  ii.  35.

t  Cio.De  Nat.  Deor.  ii.  34.

}  In  the  Hejira  year  212,  or  A.D.  827,  hy  Alhazen  ben  Yusep
with  the  aid  of  Skroius  (Montucla,  ii.  p.  304);  or  rather  by
Is'hak  ben  Honain,  whose  death  is  placed  about  the  Hejira  year  260
(D'Hbrbelot,  p.  456).  According  to  the  CasJ^fulzunim^l^'^HAK's
version  was  epitomised  by  Hajaj  ben  Yusep,  by  Thabit  ben  Kor-
bah,  and  by  NAsfRUoofN  TOsf.  Other  versions,  however,  are
mentioned:  particularly,  one  by  HajXj,  said  to  have  been  cor-
rected first  by  HoNAiN  ben  Is'hak,  and  afterwards  by  Thabit  ;
another  by  Thabit  himself;  and  a  third  by  Muni  ben  yahta.  A
different  account  is  likewise  given  of  the  earliest  ti*anslation  of  the
Almagest,  which  is  ascribed  to  Abu  Hisan  and  Salman,  who  are
said  to  have  completed  it,  after  the  failure  of  other  learned  men,
who  had  previously  attempted  the  translation.  Mention  is  also  made
of  a  version  by  IbrahIm  brn  Salat,  revised  by  Honain.  But
none  of  these  iranslations  are  anterior  to  the  ninth  century  of  the
Christian  era.

§  Adhibuit  (Tycho)  armillare  quoddam  instrumentum,  quod  tamen
comperi  ego  positum  et  adhibitum  olim  fuisse  ante  Tychonem  ab
Alhazeno,  lib.  7*  opt.  C.  1.  prop.  15.  et  a  Vitell.  lib.  10.  propos.  49.
cujus  instrumenti  astronomice  collocati  ope  atque  usu,  (vide  instru.
mentum  multiplex  armillare  apud  Tycho.  in  Mecbanicis  Astronomie),
eandem  elevationem  falsam  9  scrupulorum  invenit,  quam  per  alia  duo
diversa  instrumenta  compererat — Bbttini  Apiarian  vol.  ii.  p.  41.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  349

original  treatise,  nor  the  Latin  translation  of  it,  are  here
procurable ;  and  I  am  therefore  unable  to  ascertain  whe-
ther the  sphere,  mentioned  by  the  Arabian  author,  resem-
bled that  described  by  Indian  astronomers.  At  all  events,
he  is  more  modem*  than  the  oldest  of  the  Hindu  writers
whom  I  shall  proceed  to  quotcf

The  construction  of  the  armillary  sphere  is  briefly  and
rather  obscurely  taught  in  the  Siirya  siddhanta.  The  fol-
lowing is  a  Uteral  translation.

*'  Let  the  astronomer  frame  the  surprising  structure  of
the  terrestrial  and  celestial  spheres.

''  Having  caused  a  wooden  globe  to  be  made,  [of  such
size]  as  he  pleases,  to  represent  the  earth ;  with  a  staff  for
the  axis  passing  through  the  centre,  and  exceeding  the
globe  at  both  ends ;  let  him  place  the  supporting  hoops,j:
as  also  the  equinoctial  circle.

"  Three  circles  must  be  prepared,  (divided  for  signs  and
degrees,)  the  radius  of  which  must  agree  with  the  respec-
tive diurnal  circles,  in  proportion  to  the  equinoctial:  the
three  circles  should  be  placed  for  the  Ram  and  following
signs,  respectively,  at  the  proper  declination  in  degrees,
N.  or  S. ;  the  same  answer  contrariwise  for  the  Crab  and
other  signs.  In  like  manner,  three  drcles  are  placed  in
the  southern  hemisphere,  for  the  Balance  and  the  rest,  and
contrariwise  for  Capricorn  and  the  remaining  signs.  Circles
are  similarly  placed  on  both  hoops  for  the  asterisms  in  both
hemispheres,  as  also  for  Abhijit;  and  for  the  seven  Rtshis,
Agastya,  Brahmej  and  other  stars.


•  He  wrote  his  treatise  on  optics  and  other  works  about  the  year
1100.— Bto^.  Diet.

t  BhXsoara  flourished  in  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century;  being
bom,  as  he  himself  informs  us,  in  the  ^ca  year  1036,  answering  to
A. D.  1114. But  the  Sdrya  siddhdnta  is  more  ancient.

t  They  are  the  colures.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


360  ON  THE  INDIAN AND  ARABIAN

''  In  the  middle  of  all  these  circles  is  placed  the  equi-
DoeliaL  At  the  iDteraection  of  Hmt  and  the  supportiiig
hoopSy  and  distant  from  each  other  half  Ae  signs,  the  tiro
equinoxes  should  be  determined ;  and  the  two  solstices,  at
the  degrees  of  obliquity  from  the  equinoctial;  and  the
places  of  the  Ram  and  the  rest,  in  the  order  of  the  signs,
should  be  adjusted  by  the  strings  of  the  curve.  Another
circle,  thus  passing  from  equinox  to  equinox,  is  named  the
ecliptic ;  and  by  this  path,  the  sun,  illuminating  worlds,  for
ever  travels.  The  moon  and  the  other  planets  are  seen
deviating  from  their  nodes  in  the  ecliptic,  to  the  extent  of
their  respective  greatest  latitudes  [within  the  zodiac]."

The  author  proceeds  to  notice  the  relation  of  the  great
circles  before  mentioned  to  the  horizon ;  and  observes,  that,
whatever  place  be  assumed  for  the  apex  of  the  sphere,  the
middle  of  the  heavens  for  that  place  is  its  horizon.  He
concludes  by  showing,  that  the  instrument  may  be  made
to  revolve  with  regularity,  by  means  of  a  current  of  water ;
and  hints,  that  the  appearance  of  spontaneous  motion  may
be  given,  by  a  concealed  mechanism,  for  which  quicksilver
is  to  be  employed.  The  maimer  of  using  this  instrument
for  astronomical  observations  has  been  already  explained
(p.  324,  &c.)

More  ample  instructions  for  framing  an  armillary  sphere
are  delivered  in  the  Siddhanta  sirSmaAi.  The  passage  is
too  long  for  insertion  in  this  place ;  and  I  reserve  it  for  a
separate  article,  on  account  of  the  explanations  which  it
requires,  and  because  it  leads  to  the  considerations  of  other
topics,*  which  cannot  be  sufficiently  discussed  in  the  pre-

*  Among  others,  that  of  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes ;  respect-
ing which  different  opinions  are  stated  hy  Bhasoara.  It  appears,
from  what  is  said  by  him,  that  the  notion  of  a  libration  of  the  equi-
noxes has  not  universally  prevailed  among  Hindu  astronomers.  The
correcter  opinion  of  a  revolution  of  the  equinoctial  points  was  ad-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  361

sent  essay.  A  brief  abstract  of  BhAscara's  description
may  here  suffice.  In  the  centre  he  places  a  small  globe  to
represent  the  earth  encompassed  with  circles  for  the  orbits
of  the  planets  arranged  like  the  curved  lines  in  a  spider's
web.  On  an  axis  passing  through  the  poles  of  the  earth,
and  prolonged  on  both  sides,  a  sphere,  or  assemblage  of
circles,  is  suspended,  by  means  of  rings  or  tubes  adapted
to  the  axis,  so  that  the  sphere  may  move  freely  on  it.  This
assemblage  of  circles  comprises  a  horizon  and  equator
adjusted  for  the  place,  with  a  prime  vertical  and  meridian,
and  two  intermediate  verticals  (intersecting  the  horizon  at  the
N.  E.  and  S.W.  and  N.W.  and  S.  E.  points);  as  also  the
equinoctial  colure.  Another  circle  is  suspended  within  this
sphere  on  the  poles  of  the  horizon,  apparently  intended  to
measure  the  altitude  and  amplitude  of  an  object.

Another  sphere  or  assemblage  of  circles  is  in  like  manner
suspended  on  the  pole  of  the  equator,  ft  consists  of  both
colures,  and  the  equinoctial,  with  the  ecliptic  adjusted  to
it ;  and  six  circles  for  the  planetary  orbits  duly  adjusted  to
the  ecliptic ;  as  also  six  diurnal  circles  parallel  to  the  equi-
noctial, and  passing  through  the  extremities  of  the  several
signs.

This,  though  not  a  complete  description  of  BhAsc aba's
armillary  sphere,  will  convey  a  sufficient  notion  of  the  in-
strument for  the  purpose  of  the  present  comparison;  and
will  justify  the  remark,  that  its  construction  di£rers  greatly
from  that  of  the  instrument  specified  by  Ptolemy.

In  the  description  of  the  armillary  sphere  cited  from  the
Sdrya  siddhanta,  mention  is  made  of  several  stars  not
included  in  the  asterisms  which  mark  the  divisions  of  the
ecliptic. The  following  table  exhibits  the  positions  of


vanced  by  some  authors,  bat  has  not  obtained  the  general  suffirage  of
Hindu  writers  on  astronomy.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


362


ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN


those,  and  of  the  few  other  stars  which  have  been  particu-
larly noticed  by  Hindu  astronomers.


Brdhme

sicMdnta  ^

sirbman'i.

Graha
I6ghava,

sdrvabhauma.

siddhdnia.

Agastya

77*  S.

Long.

87°

Lat.

76°  S.

Long.

80°

Lat.

77M6'S.

Loog.
85°  5'

Lat.

80°  8.

Long.
90°

LubdhacOy  or)
the  hunter f

WS.

86°

40°  S.

810

40°  4^8.

84°  36^

40°  8.

80°

-4^t

—

—

8°N.

53°

8°  14^N.

57°  4^

8°N.

52°

Brahmehr^daya

—

—

310N.

56°

30°  49'N.

58°  36^

30°  N.

52°t

Prajdpati, \
or  Brahmd f

—

—

39°  N.

61°

38°38'N.

56°  53^

38°  N.

57°

Apdmvatsa ....

—

—

3°N.

183°

3° N.

183°

3°N.

180°

i/««

—

—

—

—

—

— 9°N.180°

The  seven  ii&Aw According  to  the

Sacalya  sanhita.
Lat

Cratu 66°  N.

PULAHA . 60°  N.

PULASTYA 60°  N.

Atri 66°  N.

Angiras 57^  >\

VASISHf'HA 60°  N.

MarIchi 60°  N.

Here  Agastya  is  evidently  Canopus;  as  Luhdhaca  is
Sirius.  Brahmehridaya  seems  to  be  Capella,  which  was
shown,  under  that  Indian  name,  to  Dr.  Hunter  at  Vjjor

t  The  Sdcalya  sankitd  and  Tatwa  vMca  agree  with  the  SQfya
siddh6nia  as  to  the  positions  of  the  first  four  stars.  They  omit  the*
other  three.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE ZODIAC.  353

yinu  Agni  may  be  the  bright  star  in  the  northern  hom  of
the  Bull  (0  Tauri) :  Prajapati  is  perhaps  the  star  on  the
head  of  the  Waggoner  (J  AurigaB).  The  distances  of  the
three  last  mentioned  stars  from  the  ecliptic  do  not  exactly
agree  with  the  places  stated  :  but  no  conspicuous  stars  are
found  nearer  to  the  assigned  positions :  and  it  may  be
remarked^  that  they  are  all  nearly  in  the  longitude  of
the  nacshatra  MrigasiraSy  con*esponding  to  the  head  of
Orion ;  and  that  the  latitude^  assigned  to  them  by  Hindu
astronomers,  is  as  much  too  small,  as  that  of  Mrigasiras  is
too  great.

The  star,  mentioned  in  the  Surya  siddhanta  under  the
name  oiApas  or  water,  is  doubtless  I  Virginis ;  and  Apam-
vatsa  comprises  the  nebulous  stars  in  the  same  constella*
tion,  marked  b.  1.  2.  3.

Astronomers  give  rules  for  computing  the  heliacal  rising
and  setting  of  the  star  Agastya,  on  account  of  certain
religious  ceremonies  to  be  performed  when  that  star  appears.
VaeAha  mihira  says,  ^Agastya  is  visible  at  Ujjayinty
when  the  sun  is  7°  short  of  the  sign  Virgo.'  But  he  after-
wards adds,  that  *  the  star  becomes  visible,  when  the  sun
reaches  Hasta,  and  disappears  when  the  sun  arrives  at
R6hiAV  His  commentator  remarks,  that  the  author  has
here  followed  earlier  writers ;  and  quotes  Par  as  a  ra,  say-
ing, ^  When  the  sun  is  in  Hastaj  the  star  rises;  and  it
sets  when  the  sun  is  in  RShiiit.*^  BHAff6TPALA  cites
from  the  &veSiddhantasf  a  rule  of  computation,  analogous
to  that  which  will  be  forthwith  quoted  from  the  Bhaswati ;
and  remarks,  that  three  periods  of  Agastya* s  heliacal  rising

t  Pancha  siddhdnitty  atreatise  by  Varaha  mihiba.
VOL.  II.  2 A


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


364  ON  THE  INDIAN AND  ARABIAN

are  observed,  viz.  8th  and  15th  of  Aswina  and  8th  of
Cartica.

The  Bhaswati  directs  the  day  of  Agastya's  rising  for
any  particular  latitude  to  be  found  by  the  following  rule.
'  The  length  of  the  shadow  of  a  gnomon*  at  a  particular
latitude,  on  the  day  of  the  equinox,  is  multiplied  by  25 ;
and  to  the  product  900  are  added ;  the  sum,  divided  by
225,  gives  in  signs  and  degrees  the  place  of  the  sun,  on
the  day  when  Agastya  rises  or  appears  in  the  south,  at
the  close  of  night/  The  commentator  adds,  that '  the  day
of  the  star's  setting  may  be  computed  by  deducting  the
sum  found  as  above,  from  1350 ;  the  difference  reduced
to  signs  and  degrees,  is  the  place  of  the  sun,  on  the  day
when  Agastya  sets  in  the  southwest.'  According  to  these
rules,  Agastya  in  latitude  2^  34',  rises  when  the  sun  is  in
4"  20°  and  sets  when  the  sun  is  in  1^  lO''.

The  Graha  laghava  teaches  another  method  of  calcula-
tion. The  length  of  the  shadow  of  the  gnomon  is  multiplied
by  8,  and  the  product  is  added  to  98  for  the  sun's  place  in
degrees,  on  the  day  when  Agastya  rises ;  or  is  deducted
from  78,  to  find  the  sun's  place  when  that  star  sets.  By
this  rule,  the  star  should  rise,  in  latitude  26^34',  when
the  sun  is  at  the  26th  degree  of  the  Lion,  and  should  set
when  the  sun  quits  the  Ram.  Accordingly,  the  Bhavishya
and  the  Brahmeoaivarta  puraiias  ordain  oblations  for
Agastya  three  days  before  the  sun  reaches  the  zodiacal
sign  Virgo;  though  the  inhabitants  of  the  province  of
Gaura,  as  observed  in  the  last-mentioned  purana^  perform
this  ceremony  three  days  earlier.

In  regard  to  the  passages  above  quoted,  it  may  be
remarked,  that  the  rule,  stated  in  the  Bhastoati,  implies
the  distance  of  three  signs,  from  the  beginning  of  Aries,  to

•  In  duodecimal  parts.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  355

Agastya,  and  supposes  the  star  to  become  visible  when
distant  one  sign  from  the  sun.  But  the  rule  delivered
in  the  Graha  laghava  places  the  star  at  the  distance  of
SS""  from  the  beginning  of  Mesha,  and  supposes  it  visible
in  the  right  sphere,  when  lO""  distant  froai  the  sun.  Ac-
cording to  Uie  quotation  from  ParAsara,  the  right  ascen-
sion of  the  star  must  have  been,  in  his  time,  not  less  than
100^  reckoned  from  the  beginning  of  Mcska;  and  the  star,
rising  cosmically,  became  visible  in  the  oblique  sphere,  at
the  distance  of  60^  from  the  sun ;  and  disappeared,  setting
acronychally,  when  widiin  that  distance.  Making  allow-
ance, therefore,  for  the  star's  proper  motion,  and  change  of
declination  and  right  ascension,  it  remains  probable,  that
ParAsara's  rule  was  framed  for  Uie  north  of  India,  at  a
period  when  the  solstitial  points  were,  as  stated  by  that
author,  in  the  middle  of  Aslcsha  and  beginning  of  Dha-
nishi'ha.*

I  have  purposely  reserved  tat  separate  consideration  the
seven  Rhhis,  who  give  name  to  seven  stars  in  Ursa  major ;
not  only  because  their  positions  are  not  stated  by  Brah-
MEGUPTA,  BhAscara,  and  ihe  Siirya  siddhanta,  but  also
because  the  authors,  who  give  their  positions,  ascribe  to
them  a  particular  motion,  or  variation  of  longitude,  different
from  other  stars,  and  apparently  unconnected  with  the  pre-
cession of  the  equinoxes.

Varaha  mihira  haQ  a  chapter  in  the  Var&himnhita
expressly  on  the  subject  of  this  supposed  motion  of  the
Btshis.  He  begins  by  annoui^cing  the  intentjon  of  stating
their  revolution  conformably  with  the  doctrine  of  VRtoDH  a
Garga,  and  proceeds  as  follows:  'When  king  Yu-
dhisht'hira  ruled  the  earth,  the  Munis  were  in  Magha,
and  the  period  of  the  era  of  that  kmg  is  2526  years. They


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii,  p.  393.
2  a2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


356  ON THB  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

remain  for  a  hundred  years  in  each  asterism,  being  con-
nected with  that  particular  nacshatra^  to  which,  when  it
rises  in  the  east,  the  line  of  their  rising  is  directed.'*

The  commentator,  BHAff6TPALA,  supports  the  text  of
his  author  by  quotations  from  VrYddha  Garga  and
C^^YAPA.  ^  At  the  junction  of  the  Cali  and  Dwapara
ages/  says  Garga,  *  the  virtuous  sages,  who  delight  in
protecting  the  people,  stood  at  the  asterism,  over  which
the  Pt^m  preside/  That  is  at  Magha.  'The  mighty
sages/  says  CA^tapa,  '  abide  during  a  hundred  years
in  each  asterism,  attended  by  the  virtuous  ArundhatI.'

The  author  next  states  the  relative  situation  of  the  seven
Htshisy  with  Arundh  ATi  near  her  husband  VAsisefHA ;
and  the  remainder  of  the  chapter  is  devoted  to  astrology.

The  revolution  of  the  seven  Rtshis,  and  its  periods,  are
noticed  in  puranas.  The  following  passage  is  from  the
Sri  Bhagavata.f

'  From  your  birth  (Paricshit  is  addressed  by  Suca)
to  the  inauguration  of  Nanda,  1116  years  will  elapse.

•  ^MW'HMIti  g5R:5lllHrrl4M1*^|\rr«t

According  to  a  different  reading  noticed  by  the  commentator,  the
concluding  hemistich  signifies  "  they  constantly  rise  in  the  north-east ;
together  with  ABUNDHAxf."

t  Book  xii.  c.  2.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  357

'  Of  the  seven  Rishis,  two  are  first  perceived,  rising  in
the  sky ;  and  the  asterism,  which  is  observed  to  be  at  night
even  with  the  middle  of  those  twostars,  is  that,  with  which
the  Rishis  are  united,  and  they  remain  so  during  a  hundred
years  of  men.  In  your  time,  and  at  this  moment,  they  are
situated  in  Magha.

'When  the  splendour  of  Vishnu,  named  CfitsHNA,
departed  for  heaven,  then  did  the  Cali  age,  during  which
men  delight  in  sin,  invade  the  world.  So  long  as  he  con-
tinued to  touch  the  earth  with  his  holy  feet,  so  long  the
Cali  age  was  unable  to  subdue  the  world.

'  When  the  seven  Rishis  were  in  Magha,  the  Qdi  age
comprising  1200  [divine]  years*  began ;  and  when,  firom
Magha,  they  shall  reach  PvrvashaAha,  then  will  this  Cali
age  attain  its  growth  under  Nanda  and  his  successors."

The  commentator  SrIdhara  swAm!  remarks,  that  the
constellation,  consisting  of  seven  stars,  is  in  the  form  of  a
wheeled  carriage.  MarIchi,  he  observes,  is  at  the  extre-
mity; and  next  to  him,  VAsisHf'HA  in  the  arched  part  of
the  yoke ;  and  beyond  him  Angiras  :  next  to  whom  are
four  stars  in  a  quadrangle  :  Atri  at  the  north-east  comer ;
south  of  him  Pulastya  ;  next  to  whom  is  Pulaha  ;  and
Cratu  is  north  of  the  last  Such  being  their  relative
position,  the  two  stars,  which  rise  first,  are  Pulaha  and
Cratu  ;  and  whichever  asterism  is  in  a  line  south  fi-om
the  middle  of  those  stars,  is  that  with  which  the  seven
Rishis  are  united ;  and  they  so  remain  for  100  years.

A  similar  passage  is  found  in  the  VishAu  puraiia,f  and
a  similar  exposition  of  it  is  given  by  the  commentator  Rat-
naoarbha  :  but  the  period,  there  stated  to  elapse  be-
tween the  birth  of  Paricshit  and  the  inauguration  of
Nanda,  is  1016  years  only.

•  432,000  common  yeais.  t  Part  4.  ch.  xxiii.  v.  32,  &c.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


368  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

The  Matsya  puraAa  contains  a  passage  to  the  like
effect;  but  allows  1050  years  from  the  birth  of  Paricshit
to  the  inauguration  of  M ahApadma  ;  and  the  seven
Rhkis  are  stated  as  being  in  a  line  with  the  constdlation
sacred  to  fire  (that  is  Crtttica),  836  years  later^  in  the
time  of  the  Andhra  kings.

In  the  JBrahme  siddhanta  of  SAcalya,  denominated
from  its  reputed  author  Sacalya  sanhita,  the  supposed
motion  of  the  seven  Rtskis  is  thus  noticed:*  'At  the
commencement  of  the  yt^a,  Cratu  was  near  the  star
sacred  to  Vishnu  iSravoAa),  at  the  beginning  of  the  aste-
rism.  Three  degrees  east  of  him,  was  Pulaha;  and
PuLASTYA,  at  ten  degrees  from  this;  Atri  followed  at
three  degrees  from  the  last;  and  Angiras,  at  eight  de^
grees  from  him  ;  next  came  VAsiSHf 'ha,  at  the  distance
of  seven  degrees;  and  lastly,  MARfcHi  at  ten.  Their
motion  is  eight  liptas  (minutes)  in  a  year.  Their  distances
frorti  the  ecUptic,  north,  were  respectively  55®,  60°,  50°,  66°,
57®,  60®,  and  60®.  For,  moving  in  the  north  into  different
positions,  the  sages  employ  2700  years  in  revolving  through
the  assemblage  of  asterisms ;  and  hence  their  portions
may  be  easily  knovm  at  any  particular  time.'

Lalla,  dted  by  MuNiSwARA  in  bis  gloss  on  the  Sir6-
manij  says,  '  If  the  mimber  of  years  of  the  Calx  age,  less
fourteen,  be  divided  by  100,  the  quotient,  as  the  wise  de-
clare, shows  the  asterisms  traversed  by  MarIchi  and
other  celestial  sages,  beginning  from  the  asterism  of  Fi-
rarvchi  (BrahmA).'

Here  Lalla  is  generally  understood  to  mean  BAhihij
which  is  sacred  to  PrajApati  (or  BrahmA).  But  Mu-
Ni^wARA  has  remarked,  in  another  place,  that  Lalla
may  intend  Abhijit,  which  is  sacred  to  Vidhi  ot  BrahmA;

.•  Prama  2.  ch.  ii.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  369

and  consequently  may  mean  SravaAiy  of  which  Abhijit
forms  a  part:  and  thus  Lalla  and  SAcalya  may  be  re-
conciled.

Most  of  the  commentators  on  the  Siirya  siddhanta  and
Sir6mani  are  silent  on  the  subject  of  the  seven  Rt$hi$.
But  NrYsinha,  in  his  rar^a  to  the  Vasana  bhaskyd,  or
gloss  on  the  StrSmaAi,  quotes  and  expounds  the  Sacalya
sanhitay  and  rejects  VarAha's  rule  of  computation,  as
disagreeing  with  puraAas.  MunISwara,  in  his  commen-
tary on  the  SirSmani,  cites  some  of  the  passages  above
noticed,  and  remarks,  that  BhAscara  has  omitted  this
topic  on  account  of  cimtradictory  opinions  concerning  it,
and  because  it  is  of  no  great  use.

The  same  author,  in  his  own  compilation  entitled  Sid-
dhanta sarvabhaumay  has  entered  more  fully  into  this  sub*
ject.  He  observes,  that  the  seven  Rhhis  are  not,  like
other  stars,  attached  by  spikes  to  the  solid  ring  of  the
ecliptic,  but  revolve  in  small  circles  round  the  northern
pole  of  the  ecliptic,  moving  by  their  own  power  in  the  ethe-
rial  sphere  above  Saturn,  but  below  the  sphere  of  the  stars.
He  places  the  Rhhis  in  the  same  relative  positions,  which
SAcalya  had  assigned  to  them ;  states  in  other  terms  the
same  distances  from  the  ecliptic,  and  the  same  annual
motion ;  and  directs  their  place  to  be  computed  by  deduct-
ing 600  from  the  years  of  the  Cali  age,  doubling  the  re-
mainder and  dividing  by  fifleen  :  the  quotient,  in  degrees,
is  divided  by  80,  to  reduce  it  into  signs.  MunIswara
supports  this  mode  of  calculation  on  the  authority  of  SA-
calya, against  VarAh  a  MiHiRA  and  Lalla  ;  and  affirms,
that  it  agrees  with  the  phenomena,  as  observable  at  the
period  of  his  compilation.  It  appears,  however,  to  be  a
correction  of  SAcalya's  rule.

CamalAcara,  in  the  Tatwavivecay  notices  the  opinion
delivered  in  the  Siddhanta  sarvabhauma;  but  observes.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


360  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

that  no  such  motion  of  the  stars  is  perceptible.  Remain-
ing, however,  that  the  authority  of  the  puranas  and  saii-
kitas,  which  affirm  their  revolution,  is  incontrovertible,  he
reconciles  faith  and  experience  by  saying,  that  the  stars
themselves  are  fixed ;  but  the  seven  Rishis  are  invisible
deities,  who  perform  the  stated  revolution  in  the  period
specified.

If  CamalAcara's  notion  be  adopted,  no  difficulty
remains:  yet  it  can  hardly  be  supposed,  thatVARAnA
MiHiRA  and  Lalla  intended  to  describe  revolutions  of
invisible  beings.  If  then  it  be  allowed,  that  they  have
attributed  to  the  stars  themselves  an  imaginary  revdution
grounded  on  an  erroneous  theory,  a  probable  inference
may  be  thence  drawn  as  to  the  period  when  those  authors
lived,  provided  one  position  be  conceded ;  namely,  that
the  rules,  stated  by  them,  gave  a  result  not  grossly  wrong
at  the  respective  periods  when  they  wrote.  Indeed  it  can
scarcely  be  supposed,  that  authors,  who,  like  the  cele-
brated astronomers  in  question,  were  not  mere  compilers
and  transcribers,  should  have  exhibited  rules  of  compu-
tation, which  did  not  approach  to  the  truth,  at  the  very
period  when  they  were  proposed.

If  this  reasoning  be  admitted,  it  would  follow,  that
VarAha  MIHIRA  composed  the  Vdrahi  sanhita  about
2800  years  after  the  period  assigned  by  him  to  the  com-
mencement of  the  reign  of  YcDHisHf*HiRA,  or  near  the
close  of  the  third  century  after  the  expiration  of  Yodhish-
f'HiRA's  era  as  defined  by  him.  For  the  circle  of  declina-
tion passing  between  Cratu  and  Pulaha  (the  two  first  of
the  seven  Rishis\  and  cutting  the  ecliptic  only  2**  short  of
the  beginning  of  Magh&y  was  the  solstitial  colure,  when
the  equinox  was  near  the  beginning  of  Crlttica  ;  and  such
probably  was  the  reason  of  that  line  being  noticed  by
ancient  Hindu  astronomers. It  agrees  with  the  solstitial


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  361

olure  on  the  sphere  of  Eudoxus,  as  described  by  Hip-
parch  us.*  A  similar  circle  of  declination,  passing  between
the  same  stars,  intei-sected  the  ecliptic  at  the  beginning  of
Magha  when  the  solstitial  colure  was  at  the  middle  of
AsUsha;  and  a  Uke  circle  passed  through  the  next  asterism
when  the  equinox  corresponded  with  the  first  point  of
Mesha.  An  astronomer  of  that  period,  if  he  were  apprised
of  the  position  assigned  to  the  same  stars  by  Garga,  i^«
puted  to  have  been  the  priest  of  CeKshn  a  and  the  PaAAusy
might  conclude  with  Varah a  mihira,  that  one  revolution
had  been  completed,  and  that  the  stars  had  passed  through
one  nacshatra  of  the  second  revolution.  In  corroboration
of  this  inference  respecting  the  age  of  VarAha  mihira's
astrological  treatise,  it  may  be  added,  that  he  is  cited  by
name  in  the  Pancha  tantra,  the  original  of  the  fables  of
Pilpay,  which  were  translated  for  N^shIrvAn  more  than
1200  years  ago.f

The  theory  being  wholly  unfounded,  VabAha  mihira's
rule  of  computation  soon  ceased  to  s^ree  with  the  pheno-
mena, and  other  rules  have  been  successively  introduced
by  different  authors, as  Lalla,  SAcalya,  and lastly.


•  "  H1PPABOHU8  teJls  U8,  that  Eudoxus  drew  the  colure  of  the  sol-
stices,  through  the  middle  of  the  Great  Bear ;  and  the  middle  of
Cancer ;  and  the  neck  of  Hydras ;  and  the  star  between  the  poop
and  mast  of  Argo;  and  the  tail  of  the  South  Fish;  and  through  the
middle  of  Capricorn,  and  of  Sagitta ;  and  through  the  neck  and
right  wing  of  the  Swan ;  and  the  left  hand  of  Cepheus;  and  that  he
drew  the  equinoctial  colure  through  the  left-hand  of  Arctophylax ;
and  along  the  middle  of  his  body;  and  cross  the  middle  of  Chelse;
and  through  the  right-hand  and  fore-knee  of  the  Centaur ;  and
through  the  flexure  of  Eridanus  and  head  of  Cetus ;  and  the  back  (^
Aries  across,  and  through  the  head  and  right-hand  of  Perseus."  Sir  I.
Newton's  Chronology,  §  29.  Hipparoh.  ad  Fhcmom.  in  Petavii
Uranologiay  p. 207, 208.  Bailly,  Aatr.  Anc,^,  506.  Costard,  p,  136.

t  Preface  to  the  Sanscrit  edition  of  the  HitOpadSia,  p.  zi.  [page
173  of  the  present  volume.]


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


362  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

MuNiswARA ;  whose  rule^  devised  less  than  two  hundred
years  ago,  does  not  yet  grossly  betray  its  insufficiency.

This  pretended  revolution  of  the  stars  of  Ursa  Major  is
connected  with  two  remarkable  epochas  in  Indian  chrono-
logy ;  the  commencement  of  the  Cali  yuga,  or  sinful  age,
in  the  reign  of  YuDHisnf'HiRA ;  and  its  prevalence,  on
the  fidlure  of  the  suoces^on  of  Cshatriya  princes,  and
estabUshment  of  a  different  dynasty,  1015  years  after  the
birth  of  Paricshit,  according  to  the  Vi$hAu  purana ;  or
1115  years,  according  to  the  Bhagavata;  but  1498  years,
if  a  correction,  which  has  been  proposed  by  SrIdhara
swAmI  and  some  other  commaitators,  be  admitted.  This
subject  has  been  already  noticed  by  Capt  Wilford  in  his
Essay  on  VicramAditya;*  and  it  is,  therefore,  unne-
cessary to  enlarge  upon  it  in  this  place.

It  has  been  noticed,  towards  the  b^imung  of  the  present
essay,  that  the  principal  star  of  each  nacshcUra,  is  denomi-
nated YSgatara.  Perhaps  it  may  not  be  superfluous  to
<!antion  the  reader  against  confounding  these  y6ga  stars
with  the  ySgaSf  of  which  a  list  is  inserted  in  Sir  William
Jones's  Treatise  on  the  Indian  Zodiac.^  They  are  men-
tioned by  him  as  divisions  of  the  ecliptic :  but  it  will  pre-
sently appear,  that  they  cannot  in  strictness  be  so  denomi-
nated. Their  principal  purpose  regards  astrology;  but
they  are  also  employed  in  regulating  certain  moveable
feasts ;  and  they  are  of  such  frequent  use,  that  every  Indian
almanac  contains  a  column  specifying  the  y6ga  for  each
day,  with  the  hour  of  its  termination.

The  y6ga  is  nothing  else  than  a  mode  of  indicating  the
sum  of  the  longitudes  of  the  sun  and  moon.  The  rule  for
its  computation,  as  given  in  the  Sdrya  siddhanta,  JBhaS'
watt,  and  Graha  laghava^  directs,  that  the  longitude  of  the

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  117,  &o.  t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  302.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  363

sun  be  added  to  the  longitude  of  the  moon ;  and  the  sum,
reduced  to  minutes,  is  to  be  divided  by  800  (the  number  of
minutes  in  13®  20 ):  the  quotient  exhibits  the  elapsed  y6g€Uj
counted  from  Vishcumbha.*  It  is  obvious,  Aerefore,  that
the  ydgas  are  twenty-seven  divisions  of  360®  of  a  great
ckcle,  measured  upon  the  ecUptic.  But,  if  they  be  repre-
sovted  on  a  cirde,  it  must  be  a  moveable  one  in  the  plane
of  the  ecliptic.

Astrologers  also  reckon  twenty-eight  y^as,  wliich  cor-
respond to  the  twenty-eight  nctoshatrcu  or  divisions  of  the
moon's  path;  varying,  however,  according  to  the  day  of
the  week.  As  the  Indian  almanacs  sometimes  appropriate
a  cohimn  to  the  moon's  y6ga  for  each  day,  I  shall  insert  in
a  note  a  list  of  these  ySgas,  with  the  rule  by  which  they  are
determined.f

•  1,  Ptshcumhha.  2.  FtUi.  3.  AyushmaU  4.  Saubh6gya,  5.  fe-
bhana,  6.  Atigahaa.  7-  Sucarman.  8.  Dhr^i.  9.  Sdla.  10.  Oa^ela.
11.  Vriddhi.  12.  Dkruva.  13.  Vyaghdta.  14.  Hersha^.  15.  Vajra.
16.  Siddhi,  1?.  Vyatip&ta.  18.  Variyas.  19.  Farigha.  20.  I^iva.
21.  Siddha,  22.  Sddhya.  23.  ^ha,  24.  ^ucla.  25.  Brahman.  26.
Aindra, 27.  Vaidhr^H,

i  \.  Ananda.  2.  CdladaMa,  3.  DhUnnra.  4.Prajdpati.  5,  Saumya.
6.  Dhwdncsha,  7.  Dhwaja,  8.  §rivatsa,  9.  Vajra.  10.  Mudgara.
\\.  Ch'hfUra.  \2.  Maitra.  13.  M6nasa.  14.  Padma.  15.  Lambtwa.
16.  Utpdta.  17.  Mriiyu.  18.  Cd^.  19.  Siddhi.  20.  §ubka.  21.
AmrUta,  22.  Musula,  23.  Gada.  24.  Mdtanga,  25.  Rdcshasa.  26.
Chara, 27.  5I^'At>fl. 28.  Pravardha.

The  foregoing  list  is  extracted  from  the  Ratnamdld  of  §RfpATi.
He  adds  the  rule  by  which  the  ybyas  are  regulated.  On  a  Sunday,  the
nacshairas  answer  to  the ybgas,  in  their  natural  order;  viz.  Ahoini  to
Ananda,  Bharahi  to  CdlandaMay  &c.  But,  on  a  Monday,  the  first  ybga
{Ananda)  corresponds  to  MrtgaUras,  the  second  to  Ardrdy  and  so
forth.  On  a  Tuesday,  the  navshaira,  which  answers  to  the  first  yOya,
is  Aslcshd;  on  Wednesday,  Hasta;  on  Thursday,  Anurddha;  on
Friday,  UttnrdshdSIia ;  and  on  Saturday,  Satabkishd.

Almanacs  usually  contain  another  set  of  astrological  divisions  of
the  lunar  month,  which  it  may  be  proper  to  explain. They  are  de-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ  iC


364  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

Another  topic,  relative  to  the  zodiac,  and  connected
with  astrology,  remains  to  be  noticed.  I  allude  to  the
DreshcancLs  answering  to  the  Decani  of  European  astrolo-
gers. The  Hindus,  like  the  Egyptians  and  Babylonians,
from  whom  that  vain  science  passed  to  the  Greeks  and
Romans,  divide  each  sign  into  three  parts,  and  allot  to
every  such  part  a  regent  exercising  planetary  influence
under  the  particular  planet  whom  he  there  represents.

The  description  of  the  thirty-six  Dreshcanas  is  given
towards  the  close  of  VarIha  mihira's  treatise  on  the
casting  of  nativities,  entided  Vrthat  jataca.  It  is  here
translated  conformably  with  the  gloss  of  BHAff6TPALA:
omitting,  however,  some  variations  in  the  reading  of  the
text,  which  are  noticed  by  him ;  but  which  can  be  of  no
use,  unless  occasion  should  arise  for  reference  to  them  in
comparing  the  description  of  the  dreshcanas  with  some
amulet  or  ancient  monument  in  which  the  Decani  may  be
supposed  to  be  figured.  Even  for  that  purpose,  the  follow-
ing description  will  probably  suffice.

1.  [Mars]  A  man  with  red  eyes,  girt  round  the  waist

nominated  CaraAa;  and  consist  of  seven  variable  and  four  invariable,
as  in  the  subjoined  list:

Variable  Caracas. Invariable  Caranas,

1.  Bava.  1.  §acuni.

2.  B^lava.  2.  Ghatusbpdd.

3.  Caalava,  3.  N^ga.

4.  Taitila.  4.  Cintughna.

5.  Gara.

6.  Van'ij.

7.  Visht'i.

They  answer  successively  to  half  a  tifhi  or  lunar  day ;  CifUughna
being  always  assigned  to  the  first  half  of  the  first  tiChi ;  and  the
variable  carahas  afterwards  succeeding  each  other  regularly,  through
eight  repetitions:  they  are  followed  by  the  three  remaining  invariable
carafMS^  which  conclude  the  month ;  Chatushpdd  and  Na^a  apper-
taining to  Amdvdsyd  or  the  new  moon,  and  §acuni  being  appropriated
to  the  latter  half  of  the  preceding  tifhi.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  366

with  a  white  cloth,  of  a  black  complexion,  as  formidable  as
able  to  protect,  holds  a  raised  battle-axe.

2.  [The  Sun]  A  female,  clad  in  red  apparel,  with  her
mind  fixed  on  wearing  ornaments,  having  a  mare's  head,
and  a  belly  like  a  jar,  thirsty  and  resting  on  one  foot,  is
exhibited  by  Yavana  as  the  figure  of  the  Arishcana  in
the  middle  of  Mesha,^

3.  [Jupiter]  A  fierce  i^d  wrathful  man,  conversant
with  arts,  of  a  tawny  complexion,  solicitpus  of  action,  but
unsteady  in  his  resolves ;  holds  in  his  hands  a  raised  stick,
and  wears  red,  clothes.  He  is  the  third  in  the  tripatite  divi-
sion of  Mesha.

4.  [Venus]  A  woman  with  hair  clipped  and  curled,  a
body  shaped  like  a  jar,  her  clothes  burnt,  herself  thirsty,
disposed  to  eat,  and  fond  of  ornaments :  such  is  the  figure
of  the  first  in  Vrtshabha.

6.  [Mercury]  A  man  with  the  head  of  a  goat,  and  a
shoulder  like  a  bull,  clothed  in  dirty  apparel,  skilful  in
regard  to  the  plough  and  the  cart,  acquainted  with  field,
grain,  house,  and  kine,  conversant  with  arts ;  and  in  dis-
position, voracious.

6.  [Saturn]  A  man  with  a  body  vast  as  an  elephant's,
and  feet  great  as  a  Sarabha'Syf  with  white  teeth  and  a
tawny  body,  his  mind  busied  upon  the  wool  of  wild  sheep,
occupies  the  extremity  of  the  sign  Taurus.

7.  [Mercury]  Such  as  are  conversant  with  the  sub-
ject, declare  the  first  in  the  tripartite  partition  of  the  third
sign,  to  be  a  woman  fond  of  working  with  the  needle,
beautiful,  delighting  in  ornaments,  childless,  amorous,  and
with  her  arms  elevated.

•  "  Mishamadhyi  drishcdiiardpam  yavmihpadishtamJ^  BHAff6T-
PALA  expoands  this  "  declared  by  YAVANicHARyA,"  "  Yavan6^
cMryaih  cafhitam,'^

t  A  monster  with  eight  legs,  who  destroj's  elephants.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


366  ON  THE  INDIAN AND ARABIAN

8.  [Venus]  In  the  middle  of  the  sign  Gemini  is  a  man,
with  the  face  of  a  garv^Uty*  standing  in  a  grore :  he  is  an
archer  clad  in  armour,  and  holds  a  bow ;  he  meditates  on
sport;  his  children,  ornaments,  and  wealth.

9.  [Saturn]  At  the  end  of  the  sign  Gemini  is  a  man
decorated  with  ornaments,  having  as  many  gems  as  the
ocean  contains;  clad  in  armour  and  furnished  with  bow
and  quiver ;  skilled  in  dance,  music,  and  song,  and  prac-
tising poetry.

10.  [  The  Moon]  The  wise  declare  the  first  in  Cancer
to  be  an  animal  with  the  body  of  an  elephant,  the  feet  of  a
Sarabha,  a  boar's  head  and  horse's  neck,  standing  in  a
grove  under  a  sandal-wood  treeji*  and  upholding  leaves,
root,  and  fruit.

11.  [Mars]  In  the  middle  of  the  sign  Cancer,  a  w(»nan,  in
prime  of  youth,  with  blossoms  of  lotus  on  her  head,  att^ided
by  a  serpent,  cries  while  standing  in  a  forest,  resting  against
the  branch  of  a  palaiaX  tree.

12.  [Jupiter]  Last  in  Cancer  is  a  man  with  his  head
inclined ;  he  is  decorated  with  golden  ornaments,  and,  em-
barking on  a  vessel  and  encompassed  by  serpaits  [twined
round  him,]  he  traverses  the  ocean  to  seek  ornaments  for
his  wife.

13.  [The  Sun]  A  vulture  and  shakal  stand  on  a  cotton
tree:§  a  dog  is  near:  and  a  man,  in  a  squalid  dress,  laments
for  his  father  and  mother.  This  representation  is  ppcoiounced
to  be  the  first  of  the  Lion.

14.  [Jupiter]  A  man  formed  Uke  a  horse,  bearing  on
his  head  a  garland  of  yellowish  white  flowers,  wears  a  leather
dress :  unconquered  like  a  lion ;  armed  with  a  bow, and

•  An  eagle :  or  else  a  gigantic  crane. Perhaps  a  vulture.

t  Santalum  album  sive  Sirium  myrtifolium.

X  Butea  frondosa.  §  Bombax  heptaphyllum.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  367

distinguished  by  a  hooked  nose;  he  is  placed  in  the  middle
of  Leo.

15.  [Mars]  The  third  in  the  tripartite  division  of  Leo,
is  a  man  having  the  head  of  a  bear,  with  a  long  beard  and
curled  hair ;  in  disposition  similar  to  an  ape ;  and  holding
a  staff,  fruits,  and  flesh.

16.  [Mercury]  A  damsel,  bearing  a  jar  filled  with
blossoms,  (her  person  clothed  in  apparel  soiled  with  dirt,)
solicitous  for  the  union  of  dress  with  opulence,  is  going
towards  the  family  of  her  spiritual  parent :  such  is  the  first
of  Virgo.

17.  [Saturn]  A  man  of  a  dark  complexion, with  a
doth  on  his  head,  holds  a  pen,  and  is  casting  up  accounts
of  receipts  and  disbursements :  he  bears  a  large  bow,  and
his  body  is  covered  with  hair :  he  is  placed  in  the  middl
of  the  sign.

18.  [Venus]  A  woman  of  a  fair  complexion,  dressed  in
bleached  silk,  tall,  holding  in  her  hand  ajar  and  ladle;  is
devoutly  going  towards  a  temple  of  the  gods.  The  wise
pronounce  this  to  be  the  last  of  Virgo.

19.  [Venus]  A  man  is  proceeding  along  the  middle  of
a  highway ;  holding  a  balance,  and  having  weights  in  his
hand;  he  is  skilled  in  measuring  and  meting,  and  meditates
on  commodities  and  their  prices.  The  Yavanas  declare  this
form  to  be  first  of  Libra.*

20.  [Saturn]  A  man  with  the  head  of  a  vulture,  car-
rying a  water-pot,  is  anxious  to  proceed,  being  hungry  and
thirsty;  in  thought,  he  visits  his  wife  and  son.  He  is
middlemost  of  the  balance-bearer  (Libra.)


•  "  Tadritpam  vadarUi  Yavandh  prafhamam  iuldydh"  This  might
signify  "  Yavana  declares;"  for  the  plural  is  used  in  SanscrU  re-
spectfully: and  Bha'H'6tpala  has  before  expounded  Yavana  as  in-
tending Yavanaoharya:  but  a  different  explanation  occurs  a  little
lower.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


368  ON  THE  INDIAN AND  ARABIAN

21.  [Mercury]  A  man,  iii  figure  like  an  ape,  adorned
with  gems,  bearing  a  golden  quiver  and  armour,  and  carry-
ing fruits  and  flesh,  is  scaring  deer,  in  a  forest:  such  is  the
figure  exhibited  by  the  Yavanas.*

22.  [Mars]  A  woman,  without  clothes  or  ornaments,
comes  from  the  great  ocean,  to  the  shore ;  she  has  fallen
from  her  place  ;  round  her  feet  are  serpents  entwined ;  but
she  is  pleasing :  such  is  the  first  of  the  sign  Scorpio.

23.  [Jupiter]  A  woman,  with  a  body  like  a  tortoise
and  a  jar,  and  with  serpents  entwined  round  her  person ;  is
solicitous  to  prepare  local  comforts  for  her  husband.  This
figure  the  wise  pronounce  to  be  the  middle  one  of  Scorpio.

24.  [The  Moon]  The  last  of  the  Scorpion  is  a  lion
with  a  large  and  stooping  head  resembling  that  of  a  tor-
toise ;  he  guards  the  place  where  sandal-wood  grows,  ter-
rifying dogs,  deer,  boai*s,  and  shakals.

25.  [Jupiter]  An  animal  with  the  body  of  a  horse
and  head  of  a  man,  holding  a  large  bow,  stands  near  a
hermitage  and  devoutly  guards  the  implements  of  sacrifice :
such  is  the  first  of  the  three  divisions  of  the  bow  (Sagitta-
rius.)

26.  [Maes]  A  pleasing  female,  of  golden  complexion
like  the  cAampaca,t  moderately  handsome,  sits  on  a
throne,  distributing  marine  gems.  This  is  described  as  the
middle  division  of  the  bow.

27.  [The  Sun]  A  man  with  a  long  beard,  of  a  com-
plexion yellow  like  the  champaca,  is  sitting  on  a  throne
with  a  staff  in  his  hand  :  he  wears  silk  raiment  and  a
deer's  skin :  such  is  the  third  figure  of  the  ninth  sign.

28.  [Saturn]  A  man,  of  a  terrible  aspect,  with  the

•  "  Yavanair  tiddhr^tahj'^  which  BHAff6TPALA  expounds  ''declared
by  the  ancient  Yavanas"  "  puraAayavanaih,^^

f  Michelia  Champaca.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC*  369

body  of  a  hog,  hairy,  having  tusks  like  a  Macara^  holds
a  yoke,  a  net,  and  fetters. He  is  first  of  Capricorn.

29.  [Venus]  In  the  middle  of  Macara  is  a  woman
skilled  in  music,  with  eyes  large  hke  the  petals  of  the
lotos,  and  with  a  dark  complexion.  She  seeks  various
things ;  she  is  decorated  with  jewels ;  and  wears  metallic
ornaments  in  her  ears.

30.  [Mercury]  A  man,  shaped  like  a  Cinnaray-);  clothed
in  a  woollen  cloth,  and  furnished  with  quiver,  bow,  and
armour,  bears  on  his  shoulder  a  jar  adorned  with  gems :
he  is  last  of  the  sign  Macara,

31.  [The  Sun]  The  first  of  the  jar  (Aquarius)  is  a  man
with  the  head  of  a  vulture,  clothed  in  silk  and  wearing  an
antelope's  hide  with  a  woollen  cloth :  his  mind  is  busied  in
obtaining  oil,  ardent  spirits,  water,  and  food.

32.  [Mercury]  In  a  burnt  carriage,  a  woman  clad  in
soiled  apparel,  bearing  vessels  on  her  head,  is  collecting
metals  in  a  forest  containing  cotton  ti*ees.

33.  [Venus]  A  man  of  a  dark  complexion,  with  hairy
ears,  adorned  with  a  diadem,  carries  and  transports  vases
vnth  articles  of  metal,  and  with  bark,  leaves,  gum,  and
fiiiit. He  is  last  of  Cumbha.

34.  [Jupiter]  The  first  of  the  fish  (Pisces)  navigates
the  sea  in  search  of  ornaments  for  his  wife  :  he  has  jewels,
and  his  hands  are  full  of  vessels  used  in  sacrifice,  together
with  pearls,  gems,  and  shells.

36.  [The  Moon]  A  woman,  surpassing  in  complexion
the  blossom  of  the  champacaj  ascends  a  ship  with  lofty
masts  and  flags ;  and  approaches  the  shore  of  the  sea,
accompanied  by  her  retinue.  This  is  declared  bj^  sages
to  be  the  second  in  the  tripartite  division  of  Mina,

•  A  sea  monster. Perhaps  the  Narwhal  may  be  intended,
t  A  human  figure  with  the  head  of  a  horse.
VOL.  II.  2 B


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


370  ON  THE  INDIAN  AND  ARABIAN

36.  [Mars]  Near  a  cavern,  in  a  forest^  a  naked  man,
with  serpents  entwined  round  his  body,  and  tormented  by
robbers  and  fire,  laments. He  is  the  last  of  the  fish.

Arabian  astronomers  in  like  manner  divide  each  sign  of
the  Zodiac  into  three  parts,  denominated  Wajeh  (^j)  or
in  the  plural  Wujih  (*^^),  which  severally  belong  to  the
different  planets*  thence  called  Rab  ul  wajeh.  The  proper
import  of  the  term  (<i^^)  is  face  or  countenance  ;  agreeing
with  the  Greek  '^potranov,  which  is  similarly  employed  in
this  acceptation.^

The  near  correspondence  of  the  dreshcanas  with  the
Decani  of  Roman  authors  and  ^i)cayo\  of  Grecian  writers
will  be  evident  from  the  following  passage  of  Manilius,
supported  by  quotations  fi'om  other  authors,  which  I  shall
insert  on  the  faith  of  Saumaise  ;J  the  original  works,
from  which  they  are  taken,  not  being  here  procurable.

Manilius  says§

Quam  partem  deciman  dixere  Decania  gentes ;
A  numero  noinen  positum  est,  qaod  partibus  astra
Condita  triceuis  propria  sub  sorte  feruntur,
Et  tribaunt  denas  in  se  coeantibus  astris,
Tnque  vicem  terris  habitantur  sidera  Signis.

Hephjestion  expressly  declares,||  that  "  each  sign  of
the  zodiac  is  divided into three  Decani  comprising ten

•  lu  the  following  order,  beginning  from  Aries:  viz.  Mars,  the
8an,  Venus,  Mercury,  the  Moon,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  the  Sun,  &c.

TkhtJD&nu'l  Sa/a.
t  FiRMioi  Mathesis  seu  Astron.,  vide  infra.

I  Salmasti  PliniaruB  Exercitationesy  p.  460,  &c.

§  Lib.  iv.  298—302.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


DIVISIONS  OF  THE  ZODIAC.  371

degrees  each :  the  first  division  of  Aries  is  named  Chontare;
the  second  Chontachre,  and  the  third  Sicet"

Firm  I  c  us  differs  in  the  names,  and  does  not  allow  ten
complete  degrees  to  each  Decanus.  Thus,  in  the  sign
Aries,  the  three  first  degrees  are,  according  to  him,  unap-
propriated ;  the  five  next  belong  to  the  first  Decanus
Asitart;  the  next  nine  are  vacant ;  and  the  four  following
appertain  to  the  second  Decanus  Senacher ;  five  degrees
are  again  unoccupied ;  and  the  four  last  belong  to  the  third
Decanus  Sentacher.^

We  learn  firom  Pselhjs+  that  the  several  Decani  were
figured  with  different  attributes  and  dresses ;  and,  firom
Demophilus  and  FirmicusJ  that  they  represent  the
planets.  The  first  appertained  to  Mars  :  the  second  to
the  Sun  ;  and  the  third  to  Venus  (the  Hindu  author  says,
Jupiter).

This  astrological  notion  was  confessedly  received  fix)m
foreign  nations.  The  doctrine  seems  to  be  ascribed  by
FiRMicus  to  Nekepso,  king  of  Egypt  :^  and  Psellus
cites  a  Babylonian  author,  whom  he  calls  Teucer;  and
who  is  also  noticed  byPoRPHYRius:  besides,  the  names  of

•  Salmasii  Plin,  Ewerc.  p.  460.

t  E<Vi  yk^  h  ixdr^  rSv  ^Jilttf  r^tJi  xarttXtyfciui  Attutvot  wuct-

tlxua-fcx* if  i!  Tfik  ii}»  Koci  ru  r^iuat»  ixKTvXitff  iyyXv^tf aiftPOO'

I  **  Primum  w^irsiwov  est  is  planeta  cujus  signum  est :  secBodum
^^6a-6tir69  planeta  sequens,  et  sic  deinceps.  Aries  est  Martis  primum
«-^oo-*?r«if,  secundum  Solis,  tertium  Veneris,  juxta  seriem  errantium."
This  agrees  precisely  with  the  Arabian  *^^»

§  Sic  et  Nekepso,  ^gypti  justissimus  imperator,  et  astrologus
valde  bonus,  per  ipsos  Decanos  omnia  vitia  valetudinesquc  collegit^
ostendens  quam  valetudinem  quis  Decanus  efficeret,  &c.

2  B  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


372  ON THE INDIAN AND ARABIAN

the  Decani,  stated  by  HEPHiESTioN  and  Firmicus,  are
decidedly  barbarous.  It  was  not,  therefore,  without  reason,
that  Saumaise  and  Kircher  sought  a  derivation  of  the
word  Decanus  itself  from  a  foreign  language.  It  cannot
be  deduced,  as  Scaliger  proposes,  from  the  similar  term
for  an  inferior  officer  commanding  ten  men;*  since  this
office  and  its  designation  were  first  introduced  later  than
the  time  of  Manilius,  by  whom  the  astrological  term  is
employed;  and  Porphyrius  expressly  affirms  that  the
word  was  used  by  those  whom  he  denominates  '  an-
cients.'t  Huet,  not  concurring  in  either  of  the  opinions
above-mentioned,  supposes  the  term  to  have  been  cor-
ruptly formed  by  the  astrologers  of  Alexandria  from  the
Greek  numeral  with  a  Latin  termination.  |  If  this  be  ad-
mitted, it  still  remains  not  improbable  that  some  affinity  of
sound,  in  the  Egyptian  or  in  the  Chaldaic  name,  may  have
su^ested  the  formation  of  this  corrupt  word.

The  Sanscrit  name  apparently  comes  firom  the  same
source.  I  do  not  suppose  it  to  be  originally  Sanscrit ;
since,  in  that  language,  it  bears  no  etymological  signifi-
cation. For  the  same  reason,  it  is  likely,  that  the  astro-
logical doctrine  itself  may  be  exotic  in  India.  One  branch
of  divination,  entitled  Tajaca,  has  been  confessedly  bor-
rowed from  the  Ai-abians :  and  the  technical  terms  used  in
it,  are,  as  I  am  informed  by  Hindu  astrologers,  Arabic.
The  casting  of  nativities,  though  its  practice  is  of  more
ancient  date  in  India,  may  also  have  been  received  from
Western  astrologers :  Egyptians,  Chaldeans,  or  even  Greeks.
If  so,  it  is  likely  that  the  Hindus  may  have  received  astro-
nomical hints  at  the  same  time.

•  Erant  Decani  denis  militibus  propoi^iti. Veget.  2.  8.
I  HuETii  animttdversi&nes  ad  Manilium,  Lib.  iv.  v.  298.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC.  373

By  their  own  acknowledgment,*  they  have  cultivated
astronomy  for  the  sake  of  astrology ;  and  they  may  have
done  so  with  the  aid  of  hints  received  from  the  same  quar-
ter,  from  which  their  astrology  is  derived.  In  the  present
instance  VabAha  mihira  himself,  as  interpreted  by  his
commentator,  quotes  the  Yavanas  (meaning  perhaps  Gre-
cian authors),  in  a  manner  which  indicates,  that  the  de-
scription of  the  dreshcanas  is  borrowed  from  them.

The  name  of  YavanAchArya,  who  is  cited  by  Bhat-
f  6tpala,  would  not  be  alone  decisive.  He  is  frequently
quoted  by  Hindu  astronomers :  and  it  is  possible,  though
by  no  means  certain,  that,  under  this  name,  a  Grecian  or
an  Arabian  author  may  be  intended.  To  determine  that
point,  it  will  be  requisite  (unless  the  work  attributed  to
him  be  recovered)  to  collect  all  the  passives,  in  which
YavanAcharya  is  cited  by  Sanscrit  authors;  and  to
compare  the  doctrmes  ascribed  to  him  with  those  of  the
Grecian  and  Arabian  vniters  on  astronomy.  Not  being
prepared  for  such  a  disquisition,  I  shall  dismiss  this  sub-
ject for  the  present,  without  offering  any  positive  opinion
on  the  question,  which  has  been  here  proposed.


•  Bhasoara  expressly  says,  "  By  ancient  astronomers,  the  pur-
pose of  the  science  is  declared  to  he  judicial  astrology;  and  that,
indeed,  depends  on  the  influence  of  configurations;  and  these,  on  the
apparent  places  of  the  planets."— <z6^fld&y<!iyo,  1.  v.  6.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


XV.

On  the  Notion  of  the  Hindu  Astronomers  concerning
the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes  aTui  Motions  of
the  Planets.


[From  the  Asiatic  Researches,  vol.  xii.  p.  209 — 250.
Calcutta,  1816.  4to.]


In  an  essay  on  the  Indian  and  Arabian  divisions  of  the
zodiac,  inserted  in  the  ninth  volume  of  the  Asiatic  Re-
searcheSy  I  adverted  to  a  passage  of  BhAscara,  on  the
precession  of  the  equinoxes,  and  intimated  an  intention  of
further  noticing  this  subject  in  a  separate  essay.*  The
passage  which  I  had  then  in  view,  occurs  in  BhAscara's
description  of  the  armillary  sphere.f  It  appears  to  me
deserving  of  distinct  examination  for  the  information  which
it  contains,  the  difficulties  which  it  presents,  and  the  va-
riety of  topics  which  it  suggests.  I  shall  here  quote  the
original,  and  add  a  verbal  translation.

rR^%r)tiJ|U||chrO  Jri^-^'1'<iri^<l:  Tl<ttTI

'  The  intersection  of  the  ecliptic  and  equinoctial  circles
is  the  CrantipatUf  or  intersecting  point  of  the  sun's  path.

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  353.  [p.  350  of  the  present  volume-l
+  GMdhy&ya,  c.  6.  v.  17  and  18.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  376

Its  revolutions,  as  declared  on  the  authority  of  Sury  a  {SaU"
rSctah),  are  retrogade  three  myriads  in  a  calpa.  This  is
the  same  with  the  motion  of  the  solstice,  as  affirmed  by
MunjAla,  and  others.  But,  according  to  their  doctrine,
its  revolutions  are  199,  669  in  a  calpaJ

This  is  the  very  passage  to  which  the  commentator  on
the  Surya  siddkdnta,  cited  by  Mr.  Davis,*  alludes,  where
he  says,  *  the  meaning  of  BhAscaka  AchArya  was  not
that  StjRYA  [in  the  Surya  siddhanta^  gave  30,000  as  the
revolutions  of  the  places  of  the  colures,  in  a  calpa ;  the
name  he  used  being  Saura  not  Surya,  and  applied  to  some
other  book.'

It  is  certainly  true,  as  here  observed  by  this  commen-
tator, that  BhAscara's  quotation  does  not  agree  with  the
text  of  the  S&rya  siddhanta,  which  expresses,  *  The  circle
of  the  asterisms  moves  eastward  thiiiy  scores  in  a  yuga.
Multiplying  the  number  of  elapsed  days  by  that,  and  di-
viding by  the  terrestrial  days,  [which  compose  the  cycle,]
the  quantity  obtained  is  an  arc,  which,  multiplied  by  three,
and  divided  by  ten,t  gives  degrees  (ansa)  termed  ayana,
[or  the  place  of  the  colure.]'

Here  the  number  of  revolutions  is  600  in  a  yuga,  an-
swering to  600,000  in  a  calpa;  and  not,  as  stated  by
BhAscara,  30,000.  But  the  commentator's  mode  of  re-
conciling the  contradiction,  by  supposing  a  different  book
from  the  Sdtrya  siddhanta  to  have  been  intended,  is  incom-

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  267.  f  Ratio  of  27**  to  90<>.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


376  HINDU  ASTRONOMERS

patible  with  BhAscara's  own  explanation  of  his  text  in
the  Vasana  hhashya^  containing  annotations  by  himself  on
his  own  treatise.  He  there  says  in  express  words,  '  the
revolutions  of  the  intersecting  point  of  the  sun's  path  are
stated  in  the  Surya  siddhanta,  as  amounting  to  30,000  in
a  calpa.^

His  commentator,  MunIswara,  has  therefore  recourse
to  other  expedients  for  reconciling  the  contradiction  between
BhAscara-s  quotation  and  the  text  of  the  Surya  sid-
dhanta. Some,  he  observes,  have  proposed  to  read  niyuta
*  a  hundred  thousand,'  for  ayuta  *  a  myriad/f  Others
have  supposed  the  calpa  to  be  a  twentieth  part  only  of  Uie
period  usually  so  denominated.  The  commentator  further
suggests  the  resolution  of  the  term  vyastah,  translated
'  retrograde,'  into  vi  for  mrisati  '  twenty,'  and  astak,
which  he  makes  to  signiiy  ^  multiplied,'  and  expounds  the
phrase,  '  thirty  thousand  multipUed  by  twenty.'  But,  dis-
satisfied with  this  and  vnih  another  exposition,  by  which  '
trayam '  three ' is  construed into  '  sixty,' he  gives  the

*  Bhascara's  Vasand  hh&shya  on  the  astronomy  and  spherics  of  his
Siddhdnta  sir6ma£i.  This  volume  of  annotations  is  commented,  with
the  ^Mmahiy  by  NrYsinha  in  the  Vdsand  vdrticGy  as  proceeding  from
the  same  writer ;  and  is  expressly  acknowledged  to  be  a  work  of  the
author  of  the  text  (as  it  actually  purports)  by  the  scholiast  MunIS-
waba,  in  this  very  place,  where  he  is  endeavouring  to  support  his
own  interpretation  of  the  text,  against  the  apparent  and  natural  sense
of  a  passage  in  the  author's  notes.

t  He  alludes  either  to  the  Vdsand  vdrtica,  in  which  that  emenda-
tion of  the  text  is  actually  suggested  by  the  annotator  NbYsinha,  or
to  some  earlier  commentary  in  which  the  same  conjectural  emendation
may  have  been  originally  proposed.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  377

preference  to  an  equally  strained  interpretation,  which
divides  the  sentence  into  two  members :  *  its  revolutions
are  declared  by  S^rya,  and  [according  to  a  different  au-
thority] are  retrogade  three  myriads  in  a  calpa.*

However  unsatisfactory  these  explanations  of  the  text
may  be,  they  prove  the  concurrence  of  the  commentators
of  both  works,  in  the  received  interpretation  of  the  obscure
passage  of  the  Surya  siddhanta,  which  is  the  subject  of
their  discussion.  That  interpretation  is  supported  by  cor-
responding passages  of  the  S6ma  siddhanta,  Laghu  van
sishi*ha,  and  Sacalya  sanhita,  in  which  the  number  of  six
hundred  revolutions  is  explicitly  stated:*  as  well  as  by
other  quotations,  which  clearly  demonstrate,  that  a  libra-
tion  of  the  equinoxes,  at  the  rate  of  six  hundred  in  a  yuga,
was  there  meant.  For,  in  all  the  passages  quoted,  the
revolution,  as  it  is  termed,  of  the  equinoctial  points,  consists
in  a  libration  of  them  within  the  limits  of  twenty-seven
degrees  east,  and  as  many  west,  of  the  beginnings  of  Aries
and  Libra :  and  that  such  is  the  meaning  conveyed  in  the
text  of  the  Surya  siddhanta,  is  distii^ctly  shown  by  the

Sima  siddhdnia.

Sacalya  safihitdy  i.  286— 291.

Laghu  vasishVka  siddhdnta,
cited  by  Dadabuai'  and  Nrisinha,  on  the  Sdrya  siddb6nUi.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


378  HINDU  ASTRONOMERS

commentator  cited  by  Mr.  Davis,*  as  well  as  by  the  other
commentators  on  that  work.

The  same  doctrine  is  taught  in  the  Parasara  siddkanta,
as  quoted  by  MunIswara  ;  and,  if  we  may  rely  on  the
authority  of  -a  quotation  by  this  author  from  the  works  of
ARYABHAffA,  it  was  also  maintained  by  that  ancient
astronomer :  but,  according  to  the  first-mentioned  treatise,
the  number  of  librations  amounts  to  581,709,  and,  accord-
ing to  the  latter,  578,159  in  a  calpa,  instead  of  600,000 ;
and  ARYABHAffA  has  stated  the  limits  of  the  libration  at
24°  instead  of  27  °.t

BhAscara  himself,  adopting  the  doctrine  for  which  he
quotes  the  authority  of  Munjala,  in  the  passage  above
cited,  mentions  a  complete  revolution  of  the  places  of  the
colures  through  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac,  at  the  rate

II  lit IT  ▼  TI

of  59  54  9.  31  12  per  annum,  or  199,669  complete  revo-
lutions in  a  calpa.  Having  computed  upon  the  same
principle,  the  quantity  of  the  precession  in  his  own  time

rev.  • o  I  II III nil T TI

at  91,189  0  10  54  35  23  55  40  48,  he  thence,  for  the
sake  of  facility  in  calculation,  assumes  in  his  practical  trea-
tise, named  Carana  cutdhala^  the  actual  precession  in
whole  numbers  at  eleven  degrees,  and  allows  the  annual
motion  to  be  taken  at  one  minute.  % The  time  for  which  this


•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  267. The  commentator  is  NrIsinha.

ARYABHAff  A,in  the  Art/dsMosata ;  quoted  byMuNfSwARA.  It  is  espe-
cially necessary  to  distinguish  the  particular  work  of  this  author,  to
which  reference  is  made:  for  Brahmeoupta  reproaches  him  for  his
inconsistency  in  affirming  revolutions  of  the  nodes  in  the  Ary6sh-
iasatay  which  he  denied  in  the  DasagUnca.  It  is  therefore  probable,
that  the  libration  of  the  equinoxes  (considered  as  nodes)  for  which  the
first-mentioned  work  is  quoted,  may  not  be  stated  in  the  other.
X  MuNfswARA,  in  his  commentary' on  the  ^irdmani.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  379

computatioii  was  made,  is  the  same  with  the  epocha  of  the
Carana  cutuhala;*  which  is  the  year  1105  Saca,t  thirty-
three  years  after  the  Sir6mani  was  completed.  J

Bhascara's  authority,  supporting  that  of  MunjAla,
and  countenanced  by  Vishnu  Chandra's, §  has  not
availed  with  Indian  astronomers.  Even  his  commentator
MuNiSwARA  rejects  the  notion  of  a  complete  revolution;
and,  in  his  own  treatise  entitled  Siddhanta  sarvabhauma,
asserts  the  doctrine  of  libration,  and  attempts  to  refute  the
other  opinion,  not  indeed  by  argument,  but  in  deference  to
the  Surya  siddhanta  and  other  authorities  to  which  it  is
opposed.  Upon  the  same  ground,  CamalAcara  in  the
Siddhanta  tatwaviveca  says,  '  The  degrees  of  the  colures,
as  stated  by  MunjAla,  and  taught  in  the  SirSmani,  con-
trary to  what  is  declared  by  Arc  a  (S6rya)  and  others,
from  not  rightly  understanding  what  was  by  them  declared,

•  The  Graha  Idghava^  written  in  1442  ^dca,  deducts  444  from  the
expired  years  of  the  ^dca,  and  divides  by  sixty,  reckoning  the  pre-
cession at  a  minute  a  year.  This  agrees  nearly  with  the  CaraHa  cutd-
hala;  for,  if  the  same  number  (444)  be  deducted  from  the  years  expired
(1 105  Sacd)y  the  remainder  gives  but  one  minute  above  1 1°,  the  quan-
tity there  assumed  by  Bhascaba.

Ramagmandra,  who  in  the  Cdla  nirAaya  states  the  quantity  of
precession  as  amounting  to  12^,  and  reckons  the  precession  at  a
minute  of  a  degree,  a  year,  seems  also  to  have  followed  the  same
authority.  He  may  therefore  have  written  about  sixty  years  subse-
quent to  the  date  of  the  Ckuraha  ctUdhala;  or  Sdca,  1165.  This  ascer-
tainment of  the  age  of  Ramachandba  aohabya  is  a  step  towards
investigating  the  age  of  writers  in  other  branches  of  science  who
have  quoted  this  author,  or  who  are  cited  by  him.  They  are  nume-
rous.

t  FaizI,  in  his  translation  of  Bhascara's  Lildvad,

I  For  it  was  finished  when  the  author  was  thirty-six  years  of  age ;
and  he  was  bom  in  1036  ^dca:  as  he  informs  us.

§  Author  of  the  FasishVha  siddhdnta,  a  distinct  work  from  the
Laghu  vashhVha  cited  by  Dadabua'i,  and  (under  the  title  of  Va-
sishVha  siddhanta)  by  Nrisinua.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


380  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

must  be  rejected  by  the  wise.'  He  certainly  here  expresses
the  prevalent  opinion  of  the  Hindu  astronomers,  which  is
decidedly  in  favour  of  a  libration  of  the  places  of  Uie
colures.

Besides  MunjIla  mentioned  by  BhAscara,  the  only
other  ancient  author,  whose  name  I  find  quoted  for  a  com-
plete revolution  of  the  equinoctial  and  solstitial  points,  is
Vishnu  chandra,  from  whose  works  a  passage  is  cited
by  PRtx'HfiDACAswAMl,  declaratory  of  a  solstitial  yuga^
or  period  of  the  ayana.  The  text  is  corrupt  in  respect  of
the  lowest  digits  of  the  number;  and,  having  found  no
other  quotation  of  it,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  state  the  period
from  a  conjectural  emendation  of  this  passage.

It  is  necessary  to  observe,  that  some  of  the  ancient
writers  on  astronomy  have  not  admitted  a  periodical  motion
of  the  equinoxes.  This  is  adverted  to  by  BhAscara  him-
self,* who  instances  Brahmegupta.  Thereason  of  that
omission  or  denial  is  supposed  by  BnAscARAf  to  have
been  the  inconsiderable  quantity  of  the  deviation  or  preces-
sion, not  then  remarkable,  and  consequently  unheeded  by
Brahmegupta;  since  whose  time  it  is  become  sensible,
and  therefore  it  is  now  taken  into  account. :}:  BhAscara
next  inquires  '  why  Brahmegupta  and  the  rest  did  not

•  In  the  Vdsand  hUshya,  t  Ibid,

*  Why  has  it  not  been  stated  by  Brahmegupta  and  other  skilful
astronomers  ?  It  was  not  perceived  by  them,  because  it  was  then  in-
considerable. But  it  is  perceived  by  the  modems,  because  it  is  now
considerable.  Accordingly  it  is  concluded,  that  there  is  motion,  [of
the  solstice.'] Bhascaka  in  the  Fdsand  bhdshya.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  381

nevertheless  state  it  on  the  strength  of  authority^  since  it
had  been  declared  in  the  Saura  siddhanta;  in  like  manner
as  the  numbers  of  revolutions,  the  periphery  of  epicycles,

&C.?'*

He  replies :  '  In  mathematical  science  holy  tradition  is
authority,  so  far  only  as  it  agrees  with  demonstration.'
He  goes  on  to  say>  '  Such  motion,  as  results  from  the
assigned  revolutions,  by  which,  places  being  calculated  agree
with  those  which  are  observed,  must  be  admitted,  whether
taught  by  a  holy  sage  or  by  a  temporal  teacher.  If  then
the  same  places  are  deducible  from  other  revolutions,
which  of  the  assigned  motions  is  the  true  one  ?  The  an-
swer is,  whichever  agrees  with  present  observation  must
be  admitted.  But,  if  in  process  of  time,  the  difference
become  great,  then  men  of  genius,  like  Brahmegupta,
will  arise,  who  will  acknowledge  such  motions  as  agree
with  present  observation,  and  compose  books  {sastras)
conformable  thereto.  Accordingly  this  mathematical  science
has  no  end  in  eternal  time.'

But  Brahmegupta's  commentator,  expounding  a  pas-
sage of  this  author,t  which  he  considers  to  be  levelled
against  those  who  affirmed  a  periodical  revolution  of  the
solstitial  points,  and  which  does  deny  such  a  revolution,
and  declares  the  solstice  to  be  invariable,  because  the
longest  day  and  shortest  night  occur  constantly  at  the  end
o(  Mifhuna  or  Gemini,  adverts,  in  the  course  of  his  expo-
sition of  the  text,  to  passages  which  place  the  southern  and
northern  solstice  respectively  in  the  middle  of  Aslesh&y  and
beginning  of  Dhanishi'h&y  and  proceeds  to  remark  *  this

t  Ch.  ii.


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


382  HINDU  ASTRONOMERS

only  proves  a  shifting  of  the  solstice,  not  numerous  revo-
lutions of  it  through  the  ecliptic'  His  notion  appears
.then  to  have  been,  that  his  author  was  aware  of  the  feet  of
a  change  in  the  positions  of  the  solstitial  and  equinoctial
points,  but  did  not  admit  the  inference  that  the  motion  must
be  periodical.

From  all  that  has  been  said,  it  appears,  that  some  of  the
most  celebrated  astronomers,  as  Brahmegupta,  have
been  silent  on  the  subject  of  a  change  in  the  places  of  the
colures,  or  have  denied  their  regular  periodical  motion.
That  others,  as  MunjAla  and  BhAscara  (we  may  add
Vishnu  chandra)  have  asserted  a  periodical  revolution
of  the  places  of  the  colures.  But  that  the  greater  number
of  celebrated  writers,  and  all  the  modem  Hindu  astrono-
mers, have  affirmed  a  libration  of  the  equinoctial  points.

The  earUest  known  author  who  is  cited  for  the  support
of  this  doctrine,  as  fer  as  present  research  has  gone,  is
ARYABHAff A,  who  is  undoubtedly  more  ancient  than
Br  A  HMEGUPTA ;  for  he  is  repeatedly  quoted  in  the  Brahme
sp'huta  siddhanta  which  is  ascribed  to  Brahmegupta,
and  which  there  is  every  reason  to  consider  genuine,  since
the  text  of  the  book  accords  with  the  quotations  from  that
celebrated  astronomer  to  be  found  in  treatises  of  various
dates.

I  purposely  omit  in  this  place  the  Sdrya  siddk&nta,
SSma,  Sacalyaj  Vasishi'ha  and  Parasaray  because  their
authenticity  and  age  are  subjects  of  question  or  of  contro-
versy.

Relying  then  upon  the  quotation  from  the  work  of  ARYA-
BHAff a,  and  on  the  tendency  of  BhAscara's  observa-
tions both  in  his  text  and  notes,  it  may  be  inferred,  that
the  notion  of  a  hbration  of  the  equinoxes  is  of  some  anti-
quity in  India:  since  Brahmegupta,  by  whom  ARYA-
BHAff a is  repeatedly  mentioned, is either author  or


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON THE  EQUINOXES.  383

republisher  of  an  astronomical  system  which  was  copied  by
BhAscara  in  1150  a.d.,  but  which  is  adapted  to  a  much
earlier  age.

The  doctrine  in  question  found  advocates  formerly  among
the  astronomers  of  Europe  and  of  Arabia.  Arzael,  a
Spaniard,  and  a  mathematician  of  the  eleventh  century,*
author  of  a  treatise,  entitled  observations  on  the  obUquity
of  the  zodiac,  affirmed  a  Ubration  or  trepidation  in  longi-
tude vrithin  the  Umits  of  10°  E.  and  W.  at  the  rate  of
a  degree  in  seventy-five  years.f  Two  centuries  after  him,
ThAbit  ben  Korrah,  an  astrologer,;]:  assigned  to  this
supposed  trepidation  the  Umits  of  22  E.  and  W,%  To
the  same  astrologer,  by  some  supposed  to  have  lived  as
much  earUer,  as  he  is  here  stated  to  have  been  later,  a
different  doctrine  is  ascribed,  affirming  a  motion  of  the
intersected  points  of  the  ecliptic  and  equinoctial  in  a  small
circle  described  with  the  radius  4°  18'  43".||

They  were  led  to  that  hypothesis  (according  to  a  remark
quoted  by  the  authors  who  have  refuted  the  notion^)  by
considering  that  '  Hermes  had  found  some  of  the  fixed
stars  more  distant  firom  the  beginning  of  Aries,  than  Pto-
lemy subsequently  did:  for  instance  the  bright  star  of
Hydra  in  7**  of  Leo,  placed  by  Ptolemy  in  30  of  Cancer;
and  the  star  named  Vultur  Cadens,  in  24°  of  Sagittarius,
but  by  Ptolemy  in  17°.*

*  He  observed  the  quantity  of  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  about
the  year  1070;  aud  is  named  by  Abraham  ebn  Ezra,  who  wrote  in
the  twelfth  centqry  (A.D.I  144  or  1150),  as  anterior  to  him  by  seventy,
one  years. Riccioli,  Almag.  nov,

t  RicoioLi,  Almagestum  novum,  3,  28,  6.

t  MORERI,  Diet,

§  Erasmus  Reinhold  on  Pur  bach;  Rico.  Almag.  nov,  3,  28,  6.

II  MoNTuoLA,  Hist,  des  Math.,  vol.  i.  p.  346.

IT  AuousTiNus  Riocius,  de  motu  octava  sphcerce.  Reoiomonta-
NU8,  lib.  7.  Epitomes  Almagesti. Rice.  Aim,  nov.  3,  28,  6.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


384  HINDU  ASTRONOMERS

The  notion  of  a  trepidation  in  longitude,  but  at  a  rate
not  equable^  had  been  entertained  by  the  astronomers,  who
compiled  the  Alphonsine  Tables,  though  Alphonsus  him-
self was  subsequently  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  correcter
opinion,  and  to  the  consequent  alteration  of  the  tables  first
published  by  him.*

The  earliest  mention  of  a  libration  in  longitude,  which
has  been  found  in  any  Arabic  writer,  is  in  the  work  of
MuHAMMED  ben  Jaber,  sumamcd  AlbAtanI,  and  by
us  called  Albategnius.  This  celebrated  astronomer,  an
Arabian  by  birth  and  Sabiau  by  religion,  flourished  at  the
end  of  the  ninth  century  ;t  or,  to  speak  with  precision,
about  the  year  of  Christ  879;  J  and  from  him  we  learn,
that  certain  astronomers  whom  he  does  not  appear  to  have
any  where  named,  had  before  him  affirmed  a  libration  of
the  fixed  stars  within  the  limits  of  8^  E.  and  W.  at  the
rate  of  a  degree  in  eighty  or  eighty-four  years.  §  He  him-
self maintained  the  doctrine  of  a  uniform  motion  at  the  rate
of  a  degree  in  sixty-six  years.  ||

I  have  dwelt  the  longer  upon  the  history  of  this  opinion,
because  it  appears  to  me  deserving  of  attention  on  more
than  one  account  AlbAtan!  is  the  earliest  of  the  Ara-
bian astronomers  who  improved  upon  Ptolemy  :  (for
Alf  ARGANi,  who  was  a  century  earlier,  is  not  cited  as  cor-
recting the  Grreek  astronomer  on  this  point.)  It  was  he  then,
who  first,  among  the  astronomers  of  the  west  of  Asia,  com-
puted the  motion  of  the  stars  at  a  degree  in  sixty-six  years ;
which  is  almost  the  same  with  the  rate  of  the  motion  of  trepi-

*  Abraham  Zacuthus,  cited,  like  the  preceding  authorities,  in
RiccioLi's  Almagest.  3,  28,  6.

t  D'Herbelot,  Bibl.  Orient.

t  He  himself  furnishes  the  date,  heing  the  year  1627  of  the  era  of
Nabonassar.  Albatron.  c.  51,  cited  in  RicoiOLrs  Almagest.  6,
16,  2.

§  Albateomius,  c.  52.  as  cited  hy  Ricoioli.  ||  Ihid,  c.  51.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EI^UINOXES.  385

dation  according  to  the  Sdrya  siddhanta,  and  the  herd  of
Hindu  astronomers^  who  reckon  a  degree  and  a-half  in  a
century.*  He  is  the  first  also,  as  far  as  can  be  discovered,
in  whose  works  mention  is  made  of  a  motion  of  trepidation,
and  we  may  be  permitted  to  conjecture,  that  the  earlier
astronomers  alluded  to  by  him  were  Indian;  since  we  find
ARYABHAffA,  an  author  seemingly  of  an  earlier  age,
quoted  for  a  libration  of  the  equinoctial  points  within  the
limits  of  twenty-four  degrees,  at  the  rate  of  one  in  seventy-
^ht  years;  and  since  we  know  that  an  Arabian  astro-
nomer, anterior  by  nearly  a  century  to  AlbAtanI,  had
compiled  tables  in  conf<Nrmity  to  rules  of  astronomy  appa-
rently Indian.t

We  may  then  safely  conclude,  that,  on  the  subject  of
the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  the  Hindus  had  a  theory,
which,  though  erroneous,  was  their  own ;  and  which,  at  a
subsequent  time,  found  advocates  among  the  astronomers
of  the  west.  That  they  had  a  knowledge  of  the  true  doc-
trine of  an  uniform  motion  in  antecedentia,  at  least  seven
hundred  years  ago,;];  when  the  astronomers  of  Europe  also
were  divided  on  the  question.  That  they  had  approximated

*  This  is  the  rate  resulting  from  the  quantity  of  the  motion  in  tre-
pidation stated  in  the  Sdrya  siddhdnta :  and  the  same  results  from  the
rules  of  calculation  given  in  the  Bhdswati  caraha  of  Satan anda  and
in  the  JSAacdr^aoa  improperly  ascribed  to  Vabaha  mihira.  They
both  direct  the  number  421  to  be  deducted  from  the  expired  years  of
hdca;  and  the  one  deducts  a  tenth  and  reduces  the  remainder  into
degrees;  the  other  adds  half  and  divides  by  a  hundred.  Another
mle,  producing  the  same  result,  is  mentioned  in  Baii*ly*8  Asit,  Ind^
p.  76.

t  ^AdreguUuSendHend:  {Siddh6ntf)  Abdlfarao.  Hist.  Dynast.
p.  114  and  161.  Costard's  Astronomy,  p.  157,  ^md  Montuola
Hkt.  des  Math.y  vol.  i.  p.  344.

X  BhIscara,  who  quotes  MunjIla,  completed  the  ^ir^ma^'  in
1072iaca,orA.D.1160.

VOL.  n.  2  c


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


386  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

to  the  trae  rate  of  that  motion  much  nearer  than  Ptolemy,
before  the  Arabian  astronomers,  and  as  near  the  truth  as
these  have  ever  done  since.  From  this  we  may  perhaps
be  led  to  a  further  conclusion,  that  the  astronomy  of  the
Hindus  merits  a  more  particular  examination  than  it  has
yet  obtained,  not  indeed  with  any  expectation  of  advancing
the  science  of  astronomy,  which  needs  not  such  aid,  and
can  derive  none  from  the  labours  of  astronomers  who  have
recorded  no  observations ;  but  for  the  history  of  the
science,  and  ascertainment  of  the  progress  which  was  here
made :  and  that,  with  this  view,  the  works  of  Hindu  astro-
nomers, whose  age  is  precisely  known,  and  in  particular,
those  of  BhAscara,  which  contain  a  complete  course  of
astronomy  and  of  sciences  connected  with  it,  should  be
cai'efully  perused;  as  well  as  those  of  Brahmegupta,
which  are  full  of  quotations  from  earlier  astronomers,  as

ARYABHAff A,* VARAHAMIHIRA,f  &RiSHfiNA,t  VlSH-

NUCHANDRA,^  and  some  others,  who  are  cited  by  him  for
the  purpose  of  exposing  and  correcting  their  errors.

In  regard  toYARAHAMiHiRA  and  the  Surya  siddhanta,
both  separately  quoted  in  the  Brahme  sp*huia  siddhanta  of
Brahmegupta,  I  may  here  remark  that  a  book  entitled
S6rya  siddhanta  is  mentioned  by  VarAhamihir^a  him-
self, in  his  most  undoubted  work,  the  treatise  on  Astrology,
entitled  Varaht  sanhithy  where,  describing  the  qualifications
requisite  to  form  an  accomplished  astrologer,  he  says,  '  the
astrologer  should  be  conversant  with  divisions  of  time  and
geometrical  figures,  as  taught  in  the  five  Siddhantas,  or

•  Author  of  the  DasagUicd  and  Art/dskta  sata:

t  Named  with  censure  by  Brahmegupta.

t  Author  of  the  Ratnaca  siddhdnta.

§  Mentioned  as  the  author  of  the  VdsishVha  siddhanta.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  387

systemB  of  astronomy,  called  Paulisa,  RSmaca,  VasisKfhaj
Saura^  and  PcAtamaJia.*  *

VarAhamihira^  as  appears  from  the  quotations  of  his
own  commentator  BHAff6TPALA  and  many  other  astro-
nomical writers,  is  likewise  author  of  a  treatise  entitled
Pancha  siddhkntica,  in  which  the  five  systems  above  men*
tioned  are  compared ;  and,  as  far  as  can  be  gathered  from
quotations,  their  agreements  and  disagreements  noticed.
A  passage  of  this  treatise  as  cited  by  BuAff 6tpala,  is
sufficiently  remarkable  to  be  here  inserted,  since  it  bears
relation  to  the  subject  of  this  paper.  It  corresponds
in  import  to  a  passage  quoted  by  Mr.  Davis,  and  Sir
William  JoN£S,t  firom  the  third  chapter  of  the  Varahi
sanhita;  but  refers  the  actual  position  of  the  colures  to  the
asterisms  instead  of  the  signs  of  the  zodiac.

'  When  the  return  of  the  sun  took  place  from  the  middle
of  Ailesha,  the  tropic  was  then  right.  It  now  takes  place
firom  Punarvasu.*

The  same  five  systems  of  astronomy  from  which  VarA-
HAMiHiRA  is  understood  to  have  compiled  the  astronomical
treatise  just  now  quoted,  and  which  are  named  by  him  in

t  As.  Res.y  vol.  ii.  p.  391.


2  c2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


388  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

the  passage  of  his  astrology  before  cited^  are  mentioned  by
Brahmegupta  also  as  standard  authcmtiesy  and  enume-
rated by  him  in  the  tame  order :  and  his  names^  which  are
precisely  the  same  with  those  inVARiHAMiniRA's  enume-
ration,'*^ are  explained  by  BHAff6TPALA|  as  intending
the  Puliia  siddhaMay  MAmaca  siddhanta,  Vanshi^ha  sid-
dh&nta,  S&rya  siddhanta,  and  Brakme  siddhanta.

All  these  books  are  fireqaendy  cited  in  astrooomical
compilations,  and  are  occasionally  refierred  to  their  real  (x
supposed  authors.  The  first  is  ev^  where  assigned  to
PuliSa,  whose  name  it  bears.  The  Riauiea  siddh&nta  is
ascribed  by  the  scholiast  of  Brahmegupta,  and  by  a
commentator  of  the  Sivrya  giddkanta,  to  SrI^^na  or
^RlsHfiifA  (for  the  name  is  variously  written).  The  Fa-
sishi^ha  siddhanta  is  by  the  same  authority  gtTen  to
YisHNUCHANDRA.  Both  thesc  authors  are  repeatedly
mentioned  with  censure  by  Brahmegupta;  and  it  is
acknowledged  that  they  are  entitled  to  no  particalar  ckfe-
rence.

This  passage,  in  which  the  Paulishtif  Rbmaca^  FdstshVhOy  SaurOy  and
Pait6maha  are  specified,  is  introductory  to  a  di^dsion  of  the  lunar
asterisms  (for  astrological  purposes,  it  should  seem),  in  unequal  por-
tions, hy  allotting  to  fifteen  of  them  a  quantity  equivalent  to  the  mean
diurnal  motion  of  the  moon  in  minutes  of  a  degree  Q^^ZST)^  and  half
as  much  more  to  six  of  those  asterisms  (lids'  52^),  and  so  much  less
to  the  like  numher  of  nac^uOras  (395^  170  ttnd  assigning  the  comple*
ment  of  the  circle  (254'  IS'')  to  the  supplementary  nacshatra  called
AI>hijit.

{l^f  '^^^  numbers  here  set  down  are  copied  from  the  scholiast
BHAff6TPALA,  and  from  BhIsc aea's  commentators ;  being  stated  by
them  at  the  nearest  second :  for  the  moon's  mean  daily  motion  accord-
ing to  Brahmboupta  and  BhIscaba  is  a  little  less  than  T^C  35^.)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON TH£ EQUINOXES.  389

Hie  Brahme  siddhantOf  which  is  the  basis  of  Brahme-
oupta's  work,  is  not  any  where  attributed  to  a  known
author;  but  referred  in  all  quotations  of  it  which  have
fallen  under  observation,  either  to  the  ViskAu  dharmSttara
purana,  of  which  it  is  considered  as  forming  a  part,  or  to
Brahme  (also  called  PitAmaha),  who  is  introduced  into
it  as  the  speaker  in  a  dialogue  with  BhrIgu;  or  it  is
acknowledged  to  be  the  work  of  some  unknown  person.^
The  true  author  it  may  be  now  impracticable  to  discover,
and  would  be  vain  to  conjecture.

The  Sivrya  siddhanta  (if  the  same  which  we  now  pps*
sess)  is  in  hke  manner  ascribed  to  no  certain  author,  unless
in  the  passage  cited  by  our  colleague  Mr.  BENTLEY^f  vdio
says,  that  '  in  the  commentary  on  the  JBhastvati,  it  is
declared,  that  VarAha  was  the  author  of  the  Sdrya
siddhantaf  and  who  adds,  that  '  SatAnanda,  the
author  of  the  Bh&swaH,  was  a  pupil  of  VarIha  under
whose  directions  he  himself  acknowledges  he  wrote  that
wwk.'

The  concluding  remark  alludes  to  the  follovring  verse  of
the  Bhaswati  caraha.

Next  I will  propound succinctly, firom Mihira's
instruction,  [this  system]  equal  to  the  Sdrya  siddhanta'

*  DadIbhaI*,  in  his  commentary  on  the  Sdarya  siddhdnki,  says  so.
t  As.  Res.,  vol.  vi.  p.  572.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


390  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

It  is  preceded  by  an  introductory  couplet  which  will  be
found  quoted  at  the  foot  of  the  page,"*^  or  is  omitted  in  some
copies :  but  the  correct  reading,  as  appears  from  collation
of  text  and  scholia,  retains  both.

Admitting  then  its  authenticity,  and  supposing,  with
most  of  the  commentators,  that  VarIhamihira  is  here
intended  by  the  single  word  Mihira,  which,  however,  is  a
name  of  the  sun,  and  may  here  allude  to  the  fabled  dia-
logue of  S6rya  with  Meya,  as  is  observed  by  the  scholiast
Balabhadra  ; t  still  the  passage  is  not  unambiguous.  It
does  not  necessarily  imply  oral  tuition,  and  may  refer  to
instruction  derived  from  the  works  of  Y arIha  ;  especially
from  the  Pancha  siddhantica  of  that  author,  in  which  the
Siirya  siddhanta  was  explained  concurrently  with  four
other  treatises  termed  Siddhanta.

To  return  from  this  digression.  It  appears  from  what
had  been  before  said,  that  a  work  bearing  the  title  of  Sdrya
siddhanta  is  named  as  authority  by  YarAhamihira,  in
whose  time,  according  to  his  assertion,  the  place  of  the

snT%  f^ift%  s[FfstnTt%^  ti

<  HaviDg  bowed  to  the  foot  of  the  foe  of  Muba,  the  fortunate  Sa-
TANANDA  propounds,  for  the  benefit  of  students,  the  Bhaswaii,  in  the
Sdca  year  1021.*

The  author  SatInanda,  as  he  himself  informs  us  in  the  close  of
the  book,  was  an  inhabitant  of  PurushoUama  (the  site  of  the  temple
of  Jagann&tlia) :  and  dates  his  work  there  in  4200  of  the  Cali  yuga.
In  the  body  of  the  work  he  directs  the  difference  of  longitude  to  be
reckoned  from  the  meridian  of  Funtshhttama  cshttra,

t  His  commentary  is  dated  in  1465  of  Vicbamaditta  ;  more  than
400  years  ago.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  391

summer  solstice  was  at  the  beginning  of  the  sign  Carcaia,
and  in  the  asterism  Punarvasu.  A  treatise  under  the  same
title  is  similarly  mentioned  by  Brahmegupta,  who  has
likewise  noticed  VarAhamihira  himself,  and  who  is
supposed  by  BhAscara  to  have  lived  when  the  colures  had
not  sensibly  deviated  from  that  position.

It  may  be  questioned  whether  this  testimony  be  not  over-
thrown by  proofs  of  a  more  modem  date  (between  seven
and  eight  hundred  years  ago),  drawn  from  internal  evidence,
as  set  forth  by  Mr.  Bentlet,  in  his  ingenious  essays
inserted  in  the  sixth  and  eighth  volumes  of  our  Researches.^

Without  entering  at  present  into  any  disquisition  on  this
subject,  or  discussmg  the  accuracy  of  the  premises ;  but
acceding  generally  to  the  position,  that  the  date  of  a  set  of
astronomical  tables,  or  of  a  system  for  the  computation  of
the  places  of  planets,  is  deducible  from  the  ascertainment
of  a  time  when  that  system  or  set  of  tables  gave  results
nearest  to  the  truth;  and  granting  that  the  date  above-
mentioned  approximates  within  certain  limits  to  such  an
ascertainment ;  I  shall  merely  observe,  that  supposing  the
dates  otherwise  irreconcileable,  still  the  book  which  we
now  have  under  the  name  of  Sdrya^  or  Saura,  siddhanta,
may  have  been,  and  probably  was,  modernized  from  a
more  ancient  treatise  of  the  same  name,  the  later  work
borrowing  its  title  firom  an  earlier  performance  of  a  dif-
ferent author.  We  have  an  instance  of  this  practice  in  the
kindred  case  of  the  Brahme  siddhanta ;  for  we  are  ac-
quainted with  no  less  than  three  astronomical  treatises
bearing  this  title;  one  extracted  from  the  VtshAudhar-
mdttara ;  another  termed  the  Sacalya ;  and  tiie  third  the
Sp^htia  siddhanta  of  Brahmeoupta  :  and  an  equal
number  of  tracts  entitled  VasishVha  siddhanta  may  be

*  As.  Res.,  ToL  vi.  p.  572,  and  vol.  viii.  p.  206.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


392  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

traced  in  the  quotations  of  authors;  one  by  Visbnu-
CHANDRA ;  another  termed  Laghu  v&sishi'hay  which  from
its  name  should  be  an  abridgment ;  and  the  third,  appa-
rently an  ample  treatise,  distinguished  as  the  Vriddha
vasishi'ka.  This  solution  of  the  objection  also  is  ^itirely
compatible  with  the  tenor  of  the  references  to  the  Saura,
which  have  been  yet  remarked  in  the  works  of  Brahme-
GUPTA  and  YarAhamihira  ;  none  of  them  being  relative
to  points  that  fiimish  arguments  for  concluding  the  age  of
the  book  from  internal  evidence.

At  all  events,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  Surya
siddhanta,  we  have  the  authority  of  a  quotation  from
ARYABHAff  A,  to  show,  that  the  Hindus  had  ascertained
the  quantity  of  the  precession  more  correctly  than  Pto-
lemy ;  and  had  accounted  for  it  l^  a  motion  in  libration
or  trepidation,  before  this  notion  was  adopted  by  any  other
astronomer  whose  labours  are  known  to  us.

It  appears  also  from  a  passage  of  Brahmegupta's
refutation  of  the  supposed  errors  of  that  author,  and  from
his  conunentator's  quotation  of  AaYABHAff  a's  tes^t,  that
this  ancient  astronomer  maintained  the  doctrine  of  the
earth's  diurnal  revolution  round  its  axis.  *  The  sj^ere  of
the  stars,'  he  affirms  *  is  stationary ;  and  the  earth,  making
a  revolution,  produces  the  daily  rising  and  setting  of  stars
and  planets.'*  Brahmbgupta  answers,  '  If  the  earth
move  a  minute  in  a  prana,  then  whence  and  what  route
does  it  proceed  ?  If  it  revolve,  why  do  not  lofty  objects
fall?'f But  his  ocHumentator,  PRlT'HtiDACA  swAmI,  re-

AaYABHAff  A  cited  by  PBlfT'H<JDAOA.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  393

plies,  ^  ARYABHAff  a's  opimon  appears  neTerthelese  satis-
factory '^  since  planets  cannot  hare  two  motions  at  once :
and  the  objection,  that  lofty  things  would  fidl,  is  contra-
dicted ;  for,  every  way,  the  under  part  of  the  earth  is  also
the  upper;  since,  wherever  the  spectator  stands  on  the
earth's  surface,  even  that  spot  is  the  uppermost  point/

We  here  find  both  an  ancient  astronomer  and  a  later
commentatoi*  maintaining,  against  the  sense  of  their  coun-
trymen, the  rational  doctrine  which  Heraclidbs  of  Pontus,
the  Pythagorean  Ecphantus,  and  a  few  others  among  the
Ghreeks,  had  affirmed  of  old,  but  which  was  abandoned  by
the  astronomers  both  of  the  east  and  of  the  west,  until
revived  and  demonstrated  in  comparatively  modem  times.f

Brahmegupta  is  more  fortunate  in  his  reascming  where
he  refutes  another  theory  of  the  alternation  of  day  and
night  imagined  by  the  Jairuzs,  who  account  for  the  diurnal
change  by  the  passage  of  two  suns,  and  as  many  moons,
and  a  double  set  of  stars  and  minor  planets,  round  a  pyra-
midical  mountain,  at  the  foot  of  which  is  this  habitable
earth.  His  confutation  of  that  absurdity  is  copied  by  B  h  As-
CAiA,  idio  has  added  to  it  from  PRYr'ntiDACA's  gloss  on
a  different  passage  of  Brahmeoupta,  a  refutation  of  ano-
ther notion  ascribed  by  him  to  the  same  sect,  respecting
the  translatbn  of  the  earth  in  space.

This  idea  has  no  other  or^n  than  the  notion,  that  the
earth,  being  heavy  and  without  support,  must  perpetually
descend:  and  has,  therefore,  no  rdation  whatever  to  the
modem  opim<ni  of  a  proper  motion  of  the  sun  and  stars.

Brahme  sp'huta  siddh6nia,

*  The  commentator  wrote  at  least  seven  centuries  ago;  for  he  is
qqoted  by  Bhasoara  in  the  text  and  notes  of  the  ^iromahu

t  For  an  outline  of  ARVABHAffA's  system  of  astronomy,  see  a
note  at  the  close  of  this  Essay,  (p.  414.)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


394  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

Part  of  the  passage  of  BhAscara  has  been  quoted  in  a
former  essay.*  What  regards  the  further  subject  now  no-
ticed, is  here  subjoined.

'  The  earth  stands  firm,  by  its  own  power,  without  other
support  in  space.

'  If  there  be  a  material  support  to  the  earth,  and  another
upholder  of  that,  and  again  another  of  this,  and  so  on,
there  is  no  limit.  If  finally  self-support  must  be  assumed,
why  not  assume  it  in  the  first  instance  ?  why  not  recognise
it  in  this  multiform  earth  ?

'  As  heat  is  in  the  sun  and  fire,  coldness  in  the  moon,
fluidity  in  water,  hardness  in  iron ;  so  mobility  is  in  air ;
and  immobility  in  the  earth,  by  nature.  How  wonderful  are
the  implanted  faculties !

'  The  earth  possessing  an  attractive  force,t  draws  towards
itself  any  heavy  substance  situated  in  the  surrounding  atmos-
phere, and  that  substance  appears  as  if  it  fell.  But  whither
can  the  earth  fall  in  ethereal  space  which  is  equal  and  alike
on  every  side  ?

'  Observing  the  revolution  of  the  stars,  the  Bauddha^
acknowledge,  that  the  earth  has  no  support ;  but  as  nothing
heavy  is  seen  to  remain  in  the  atmosphere,  they  thence
conclude  that  it  falls  in  ethereal  space.

*  Whence  dost  thou  deduce,  O  Bauddha,  this  idle  notion,
that,  because  any  heavy  substance  thrown  into  the  air,
falls  to  the  earth,  therefore  the  earth  itself  descends  ? '  §

He  adds  this  further  explanation  in  his  notes :  '  For  if
the  earth  were  falling,  an  arrow  shot  into  the  air  would  not
return  to  it  when  the  projectile  force  was  expended,  since

*  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  322.  [p.  224,  of  the  present  volume.]

t  Like  the  attraction  of  the  loadstone  for  iron. Mdfichi  on  BhXs-

OABA.

t  Meaning  the  Jainas  ;  as  appears  from  the  author's  own  annota-
tion on  this  passage.
§  ^bma^iy  G6l&dhydyay  c.  i.  v.  2,  4,  7  and  9.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  395

both  would  descend.  Tfor  can  it  be  said  that  it  moves
slower,  and  is  overtaken  by  the  arrow ;  for  heaviest  bodies
iail  quickest,  and  the  earth  is  heaviest.'

It  has  been  observed  in  a  former  part  of  this  essay,  that
Brahmegupta's  treatise  of  astronomy  is  founded  on  an
anterior  one  entitled  Brahme  siddhanta ;  and  the  authen-
ticity of  the  book  extant  under  Brahmegupta's  name
has  been  relied  upon,  and  passages  have  been  freely  cited
from  it,  as  the  genuine  performance  of  that  ancient  astro-
nomer. These  matters  appear  to  be  of  sufficient  import-
ance to  deserve  a  more  particular  explanation  of  their
grounds.

The  source  from  which  Brahmegupta  drew,  is  indi-
cated by  the  author  himself,  in  his  introductory  couplet,
cited  by  LacshmIdAsa  in  the  commentary  on  BhAs-
cara;*

which,  in  a  literal  version,  will  stand  thus : — '  The  compu-
tation of  planets,  as  declared  by  BrahmA,  and  become
imperfect  by  great  length  of  time,  is  perspicuously  {sp'huid)
explained  by  Brahmegupta,  son  of  Jishnu.'

The  ambiguity  imputable  to  this  passage  is  obviated  by
the  more  explicit  terms  of  the  initial  stanza  of  his  eleventh
chapter,  where  Brahmegupta  announces  a  refutation  of
opinions  opposed  to  the  Brahme  siddhanta :

•  •  The  Oahita  taiwa  chmtdmaiiiy  dated  in  1423  ^dca^  or  1501  A.D.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


396  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

'  I  wUl  refiite  the  errors  (respecting  the  yugas  and  other
matters)  of  those  who,  misled  by  ignorance,  maintain  things
contrary  to  the  Brakme  siddhanta/

What  the  work  is,  to  which  Brahmegupta  refers  under
the  title  specified  by  him,  and  corresponding  to  a  subse-
quent mention  by  him  of  the  Paitamaha  nddh&nta  (both
titles  being  of  the  same  import),  is  explained  by  the  scho-
liasts of  BhAscara  and  of  the  Sdrya  siddhanta.  NrY-
siNH  A,  a  commentator  on  both  texts,*  affirms  that  Brah-
meoupta's  rules  are  formed  from  the  VishAu  dharmSttara
puranaf  in  which  the  Brakme  tiddhanta  is  contained  ^
BhAscara's  commentator,  MuNiSwARA;]:,  remarks,  that
Brahmegupta,  having  verified  by  observation  the  revo-
lutions stated  in  the  Brakme  riddhanta  of  the  Vish^
dharmSttara^  and  having  found  them  suitable  to  his  own
time,  adopted  these  numbers,  rejecting  the  revolutions
taught  by  Surya  and  the  rest.  In  other  places  the  com-
mentator cites  parallel  passages  from  Brahmegupta  and
the  Brakme  (also  termed  by  him  Paitimakd)  Hddkanta
of  the  Visknu  dkarmdttara :%  and  these  with  numerous


*  He  is  the  author  of  a  comroentary  on  the  S(trya  MdhSniOy  and  of
the  Vdsand  v6riica  on  BhIsoaba's  text  and  notes.  It  is  dated  in
1543  ^^kra,  orl62lA.D.

t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  242.

X  Author  of  the  Mdfichi  on  BhIsoara's  6if^mdii,  and  of  a  dis-
tinct treatise  of  astronomy,  the  Siddfidnta  sdrvabhauma.  The  ear-
liest copy  of  the  Mdrichi  is  dated  1560  §6ca  (A.D.  1638),  which  is  not
much  later  than  the  date  of  the  work  itself;  for  the  Emperor  N6b-
UDDfir  JbhIn ofR  is  mentioned  at  the  close  of  the  bode,  as  he  also
is  in  the  preface  of  a  commentary  on  the  Siktya  iiddkdfUa  by  the
aathor*s  father  Ranoanat*ha.

§  Take  the  following  as  examples :

ht.  The  number  of  sidereal  days  in  a  calpa,  (viz.  1582,236,450,000)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  397

quotations  irora  Brahmegupta  in  the  Chintamani  and  in
other  commentaries  on  BhAscara,  as  well  as  in  the
author's  notes  on  his  own  text^  are  exactly  conformable  with
the  Brahme  sp'kuia  siddhanta  now  An  my  possession,  and
which  is  accompanied  by  the  gloss  of  Brahm£6Upta*s
celebrated  commentator  Chaturv^da  PrKt'e^jdaca
swlMf.

It  appears  then,  from  a  collation  of  the  passages  so  cited,
that  Brahmboupta's  work  is,  at  least  in  part,  a  para-
phrase of  the  Brahme or  Paitamaha ;  containing,  how*-

which  the  PaUdmaha  siddhSnta  of  the  Vishim  dhermbttara  (cited  in
MMchif  ch.  i.)  ezpreMes  hy  these  words :

and  Brahmegupta  renders  by  the  equivalent  terms,

frT«R:tl

2d.  The  commencement  of  the  calpOf  on  Sunday,  Ist  ChaUra^  at
the  moment  of  sunrise  on  the  meridian  of  Lancd,  which  the  Brdhme
siddhdnia  of  the  Vish^  dhannibUara  pvr&ha  (Mdrichiy  ch.  ii.)  thus
expresses :

and  Brahmboupva  by  the  following  couplet.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


398  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

ever,  additional  matter:  and  it  is  accordingly  termed  by
one  of  the  scholiasts  of  the  Surya  siddhanta,*  a  commen-
tary on  the  Paitamaha;  and  Chaturv^da's  gloss  is
denominated,  by  the  same  scholiast,  an  interpretation  of  the
Paitamaha  bhashya.

In  support  of  what  has  been  here  said,  I  shall  adduce  a
few  instances  of  quotation  on  subjects  possessing  some
degree  of  interest.

The  first  is  one  in  which  BhAscara  vindicates  a  pas-
sage of  Brahmegupta  from  the  objections  of  his  com-
mentator, quoting  the  passage  itself  in  his  notes,  and
there  naming  the  scholiast,  Chaturv£da  :  from  which,
be  it  remarked,  the  commentary  is  ascertained  to  be  ante-
rior to  BhAscara's  work:  I  have  a  further  reason,  how-
ever, for  citing  the  passage,  as  it  furnishes  occasion  for
some  observations  on  the  Indian  theory  of  astronomy.

The  Hindus,  as  is  well  known,  place  the  earth  in  the
centre  of  tlie  world,  and  make  the  Sun  and  Moon  and
minor  planets  revolve  round  it,  apparently  in  concentric
orbits,  with  unequal  or  irregular  motion.  For  a  physical
explanation  of  the  pheenomena,  they  imagine  the  planets
driven  by  currents  of  air  along  their  respective  orbits  (be-
sides one  great  vortex  carrying  stars  and  planets  with
prodigious  velocity,  round  the  earth,  in  the  compass  of  a
day).  The  winds  or  currents,  impelling  the  several  planets,
communicate  to  them  velocities,  by  which  their  motion
should  be  equable  and  in  the  plane  of  the  ecUptic;  but  the
planets  are  drawn  from  this  course  by  certain  controlling
powers,  situated  at  the  apogees,  conjunctions,  and  nodes.

These  powers  are  clothed  by  Hindu  imaginations  with
celestial  bodies  invisible  to  human  sight,  and  furnished  with
hands  and  reins^  by  which  they  draw  the  planets  from  their

•  DadabhaI.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  399

direct  path  and  uniform  progress.  The  being  at  the  apogee,
for  instance,  constantly  attracts  the  planet  towards  itaetf,
alternately,  however,  with  the  right  and  left  hands.  The
deity  of  the  node  diverts  the  planet,  first  to  one  side  then
to  the  other,  from  the  ecliptic.  And  lastly,  the  deity  at
the  conjunction  causes  the  planet  to  be  one  while  stationary,
another  while  retrograde,  and  to  move  at  different  times
with  velocity  accelerated  or  retarded.  These  fismcied  beings
are  considered  as  invisible  planets ;  the  nodes  and  apogees
having  a  motion  of  their  own  in  the  ecliptic.

This  whimsical  system,  more  worthy  of  the  mythologist
than  of  the  astronomer,  is  gravely  set  forth  in  the  Sdrya
siddhanta:  and  even  BhAscara  gives  into  it,  though  not
without  indications  of  reluctant  acquiescence ;  for  he  has
not  noticed  it  in  his  text,  and  only  briefly  in  his  notes.

To  explain  on  mathematical  principles  the  irregularity  of
the  planetary  motions,  the  Qindu  astronomers  remove  the
earth  fi'om  the  centre  of  the  planet's  orbit,  and  assume  the
motion  in  that  excentric  to  be  really  equable,  though  it
appear  irregular  as  viewed  from  the  earth.  Another  hypo-
thesis is  also  taught  by  them ;  according  to  which  the
planet  revolves  with  an  equal  but  contrary  motion  in  an
epicycle,  of  which  the  centre  is  carried  with  like  but  direct
motion  on  a  concentric  orbit.

BhAscara  remarks,  that  both  theories  are  equivalent,
giving  the  same  results  in  computation :  but  he  maintains,
that  the  planet's  motion  in  an  excentric  orbit  (pratimaii''
Sala)  is  consonant  to  the  truth ;  and  the  other  hypothesis
of  an  epicycle  (nichSchcAa  vrttta)  is  merely  a  device  for  the
facility  of  computation.

Both  theories,  with  certain  modifications,  which  will  be
subsequently  noticed,  suffice  for  the  anomaly  of  the  Sun
and  Moon.  '  To  account  for  the  still  greater  apparent  irre-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


400  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

gularities  of  the  five  minor  planets,  the  Hindu  astronomers
make  them  revolve  with  direct  motion  on  an  epicycle  borne
on  an  excentric  deferent.  (In  the  case  of  the  two  inferior
planets,  the  revolution  in  the  excentric  is  performed  in  the
same  time  with  the  Sun :  consequently  the  planet's  motion
in  its  epicycle  is  in  fiu^t  its  proper  revolution  in  its  orbit.
In  the  instance  of  the  superior  planets,  on  the  omtrary,  the
epicycle  corresponds  in  time  to  a  revolution  of  the  Sun,  and
the  excentric  deferent  answers  to  the  true  revolution  of  the
planet  in  its  orbit.)

So  far  the  Indian  system,  as  already  remarked  by  Mr.
Davis  in  his  treatise  on  the  astronomical  computations  of
the  Hindus,*  agrees  with  the  Ptolemaic.  At  the  first  glance
it  will  remind  the  reader  of  the  hypothesis  of  an  excentric
orbit  devised  by  Hipparchus  ;  and  of  that  of  an  epicycle
on  a  deferent,  said  to  have  been  invented  by  Apollonius,
but  applied  by  Hipparchus.  At  the  same  time  the
omission  of  an  equant  (having  double  the  excentricity  of
the  deferent)  imagined  by  Ptolbmt  for  the  five  minor
planets,  as  well  as  the  epicycle  with  a  deferent  of  the  centre
of  the  excentric,  contrived  by  him  to  account  for  the  eveo-
tion  of  the  Moon ;  and  the  circle  of  anomaly  of  excentricity,
adapted  to  the  inequality  of  Mercury's  motions,  cannot  fail
to  attract  notice.

The  Hindus,  who  have  not  any  of  Ptolemy's  additions
to  the  theory  of  Hipparchus,  have  introduced  a  different
modification  of  the  hypothesis,  for  they  give  an  oval  fonn
to  the  excentric  or  equivalent  epicycle,  as  well  as  to  the
planefs  proper  epicycle.  That  is,  they  assume  the  axis  of
the  epicycle  greater  at  the  end  of  the  {sama)  even  qua*
drants  of  anomaly  (or,  in  the  line  of  the  apsides  and  con-
junctions), and  least  at  the  end  of  the  (pishama)  odd

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  250.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  401

quadrants  (1st  and  3d),  and  intermediately  in  proportion.*
This  contrivance  of  an  oval  epicycle  is  applied  by  certain
astronomers  to  all  the  planets  ;  and  by  others,  is  restricted  to
few;  and  by  some,  is  altogether  rejected.  ARYABHAffA,
for  example,  and  the  Sdrya  siddhanta,  make  both  epi-
cycles of  all  the  planets  oval,  placing  however  the  short
axis  of  the  proper  epicycles  of  Jupiter  and  Saturn  in  the
line  of  mean  conjunction,  termed  by  Hindu  astronomers
their  quick  apogee  (sighrSchcha).  Brahmegupta  and
BhAscara,  on  the  contrary,  acknowledge  only  the  epi-
cycles of  Mars  and  Venus  to  be  oval,  and  insist  that  the
rest  are  circular.  The  author  of  the  Siddhanta  sarva-
bhauma  goes  a  step  fiirther,  maintaining  that  all  are  circu-
lar, and  taking  the  mean  between  the  numbers  given  in  the
Sdrya  siddhanta.

*  Rad :  Sine  of  anomaly  : :  Diff.  between  circles  described  on
greatest  and  least  axis :  Diff.  between  circles  described  on  greatest
axis  and  on  the  diameter  of  the  epicycle  for  the  proposed  anomaly.
Whence  the  ^ircle  described  on  that  diameter  is  determined ;  and  is
used  for  the  epicycle  in  computations  for  that  anomaly.  Since  circles
are  to  each  other  as  their  radii,  the  proportion  above  stated  answers
to  the  following ;  semitransverse  axis :  diff.  between  transverse  and
conjugate  semiaxis  : :  ordinate  of  the  circle :  a  fourth  proportional ;
which  is  precisely  the  difference  between  that  ordinate  and  an  ordinate
of  the  ellipse  for  the  same  absciss.  Hindu  astronomers  take  it  for
the  difference  between  the  radius  of  the  circumscribed  circle  and  the
semidiameter  of  the  ellipse  at  an  angle  with  the  axis  equal  to  the
proposed  anomaly ;  and,  in  an  ellipsis  very  little  excentric,  the  error
is  small.


VOL.  11.  2  D


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


402


HINDU  ASTRONOMERS


«

It*

»

ft

H

H

H

h

O


M
M
0S
O

tc

Q


n

R

H

O

I

SB
M


^

o

o

c

> c

> e

o

•Cr  o

^

o

M5

?J

5

i §

^ S

s

+-

•♦-

§.

s

!

o<J8

J

;;

< c

1 8

§

o

> o«

04

>

F-4

«

1

^

I

O

o o o

o

I

Si

§? s s

s

^

o

c

> c

> o

o

-^^

1

s;

a

04

! P

I Pi

1 l-H

1— 1

n

"""■

^

1

1

1

• 1

1

41

1

1

o

1

c

to

•H

1

©

*°k

1

ii

a 5

J s

\^

Cs

1 Si

<M

1

o

^ 1

1

1

F-H

(M

•-H I

1

CO

CO

CO

o|

1

o

5

; 1

1

1

1— 1

l-H

^

,

•

•

» •

• •

•

•

•

•

•

£

•
•

J

0

P

*^

t

1 rS

o

<

c

n

tA

^

! *

1 "g

n

-<

o
v5

1

*

: ^

1

n

PC

1 ?•

/^^^

^ /^

•k

<•>^^

n.

• 00 •

-a

S|

^ §

' '3  '.

cs •

^ 1

u 13

i  1
1  \

.  If
;  !l

i

1
1

'cu

!-• ttDO

' .h

h  «*

.b

H

5

O

i

;  o

w

"i

S

3


I-

91


>> s


I


s


.S  8
IS

J  -


©  o


I


S
e


o  •;


(6


PQ


c

w «  «

J  -§

11  •

<<  p  3


it


2


•2


5I


I
a  1


§  i -s

8  ?«


®  a

00  o  ^

>  S  "

:="  S  a


si
I  2

>  2

^■§


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQIUNOXES.  403

A  further  difference  of  theory,  though  not  of  practice,
occurs  among  the  Hindu  astronomers,  in  regard  to  the  cur-
vature of  the  excenl^ic  deferents,  and  the  consequent  me-
thod of  computing  on  the  equivalent  hypothesis  of  epi-
cycles*

A  refer^ce  to  Mr.  Davis's  Essay,*  and  to  the  diagrams
which  accompany  it,  will  render  intelligible  what  has  been
already  said,  and  what  now  remains  to  be  explained.  It
is  there  observed,  that  it  is  only  in  computing  the  retrogra-
dations,  and  other  particulars  respecting  the  minor  plan^,
that  the  Hmdus  find  the  length  of  the  carna  6  0t  (or
line  drawn  fix>m  the  centre  of  the  earth  to  the  planet's
place  in  the  epicycle).  In  other  cases,  as  for  the  ano-
malistic equation  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  they  are  satisfied
to  take  he  as  equal  to  the  sine  lm%y  (that  is,  the  sine  of
mean  anomaly,  reduced  to  its  dimensions  in  the  epicycle
in  parts  of  the  radius  of  the  concentric,  equal  to  the  sine  of
the  anomalistic  equation).  The  reason  is  subjoined: '  The
difference,  as  the  commentator  on  the  Surya  siddhanta
observes,  being  inconsiderable.'

Most  of  the  commentators  on  the  Sdrya  siddhanta  do
assign  that  reason;  but  some  of  them  adopt  Bbahme-
oupta's  explanation.  This  astronomer  maintains,  that
the  operation  of  finding  the  car^  is  rightly  omitted  in
respect  of  the  excentrics  or  equivalent  epicycles  of  all  the
planets,  and  retained  in  regard  to  the  proper  epicycles  of
the  minor  planets  carried  by  the  excentric  deferents.  His
hypothesis,  as  briefly  intimated  by  himself,  and  as  ex-
plained by  BhAscara,  supposes  the  epicycle,  which  re-
presents the  excentric,  to  be  augmented  in  the  proportion

*  As.  Bes.,  vol.  ii.  p.  249.

t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  250. Diagram,  fig.  2.

t  Ibid,

2  d2


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


404  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

which  carna  (or  the  distance  of  the  planet's  place  from  the
earth's  centre)  bears  to  the  radius  of  the  concentric ;  and  it
is  on  this  account^  and  not  as  a  mere  approximation,  that
the  finding  of  the  carna^  with  the  subsequent  operation  to
which  it  is  applicable,  is  dispensed  with.*

The  scholiast  of  Brahmegupta  objects  to  his  author's
doctrine  on  this  point,  that,  upon  the  same  principle,  the
process  of  finding  the  carruif  with  the  subsequent  employ-
ment of  it  to  find  the  sine  of  the  anomalistic  equation,
should  in  like  manner  be  omitted  in  the  proper  epicycle  of
the  five  minor  planets ;  and  he  concludes  therefore,  that
the  omission  of  that  process  has  no  other  ground,  but  the
very  inconsiderable  difference  of  the  4*esult  in  the  instance
of  a  small  epicycle.  For,  as  remarked  by  another  author, f
treating  on  the  same  subject,  the  equation  itself  and  its
sine  are  very  small  near  the  line  of  the  apsides ;  and  at  a
distance  from  that  line,  the  carna  and  radius  approach  to
equality.

BhAscara,  in  the  SirSmanif  quotes  succinctly  Brah-
megupta's  doctrine,  and  the  scholiast's  objection  to  it;
and  replies  to  the  latter :  and  in  his  notes  in  the  Vasana
bhashya,  cites  the  text  of  Brahmegupta  and  Chatur-
v^da's  reasoning,  which  he  tries  to  confiite.  His  quota-
tion agrees  perfectly  with  the  present  text  of  the  Brahme


•  For  Rad  :  periphery  of  the  epicycle  : :  ccvrita  :  augmented  epi-
cycle. And  circle  :  sine  of  anomaly  : :  augmented  epicycle  :  sine  of
anomaly  in  augmented  epicycle.

Lastly,  carna  :  sine  of  anomaly  in  augmented  epicycle  : :  radios  :
sine  of  anomalistic  equation.

Whence  periphery  X^X^X^'-'g.^y^aine  of  anoma-
listic  equation.

And,  abridging,  periphery  X^^^^^^^^^=8ine  of  anomalistic  equa-
tion.

t  In  the  Mdrkhi.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  405

sp^kuia  siddhanta  and  commentary  of  Chaturv^da  PrK-
T'HtjDACA  swAmI,  which  is  annexed  to  it.

The  passage  which  has  required  so  much  preparatory
explanation^  is  itself  short :

*  The  carna^  or  longest  side  of  the  triangle,  multiplied
by  the  periphery  of  the  epicycle  and  divided  by  radius,
becomes  the  miiltiplier  of  the  sine  and  cosine  of  anomaly.
The  same  result,  as  before,  is  obtained  by  a  single  operation
in  the  instance  of  the  anomalistic  epicycle :  and  therefore
carna  is  not  here  employed.'

BhAscara's  words  in  the  Sir6manx  are  these:  '  Some
say  that  in  this  system,  in  the  operation  of  finding  the
equation  of  anomaly,  the  carna  or  long  side  of  the  triangle
is  not  employed,  because  the  difference  in  the  two  modes
of  computation  is  very  inconsiderable.  But  others  maintain
that,  if  the  carna  be  used,  the  periphery  of  the  epicycle
must  in  this  operation  be  corrected,  by  multiplying  it  by
carna  and  dividing  by  radius.  Wherefore  the  result  is
the  same  as  by  the  former  method ;  and  on  that  account,
they  say,  the  carna  is  not  employed.  It  is  not  to  be
objected,  why  is  not  the  same  method  used  in  the  sighra
epicycle  ? For  the  principles  of  the  two  differ.'

In  his  notes  on  this  part  of  his  text,  he  cites,  as  before
observed,  the  precise  passage  of  Brahmegupta  which
has  been  inserted  above,  and  a  portion  of  Chaturv^da's
comment  on  it,  and  names  the  author.

In  another  instance  BhAscara  quotes  in  his  SirfmuiM
Brahmegupta  by  name,  and  the  commentator  by  impli-
cation, (and  fuller  quotations  of  both  occur  in  the  notes  and
commentaries),  for  a  disagreement  in  regard  to  the  latitude


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


'406  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

of  stars  and  planets  measured  from  the  ecliptic  both  on  a
circle  drawn  through  its  poles,  and  on  one  passing  through
the  poles  of  the  equator ;  the  latter  termed  sp^htAa  or  appa-
rent, and  the  other  asp'huia  or  unapparent.*  BhAscara
remarks  that  Brahmeoupta  has  directed  the  latitudes  of
planets  to  be  computed  by  one  mode,  and  has  given  those
of  the  stars  in  the  other,  but  has  stated  no  rule  for  reducing
the  latitude  of  one  denomination  to  the  other,  or  for  recti-
fying the  true  latitude  from  the  measure  given  on  the  circle
of  declination.  The  reason  he  considers  to  be  the  Uttle
difference  between  them  (which  is  true  in  respect  of  the
planets,  though  not  so  in  the  case  of  most  of  the  stars),
and  the  frequent  occasion  in  astronomical  computations,  for
the  declination  of  stars,  while  their  proper  latitude  is  not
an  element  in  any  calculation ;  whereas,  in  the  case  of  the
planets,  both  are  employed  on  different  occasions :  he  ad-
verts to  a  strained  interpretation  proposed  by  the  com-
mentator to  construe  Brahmegupta's  rule  as  adapted  \o
the  same  denomination  of  latitude  which  is  employed  by
him  for  the  stars.  BhAscara  refutes  that  interpretation,
and  justifies  Brahmegupta's  text  taken  in  its  obvious
and  natural  sense.
This  passage  of  the  ^ir6ma'Ai'\  confirms  what  was  said

*  Asp'huta  sara  is  the  true  latitude  of  m  star  or  planet ;  sp^huia  sara
is  its  decliuation  dr  deGlination  of  the  point  of  intersection  in  the
ecliptic.

R^f'M>jMr<^<c||<)j||uH|iMCq-f%tl
5T^RT0n?^27  5:5r1^rTtm?qf2rn:STO:  \

G6lddhyaya,  c.  viii.  v.  11,  &c.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE  EQUINOXES.  407

by  me,  from  other  authority,  in  a  former  easay,*  concem-
ing  the  Hindu  method  of  determining  a  star's  place  with
reference  to  the  ecliptic,  by  the  intersection  of  a  circle  of
decUnation,  and  by  taking  the  latitude  and  longitude  of  the
star  to  that  point  of  intersection,  instead  of  employing  a
perpendicular  to  the  ecliptic.

The  only  other  passage  to  which  I  shall  draw  the  reader's
attention,  is  one  of  considerable  length,  in  which  Brahme-
GUPTA,  although  he  has  rightly  giren  the  theory  of  solar
and  lunar  eclipses,  with  the  astronomical  principles  on
which  they  are  to  be  computed,  affirms  in  compliance  with
the  prejudices  of  Hindu  bigots,  the  existence  of  Rahu  as
an  eighth  planetand  as  the  immediate  cause  of  eclipses,  and
reprehends  VarAhamiuira,  AaYABHAff a,  SaisHiKA
and  VisHNucHANDRA  for  rejecting  this  orthodox  expla-
nation of  the  phenomenon.  The  passage  is  quoted  by
BhAscara's  commentator  in  lihe  ChintiLmaAi  on  the  occa-
sion of  a  more  concise  text  of  the  Sh^dmani  affirming  the
agency  of  JRahu  in  eclipses.f

This  quotation  from  the  Brahme  siddhanta  comprising
seven  couplets  in  the  Ckintamani,  has  been  verified  in  the
text  of  the  Brahme  sp'htda  siddhanta  of  Brahmegupta.j:

All  these,  with  numerous  other  instances  in  the  annota-
tions and  commentaries  of  the  SiritnaM,  which  I  refrain
from  adducing,  lest  the  reader's  patience  should  be  tired,
have  established  to  my  entire  conviction  the  genuineness  of
the  Sp'huia  siddA&nta  founded  on  a  prior  treatise  entitled
Brahme  siddhanta.

I  am  not  unapprised,  that,  under  a  feeling  of  great  dis-
trust or  unvrillingness  to  admit  the  conclusions  which  follow
from  this  position,  a  variety  of  hypotheses  might  be  formed

*  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  [p.  324,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.]
t  Part  2,  ch.  vii.  v.  10.  t  Oblddhy&ya.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


408  HINDU  ASTRONOMERS

to  a  different  effect  Brahmegupta,  supposing  him  to
be  entirely  an  original  writer,  may  have  referred  to  an
imaginary  work  to  give  that  kind  of  authority  to  his  per-
formance which  the  Hindus  most  fancy ;  or  he  may  have
fathered  on  9.purana  a  synopsis  of  his  own  doctrine  for
the  same  purpose;  or  some  other  writer,  from  whatever
motive,  may  have  fabricated  a  pretended  extract  of  a  purana
containing  the  heads  of  Brahmegupta's  system,  and  have
given  currency  to  it  on  the  strength  of  the  reference  in  that
astronomer's  treatise  to  an  anterior  work.  These  and  other
suppositions  grounded  on  surmise  of  fraud  and  forgery  may
be  formed.  I  shall  not  discuss  them :  for  I  have  no  con-
cern but  with  the  facts  themselves.  BhAscara,  writing
650  yeai-s  ago,  declares,  and  so  do  all  his  commentators,
that  he  has  followed  Brahmegupta  as  his  guide.  They
quote  numerous  passages  from  his  work;  and  BhAscara
affirms  that  Brahmegupta  took  the  number  of  revolu-
tions assigned  to  the  planets  in  the  great  period  termed
calpa  from  an  earUer  authority.  The  commentators,  who
wrote  from  two  to  four  centuries  ago,  assert,  that  those
numbers  were  taken  from  a  treatise  in  form  of  dialogue
between  BhAgavat  (or  BrAhma)  and  BhrYgu,  inserted
in  the  Vishnu  dharmdttara  puraAa  and  distinguished  by
the  title  of  BrcJima  or  Paitamaha  siddhanta.  They  cite
parallel  passages^  which  do  in  fact  exactly  accord  in  sense
and  import.  They  occasionally  quote  observations  on
Brahmegupta  by  his  scholiast  Chaturv^da  PrIt'hu-
DACA  swAmI.  a  book  is  extant  (a  copy,  partly  deficient,
however,  having  come  into  my  possession  with  other  astro-
nomical collections)  and  which  consists  of  a  text  under  the
title  of  Brahme  sp'huta  dddhanta  accompanied  by  a  con-
tinual commentary  byCHATURvfeDA  PRtT'n^DACA  sw  Am!.
The  text  contains  the  same  astronomical  doctnne  which
BhAscara  teaches,  and  which  he  professes  to  have  derived


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES.  409

irom  Brahmeoupta  ;  and  passages  quoted  by  him  in  his
text,  or  at  more  length  in  his  notes,  or  by  his  commentators,
or  by  other  astronomical  writers,  as  the  words  of  Brahme-
oupta, are  found  verbatim  in  it.  I  consider  it  therefcH^
as  the  genuine  text  of  the  treatise  used  by  BhAscara,  as
Brahme6Upta*s;  and  seeing  no  reason  for  suspicion  and
distrust,  I  quote  it  as  the  authentic  work  of  that  celebrated
astronomer.

As  the  evidence  which  has  been  here  collected  with
reference  to  particular  points,  bears  also  upon  other  ques-
tions, I  shall  now  state  further  conclusions,  regarding  the
history  of  Indian  astronomy,  which  appear  to  me  to  be
justly  deducible  from  the  premises.  Those  conclusions  will
be  supported,  when  necessaiy,  by  additional  references  to
authorities.

Brahmegupta  and  VarAhamihira,  though  named
at  the  head  of  astronomers  by  BhAscara  and  SatAn  anda
and  by  the  herd  of  later  writers,  are  not  to  be  considered
as  the  authors  of  the  Indian  system  of  astronomy.  They
abound  in  quotations  from  more  ancient  astronomers,  upon
whose  works  their  own  are  confessedly  grounded.  In
addition  to  the  names  before-mentioned,''^  those  of  Pra-
DYUMNA,  LAla  sinha,  and  LAdhAchArya,  may  be  here
specified.  But  the  Brahme  siddhanta  and  the  works  of
ARYABHAff A  are  what  principaUy  engages  Brahme-
gupta's  attention :  and  the  five  Siddhantas  have  been  the
particular  subject  of  VarAhamihtra's  labours.  He  ap-
pears to  have  been  anterior  to  Brahmegupta,  being
actually  cited  by  him  among  other  writers,  whose  errors
are  exposed  and  corrected.

VarAhamihira,  constantly  quoted  as  the  author  of
the  Varahi  sanhita and Pancha  siddhantica,  must be

•  Page  386.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


410  HINDU ASTRONOMERS

judged  firom  those  wcnrks,  which  are  undoubtedly  his  by  the
unanimous  consent  of  the  learned,  and  by  the  testimony  of
the  ancient  schoUast  BHAff 6tpala.  The  minor  works,
ascribed  to  the  same  author,  may  have  been  composed  in
later  times,  and  the  name  of  a  celebrated  author  have  been
a£Bxed  to  them,  according  to  a  practice,  which  is  but  too
common  in  India  as  in  many  other  countries.  The  Jiia-
carhava^  for  example,  which. has  been  attributed  to  him,
may  not  improbably  be  the  work  of  a  different  author.  At
least,  I  am  not  apprized  of  any  collateral  evidence  (such  as
quotations  from  it  in  books  of  some  antiquity)  to  suj^rt
its  genuineness,  as  a  work  of  VarAhamihira's.

In  the  Varahi  sanhita,  this  author  has  not  followed  the
system  which  is  taught  in  the  Sdrya  siddhanta.  For  in-
stance, his  rule  for  finding  the  year  of  the  cycle  of  sixty
years,  founded  on  the  mean  motions  of  Jupiter,  shews  that  he
employed  a  different  number  from  that  which  the  S^rya
siddkanta  furnishes,  viz.  364,224  revolutions  in  a  yuga,
instead  of  364,200 ;  and  it  appears  fix>m  a  quotation  of  the
scholiast  that  ARYASHAftA  is  the  authority  for  that  num*
ber  of  revolutions  of  Jupiter.

Before  the  age  of  VarAhamihira  and  Brahme-
GUPTA,  and  subsequently  to  that  of  Oarga,  a  number  of
illustrious  astronomers  flourished,  by  whom  the  science  was
cultivated  and  promoted,  but  whose  works  unhappily  are
lost,  or  at  least  have  not  been  yet  recovered,  and  are  at
present  known  to  us  only  by  quotation.  No  less  than
ten  intermediate  writers  are  cited  by  Brahmegufta  ;  of
whom  five  at  the  least  are  noticed  by  VarAhamihira.*

The  proficiency  of  the  YavatKis  in  astronomy  was  known
to  VarAhamihira. He  has  mentioned  it  with  applause,t

'  See  before,  p.  386,  388,  and  409.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ON THE EQUINOXES.  411

and  has  more  than  once  referred  to  the  authority  of  their
writers.  The  name  of  YavakAchArya,  which  occurs
frequently  in  the  compilations  of  Hindu  astronomers,''^  has
apparently  reference  to  an  author  of  that  nation ;  which  is
characterized  by  VarAhamihira  as  a  people  oi MUcV'^
has,  or  barbarians.  The  title  of  RSmaca  siddhanta,  given
by  SrIsh^na  to  his  astronomical  treatise,  which  is  quoted
under  this  title  by  VarAhamihira  and  Brahmegupta,
may  be  presumed  also  to  carry  some  allusion  to  the  sys-
tem of  the  astronomers  of  the  West.

If  these  circumstances,  joined  to  a  resemblance  hardly
to  be  supposed  casual,  which  the  Hindu  astronomy,  with
its  apparatus  of  excentrics  and  epicycles,  bears  in  many
respects  to  that  of  the  Greeks,  be  thought  to  authorize  a
belief,  that  the  Hindus  received  from  the  Greeks  that  know-
ledge which  enabled  them  to  correct  and  improve  their
own  imperfect  astronomy,  I  shall  not  be  inclined  to  dissent
from  the  opinion.  There  does,  indeed,  appear  ground  for
more  than  a  conjecture,  that  the  Hindus  had  obtained  a
knowledge  of  Grecian  astronomy  before  the  Arabs  began
to  cultivate  the  science ;  and  that  the  whole  cluster  of
astronomers  mentioned  by  Brahmeoupta  must  be  placed
in  the  internal  between  the  age  of  Hipparchus,  and  pos-
sibly that  of  Ptolemy,  and  the  date  of  Brahmegupta's
revision  of  the  Brahme  siddhanta.

In  reforming  the  Indian  astronomy,  Brahmegupta,
and  the  astronomers  who  preceded,  him,  did  not  take  im-
plicitly the  mean  motions  of  the  planets  given  by  the  Gre-

*  For  the  Yavanas  are  barbariaDs ;  but  this  science  is  well  esta-
blished among  them  ;  and  they  are  revered  like  holy  sages :  much
more  shall  a  priest  who  is  learned  in  it  be  venerated.'

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  376  [see  p.  365,  367,  and  368  of  the  present
volume.]


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


412


HINDU ASTRONOMERS


cian  astronomer.  In  general  they  are  wider  from  the  truth
than  Ptolemy."!^  But,  in  the  instance  which  is  the  sub-
ject of  this  paper,  they  made  a  nearer  approach  to  aoenracy
than  he  had  done,  and  must  therefore  have  used  other  ob-
servations besides  those  which  he  has  recorded.

The  Arabs  adopted  in  its  totality  Ptolemy's  theory  cf
the  motions  of  the  planets ;  which  the  Hindus  have  only


*  Mban  Diurnal  Motions  op  thb  Plamrts.


Beaumkoupta.

Sirya  siddhSnta.

o I 11 Ml nil

O I II tit Ilti

©

0  59 8  10  22

0  59 8  10  10

J>

13  10  34  52  47

13  10  34  52 3

3)-

-0 12  11  26  42  25

12  11  26  41  53

^

0  31  26  28 7

0  31  26  28  11

9

4 5  32  18  28

4 5  32  20  42

It

0 459 9 9

0 4  59 8  48

9

1  36 7  44  35

1  86 7  43  39

1?

0 2 0  22  52

0 2 0  22  53

Ptolbmt.


II 111  tilt


0  59  8  17  13
13  10  34  58  30
12  11  26  31  17
0  31  26  36  53
4 5  32  24  IS

0  4  59  14  26

1  36 7  43 6
0 2 0  33  31


o I II m  na

0  59  8  19  46
13  10  35  I  40
12  11  26  41S
0  31  26  39  23
4 5  32  3IIS

0  4  59  15  53

1  a6 7  46  S«
0 2 0353B


In  ibis  comparative  table  computed  to  fourth  minutes,  it  will  be
remarked,  tbat  the  Hindu  astronomers  mostly  agree  to  third  minutes,
and  differ  in  the  fourths.  They  disagree  with  Ptolbmt  at  the  diirdt,
and  give,  in  almost  every  instance,  slower  motions  than  he  does,  to
the  planets,  and  still  slower  than  the  truth.  In  the  moon's  syDodicml
motion,  however,  they  are  very  nearly  correct  On  the  other  band,
the  equation  of  the  centre  deducible  from  the  epicycles  (page  404)  is
a  nearer  approximation  to  the  truth  than  results  from  the  excen-
tricity  assigned  by  Ptolemy  to  the  orbits  of  the  planets.  For  in-
stance,

EXCBNTRIOITY OF THE Sun's OrBIT.

o I n
5^r^a  5t(/(2^^($n<a  and  Bra  HMEOUPTA  (Had.  of  the  epicycle) 2  10  30

HiPPAROHUsandPTOLEMT  (Aim.,  1.3.  c.  4.)  in  parts,  of

which  radius  contains  60 2  29  30

ALBlTANf  (c.  28.)  2 445

Oreatibst  Equation  op  the  Sun's  Centre  :

Sdrya  siddhdnta,  &c.  (computed  by  the  commentators) . .  2  10  32

Ptolemy  (Rico.  Aim.  nov.) 2  23 0

AlbItanI 159 0

Alphonsine  Tables 2  10 0

Kbpler,&c 2 3  46

Lalande  (3d  edit.) 1  55  36J


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


ON  THE  EQUINOXES^  413

in  part.  But  the  Arabs  improved  on  his  astronomy  by
carefiil  observations :  a  praise  to  which  the  Hindus  are  not
equally  entitled.  AlbAtanI  discovered  the  motion  of
the  Sun's  apogee^  and  suspected  from  analogy  a  motion  of
the  apsides  of  the  minor  planets.''^  The  Hindus  surmised
the  motion  of  the  apogee  of  the  Sun,  and  nodes  and  apsides
of  the  planets,  from  analogy  to  the  Moon's  ;t  but  were
unable  to  verify  the  conjecture  by  observation ;  and  have,
in  fact,  merely  assigned  arbitrary  numbers  to  the  supposed
revolutions,  to  bring  out  the  places  right,  (or  as  nearly  so
as  they  had  determined  them,)  relatively  to  the  origin  of
the  ecUptic  at  a  vastly  remote  period.  BhAscara,  when
treating  of  the  manner  of  verifying  or  of  finding  the  number
of  revolutions  of  the  planets,  &c.  in  a  given  period,  teaches
the  mode  of  observing  the  planetary  motions,  but  considers
the  life  of  man  too  short  for  observing  the  motion  of  the
apsides  and  nodes  (the  Moon's  excepted);  and  certainly  the
revolutions  assigned  to  them  by  him  and  other  Hindu
astronomers  are  too  few,  and  the  motions  too  slow,  (the
quickest  not  exceeding  seven  degrees  in  100,000  years)  to
have  been  assumed  on  any  other  ground  but  the  arbitrary
one  just  now  stated.  The  astronomical  instruments  em-
ployed by  the  Hindus,  of  which  BhAscara  describes  nine,
including  one  of  his  own  invention,  and  comprehending  the
quadrant,  semicircle  and  entire  circle,  besides  the  armillary
sphere,  horary  ring,  gnomon  and  clepsydra,  J  were  too
rudely  executed,  whatever  may  be  thought  of  their
design,  to  enable  the  astronomers  to  make  very  delicate
observations ;  and  they  were  not  assisted,  as  in  the  preces-
sion of  the  equinoxes,  by  the  memory  of  a  former  position
recorded  in  their  ancient  writings.

•  MoNTUOLA,  p.  349.  t  Bhascara  in  Fdsana  hh&shya,

\  Gblddhyaya^  ch.  9.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


414  ^INDU  ASTRONOMERS


Note  referred  to  prom  Page  397.

According  to  ARYABHAff a  as  quoted  by  Brahmboupta  aod  bu

scboliastPatT'HOoAOA  swiiif,

One  ^u^a  contains  Years 1,080,000

One  mahdjfuga  =  Aytigas  4,320,000

One  Menu  puffa  sc  72mahdysgas 311,040,000

Onecalpa = U  Menus = lOOS  mahd  yuffoSy  4,354,560,000
f^T'  'I'be  calpa  began  on  Thursday  Ist  Ckaitra  sucla,

at  the  moment  of  sun- rise  at  Lanca,

Years  expired  from  the  commencement  of  the  calpa

to  the  war  of  the  Bhdrata,  or  beginning  of  the  Cali  age  1,986,120,000
Add  expired  years  of  the  CcUi  to  the  ^a  era 3,179

Years  from  the  beginning  of  the  calpa  to  the  com-  ]
mencement  <


om  the  beginning  of  the  calpa  to  the  com-  >

;  of  the  ^^  era 3  1,986,123,179


Years  expired  from  the  commencement  of  the  present
Mahd  yugUy  to  the  beginning  of  the  Cali  age,  when  there
was  a  conjunction 3,240,000

Revolutions  of  the  earth  round  its  own  axis,  in  a  qua-
druple yuga  or  mahd  yuga * 1 ,582,237,500

Hence,  deducting  revolutions  of  the  sun, 4,320,000

Remain,  nycthemera,  or  sdvana  days, in  a  fMM  yuga 1, 577*917,500

itsf"  Length  of  the  sidereal  year  is  4.  r  >  <>  d.  h.  r  n
therefore,  according  to  ABYAsaAff  a,  365  15  31  15  or  365  6  12  30

N.  B.  ARYABHA^fA  taught  the  earth's  diurnal  revolution  round  its
axis;  a  doctrine  which  BRAHMsauPTA  controverts;  but  to  which  his
scholiast  pRYr'nifDACA  swImI  inclines*

According  to  the  Paulisa  siddhdnta  cited  by  BHAff6TPALA  on
VarIhamihiba's  Sanhitdy  and  by  PbIt'h^daoa  swliif  ob  Bbah-
meoupta's  Siddhdnta,

Cr^tayuga,  4,800  divine  years  =  1,728,000
Tritd,  3,600  =  1,296,000

Dwdpara, 2,400  = 864,000

3,888,000
Cali,  1,200  s 432,000

Mahdyuga  « 4,320,000


This  author's  computation  of  the  calpa  has  not  been  found
in  any  quotation ;  but  he  is  cited  as  reckoning  its  commencement
from  midnight


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ON  THE EQUTNOXE&U  416

Years  expired  from  the  commeiicemeDt  of  the  present
fnahd  yuga  tu  the  first  conjunction  of  the  planets,  in  the
Cf^tayuga  648,000

Interval  between  that  and  the  last  conjunction,  at  the
beginning  of  the  Ga/t  yw^ 3,240,000

Years  expired  to  the  commencement  of  the  CkUi  yuga 3,888,000

Mean  solar  {saura)  days,  termed  by  other  astronomers
sdvana  days,  in  one  mah6t  yuga  1,577,917,800

^tSt"  Length  of  the  year,  according  d.  %.  i  n  d.  h.  i  n
to  the  PaultM  siddMnta 365  15  31  30  or  365  6  12  36

N.  B.  The  difference  of  300  days  in  the  computations  of  Arya-
BHAff A  and  PdliSa,  gives  one  day  in  14,400  years,  as  is  remarked
by  Brahmboupta.

Length  of  the  year  accord-  d.  f.  x  u  m  d.  h.  i  n  m  iv
ing  to  the  Siirya  siddhdnta  ..  365  15  31  31  24=365  6  12  36  33  36

According  to  Brahmr-
ouPTA 365  15  30  22  30=365  6  12 9

The  computation  of  the  yuga  and  calpay  according  to  these  autho-
rities, is  well  known,  and  need  not  be  exhibited  in  this  place.  They
make  it  begin  on  Sunday ;  the  one  at  midnight,  the  other  at  sun-rise,
on  the  meridian  of  Lancd;  and  the  elapsed  years  to  the  beginning  of
the  Cali  age  are,  1,972,944,000.  To  which  Brahmegupta  adds
3,179  years  to  the  l^a  era.  The  SArya  siddhdnta  deducts  17,064,000
years ;  making  the  epoch  of  a  supposed  conjunction  of  planets  by  so
many  years  later  than  the  beginning  of  the  caipa.


Rbvolutions  of  the  Planets.

According  to  PuliSa  According  to  Accordmg

quoted  by  the  to

BflAffdrPALA,  Sdryasiddhdnta,  Brahmegupta,

In  a  mahd  yuga.  In  a  mahd  yuga. In  a  calpa.

Sun 4,320,000  4,320,000  4,320,000,000

Moon Tpe- 1

riodical)/ ••••  ^7,753,336  57,753,a36  57,753,300,000

Mars 2,296,824  2,296,832  2,296,828,522

Mercury 17,937,000  17,937,060  17,936,998,984

Jupiter  364,220  364,220  364,226,455

Venus 7,022,388  7,022,376  7,022,389,492

Saturn 146,564  146,568  146,567,298

Days  • . . .  1,577,917,800  1,577,917,828  1,577,916,460,000


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


416 HINDU  ASTRONOMERS  ON  THE  EQUINOXES.

1^^  AaTABUAffA  states  the  revolutions  of  Jupiter  at  364^24;
and  Varahamihira's  rule  for  the  cycle  of  sixty  years  of  Jupiter  is
founded  on  that  number.  The  periods  assigned  by  these  two  authors
to  other  planets  have  not  been  ascertained;  except  Saturn's  aphelion,
reckoned  by  ARYABHAff  a  at  fifty-four  revolutions  in  a  calpa.  Arta-
BHAff  a's  numbers  are  said  to  have  been  derived  from  the  Fdrdsara
siddMnta, (As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  242.)


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


XVI.
Dissertation  on  the  Algebra  of  the  Hindus.


[Prefixed  to  the  Author's  <  Algebra,  with  Arithmetic  and  Menso-
ration,  from  the  Sanscrit  of  Brahmeoupta  and  BhXscara.*
London,  1817. 4to.]


The  history  of  sciences,  if  it  want  the  prepossessing
attractions  of  political  history  and  narration  of  events,  is
nevertheless  not  wholly  devoid  of  interest  and  instruction.
A  laudable  curiosity  prompts  to  inquire  the  sources  of
knowledge  ;  and  a  review  of  its  progress  furnishes  sugges-
tions tending  to  promote  the  same  or  some  kindred  study.
We  would  know  the  people  and  the  names  at  least  of  the
individuals,  to  whom  we  owe  particular  discoveries  and  suc-
cessive steps  in  the  advancement  of  knowledge.  If  no
more  be  obtained  by  the  research,  still  the  inquiry  has  not
been  wasted,  which  points  aright  the  gratitude  of  mankind.

In  the  history  of  mathematical  science,  it  has  long  been
a  question  to  whom  the  invention  of  Algebraic  analysis  is
due  ?  among  what  people,  in  what  region,  was  it  devised  ?
by  whom  was  it  cultivated  and  promoted  ?  or  by  whose
labours  was  it  reduced  to  form  and  system  ?  and  finally,
from  what  quarter  did  the  diffusion  of  its  knowledge  pro-
ceed ?  No  doubt,  indeed,  is  entertained  of  the  source  from
which  it  was  received  immediately  by  modern  Europe ;
though  the  channel  have  been  a  matter  of  question.  We
are  well  assured,  that  the  Arabs  were  mediately  or  imme-
diately our  instructors  in  this  study. But  the  Arabs  them-

VOL.  II.  2  E


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


418  DISSERTATION ON THE

selves  scarcely  pretend  to  the  discovery  of  Algebra.  They
were  not  in  general  inventors  but  scholars,  during  the  short
period  of  their  successful  culture  of  the  sciences :  and  the
germ  at  least  of  the  Algebraic  analysis  is  to  be  found
among  the  Gi^eeks  in  an  age  not  precisely  determined,  but
more  than  probably  anterior  to  the  earhest  dawn  of  civili-
zation among  the  Arabs ;  and  this  science  in  a  more  ad-
vanced state  subsisted  among  the  Hindus  prior  to  the  ear-
liest disclosure  of  it  by  the  Arabians  to  modem  Europe.

The  object  of  the  present  publication  is  to  exhibit  the
science  in  the  state  in  which  the  Hindus  possessed  it,  by
an  exact  version  of  the  most  approved  treatise  on  it  in  the
ancient  language  of  India,  with  one  of  the  earlier  treatises
(the  only  extant  one)  from  which  it  was  compiled.  The
design  of  this  preliminary  dissei*tation  is  to  deduce  from
these  and  from  the  evidence  which  will  be  here  offered,  the
degree  of  advancement  to  which  the  science  had  arrived  in
a  remote  age.  Observations  will  be  added,  tending  to  a
comparison  of  the  Indian  with  the  Arabian,  the  Grecian,
and  the  modern  Algebra :  and  the  subject  will  be  left  to
the  consideration  of  the  learned,  for  a  conclusion  to  be
dravm  by  them  from  the  internal,  no  less  than  the  external
proof,  on  the  question  who  can  best  vindicate  a  claim  to
the  merit  of  having  originally  invented  or  first  improved
the  methods  of  computation  and  analysis,  which  are  the
groundwork  of  both  the  simple  and  abstruser  parts  of
Mathematics ;  that  is.  Arithmetic  and  Algebra :  so  far,  at
least,  as  the  ancient  inventions  are  affected;  and  also  in
particular  points,  where  recent  discoveries  are  concerned.

In  the  actual  advanced  condition  of  the  analytic  art,  it  is
not  hoped,  that  this  version  of  ancient  Sanscrit  treatises  on
Algebra,  Arithmetic,  and  Mensuration,  will  add  to  the
resources  of  the  art,  and  throw  new  light  on  mathematical
science,  in  any  other  respect,  than  as  concerns  its  history.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.  419

Yet  the  remark  may  not  seem  inapposite, .  that  had  an
earlier  version  of  these  treatises  been  completed,  had  they
been  translated  and  given  to  the  public  when  the  notice  of
mathematicians  was  first  drawn  to  the  attainments  of  the
Hindus  in  astronomy  and  in  sciences  connected  with  it,
some  addition  would  have  been  then  made  to  the  means
and  resources  of  Algebra  for  the  general  solution  of  pro-
blems by  methods  which  have  been  re-invented,  or  have
been  perfected,  in  the  last  age.

The  treatises  in  question,  which  occupy  the  present
volume,  are  the  Vija  ganita  and  Lilavati  of  BhAscara
achArya,  and  the  Ganitadhyaya  and  CvHacadkyaya  of
Brahmegufta.  The  two  first  mentioned  constitute  the
preliminary  portion  of  BhAscara's  Course  of  Astronomy,
entitled  Siddhanta  sir6mani.  The  two  last  are  the  twelfth
and  eighteenth  chapters  of  a  similar  course  of  astronomy,
by  Brahmegufta,  entitled  Brahma  siddhanta.

The  questions  to  be  first  examined  in  relation  to  these
works  are  their  authenticity  and  their  age.  To  the  con-*
sideration  of  those  points  we  now  proceed.

The  period  when  BhAscara,  the  latest  of  the  authors
now  named,  flourished,  and  the  time  when  he  wrote,  are
ascertained  with  unusual  precision.  He  completed  his
great  work,  the  Siddhanta  sirSmaAi,  as  he  himself  in-
forms us  in  a  passage  of  it,*  in  the  year  1072  Saca.  This
information  receives  corroboration,  if  any  be  wanted,  fit)m
the  date  of  another  of  his  works,  the  Carana  cutiihala,  a
practical  astronomical  treatise,  the  epoch  of  which  is  1 105
Saca;'\'  thirty-three  years  subsequent  to  the  completion  of
the  systematic  treatise.  The  date  of  the  Siddhanta
sirdmani,  of  which  the  Vija  gaiiita  and  Lilavati  are  parts,

•  Gblddhy6yay  or  lecture  on  the  sphere,  c.  11. §  56. As.  Res.,
vol.  ill.  p.  214  [p.  379  of  the  present  volame.]
t  As.  Res.,  ibid,

2  E  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


420  DISSERTATION ON THE

is  fixed,  then,  with  the  utmost  exactness,  on  the  most  satis-
factory groimds,  at  the  middle  of  the  twelfth  century  of  the
Christian  era,  A.D.  1150.*

The  genuineness  of  the  text  is  established  with  no  less
certainty  by  numerous  commentators  in  Sanscrit,  besides
a  Persian  version  of  it.  Those  commentaries  comprise  a
perpetual  gloss,  in  which  every  passage  of  the  original  is
noticed  and  interpreted :  and  every  word  of  it  is  repeated
and  explained.  A  comparison  of  them  authenticates  the
text  where  they  agree ;  and  would  serve,  where  they  did
not,  to  detect  any  alterations  of  it  that  might  have  taken
place,  or  variations,  if  any  had  crept  in,  subsequent  to  the
composition  of  the  earUest  of  them.  A  careful  collation  of
several  commentaries,t  and  of  three  copies  of  the  original
work,  has  been  made ;  and  it  will  be  seen  in  the  notes  to
the  translation  how  unimportant  are  the  discrepancies.

From  comparison  and  collation,  it  appears  then  that
the  work  of  BhAscara,  exhibiting  the  same  uniform  text
which  the  modem  transcripts  of  it  do,  was  in  the  hands  of
both  Muhammedans  and  Hindus,  between  two  and  three
centuries  ago :  and,  numerous  copies  of  it  having  been  dif-
fused throughout  India,  at  an  earlier  period,  as  of  a  per-
formance held  in  high  estimation,  it  was  the  subject  of
study  and  habitual  reference  in  countiies  and  places  so
remote  from  each  other  as  the  north  and  west  of  India  and
the  southern  peninsula ;  or,  to  speak  with  the  utmost  pre-
cision, Jambusara  in  the  west,  Agra  in  North  Hindustan,
and  Partkapura,  Gdlagrama,  Amaravati,  and  Nandir
grama,  in  the  south.

•  Though  the  matter  he  introductory,  the  preliminary  treatises  on
arithmetic  and  algehra  may  have  heen  added  subsequently,  as  is
hinted  by  one  of  the  commentators  of  the  astronomical  part  {F6rtic).
The  order  there  intimated  places  them  after  the  computation  of
planets,  but  before  the  treatise  on  spherics ;  which  contains  the  date.

t  Note  A.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  421

Thisy  though  not  marking  any  extraordinary  antiquity,
nor  approaching  to  that  of  the  author  himself,  was  a  mate-
rial point  to  be  determined :  as  there  will  be  in  the  sequel
occasion  to  show,  that  modes  of  analysis,  and,  in  particular,
general  methods  for  the  solution  of  indeterminate  problems
both  of  the  first  and  second  degrees,  are  taught  in  the
Vija  ganita,  and  those  for  the  first  degree  repeated  in  the
Lilavatiy  which  were  unknown  to  the  mathematicians  of
the  west,  until  invented  anew  in  the  last  two  centuries  by
algebraists  of  France  and  England.  It  will  be  also  shown,
that  BhAscara,  who  himself  flourished  more  than  six  hun-
dred and  fifty  years  ago,  was  in  this  respect  a  compiler,
and  took  those  methods  firom  Indian  authors  as  much  more
ancient  than  himself.

That  BuAscara's  text  (meaning  the  metrical  rules  and
examples,  apart  from  the  interspersed  gloss)  had  con-
tinued unaltered  firom  the  period  of  the  compilation  of  his
work  until  the  age  of  the  commentaries  now  current,  is
apparent  from  the  care  with  which  they  have  noticed  its
various  readings,  and  the  little  actual  importance  of  these
variatioas ;  joined  to  the  consideration,  that  earUer  com-
mentaries, including  the  author's  own  explanatory  anno-
tations of  his  text,  were  extant,  and  lay  before  them  for
consultation  and  reference.  Those  earlier  commentaries  are
occasionally  cited  by  name :  particularly  the  GaMta  cau-
mttdi^  which  is  repeatedly  quoted  by  more  than  one  of  the
scholiasts.*

No  doubt  then  can  be  reasonably  entertained,  that  we
now  possess  the  arithmetic  and  algebra  of  BhAscara,  as
composed  and  published  by  him  in  the  middle  of  the
twelfth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  The  age  of  his  pre-
cursors cannot  be  determined  with  equal  precision. Let

*  For  example,  by  S(jbyadasa,  under  LildvatHy  §  74;  and  still
more  frequently  by  Rang  an  at 'ha.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


422  DISSERTATION ON THE

US  proceed,  however,  to  examine  the  evidence,  such  as  we
can  at  present  collect,  of  their  antiquity.

Towards  the  close  of  his  treatise  on  Algebra,*  BbAs-
CAR  A  informs  us,  that  it  is  compiled  and  abridged  from  the
more  diffuse  works  on  the  same  subject,  bearing  the  names
of  Brahme,  (meaning  no  doubt  Brahmegupta,)  SrI-
BHARA  and  PadmanAbha  ;  and  in  the  body  of  his  trea-
tise, he  has  cited  a  passage  of  SrIdhara's  algebra,t  and
another  of  Padmanabha's.J  He  repeatedly  adverts  to
preceding  writers,  and  refers  to  them  in  general  terms,
where  his  commentators  understand  him  to  allude  to  Ar-
YABHAff  A,  to  Brahmegupta,  to  the  latter's  schoUast
ChaturvIida  Prit'h6daca  swAMi,§  and  to  the  other
writers  above  mentioned.

Most,  if  not  all,  of  the  treatises,  to  which  he  thus  alludes,
must  have  been  extant,  and  in  the  hands  of  his  commen-
tators, when  they  wrote ;  as  appears  from  their  quotaticms
of  them;  more  especially  those  of  Brahmegupta  and
ARYABHAff A,  who  are  cited,  and  particularly  the  first
mentioned,  in  several  instances.  ||  A  long  and  diligent  re^
search  in  various  parts  of  India,  has,  however,  failed  of
recovering  any  part  of  the  Padmanabha  vija  (or  Algebra  of
Padmanabha),  and  of  the  algebraic  and  other  works  of
ARYABHAff A.IT  But  the  translator  has  been  more  for-
tunate in  regard  to  the  works  of  SrIdhara  and  Brah-
megupta, having  in  his  collection  SrIdhara's  compen-
dium of  arithmetic,  and  a  copy,  incomplete  however,  of  the
text  and  scholia  of  Brahmegupta's  Brahma  siddhanta,
comprising  among  other  no  less  interesting  matter,  a  chap-
ter treating  of  arithmetic  and  mensuration ;  and  another,

•  Vijaga^ta,  §  218.  t  Ibid,  §  131.  J  Ibid.  §  142.

§  Vtjaga^,,  ch.  6,  note  of  S(jryadasa.  Also  rifaga^.^  §  174;  and
LiLy  §  246,  adfinem.
II  For  example,  under  LiL  ch.  11,  f  Note  G.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  423

the  subject  of  which  is  algebra :  both  of  them  fortunately
complete.*

The  commentary  is  a  perpetual  one  ;  successively  quot-
ing at  length  each  verse  of  the  text ;  proceeding  to  the
interpretation  of  it,  word  by  word ;  and  subjoining  eluci-
dations and  remarks:  and  its. colophon,  at  the  close  of
each  chapter,  gives  the  title  of  the  work  and  the  name  of
the  author. +  Now  the  name,  which  is  there  given,  Cha-
TURv^DA  Pbit'h6daca  swAmI,  is  that  of  a  celebrated
scholiast  of  Brahmegupta,  frequently  cited  as  such  by
the  commentaries  of  BhAscara  and  by  other  astronomical
writers  :  and  the  title  of  the  work,  Brahma  siddhdnta,  or
sometimes  Brahma  sp^huia  siddhanta,  corresponds,  in  the
shorter  form,  to  the  known  title  of  Brahmegupta^s  trea-
tise in  the  usual  references  to  it  by  BhAscara's  commen-
tators;! and  answers,  in  the  longer  form,  to  the  desig-
natioti  of  it,  as  indicated  in  an  introductory  couplet  which
is  quoted  firom  Brahmegupta  by  LacshmIdAsa,  a  scho-
liast of  BhAscara. §

Remarking  this  coincidence,  the  translator  proceeded  to
collate,  with  the  text  and  commentary,  numerous  quota-  '
tions  from  both,  which  he  found  in  BhAscara's  wiitmgs,
or  in  those  of  his  expositors.  The  result  confirmed  the^
indication,  and  established  the  identity  of  both  text  and
scholia  as  Brahmegupta's  treatise,  and  the  gloss  of
Prit'h6daca.  The  authenticity  of  this  Brahma  sid"
dh&nta  is  further  confirmed  by  numerous  quotations  in  the
commentary  of  BnAff  6tpala  on  the  sanhita  of  VarAha-

•  Note  B.

t  Vdscmd  bhdshya  by  Chaturv^da  PBiT'ntjDACA  swamI,  son  of
MadhusCoana,  on  ilke  Brahma  aiddhdnta  ;  (or  sometimes  Br^mo-
sip\ini'^8iddh6nta.)

X  They  often  quote  from  the  Brdhma  siddhdnta  after  premising  a
reference  to  Brahmegupta.  '

§  Note  C.  .  .


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


424  DISSERTATION ON THE

MiHiRA  :  as  the  quotations  from  the  Brahma  siddhanta
in  that  commentary,  (which  is  the  work  of  an  author  who
flourished  eight  hundred  and  fifty  years  ago,)  are  veri-
fied in  the  copy  under  consideration.  A  few  instances  of
both  will  suffice,  and  cannot  fail  to  produce  conviction.*

It  is  confidently  concluded,  that  the  chapters  on  aritJi-
metic  and  algebra,  fortunately  entire  in  a  copy,  in  many
parts  imperfect,  of  Brahmegupta's  celebrated  work,  as
here  described,  are  genuine  and  authentic.  It  remains  to
investigate  the  age  of  the  author.

Mr.  Davis,  who  first  opened  to  the  pubUc  a  correct
view  of  the  astrcMiomical  computations  of  the  Hindus,f  is
of  opinion,  that  Brahmegupta  lived  in  the  seventh  cen-
tury of  the  Christian  era.;}:  Dr.  William  Hunter,  who
resided  for  some  time  with  a  British  embassy  at  Ujjayam,
and  made  diligent  researches  into  the  remains  of  Indian
science  at  that  ancient  seat  of  Hindu  astronomical  know^
ledge,  was  there  furnished,  by  the  learned  astronomers
whom  he  consulted,  with  the  ages  of  the  principal  ancient
authorities.  They  assigned  to  Brahmegupta  the  date  of
650  Saca;  which  answers  to  A.D.  628.  The  grounds  on
which  they  proceeded  are  unfortunately  not  specified  :  but,
as  they  gave  BhA.scara's  age  correctly,  as  well  as  several
other  dates  right,  which  admit  of  being  verified ;  it  is  pre-
sumed that  they  had  grounds,  though  unexplained,  for  the
information  which  they  communicated.  ^

Mr.  Bentley,  who  is  Uttle  disposed  to  favour  the  anti-
quity of  an  Indian  astronomer,  has  given  his  reasons  for
considering  the  astronomical  system  which  Brahme-
gupta teaches,  to  be  between  twelve  and  thirteen  hundred
years  old  (12631  years  in  A.D.  1799). ||  Now,  as  the
system  taught  by  this  author  is  professedly  one  corrected

•  Note  D. t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  225. t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  242.
§  Note  E. II  As.  Resi,  vol.  vi.  p.  586.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


i


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  425

and  adapted  by  him  to  conform  with  the  observed  positions
of  the  celestial  objects  when  he  wrote,*  the  age,  when
their  positions  would  be  conformable  with  the  results  of
computations  made  as  by  him  directed,  is  precisely  the
age  of  the  author  himself:  and  so  far  as  Mr.  Bentley's
calculations  may  be  considered  to  approximate  to  the  truth,
the  date  of  Brahmegupta's  performance  is  determined
with  like  approach  to  exactness,  within  a  certain  latitude
however  of  uncertainty  for  allowance  to  be  made  on  account
of  the  inaccuracy  of  Hindu  observations.

The  translator  has  assigned  on  former  occauons*)-  the
grounds  upon  which  he  sees  reason  to  place  the  author's
age,  soon  after  the  period  when  the  vernal  equinox  coin-
cided with  the  beginning  of  the  lunar  mansion  and  zodiacal
asterism  Asmni^  where  the  Hindu  ecliptic  now  commences.
He  is  supported  in  it  by  the  sentiments  of  BhAscara  and
other  Indian  astronomers,  who  infer  from  Brahmegupta's
doctrine  concerning  the  solstitial  points,  of  which  he  does
not  admit  a  periodical  motion,  that  he  lived  when  the
equinoxes  did  not,  sensibly  to  him,  deviate  from  the  begin-
ning o(Aswini  and  middle  of  Chitra  on  the  Hindu  sphere.;}:
On  these  grounds  it  is  maintained,  that  Brahmegupta
is  rightly  placed  in  the  sixth  or  beginning  of  the  seventh
century  of  the  Christian  era ;  as  the  subjoined  calculations
will  more  particularly  show.^  The  age  when  Brahme-
gupta flourished,  seems  then,  from  the  concurrence  of  all
these  arguments,  to  be  satisfactorily  settled  as  antecedent
to  the  earliest  dawn  of  the  culture  of  sciences  among  the
Arabs;  and  consequently  establishes  the  fact,  that  the
Hindus  were  in  possession  of  algebra  before  it  was  known
to  the  Arabians.

•  Supra. t  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  329.  [p.  327  of  the  present  vol.]
t  As.  Res.,  vol,  xii.  p.  215.  [p.  380.  of  the  present  vol.] §  Note  F.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


426  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

Brahmegupta'^  treatise,  however^  is  Dot  the  earliest
work  known  to  have  been  written  on  the  same  subject  by
an  Indian  author.  The  most  eminent  scholiast  of  BhAs-
CARA"*^  quotes  a  passage  of  ARYABHAff a  spedfyiog
algebra  under  the  designation  of  Vija,  and  making  sepa-
rate mention  of  Cuiiaca^  which  more  particularly  intends  a
problem  subservient  to  the  general  method  of  resolution  of
indeterminate  problems  of  the  first  degree :  he  is  tmder-
stood  by  another  of  BhAscara's  commentators  f  to  be  at
the  head  of  the  elder  writers,  to  whom  the  text  then  under
consideration  adverts,  as  having  designated  by  the  name
of  MadhyamaharqLna  the  resolution  of  affected  quadratic
equations  by  means  of  the  completion  of  the  square.  It
is  to  be  presumed,  therefore,  that  the  treatise  of  ARYA-
BHAff a  then  extant,  did  extend  to  quadratic  equations
in  the  determinate  analysis,  and  to  indeterminate  problems
of  the  first  degree ;  if  not  to  those  of  the  second  likewise,
as  most  probably  it  did.

This  ancient  astronomer  and  algebraist  was  anterior  to
both  VarAhamihira  and  Brahmegtjpta,  being  re-
peatedly named  by  the  latter ;  and  the  determination  of
llie  age  when  he  flourished  is  particularly  interesting,  as
his  astronomical  system,  though  on  some  points  agreeing,
essentially  disagreed  on  others,  vrith  that  which  those
authors  have  followed,  and  which  the  Hindu  astronomers
still  maintain,  j:

He  is  considered  by  the  commentators  of  the  Skrya
siddhanta  and  SirSmani,^  as  the  earliest  of  iminspired
and  mere  human  writers  on  the  science  of  astronomy ;  as
kaving  introduced  requisite  corrections  into  the  system  of

^  Gx^i^A,  a  distinguished  mathematician  and  astronomer,
t  StjR.  on  nja  gad.  §  128.  J  Note  G.

4  NrIsinha  on  Sdr, GkiiikA  pref.  XoOrdh.  lagh.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  427

ParAsara,  from  whom  he  took  the  numbers  for  the
planetary  mean  motions;  as  having  been  followed  in  the
tract  of  emendation^  after  a  sufficient  interval  to  make
further  correction  requisite,  by  DuRGASiNH  a  and  Mihira;
who  were  again  succeeded  after  a  fiirther  interval  by  Brah-

MEGUPTA  son  of  JlSHNU.*

In  shorty  Ary  ABHAff  a  was  founder  of  one  of  the  sects
of  Indian  astronomers,  as  PuLf§A,  an  author  likewise  an-
terior to  both  Varahamihira  and  Brahmegupta,  was
of  another:  which  were  distinguished  by  names  derived
from  the  discriminative  tenets  respecting  the  commencement
of  planetary  motions  at  sun-rise  according  to  the  first,  but
at  midnight  according  to  the  latter,  f  on  the  meridian  of
Lancdj  at  the  beginning  of  the  great  astronomical  cycle.
A  third  sect  began  the  astronomical  day,  as  well  as  the
great  period,  at  noon.

His  name  accompanied  the  intimation  which  the  Arab
astronomers  (under  the  Abbasside  Khalifs,  as  it  would
appear,)  received,  that  three  distinct  astronomical  systems
were  current  among  the  Hindus  of  those  days :  and  it  is
but  slightly  corrupted,  certainly  not  at  all  disguised,  in  the
Arabic  representation  of  it  Arjabahary  or  rather  Arjdbhar.  %
The  two  other  systems were, first, Brahmegupta's

•  A8.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  235,  242,  and  244;  and  Note  H.

t  Brahmeoupta,  ch.  11.  The  names  are  Audai/aca  from  Udatfa
rising;  and  Ardhardirica  from  Ardhardtri,  midnight.  The  third
school  is  noticed  by  BHAff6TPALA  the  scholiast  of  Varahamihira,
under  the  denomination  of  Mddhyandinas,  as  alleging  the  commence-
ment of  the  astronomical  period  at  noon  :  {horn  Madhyandina^  mid-
day.)

X  The  San$cr^t  t,  it  is  to  be  remembered,  is  the  character  of  a
peculiar  sound  often  mistaken  for  r,  and  which  the  A  rabs  were  likely
so  to  write,  rather  than  with  a  te  or  with  a  tau.  The  Hindi  t  is
generally  written  by  the  English  in  India  with  an  r.  Example:  Ber
{v&ta)f  the  Indian  fig,  vulg.  Banian  tree.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


428  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

Siddhanta,  which  was  the  one  they  became  best  ac-
quainted withy  and  to  which  they  apply  the  denomination
of  Hie  sind-hind;  and  second,  that  of  Area  the  sun,  which
they  write  Arcand,  a  corruption  still  prevalent  in  the  vulgar
Hindi*

ARYABHAff  A  appears  to  have  had  more  correct  notions
of  the  true  explanation  of  celestial  phenomena  than  Brah-
MEGUPTA  himself;  who,  in  a  few  instances,  correcting
errors  of  his  predecessor,  but  oftener  deviating  from  that
predecessor's  juster  views,  has  been  followed  by  the  herd
of  modem  Hindu  astronomera,  in  a  system  not  improved,
but  deteriorated,  since  the  time  of  the  more  ancient  au-
thor.

Considering  the  proficiency  of  ARYABHAff  a  in  astro-
nomical science,  and  adverting  to  the  fact  of  his  having
written  upon  Algebra,  as  well  as  to  the  circumstance  of
his  being  named  by  numerous  vmters  as  the  founder  of  a
sect,  or  author  of  a  system  in  astronomy,  and  being  quoted
at  the  head  of  algebraists,  when  the  commentators  of  extant
treatises  have  occasion  to  mention  early  and  originalf  writers
on  this  branch  of  science,  it  is  not  necessary  to  seek  fur-
ther for  a  mathematician  qualified  to  have  been  the  great
improver  of  the  analytic  art,  and  likely  to  have  been  the
person  by  M^hom  it  was  carried  to  the  pitch  to  which  it  is
found  to  have  attamed  among  the  Hindus,  and  at  which  it
is  observed  to  be  nearly  stationary  through  the  long  lapse
of  ages  which  have  since  passed  :  the  later  additions  being
few  and  unessential  in  the  writings  of  Brahmegopta,  of
BhAscara,  and  of  JnyAna  rAja,  though  they  Uved  at
intervals  of  centuries  from  each  other.

ARYABHAff  A  then  being  the  earliest  author  known  to

•  See  notes  I,  K,  and  X.

t  S6rya  dIsa  on  Vijagahita^  ch.  5.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  429

have  treated  of  Algebra  among  the  Hindus,  and  being
likely  to  be,  if  not  the  inventor,  the  improver  of  that
analysis,  by  whom  too  it  was  pushed  nearly  to  the  whole
degree  of  excellence  which  it  is  found  to  have  attained
among  them ;  it  becomes  in  an  especial  manner  interesting
to  investigate  any  discoverable  trace  in  the  absence  of  better
and  more  direct  evidence,  which  may  tend  to  fix  the  date
of  his  labours,  or  to  indicate  the  time  which  elapsed  be-
tween him  and  Brahmegupta,  whose  age  is  more  accu-
rately determined.*

Taking  ARYABHAff  a,  for  reasons  given  in  the  notes,
to  have  preceded  Brahmegupta  and  VarAhamihira
by  several  centuries;  and  Brahmegupta  to  have  flou-
rished about  twelve  hundred  years  ago;t  and  VarAha-
MiHiRA,  concerning  whose  works  and  age  some  further
notices  will  be  found  in  a  subjoined  note,J  to  have  lived  at
the  beginning  of  the  sixth  century  after  Christ,^  it  appears
probable  that  this  earliest  of  known  Hindu  algebraists
wrote  as  far  back  as  the  fifth  century  of  the  Christian  era ;
and,  perhaps,  in  an  earlier  age.  Hence  it  is  concluded
that  he  is  nearly  as  ancient  as  the  Grecian  algebraist
DioPHANTUs,  supposed,  on  the  authority  of  Abulfaraj,||
to  have  flourished  in  the  time  of  the  Emperor  Julian,  or
about  A.D.  360.

Admitting  the  Hindu  and  Alexandrian  authors  to  be
nearly  equally  ancient,  it  must  be  conceded  in  favour  of
the  Indian  algebraist,  that  he  was  more  advanced  in  the
science ;  since  he  appears  to  have  been  in  possession  of  the
resolution  of  equations  involving  several  unknown,  which
it  is  not  clear,  nor  fairly  presumable,  that  Diophantus

•  Note  I.  t  See  before  and  note  F.

{  Note  K.  §  See  before  and  note  £.

II  Pococke's  edition  and  translation,  p.  89.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


430  DISSERtATION  ON THE

koew ;  and  a  general  method  for  indeterminate  problems  of
at  least  the  first  degree,  to  a  knowledge  of  which  the
Grecian  algebraist  had  certainly  not  attained ;  though  he
displays  infinite  sagacity  and  ingenuity  in  particular  solu-
tions ;  and  though  a  certain  routine  is  discernible  in  them.

A  comparison  of  the  Grecian,  Hindu,  and  Arabian  alge-
bras, will  more  distinctly  show,  which  of  them  had  made
the  greatest  progress  at  the  earliest  age  of  each,  that  can
be  now  traced.

The  notation  or  algorithm  of  Algebra  is  so  essential  to
this  art,  as  to  deserve  the  first  notice  in  a  review  of  the
Indian  method  of  analysis,  and  a  comparison  of  it  with  the
Grecian  and  Ambian  algebras.  The  Hindu  algebraists  use
abbreviations  and  initials  for  symbols:  they  distinguish
negative  quantities  by  a  dot,*  but  have  not  any  mark,
besides  the  absence  of  the  negative  sign,  to  discriminate
a  positive  quantity.  No  marks  or  symbols  indicating
operations  of  addition,  or  multiplication,  &c.  are  employed
by  them :  nor  any  announcing  equality f  or  relative  magni-
tude (greater  or  less)4  But  a  factum  is  denoted  by  the
initial  syllable  of  a  word  of  that  import,^  subjoined  to  the
terms  which  compose  it,  between  which  a  dot  is  sometimes
interposed.  A  fraction  is  indicated  by  placing  the  divisor
under  the  dividend,||  but  without  a  line  of  separation.
The  two  sides  of  an  equation  are  ordered  in  the  same
manner,  one  under  the  other  :5[  and  this  method  of  placing


•  Fija  gah.  §  4.

t  The  sign  of  equality  was  first  used  by  Robert  Records,  because,
as  he  says,  no  two  things  can  be  more  equal  than  a  pair  of  parallels,
or  gemowe  lines  of  one  length. Hutton.

t  The  signs  of  relative  magnitude  were  first  introduced  into  Euro-
pean algebra  by  Harriot.

J  Vijaga^.h2\,  \\  ZJ/.  §  33.

IF Vija gah,  and  Braum.  18,  passim.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA OF  THE HINDUS.  431

terms  under  each  other  being  likewise  practised  upon  other
occasions,*  the  intent  is  in  the  instance  to  be  collected
firom  the  recital  of  the  steps  of  the  process  in  words  at
lengthy  which  always  accompanies  the  algebraic  process.
That  recital  is  also  requisite  to  ascertain  the  precise  intent
of  vertical  lines  interposed  between  the  terms  of  a  geometric
progression,  but  used  also  upon  other  occasions,  to  separate
and  discriminate  quantities.  The  symbols  of  unknown
quantity  are  not  confined  to  a  single  one :  but  extend  to
ever  so  great  a  variety  of  denominations :  and  the  charac-
ters used  are  initial  syllables  of  the  names  of  colours,t
excepting  the  first,  which  is  the  initial  of  yavat-tavat,  *  as
much  as';  words  of  the  same  import  with  Bombelli's
tanto^  used  by  him  for  the  same  purpose.  Colour  there*
fore  means  unknown  quantity,  or  the  symbol  of  it :  and
the  same  Sanscrit  vford,  variia,  also  signifying  a  Utera)
character,  letters  are  accordingly  employed  likewise  as
symbols;  either  taken  from  the  alphabet ;j:  or  else  iilitial
syllables  of  words  signifying  the  subjects  of  the  problem  ;
whether  of  a  general  nature,^  or  specially  the  names  of
geometric  lines  in  algebraic  demonstrations  of  geometric
propositions  or  solution  of  geometric  problems.||  Symbols
too  are  employed,  not  only  for  unknown  quantities,  of
which  the  value  is^  sought ;  but  for  variable  quantities  of
which  the  value  may  be  arbitrarily  put  iVij,  Ch.  6,  note
on  commencement  of  §  163 — 166),  and  especially  in  de-
monstrations, for  both  given  and  sought  quantities.  Ini-
tials of  the  terms  for  square  and  solid  respectively  denote
those  powers;  and  combined  they  indicate  the  higher.
These  are  reckoned  not  by  the  sums  of  the.  powers,  but
by  their  products. An  initial^  syllable  is  in  like  manner

•  rifa  ffait.  §  55.  f  r^a  gak.  §  17. Bbahm.  c.  18.  §  2.

t  V^agah.  ch.  6. §  Vija gah,  §  111. ||  Vija gnU.  §  146.
5f  Zi/.  §26.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


432  DISSERTATION  ON THE

used  to  mark  a  surd  root*  The  terms  of  a  compound
quantity  are  ordered  according  to  the  powers;  and  the
absolute  number  invariably  comes  last.  It  also  is  distin-
guished by  an  initial  syllable,  as  a  discriminative  token  of
known  quantity.f  Numeral  coefficients  are  employed,  in-
clusive of  unity  which  is  always  noted,  and  comprehending
fractions  ;|  for  the  numeral  divisor  is  generally  so  placed,
rather  than  under  the  symbol  of  the  unknown :  and  in
like  manner  the  niegative  dot  is  set  over  the  numeral  coeffi-
cient :  and  not  over  the  literal  character.  The  coefficients
are  placed  after  the  symbol  of  the  unknown  quantity.§
Equations  are  not  ordered  so  as  to  put  all  the  quantities
positive;  nor  to  give  precedence  to  a  positive  term  in  a
compound  quantity:  for  the  negative  terms  are  retained,
and  even  preferably  put  in  the  first  place.  In  stating  the
two  sides  of  an  equation,  the  general,  though  not  inva-
riable, practice  is,  at  least  in  the  first  instance,  to  repeat
every  term,  which  occurs  in  the  one  side,  on  the  other:
annexing  nought  for  the  coefficient,  if  a  term  of  that  parti-
cular denomination  be  there  wanting.

If  reference  be  made  to  the  writings  of  Diophantus,
and  of  the  Arabian  algebraists,  and  their  early  disciples
in  Europe,  it  will  be  found,  that  the  notation,  which  has
been  here  described,  is  essentially  difierent  fit>m  all  theirs,
much  as  they  vary.  Diophantus  employs  the  inverted
medial  of  ix^t^iq,  defect  or  want  (opposed  to  iira^^tq,  sub-
stance or  abundance  II)  to  indicate  a  negative  quantity.  He
prefixes  that  mark  ^  to  the  quantity  in  question.  He  calls
the  unknown,  api6fA6( ;  representing  it  by  the  final  $,  which

•  Vijaffa^.k 29.  t  P'ijagaii.hn.

%  Stbvinus  in  like  manner  included  fractions  in  coefficients.

§  ViBTA  did  80  likewise.

II  A  word  of  nearly  the  same  import  with  the  Sanscrit  dhana,  used
by  Hindu  algebraists  for  the  same  signification.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  433

he  doubles  for  the  plural ;  while  the  Arabian  algebraists
apply  the  equivalent  word  for  number  to  the  constant
or  known  term ;  and  the  Hindus,  on  the  other  hand,
refer  the  word  for  numerical  character  to  the  coefficient.
He  denotes  the  monad,  or  imit  absolute,  by  m*;  and  the
linear  quantity  is  called  by  him  arithmos;  and  designated,
Uke  the  unknown,  by  the  final  sigma.  He  marks  the
further  powers  by  initials  of  words  signifying  them :  3^,  *",
JJ",  Sk",  lof",  8cc.  for  dynamisy  power  (meaning  the  square) ;
cubosj  cube;  dynamo^dynamis,  biquadrate,  &c.  But  he
reckons  the  higher  by  the  sums,  not  the  products,  of  the
lower.  Thus  the  sixth  power  is  with  him  the  cubo^cubos,
which  the  Hindus  designate  as  the  quadrate-cube,  (cube  of
the  square,  or  square  of  the  cube).

The  Arabian  algebraists  are  still  more  sparing  of  sym-
bols, or  rather  entirely  destitute  of  them.f  They  have
none,  whether  arbitrary  or  abbreviated,  either  for  quantities
known  or  unknown,  positive  or  negative,  or  for  the  steps
and  operations  of  an  algebraic  process ;  but  express  every
thing  by  words,  and  phrases,  at  full  length.  Their  Euro-
pean scholars  introduced  a  few,  and  very  few  abbreviations
of  names :  c®,  c*,  c",  for  the  three  first  powers ;  c^,  q*,  for
the  first  and  second  unknown  quantities ,-  p,  m,  for  plus
and  minus ;  and  R  for  the  note  of  radicality ;  occur  in  the
first  printed  work,  which  is  that  of  Paciolo.  J  Leonardo
BoNACci  of  Pisa  the  earliest  scholar  of  the  Arabians, §
is  said  by  Targioni  Tozzbtti  to  have  used  the  small
letters  of  the  alphabet  to  denote  quantities.  || But  Leo-


•  Def.  9.  t  As.  Res.,  vol.  xii.  p.  183.

t  Or  Paoioli,  Paciuolo, — li,  &c. For  the  name  is  variously
nrritten  by  Italian  authors.
§  See  note  L.

II  Viofffft,  2d  Edit.,  vol.  ii.  p.  62.
VOL.  II.  2  F


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


434  DISSERTATION  ON THE

NARDO  only  does  so  because  he  represents  quantities  by
straight  lines,  and  designates  those  lines  by  letters,  in
elucidation  of  his  algebraic  solutions  of  problems.*

The  Arabians  termed  the  unknown  (and  they  wrought
but  on  one)  shai  thing.  It  is  translated  by  Leonardo  of
Pisa  and  his  disciples,  by  the  correspondent  Latin  word
res  and  Italian  cosa ;  whence  Regola  de  la  Corny  and  Rule
of  Cossy  with  Cossike  practice  and  Cossike  number  of  our
older  authors,t  for  Algebra  or  Speculative  practice,  as
Paciolo  I  denominates  the  analytic  art ;  and  Cassic
number,  in  writers  of  a  somewhat  later  date,  for  the  root
of  an  equation.

The  Arabs  termed  the  square  of  the  unknown  mal,  pos-
session or  wealth ;  translated  by  the  Latin  census  and
Italian  censo;  as  terms  of  the  same  import :  for  it  is  in  the
acceptation  of  amount  of  property  or  estate^  that  census
was  here  used  by  Leonardo.

The  cube  was  by  the  Arabs  tenned  caby  a  die  or  cube ;
and  they  combined  these  terms  mal  and  c&b  for  compound
names  of  the  more  eleyated  powers,  in  the  manner  of
DioPHANTUs,  by  the  sums  of  the  powers;  and  not  like
the  Hindus  by  their  products.  Such,  indeed,  is  their  method
in  the  modem  elementary  works :  but  it  is  not  clear  that
the  same  mode  was  observed  by  their  earlier  writers  ,•  for
their  Italian  scholars  denominated  the  biquadrate  and
higher  powers  Relato  primo,  secundo,  tertio,  &c.

Positive  they  cidl  zaid  additional;  and  negative  nakis
deficient:  and,  as  before  observed,  they  have  no  discrimi
native  marks  for  either  of  them.

•  C0S8AM,  Origine  dell'Algebra,  i.

t  Robert  Reoordb's  Whetstone  of  Witte.

X  Secondo  noi  detta  Pratica  Speculativa. Summa  8.  1.

§  CcTtsitSj  quicquid  fortunarum  quis  habet. Stbph.  TTies.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.  435

The  operation  of  restoring  negative  quantities,  if  any
there  be,  to  the  positive  form,  which  is  an  essential  step
with  thero,  is  termed  jebr,  or  with  the  article  Aljebr,  the
mending  or  restoration.  That  of  comparing  the  terms  and
taking  like  from  like,  which  is  the  next  material  step  in
the  process  of  resolution,  is  called  by  them  mukdbalahy
comparison.  Hence  the  name  of  Tarik  aljebr  tea  almukd"
balah,  '  the  method  of  restoration  and  comparison,'  which
obtained  among  the  Arabs  for  this  branch  of  the  analytic
art;  and  hence  our  name  of  Algebra,  from  Leonardo  of
Pisa's  exact  version  of  the  Arabic  title.  Fi  istikhraju'l
majhiilat  be  tarik  aljebr  wa  almukdbalah,*  De  solutione
quarundam  queestionum  secundum  modum  Algebrce  et
Almuchabalai,'\

The  two  steps  or  operations  which  have  thus  given
name  to  the  method  of  analysis,  are  precisely  what  is
enjoined  without  distinctive  appellations  of  them,  in  the
introduction  of  the  arithmetics  of  Diophantus,  where  he
directs,  that,  if  the  quantities  be  positive  on  both  sides,
like  are  to  be  taken  from  like,  until  one  species  be  equal  to
one  species ;  but  if  on  either  side  or  on  both  any  species
be  negative,  the  negative  species  must  be  added  to  both
sides,  so  that  they  become  positive  on  both  sides  of  the
equation :  after  which  like  are  again  to  be  taken  from  like,
until  one  species  remain  on  each  side.  %

The  Hindu  algebra  not  requiring  the  terms  of  the  equa-
tion to  be  all  exhibited  in  the  form  of  positive  quantity,
does  not  direct  the  preliminary  step  of  restoring  negative
quantity  to  the  affirmative  state,  but  proceeds  at  once  to
the  operation  of  equal  subtraction  {sanuisSdhana)  for  the
difference  of  like  terms,  which  is  the  process  denominated

•  Khuldsatu'l  hisdb.  c.  8. Calcutta,  1812.  (8vo.)
t  Liber  abb 9.  15.  3. M.S.  in  Magliab.  Libr.  Jef.  11.

2f2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


436 .  DISSERTATION ON  THE

by  the  Arabian  algebraists  comparison  (mukabalak).  On
that  point,  therefore,  the  Arabian  algebra  has  more  affinity
to  the  Grecian  than  to  the  Indian  analysis.

As  to  the  progress  which  the  Hindus  had  made  in  the
analytic  art,  it  will  be  seen,  that  they  possessed  well  the
arithmetic  of  surd  roots;*  that  they  were  aware  of  the
infinite  quotient  resulting  from  the  division  of  finite  quan-
tity by  cipher ;+  that  they  knew  the  general  resolution  of
equations  of  the  second  degree,  and  had  touched  upon
those  of  higher  denomination,  resolving  them  in  the  sim-
plest cases,  and  in  those  in  which  the  solution  happens  to
be  practicable  by  the  method  which  serves  for  quadratics:  J
that  they  had  attained  a  general  solution  of  indeterminate
problems  of  the  first  degree ;  §  that  they  had  arrived  at  a
method  for  deriving  a  multitude  of  solutions  of  answers  to
problems  of  the  second  degree  from  a  single  answer  found
tentatively,  II  which  is  as  near  an  approach  to  a  general
solution  of  such  problems  as  was  made  until  the  days  of
Lagrange^  who  first  demonstrated,  that  the  problem,  on
which  the  solutions  of  all  questions  of  this  nature  depend,
is  always  resolvable  in  whole  numbers.lf  The  Hindus  had
likewise  attempted  problems  of  this  higher  order  by  the
application  of  the  method  which  suffices  for  those  of  the
first  degree;**  with  indeed  very  scanty  success,  as  might
be  expected.

They  not  only  applied  algebra  both  to  astronomyft  and


•  Brahm.  18.  §  27—29. Flj,'gan.  §  23—52.

t  LU,  §  45. rij,'gafi.  §  15-16  and  §  135.

X  rij.-gan.  §  129,  and  §  137—138.

§  Brahm.  18.  §  3—18. Vij.-gah.  53-73. LU.  §  248—265.

II  Brahm.  18.  §  29—49. Vij.-gah.  §  75—99.

If  Mem.  of  Acad,  of  Turin  :  and  of  Berlin.

••  Vij^-gaH.  §  206—207.  ft  Brahm.  18.  passim. Vy.-gan.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.  437

to  geometry,*  but  conversely  applied  geometry  likewise  to
the  demonstration  of  algebraic  rules,  f  In  short,  they
cultivated  algebra  much  more,  and  with  greater  success,
than  geometry ;  as  is  evident  fix)m  the  comparatively  low
state  of  their  knowledge  in  the  one,^  and  the  high  pitch  of
their  attainments  in  the  other :  and  they  cultivated  it  for
the  sake  of  astronomy,  as  they  did  this  chiefly  for  astro-
logical purposes.  The  examples  in  the  earliest  algebraic
treatise  extant (Brahmegupta's)  are  mostly  astronomical:
and  here  the  solution  of  indeterminate  problems  is  some-
times of  real  and  practical  use.  The  instances  in  the  later
treatise  of  algebra  by  Bhascara  are  more  various:  many
of  them  geometric ;  but  one  astronomical ;  the  rest  nume-
ral :  among  which  a  great  number  of  indeterminate ;  and
of  these  some,  though  not  the  greatest  part,  resembling  the
questions  which  chiefly  engage  the  attention  of  Diophan-
Tus.  But  the  general  character  of  the  Diophantine  pro-
blems, and  of  the  Hindu  unlimited  ones,  is  by  no  means
alike :  .and  several  in  the  style  of  Diophantine  are  noticed
by  BhAscara  in  his  arithmetical,  instead  of  his  algebraic,
treatise.  §

To  pursue  this  summary  comparison  further,  Diophan-
Tus  appears  to  have  been  acquainted  with  the  direct  reso-
lution of  aflected  quadratic  equations ;  but  less  familiar
with  the  management  of  them,  he  seldom  touches  on  it.
Chiefly  busied  with  indeterminate  problems  of  the  first
degree,  he  yet  seems  to  have  possessed  no  general  rule  for
their  solution.  His  elementary  instructions  for  the  prepa-
ration of  equations  are  succinct ;  \\  his  notation,  as  before

•  Flj.'^a^.  §  117-127,  §  146—152.  f  vy.-ffa^.  §  212— 2J4.

X  Brahm.  12.  §  21 ;  corrected  however  in  Lil.  §  169 — I7O.
§  Lii.  §  59 — 61,  where  it  appears,  however,  that  preceding  writers
had  treated  the  question  alg:ebraicaliy. See  likewise  §  139—146.
llDef.  11.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


438  DISSERTATION ON  THE

observed,  scanty  and  inconvenient.  In  the  whole  science
he  is  very  far  behind  the  Hindu  writers,  notwithstanding
the  infinite  ingenuity  by  which  he  makes  up  for  the  want
of  rule,  and  although  presented  to  us  under  the  disadvan-
tage of  mutilation  ;  if  it  be,  indeed,  certain  that  the  text  of
only  six,  or  at  most  seven,  of  thirteen  books,  which  his
introduction  announces,  has  been  preserved.*  It  is  suffi-
ciently clear  fit>m  what  does  remain,  that  the  lost  part
could  not  have  exhibited  a  much  higher  degree  of  attain-
ment in  the  art.  It  is  presumable,  that  so  much  as  we
possess  of  his  work  is  a  fair  specimen  of  the  progress
which  he  and  the  Greeks  before  him  (for  he  is  hardly  to  be
considered  as  the  inventor,  since  he  seems  to  treat  the  art
as  already  known)  had  made  in  his  time.

The  points  m  which  the  Hindu  algebra  appears  parti-
cularly distinguished  fi*om  the  Greek,  are,  besides  a  better
and  more  comprehensive  algorithm, — 1st,  The  manage-
ment of  equations  involving  more  than  one  unknown  term.
(This  adds  to  the  two  classes  noticed  by  the  Arabs,  namely,
simple  and  compound,  two,  or  rather  three,  other  classes  of
equation.)  2d,  The  resolution  of  equations  of  a  higher
order,  in  which,  if  they  achieved  little,  they  had,  at  least,
the  merit  of  the  attempt,  and  anticipated  a  modem  dis-
covery in  the  solution  of  biquadratics.  3d.  General  me-
thods for  the  solutions  of  indeterminate  problems  of  first
and  second  degrees,  in  which  they  went  far,  indeed,  be-
yond DioPHANTUS,  and  anticipated  discoveries  of  modern
algebraists.  4th,  Application  of  algebra  to  astronomical
investigation  and  geometrical  demonstration,  in  which  also
they  hit  upon  some  matters  which  have  been  reinvented  in
later  times.

This  brings  us  to  the  examination  of  some  of  their  anti-


•  Note  M.


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  439

cipations  of  modern  discoveries.  The  reader's  notice  will
be  here  drawn  to  three  instances  in  particular.

The  first  is  in  the  demonstration  of  the  noted  proposition
of  Pythagoras,  concerning  the  square  of  the  base  of  a
rectangular  triangle,  equal  to  the  squares  of  the  two  legs
containing  a  right  angle.  The  demonstration  is  given  two
ways  in  BhAscara's  algebra  {Vij.-gan.  %  146).  The  first
of  them  is  the  same  which  is  delivered  by  Wallis  in  his
treatise  on  angular  sections  (ch.  vi.),  and,  as  &r  as  appears,
then  given  for  the  first  time.  *

On  the  subject  of  demonstrations,  it  is  to  be  remarked
that  the  Hindu  mathematicians  proved  propositions  both
algebraically  and  geometrically :  as  is  particularly  noticed
by  BhAscara  himself,  towards  the  close  of  his  algebra,
where  he  gives  both  modes  of  proof  of  a  remarkable  method
for  the  solution  of  indeterminate  problems,  which  involve  a
factum  of  two  unknown  quantities.  The  rule  which  he
demonstrates  is  of  great  antiquity  in  Hindu  algebra,  being
found  in  the  works  of  his  predecessor  Brahmegupta,
and  being  there  a  quotation  from  a  more  ancient  treatise ;
for  it  is  injudiciously  censured,  and  a  less  satis&ctory
method  by  unrestricted  arbitrary  assumption  given  in  its
place. BhAscara  has  retained  both.

The  next  instance,  which  will  be  here  noticed,  is  the  ge-
neral solution  of  indeterminate  problems  of  the  first  degree.

*  He  designates  the  sides  C.  D. Base  B. Segments  »>  ^  Then

»'^''^'5^«^d  thereforei^^*

Therefore  C«-HD«=(B*-|-B  >=:B  into«-|->=)  B*.
The  Indian  demonstration^  with  the  same  symbols,  is

"b

Therefore  B=«+J=C«+D«  and  B2=C«-hD«.
B B


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


440  DISSERTATION  ON THE

It  was  first  given  among  modems  by  Bachet  oe  Mezi-
RiAc  in  1624.*  Having  shown  how  the  solution  of  equa-
tions of  the  form  ax — hy^c  is  reduced  to  ax-  6y=+l,  he
proceeds  to  resolve  this  equation ;  and  prescribes  the  same
operation  on  a  and  b  as  to  find  the  greatest  common  divi-
sor. He  names  the  residues  c,  d^  e,  J\  8cc.  and  the  last
remainder  is  necessarily  unity  :  a  and  b  being  prime  to  each
other.  By  retracing  the  steps  from  «ipi  or  /^l  (accord-
ing as  the  number  of  remainders  is  even  or  odd)  64^1=1,
fd+l  =3;  fc+l=y,  yb±l  =/J,  |5a+l=a

e  "5  ~  b

or  /±1=^,  j^  =f,  £d+l=J,  &c.

/
The  last  numbers  0  and  a  will  be  the  smallest  values  of
X  and  y.  It  is  observed,  that  if  a  and  b  be  not  prime  to
each  other,  the  equation  cannot  subsist  in  whole  numbers,
unless  c  be  divisible  by  the  greatest  common  measure  of
a  and  b.

Here  we  have  precisely  the  method  of  the  Hindu  alge-
braistSy  who  have  not  fiuled,  likewise,  to  make  the  last
cited  observation.  See  Brahm.  Algebra,  section  1.  and
BhAsc.  LiL  ch.  xii.  Fy.  ch.  ii.  It  is  so  prominent  in  the
Indian  algebra  as  to  give  name  to  the  oldest  treatise  on  it
extant,  and  to  constitute  a  distinct  head  in  the  enumera-
tion of  the  different  branches  of  mathematical  knowledge  in
a  passage  cited  fi*om  a  still  more  ancient  author.  See  LiL
§248.

Confining  the  comparison  of  Hindu  and  modem  algebras
to  conspicuous  instances,  the  next  for  notice  is  that  of  the
solution  of  indeterminate  problems  of  the  second  degree ;
for  which  a  general  method  is  given  by  Brahmegupta,


*  Probl^mes  plaisans  ct  d^lcctables  qui  se  font  par  les  nombres.
2d  Edit.  (1624).  LAaRANoe^s  additions  to  Euler's  Alg^cbra,  ij.  382.
(Edit.  1807.)


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.  441

besides  rules  for  subordinate  cases^  and  two  general
methods  (one  of  them  the  same  with  Brahmegupta's)
besides  special  cases,  subservient,  however,  to  the  universal
solution  of  problems  of  this  nature;  and,  to  obtain  whole
numbers  in  all  circumstances,  a  combination  of  the  method
for  problems  of  the  first  degree  with  that  for  those  of  the
second,  employmg  them  alternately,  or,  as  the  Hindu  alge-
braist terms  it,  proceeding  in  a  circle.

BhAscara's  second  method  (Fj/.  §  80—81)  for  a  so-
lution of  the  problem  on  which  all  indeteiminate  ones  of
this  degree  depend,  is  exactly  the  same  which  Lord
Brouncker  devised  to  answer  a  question  proposed  by
way  of  challenge  by  Fermat  in  1667.  The  thing  required
was  a  general  rule  for  finding  the  innumerable  square
numbers,  which  multiplied  by  a  proposed  (non-quadrate)
number,  and  then  assuming  an  unit,  will  make  a  square.
Lord  Brouncker's  mle,  putting  n  for  any  given  number,
r  for  any  square  taken  at  pleasure,  and  d  for  difference

2  4  7^/ 2rx^\

between  n  and  r-  (r CQ  n)  was  -^  ( =-^ -r  )  the  square

9/r
required. In  the  Hindu  rule,  usmg  the  same  symbols,  -7

CL

is  the  squai'e  root  required.*  But  neither  Brouncker,
nor  Wallis,  who  himself  contrived  another  method,  nor
Fermat,  by  whom  the  question  was  proposed,  but  whose
mode  of  solution  was  never  made  known  by  him,  (probably
because  he  had  not  found  any  thing  better  than  Wallis
and  Brouncker  discoveredf),  norFRENiCLE,  who  treated
the  subject  without,  however,  adding  to  what  had  been
done  by  Wallis  and  Brouncker, J  appear  to  have  been
aware  of  the  importance  of  the  problem  and  its  universal
use ;  a  discovery  which,  among  the  modems,  was  reserved
for  Euler  in  the  middle  of  the  last  century. To  him,

•  yij.-gah,  §  80—81.  f  Wallis,  Alg.  c.  98. J  Ibid.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


442  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

among  the  modems^  we  owe  the  remark  which  the  Hindus
had  made  more  than  a  thousand  years  before,'*'  that  the
problem,  was  requisite  to  find  all  the  possible  solutions  of
equations  of  this  sort.  Lagrange  takes  credit  for  having
further  advanced  the  progress  of  this  branch  of  the  indeter-
minate analysis,  so  lately  as  1767  ;t  and  his  complete  solu-
tion of  equations  of  the  second  degree  appeared  no  earlier
than  1769.  J

It  has  been  pretended,  that  traces  of  the  art  are  to  be
discovered  in  the  writings  of  the  Grecian  geometers,  and
particularly  in  the  five  first  propositions  of  Euclid's  thir-
teenth book;  whether,  as  Wallis  conjectures,  what  we
there  have  be  the  work  ofTnRON  or  some  other  ancient
scholiast,  rather  than  of  Euclid  himself:  §  also  examples
of  analytic  investigation  in  Pappus  ;||  and  indications  of  a
method  somewhat  of  a  like  nature  with  algebra,  or  at  least
the  effects  of  it,  in  the  works  of  Archimedes  and  Apollo-
Nius,  though  they  are  supposed  to  have  very  studiously
concealed  this  their  art  of  invention.  5[

This  proceeds  on  the  groimd  of  considering  analysis  and
algebra  as  interchangeable  terms ;  and  applying  to  algebra
Euclid's  or  Theon's  definition  of  analysis,  'a  taking  of
that  as  granted,  which  is  sought,  and  thence  by  conse-
quences arriving  at  what  is  confessedly  true.'**

Undoubtedly  they  possessed  a  geometrical  analysis;
hints  or  traces  of  which  exist  in  the  writings  of  more  than

•  Bhascara  Vij.  §  173,  and  §  207. See  likewise  Brahm.  Alg.  §  7.
t  M6m.  de  PAcad.  de  Berlin,  vol.  xxiv.

X  See  French  translation  of  Euler's  Algebra,  Additions,  p.  286.
And  Lbobndrb  Th^orie  des  Nombres  1.  §  6.  No.  36.

§  Wallis,  Algebra,  c.  2.  |1  Ibid,  and  Preface.

IF  Md,  and  Nunez  Algebra  114.

**  Wallis,  following  Vieta's  Version,  Alg.  c.  1.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  443

one  Greek  mathematician,  and  especially  in  those  of
Archimedes.  But  this  is  very  different  from  the  alge-
braic calculus.  The  resemblance  extends,  at  most,  to  the
method  of  inversion;  which  both  Hindus  and  Arabians
consider  to  be  entirely  distinct  from  their  respective  alge-
bras; and  which  the  former,  therefore,  join  with  their
arithmetic  and  mensuration.*

In  a  very  general  sense,  the  analytic  art,  as  Hindu
writers  observe,  is  merely  sagacity  exercised,  and  is  inde-
pendent of  symbols,  which  do  not  constitute  the  art  In  a
more  restricted  sense,  according  to  them,  it  is  calculation
attended  with  the  manifestation  of  its  principles ;  and,  as
they  further  intimate,  a  method  aided  by  devices,  among
which  symbols  and  literal  signs  are  conspicuous,  f  Defined,
as  analysis  is  by  an  illustrious  modem  mathematician,;}: '  a
method  of  resolving  mathematical  problems  by  reducing
them  to  equations,'  it  assuredly  is  not  to  be  found  in  the
works  of  any  Grecian  writer  extant,  besides  Diophantus.

In  his  treatise  the  rudiments  of  algebra  are  clearly  con-
tained. He  delivers  in  a  succinct  manner  the  algorithm  of
a€Krmative  and  negative  quantities;  teaches  to  form  an
equation ;  to  transpose  the  negative  terms ;  and  to  bring  out
a  final  simple  equation  comprising  a  single  term  of  each  spe-
cies known  and  imknown.

Admitting,  on  the  ground  of  the  mention  of  a  mathema-
tician of  his  name,  whose  works  were  commented  by  Hy-
PATiA  about  the  beginning  of  the  fifth  century,^  and  on
the  authority  of  the  Arabic  annals  of  an  Armenian  Chris-
tian, ||  which  make  him  contemporary  with  Julian,  that

•  LU.  3.  1.  §  47. Khuiasatu'l  Hisdb,  c.  5.
t  V^\'ffa^,  §  110,  174,215,  224.

X  D'Albmbkrt.  §  SuiDAs,  in  voce  Hypaiia,

II  Gregory  Abulkaraj.  Ex  ijs  etiam  [nempe  philosophis  qui
prope tempora  Juliani florueruntj Diophantus,  cujus liber,  quern


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


444  DISSERTATION  ON THE

he  lived  towards  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century  of  the
Christian  era ;  or,  to  speak  with  precision,  about  the  year
360  ;*  the  Greeks  will  appear  to  have  possessed  in  the
fourth  century  so  much  of  algebra,  as  is  to  be  effected  by
dexterous  application  of  the  resolution  of  equations  of  the
first  degree,  and  even  the  second,  to  limited  problems;  and
to  indeterminate  also,  without,  however,  having  attained  a
general  solution  of  problems  of  this  latter  class.

The  Arabs  acquired  algebra,  extending  to  sim]de  and
compound  (meaning  quadratic)  equations ;  but  it  was  con-
fined, so  far  as  appears,  to  limited  problems  of  those  de-
grees ;  and  they  possessed  it  so  early  as  the  close  of  the
eighth  century,  or  commencement  of  the  ninth.  Treatises
were  at  that  period  written  in  the  Arabic  language  on  the
algebraic  analysis,  by  two  distinguished  mathematicians
who  flourished  under  the  Abasside  AlmAmun  ;  and  the
more  ancient  of  the  two,  Muhammed  ben  Musa  al
Khuwarazmiy  is  recognized  among  the  Arabians  as  the  first
who  made  algebra  known  to  them.  He  is  the  same  who
abridged,  for  the  gratification  of  AlmAm6n,  an  astrono-
mical work  taken  from  the  Indian  system  in  the  preced-
ing age,  under  Almans6r.  He  framed  tables,  likewise,
grounded  on  those  of  the  Hindus,  which  he  professed  to
correct.  And  he  studied  and  communicated  to  lus  country-
men the  Indian  compendious  method  of  computation ;
that  is,  their  arithmetic,  and,  as  is  to  be  inferred,  their  ana-
lytic calculus  also.t

The  Hindus  in  the  fifth  century,  perhaps  earlier,  j:  were
in  possession  of  Algebra  extending  to  the  general  solution


Algehram vocant,  Celebris  est, in  quern  si iromiserit se  lector,
oceanum  hoc  in  genere  reperiet. — Pococke.

*  Julian  was  emperor  from  360  to  363. See  note  M.

t  Note  N.  X  See  note  T.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE HINDUS.  445

of  both  determinate  and  indeterminate  problems  of  the  1st
and  2d  degrees :  and  subsequently  advanced  to  the  special
solution  of  biquadratics  wanting  the  second  term ;  and  of
cubics  in  very  restricted  and  easy  cases.

Priority  seems  then  decisive  in  favour  of  both  Greeks
and  Hindus  against  any  pretensions  on  the  part  of  the
Arabians,  who  in  fact,  however,  prefer  none,  as  inventors
of  algebra.  They  were  avowed  borrowers  in  science ;  and,
by  their  own  unvaried  acknowledgment,  from  the  Hindus
they  learnt  the  science  of  numbers.  That  they  also  received
the  Hindu  algebra,  is  much  more  probable,  than  jthat  the
same  mathematician  who  studied  the  Indian  arithmetic
and  taught  it  to  his  Arabian  brethren,  should  have  hit
upon  algebra  unaided  by  any  hint  or  suggestion  of  the
Indian  analysis.

The  Arabs  became  acquainted  with  the  Indian  astronomy
and  numerical  science  before  they  had  any  knowledge  of  the
writings  of  the  Grecian  astronomers  and  mathematicians;  and
it  was  not  until  after  more  than  one  century,  and  nearly  two,
that  they  had  the  benefit  of  an  interpretation  ofDioPHANTus,
whether  version  or  paraphrase,  executed  by  Muhammed
AbulwafA  al  Buzjani;  who  added,  in  a  separate  form,
demonstrations  of  the  propositions  contained  in  Diophan-
Tus;  and  who  was  likewise  author  of  commentaries  on
the  algebraic  treatises  of  the  Khuwarezmite  Muhammed
BEN  MusA,  and  of  another  algebraist  of  less  note  and
later  date,  Abu  Yahya,  whose  lecture  she  had  personally
attended.*  Any  inference  to  be  drawn  from  their  know-
ledge and  study  of  the  Arithmetics  of  Diophantus,  and
their  seeming  adoption  of  his  preparation  of  equations  in
their  ovm  algebra,  or  at  least  the  close  resemblance  of
both  on  this  point,  is  of  no  avail  against  the  direct  evidence,


•  See  note  N.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


446  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

with  which  we  are  furnished  by  theniy  of  previous  instruc-
tion in  algebra  and  the  publication  of  a  treatise  on  the  art,
by  an  author  conversant  with  the  Indian  science  of  com-
putation in  all  its  branches.

But  the  age  of  the  earliest  known  Hindu  writer  on
algebra  not  being  with  certainty  carried  to  a  period  ante-
rior,  or  even  quite  equal  to  that  in  which  Diophantus  is
on  probable  grounds  placed,  the  argument  of  priority,  so
far  as  investigation  has  yet  proceeded,  is  in  favour  of
Grecian  invention.  The  Hindus,  however,  had  certainly
made  distinguished  progress  in  the  science,  so  early  as  the
century  immediately  follovring  that  in  which  the  Grecian
taught  the  rudiments  of  it.  The  Hindus  had  the  benefit  of
a  good  arithmetical  notation :  the  Greeks,  the  disadvantage
of  a  bad  one.  Nearly  allied  as  algebra  is  to  arithmetic,
the  invention  of  the  algebraic  calculus  was  more  easy  and
natural  where  arithmetic  was  best  handled.  No  such
marked  identity  of  the  Hindu  and  Diophantme  systems  is
observed,  as  to  demonstrate  communication.  They  are
su£Bciently  distinct  to  justify  the  presumption,  that  both
might  be  invented  independently  of  each  other.

If,  however,  it  be  insisted,  that  a  hint  or  suggestion,  the
seed  of  their  knowledge,  may  have  reached  the  Hindu
mathematicians  immediately  from  the  Greeks  of  Alexandria,
or  mediately  through  those  of  Bactria,  it  must  at  the  same
time  be  confessed,  that  a  slender  germ  grew  and  fructified
rapidly,  and  soon  attained  an  approved  state  of  maturity  in
Indian  soil.

More  will  not  be  here  contended  for :  since  it  is  not  im-
possible, that  the  hint  of  the  one  analysis  may  have  been
actually  received  by  the  mathematicians  of  the  other  nation;
nor  unlikely,  considering  the  arguments  which  may  be
brought  for  a  probable  communication  on  the  subject  of
astrology;  and  adverting  to  the  intimate  connexion  between


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


ALGEBRA  OF  1  HE  HINDUS.  447

this  and  the  pure  mathematics,  through  the  medium  of
astronomy.

The  Hindus  had  undoubtedly  made  some  progrees  at  an
early  period  in  the  astronomy  cultivated  by  them  for  the
regulation  of  time.  Their  calendar,  both  civil  and  religious^
W2LB  governed  chiefly,  not  exclusively,  by  the  moon  and
sun :  and  the  motions  of  these  luminaries  yvere  carefully
observed  by  them,  and  with  such  success,  that  their  deter-
mination of  the  moon's  synodical  revolution,  which  was
what  they  were  principally  concerned  with,  is  a  much  more
correct  one  than  the  Greeks  ever  achieved.*  They  had  a
division  of  the  ecliptic  into  twenty-seven  and  twenty-eight
parts,  suggested  evidently  by  the  moon's  period  in  days,
and  seemingly  their  own :  it  was  certainly  borrowed  by  the
Arabians.f  Being  led  to  the  observation  of  the  fixed  stars^
they  obtained  a  knowledge  of  the  positions  of  the  most
remarkable ;  and  noticed,  for  religious  purposes,  and  from
superstitious  notions,  the  heliacal  rising,  with  other  phoeno-
mena  of  a  few.  The  adoration  of  the  sun,  of  the  planets,
and  of  the  stars,  in  common  with  the  worship  of  the  ele-
ments, held  a  principal  place  in  their  religious  observances
enjoined  by  the  Vedas.'X  ^°^  ^^^  ^^^  ^^  consequently
by  piety  to  watch  the  heavenly  bodies.  They  were  parti-
cularly conversant  with  the  most  splendid  of  the  primary
planets ;  the  period  of  Jupiter  being  introduced  by  them,
in  conjunction  with  those  of  the  sun  and  moon,  into  the
regulation  of  their  calendar,  sacred  and  civil,  in  the  form  of
the  celebrated  cycle  of  sixty  years,  common  to  them  and  to
the  Chaldeans,  and  still  retained  by  them.  From  that
cycle  they  advanced  by  progressive  stages,  as  the  Chal-
deans likewise  did,  to  larger  periods;  at  first  by  combining

*  As.  Res.,  Tol.  ii.  and  xii.

t  See  p.  321,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.  J  See  vol.  i.  p.  106.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


448  DISSERTATION  ON  THE

that  with  a  number  specifically  suggested  by  other,  or
more  correctly  determined,  revolutions  of  the  heavenly
bodies ;  and  afterwards,  by  merely  augmenting  the  places
of  figures  for  greater  scope,  (preferring  this  to  the  more
exact  method  of  combining  periods  of  the  planets  by  an
algebraic  process,  which  they  likewise  investigated*),
until  they  arrived  finally  at  the  unwieldy  cycles  named
Mahayugds  and  Calpas.  But  it  was  for  the  sake  of
astrology  that  they  pushed  their  cultivation  of  astronomy,
especially  that  of  the  minor  planets,  to  the  length  alluded
to.  Now  divination,  by  the  relative  position  of  the  planets,
seems  to  have  been,  in  part  at  least,  of  a  foreign  growth,
and  comparatively  recent  introduction,  among  the  Hindus.
The  belief  in  the  influence  of  the  planets  and  stars  upon
human  affairs  is  with  them,  indeed,  remotely  ancient ;  and
was  a  natural  consequence  of  their  creed,  which  made
the  sun  a  divine  being,  and  the  planets  gods.  But  the
notion,  that  the  tendency  of  that  supposed  influence,  or
the  manner  in  which  it  will  be  exerted,  may  be  foreseen
by  man,  and  the  effect  to  be  produced  by  it  foretold,
through  a  knowledge  of  the  position  of  the  planets  at  a
particular  moment,  is  no  necessary  result  of  that  creed ;
for  it  takes  from  beings  believed  divine,  free-agency  in  other
respects,  as  in  their  visible  movements.

Whatever  may  have  been  the  period  when  the  notion
first  obtained,  that  foreknowledge  of  events  on  earth  might
be  gained  by  observations  of  planets  and  stars,  and  by
astronomical  computation,  or  wherever  that  fancy  took  its
rise,  certain  it  is,  that  the  Hindus  have  received  and  wel-
comed communications  firom  other  nations  on  topics  of
astrology :  and  although  they  had  astrological  divinations
of  their  own  as  early  as  the  days of  Parasara and

•  Bbahmkoupta,  Algebra.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.  449

GARGAy  centuries  before  the  Christian  era,  there  are  yet
grouikls  to  presume  that  communications  subsequently
passed  to  them  on  the  like  subject,  either  from  the  Greeks,
or  from  the  same  common  source  (perhaps  that  of  the
Chaldeans)  whence  the  Greeks  derived  the  grosser  super-
stitions en^fted  on  their  own  genuine  and  ancient  astro-
logy, which  was  meteorolc^cal.

This  opinion  is  not  now  suggested  for  the  first  time.
Former  occasions  have  been  taken  of  intimating  the  same
sentiment  on  this  point:"*  and  it  has  been  strengthened  by
further  consideration  of  the  subject.  As  the  question  is
closely  connected  with  the  topics  of  this  dissertation,
reasons  for  this  opinion  will  be  stated  in  the  subjoined
note.f

Joining  this  indication  to  that  of  the  division  of  the
zodiac  into  twelve  signs,  represented  by  the  same  figures
of  animals,  and  named  by  words  of  the  same  import  with
the  zodiacal  signs  of  the  Greeks;  and  taking  into  con-
sideration the  analogy,  though  not  identity,  of  the  Ptole-
maic system,  or  rather  that  of  Hipparchus,  and  the
Indian  one  of  excentric  deferents  and  epicycles,  which  in
both  serve  to  account  for  the  irregularities  of  the  planets,
or  at  least  to  compute  them,  no  doubt  can  be  entertained
that  the  Hindus  received  hints  from  the  astronomical
schools  of  the  Greeks.

It  must  then  be  admitted  to  be  at  least  possible,  if  not
probable,  in  the  absence  of  direct  evidence  and  positive
proof,  that  the  imperfect  algebra  of  the  Greeks,  which  had
advanced  in  their  hands  no  further  than  the  solution  of
equations,  involving  one  unknown  term,  as  it  is  taught  by
Diophantus,  was  made  known  to  the  Hindus  by  their
Grecian  instructors  in  improved  astronomy. But,  by  the

*  See  page  410,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.  t  Note  O.

VOL.  II.  2  G


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


450  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

ingenuity  of  the  Hindu  scholars^  the  hint  was  rendered
fruitful,  and  the  algebraic  method  was  soon  ripened  from
that  slender  beginning  to  the  advanced  state  of  a  well
arranged  science,  as  it  was  taught  by  ARYASHAff  a,  and
as  it  is  found  in  treatises  compiled  by  Brahmegupta  and
BhAscara,  of  bodi  which  versions  are  here  presented  to
the  public.


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.


Scholiasts  of  BhAscara.

The  oldest  commentary  of  ascertained  date  which  has
come  mto  the  translator's  hands,  and  has  been  accordingly
employed  by  him  for  the  purpose  of  collation,  as  well  as  in
the  progress  of  translation,  is  one  composed  by  GangA-
dhara,  son  of  G6BARDHANA,  and  grandson  of  DivA-
CAR  A,  inhabitant  of  Jamhusara.*  It  appears  from  an
example  of  an  astronomical  computation  which  it  ex-
hibits,t  to  have  been  written  about  the  year  1342  Saca
(A.D.  1420).  Though  confined  to  the  LUavati,  it  ex-
pounds and  consequently  authenticates  a  most  material
chapter  of  the  Vija  ganita,  which  recm*s  nearly  verbatim
in  both  treatises ;  but  is  so  essential  a  part  of  the  one,  as
to  have  given  name  to  the  algebraic  analysis  in  the  works
of  the  early  writers.^ His  elder  brother  Vishnu  pan-

*  A  town  situated  in  Gujrat  (CrUfyara),  twenty-eight  miles  north  of
the  town  of  Broach.

t  Cutiacddh^dya,  thetitle  of  BBAHMEOUPTA'schapter  on  algebra,
and  of  a  chapter  in  Ar  vABHAff  a's  work.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  461

61TA  was  author  of  a  treatise  of  arithmetic,  &c.  named
Gamta  sara,  a  title  borrowed  from  the  compendium  of
SrIdhara. It  is  frequently  quoted  by  him.

The  next  commentary  in  age^  and  consequent  importance
for  the  objects  now  under  consideration,  is  that  of  S6rya
suRi,  also  named  S^jryadasa,  native  of  Part' hapura,  near
the  confluence  of  the  G6da  and  Vtdarbha  rivers.*  He  was
author  of  a  complete  commentary  on  the  Siddhanta  sirS-
mani;  and  of  a  distinct  work  on  calculation,  under  the  title
of  Ganita  malati  ;  and  of  a  compilation  of  astronominal  and
astrological  doctrines,  Hindu  and  Muhammedan,  under  the
name  of  Siddhanta  sanhita  sara  samuchchayaj  in  which
he  makes  mention  of  his  commentary  on  the  Sirdmani.
The  gloss  on  the  Lilavatif  entitled  Ganitamrita,  and  that
on  the  Vija  ganita^  named  Siirya  pracasa,  both  excellent
works,  containing  a  clear  interpretation  of  the  text,  vrith  a
concise  explanation  of  the  principles  of  the  rules,  are  dated
the  one  in  1460,  the  other  in  1463  &zca ;  or  A.  D.  1638  and
1641.  His  father  JnyAnarAja,  son  of  NAganAt'ha,  a
Brahmen  and  astronomer,  was  author,  among  other  works,
of  an  astronomical  course,  under  the  title  of  Siddhanta-
sundara,  still  extant,t  which,  like  the  Siddhanta  sirS-
mani,  comprises  a  treatise  on  algebra.  It  is  repeatedly
cited  by  his  son.

Gan£§a,  son  of  C^Sava,  a  distinguished  astronomer,
native  otNandi  grama,  near  Devagiri,  (better  known  by
the  Muhammedan  name  of  Dauletabad),%  was  author  of  a
commentary  on  the  Siddhanta  sirSmani,  which  is  men-
tioned by  his  nephew and scholiast  NrYsinha,  in an

•  Gbddvari  nnd  fTerdd.

t  The  astronomical  part  is  in  the  library  of  the  East- India  Com-
pany.

I  Nandigrdm  retains  its  ancient  name,  and  is  situated  west  of
Daulet6bddf  about  sixty-five  miles.

2  G  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


452  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

enumeration  of  his  works,  contained  in  a  passage  quoted  by
ViswanAt'ha  on  the  Chrahalaghava.  His  commentary
on  the  Lilavati  bears  the  title  of  Buddhivilasini,  and  date
of  1467  Saca,  or  A.D.  1646.  It  comprises  a  copious
exposition  of  the  text,  with  demonstrations  of  the  rules ;
and  has  been  used  throughout  the  translation  as  the  best
interpreter  of  it.  He,  and  his  father  CfesAVA,  and  nephew
NrYsinha,  as  well  as  his  cousin  LacshmIdAsa,  were
authors  of  numerous  works  both  on  astronomy  and  divi-
nation. The  most  celebrated  of  his  own  performances,  the
Qrahalaghava,  bears  date  1442  Saca^  answering  to  A.D.
1620.

The  want  of  a  commentary  by  Gan£§a  on  the  Vija
ganitay  is  supplied  by  that  of  CrYshna,  son  of  BallAla,
and  pupil  of  Vishnu,  the  disciple  of  Gan^sa's  nephew
NrTsinha.  It  contains  a  clear  and  copious  exposition  of
the  sense,  with  ample  demonstrations  of  the  rules,  much  in
the  manner  of  Ganesa,  on  the  Lilavati ;  whom  also  he
imitated  in  composing  a  commentary  on  that  treatise,  and
occasionally  refers  to  it.  His  work  is  entitled  Calpcdata'
vatara.  Its  date  is  determined  at  the  close  of  the  sixteenth
century  of  the  Christian  era,  by  the  notice  of  it  and  of  the
author  in  a  work  of  his  brother  RanganAt'ha,  dated
1624  Saca  (A.D.  1602),  as  well  as  in  one  by  his  nephew
MunISwara.  He  appears  to  have  been  astrologer  in  the
service  of  the  Emperor  JehAngIr,  who  reigned  at  the
beginning  of  the  seventeenth  century.

The  gloss  of  RanganIt'ha  on  the  V&san&y  or  demon-
stratory  annotations  of  BhAscara,  which  is  entitled  Mita-
bhashinif  contains  no  specification  of  date ;  but  is  deter-
mined, with  sufficient  certainty,  towards  the  middle  of  the
sixteenth  century  of  the  Saca  era,  by  the  writer's  relation  of
son  to  NrYsinha,  the  author  of  a  commentary  on  the
Sitrya  siddhanta, dated  1642  Saca,  and  of  the  Vasana


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  453

vartica  (or  gloss  on  BhAscara's  annotations  of  the  Sir6~
mani),  which  bears  date  in  1643  ^a,  or  A.D.  1621 ;  and
his  relation  of  brother,  as  well  as  pupil,  to  CamalAcara,
author  of  the  Siddhanta  tatwa  viveca,  also  composed  to-
wards the  middle  of  the  same  century  of  the  Saca  era.
NrTsinha,  and  his  uncle  ViswanAt'ha,  author  of  astro-
logical commentaries,  describe  their  common  ancestor
DivAcara,  and  his  grandfather  RAma,  as  Maharashira
Brahmensj  hving  at  G6lagramaj^  on  the  northern  bank  of
the  GSdavari,  and  do  not  hint  a  migration  of  the  family.
NrYsinha's  own  father,  CrYshna,  was  author  of  a  treatise
on  algebra  in  compendious  rules  {s{ttraX  as  his  son  affirms.

The  Vija  prabSdha,  a  commentary  on  the  Vija  gaAitay
by  RAma  CrYshna,  son  of  Lacshmana,  and  grandson
of  NrYsinha,  inhabitant  o{  Atnaravatljf  is  without  date
or  express  indication  of  its  period ;  unless  his  grandfa&er
NrYsinha  be  the  same  with  the  nephew  of  ViSwanAt'ha
just  now  mentioned ;  or  else  identified  with  the  nephew  of
Gan£§a  and  preceptor  of  Vishnu,  the  instructor  of
CrYshna,  author  of  the  CalpaJatavatara.  The  presump-
tion is  on  either  part  consistent  with  proximity  of  country :
Amaravati  not  being  more  than  150  miles  distant  from
Nandigrama,  nor  more  than  200  from  G6lagr&ma.  It  is
on  one  side  made  probable  by  &e  author's  frequent  refer-
ence to  a  commentary  of  his  preceptor  CrYshna,  which  in
substance  corresponds  to  the  Calpalatavatara;  but  the  title
differs,  for  he  cites  the  Navancura.  On  the  other  side  it
is  to  be  remarked,  that  CrYshna,  father  of  the  NrYsinha,
who  wrote  the  Vasana  virtica,  was  author  of  a  treatise  on
algebra,  which  is  mentioned  by  his  son,  as  before  observed.

The  Man&ranjanay  another  commentary  on  the  LU&vati,

•  Golgdm  of  the  maps,  in  lat.  18°  N.  loDg.  78**  E.
t  A  great  commercial  town  in  Berdr.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


464  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

which  has  been  used  in  the  progress  of  the  translation,  bears
no  date,  nor  any  indication  whatsoever  of  the  period  when
the  author  RAma  crIshna  d£ta,  son  of  SadAd^ya,
surnamed  Apad^va,  wrote.

The  Ganita  caumudiy  on  the  Lilavati,  is  fieqiiefl%
cited  by  the  modem  commentators,  and  in  particular  by
S6rya  suri  and  RanganAt'ha  ;  but  has  not  been  reco-
vered, and  is  only  known  from  their  quotations.

Of  the  numerous  commentaries  on  the  asti'onomical  por-
tion of  BhAscara's  Siddhanta  sirSmaM,  little  use  having
been  here  made,  either  for  settling  the  text  of  the  algebraic
and  arithmetical  treatises  of  the  author,  or  for  interpreting
particular  passages  of  them,  a  reference  to  two  commen-
taries of  this  class,  besides  those  of  S^rya  suri  and
Gan^sa  (which  have  not  been  recovered),  and  the  author's
own  annotations,  and  the  interpretation  of  them  by  NrYsin-
HA  above  noticed,  may  suffice:  viz.  the  Gahita  tcttwa  chin"
tama^i,  by  LAcsHMinAsA,  grandson  of  C^sava,  (probably
the  same  with  the  father  of  GanIeSa  before  mentioned),
and  son  of  VAchespati,  dated  1423  iSoca,  A.D.  1501);
and  the  Maricha,  by  MunIswara,  surnamed  Viswa-
r6pa,  grandson  of  BallAla,  and  son  of  RanganAt'h  a,
who  was  compiler  of  a  work  dated  1524  Saca^  A.  D.  1620),
as  before  mentioned.  MunIswara  himself  is  the  author
of  a  distinct  treatise  of  astronomy  entitled  Siddhanta
sarvahhauma,

Persian  versions  of  both  the  Lilavati  and  Vya  ganita
have  been  already  noticed,  as  also  contributing  to  the
authentication  of  the  text.  The  first  by  FaizI,  undertaken
by  the  command  of  the  Emperor  Acber,  vras  executed  in
the  32d  year  of  his  reign;  A.H.  995,  A.D.  1587.  The
translation  of  the  Vija  ganita  is  later  by  half  a  century,
having  been  completed  by  At  a  Ullah  RASHini,  in  the  8th
year  of  the  reignof  ShAh  JehAn;  A.H.  1044.  A.D.  1634.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  455

B.
Astronomy  ofBRAHMEGUPTA.

Brahmegupta's  entire  work  comprises  twenty-one
lectures  or  chapters;  of  which  the  ten  first  contain  an
astronomical  system,  ccmsisting  (1st  and  2d)  in  the  com-
putation of  mean  motions  and  true  places  of  the  planets ;
3d,  solution  of  problems  concerning  time,  the  points  of  the
horizon,  and  the  position  of  places ;  4th  and  5th,  calcula-
tion of  lunar  and  solar  eclipses ;  6th,  rising  and  setting  of
the  planets ;  7th,  position  of  the  moon's  cusps ;  8th,  ob-
servation of  altitudes  by  the  gnomon ;  9th  conjunctions  of
the  planets ;  and,  10th,  their  conjunction  with  stars.  The
next  ten  are  supplementary,  including  five  chapters  of  pro-
blems with  their  solutions:  and  the  twenty-first  explains
the  principles  of  the  astronomical  system  in  a  compendious
treatise  on  spherics,  treating  of  the  astronomical  sphere  and
its  circles,  the  construction  of  sines,  the  rectification  of  the
apparent  planet  firom  mean  motions,  the  cause  of  lunar
and  solar  eclipses,  and  the  construction  of  the  armiUary
sphere.

The  copy  of  the  scholia  and  text,  in  the  translator's  pos-
session, wants  the  whole  of  the  6th,  7th,  and  8th  chapters,
and  exhibits  gaps  of  more  or  less  extent  in  the  preceding
five ;  and  appears  to  have  been  transcribed  firom  an  exemplar
equally  defective.  From  the  middle  of  the  9th,  to  near  the
close  of  the  15th  chapters,  is  an  uninterrupted  and  regular
series,  comprehending  a  very  curious  chapter,  the  11th,
which  contains  a  revision  and  censure  of  earlier  vmters :
and  next  to  it  the  chapter  on  arithmetic  and  mensuration,
which  is  the  12th  of  the  work.  It  is  followed  in  the  13th,
and  four  succeeding  chapters,  by  solutions  of  problems
concerning  mean  and  true  motions  of  planets,  finding  of


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


456  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

time,  place,  and  points  in  the  horizon ;  and  relative  to
other  matters,  which  the  defect  of  the  two  last  of  fiw
chapters  renders  it  impracticable  to  specify.  Neirt  comes,
(but  in  a  separate  form,  being  transcribed  fix)m  a  difierent
exemplar,)  the  18th  chapter  on  Algebra.  The  two  which
should  succeed,  (and  one  of  which,  as  appears  from  a
reference  to  a  chapter  on  this  subject,  treats  of  the  various
measures  of  time  under  the  several  denominations  of  sdar,
siderial,  lunar,  &c. ;  and  the  other,  from  like  references  to
it,  is  known  to  treat  of  the  delineation  of  celestial  phseno-
mena  by  diagram,)  are  entirely  wanting,  the  remainder  of
the  copy  being  defective.  The  twenty-first  chapter,  however,
which  is  last  in  the  author's  arrangem^it,  (as  the  cor-
responding book  on  spherics  of  BhAscara's  Siddhanta
sir6mani  is  in  his,)  has  been  transposed  and  first  expounded
by  the  schoUast :  and  very  properly  so,  since  its  subject  is
naturally  preliminary,  being  explanatory  of  the  principles
of  astronomy.  It  stands  first  in  the  copy  under  con-
sideration; and  is  complete,  except  one  or  two  initial
couplets.

C.

Brahma  siddhanta,  title  of  Brahmegupta's  Astronomy.

The  passage  is  this :  "  BHAHMdcta^graha-gcMtam
mahata  caUna  yat  c^hilUbhiitam,  abhidhiyate  sp'hut'an  tat
JisHNu-^tt^a  Brahmegupt^na."

'  The  computation  of  planets,  taught  by  Brahma,
which  had  become  imperfect  by  great  length  of  time,  is
propounded  correct  by  Brahmegupta,  son  of  Jishnu.'

The  beginning  of  PRtx'HiDACA's  commentary  on  the
Brahma  siddhanta  where  the  three  initial  couplets  of  the
text  are  expounded,  being  deficient,  the  quotation  cannot
at  present  be  brought  to  the  test  of  collation.  But  the
title  is  still  more  expressly  given  near  the  close  of  the


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


^


NOTES  ANp  ILLUSTRATIONS.  467

eleventh  chapter,^  (§  69)  "  Brahme  sp'huia-siddh&nte
ravindu-bhii-yogain,  &c."

And  again^  (§  61)  "  Chandra-ravUgraha'Aendu-ch^haya-
dishu  sarvada  yat6  Brahme,  drig-ganitaicyam  bhavati,
spliuta-siddh&ntas  tatS  Brahmah."  *  As  observation  and
computation  alveays  agree  in  respect  of  lunar  and  solar
eclipses,  moon's  shadow  (i.  e.  altitude)  and  other  particulars,
according  to  the  Brahma,  therefore  is  the  Brahma  a  cor-
rect system  (sp^huia  siddhanta).'

It  appears  from  the  purport  of  these  several  passages
compared,  that  Brahmegupta's  treatise  is  an  emendation
of  an  earlier  system,  (bearing  the  same  name  of  Brahma
siddhanta,  or  an  equivalent  title,  as  Pitamaha  siddhanta,
or  adjectively  Paitamaha,)  which  had  ceased  to  agree  with
the  phenomena,  and  into  which  requisite  corrections  were
therefore  introduced  by  him  to  reconcile  computation  and
observation ;  and  he  entitled  his  amended  treatise  '  Correct
Brahma  siddhanta.'  That  earlier  treatise  is  considered  to
be  the  identical  one  which  is  introduced  into  the  Vishnu
dharmSttara  puraiia,  and  from  which  parallel  passages  are
accordingly  cited  by  the  scholiasts  of  BhAscara.  (See
following  note.)  It  is  no  doubt  the  same  which  is  noticed
by  VarAhamihira  under  the  title  of  Paitamaha  and
Brahma  siddh&nta.  Couplets,  which  are  cited  by  this
commentator  Bh  Aff6TPALA  fix)m  the  Brahma  siddhanta,
are  found  in  Brahmegupta's  work.  But  whether  the
original  or  the  amended  treatise  be  the  one  to  which  the
scholiast  referred,  is  nevertheless  a  disputable  point,  as  the
couplets  in  question  may  be  among  passages  which  Brah-
MEGUPTA  retained  unaltered.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


458  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.


D.


Verification  of  the  ITer/ of  Brahmegupta's  TVeatise  of
Astronomy.

A  passage^  referring  the  commencement  of  astronomical
periods  and  of  planetary  revolutions  to  the  supposed  instant
of  the  creation,  is  quoted  from  Bhahmegupta,  with  a
parallel  passage  of  another  Brahma  siddhanta  (compre-
hended in  the  Vishnu  dharm6ttara  pvraAcL)  in  a  com-
pilation by  MunISwara,  one  of  BhIscara's  glossators.*
It  is  verified  as  the  4th  couplet  of  Brahmegupta's  first
chapter  (upon  mean  motions)  in  the  translator's  copy.

Seven  couplets,  specifying  the  mean  motions  of  the
planets'  nodes  and  apogees,  are  quoted  after  the  parallel
passage  of  the  other  Brahma  siddhanta,  by  the  same
scholiast  of  BhAscara,  as  the  text  of  Brahmegupta  :
and  they  are  found  in  the  same  order  from  the  16th  to  the
21st  in  the  first  chapter  of  his  work  in  the  copy  above-
mentioned.

This  commentator,  among  many  other  corresponding
passages  noticed  by  him  on  various  occasions,  has  quoted
one  from  the  same  Brahma  siddhanta  of  the  Vishmt
dharmbttara  concerning  the  orbits  of  the  planets  deduced
from  the  magnitude  of  the  sky  computed  there,  as  it  also  is
by  Brahmegupta  (ch.  21,  §9),  but  in  other  words,  at  a
circumference  of  18712069200000000  ySjanas.  He  goes
on  to  quote  the  subsequent  couplet  of  Brahmegupta,
declaring  that  planets  travel  an  equal  measured  distance  in
their  orbits  in  equal  times;  and  then  cites  his  scholiast
{iicac&ra)  CHATURvfeDAcHARYA.

The  text  of  Brahmegupta  (ch.  1,  §  21),  specifying  the
diurnal  revolutions  of  the  siderial  sphere,  or  number  of


■  As.  Res.,  vol.  xii.  p.  232.  [p.  396  of  the  present  volume.]


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  469

siderial  days  in  a  calpa,  with  the  correspondent  one  of  the
Paitamaka  siddhdnta  in  the  ViskAu  dharmSttara,  is  ano-
ther of  the  quotations  of  the  same  writer  in  his  commentary
on  BhAscara.

A  passage  relating  to  oval  epicycles,*  cited  by  the  same
author  in  another  place,  is  also  verified  in  the  2d  chapter
(m  the  rectification  of  a  planet's  place).

A  number  of  couplets  on  the  subject  of  e^pses-f-  is  cited
by  LacshmIdAsa,  a  commentator  of  BhAscara.  They
are  found  in  the  6th  chapter  (on  eclipses)  §  10  and  24 ;
and  in  a  section  of  the  21st  (on  the  cause  of  eclipses)  §  37
to  46,  in  the  copy  in  question.

Several  couplets,  relating  to  the  positions  of  the  constel-
lations and  to  the  longitudes  and  latitudes  of  principal  fixt
stars,  are  cited  firom  Brahmeoupta  in  numerous  com-
pilations, and  specifically  in  the  commentaries  on  the
S{irf/a  siddhanta  and  Siddhanta  8ir6ma'/iL%  They  are  all
found  correct  in  the  10th  chapter,  on  the  conjunctions  of
planets  with  fixt  stars.

A  quotation  by  Gan&Sa  on  the  Lilavati  (A.D.  1646)
describing  the  attainments  of  a  true  mathematician,  §  occurs
with  exactness  as  the  first  couplet  of  the  12th  chapter,  on
arithmetic;  and  one  adduced  by  BhAscara  himself,  in
bis  arithmetical  treatise  (^  190),  giving  a  rule  for  finding
the  diagonal  of  a  trapezium,  ||  is  precisely  the  28th  of  the
same  chapter.

A  very  important  passage,  noticed  by  BhAscara  in  his
notes  on  his  Siddhanta  sirSmaM,  and  alluded  to  in  his
text,  and  fiilly  quoted  by  his  commentator  in  the  Maricha,
relative  to  the  rectification  of  a  planet's  true  place  firom  the

•  Page  401,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.
t  Page  497  of  the  present  volume.
X  Page  323,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.
§Zi/.  ch.  11.  II  £i/.  §190.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


460  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

mean  motions,*  is  found  in  the  21st  chapter,  §  27.  BhAs-
CARA  has,  on  that  occasion,  alluded  to  the  scholiast,  who
is  accordingly  quoted  by  name  in  the  commentary  of
LAcsHMioAsA  (A.D.  1501) :  and  here  again  the  corres-
pondence is  exact.

The  identity  of  the  text  as  Brahmeoupta's,  and  of  the
gloss  as  his  scholiast's,  being  (by  these  and  many  other
instances,  which  have  been  collated)  satisfactorily  esta-
blished ;  as  the  genuineness  of  the  text  is  by  numerous
quotations  from  the  Brahma  siddhanta  (without  the  author's
name)  in  the  more  ancient  commentary  of  BuAff 6tpala
(A.D.  968)  on  the  works  of  Varahamihira,  which  abo
have  been  verified  in  the  mutilated  copy  of  the  Brahma
siddhanta  under  consideration ;  the  next  step  was  the
examination  of  the  detached  copy  of  a  commentary  on  the
18th  chapter,  upon  algebra,  which  is  terminated  by  a
colophon  so  describing  it,  and  specifying  the  title  of  the
entire  book  Brahma  siddhanta^  and  the  name  of  its  author
Brahmegupta.

For  &is  purpose  materials  are  happily  presented  in  the
scholiast's  enumeration,  at  the  close  of  the  chapter  on
arithmetic,  of  the  topics  treated  by  his  author  in  the  chapter
on  algebra,  entitled  Cuiiaca:'\'  in  a  general  reference  to
the  author's  algorithm  of  unknown  quantities,  aflirmative
and  negative  terms,  cipher  and  surd  roots,  in  the  same
chapter;;]:  and  the  same  scholiast's  quotations  of  the  initial
words  of  four  rules ;  one  of  them  relative  to  surd  roots ;  §
the  other  three  regarding  the  resolution  of  quadratic  equa-
tions :  n  as  also  in  the  references  of  the  scholiast  of  the

*  Page  404,  &c.  of  the  present  volume.

t  Arithm.  of  Bbahm.  §  66.  X  Arithm.  of  Brahm.  §  13.

§  Arithm.  of  Bbahm.  §  39.  |i  Arithm.  of  Brahm.  §  15  and  18.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.  461

algebraic  treatise  to  passages  in  the  astronomical  part  of
his  author's  work.*

The  quotations  have  been  verified:  and  they  exactly
agree  with  the  rule  concerning  surds  (§  26)  and  the  three
rules  which  compose  the  section  relating  to  quadratic  equa-
tions (§  32 — 34) ;  and  with  the  rule  in  the  chapter  on  the
solution  of  astronomical  problems  concerning  mean  motions
(ch.  13^  ^  22):  and  this  verification  and  the  agreement  of
the  more  general  references  demonstrate  the  identity  of
this  treatise  of  algebra,  consonantly  to  its  colophon,  as
Brahmbgupta's  algebra  entitled  CuHaca  and  a  part  of
his  Brahma  siddhanta.

E.

Chronology  of  Astronomical Authorities according to
Astronomers  of  UjjayanL

The  names  of  astronomical  writers  with  their  dates,
as  furnished  by  the  astronomers  of  Ujjayaniy  who  were
consulted  by  Dr.  William  Hunter  sojourning  there
with  a  British  embassy,  are  the  following :

Varahamihira ....  I22,§aca [A.D. 200-1]
Another  VarIh AM iHiRA ....427  [A.D. 505-6]

Brahmeoupta  550  [A.D. 628-9]

MunjXla ;...  854  [A.D. 932^]

BHAff6TPALA 890  [A.D.  1068-9]

§w6t6tpala  939  [A.D.  1017-8]

VARuifA  BHAffA ....  962  [A.D.  1040-1]

Bh6ja  raja 964  [A.D.  1042-3]

BhJiscara 1072  [A.D.  1150-1]

CaLYANA  CHANDRA  ..1101  [A.D.1179-80]

The  grounds  on  which  this  chronology  proceeds  are
unexplained  in  the  note  which  Dr.  Hunter  preserved  of
the  communication ;  but  means  exist  for  verifying  two  of
the  dates  specified  and  corroborating  others.

•  Alg.  of  Brahm.  §  96.  (Rule  ^5).


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


462  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

The  date  assigned  to  BhAscara^  is  precisely  that  of
his  Siddhanta  sirdmani,  plainly  concluded  from  a  passage
of  it,  in  which  he  declares,  that  it  was  completed  by  him,
being  thirty-six  years  of  age  ;  and  that  his  birth  was  in
1036  Saca.

Raja  Br6ja  d£va,  or  Bh6ja  rAja,  is  placed  in  Uiis
list  of  Hindu  astronomers  apparently  on  account  of  his
name  being  affixed,  as  that  of  the  author,  to  an  astrolo-
gical treatise  on  the  calendar,  which  bears  the  title  of
Raja  marta'AAa^  and  which  was  composed  probably  at  bis
court  and  by  astrologers  in  his  service.  It  contains  no
date ;  or  at  least  none  is  found  in  the  copy  which  has  been
inspected.  But  the  age  assigned  to  the  prince  is  not  incon-
sistent with  Indian  History:  and  is  supported  by  the
colophon  of  a  poem  entitled  Subhashita  ratna  sand6ha,
composed  by  a  Jaina  sectary  named  Amitag  ati,  who  has
given  the  date  of  his  poem  in  1060  of  VicramAditya,  in
the  reign  of  Munja.  Now  Munja  was  uncle  and  prede-
cessor of  Bhoja  rAja,  being  regent,  with  the  title  of
sovereign,  during  his  nephew's  minority:  and  this  date,
which  answers  to  A.D.  993-4,  is  entirely  consistent  with
that  given  by  the  astronomers  of  Vjjayaniy  viz.  964  Saca
corresponding  to  A.D.  1042-3:  for  the  reign  of  Bh6ja
d£va  was  long  ;  extending,  at  the  lowest  computation,  to
half  a  century,  and  reaching,  according  to  an  extravagant
reckoning,  to  the  round  number  of  an  hundred  years.

The  historical  notices  of  this  King  of  Dhara^  are  exa-
mined by  Major  Wilford  and  Mr.  Bentley  in  the
ninth  and  eighth  volumes  of  Asiatic  Restarches :  and  they
refer  him  to  the  tenth  century  of  the  Christian  era,  the
one  making  him  ascend  the  throne  in  A.D.  982 ;  the
other,  in  A.D.  913. The  former,  which  takes  his  reign

•  The  modern  Dhar, Wii.ford,  As.  Res.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.  463

at  an  entire  century,  including  of  course  his  minority,  or
the  period  of  the  administration,  reign,  or  regency,  of  his
uncle  MuNJA,  is  compatible  with  the  date  of  Amitagati's
poem  (A.D.  993)  and  with  that  of  the  Raja  martaAAa  or
other  astrological  and  astronomical  works  ascribed  to  him
(A.D.  1042)  according  to  the  chronology  of  the  astronomers
of  UjjayanL

The  age  assigned  to  Brahmegupta  is  corroborated
by  the  arguments  adduced  in  the  text.  That  given  to
MunjAla  is  consistent  with  the  quotation  of  him  as  at
the  head  of  a  tribe  of  authors,  by  BhAscara,  at  the  dis-
stance  of  two  centuries.  The  period  allotted  to  VarAha-
MiHiRA,  that  is,  to  the  second  and  most  celebrated  of  the
name,  also  admits  corroboration.  This  point,  however,
being  specially  important  to  the  history  of  Indian  astro-
nomy, and  collaterally  to  that  of  the  Hindu  algebra,  de-
serves and  will  receive  a  full  and  distinct  consideration.

F.

Age  of  Brahmegupta  inferred  from  Astronomical  data.

The  star  Chitra,  which  unquestionably  is  Spica  Virginis,*
was  referred  by  Brahmegupta  to  the  103d  degree  counted
from  its  origin  to  the  intersection  of  the  star's  circle  of
dech'nation;t  whence  the  star's  right  ascension  is  deduced
182^  46'.  Its  actual  right  ascension  in  A.D.  1800  was
198^  40^  2".t  The  difference,  16^  66'  2\  is  the  quantity
by  which  the  beginning  of  the  first  zodiacal  asterism  and
lunar  mansion,  Aiwini,  as  inferrible  from  the  position  of  the
star  Ckitr&f  has  receded  from  ike  equinox :  and  it  indicates

*  Page  337  of  the  present  volume.

t  Pages  343,  &c.  and  406  of  the  present  volume.

I  Zacr's  Tables  for  1800  deduced  from  Maskbltnb's  Catalogue.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


464  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

the  lapse  of  1216  years  (to  A.D.  1800)  since  that  point
coincided  with  the  equinox ;  the  annual  precession  of  the
star  being  reckoned  at  47",  14.*

The  star  RevaH,  which  appears  to  be  ^  Piscium,  f  had
no  longitude,  according  to  the  same  author,  being  si-
tuated precisely  at  the  dose  of  the  asterism  and  com-
mencement of  the  following  one,  Aswini,  without  latitude
or  declination,  exactly  in  the  equinoctial  point.  Its  actual
right  ascension  in  1800  was  16**  49  16".  J  This,  which  is
the  quantity  by  which  the  origin  of  the  Indian  ediptic,  as
inferrible  from  the  position  of  the  star  Bevati,  has  receded
from  the  equinox,  indicates  a  period  of  1221  years  elapsed
to  the  end  of  tl^e  eighteenth  century ;  the  annual  preces-
sion for  that  star  being  46",  63  .§

The  mean  of  the  two  is  121 8|  years ;  which,  taken
from  1800,  leave  581  or  682  of  the  Christian  era.  Brah-
MEGCPTA  then  appears  to  have  observed  and  written  to-
wards the  close  of  the  sixth,  or  the  begmning  of  the
following  century;  for,  as  the  Hindu  astronomers  seem
not  to  have  been  very  accurate  observers,  the  bdief  of  his
having  lived  and  published  in  the  seventh  century,  about
A.D.  628,  which  answers  to  660  ^aca^  the  date  assigned
to  him  by  the  astronomers  of  l^ayam^  is  not  inconsistent
with  the  position,  that  the  vernal  equinox  did  not  sensibly
to  his  view  deviate  from,  the  b^inning  of  Aries  or  Mesha,
as  determined  by  him  frx)m  the  star  Revati  ((  Pisdum)
which  he  places  at  that  point.

The  same  author  assigns  to  Agastya  or  Canopus  a  dis-
tance of  87  ,  and  to  Lvbdhaca  or  Sirius  86^,  from  the

*  Maskelyne's  Catalogue  :  the  mean  precession  of  the  equinoc-
tial points  being  reckoned  50^,  3.

t  Page  343  of  the  present  volume.

\  Zaoh's  Tables.  §  Zach's  Tables.


• Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  465

beginning  of  Misha.  From  these  positions  a  mean  of
1280  years  is  deducible.

The  passage  in  which  this  author  denies  the  precession
of  the  colores,  as  well  as  the  comment  of  his  schoUast  on
it,  being  material  to  the  present  argument,  they  are  here
subjoined  in  a  literal  version.

^  The  very  fewest  hours  of  night  occur  at  the  end  pf
Mifhuna,  and  the  seasons  are  governed  by  the  sun's
motion ;  therefore  the  pair  of  solstices  appears  to  be  sta-
tionary, by  the  evidence  of  a  pair  of  eyes.**

Scholia:  '  What  is  said  by  Vishnu  chandra  at  the
beginning  of  the  chapter  on  the  yuga  of  the  solstice
( *  Its  revolutions  through  the  asterisms  are  here  [in  the
calpd]  a  hundred  and  eighty-nine  thousand  four  hundred
and  eleven.  This  is  termed  a  yuga  of  the  solstice,  as  of
old  admitted  by  Brahma,  Arca,  and  the  rest.")  is  wrong :
for  the  very  fewest  hours  of  night  to  us  occur  when  the
sun's  place  is  at  the  end  of  Mifhuna  [Gemini] ;  and  of
course  the  very  utmost  hours  of  day  are  at  the  same
period.  From  that  limitary  point,  the  sun's  progress
regulates  the  seasons ;  namely,  the  cold  season  (sisira)  and
the  rest,  comprising  two  months  each,  reckoned  from
Macara  [Capricorn].  Therefore  what  has  been  said  con-
cerning the  motion  of  the  limitary  point  is  wrong,  being
contradicted  by  actual  observation  of  days  and  nights.

'  The  objection,  however,  is  not  vaUd:  for  now  the
greatest  decrease  and  increase  of  night  and  day  do  not
happen  when  the  sun's  place  is  at  the  end  of  Mifhuna :
and  passages  are  remembered,  expressing  '^  The  southern
road  of  the  sun  was  from  the  middle  of  AsUsha  ;  and
the  northern  one  at  the  beginning  of  Dhanishi*ha  ;"t  and

*  Brahma  siddhdnta,  ii.  §  54.

t  This  quotation  is  from  VARAHi^MiHiiiA's  sanhiidy  ch.  3,  §  I  and  2.

VOL.  II.  2h


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


466  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

others  [of  like  import].  But  all  this  only  proves^  that
there  is  a  motion ;  not  that  the  solstice  has  made  many
revolutions  through  the  asterisms.'*

It  was  hinted  at  the  beginning  of  this  note^  that  Brah-
megupta's  longitude  idhruvaca)  of  a  star  is  the  arc  of  the
ecliptic  intercepted  by  the  star's  circle  of  declination,  and
counted  from  the  origin  of  the  ecliptic  at  the  beginning
of  Mesha ;  as  his  latitude  {vicshepa)  of  a  star  is  the  star's
distance  on  a  circle  of  declination  from  its  point  of  inter-
section with  the  ecliptic.  In  short,  he,  like  other  Hindu
astronomers,  counts  longitude  and  latitude  of  stars  by  the
intersection  of  circles  of  declination  with  the  ecliptic.
The  subject  has  been  before  noticed.f  To  make  it  more
clear,  an  instance  may  be  taken :  and  that  of  the  scho-
liast's computation  of  the  zenith  distance  and  meridian
altitude  of  Canopus  for  the  latitude  of  Canyacubja  (Canotg)
may  serve  as  an  apposite  example.

From  the  vicshepa  of  the  star  Agastya,  77**,  he  sub-
tracts the  declination  of  the  intersected  point  of  the  ecliptic
23^  68' ;  to  the  remainder,  which  is  the  declination  of  the
star,  63^  2\  he  adds  the  latitude  of  the  place  26^  36' ;  the
sum,  79^  37  ,  is  the  zenith  distance ;  and  its  complement
to  ninety  degrees,  10*^  23',  is  the  meridian  altitude  of  the
star.J

The  annual  variation  of  the  star  in  declination,  1",  7,  is
too  small  to  draw  any  inference  as  to  the  age  of  the  scho-
liast from  the  declination  here  stated.  More  especially  as
it  is  taken  from  data  furnished  by  his  author  ;  and  as  he
appears  to  have  been,  like  most  of  the  Hindu  astronomers,
no  very  accurate  observer;  the  latitude  assigned  by  him  to

•  PbIt'h<jdaoa  swam!  chaturvIda  on  Brahm.
t  Pages  324,  &c.,  and  407  of  the  present  volume.
I  PRfT*H(jDACA  swam!  on  Brahm.,  ch.  10.  §  35.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  467

the  city  in  which  he  dwelt  being  no  less  than  half  a
degree  wrong :  for  the  ruins  of  the  city  of  Canouj  are  in
270  6'.  N.

G.

ARYABHAtf  a's  Doctrim.

ARYABHAff  A  was  author  of  the  Aryashiasata  (800
couplets)  and  Dasagitica  (ten  stanzas)^  known  by  the
numerous  quotations  of  Brahmegupta,  BHAff6TPALA9
and  others^  who  cite  both  under  these  respective  titles.
The  Laghu  Arya  siddhantaj  as  a  work  of  the  same  author^
and,  perhaps,  one  of  those  above-mentioned,  is  several
times  quoted  by  Bhascara*s  commentator  MunISwara.
He  likewise  treated  of  algebra,  &c.  under  the  distinct  heads
of  Cutiaca,  a  problem  serving  for  the  resolution  of  indeter-
minate ones,  and  Vija,  principle  of  computation,  or  analysis
in  general. — LiL  c.  11.

From  the  quotations  of  writers  on  astronomy,  and  par-
ticularly of  Brahmegvpta,  who,  in  many  instances,
cites  ARYABHAff  A  to  coutrovert  his  positions,  (and  is  in
general  contradicted  in  liis  censure  by  his  own  scholiast
PRtT'HfiDACA,  either  coiTecting  his  quotations,  or  vindi-
cating the  doctrine  of  the  earlier  author),  it  appears  that
ARYABHAff  A  affirmed  the  diurnal  revolution  of  the  earth
on  its  axis,  and  that  he  accounted  for  it  by  a  wind  or
current  of  aerial  fluid,  the  extent  of  which,  according  to  the
orbit  assigned  to  it  by  him,  corresponds  to  an  elevation  of
little  more  than  a  hundred  miles  from  the  surface  of  the
earth :  that  he  possessed  the  true  theory  of  the  causes  of
lunar  and  solar  eclipses,  and  disregarded  the  imaginary
dark  planets  of  the  mythologists  and  astrologers,  affirming
the  moon  and  primary  planets  (and  even  the  stars)  to  be
essentially  dark,  and  only  illumined  by  the  sun :  that  he

2h  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


468  ALGEBRA  OF  THE HINDUS.

noticed  the  motion  of  the  solstitial  and  equinoctial  points,
but  restricted  it  to  a  regular  oscillation^  of  which  he  assigned
the  limit  and  the  period  :  that  he  ascribed  to  the  epicycles,
by  which  the  motion  of  a  planet  is  represented,  a  form  vary-
ing from  the  circle  and  nearly  elliptic :  that  he  recognised  a
motion  of  the  nodes  and  apsides  of  all  the  primary  planets,
as  well  as  of  the  moon ;  though  in  this  instance,  as  in
some  others,  his  censurer  imputes  to  him  variance  of  doc-
trine.

The  magnitude  of  the  earth,  and  extent  of  the  encom-
passing wind,  is  among  the  instances  wherein  he  is  re-
proached by  Br AHMEGUPTA  with  versatility,  as  not  having
adhered  to  the  same  position  throughout  his  writings ;  but
he  is  vindicated  on  this,  as  on  most  occasions,  by  the  scho-
liast of  his  censurer.  Particulars  of  this  question,  leading
to  rather  curious  matter,  deserve  notice.

ARYABHAff A*s  tcxt  spccifics  the  earth's  diameter,
1050  y^anas ;  and  the  orbit  or  circumference  of  the  earth's
wind  [spiritus  vector]  3393  ydjanas;  which,  as  the  scho-
liast rightly  argues,  is  no  discrepancy.  The  diameter  of
this  orbit,  according  to  the  remark  of  Brahmegupta,  is
1080.

On  this  it  is  to  be  in  the  first  place  observed,  that  the
proportion  of  the  circumference  to  the  diameter  of  a  circle,
here  employed,  is  that  of  22  to  7 ,-  which  not  being  the
same  which  is  given  by  Brahmegupta's  rule  (Arithm.
§  40),  must  be  presumed  to  be  that  which  ARYABHAff  a
taught.  Applying  it  to  the  earth's  diameter  as  by  him
assigned,  viz.  1050,  the  circumference  of  the  earth  is  3300;
which  evidently  constitutes  the  dimensions  by  him  in-
tended :  and  that  number  is  accordingly  stated  by  a  com-
mentator of  BhAscara. See  Gan.  on  LiL  §  4.

This  approximation  to  the  proportion  of  the  diameter  of
a  circle  to  its  periphery,  is  nearer  than  that  which  both


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  469

Brahmbgupta  and  I^RfDHARA,  though  later  writers,
teach  in  their  mensuration,  and  which  is  employed  in  the
Surya  siddhanta  ;  namely,  one  to  the  square-root  of  ten.
It  is  adopted  by  BhAscara,  who  adds,  apparently  from
some  other  authority,  the  still  nearer  approximation  of  1260
to  3927.— (ii/.  ^  201.)

ARYABHAff  A  appears,  however,  to  have  also  made  use
of  the  ratio  which  afterwards  contented  both  Brahme-
gupta  and  §Rf  dhara  ;  for  his  rule  adduced  by  Gan^sa
{LiL  %  207)  for  finding  the  arc  from  the  chord  and  versed
sine,  is  clearly  founded  on  the  proportion  of  the  diameter  to
the  periphery,  as  one  to  the  square  root  of  ten :  as  vrill  be
evident  if  the  semicircle  be  computed  by  that  rule :  for  it
comes  out  the  square  root  of  V^  ^^  diameter  being  1.

A  more  favourable  notion  of  his  proficiency  in  geometry,
a  science,  however,  much  less  cultivated  by  the  Hindus
than  algebra,  may  be  received  from  his  acquaintance  with
the  theorem  containing  the  fundamental  property  of  the
circle,  which  is  cited  by  PRtT'nijDACA. — (Brahm.  12,
§21.)

The  number  of  3300  yijanas  for  the  circumference  of  the
earth,  or  9i  ydjanas  for  a  degree  of  a  great  circle,  is  not
very  wide  of  the  truth,  and  is,  indeed,  a  very  near  ap-
proach, if  the  ydjana,  which  contains  four  crSias,  be
rightly  inferred  fit)m  the  modem  computed  crSia  found  to
be  1,  9  B.  M.*  For,  at  that  rate  of  7,  6  miles  to  a  yijana,
the  earth's  circumference  would  be  25080  B.  miles.

The  difference  between  the  diameter  of  the  earth  and
that  of  its  air  iv&yu),  by  which  term  ARYAJBHAff  a  seems
to  intend  a  current  of  vrind  whirling  as  a  vortex,  and  caus-
ing the  earth's  revolution  on  its  axis,  leaves  16  ydjanas,  or


♦  As.  Resy  vol.  V.  p.  105.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


470  ALGEBRA  OF  THE HINDUS.

114  miles,  for  the  limit  of  elevation  of  this  atmospheric
current.

H.

Scantiness  of  the  Additions  by  later  Writers  on  Algebra.

The  observation  in  the  text  on  the  scantiness  of  the  im-
provements or  additions  made  to  the  algebra  of  the  Hindus
in  a  long  period  of  years  after  ARYABHAff  a  probably,  and
after  Brahmegupta  certainly,  is  extended  to  authors
whose  works  are  now  lost,  on  the  faith  of  quotations  from
them.  SrIdhara's  rule,  which  is  cited  by  BhAscara
{Vij.'gan,  \  131),  concerning  quadratics,  is  the  same  in
substance  with  one  of  Brah  megupta's  (ch.  18.  ^  32 — ^33).
PadmanAbha,  indeed,  appears  from  the  quotation  from
his  treatise  {Vij.-gan.  %  142)  to  have  been  aware  of  qua-
dratic equations  affording  two  roots;  which  Brahme-
gupta has  not  noticed;  and  this  is  a  material  accession
which  the  science  received.  There  remains  an  uncertainty
respecting  the  author,  from  whom  Bhasoara  has  taken
the  resolution  of  equations  of  the  third  and  fourth  degrees
in  their  simple  and  unaffected  cases.

The  only  names  of  algebraists  who  preceded  Bhasoara,
to  be  added  to  those  already  mentioned,  are,  1st,  an  earlier
writer  of  the  same  name  (BhAscara),  who  was  at  the  head
of  the  commentators  of  Aryabh  Aff  a  ;  and,  2d,  the  elder
scholiast  of  the  Brahma  siddhanta,  named  BHArfA
Balabhadra.  Both  are  repeatedly  cited  by  the  suc-
cessor of  the  latter  in  the  same  task  of  exposition,
PrKt'h^daca  swAmI,  who  was  himself  anterior  to  ihe
author  of  the  SirSmani,  being  more  than  once  quoted  by
him.  As  neither  of  those  earlier  commentators  is  named
by  the  younger  BhAscara,  nor  any  intimation  given  of
his  having  consulted  and  employed  other  treatises  besides


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  471

the  three  specified  by  him  in  the  compilation  of  the  Vya-
gaMta,  it  is  presumable^  that  the  few  additions,  which  a
comparison  with  the  Cuitaca  of  Brahmbgupta  exhibits,
are  properly  ascribable  either  to  SrIdhara  or  to  Padma-
nabha;  most  likely  to  the  latter,  as  he  is  cited  for  one
such  addition  ;*  and  as  SrIdh ara's  treatise  of  arithmetic
and  mensuration,  which  is  extant,  is  not  seemingly  the
work  of  an  author  improving  on  the  labours  of  those  who
went  before  him.f  The  corrections  and  improvements
introduced  by  BhAscara  himself,  and  of  which  he  care-
fully apprizes  his  readers,  J  are  not  very  numerous,  nor  in
general  important.  §

I.

Age  of  ARYABHAff  A.

Under  the  Abbasside  khalifs  Almans6r  and  AlmA-
m6n,  in  the  middle  of  the  eighth  and  beginning  of  the
ninth  centuries  of  the  Christian  era,  the  Arabs  became  con-
versant with  the  Indian  astronomy.  It  was  at  that  period,
as  may  be  presumed,  that  they  obtained  information  of  the
existence  and  currency  of  three  astronomical  systems  among
the  Indians;||  one  of  which  bore  the  name  of  ARYABHAff  a,
or,  as  written  in  Arabic  characters,  Arj  ABAHAR^f  (perhaps


•  nj.-ffa^.  §  142.

t  LU,  §  147. Brahm.  c.  12.  §  21  and  40. Ga^.  S6r.  §  126.

t  Vij,'gah,  before  §  44,  and  after  §  57.  also  Ch.  1,  towards  the  end ;
and  Cb.  5.  §  142.

§  Unless  X^.§  170  and  190.

II  TMkhu'lhucamdy  or  Bibl.  Arab.  Phil,  quoted  by  Casiri:  Bibl.
Arab.  Hisp.  vol.  i.  p.  426. See  note  M.

IF  C  OSS  A  Li's  Argebakr  is  a  misprint  (Orig.  &c.  dell*  Alg.  vol.  i.
p.  207).  Casiri  gives,  as  in  the  Arabic,  Argebahr:  which,  in  the
orthography  here  followed,  is  ArjabcLhr,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


472  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

intended  for  Arjabhar),  which  is  as  near  an  approximatioD
as  the  difference  of  characters  can  be  expected  to  exhibit.
This  then  unquestionably  was  the  system  of  the  astro-
nomer whose  age  is  now  to  be  investigated ;  and  who  is  in
a  thousand  places  cited  by  Hindu  writers  on  astronomy,
as  author  of  a  system  and  founder  of  a  sect  in  this  science.
It  is  inferred  from  the  acquaintance  of  the  Arabs  with  the
astronomical  attainments  of  the  Hindus,  at  that  time,  when
the  court  of  the  khalif  drew  the  visit  of  a  Hindu  astrologer
and  matliematician,  and  when  the  Indian  determination  of
the  mean  motions  of  the  planets  was  made  the  basis  of
astronomical  tables  compiled  by  order  of  the  khalife,  *  for
a  guide  in  matters  pertaining  to  the  stars/  and  when  Indian
treatises  on  the  science  of  numbers  were  put  in  an  Arabic
dress ;  adverting  also  to  the  difficulty  of  obtaining  further
insight  into  the  Indian  sciences,  which  the  author  of  the
Tarikhu'l  hucamd  complains  of,  assigning  for  the  cause  the
distance  of  countries,  and  the  various  impediments  to  inter-
course :  it  is  inferred,  we  say,  from  these,  joined  to  other
considerations,  that  the  period  in  question  was  that  in
which  the  name  of  ARYASHAff  a  was  introduced  to  the
knowledge  of  the  Arabs.  This,  as  a  first  step  in  inquiring
the  antiquity  of  this  author,  ascertains  his  celebrity  as  an
astronomical  authority  above  a  thousand  years  ago.

He  is  repeatedly  named  by  Hindu  authors  of  a  still
earlier  date:  particularly  by  Brahmegupta,  in  the  first
part  of  the  seventh  century  of  the  Christian  era.  He  had
been  copied  by  writers  whom  Brahmegupta  cites.
VarAhamihira  has  allusions  to  him,  or  employs  his
astronomical  determinations  in  an  astrological  work  at  the
beginning  of  the  sixth  century.  These  fects  will  be  fiirther
weighed  upon  as  we  proceed.

For  determining  ARYABHAff  a's  age  with  the  greater
precision  of  astronomical  chronology, grounds  are  pre-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  473

sentedy  at  the  first  view  promising,  but  on  examination
insufficient.

In  the  investigation  of  the  question  upon  astronomical
grounds,  recourse  was  in  the  first  place  had  to  his  doctrine
concerning  the  precession  of  the  equinoxes.  As  quoted  by
MuNi^wARAy  a  scholiast  of  BhAscaba,  he  mamtained  an
oscillation  of  the  equinoctial  points  to  twenty-four  degrees
on  either  side  ;  and  he  reckoned  578159  such  librations  in
a  ccdpa.*  From  another  passage  cited  by  BHAff6TPALA
on  VARAHAMiHiRAyf  his  position  of  the  mean  equinoxes
was  the  beginning  of  Aries  and  of  Libra.  J  From  one  more
passage  quoted  by  the  scholiast  of  Brahmegupta,^  it
further  appears,  that  he  reckoned  1986120000  years  ex-
pired II  before  the  war  of  the  Bharata :  and  the  duration
of  the  ccdpa,  if  he  be  rightly  quoted  by  BrahmeguptAj^T
is  1008  quadruple  yugas  of  4320000  years  each.

From  these  data  it  follows  that,  according  to  him,  the
equinoctial  point  had  completed  263699  oscillations  at  the
epoch  of  the  war  of  the  Bharata.  But  we  are  without
any  information  as  to  the  progress  made  in  the  current
oscillation  when  he  wrote,  or  the  actual  distance  of  the
equinox  fix>m  the  beginning  of  Mesha :  the  position  of
which,  also,  as  by  him  received,  is  uncertain.

His  limit  of  the  motion  in  trepidation,  24**,  was  evidently
suggested  to  him  by  the  former  position  of  the  colures
declared  by  PArASara;  the  exact  difference  being  23''20^

*  Page  378  of  the  present  volame.  t  rHhat  tanhitd,  ch.  2.

t  *  From  the  beginDing  of  Mesha  to  the  end  of  Canyd  (Virgo),  the
half  the  ecliptic  passes  through  the  north.  From  the  beginning  of
7\ild  to  the  end  of  (the  fishes)  MnOy  the  remaining  half  passes  by  the
south.'

§  Prit'h^daca  on  Braum.,  c.  i.  §  10  and  30,  and  c.  xi.  §  4.

11  Six  Menus,  twenty-seven  yuffos  and  three-quarters.

H  PrYt'hOdaca  on  Brahm.,  c.  i.  §  12.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


474  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

But  the  commencement  of  PiRAiiARA's  Ailesha,  in  his
sphere,  or  the  oiigin  of  his  siderial  Mesha,  are  unascer-
tained. Whether  his  notions  of  the  duodecimal  divisicm  of
the  zodiac  were  taken  from  the  Grecian  or  Egyptian  spheres,
or  from  what  other  immediate  source,  is  but  matter  of
conjecture.

Quotations  of  this  author  furnish  the  revolutions  of
Jupiter  in  a  ytigUy*  and  of  Saturn's  aphelion  in  a  calpa;^
and  those  of  the  moon  in  the  latter  period :  but  the  same
passage,  {  in  which  the  number  of  lunar  revolutions  in  that
great  period  are  given,  supplies  those  of  the  sun ;  namely,
4320000000;  differing  from  the  duration  of  the  calpa
according  to  this  author  as  cited  by  more  ancient  compilers.
The  truth  is,  as  appears  from  another  quotation,  §  that
ARYABHAffA,  after  delivering  ouc  complete  astronomical
system,  proceeds  in  a  second  and  distinct  chapter  to  deliver
another  and  different  one  as  the  doctrine  of  PArAsara  ;
whose  authority,  he  observes,  prevails  in  the  CcUi  age :  and
though  he  seems  to  indicate  the  ccdpa  as  the  same  in
both,  he  also  hints  that  in  one  a  deduction  is  made  for  the
time  employed  in  creation;  and  we  have  seen,  that  the
duration  of  the  calpa  differs  in  the  quotations  of  compilers
from  this  author.

The  ground  then  being  insufficient,  until  a  more  defi-
nitive knowledge  of  either  system,  as  developed  by  him,
be  recovered,  to  support  any  positive  conclusion,  recourse
must  be  had,  on  failure  of  precise  proof,  to  more  loose
presumption.  It  is  to  be  observed,  that  he  does  not  use
the  ^a  or  Sambat  of  VicramAditya,  nor  the  Sa^  era
of  ^AlivAhana,  but  exclusively  employs  the  epoch  of
the  war  of  the  Bharata^  which  is  the  era  of  Yudhish-

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  jii.  p.  215.  t  Mun.  on  Bhas.,  c.  i.  §33.

I  Mun.  on  Bhas.  c.  i.  §  16—18.  §  fdrf*  and  Mtn.  on  Bhas.


,  Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  475

fniRA  and  the  same  with  the  commencement  of  the  Cali
yuga.  Hence  it  is  to  be  argued,  that  he  flourished  before
this  era  was  superseded. by  the  introduction  of  the  modem
epochas.  VARAHAMiHiRA^on  the  other  hand,  does  employ
the  iSoca,  termed  by  him  Saca^bhiLpa-cala  and  Sacendra^
cala:  which  the  old  scholiast  interprets  ^the  time  when
the  barbarian  kings  called  Stica  were  discomfited  by
VicramAditya:'*  and  Brahmegupta  uses  the  modem
Saca  era,  which  he  expresses  by  Saca-nripante,  interpreted
by  the  scholiast  of  BhAscara  'the  end  [of  the  life  or
reign]  of  VicramAditya,  who  slew  a  people  of  barbarians
named  Sacas.'  VarAhamihira's  epoch  of  Saca  appears
to  have  been  understood  by  his  scholiast  BHAff6TPALA
to  be  the  same  with  the  era  of  VicramAditya,  which
now  is  usually  called  Sambat,  and  which  is  reckoned  to
commence  after  3044  years  of  the  Cali  age  were  expired :
and  Brahmegupta's  epoch  of  Saca  is  the  era  of  SAlivA-
HANA,  beginning  at  the  expiration  of  3179  years  of  the
Cali  yuga :  and  accordingly  this  number  is  specified  in  his
Brahma  siddhanta.  When  those  eras  were  first  intro-
duced is  not  at  present  with  certainty  known.  If  that  of
VicramAditya,  dating  with  a  most  memorable  event  of
his  reign,  came  into  use  during  its  continuance,  still  its
introduction  could  not  be  firom  the  first  so  general  as  at  once
and  universally  to  supersede  the  former  era  of  Yudhish-
f*HiRA.  But  the  argument  drawn  from  ARYABHAff  a's
use  of  the  ancient  epoch,  and  his  silence  respecting  the
modern,  so  far  as  it  goes,  favours  the  presumption  that  he
lived  before  the  origin  of  the  modem  eras.  Certainly  he
is  anterior  to  Brahmegupta,  who  cites  him  in  more  than
a  hundred  places  by  name;  and  to  VarAhamihira,
whose  compilation  is  founded,  among  other  authorities,  on

•  rr^hat  sanhit6.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


476  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

the  R6maca  of  SfiisHfiNA,  and  Vasishi^ha  of  Vishnu
CHANDRA)  which  Brahmegupta  affirms  to  be  partly
taken  from  ARYABHAff  a.*  The  priority  of  this  aathor
is  explicitly  asserted  likewise  by  the  celebrated  astronomer
Gan^SA)  whO)  in  explanation  of  his  own  undertaking,
says :  '  Rules  framed  by  other  holy  sages  were  right  in
the  Treth  and  Dwapara ;  but,  in  the  present  age,  PArA-
sara's.  ARYABHAff  a,  howcver,  finding  his  imperfect,
after  great  lapse  of  time,  reformed  the  system.  It  grew
inaccurate,  and  was  therefore  amended  by  Durgasinha,
MiHiRA,  and  others.  This  again  became  insufficient:  and
correct  rules  were  framed  by  the  son  of  Jishnu  [Brah-
megupta] founded  upon  Brahma's  revelation.  His
system  also,  after  a  long  time,  came  to  exhibit  differences.
Cfi^AVA  rectified  it.  Now,  finding  this  Ukewise  a  little
incorrect  after  sixty  years,  his  son  Gan^^a  has  perfected
it,  and  i*econciled  computation  and  experience.'t

ARYABHAff  A  then  preceded  Brahmegupta,  who  lived
towards  the  middle  of  the  sixth  century  of  the  oaca  era ;
and  VarAhamihira  placed  by  the  chronolc^ers  oiVjjor
yani  at  the  beginning  of  the  fiftli  or  of  the  second ;  (for
they  notice  two  astronomers  of  the  name.)  He  is  prior  also
to  Vishnu  chandra,  SrIsh^na,  and  Durgasinha;  all
of  them  anterior  to  the  second  VarAhamihira;  and  an
interval  of  two  or  of  three  centuries  is  not  more  than
adequate  to  a  series  of  astronomers  following  each  other  in
the  task  of  emendation,  which  process  of  time  rendered
successively  requisite.

On  these  considerations  it  is  presumed,  that  ARYA-
BHAff a  is  unquestionably  to  be  placed  earlier  than  the
fifth  century  of  the  Saca:  and  probably  so,  by  several  (by

•  Brahm,  Siddh.,  c.  11,  §  48—51.

t  Citation  by  Nrisinha  on  S&r.  Siddh»


■  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  477

more  than  two  or  three)  centuries :  and  not  unlikely  before
the  commencement  of  either  Saca  or  Sambat  eras.  In
other  words,  he  flourished  some  ages  before  the  sixth
century  of  the  Christian  era:  and  perhaps  lived  before,  or,
at  latest,  soon  after  its  commencement.  Between  these
limits,  either  the  third  or  the  fourth  century  might  be
assumed  as  a  middle  term.  We  shall,  however,  take  the
fifth  of  Christ  as  the  latest  period  to  which  ARYABHAff  a
can,  on  the  most  moderate  assumption,  be  referred.

K.

Writings  and  Age  of  VarAhamihira.

This  distinguished  astrological  writer,  a  native  of  VJja"
yaniy  and  son  of  AdityadAsa,''''  was  author  of  a  copious
work  on  astrology,  compiled,  and,  as  he  declares,  abridged
from  earlier  writers.  It  is  comprised  in  three  parts ;  the
first  on  astronomy ;  the  second  and  third,  on  divination :
together  constituting  a  complete  course.  Such  a  course,
he  observes  in  his  preface  to  the  third  part,  has  been  termed
by  ancient  writers  Sanhita^  and  consists  of  three  scan-
dhas  or  parts :  the  first,  which  teaches  to  find  a  planet's
place  by  computation  (gaiiito),  is  called  tantra;  the  se-
cond, which  ascertains  lucky  and  unlucky  indications,  is
named  h&ra ;  it  relates  chiefly  to  nativities,  journeys,  and
weddings ;  the  third,  on  prognostics  relative  to  various
matters,  is  denominated  sac^ha. The  direct  and  retrogade


*  Frihat  j6taca^  c.  26,  §  5;  where  the  author  so  describes  himself.
His  scholiast  also  calls  him  AvatUica  from  his  native  city  UjjayanX^
and  terms  him  a  Magadha  Br6hmen^  and  a  compiler  of  astronomical
science.  BHAff6TPALA  on  VH.-jdt.  I.  The  same  scholiast  similarly
describes  him  in  the  introdaction  of  a  commentary  on  a  work  of  his
SCO  PbYt'huya^as.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


478  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

motions  of  planets,  with  their  rising  and  settings  and  other
particulars,  he  goes  on  to  say,  had  been  propounded  by
him  in  a  treatise  termed  Caramiy  meaning,  as  the  scholiast
remarks,  his  compilation  entitled  Pancha  siddkantica:
which  constitutes  the  first  and  astronomical  portion  of  his
entire  work.  What  relates  to  the  first  bi*anch  of  astrology
ik6rd)f  the  author  adds,  had  likewise  been  deUvered  by
him,  including  nativities  and  prognostics  concerning  jour^
neys  and  weddings.  These  astrological  treatises  of  his
author,  the  scholiast  observes,  are  entitled  Vrtkatjatcica,
Vrihad  yatriiy  and  Vrihad  vivaha  paiala^  The  author  pro-
ceeds to  deliver  the  third  part  of  his  course,  or  the  second
on  divination,  omitting,  as  he  says,  superfluous  and  pith-
less matter,  which  abounds  in  the  wiitings  of  his  prede-
cessors :  such  as  questions  and  replies  in  dialogue,  legen-
dary tales,  and  the  mythological  origin  of  the  planets.

The  third  part  is  extant,  and  entire ;  and  is  generally
known  and  cited  by  the  title  of  Vrihat  sanhita,  or  great
course  of  astrology :  a  denomination  well  deserved ;  for,
notwithstanding  the  author's  professions  of  conciseness,  it
contains  about  four  thousand  couplets  distributed  in  more
than  a  hundred  chapters,  or  precisely  (including  the  metrical
table  of  contents)  1 06.

Of  the  second  part,  the  first  section,  on  casting  of  nati-
vities, called  Vrihat  jatacay  is  also  extant,  and  comprises
twenty-five  chapters,  or,  with  the  metrical  table  of  contents
and  peroration  which  concludes  it,  twenty-six.  The  other
two  sections  of  this  part  of  the  course  have  not  been
recovered,  though  probably  extant  in  the  hands  of  Hindu
astrologers.

The  scholia  of  the  celebrated  commentator  of  this  author's
works,  who  is  usually  called  BHAff 6tpala,  and  who  in
several  places  of  his  commentary  names  himself  Utpala
(quibbling  with  stimulated  modesty  on  his  appellation,  for


•Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  479

the  word  signifies  stone)^''''  are  preserved;  and  are  complete
for  the  third  part  of  the  author's  course,  and  for  the  first
section  of  the  second :  and  the  remainder  of  it  likewise  is
probably  extant,  as  the  copy  of  the  first  section  in  the
possession  of  the  author  of  this  dissertation  terminates
abruptly  after  the  commencement  of  the  second*

This  commentator  is  noticed  in  the  list  of  authorities
fiimished  by  the  astronomers  of  UJjayani,  and  is  there
stated  as  of  the  year  890  of  the  Saca  era  (A.D.  1068).
Sir  William  Jones  supposed  him  to  be  the  son  of  the
author,  whose  work  is  expounded  by  him.  The  grounds
of  this  notion,  which  is  not,  however,  very  positively
advanced  by  that  learned  orientalist,t  are  not  set  forth.
No  intimation  of  such  relation  of  the  scholiast  to  his  author
appears  in  the  preface  or  the  conclusion,  nor  in  the  colo-
phon, of  the  commentary  which  has  been  inspected :  nor
in  the  body  of  the  work,  where  the  author  is  of  course
repeatedly  named  or  referred  to,  without  however  any
addition  indicative  of  filial  respect,  as  Hindu  writers  usually
do  employ  when  speaking  of  a  parent  or  ancestor.  Neither
is  there  any  hint  of  relationship  in  the  commentary  of  the
same  scholiast  BHAff6TPALA  on  a  brief  treatise  of
divination,  entitled  Prasna-cdshU,  comprizing  fifty-six
stanzas  by  PrYt'huyasas  son  of  VarAhamihira.  The
suggestion  of  the  filial  relation  of  the  scholiast  is  probably
therefore  a  mere  error.

The  Pancha  siddhdntica  of  VarAhamihira  has  not
yet  been  recovered ;  and  is  only  at  present  known  from

*  Preface  to  the  commentary  on  the  VHhat  jdtaca.  Conclusion
of  the  gloss  on  ch.  1 8  of  F'rihat  sanhitd.  &c.  '  Stone  (utpala)  frames
the  raft  of  interpretation  to  cross  the  ocean  composed  by  V  a  bah  a -

MIHIBA.*

t  The  words  are  '  the  comment  written  by  BHAff6TPALA,  who,  it
seems,  was  a  son  of  the  author.' As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  390.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


480  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

quotations  of  authors ;  and  particularly  a  number  of  pas-
sages cited  from  it  by  his  scholiast  in  course  of  interpreting
his  astrological  writings.  An  important  passage  of  it  so
quoted  will  be  noticed  forthwith.

It  is  a  compilation,  as  its  name  impUes,  from  five  sid-
dhantas ;  and  they  are  specified  in  the  second  chapter  of
the  Vrihat  sanhita,  where  the  author  is  enumerating  the
requisite  qualifications  of  an  astronomer  competent  to
calculate  a  calendar.  Among  other  attainments,  he  requires
him  to  be  conversant  with  time  measured  by  yugasj  Sec.
as  taught  in  the  five  siddhantas  upon  astronomy  named
Paulisa,  R6macaj  Vasisht'ha,  Saura,  and  Paitamaha.*

The  title  of  VarAhamihira's  compilation  misled  a
writer  on  Hindu  astronomyf  into  an  unfounded  supposition,
that  he  was  the  acknowledged  author  of  the  five  sid-
dhantas ;  the  names  of  two  of  which  moreover  are  mis-
taken, S6ma  and  Paulastya  being  erroneously  substituted
for  Rinuica  and  Paulisa.  These  two,  as  well  as  the
Vasishi'hay  are  the  works  of  known  authors,  namely,
PuliSa,  SRisH^KA,  and  Vishnu  chandra  ;  all  three
mentioned  by  Brahmegupta  :  by  whom  also  the  whole
five  siddhantas  are  noticed  under  the  very  same  names
and  in  the  same  order  '^  and  who  has  specified  the  authors
of  the  first  three.§  The  Vasishi^ha  of  Vishnu  chanora
was  indeed  preceded  by  an  earlier  work  (so  entitled)  of  an
unknown  author,  from  which  that,  as  well  as  the  RAmacdy
is  in  part  taken  ;||  and  it  may  be  deemed  an  amended
edition :  but  the  R6maca  and  Paulisa  are  single  of  the
names ;  and  no  Hindu  astronomer,  possessing  any  know-
ledge of  the  history  of  the  science  cultivated  by  him,  ever

•  rr}ihai  sanfiita,  c.  2.  §  7.  f  As.  Res.,  vol.  viii.  p.  196.

X  Brahma  siddhdntay  e.  14.  §  Ibid.  c.  11.

II  Ibid,


■  Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.  481

ever  could  imagine,  that  Vara  ham  i  hi  r  a  composed  the
work  which  takes  its  name  from  PuliSa,  the  distinguished
founder  of  a  sect  or  school  in  astronomy  opposed  to  that  of

ARYABHAffA.

The  passage  of  the  Pancha  siddhantica  cited  by  the
scholiast,"*  and  promised  to  be  here  noticed,  has  been
quoted  in  an  essay  inserted  in  the  researches  of  the
Asiatic  Society ,t  as  well  as  a  parallel  passage  of  the
Vrtkat  sanhita,X  both  relative  to  the  ancient  and  actual
position  of  the  colures ;  and  deemed  parallel  (though  one
be  less  precise  than  the  other),  since  they  are  cited  together
as  of  the  same  author,  and  consequently  as  of  Uke  import,
by  the  scholiast.§  The  text  of  the  Vrihat  sanhita  is  further
authenticated  by  a  quotation  of  it  in  the  commentary  of
PrKt'h^daca  on  Brahmegtjpta  ;||  and  the  former  posi-
tion of  the  colures  is  precisely  that  which  is  described  in
the  calendar  appendant  on  the  VedcLs,^  'and  which  is
implied  in  a  passage  of  PArASara  concerning  the  seasons,
which  is  quoted  by  BHAff6TPALA.

The  position  of  the  colures,  affirmed  as  actual  in  his
time  by  Varahamihira,  in  the  Vrikat  sanhita^  implies
an  antiquity  of  either  1216  or  1440  years  before  A.D.  1800,
according  to  the  origin  of  the  ecliptic  determined  from
the  star  Chitra  (Spica  vii^inis)  distant  either  180^  or  183^
from  it ;  or  a  still  greater  antiquity,  if  it  be  taken  to  have
corresponded  more  nearly  with  the  Grecian  celestial
sphere.  The  mean  of  the  two  numbers  (disregarding  the
surmise  of  greater  antiquity),  carries  him  to  A.D.  472.  If
VarAhamihira  concurred  with  those  Indian  astrono-
mers, who  allow  an  oscillation  of  the  equinox  to  27 in

•  On  Frthai  sanhita,  c.  2. f  See  page  387  of  the  present  vol.
t  C.  3.  §  1  and  2.  §  On  Fr^hat  sanli.  c.  2.

11  Brahm,  siddhdnta,  c.  xi.§54. f  See  vol.  i.  p.  108.
VOL. IK  2  I


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


482  ALGEBRA OF  THE HINDUS.

1800  years,  or  a  complete  oscillation  of  that  extent  both
E.  and  W.  in  7200  years,  he  must  have  lived  soon  after
the  year  3600  of  the  Call  yuga^  or  421  Sacay  answering
to  A.D.  499  ;  which  is  but  six  years  from  the  date  assigned
to  him  by  the  astronomers  of  Ujjayani,  and  twenty-seven
from  the  mean  before  inferred.

U  is  probable,  therefore,  that  he  flourished  about  the
close  of  the  fifth  century  of  the  Christian  era ;  and  this
inference  is  corroborated  by  the  mention  of  an  astrologer
of  this  name  in  the  Panckatantra,  the  Sanscrit  original
of  the  fables  of  Pilpay,  translated  in  the  reign  of  N  us  hi  r-
VAN,  King  of  Persia,  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sixth  century
and  beginning  of  the  seventh.*

To  that  conclusion  there  is  opposed  an  argument  drawn
from  a  passage  of  the  Bhaswati  carana ;  in  which  the
author  of  that  treatise,  dated  1021  Saca  (A.D.  1098),  pro-
fesses to  have  derived  instruction  ftt>m  Mihira,  meaning,
it  is  supposed,  oral  instruction  from  VarAhamihira;
and  the  argument  has  been  supported  by  computations
which  make  the  Surya  siddhanta  and  Jatacarnavay  the
latter  ascribed  to  VarAhamihira,  to  be  both  works  of
the  same  period,  and  as  modem  as  the  eleventh  century  .f

To  this  it  has  been  replied,  that  the  Mihira,  from
whom  SatAnanda,  author  of  the  Bhaswati,  derived  in-
struction, is  not  the  same  person  or  personage  with  the
author  of  the  Vrthat  sanhita;  if  indeed  SatAnanda's
expression  do  intend  the  same  name,  VarAha.;}:  That
expression  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  very  imperfect  designa-
tion, which  omits  half,  and  that  the  most  distinctive  half,
of  an  appellation :  and  it  is  not  such  as  would  be  applied


•  Pref.  to  the  Sanscrit  edition  of  the  Hitbpadcsa^  printed  at  Seram-
pur. [See  page  173  of  the  present  volume.]

t  As.  Res.,  vol.  vi.  p.  572. %  See  page  389  of  the  present  volume.


.  Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  483

by  a  contemporary  and  auditor  to  an  author  and  lecturer,
whose  celebrity  could  not  yet  be  so  generally  difiused,  as
to  render  a  part  of  his  name  a  sufficient  intimation  of  the
remainder,  without  previous  and  well  established  associa-
tion of  the  terms.  But  even  conceding  the  interpretation,
it  would  then  be  right  to  admit  a  third  VarAhamihira,
besides  the  two  noticed  by  the  chronologists  of  Ujjayani ;
and  the  third  will  be  an  astronomer,  contemporary  with
RAja  Bh6ja  DfevA,  and  the  preceptor  of  SatAnanda,
and  author  of  the  Jatacarnavay  supposing  this  treatise  on
nativities  to  be  properly  ascribed  to  an  author  bearing  that
name,  and  to  be  on  suflScient  grounds  referred  to  the
eleventh  century.

There  remains  to  be  here  noticed  another  treatise  on
casting  of  nativities,  to  which  the  same  favourite  name  of
a  celebrated  astrologer  is  affixed.  It  is  a  concise  tract
entitled  Laghujataca :  and  its  authenticity  as  a  work  of
the  astrologer  oiUjjayani  is  established  by  the  verifying
of  a  quotation  of  the  scholiast  BHAff6TPALA,  who  cites
a  passage  of  his  author's  compendious  treatise  on  the  same
subject  {swalpajataca),  in  course  of  expounding  a  rule  of
prognostication  concerning  the  destination  of  a  prince  to
the  throne,  and  his  future  character  as  a  monarch  (Vrthat
jataca  11.  1.).  That  passage  occurs  in  the  Laghujataca
(Misc.  Chap.)*  It  is  hardly  to  be  supposed,  that  the  same
writer  can  have  given  a  third  treatise  on  the  same  subject
of  nativities,  entitled  Jata>carnava.

The  question  concerning  the  age  of  the  Sdrya  siddhanta
remains  for  consideration.  It  is  a  very  material  one,  as
both  VarAhamihira  and  Brahmegupta  speak  of  a
Saura  (or  Solar)  siddhanta,  which  is  a  title  of  the  same
import:  and  unless  a  work  bearing  this  title  may  have
existed  earUer  than  the  age  which  is  assigned,  for  reasons
to  be  at  a  future  time  examined,  to  the  S(^rya  siddhanta,

2i  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


484  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

the  conclusions  respecting  the  periods  when  they  respec-
tively wrote,  are  impeached  in  the  degree  in  which  those
grounds  of  calculation  may  deserve  confidence.  Those
grounds  in  detail  will  be  discussed  at  a  separate  opportunity.
But  independently  of  this  discussion  of  their  merits,  suffi-
cient evidence  does  exist  to  estabUsh,  that  more  than  one
edition  of  a  treatise  of  astronomy  has  borne  the  name  of
Sdrya  (with  its  synonyma)  the  sun.  For  LacshmIdIsa
cites  one  under  the  title  of  Vrihat  surya  siddkanta*  (for
a  passage  which  the  current  solar  Siddkanta  does  not
exhibit),  in  contradistinction  to  another  more  frequently
cited  by  him  without  the  distinctive  epithet  of  Vrihat :  and
in  these  latter  instances  his  quotations  admit  of  verification.
A  reference  of  BhAscara  to  a  passage  of  the  Saura,  or,  as
explained  by  his  own  annotation,  the  Surya  siddkanta,  does
not  agree  with  the  text  of  the  received  Surya  siddhanta.f
His  commentators  indeed  do  not  imreservedly  conclude
from  the  discrepancy  a  difference  of  the  work  quoted,  and
that  usually  received  under  the  same  title.  Yet  the  infe-
rence seems  legitimate.  At  all  events  the  quotation  fi'om
the  Vrikat  surya  siddkanta,  in  the  Ganita  tatwa  ckinta-
mani  of  LACSHMtnisA,  proves  beyond  question,  that  in  that
commentator's  opinion,  and  consistently  with  his  knowledge,
more  than  one  treatise  bearing  the  same  name  existed.

There  is  evidence  besides  of  Arabian  writers,  that  a
system  of  astronomy  bearing  the  equivalent  title  of  Area
(Solar)  was  one  of  three,  which  were  found  by  them  current
among  the  Hindus,  when  the  Arabs  obtained  a  knowledge
of  the  Indian  astronomy  in  the  time  of  the  Abbasside
khalifs,  about  the  close  of  the  eighth  century  or  com-
mencement of  the  ninth  of  the  Christian  era.;]: Arcand,

•  6an,  tatwa  chinU  on  Spherics  of  ^irbmahi,  ch.  4.  Cons,  of  Sines.
+  See  page  374  of  the  present  volume.  X  See  note  N.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  486

the  name  by  which  the  Arabs  designate  one  of  those  three
astronomical  systems,  assigning  it  as  an  Indian  term,  is  the
well  known  corruption  of  Area  in  the  common  dialects,
and  is  familiar  in  the  application  of  the  same  word  as  a
name  of  a  plant  (Asclepias  gigantea),  which  bearing  all
the  synonyma  of  the  sun,  is  called  vulgarly  Acand  or
Arcand.

The  solar  doctrine  of  astronomy  appears  then  to  have
been  known  by  this  name  to  the  Arabians  as  one  of  the
three  Indian  asti*onomical  systems  a  thousand  years  ago.
The  fact  is,  that  both  the  title  and  the  system  are  con-
siderably more  ancient.  Revisions  of  systems  occasionally
take  place;  like  Brahmegupta's  revisal  of  the  Brahma
siddkanta,  to  adapt  and  modernize  them;  or,  in  other
words,  for  the  purpose,  as  Brahmegupta  intimates,  of
reconciling  computation  and  observation.  The  Surya  or
Area  siddhanta,  no  doubt,  has  undergone  this  process,
and  actually  exhibits  manifest  indications  of  it.*

In  every  view^  it  is  presumed,  that  any  question  con-
cerning the  present  text  of  the  Surya  siddkanta,  or  deter-
mination of  that  question,  will  leave  untouched  the  evidence
for  the  age  of  the  author  of  the  Vrihat  sanhita,  VarAha-
MiHiRA,  son  of  AdityadAsa,  an  astrologer  of  ZTy^y^w^
who  appears  to  have  flourished  at  the  close  of  the  fifth,  or
beginning  of  the  sixth  century  of  the  Christian  era.  He
was  preceded,  as  it  seems,  by  another  of  the  same  name,
who  Uved,  according  to  the  chronologists  of  Zljjayam,  at
the  close  of  the  second  century.  He  may  have  been  fol-
lowed by  a  third,  who  is  said  to  have  flourished  at  the
court  of  RAjA  Bh6ja  d^va  of  Dhara,  and  to  have  had
SatAnanda,  the  author  of  the  Bhaswati,  for  his  scholar.

*  As.  Res.,  vol.  ii.  p.  235.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


486  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.


Introduction  and  Progress  of  Algebra  among  tlie  Italians.

Leonardo  of  Pisa  was  unquestionably  the  first  who
made  known  the  Arabian  algebra  to  Christian  Europe.
The  fact  was,  indeed,  for  a  time  disputed,  and  the  pre-
tensions of  the  Italians  to  the  credit  of  being  the  first
European  nation  which  cultivated  algebra,  were  contested,
upon  vague  surmises  of  a  possible,  and  therefore  presumed
probable,  communication  of  the  science  of  algebra,  together
with  that  of  arithmetic,  by  the  Saracens  of  Spain  to  their
Christian  neighbours  in  the  Peninsula,  and  to  others  alleged
to  have  resorted  thither  for  instruction.  The  conjecture
hazarded  by  Wallis  (Algebra  historical  and  practical)  on
this  point,  was  assisted  by  a  strange  blunder,  in  which
Blancanus  was  followed  by  Vossius  and  a  herd  of  sub-
sequent writers,  concerning  the  age  of  Leonardo,  placed
by  them  precisely  two  centuries  too  low.  The  claims  of
the  Italians  in  his  favour,  and  for  themselves  as  his  early
disciples,  were  accordingly  resisted  with  a  degree  of  acri-
mony (Gu  a  ;  M^m.  de  TAcad.  des  Sc.  174L  p.  436.)  which
can  only  be  accounted  for  by  that  disposition  to  detraction,
which  occasionally  manifests  itself  in  the  Uterary,  as  in
the  idler,  walks  of  society.  The  evidence  of  his  right  to
acknowledgments  for  transplanting  Arabian  algebra  into
Europe  was  for  a  long  period  ill  set  forth:  but,  when
diligently  sought,  and  cai*efully  adduced,  doubt  was  removed
and  opposition  silenced.*

The  merit  of  vindicating  his  claim  belongs  chiefly  to
CossALi.f A manuscript  of  Leonardo's  treatise on

*  MoNTUCLA,  2d  Ed.  Additions.

t  Origine,  &c.  dell' Algebra. Parma  179?.


• Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  487

arithmetic  and  algebra,  bearing  the  title  of  Liber  Abbaci
compositus  a  Leonardo  filio  JBonacci  Pisano  in  anno
1202,  was  found  towards  the  middle  of  the  last  century  by
Targioni  Tozzetti*  in  the  Magliabecchian  library  at
Florence,  of  which  he  had  the  care ;  and  another  work  of
that  author,  on  square  numbers,  was  afterwards  found  by
the  same  person  inserted  in  an  anonymous  compilation,
treating  of  computation,  (un  trattato  d'Abbaco),  in  the
library  of  a  royal  hospital  at  the  same  place.  A  transcript
of  one  more  treatise  of  the  same  writer  was  noticed  by
Tozzetti  in  the  Magliabecchian  collection,  entitled  Leo-
nardi  Pisani  de  jiliis  JBonacci  Practica  Geometrice  com-
posita  anno  1220.  The  subject  of  it  is  confined  to  men-
suration of  land ;  and  being  mentioned  by  the  author  in
bis  epistle  prefixed  to  the  revised  Liber  Abbaci,  shows  the
revision  to  be  of  later  date.  It  appears  to  be  of  1228.t
Tozzetti  subsequently  met  with  a  second  copy  of  the
Liber  Abbaci  in  Magliabecchi's  collection  :  but  it  is  de-
scribed by  him  as  inaccurate  and  incomplete.  X  A  third  has
been  since  discovered  in  the  Riccardian  collection,  also  at
Florence:  and  a  fourth,  but  imperfect  one,  was  commu-
nicated by  Nelli  to  CossALi.^  No  diligence  of  research
has,  however,  regained  any  trace  of  the  volume  which
contained  Leonardo's  treatise  on  square  numbers:  the
library  in  which  it  was  seen  having  been  dispersed  previ-
ously to  CossALi's  inquiries.

It  appears  from  a  brief  account  of  himself  and  his  travels,
and  the  motives  of  his  undertaking,  which  Leonardo  has
introduced  into  his  preface  to  the  Liber  Abbaci,  that  he

•  Viaggj,  vol.  i.  and  vi. Edit  1751—1754.
f  CossALi,  Origine,  &c.  c.  I.  §  5.
t  Viaggi,  vol.  ii. Edit.  1768.
§  Origine,  &c.  dell'  Algebra,  c.  2.  §  1.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


488  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

travelled  into  Egypt,  Barbary,  Syria,  Greece,  and  Sicily ;
that  being  in  his  youth  at  Bugia  in  Barbary,  where  his
father  Bonacci  held  an  employment  of  scribe  at  the
Custom-house,  by  appointment  from  Pisa,  for  Pisan  mer-
chants resorting  thither,  he  was  there  grounded  in  the
Indian  method  of  accounting  by  nine  numerals :  and  that
finding  it  more  commodious,  and  far  preferable  to  that
which  was  used  in  other  countries  visited  by  him,  he  pro-
secuted the  study,*  and  with  some  additions  of  his  own
and  taking  some  things  from  Euclid's  geometry,  he  under-
took the  composition  of  the  treatise  in  question,  that  "  the
Latin  race  might  no  longer  be  found  deficient  in  the  com-
plete knowledge  of  that  method  of  computation/'  In  the
epistle  prefixed  to  the  revision  of  his  work  he  professes  to
have  taught  the  complete  doctrine  of  numbers  according  to
the  Indian  method,  f

His  peregrinations  then,  and  his  study  of  the  Indian
computation  through  the  medium  of  Arabic,  in  an  African
city,  took  place  towaixls  the  close  of  the  twelfth  century ;
the  earliest  date  of  his  work  being  A.  C.  1202.

He  had  been  pi*eceded  by  more  than  two  centuries,  in
the  study  of  arithmetic  under  Muhammedan  instructors,  by
Gerbert  (the  Pope  Silvester  II. )|,  whose  ardour  for
the  acquisition  of  knowledge  led  him,  at  the  termination  of
a  two  years  noviciate  as  a  Benedictine,  to  proceed  by
stealth  into  Spain,  where  he  learnt  astrology  from  the
Saracens,  and with it  more  valuable science,  especially


•  Quare  amplectens  strictiue  ipsum  modum  YDdorum,  et  actentius
studeDs  in  eo,  ex  proprio  sensu  qusedam  addens,  et  qusedam  ex  subti-
litatibus  Euclidis  geometrise  artis  apponeDs,  &c.

t  Plenam  numerorum  doctrinam  edidi  Yndorum,  quern  modum  in
ipsa  scientia  prsestantiorem  elegi.

}  Archbishop  in  992;  Pope  in  999;  died  in  1003.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  489

arithmetic.  This,  upon  his  return,  he  communicated  to
Christian  Europe,  teaching  the  method  of  numbers  under
the  designation  o{  Abacus,  o,  name  apparently  first  intro-
duced by  him  (rationes  numerorum  Abaci*),  by  rules
abstruse  and  difficult  to  be  understood,  as  William  of
Malmesbury  affirms :  Ahacum  certe  primus  a  Saracenis
rapiens,  regulas  dedit,  qtuB  a  sudantihus  Abacistis  vix
intelliguntur.f  It  was  probably  owing  to  this  obscurity  of
bis  rules  and  manner  of  treating  the  Arabian,  or  rather
Indian  arithmetic,  that  it  made  so  little  progress  between
his  time  and  that  of  the  Pisan.

Leonardo's  work  is  a  treatise  of  arithmetic,  terminated,
as  Arabic  treatises  of  computation  are  similarly, ;{:  by  the
solution  of  equations  of  the  two  first  degrees.  In  the
enumeration  and  exposition  of  the  parts  comprised  in  his
fifteenth  chapter,  which  is  his  last,  he  says,  Tertia  erit
super  modum  AlgehrcB  et  AlmucahalcB;  and,  beginning  to
treat  of  it,  Incipit  pars  tertia  de  solutione  quarundam
qucBstionum  secundum  modum  AlgebrcB  et  Almucabake,
scilicet  oppositionis  et  restaurationis.  The  sense  of  the
Arabic  terms  are  here  given  in  the  inverse  order,  as  has
been  remarked  by  Cossali,  and  as  clearly  appears  from
Leonardo's  process  of  resolving  an  equation,  which  will
be  hereafter  shown.

He  premises  the  observation,  that  in  number  three  con-
siderations are  distinguished:  one  simple  and  absolute,
which  is  that  of  number  in  itself:  the  other  two  relative,
being  those  of  root  and  of  square. The  latter,  as  he  adds,

*  Ep.  prefixed  to  his  Treatise  De  Numerorum  Diyisione.  Gbrb.
Ep.  160.  (Ed.  1611.)

t  De  Gestis  Anglorum,  c.  2.

t  See  Mr.  Strachky^s  examination  of  the  Khuldsatu  I  his^y  As,
Res*,  vol.  xii* Early  History  of  Algebra.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


490  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

is  caUed  census,  which  is  the  term  he  afterwards  employs
throughout.

It  is  the  equivalent  of  the  Arabic  mat,  which  properly
signifies  wealthy  estate ;  and  census  seems  therefore  to  be
here  employed  by  Leonardo^  on  account  of  its  corres-
pondent acceptation  {quicquid  fortunarum  quis  habet.
Steph.);  in  like  manner  as  he  translates  the  Arabic  shai
by  resy  things  as  a  designation  of  the  root  unknown.

He  accordingly  proceeds  to  observe,  that  the  simple
number,  the  root,  and  the  square  (census),  are  equalled
together  in  six  ways :  so  that  six  forms  of  equality  are
distinguished ;  the  three  first  of  which  are  called  simple,
and  the  three  others  compound.  The  order  in  which
he  arranges  them  is  precisely  that  which  is  copied  by
Paciolc*  It  differs  by  a  slight  transposition  from  the
order  in  which  they  occur  in  the  earliest  Arabic  treatises  of
algebra  ;f  and  which,  no  doubt,  was  retained  in  the  Italian
version  from  the  Arabic  executed  by  Guglielmo  di  Lunis,
and  others  who  are  noticed  by  Cossali  upon  indications
which  are  pointed  out  by  him.  J  For  Paciolo  cautions
the  reader  not  to  regard  the  difference  of  arrangement,  as
this  is  a  matter  of  arbitrary  choice .§  Leonardo's  six-fold
distinction,  reduced  to  the  modern  algebraic  notation,  is
Ist,  w^=p  oc,  2d,  x^zin,  3d,  p  wzzn.  4th,  a^^  pwzun.
5th, p  0?  +  nzzof^.  6th,  .ty^+nnp  a?.  In  Paciolo's  abridged
notation  it  is  1st,  c°ec«.  2d,  c°  en"".  3d,  c^e  n^  &c.||
The  Arabic  arrangement,in  the  treatise  of  the  Khuwarezmite,
is,  \si,  a/^^pw,  2d,  a?^=w.  3d,  pa?z:n.  4th,a?*+p.i?=:n.
6th,  a^'\-n=p  w.  6th,  p  x-^-nzzx'^.  Later  compilations
transfer  the  third  of  these  to  the  first  place.  If

*  Sum  ma  de  Arithmetica,  &c.  f  See  note  N.

\  Origine,  &c.  dell'  Alg.  §  Summa,  8,  5.  5.

II  Summa,  8, 5, 5.  IT  Khtddsattil  hisdb.


■  Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  491

Like  the  Arabs^  Leonardo  omits  and  passes  unnoticed
the  fourth  form  of  quadratic  equations^  o?^  ^p.v  +  n=:o.  It
could  not,  indeed,  come  within  the  Arabian  division  of
equations  into  simple,  between  species  and  species,  and
compound,  between  one  species  and  two  :  *  quantity  being
either  stated  aflBrmatively,  or  restored  in  this  algebra  to  the
positive  form.  Paciolo  expressly  observes,  that  in  no
other  but  these  six  ways  is  any  equation  between  those
quantities  possible :  Altramente  che  in  questi  6  discorsi  modi
non  e  possible  alcuna  loro  equatione,

Leonardo's  resolution  of  the  three  simple  cases  of
equation  is  not  exhibited  by  Cossali.  It  is,  however,  the
same,  no  doubt,  with  that  which  is  taught  by  Paciolo;
and  which  precisely  agrees  with  the  rules  contained  in  the
Arabic  books,  f  To  facilitate  comparison,  and  obviate  dis-
tant reference,  Paciolo's  rules  are  here  subjoined  in  fewer
words  than  he  employs.

1st,  Divide  the  things  by  the  squares  [coefficient  by
coefficient],  the  quotient  is  the  value  of  thing.

2d,  Divide  the  number  by  the  squares  [by  the  coefficient
of  the  square],  the  root  of  the  quotient  is  the  value  of
thing.

3d,  Divide  the  number  by  the  things  [that  is,  by  the
coefficient],  the  quotient  is  tlie  value  of  thing.;};

The  resolution  of  the  three  cases  of  compound  equations
is  deKvered  by  Cossali  from  Leonardo,  contracting  his
rugged  Latin  into  modem  algebraic  form.

1st,  Bea?«+pa?=n. Then  w^-^i  p-{"^  (ip^+n).

2d,  Bea?2=pcr+n. Thena?=ip+v'  (ip^  +  n).

3d,  Be  a?«+n=pa?. Then,  if  ^p^/Lriy  the  equation  is


*  Khtddsaiu'l  hisdb.  t  See  note  N ;  and  As.  Res.,  vol.  xii.

\  Summa,  8,  5,  6.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


492  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

impossible.  If  ^  p^:^ny  then  mi^^p.  If  i  p*"7w,  then
a?=ip-V  (ip2-n),  or  -\p+V  (ip*-«)

He  adds  the  remark :  Et  sic,  si  non  solvetur  quuBstio  cum
diminutione,  solvetur  cum  additione.

The  rules  are  the  same  which  are  found  in  the  Arabic
treatises  of  algebra.*  The  same  rules  will  be  likewise
found  in  the  work  of  Paciolo,  expressed  with  his  usual
verboseness  in  his  Italian  text :  to  which,  in  this  instance,
he  has  added  in  the  margin  the  same  instructions  delivered
in  a  conciser  form  in  Latin  memorial  verses.  As  they  are
given  at  length  by  Montucla,  it  is  unnecessary  to  cite
them  in  this  place.  On  the  subject  of  the  impossible  case
Paciolo  adds,  as  a  Notandum  utilissimum,  '  Sel  numero
qual  si  trova  in  la  ditta  equatione  accompagnato  con  lo
censo,  sel  non  e  minore  o  veramente  eqiwle  al  quadrato  de  la
mita  de  le  cose,  el  caso  essere  insoluMle :  e  per  consequente
dico  aguaglimento  non  potere  avenire  per  aUun  modo.*
Summa,  8,  4,  12.

Concerning  the  two  roots  of  the  quadratic  equation  in
the  other  case,  under  the  same  head,  he  thus  expands  the
short  concluding  remark  of  Leonardo  :  Siccke  Vuno  e
Valtro  modo  satisfa  al  tema :  ma  a  le  volte  se  have  la
verita  a  Vuno  modo,  a  le  volte  a  raltro;f  el  perche,  se
cavando  la  radice  del  ditto  remanente  de  la  mita  de  le
cose  non  satisfacesse  al  tema,  la  ditta  radice  aggiongni  a
la  mita  de  le  cose,  e  averai  el  quesito :  e  mai  fallara  che
a  Vuno  di  tai  modi  non  sia  satisfatto  al  quesito,  cioe  giong^
nendo  la,  owero  cavando  la  del  dimeciamento  de  le  cose.
Summa,  8,  4,  12.

BoMBELLi  remarks  somewhat  differently  on  the  same
point.  Nei  quesiti  alcuna  volta,  ben  che  di  rado,  il  restante
non  servi,  ma  ben  si  la  somma  sempre. Alg.  2.  262.

•  See  note  N,

i  Compare  with  Hindu  algebra, yij.-gah.  §  130  and  142.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  493

The  rules  for  the  resolution  of  compound  equations  are
demonstrated  by  Leonardo  upon  rectilinear  figures ;  and
in  the  last  instance  he  has  reference  to  Euclid. — Lib.  2.
Th.  5.  There  is  i-oom  then  to  surmise,  that  some  of  the
demonstrations  are  among  the  additions  which  he  professes
to  have  made.

Among  the  many  problems  which  he  proceeds  to  resolve,
two  of  which  are  selected  by  Cossali  for  instances  of  his
manner,  it  will  be  suflBcient  to  cite  one,  in  the  resolution  of
which  the  whole  thread  of  his  operations  is  exhibited ;
substituting,  however,  the  more  compendious  modern  signs.
His  manner  of  conducting  the  algebraic  process  may  be
fully  understood  from  this  single  instance.

Problem  :  To  divide  the  number  10  into  two  parts,  such
that  dividing  one  by  the  other,  and  adding  10  to  the  sum
of  the  quotient,  and  multiplying  the  aggregate  by  the
greater,  the  amount  is  finally  114.

Let  the  right  line  a  be  the  greater  of  the  parts  sought ;
which  I  call  thing  (qiiam  pono  rem) :  and  the  right  line
hg  equal  to  10  :  to  which  are  joined  in  the  same  direction
gd,  de,  representing  the  quotients  of  division  of  the  parts,
one  by  the  other.  Since  a  multiplied  by  5  e  is  equal  to
114,  therefore  aX J  g  +  aXgrf+a+rfe=114;  and  taking
from  each  side  axb  g,  there  will  be  a  Xg  d+a  x  e?e=114
^ax^bg, Be  grf  the  quotient  10— a,  there  will  arise

a
10-a+axde=114-ax&g=:114— 10a; since  bg is
equal  to  10. Whence  a xde= 104— 9a. But de is
the  quotient a :  wherefore a«  z=104  — 9  a. So  that
10^  10^

a^=l040— 194a  +  9al  Restore  diminished  things  (re-
staura  res  diminutas),  and  take  one  square  from  each  side
iet  extrahe  unum  censum  ab  utraqne  parte),  the  remainder


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


494  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

is  8  0-  + 1040=194  a;  and  dividing  by  eight,  o^^lSOzr
24^ a; and resolving  this according  to rule, a=97—

V  (97)2 -130:=  97- 33 =8:  consequently  10- a=2.  ^
8  8 "8

Besides  his  great  work  on  arithmetic  and  algebra,  Leo-
nardo was  author  of  a  separate  treatise,  as  already
intimated,  on  square  numbers.  Reference  is  formally
made  to  it  by  Paciolo,  who  drew  largely  from  this
source,  and  who  mentions  Le  quali  domande  (questions
concerning  square  numbers)  sono  diffidllissime  quanta  ala
demonstratione  dela  practica :  comme  sa  chi  ben  f  a  scnUi--
nato,  Maxime  Leonardo  Pisano  in  un  particulare  tractato
che  fa  de  quadratis  numeris  intitulato.  Dove  con  grande
sforzo  se  ingegna  dare  norma  e  regola  a  simili  solutioni,
Summa  1.  4.  6.

The  directions  for  the  solution  of  such  problems  being
professedly  taken  by  Paciolo  chiefly  from  Leonardo,
and  the  problems  themselves  which  are  instanced  by  him
being  probably  so,  it  can  be  no  difficult  task  to  restore
the  lost  work  of  Leonardo  on  this  subject.  The  divina-
tion has  accordingly  been  attempted  by  Cossali,  and
with  a  considerable  degree  of  success.  (Origine,  &c.  dell*
Algebra,  c.  6.)

Among  problems  of  this  sort  which  are  treated  by  Pa-
ciolo after  Leonardo,  several  are  found  in  the  current
Arabic  treatises ;  others,  which  belong  to  the  indeterminate
analysis,  occur  in  the  algebi*aic  treatises  of  the  Hindus ;
some,  which  are  more  properly  Diophantine,  may  have
been  taken  from  the  Ai*abic  translation,  or  commentary,
of  the  work  of  Diophantus.  Leonardo's  endeavour  to
reduce  the  solution  of  such  problems  to  general  rule  and
system,  according  to  Paciolo's  intimation  of  his  efforts
towards  that  end,  must  have  been  purely  his  own:  as
nothing  systematic  to  this  effect  is  to  be found  in  the


■Digitized  by  C^OOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  495

Arabic  treatises  of  algebra ;  and  as  he  clearly  had  no
communication  through  his  Arab  instructors,  nor  any
knowledge  of  the  Hindu  methods  for  the  general  resolution
of  indeterminate  problems,  simple  or  quadratic.

MoNTucLA,  who  had  originally  underrated  the  perform-
ance of  Leonardo,  seems  to  have  finally  conceded  to  it
a  merit  rather  beyond  its  desert,  when  he  ascribes  to  that
author  the  resolution  of  certain  biquadratics  as  derivative
equations  of  the  second  degree.  The  derivative  rules  were,
according  to  Cardan's  affirmation,  added  to  the  original
ones  of  Leonardo  by  an  uncertain  author;  and  placed
with  the  principal  by  Paciolo.  Cardan's  testimony
in  this  respect  is  indeed  not  conclusive,  as  the  passage  in
which  the  subject  is  mentioned  is  in  other  points  replete
with  errors;  attributing  the  invention  of  algebm  to  Mu-
HAMMED  son  of  MusA,  and  alleging  the  testimony  of
Leonardo  to  that  point ;  limiting  Leonardo's  rules  to
four,  and  intimating  that  Paciolo  introduced  the  deriva-
tive rules  in  the  same  place  with  the  principal :  all  which  is
unfounded  and  contrary  to  the  fact.  Cossali,  however,
who  seems  to  have  diligently  examined  Leonardo's
remains,  does  not  claim  this  honour  for  his  author;  but
appears  to  admit  Cardan's  position,  that  the  derivative,
or,  as  they  are  termed  by  Paciolo,  the  proportional  equa-
tions, and  rules  for  the  solution  of  them,  were  devised  by
an  uncertain  author,  and  introduced  by  Paciolo  into  his
compilation  under  a  sepamte  head  :  which  actually  is  the
case. (Summa,  8,  6,  2,  &c.)

In  regard  to  the  blunder,  in  which  Montucla  copied
earlier  writers,  respecting  the  time  when  Leonardo  of
Pisa  flourished,  he  has  defended  himself  (2d  edit.  Additions)
against  the  reprehension  of  Cossali,  upon  the  plea,  that
he  was  not  bound  to  know  of  manuscripts  existing  in
certain  libraries  of  Italy,  which  served  to  show  the  age  in


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


496  ALGEBRA OF  THE HINDUS.

which  that  author  Uved.  The  excuse  is  not  altogether
valid:  for  Targioni  Tozzetti  had  announced  to  the
public  the  discovery  of  the  manuscripts  in  question^  with
the  date^  and  a  sufficient  intimation  of  the  contents,  several
years  before  the  first  volumes  of  Montucla's  History  of
Mathematics  appeared.*

I  am  withheld  from  further  animadversion  on  the  negli-
gence of  an  author  who  has  in  other  respects  deserved
well  of  science,  by  the  consideration,  that  equal  want  of
research,  and  in  the  very  same  instance,  has  been  mani-
fested by  more  recent  writers,  and  among  our  own  coun-
trymen. Even  so  lately  as  in  the  past  year  (1816)  a
distinguished  mathematician,  writing  in  the  Encyclopaedia
which  bears  the  national  appellation,i'  has  relied  on  obso-
lete authorities  and  antiquated  disquisitions  concerning  the
introduction  of  the  denary  numerals  into  Europe,  and
shown  total  unacquaintance  with  what  was  made  public
sixty  yeai-s  ago  by  Targioni  Tozzetti,  and  amply
discussed  by  Cossali  in  a  copious  work  on  the  pro-
gress of  algebra  in  Italy,  and  in  an  earlier  one  on  the
origin  of  arithmetic,  published  more  than  twenty  years
since :  matter  fully  recognised  by  Montucla  in  his  second
edition,  and  briefly  noticed  in  common  biographical  die-

tionaries.J

In  the  article  of  the  Encyclopeedia  to  which  reference
has  been  just  made,  the  author  is  not  less  unfortunate  in  all
that  he  says  concerning  the  Hindus  and  their  arithmetical
knowledge. He  describes  the  Lilavati  as a  short  and

•  Taboioni  TozzBTTi's  first  volume  bears  date  1751.  His  sixth,
(the  last  of  his  first  edition)  1754.  Montucla's  first  two  volumes
were  published  in  1758.

t  Encycl.  Brit.  Supp.  art  Arithmetic.

\  Diet.  Hist,  par  Chaudon  et  Dalandinb  :  art.  Leonard  de  Pise.
7  Edit.  (1789). Probably  in  earlier  editions  likewise.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  497

meagre  performance  headed  with  a  silly  preamble  and
colloquy  of  the  gods."  (Where  he  got  this  colloquy  is
difficult  to  divine;  the  Lilavatt  contains  none.)  "  The
examples/'  he  says,  "  are  generally  very  easy,  and  only
vnritten  on  the  margin  with  red  ink."  (Not  so  written  in
any  one  among  the  many  copies  collated  or  inspected.)
"  Of  fractions,"  he  adds,  '^  whether  decimal  or  vulgar,  it
treats  not  at  all."  (See  Ch.  2.  Sect.  3  and  Ch.  4.  Sect.  2.
also  §  138.)

He  goes  on  to  say,  "  the  Hindus  pretend,  that  this
arithmetical  treatise  was  composed  about  the  year  1185  of
the  Christian  era,  &c."  Every  thing  in  that  passage  is
erroneous.  The  date  of  the  Lilavati  is  1150,  at  the  latest.
The  uncertainty  of  the  age  of  a  manuscript  does  not,  as
suggested,  affect  the  certainty  of  the  date  of  the  original
composition.  It  is  not  true,  as  alleged,  that  the  oriental
transcriber  is  accustomed  to  incorporate  without  scruple
such  additions  in  the  text  as  he  thinks  fit.  Nor  is  it
practicable  for  him  to  do  so  with  a  text  aiTanged  in  metre,
of  which  the  lines  are  numbered:  as  is  the  case  with
Sanscrit  text  books  in  general.  Collation  demonstrates
that  no  such  liberty  has  been  taken  with  the  particular  book
in  question.

The  same  writer  affirms,  liiat ''  the  Persians,  though  no
longer  sovereigns  of  Hindustan,  yet  display  their  superiority
over  the  feeble  Gentoos,  since  they  generally  fill  the  oflSces
of  the  revenue,  and  have  the  reputation  of  being  the  most
expert  calculators  in  the  east."  This  is  literally  and  pre-
cisely the  reverse  of  the  truth ;  as  every  one  knows,  who
has  read  or  heard  any  thing  concerning  India.

The  author  is  not  more  correct  when  he  asserts,  that

it  appears  from  a  careful  inspection  of  the  manuscripts
preserved  in  the  different  public  libraries  in  Europe,  that
the  Arabians  were  not  acquainted  with  the  denary  numerals

VOL.  II.  2 K


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


498  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

before  the  middle  of  the  thirteenth  century  of  the  Christian
era."  Leonardo  of  Pisahad  learned  the  Indian  numerals
from  Arabian  instruction  in  the  twelfth  century,  and  tau^t
the  use  of  them  in  the  second  year  of  the  thirteenth :  and
the  Arabs  were  in  possession  of  the  Indian  mode  of
computation  by  these  numerals  so  far  back  as  the  eighth
century  of  the  Christian  era.*

To  return  to  the  subject.

After  Leonardo  of  Pisa,  and  before  the  invention  of
the  art  of  printing,  and  publication  of  the  first  printed
treatise  on  the  science,  by  Paciolo,  algebra  was  diligently
cultivated  by  the  Italian  mathematicians;  it  was  publicly
taught  by  professors ;  treatises  were  written  on  it,  and
recurrence  was  again  had  to  the  Arabian  source.  A  trans-
lation of  "  tlie  Rule  of  Algebra  "  (La  Regola  dell*  Algebra)
from  the  Arabic  into  the  language  of  Italy,  by  Guglielmo
Di  LuNis,  is  noticed  at  the  beginning  of  the  Ragiana-
mento  di  Algebra  by  Raffaelo  Caracci,  the  extant
manuscript  of  which  is  considered  by  antiquarians  to  be  of
the  fourteenth  century.f  A  translation  of  the  original
treatise  of  Mu hammed  ben  Musa,  the  Khuwarezmite,
appears  to  have  been  current  in  Italy ;  and  was  seen  at  a
later  period  by  both  Cardan  and  Bombelli.;]:  Paolo
DELLA  Pergola,  Demetrio  Bragadini,  and  Anto-
nio Cornaro,  are  named  by  Paciolo  as  successively
filling  the  professor's  chair  at  Venice ;  the  latter  his  own
fellow-disciple.  He  himself  taught  algebra  pubUcly  at
Peroscia  at  two  different  periods.  In  the  preceding  age  a
number  of  treatises  on  algorithm,  some  of  them  with  that
title:  others  like  Leonardo's,  entitled  De  Abaco,  and

•  See  note  N.

t  CossALi,  Orig.  &c.  deir  Algebra,  vol.  i.  p.  7.

X  Ibid,  vol.  i.  p.  9. Cardan,  Ars  Magna,  5.


•  Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.  499

probaUy  like  his  touchmg  on  algebra  as  well  as  «rith-
meiic,  were  circulated.  Paolo  bi  Dagomari,  in  parti-
cular,  a  mathematician  living  in  the  middle  of  the  four-
teenth century,  obtained  the  surname  of  DelT  Abaco  for
his  skill  in  the  science  of  numbers,  and  is  besides  said  to
have  been  conversant  with  equations  (whether  algebraic  or
astronomical  may  indeed  be  questioned),  as  well  as  geo-
metry.*

With  the  art  of  printing  came  the  publication  of  Pa-
ciOLO,  and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  inventbns  in
algebra  by  Italian  masters,  is  too  well-known  to  need  to
be  repeated  in  this  place.

M.

Arithmetics  of  Diophantus.

Five  copies  of  Diophantus,  viz,  three  in  the  Vatican
(CossALi,  Orig.  delV  Alg.  i.  4.  §  2.);  Xylander's,  sup*
posed  (Coss.  ib.  \  5.)  to  be  the  same  widi  the  Palatine
inspected  bySAUMAisE,  though  spoken  of  as  distinct  by
Bachet,  {Epist.  ad  lect.);  and  the  Parisian  used  by
Bachet  himself  (ti.);  all  contain  the  same  text.  But  one
of  the  Vatican  copies,  believed  to  be  that  which  Bombelli
consulted,  distributes  a  like  portion  of  text  into  seven  instead
of  six  books.  (Coss.  ib,  §  6.)  In  truth  the  division  of
manuscript  books  is  very  uncertain :  and  it  is  by  no  means
improbable,  that  the  remains  of  Diophantus,  as  we
possess  them,  may  be  less  incomplete  and  constitute  a
larger  portion  of  the  thirteen  books  announced  by  him
iDef.  11.),  than  is  commonly  reckoned.  His  treatise  on
polygon  numbers,  which  is  surmised  to  be  one  (and  that
the  last  of  the  thirteen,)  follows,  as  it  seems,  the  six  (or


•  CossAU,  vol.  i.  p.  9.
2  K  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


500  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

seven)  books  m  the  exemplars  of  the  work,  as  if  the  pre-
ceding portion  were  complete.  It  is  itself  imperfect :  but
the  manner  is  essentially  different  from  that  of  the  foregoing
books:  and  the  solution  of  problems  by  equations  is  no
longer  the  object,  but  rather  the  demonstration  of  proposi-
tions. There  appeal's  no  ground,  beyond  bare  surmise,  to
presume,  that  the  author,  in  the  rest  of  the  tracts  relative
to  numbers,  which  fuliiUed  his  promise  of  thirteen  books,
resumed  the  algebraic  manner :  or  in  short,  that  the  alge-
braic part  of  his  performance  is  at  all  mutilated  in  the
copies  extant,  which  are  considered  to  be  all  transcripts  of
a  single  imperfect  exemplar. (Bachet,  Ep.  ad  lect,)

It  is  indeed  alleged,  that  the  resolution  of  compound
equations  (two  species  left  equal  to  one)  which  Dio-
PHANTUS  promises  (De/.  11.)  to  show  subsequently,  bears
reference  to  a  lost  part  of  his  work.  But  the  author,  after
confining  himself  to  cases  of  simple  equations  (one  species
equal  to  one  species)  in  the  first  three  books,  passes  occa-
sionally to  compound  equations  (two  species  equal  to  one,
and  even  two  equal  to  two  species)  in  the  three  following
books.  See  iv.  Q.  33 ;  vi.  Q.  6  and  19;  and  Bachet  on
Def  11,  and  i.  Q.  33.  In  various  instances  he  pursues  the
solution  of  the  problem,  until  he  arrives  at  a  final  quadratic
equation ;  and,  as  in  the  case  of  a  simple  equation,  he  then
merely  states  the  value  inferrible,  without  specifying  the
steps  by  which  he  arrives  at  the  inference.  See  iv.  Q.  23 ;
vi.  Q.  7,  9  and  11.  But,  in  other  places,  the  steps  are
sufficiently  indicated :  particularly  iv.  Q.  33  and  45 ;  v.  Q.
13 ;  vi.  Q.  24 :  and  his  method  of  resolving  the  equation
is  the  same  with  the  second  of  Brahmegupta's  rules  for
the  resolution  of  quadratics  (Brahm.  18.  §  34).  The  first
of  the  Hindu  author's  rules,  the  same  with  SrIdhara's
quoted  by  BhAscara  {Vy.-gan,  %  131.  Brahm.  18.
§32.),  differs  from  that  of  Nugnez  (Nonius)  quoted  by


Digitized  by  (^OOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  501

Bachet  (on  DioPH.  i.  33),  in  dispensing  with  the  pre-
liminary step  of  reducing  the  square  term  to  a  single
square :  a  preparation  which  the  Arabs  first  introduced,  as
well  as  the  distinction  of  three  cases  of  quadratics :  for  it
was  practised  neither  by  Diophantus,  nor  by  the  Hindu
algebraists.

Diophantus  has  not  been  more  explicit,  nor  methodical,
on  simple,  than  on  compound,  equations.  But  there  is  no
reason  to  conclude,  that  he  returned  to  either  subject  in  a
latter  part  of  his  work,  for  the  purpose  of  completing  the
instruction,  or  better  explaining  the  method  of  conducting
the  resolution  of  those  equations.  Such  does  not  seem  to
be  the  manner  of  his  arithmetics,  in  which  general  methods
and  comprehensive  rules  are  wanting.  It  is  rather  to  be'
inferred,  as  Cossali  does,  from  the  compendious  way  in
which  the  principles  of  Algebra  are  deUvered,  or  alluded
to,  by  him,  that  the  determinate  analysis  was  previously  not
unknown  to  the  Greeks,  wheresoever  they  got  it;  and
that  Diophantus,  treating  of  it  cursorily  as  a  matter
already  understood,  gives  all  his  attention  to  cases  of
indeterminate  analysis,  in  which  perhaps  he  had  no  Greek
precursor.  (Coss.  Orig.  deW  Alg.  i.  4.  §  10.)  He  cer-
tainly intimates,  that  some  part  of  what  he  proposes  to
teach  is  new :  ?<^«$  M^"  ^^  3b*6r  ri  ir^ayiia  3i/(r%ff erc^oy  luBiivi
fjoiva  yvi^ifiov  In.  While  in  other  places  (Def.  10.)  he
expects  the  student  to  be  previously  exercised  in  the  algo-
rithm of  algebra.  The  seeming  contradiction  is  reconciled
by  conceiving  the  principles  to  have  been  known ;  but  the
application  of  them  to  a  certain  class  of  problems  concern-
ing numbers  to  have  been  new.

Concerning  the  probable  antiquity  of  the  Diophantine
algebra,  all  that  can  be  confidently  affirmed  is,  that  it  is
not  of  later  date  than  the  fourth  century  of  Christ.
Among  the  works  of  Hypatia,  who  was  murdered  A.D.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


502  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

415,  as  they  are  enumerated  by  Suidas,  is  a  commentary
on  a  work  of  a  Diophantus,  most  likely  this  author.
An  epigram  in  the  Greek  antbologia  (lib.  ii.  c.  22.)  is
considered  with  probability  to  relate  to  him :  but  the  age
of  its  author  Lucillius  is  uncertain.  Bachet  observes,
that,  so  &r  as  can  be  conjectured,  Lucillius  lived  about
the  time  of  Nero. This,  however,  is  mere  conjecture.

DiopHANTus  is  posterior  to  Hypsicles,  whom  he  cites
in  the  treatise  an.  polygon  numbers.  (Prop.  8.)  This
should  furnish  another  fixed  point.  But  the  date  of  Hyp-
siCLEs  is  not  well  determined.  He  is  reckoned  the  author,
or  at  least  the  reviser,*  of  two  books  subjoined  to  Euclid's
elements,  and  numbered  14th  and  15th.  In  the  introduce
tion,  he  makes  mention  of  Apollokius,  one  of  whose
writings,  which  touched  on  the  ratio  of  the  dodecaedroQ
and  icosaedron  inscribed  in  the  same  sphere,  was  con-
sidered by  Basilides  of  Tyre,  and  by  the  father  of  him
(Hypsicles)  as  incorrect,  and  was  amended  by  them
accordingly:  but  subsequently  he  (Hypsicles)  met  with
another  work  of  Apollonius,  in  which  the  investigation
of  the  problem  was  satisfactory,  and  the  demonstration  of
the  proposition  correct.  Here  again  Bacui^t  observes,
that,  so  far  as  can  be  conjectured,  from  the  manner  in
which  he  speaks  of  Apollonius,  he  must  have  lived  not
long  after  him.  Cossali  goes  a  little  further:  and  con*
dudes  on  the  same  grounds,  that  they  were  nearly  con-
temporary. iOr^.  deir  Alg.  i.  4.  §  4.)  The  grounds
seem  inadequate  to  support  any  such  conclusion :  and  aU
that  can  be  certainly  inferred  is,  that  Hypsicles  of
Alexandria  was  posterior  to  Apollonius,  who  flourished
in  the  reign  of  Ptolemy  Euergetes  :  two  hundred  years
before  Christ.


•  TdrikhuH  hucamd  cited  by  Casiri,  BihL  Arab.  Hisp.,  vol.  i.
.  346. The  Arabian  author  uses  the  word  asleh  amended.


■Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  503

Several  persons  of  the  name  of  Dioph  antus  are  noticed
by  Greek  authors ;  but  none  whose  place  of  abode,  pro-
fession, or  avocations,  seem  to  indicate  any  correspondence
with  those  of  the  mathematician  and  algebraist :  one,  a
praetor  of  Athens,  mentioned  by  Diodorus  Siculus,
Zenobius,  and  Suidas;  another,  secretary  of  king
Herod,  put  to  death  for  forgery,  as  noticed  by  Tzetzes;
and  a  third,  the  instructor  ^  of  Libanius  in  eloquence,
named  by  Suidas  in  the  article  concerning  that  sophist
and  rhetorician.

The  Armenian  Abu'lfaraj  places  the  algebraist  Dio-
phantus  under  the  emperor  Julian.  But  it  may  be
questioned,  whether  he  has  any  authority  for  that  date,
besides  the  mention  by  Greek  authors  of  a  learned  person
of  the  name,  the  instructor  of  Libanius,  who  was  con-
temporary with  that  emperor.

Upon  the  whole,  however,  it  seems  preferable  to  abide
by  the  date  furnished  in  a  professed  history,  even  an  Arabic
one,  on  a  Grecian  matter ;  and  to  consider  Diophantus  as
contemporary  with  the  emperor  Julian,  about  A.D.  366.
That  date  is  consistent  with  the  circumstance  of  Hypatia
writbg  a  commentary  on  his  works ;  and  is  not  contradicted
by  any  other  fact,  nor  by  the  affirmation  of  any  other
writer  besides  Bombelli,  on  whose  authority  Cossali
nevertheless  relies.

Bombelli,  when  he  announced  to  the  public  the  exist-
ence of  a  manuscript  of  Diophantus  in  the  Vatican,
placed  the  author  under  the  emperor  Antoninus  Pius,
without  citing  any  grounds.  His  general  accuracy  is,
however,  impeached  by  his  assertion,  that  the  Indian
authors  are  frequently  cited  by  Diophantus.  No  such
quotations  are  found  in  the  very  manuscript  of  that  author's
work,  which  he  is  known  to  have  consulted,  and  which
has  been  purposely  re-examined. (Coss.  i.  4.  §  4.)  Bom-


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


504


ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.


BELLi's  authority  was,  therefore,  very  properly  rejected  by
Bachet,  and  should  have  been  so  by  Cossali.

N.
Progress  and  proficiency  of  the  Arabians  in  Algebra.

In  the  reign  of  the  second  Abbassidekhalif  Almans6r,
and  in  the  166th  year  of  the  Hejira  (A.D.  773),  as  is
related  in  the  preface  to  the  astronomical  tables  of  Ben-
AL  Adami,  published  by  his  continuator  Al  Casem  in  308.
H.  (A.D.  920),  an  Indian  astronomer,  well  versed  in  the
science  which  he  professed,  visited  the  court  of  the  khalif,
bringing  with  him  tables  of  the  equations  of  planets  accord-
ing to  the  mean  notions,  with  observations  relative  to  both
solar  and  lunar  eclipses  and  the  ascension  of  the  signs ;
taken,  as  he  affirmed,  from  tables  computed  by  an  Indian
prince,  whose  name,  as  the  Arabian  author  writes  it,  was
PhIghar.  The  khalif,  embracing  the  opportunity  thus
happily  presented  to  him,  commanded  the  book  to  be
translated  into  Arabic,  and  to  be  published  for  a  guide  to
the  Arabians  in  matters  pertaining  to  the  stars.  The  task
devolved  on  Muhammed  ben  IbrAhIm  Alfazari;  whose
version  is  known  to  astronomers  by  the  name  of  the
greater  Sind-hind  or  Hind-sind,  for  the  term  occurs
vnitten  both  ways.''^  It  signifies,  according  to  the  same
author  Ben  al  Adam!,  the  revolving  ages,  Al  dehr  al
daher ; which  Casiri  translates  perpettatm  {Btemumqtie.f

No  Sanscrit  term  of  similar  sound  occurs,  bearing  a
signification  reconcilable  to  the  AraUc  interpretation. If  a


•  Casiri,  Bibl.  Arab.  Hisp.  citing  Bibl.  Arab,  Phil.  {Tdrikhu'l
hucama)  vol.  i.  p.  438.  voce  Alphazdri.

t  Ibid.  vol.  i.  p.  426.  voce  Katka.  Sind  aod  Hind  likewise  signify,
in  the  Arabian  writers,  the  hither  and  remoter  India.  D'Herbblot,
Bibl.  Orient,  p.  415.


•Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  505

conjecture  is  to  be  hazarded,  the  original  word  may  have
been  Siddhanta.  Other  guesses  might  be  proposed,
partly  combining  sound  with  interpretation,  and  taking  for
a  termination  sindhu  ocean,  which  occurs  in  titles  now
familiar  for  works  relative  to  the  regulation  of  time,  as
Cala  sindhu,  Samaya  sindhu,  &c.  or  adhering  exclusively
to  sound,  as  Indu  sindhu,  or  Indu  siddhanta  ;  the  last  a
title  of  the  same  import  with  S6ma  siddhanta  still  current.
But  whatever  may  have  been  the  name,  the  system  of
astronomy  which  was  made  known  to  the  Arabs,  and
which  is  by  them  distinguished  by  the  appellation  in
question,  appears  to  have  been  that  which  is  contained  in
the  Brahma  siddhanta,  and  which  is  taught  in  Br  ah  me-
gupta's  revision  of  it.  This  fact  is  deducible  from  the
number  of  elapsed  days  between  the  beginning  of  planetary
motions  and  the  commencement  of  the  present  age  of  the
world,  according  to  the  Indian  reckoning,  as  it  is  quoted
by  the  astrologer  of  Balkh,  Abu  Mashar,  and  which
precisely  agrees  with  Brahmegupta.  The  astrologer
does  not  indeed  specify  which  of  the  Indian  systems  he  is
citing.  But  it  is  distinctly  affirmed  by  later  Arabian
authorities,  that  only  one  of  the  three  Indian  doctrines  of
astronomy  was  understood  by  the  Arabs ;  and  that  they
had  no  knowledge  of  the  other  two  beyond  their  names.*
Besides,  ARYABHAff  a  and  the  Area  siddhanta,  the  two
in  question,  would  have  furnished  very  different  numbers.

The  passage  of  Abu  Mashar,  to  which  reference  has
been  now  made,  is  remarkable,  and  even  important;  and,
as  it  has  been  singularly  misunderstood  and  grossly  mis-
quoted by  B  A  ILLY,  in  his  Astronomic  Ancienne  (p.  302),
it  may  be  necessary  to  cite  it  at  full  length  in  this  place.


*  Tarikku'l  hucamdf  cited  by  Casiri,  Bibl  Arab,  Hisp,,  vol.  i.
p.  426.  voce  Katka.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


506  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

It  occurs  at  the  end  of  the  fourth  tract  (and  not,  as  Bailly
quotes,  the  beginning  of  the  fifth),  in  Abu  Mashar's
work  on  the  conjimctions  of  planets.  The  author  there
observes,  that  '  the  Indians  reckoned  the  beginning  [of
the  world]  on  Sunday,  at  sunrise  (or,  to  quote  from  the
Latin  version,  Et  eestimaverunt  Indi  quod  principium  fuit
die  dominica  sole  ascendente);  and  between  that  day  and
the  day  of  the  deluge  (et  est  inter  eos,  s.  inter  ilium
diem  et  diem  diluvii)  720634442716  days  equivalent  to
1900340938  *  Persian  years  and  344  days.  The  deluge
happened  on  Friday  (et  init  diluvium  die  Veneris)  27tfa
day  of  Rabe  1st,  which  is  29  from  Cibat  and  14  firom
Adristinich.  Between  the  deluge  and  the  first  day  of
the  year  in  which  the  Hejira  occurred  (fuerunt  ergo  inter
diluvium  et  primum  diem  anni  in  quo  fuit  Alhegira)  3837
years  and  268  days ;  which  will  be,  according  to  the  years
of  the  Persians,  3725  years  and  348  days.  And  between
the  deluge  and  the  day  of  Jesdagir  (Yezdajeed)  king  of
the  Persians,  from  the  beginning  of  whose  reign  the  Per-
sians took  their  era, . . , .  3735  years,  10  months,  and  22
days.'  The  author  proceeds  with  the  comparison  of  the
eras  of  the  Persians  and  Arabians,  and  those  of  Alex-
ander and  Philip;  and  then  concludes  the  treatise:
completi  sunt  quatuor  tractatus,  Deo  adjuvante.

Bailly's  reference  to  this  passage  is  in  the  following
words.  ^  ALBUMASARf  rapporte  que  selon  les  Indiens,  il
s'est  ecoul^  720634442715  jours  entre  le  deluge  etTepoque
de  rh^gire.  II  en  conclut,  on  ne  sait  trop  comment,  qu'il
s'est  ecoule  3725  ans  dans  cet  intervalle :  ce  qui  placeroit


*  There  is  something  wanting  in  the  number  of  years :  which  is
deficient  at  the  third  place.  Both  editions  of  the  translation  (Augs-
burg 1489,  Venice  1515)  give  the  same  words.

t  De  Magn.  Conj.  Traite  v,  au  commencement.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  507

le  deluge  3103  ans  avant  J.  C.  pr^cis^ment  k  I'epoque
cbronologique  et  astronomique  des  Indiens.  Mais  Albu-
MASAB  ne  dit  point  comment  il  est  parvenu  k  6galer  ces
deux  nombres  de  3723  ans  et  de  720634442716  jours/
Ast.  anc.  eel.  liv.  i.  §  xvii.

Now  on  this  it  is  to  be  observed,  that  Bailly  makes
the  ante-diluvian  period  between  the  Sunday  on  which  the
world  began  and  the  Friday  on  which  the  deluge  took
place,  comprising  720634442715  days,  to  be  the  same
with  the  post-diluvian  period,  from  the  deluge  to  the  Hejira ;
and  that  he  quotes  the  author,  as  unaccountably  rendering
that  number  equivalent  to  3725  years,  though  the  text
expressly  states  more  than  1900000000  years.  The  blun-
der is  the  more  inexcusable,  as  B  a  illy  himself  remark-
ed the  inconsistency,  and  should  therefore  have  re-examined
the  text  which  he  cited,  to  verify  his  quotation.

Major  WiLFORD,*  relying  on  the  correctness  of  Bail-
ly's  quotation,  concluded  that  the  en-or  originated  with
either  the  transcriber  or  translator.  But  in  fact  the  mistake
rested  solely  with  the  citer :  as  he  would  have  found  if  his
attention  had  been  drawn  to  the  more  correct  quotation  in
Anquetil  du  Pebron's  letter  prefixed  to  his  Rech.
Hist,  et  Geog.  sur  Vlnde,  inserted  in  Bernoulli's  2d
vol.  oi Desc.  de  VInde  (p.  xx).  But,  though  Anquetil  is
more  accurate  than  Bailly  in  quotation,  he  is  not  more
successful  in  his  inferences,  guesses,  and  surmises.  For
he  strangely  concludes  from  a  passage  which  distinctly
proves  the  use  of  the  great  cycle  of  the  calpa  by  the  Indian
astronomers  to  whom  Abu  Mashar  refers,  that  they  were
on  the  contrary  unacquainted  in  those  days  with  a  less
cycle,  which  is  comprehended  in  it.  So  little  did  he  un-
derstand the  Indian  periods,  that  he  infers  from  a  specified

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  X.  p.  1 17.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


608  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

number  of  elapsed  days  and  correspondent  years,  reckoned
from  the  beginning  of  the  great  cycle  which  dates  from  the
supposed  moment  of  the  commencement  of  the  world,  that
ihey  knew  nothing  of  a  subordinate  period,  which  is  one
of  the  elements  of  that  cycle.  Nor  is  he  nearer  the  truth,
but  errs  as  much  the  other  way,  in  his  conjecture,  that
the  number  of  solar  years  stated  by  Abu  Mashar  relates
to  the  duration  of  a  life  of  BraumA,  comprising  a  hundred
of  that  deity's  years.

In  short,  Anquetil's  conclusions  are  as  erroneous  as
Bailly's  premises.  The  discernment  of  Mr.  Davis,  to
whom  the  passage  was  indicated  by  Major  Wilford,
anticipated  the  correction  of  this  blunder  of  B  a  illy,  by
restoring  the  text  with  a  conjectural  emendation  worthy  of
his  sagacity.*

The  name  of  the  Indian  author  from  whom  Abu  Mashar
derived  the  particulars  which  he  has  frimished,  is  written  by
Bailly,  Kankaraf;  taken,  as  he  says,  from  an  ancient
Arabic  writer,  whose  work  is  subjoined  to  that  of  Messala,
published  at  Nuremberg  by  Joachim  Heller  in  1648.t
The  latin  translation  of  Messahala  (MA.-shAa-Allah)
was  edited  by  Joachim  Heller  at  Nuremberg  in  1649  ;
but  it  is  not  followed,  in  the  only  copy  accessible  to  me,
by  the  work  of  any  other  Arabic  author ;  and  the  quotation
consequently  has  not  been  verified.  D'Herbelot  writes
the  same  variously ;  Kankah  or  Cancah,  Kenker  or
KankaVy  and  Kengheh  or  Kanghah ;%  to  which  Reiske
and  Schultens,  from  frulher  research,  add  another  varia-


♦  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  242. Appendix  to  an  Essay  of  Major  Wil-
ford.

t  Astr.  Anc.  p.  303.

t  BihL  Or,  Art.  Cancah  al  Hendi,  and  Kenker  al  Hendi. Also
Ketab  Menazel  al  Gamar  and  Ketab  al  Keranat.


■  Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTBS  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  509

tion,  Kengch;*  which  is  not  of  Arabic  but  Persian  ortho-
graphy. Casiri^  by  a  difference  of  the  diacritical  pointy
reads  from  the  TarikhvH  hucama,  and  transcribes,  Katka.f
That  the  same  individual  is  all  along  meant,  clearly
appears  from  the  correspondence  of  the  works  ascribed  to
him :  especially  his  treatise  on  the  greater  and  less  con-
junctions of  the  planets,  which  was  imitated  by  Abu
Mashar.

Amidst  so  much  diversity  in  the  orthography  of  the
word  it  is  difficult  to  retrieve  the  original  name,  without  too
much  indulgence  in  conjecture.  Canca,  which  comes
nearest  to  the  Arabic  corruption,  is  in  Sanscrit  a  proper
name  among  other  significations ;  but  it  does  not  occur  as
the  appellation  of  any  noted  astrologer  among  the  Hindus.
Garga  does ;  and,  as  the  Arabs  have  not  the  soft  guttural
consonant,  they  must  widely  corrupt  that  sound  ;  yet  Can^
gliar  and  Cancah  seem  too  remote  from  it  to  allow  it  to  be
proposed  as  a  conjectural  restoration  of  the  Indian  name.

To  return  to  the  more  immediate  subject  of  this  note.
The  work  of  AlfazaA,  taken  from  the  Hindu  astronomy,
continued  to  be  in  general  use  among  the  Muhammedans,
until  the  time  of  AlmAm6n  ;  for  whom  it  was  epitomized
by  MuHAMMED  BEN  MusA  ol  Khuwavezmi;  and  his
abridgment  was  thenceforward  known  by  the  title  of  the
less  Sind'kind.  It  appears  to  have  been  executed  for  the
satisfaction  ofALMA.M6N  before  this  prince's  accession  to
the  khelafet,  which  took  place  early  in  the  third  century  of
the  Hejira  and  ninth  of  Christ.  The  same  author  compiled
similar  astronomical  tables  of  his  own ;  wherein  he  pro-
fessed to  amend  the Indian  tables  which  frirnished  the


•  Bibl.  Or.  (1777-79),  vol.  iv.  p.  725. Should  be  Kengeh:  a  like
error  occurs  p.  727,  where  sharchi^  put  for  shareh.
t  Bibl.  Arab.  Hisp.,  vol.  i.  p.  426.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


510  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

mean  motions ;  and  he  is  said  to  have  taken^  for  that  por^
pose,  equations  from  the  Persian  astronomy,  some  oilfa^
matters  from  Ptolemy,  and  to  have  added  something  of
his  own  on  certam  points.  His  work  is  reported  to  have
been  well  received  by  both  Hindus  and  Muhanmiedans :
and  the  greater  tables,  of  which  the  compilatioa  was
commenced  in  the  following  age,  by  Ben  al  adamI  and
completed  by  Al  Casem,  were  raised  upon  the  like  foun-
dation of  Indian  astronomy :  and  were  long  in  general  use
among  the  Arabs,  and  by  them  deemed  excellent  Anotb^
and  earlier  set  of  astronomical  tables,  founded  on  the  Indian
system  called  Sind^hind,  was  compiled  by  Habash,  an
astronomer  of  Baghdad ;  who  flourished  in  the  time  of  the
khalif  AlmAm^n.*  Several  others,  similarly  founded  on
the  mean  motions,  furnished  by  the  same  Indian  system,
were  published  in  the  third  century  of  Hejira,  or  earlier :
particularly  those  of  Fazl  ben  HAtim  Nariai;  and  Al
Hasan  ben  MisBAH.f

It  was  no  doubt  at  the  same  period,  while  the  Arabs
were  gaining  a  knowledge  of  one  of  the  Indian  systems
of  astronomy,  that  they  became  apprized  of  the  exist*
ence  of  two  others.  No  intimation  at  least  occurs  of
any  different  specific  time  or  moi-e  probable  period,  when
the  information  was  likely  to  be  obtained  by  them,  than
that  in  which  they  were  busy  with  the  Indian  astronomy,
according  to  one  of  the  three  systems  that  prevailed  among
the  Hindus ;  as  the  author  of  the  Tarikhu*l  hucamay  quoted
by  Casirt,  affirms.  The  writer,  whose  compilation  is  of
the  twelfth  century, ;{:  observes,  that  *  owing  to  the  distance

•  TdrikhuH  hucamd,  Casiri,  vol.  i.  pp.  426  and  428.  Abulfabaj,
ed.  PooocKB,  161.

t  Casiri,  vol.  1.  pp.  413  and  421.

}  He  flourished  in  595  H.  (A.  D.  1198),  as  appears  from  passaf^
of  his  work.  M.  S.  MDCCLXXIII.  Lib.  Esc.  p.  74  and  316
Casiri,  vol.  ii.  p.  332.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  611

of  countries  and  impediments  to  intercourse,  scarcely  any
of  the  writings  of  the  Hindus  had  reached  the  Arabians*
There  are  reckoned/  he  adds,  ^  three  celebrated  systems
(mazhab)  of  astronomy  among  them ;  namely  Sind  and
hind;  Arjabahar,  and  Arckajid :  *  one  only  of  which  has
been  brought  to  us,  namely,  the  Sijid-hind :  which  most  of
the  learned  Muhammedans  have  followed.'  After  naming
the  authors  of  astronomical  tables  founded  on  that  basis,
and  assigning  the  interpretation  of  the  Indian  title,  and
quoting  the  authority  of  Ben  al  AdamI,  the  compiler  of
the  latest  of  those  tables  mentioned  by  him,  he  goes  on  to  .
say,  that '  of  the  Indian  sciences  no  other  communications
have  been  received  by  us  (Arabs),  but  a  treatise  on  music,
of  which  the  title  in  Hindi  is  3iyaphar,  and  the  signi-
fication of  that  title  "  fruit  of  knowledge  ;"t  the  work
entitled  CaUlah  and  Damanah,  upon  ethics ;  and  a  book
of  numerical  computation,  which  Abu  JAfar  Muhammed
BEN  MusA  al  Khuwarezmi  amplified  {basat),  and  which
is  a  most  expeditious  and  concise  method,  and  testifies  the
ingenuity  and  acuteness  of  the  Hindus/

The  book,  here  noticed  as  a  treatise  on  ethics,  is  the
well  known  collection  of  fables  of  Pilpai  or  Bidpai  (Sans.
Vaidyapriya) ;  and  was  translated  from  the  Pehlevi  version
into  Arabic,  by  command  of  the  same  Abbaside  khalif
ALMANst]R,:{:  who  caused  an  Indian  astronomical  treatise
to  be  translated  into  the  Arabian  tongue.  The  Arabs,
however,  had  other  communications  of  portions  of  Indian
science,  which  the  author  of  the  Tarikhu*l  hucama  has  in
this  place  overlooked  ;  especially  upon  medicine,  on  which


*  GA8iRi,Tol.i.  pp.426  and  428.  The  CtiA^'/irfmicn  specifies  three
astronomical  systems  of  the  Hindus  nnder  the  same  names.
t  Sans.  VidySp'hala,  fm\X  of  science.
X  Introd.  Rem.  to  the  Hitapad^sa*  [page  16?  of  the  present  volume.]


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


512  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

many  treatises,  general  and  particular,  were  translated  from
the  Indian  tongue.  For  instance,  a  tract  upon  poisons  by
Shan  AC,  (Sansc.  Characa?)  of  which  an  Arabic  Tersion
was  made  for  the  khalif  AlmAm6n,  by  his  preceptor
Abbas  ben  SA'id  JShari.  Also  a  treatise  on  medicine  and
on  materia  medica  in  particular,  which  bears  the  name  of
Shashurd  (Sansc.  SuSruta)  :  and  numerous  others.*

The  Khuwarezmite  Muhammed  ben  Musa,  who  is
named  as  having  made  known  to  the  Arabians  the  Indian
method  of  computation,  is  the  same  who  is  recognized  by
Arabian  authors  with  almost  a  common  consent  (Zaca-
RiA  of  Casbin,  &c.)  as  the  first  who  wrote  upon  algebra.
His  competitor  for  the  honour  of  priority  is  Abu  KAmil
ShujAa  ben  Aslam,  sumamed  the  Egyptian  arithme-
tician, (Hasib  al  Misri) ;  whose  treatise  on  algebra  was
commented  by  Ali  ben  Ahmed  al  Amrani  of  MuieUa;\
and  who  is  said  by  D'Herbelot  to  have  been  the  first
among  learned  Muslemans,  that  wrote  upon  this  branch
of  mathematics4  The  commentator  is  a  writer  of  the
tenth  century ;  the  date  of  his  decease  being  recorded  as
of  344H.§  (A.D.  956).  The  age  in  which  his  author
flourished,  or  the  date  of  his  text,  is  not  furnished  by  any
authority  which  has  been  consulted ;  and  unless  some  evi-
dence be  found,  showing  that  he  was  anterior  to  the
Khuwarezmi,  we  may  abide  by  the  historical  authority  of
Zacaria  of  Casbin;  and  consider  the  Khuwarezmi  as  the

•  D'Herbrlot,  Bibl,  Orient.  Ketab  al  samoun,  Ketab  Sendha-
schat,  Ketab  al  sokkar,  Ketab  Schaschourd  al  Hendi,  Ketab  Rai  al
Hendi,  Ketab  Noufschal  al  Hendi,  Ketab  al  akakir,  &c.

t  TdrikhuH  hucamd,  Casibi,  vol,  i.  p.  410.

}  Bibl.  Orient.  482.  Also  226  and  494.  No  grounds  are  specified.
£bn  KhalcIn  and  HajI  Khalpah,  whom  he  very  commonly
follows,  have  been  searched  in  vain  for  authority  on  this  point.

§  Tar,  Casiri,  vol.  i.  p.  410.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.  513

earliest  writer  on  algebra  in  Arabic.  Next  was  the  cele-
brated Alchindus  (Abu  Yusef  AlkendO,  contemporary
with  the  astrologer  Abu  MAshab,  in  the  third  century  of
the  Hejira  and  ninth  of  the  Christian  eray"*^  an  illustrious
philosopher,  versed  in  the  sciences  of  Greece,  of  India,  and
of  Persia,  and  author  of  several  treatises  upon  numbers.  In
the  prodigious  multitude  of  his  writings,  upon  every  branch
of  science,  one  is  specified  as  a  tract  on  Indian  computation
(Hisabu'l  hindi):  others  occur  with  titles  which  are  under-
stood by  Casiri  to  relate  to  algebra,  and  to  the  *  finding
of  hidden  numbers ;'  but  which  seem  rather  to  appertain  to
other  topics.f  It  is,  however,  presumable,  that  one  of  the
works  composed  by  him  did  treat  of  algebra  as  a  branch
of  the  science  of  computation.  His  pupil,  Ahmed  ben
MuHAMMED  o(  Sarkhas  in  Persia  (who  flourished  in  the
middle  of  the  third  century  of  the  Hejira,  for  he  died  in
286  H.),  was  author  of  a  complete  treatise  of  computation
embracing  algebra  with  arithmetic.  About  the  same  time
a  treatise  of  algebra  was  composed  by  Abu  Hanifah
Dainawariy  who  lived  till  290  H.  (A.  D.  903.)

At  a  later  period  Abu'lwafA  Suzjani,  a  distinguished
mathematician,  who  flourished  in  the  fourth  century  of  the
Hejira,  between  the  years  348,  when  he  commenced  his
studies,  and  388,  the  date  of  his  demise,  composed  nume-
rous ti-acts  on  computation,  among  which  are  specified
several  commentaries  on  algebra  :  one  of  them  on  the  trea-
tise of  the  Khuwarezmite  upon  that  subject :  another  on  a
less  noticed  treatise  by  Abu  Yahya,  whose  lectures  he
had  attended  :  an  interpretation  (whether  commentary  or
paraphrase  may  perhaps  be  doubted)  of  the  work  of  Dio-
PHANTus: demonstrations  of  the  propositions  contained

•Abulfabaj;  Pococke,  p.  179.
t  TdrVchuH hucamd ;  Casiri,  vol,  i.  pp.363— 360.
VOL.  II.  2  I.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


514  ALGEBBA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

in  that  work :  a  treatise  on  niunerical  computation  in
general :  and  several  tracts  on  particular  branches  of  this
subject.*

A  question  has  been  raised,  as  just  now  hinted,  wh^her
this  writer's  interpretation  of  Diophantus  is  to  be  deemed
a  translation  or  a  commentary.  The  term  which  is  here
employed  in  the  Tarikhu'l  hucama  {tafsir,  paraphrase,)  and
that  which  Abujlfara j  uses  upon  the  same  occasion  {fagr,
interpreted,)  are  ambiguous.  Applied  to  the  relation  be-
tween works  in  the  same  language,  the  term,  no  doubt,
implies  a  gloss  or  comment ;  and  is  so  understood^  the
very  same  passage  where  an  intepretaiion  of  the  Khuwa-
rezmite's  treatise,  and  another  of  Abu  Yahya's,  were
spoken  of.  But,  where  a  difference  of  language  subsists,
it  seems  rather  to  intend  a  version,  or  at  least  a  paraphrase,
than  mere  scholia ;  and  is  employed  by  the  same  author
in  a  passage  before  cited  ,t  where  he  gives  the  Arabic  sig-
nification of  a  Hindi  term.  That  Buzjani's  performance
is  to  be  deemed  a  translation,  appears  to  be  fairly  infenible
from  the  separate  mention  of  the  demonstration  of  the  pro-
positions in  DioPHANTUs,  as  a  distinct  work:  for  the
latter  seems  to  be  of  the  nature  of  a  commentary ;  and  the
other,  consequently,  is  the  more  likely  to  have  been  a  version,
whether  literal  or  partaking  of  paraphrase.  Besides,  there
is  no  mention,  by  an  Arabian  writer,  of  an  earlier  Arabic
translation  of  Diophantus;  and  the  Buzjani  was  not
likely  to  be  the  commentator  in  Arabic  of  an  untranslated
book.  D'Herbelot  then  may  be  deemed  correct  in
naming  him  as  the  translator  of  the  arithmetics  of  Dio-
PHANTUs  ;  and  Cossali,  examining  a  like  question,  arrives
at  nearly  the  same  conclusion ;  namely,  that  the  Buzjani

•  T&tikhuH  hucamd;  Casibi,  vol.  i.  p.  433.
t  Ibid,  vol.  i.  p.  426.  Art.  Katya.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  516

was  the  translator^  and  the  earliesti  as  well  as  the  expositor^
of  DioPHANTUs. — {Orig.  delV  Alg,,  vol.i.  p.  175.)  The
version  was  probably  made  soon  after  th^  date  which
Abulfaraj  assigns  to  it,  348  H.  (A.D.  969),  which  more
properly  is  the  date  of  the  commencement  of  the  translator's
mathematical  studies.

From  all  these  facts,  joined  with  other  circumstances  to
be  noticed  in  progress  of  this  note,  it  is  inferred,  1st,  That
the  acquaintance  of  the  Arabs  with  the  Hindu  astronomy  is
traced  to  the  middle  of  the  second  century  of  the  Hejira,  in
the  reign  of  ALMANstjR,  upon  authority  of  Arabian  histo-
rians citing  that  of  the  preface  of  ancient  astronomical
tables;  while  their  knowledge  of  the  Greek  astronomy
does  not  appear  to  have  commenced  until  the  subsequent
reign  of  HAr^jn  AlrashId,  when  a  ti*anslation  of  the
Almagest  is  said  to  have  been  executed  under  the  auspices
of  the  Barmacide  Yahya  ben  KhAled,  by  Abu  H'iAn
and  Sal  A  MA,  employed  for  the  purpose.*  2dly,  That  they
were  become  conversant  in  the  Indian  method  of  numerical
computation  within  the  second  century;  that  is,  before
the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  AlmAm6n,  whose  accession
to  the  Khelafet  took  place  in  205  H.  3dly,  That  the  first
treatise  on  algebra  in  Arabic  was  published  in  his  reign;
but  their  acquaintance  with  the  work  of  Diophantus  is
not  traced  by  any  historical  fiicts  collected  firom  their  writ^
ings  to  a  period  anterior  to  the  middle  of  the  fourth  century
of  the  Hejira,  when  Abu'lwafA  Buzjani  flourished.
4thly,  That  Muhammed  ben  Musa  Khuwarezmiy  the
same  Arabic  author  who,  in  the  time  of  AlmAm6n,  and
before  his  accession,  abridged  an  earlier  astronomical  work
taken  from  the  Hindus,  and  who  published  a  treatise  on
the  Indian  method  of  numerical  computation,  is  the  first


•CasirijVoI.  i.  p. 349.
2l2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


516  AI^GEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

also  who  fiiraished  the  Arabs  with  a  knowledge  of  algebra,
upon  which  he  expressly  wrote,  and  in  that  khaliTs  reign,
as  will  be  more  particularly  shown  as  we  proceed.

A  treatise  of  algebra  bearing  his  name,  it  may  be  here
remarked,  was  in  the  hands  of  the  ItaUan  algebrakts,
translated  into  the  ItaUan  language,  not  very  long  after
the  introduction  of  the  science  into  that  country  by  Leo-
nardo of  Pisa.  It  appears  to  have  been  seen  at  a  later
period  both  by  Cardan  and  by  Bombblli.  No  manu-
script of  that  version  is,  however,  now  extant ;  or  at  least
known  to  be  so.

Fortunately,  a  copy  of  the  Arabic  original  is  preserved
in  the  Bodleian  collection.  It  is  the  manuscript  marked
CMXVIII.  Hunt.  214  folio,  and  bearing  the  date  of  the
transcription  743  H.  (A.D.  1342).  The  rules  of  the  library,
though  access  be  readily  allowed,  preclude  the  study  of
any  book  which  it  contains,  by  a  person  not  enured  to  the
temperature  of  apartments  unvisited  by  artificial  warmth.
This  impediment  to  the  examination  of  the  manuscript  in
question  has  been  remedied  by  the  assistance  of  the  under
librarian,  Mr.  Alexander  Nicoll,  who  has  furnished
ample  extracts  purposely  transcribed  by  him  from  the
manuscript.  This  has  made  it  practicable  to  ascertain  the
contents  of  the  book,  and  to  identify  the  work  as  that  in
which  the  Khuwarezmi  taught  the  principles  of  algebra;
and  consequently  to  compare  the  state  of  the  science,  as  it
was  by  him  taught,  with  its  utmost  progress  in  the  hands
of  the  Muhammedans,  as  exhibited  in  an  elementary  work
of  not  very  ancient  date,  which  is  to  this  time  studied
among  Asiatic  Muslemans.

I  allude  to  the  Khulasetu'l  hisab  of  Behau'ldIn,  an
author  who  lived  between  the  years  963  and  1031  H.  The
Arabic  text,  with  a  Persian  commentary,  has  been  printed
in  Calcutta;  and  a  summary  of  its  contents  had  been  pre-


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  517

viously  given  by  Mr.  Strachey  in  his  "  Early  History  of
Algebra,"  in  which,  as  in  his  other  exertions  for  the  inves-
tigation of  Hindu  and  Arabian  algebra,  his  zeal  surmounted
great  difficulties,  while  his  labours  have  thrown  much  light
upon  the  subject.*

The  title  page  of  the  manuscript  above  described,  as
well  as  a  marginal  note  on  it,  and  the  author's  preface,  all
concur  in  declaring  it  the  work  of  Muhammed  ben
MusA  Khuwarezmi:  and  the  mention  of  the  khalif  Alma-
m6n  in  that  preface,  establishes  the  identity  of  the  author,
whose  various  works,  as  is  learned  from  Arabian  historians,
were  composed  by  command,  or  with  encouragement,  of
that  khalif,  partly  before  his  accession,  and  partly  during
his  reign.

The  preface,  a  transcript  of  which  was  supplied  by  the
care  of  Mr.  Nicoll,  has  been  examined  at  my  request  by
Colonel  John  Baillie.  After  perusing  it  with  him,  I
am  enabled  to  affirm,  that  it  intimates  ''  encouragement
from  the  Imam  AlmAmun,  Commander  of  the  Faithful,  to
compile  a  compendious  treatise  of  calculation  by  algebra ;"
terms  which  amount  not  only  to  a  disclaimer  of  any  pre-
tentions to  the  invention  of  the  algebraic  art,  but  which
would,  to  my  apprehension,  as  to  that  of  the  distinguished
Arabic  scholar  consulted,  strongly  convey  the  idea  of  the
pre-existence  of  ampler  treatises  upon  algebra  in  the  same
language  (Arabic),  did  not  the  marginal  note  above  cited
distinctly  assert  this  to  be  ^^  the  first  treatise  composed
upon  algebra  among  the  faithful;"  an  assertion  corrobo-
rated by  the  similar  affirmation  of  Zacaria  of  Cashiny
and  other  writers  of  Arabian  history.  Adverting,  however,
to  that  express  affirmation,  the  author  must  be  here  under-

*  See  Bija  Ganita^  or  Algebra  of  the  Hindus;  London,  1813.
Hutton's  Math.  Diet  Ed.  1815,  Art.  Algebra:  and  As.  Res.,
vol.  zii.  p.  159.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


518  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

stood  as  declaring  that  he  compiled  {alaf  is  tlie  verb  used
by  him)  the  treatise  upon  algebra  from  books  in  some  other
language :  dbubtless,  then^  in  the  Indian  tongue,  as  it  has
been  already  shown  that  he  was  conversant  with  Hindu
astronomy,  and  Hindu  computation  and  account.

It  may  be  right  to  notice,  that  the  title  of  the  manuscript
denominates  the  author,  Abu  Abdullah  Muhammed
BEN  MusA  al  Khuwarezmiy  differing  in  the  first  part  of
the  name  from  the  designation  which  occurs  in  one  passage
of  the  TarikhuH  hucama,  quoted  by  Casiri,  where  the
KhuwareznA  MuHAMMkn  ben  Musa  is  called  Abu
J  A  far.*  But  that  is  not  a  sufficient  ground  for  questtoning
the  sameness  of  persons  and  genuineness  of  the  work,  as
the  Khuwdrezmi  is  not  usually  designated  by  either  of
those  additions,  or  by  any  other  of  that  nature  taken  from
the  name  of  offspring :  and  error  may  be  presumed,  mosl
probably  on  the  part  of  the  Egyptian  author  of  the  Tiai*
khu'l  hucama,  since  the  addition  which  he  introduces,  that
of  Abu  Jafah,  belongs  to  Muhammed  ben  Musa  ben
Shaker,  a  very  different  person;  as  appears  from  another
passage  of  the  same  Egyptian's  compilation.f

The  following  is  a  translation  of  the  KhuwarezmVs  direc-
tions for  the  sotntion  of  equations,  simple  and  compound,
a  topic  which  he  enters  upon  at  no  great  distance  from  die
commencement  of  the  volume,  having  first  treated  of  uni^
and  number  in  general.

^  I  found  that  the  numbers,  of  which  ^ere  is  need  in
computation  by  restoration  and  comparison,  j:  are  of  three
kinds ;  namely,  roots,  and  squares,  and  simple  number
relative  to  neither  root  nor  square.  A  root  is  the  whole  of
thing  multiplied  by  [root]  itself,  consisting  of  unity,  or

•  C.\siiti,  vol.  i.  p.  428.  t  Casiri,  vol.  i.  p.  418.

}  Hii,d!.ulj':br  iva  al  miikalnlnh.


"Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  519

numberB  ascending,  or  fractions  descending.  A  square  is
the  whole  amount  of  root  multiplied  into  itself;  and  simple
number  is  the  whole  that  is  denominated  by  the  number,
without  reference  to  root  or  square.

^  Of  these  three  kinds,  which  are  equal,  some  to  some,
the  cases  are  these :  for  instance,  you  say  '^  squares  are
equal  to  roots ;"  and  **  squares  are  equal  to  numbers ;"  and
"  roots  are  equal  to  numbers."

'  As  to  the  case  in  which  squares  are  equal  to  roots ;  ((X
example,  *'  a  square  is  equal  to  five  roots  of  the  same :"
the  root  of  the  square  is  five;  and  the  square  is  twenty-five :
and  that  is  equivalent  tp  five  times  its  root.

'  So  you  say  **  a  third  of  the  square  is  equal  to  four
roots:"  the  whole  square  then  is  equal  to  twelve  roots;
and  that  is  a  hundred  and  forty-four;  its  root  is  twelve.

^  Another  example :  you  say  '^  five  squares  are  equal  to
ten  roots."  Then  one  square  is  equal  to  two  roots :  and
the  root  of  the  square  is  two ;  and  the  square  is  four.

^  In  like  manner,  whether  the  squares  be  many  or  few,
they  are  reduced  to  a  single  square :  and  as  much  is  done
to  the  equivalent  in  roots ;  reducing  it  to  the  like  of  that  to
which  the  square  has  been  brought.

'  Case  in  which  squares  are  equal  to  numbers :  for  in-
stance, you  say,  "  the  square  is  equal  to  nine."  Then  that
is  the  square,  and  the  root  is  three.  And  you  say,  ^'  five
squares  are  equal  to  eighty :"  then  one  square  is  a  fifth  of
eighty ;  and  that  is  sixteen.  And,  if  you  say,  ^^  the  half
of  the  square  is  equal  to  eighteen:"  then  the  square  is
equal  to  thirty-six ;  and  its  root  is  six.

'  In  like  manner,  with  all  squares  affirmative  and  nega-
tive, you  reduce  them  to  a  single  square.  If  there  be
less  than  a  single  square,  you  add  thereto,  until  the  square
be  quite  complete.  Do  as  much  with  the  equivalent  in
numbers.


Digitized  by  LjOOQ IC


520  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

*  Case  in  which  roots  are  equal  to  number  :  for  instance,
you  say  "  the  root  equals  three  in  number."  Then  the
root  is  three ;  and  the  square,  which  is  raised  therefrom,  is
nine.  And,  if  you  say  "  four  roots  are  equal  to  twenty;"
then  a  single  root  is  equal  to  five ;  and  the  square,  that  is
raised  therefirom,  is  twenty-five.  And,  if  you  say  "  the  half
of  the  root  is  equal  to  ten : "  then  the  [whole]  root  is  equal
to  twenty ;  and  the  square,  which  is  raised  therefrom,  is
four  hundred.

*  I  found  that,  with  these  three  kinds,  namely,  roots,
squares,  and  number  compound,  there  will  be  three  com-
pound sorts  [of  equation]  ;  that  is,  square  and  roots  equal
to  number ;  squares  and  number  equal  to  roots ;  and  roots
and  number  equal  to  squares.

*  As  for  squares  and  roots,  which  are  equal  to  niunber :
for  example,  you  say  '^  square,  and  ten  roots  of  the  same,
amount  to  the  sum  of  thirty-nine."  Then  the  solution  of
it  is  :  you  halve  the  roots ;  and  that  in  the  present  instance
yields  five.  Then  you  multiply  this  by  its  like,  and  the
product  is  twenty-five.  Add  this  to  thirty-nine :  the  simi
is  sixty-four.  Then  take  the  root  of  this,  which  is  eight,
and  subtract  from  it  half  the  roots,  namely,  five;  the
remainder  is  three.  It  is  the  root  of  the  square  which  you
I'equired ;  and  the  square  is  nine.

'  In  like  manner,  if  two  squares  be  specified,  or  three,
or  less,  or  more,  reduce  them  to  a  single  square;  and
reduce  the  roots  and  number  therewith  to  the  like  of  that
to  which  you  reduced  the  square.

'  For  example,  you  say  **  two  squares  and  ten  roots  are
equal  to  forty-eight  dirhems  ;^*  and  the  meaning  is,  any
two  [such]  squares,  when  they  are  summed,  and  unto  them
is  added  the  equivalent  of  ten  times  the  root  of  one  of
them,  amount  to  the  total  of  forty-eight  dirhems.  Then
you  must  reduce  the  two  squares  to  a  single  square :  and


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  621

assuredly  you  know,  that  one  of  two  squares  is  a  moiety
of  both.  Then  reduce  the  whole  thing  in  the  instance  to
its  half:  and  it  is  as  much  as  to  say,  a  square  and  five
roots  are  equal  to  twenty-four  dirhems ;  and  the  meaning
is,  any  [such]  square,  when  five  of  its  roots  are  added  to
it,  amounts  to  twenty-four.  Then  halve  the  roots,  and
the  moiety  is  two  and  a-half.  Multiply  that  by  its  like,
and  the  product  is  six  and  a-quarter.  Add  this  to  twenty-
four,  the  sum  is  thirty  dirhems  and  a-quarter.  Extract
the  root,  it  is  five  and  a-half.  Subtract  firom  this  the
moiety  of  the  roots;  that  is,  two  and  a-half:  the  remain-
der is  three.  It  is  the  root  of  the  square  :  and  the  square
is  nine.

'  In  Uke  manner,  if  it  be  said  ''  half  of  the  square  and
five  roots  are  equal  to  twenty-eight  dirhems  ;"  it  signifies,
that,  when  you  add  to  the  moiety  of  any  [such]  square  the
equivalent  of  five  of  its  roots,  the  amount  is  twenty-eight
dirhems.  Then  you  desire  to  complete  your  square  so  as
it  shall  amount  to  one  whole  square ;  that  is,  to  double  it.
ITierefore  double  it,  and  double  what  you  have  with  it ;  as
well  as  what  is  equal  thereunto.  Then  a  square  and  ten
roots  are  equal  to  fifty-six  dirhems.  Add  half  the  roots
multipUed  by  itself,  twenty-five,  to  fifty-six  ;  and  the  sum
is  eighty-one.  Extract  the  root  of  this,  it  is  nine.  Sub-
tract firom  this  the  moiety  of  the  roots  ;  that  is,  five :  the
remainder  is  four.  It  is  the  root  of  the  square  which  you
required :  and  the  square  is  sixteen ;  and  its  moiety  is
eight.

*  Proceed  in  like  manner  with  all  that  comes  of  squares
and  roots ;  and  what  number  equals  them.

'  As  for  squares  and  number,  which  are  equal  to  roots ;
for  example,  you  say,  "  a  square  and  twenty-one  are  equal
to  ten  of  its  roots :"  the  meaning  of  which  is,  any  [such]
square,  when  twenty-one  dirhems  are  added  to  it,  amounts


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


622  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS

to  what  is  the  equivalent  of  ten  roots  of  that  square :  then
the  solution  is,  halve  the  roots;  and  the  moiety  is  five*
Multiply  this  by  itself;  the  product  is  twenty-five.  Then
subtract  from  it  twenty-one,  the  number  specified  with  the
square :  the  remainder  is  four.  Extract  its  root ;  which  is
two.  Subtract  this  from  the  moiety  of  the  roots ;  that  is,
from  five  :  the  remainder  is  thi*ee.  It  is  the  root  of  the
square  which  you  required :  and  the  square  is  nine.  Or,
if  you  please,  you  may  add  the  root  to  the  moiety  of  the
roots :  the  sum  is  seven.  It  is  the  root  of  the  square
which  you  required  ;  and  the  square  is  forty-nine.

'  When  a  case  occurs  to  you  which  you  hsiag  under  this
head,  try  its  answer  by  the  sum :  and,  if  that  do  not
serve,  it  certainly  will  by  the  difference.  This  head  is
wrought  both  by  the  sum  and  by  the  difierence.  Not  so
either  of  the  others  of  three  cases  requiring  for  theii*  solu-
tion tliat  the  root  be  halved.  And  know,  that,  under  this
head,  when  the  roots  have  been  halved,  and  the  moiety
has  been  multiplied  by  its  like,  if  the  amount  of  the  pro-
duct be  less  than  the  dirkems  which  are  with  the  square,
then  the  instance  is  impossible  :  and,  if  it  be  equal  to  the
dirhems  between  them,  the  root  of  the  square  is  like  the
moiety  of  the  roots,  without  either  addition  or  subtrac-
tion.

*  In  every  instance  where  you  have  two  squares,  or  more
or  less,  reduce  to  a  single  square,  as  I  explained  under
the  first  head.

'  As  for  roots  and  number,  which  are  equal  to  squares  :
for  example,  you  say,  "  three  roots  and  four  in  number
are  equal  to  a  square  :*'  the  solution  of  it  is,  halve  the
roots:  and  the  moiety  will  be  one  and  a-half.  Multiply
this  by  its  like,  [the  product  is  two  and  a-quarter.  Add  it
to  four,  the  sum  is  six  and  a-quartcr.  Extract  the  root,
which  is  two  and  a-half. To  this  add  the  moiety  of  the


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  623

roots:  the  sum  is  four.  It  is  the  root  of  the  square
which  you  required  :  and  the  square  is  sixteen.]'

The  author  returns  to  the  subject  in  a  distinct  chapter,
which  is  entitled  ''  On  the  six  cases  of  Algebra."  A  short
extract  from  it  may  suffice.

'  The  first  of  the  six  cases.  For  example,  you  say,
''  you  divide  ten  into  two  parts,  and  multiply  one  of  the
two  parts  by  the  other :  then  you  multiply  one  of  them  by
itself,  and  the  product  of  this  multiplication  into  itself  is
equal  to  four  times  that  of  one  of  the  parts  by  the  other."

*  Solution.  Make  one  of  the  two  parts  thiTig,  and  the
other  ten  less  thing :  then  multiply  thing  by  ten  less  things
and  the  product  will  be  ten  things  less  a  square.  Multiply
by  (bur ;  for  you  said  ''  four  times :"  it  will  be  four  times
the  product  of  one  pail  by  the  other ;  that  is,  forty  things
less  four  squares.  Now  multiply  thin^  by  things  which
is  one  of  the  parts  by  itself:  the  result  is,  square  equal
to  forty  things  less  four  squares.  Then  restore  it  in  the
four  squares,  and  add  it  to  the  one  square.  There  will  be
forty  things  equal  to  five  squares ;  and  a  single  square  is
equal  to  eight  roots.  It  is  sixty-four;  and  its  root  is
eight :  and  that  is  one  of  the  two  parts,  which  was  multi-
plied into  itself:  and  the  remainder  of  ten  is  two ;  and  that
is  the  other  part.  Thus  has  this  instance  been  solved  under
one  of  the  six  heads  :  and  that  is  the  case  of  squares  equal
to  roots.

*  The  second  case.  "  You  divide  ten  into  two  parts,
and  multiply  the  amount  of  a  part  into  itself.  Then  multi-
ply ten  into  itself;  and  the  product  of  this  multiplication  of
ten  into  itself,  is  equivalent  to  twice  the  product  of  the  part
taken  into  itself,  and  seven-ninths :  or  it  is  equivalent  to
six  times  and  a-quarter  the  product  of  the  other  part  taken
into  itself."

^  Solution. Make  one  of  the  parts  things  and  the  other


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


524  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

ten  less  thing.  Then  you  multiply  thing  into  itself:  it  is  a
square.  Next  by  two  and  seven-ninths :  the  product  will
be  two  squares,  and  seven-ninths  of  a  square.  Then  mul-
tiply ten  into  itself,  and  the  product  is  a  hundred.  Reduce
it  to  a  single  square,  the  result  is  nine  twenty-fifths ;  that
is,  a  fifth  and  four-fifths  of  a  fifth.  Take  a  fifth  of  a  hun-
dred and  four-fifths  of  a  fifUi ;  the  quotient  is  thirty-six,
which  is  equal  to  one  square.  Then  extract  the  root,  which
is  six.  It  is  one  of  the  two  parts ;  and  the  other  is  un-
doubtedly four.  Thus  you  solve  this  instance  under  one  of
the  six  heads :  and  that  is  '^  squares  equal  to  number."  *

These  extracts  may  serve  to  convey  an  adequate  notion
of  the  manner  in  which  Khuwarezmi  conducts  the  reso-
lution of  equations  simple  and  compound,  and  the  investi-
gation of  problems  by  their  means.  If  a  comparison  be
made  with  the  Khulasetu'l  hisdb,  of  which  a  summary  by
Mr.  Strachey  will  be  found  in  the  Researches  of  the
Asiatic  Society,"*^  it  may  be  seen  that  the  algebraic  art  has
been  nearly  stationary  in  the  hands  of  the  Muhammedans,
firom  the  dajrs  of  Muhammed  o{  Khuwarezmf  to  those
of  BehAu'ldIn  o{  AamulyX  notwithstanding  the  interme-
diate study  of  the  arithmetics  of  Diophantus,  translated
and  expounded  by  Muhammed  of  Buzjan.  Neither  that
comparison,  nor  the  exclusive  consideration  of  the  Khu*
warezmVs  performance,  leads  to  any  other  conclusion,  than,
as  before  intimated,  that,  being  conversant  with  the  sciences
of  the  Hindus,  especially  with  their  astronomy  and  their
method  of  numerical  calculation,  and  being  the  author
of  the  earliest  Arabic  treatise  on  algebra,  he  must  be
deemed  to  have  learnt  from  the  Hindus  the  resolution  of
simple  and  quadratic  equations,  or,  in  short,  algebra,  a
branch  of  their  art  of  computation.

•  Vol.  xii.  +  On  the  Oxus.

X  A  district  of  Syria;  not  Amal^  a  town  in  Khurasan. Com.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  525

The  conclusion,  at  which  we  have  arrived,  may  be
strengthened  by  the  coincident  opinion  of  Cossali,  who,
after  diligent  research  and  ample  disquisition,  comes  to
the  following  result*

'  Concerning  the  origin  of  algebra  among  the  Arabs,
what  is  certain  is,  that  Muhammed  ben  Musa^  the  Khu-
warezmite,  first  taught  it  to  them.  The  Casbinian,  a  writer
of  authority,  affirms  it ;  no  historical  fact,  no  opinion,  no
reasoning,  opposes  it.

^  There  is  nothing  in  history  respecting  Muhammed
BEN  MusA  individually,  which  favours  the  opinion,  that  he
took  from  the  Greeks  the  algebra  which  he  taught  to  the
Muhammedans.

^  History  presents  in  him  no  other  than  a  mathematician,
of  a  country  most  distant  from  Greece  and  contiguous  to
India,  skilled  in  the  Indian  tongue,  fond  of  Indian  mat-
ters, which  he  translated,  amended,  epitomized,  adorned  :
and  he  it  was,  who  was  the  first  instructor  of  the  Muham-
medans in  the  algebraic  art.t

*  Not  having  taken  algebra  from  the  Greeks,  he  must
have  either  invented  it  himself,  or  taken  it  firom  the  Indians.
Of  the  two,  the  second  appears  to  me  the  most  probable.'J


O.

Communication  of  the  Hindus  with  Western  Nations  on
Astrology  and  Astronomy,

The  position,  that  Astrology  is  partly  of  foreign  growth
in  India;  that  is,  that  the  Hindus  have  borrowed,  and
largely  too,  firom  the  astrology  of  a  more  western  region,

•  OHsf.  delP  Alg,,  vol.  i.  p.  216. t  Ong.  delP  Alg.,  vol.  i.  p.  219.
X  See  his  reasons  at  large.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


526  ALGEBRA OF  THE  HINDUS.

is  grounded^  as  the  similar  inference  concemiDg  a  different
branch  of  divination,*  on  the  resemblance  o#  certain  terms
employed  in  both.  The  n^ode  of  divination,  called  Tajaca,
implies  by  its  very  name  its  Arabian  origin.  Astrological
prediction  by  configuration  of  planets,  in  like  manner,
indicates  even  by  its  Indian  name  a  Grecian  source.  It  is
denominated  H6ra,  the  second  of  three  branches  which
compose  a  complete  course  of  astronomy  and  astrol<^  :f
and  the  word  occurs  in  this  sense  in  the  writings  of  early
Hindu  astrologers.  VarAhamihira,  whose  name  stands
high  in  this  class  of  writers,  has  attempted  to  supply  a
Sanscrit  etymology;  and  in  his  treatise  on  casting  nativities
derives  the  word  from  Ahdratra,  day  and  night,  a  nycthe-
meron.  This  formation  of  a  word  by  dropping  both  the
first  and  last  syllables,  is  not  conformable  to  the  analogies
of  Sanscrit  etymology.  It  is  more  natural^  then,  to  look
for  the  origin  of  the  term  in  a  foreign  tongue  :  and  that  is
presented  by  the  Greek  wfa  and  its  derivative  wfo^wTtf^,
an  astrologer,  and  especially  one  who  considers  the  natal
kaur,  and  hence  predicts  events.j;  The  same  term  hSra
occurs  again  in  the  writings  of  the  Hindu  astrologers,  with
an  acceptation  (that  of  hour|)  which  more  exactly  con-
forms to  the  Grecian  etymon.

The  resemblance  of  a  single  term  would  not  suffice  to
ground  an  inference  of  common  origin,  since  it  might  be
purely  accidental.  But  other  words  are  also  remarked  in
Hindu  astrology,  which  are  evidently  not  Indian.  An  in-
stance of  it  is  drishcanaj  ||  used  in  the  same  astrological
sense  with  the  Greek  iiKavo$  and  Latin  decanus:  words,
which,  notwithstanding  their  classic  sound,  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  of  foreign  origin  (Chaldean  or  Egyptian)  in  the

•  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p.  366.  [p,  363  of  the  present  volume.]

t  See  note  K. J  Hesych.  and  Suid. §  As.  Res.,  vol.  v.  p.  107.

11  As.  Res.,  vol.  ix.  p  367. [p.  364  of  the  present  volume.]


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  627

classic  languages,  at  least  with  this  acceptation.  The
term  is  assuredly  not  genuine  Sanscrit :  and  hence  it  was
before*  inferred,  that  the  particular  astrological  doctrine,
to  which  it  belongs,  is  exotic  in  India.  It  appears,  how-
ever, that  this  division  of  the  twelve  zodiacal  signs  into
three  portions  each,  with  planets  governing  them,  and
pourtrayed  figures  representing  them,  is  not  implicitly  the
same  among  the  Hindu  astrologers,  which  it  was  among
the  Chaldeans,  with  whom  the  Egyptians  and  Persians
coincided.  Variations  have  been  noticed.f  Other  points
of  difference  are  specified  by  the  astrologer  of  Balkh;X
and  they  concern  the  allotment  of  planets  to  govern  the
decani  and  drishcanaSf  and  the  figures  by  which  they  are
represented.  Abu  Mashar  is  a  writer  of  the  ninth  cen-
^u^  >^  ^i^d  his  notice  of  this  astrological  division  of  the
zodiac  as  received  by  Hindus,  Chaldeans,  and  Egyptians,
confirms  the  fact  of  an  earlier  communication  between  the
Indians  and  the  Chaldeans,  perhaps  the  Egyptians,  on  the
subject  of  it.

With  the  sexagesimal  firacUons,  the  introduction  of  which
is  by  Wallis  ascribed  to  Ptolemy  among  the  Greeks,  ||
the  Hindus  have  adopted  for  the  minute  of  a  degi-ee,  be-
sides a  term  of  their  own  language,  cala^  one  taken  from
the  Greek  ^£9r7a  scarcely  altered  in  the  Sanscrit  lipta.
The  term  must  be  deemed  originally  Greek,  rather  than
Indian,  in  that  acceptation,  as  it  there  corresponds  to  an
adjective  xstTo^y  slender,  minute:  an  import  which  pre-
cisely agrees  with  the  Sanscrit  cala  and  Arabic  dakiky  fine,

•  As.  Re8.,  vol.  ix.  p.  36?  &  372.  f  p.  364  of  the  present  volume.]
V  i  de  S  A  L  M.  Exerc,  Flin .
t  Ibid.f  vol.  ix.  p.  374.  [p.  371  of  the  present  volume.]
X  Lib.  intr.  in  Ast  Albumasis  Abalachi,  pp.  5,  12  and  13.
§  Died  in  272  H.(885  C.)  aged  a  hundred.
II  Wallis,  Alg,  c.  7.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ iC


528  ALGEBRA  OF  THE HINDUS.

minute ;  whence^  in  these  languages  respectiYely,  cala  and
dakik  for  a  roinute  of  a  degree.  But  the  meanings  otlipta
in  Sanscrit^  are,  1st,  smeared;  2d,  infected  with  poison ;
3d,  eaten :  and  its  derivative  liptaca  signifies  a  poisoned
arrow;  being  derived  from  lipy  to  smear:  and  the  dic-
tionaries give  no  interpretation  of  the  word  that  has  any
a£Snity  with  its  special  acceptation  as  a  technical  term  in
astronomy  and  mathematics.  Yet  it  occurs  so  employed
in  the  work  of  BRAHMEGUPTA.f

By  a  different  analogy  of  the  sense  and  not  the  sound,
the  Greek  ^r^o,  a  part,  and  specially  a  degree  of  a  circle,
is  in  Sanscrit  ansa,  bhaga,  and  other  synonyma  of  part,
applied  emphatically  in  technical  language  to  the  360th
part  of  the  periphery  of  a  circle.  The  resemblance  of  the
radical  sense,  in  the  one  instance,  tends  to  corroborate  the
inference  from  the  similarity  of  sound  in  the  other.

Cendra  is  used  by  Brahmegupta  and  the  Surya  sid-
dkantOy  as  well  as  other  astronomical  writers  (BhAs-
CARA,  &c.),  and  by  the  astrologers  VarAhamthira  and
the  rest,  to  signify  the  equation  of  the  centre.^  The  same
term  is  employed  in  the  Indian  mensuration  for  the  centre
of  a  circle  ;^  also  denoted  by  madhya,  middle.  It  comes
so  near  in  sound,  as  in  signification,  to  the  Greek  Msyrpov,
that  the  inference  of  a  common  origin  for  these  words  is
not  to  be  avoided.  But  in  Sanscrit  it  is  exclusively  tech-
nical ;  it  is  unnoticed  by  the  vocabularies  of  the  language ;
and  it  is  not  easily  traced  to  a  Sanscrit  root*.  In  Greek,  on
the  contrary,  the  correspondent  term  was  borrowed  in  ma-
thematics from  a  familiar  word  signifying  a  goad,  spur,
thorn,  or  point ;  and  derived  from  a  Greek  theme  utvlU.

•  Am,  C6sk.  t  C.  i,  §  6,  et  passim,

%  Brahm,  siddh,  c.'2.  Sdr,  siddh,  c,  2. Vr^hai  and  La^?iu  Jdiacas,

§  S4r.  on  LU.  §  207.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  JLLUSTRAT10N8.  629

The  other  term^  which  has  been  mentioned  as  commonly
used  for  the  centre  of  a  circle,  namely,  medhya,  middle,  is
one  of  the  numerous  instances  of  radical  and  primary  ana-
logy between  the  Sanscrit  and  the  Latin  and  Greek  lan-
guages. It  is  a  common  word  of  the  ancient  Indian
tongue ;  and  is  cleai'Iy  the  same  with  the  Latin  medius ;
and  serves  to  shew  that  the  Latin  is  nearer  to  the  ancient
pronunciation  of  Greek,  than  fxscroq ;  from  which  Sipon-
TIN  us*  derives  it,  but  which  must  be  deemed  a  corrupted
or  softened  utterance  of  an  ancient  term  coming  nearer  to
the  Sanscrit  medhyas  and  Latin  medius.

On  a  hasty  glance  over  Hiejatacas,  or  Indian  treatises
upon  horoscopes,  several  other  terms  of  the  art  have  been
noticed,  which  are  not  Sanscrit,  but  apparently  barbarian.
For  instance,  anap/ia,  sunapha,  durudkara,  and  c6ma'
dr?ima,  designating  certain  configurations  of  the  planets.
They  occur  in  both  the  treatises  of  VarAhamihira  ;
and  a  passage,  relative  to  this  subject,  is  among  those
quoted  from  the  abridgment  by  the  scholiast  of  the  greater
treatise,  and  verified  in  the  text  of  the  less.f  The  affi-
nity of  those  terms  to  words  of  other  languages  used  in  a
similar  astrological  sense,  has  not  been  traced ;  for  want,
perhaps,  of  competent  acquaintance  with  the  terminology
of  that  silly  art.  But  it  must  not  be  passed  unremarked,
that  Varahamihira,  who  has  in  another  place  praised
^eYavanas  for  their  proficiency  in  astrology  (or  astronomy,
for  the  term  is  ambiguous,)  frequently  quotes  them  in  his
great  treatise  on  horoscopes;  and  his  scholiast  marks  a
distinction  between  the  ancient  YavaTias,  whom  he  cha-


•  Pybbhi  Pbbotti,  Epincopi  Siponiiniy  Cornucopia  sive  LingiuB
Latina  CommetUarii,  col.  1019.  edit.  Aid.  1527-  fol.

t  See  p.  483. Another  passage  so  quoted  and  verified  uses  the
term  ccndrn  in  the  sense  above-mentioned.

VOL.  II.  2 M


Digitized  by  VjOOQ iC


630  ALGEBRA  OF  THE  HINDUS.

racterizes  as  ''  a  race  of  barbarians  conversant  with  {h6ra)
horoscopes/'  and  a  known  Sanscrit  author  bearing  the  title
of  YAVANfeswARA,  whosc  work  he  had  seen  and  repeat-
edly cites ;  but  the  writings  and  doctrine  of  the  ancient
Yavanas,  he  acknowledges,  had  not  been  seen  by  him,  and
were  known  to  him  only  by  this  writer's  and  his  own
author's  references.

No  argument,  bearing  upon  the  point  under  consideration,
is  built  on  BhAscara's  use  of  the  woi*d  dramma  for  the
value  of  sixty-four  cowry-shells  (^Lil.  §  2)  in  place  of  the
proper  Sanscrit  term  pramanay  which  SrIdhara  and
other  Hindu  authors  employ  ;  nor  on  the  use  of  dinaray  for
a  denomination  of  money,  by  the  schoUast  of  Brahme-
gupta  (12.  §  12)  who  also,  like  BhAscara,  employs  the
first  mentioned  word  (12.  §  14) :  though  the  one  is  clearly
analogous  to  the  Greek  drachmay  a  word  of  undoubted
Grecian  etymology,  being  derived  from  ifdHrofjicu ;  and  the
other  apparently  is  so,  to  the  Roman  denariusy  which  has
a  Latin  derivation.  The  first  has  not  even  the  Sanscrit
air ;  and  is  evidently  an  exotic,  or,  in  short,  a  barbarous
term.  It  was  probably  received  mediately  through  the
Muhammedans,  who  have  their  dirhem  in  the  Uke  sense.
The  other  is  a  genuine  Sanscrit  word,  of  which  the  ety-
mology, presenting  the  sense  of  '  splendid,'  is  consistent
with  the  several  acceptations  of  a  specific  weight  of  gold  ;
a  golden  ornament  or  breast-piece ;  and  gold  money :  all
which  senses  it  bears,  according  to  the  ancient  vocabularies
of  the  language.*

The  similarity  seems  then  to  be  accidental  in  this  in-
stance ;  and  the  Muhammedans,  who  have  also  a  Uke  term,
may  have  borrowed  it  on  either  hand ;  not  improbably
from  the  Hindus,  as  the  dinar  of  the  Arabs  and  Persians  is

•  Amera  coshay  &c.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


NOTES  AND  ILLUSTRATIONS.  631

a  gold  coin  like  the  Indian ;  while  the  Roman  denarius  is
properly  a  silver  one.  D'Herbelot  assigns  as  a  reason
for  deriving  the  Arabic  dinar  from  the  Roman  denarius^
that  this  was  of  gold.  The  nummus  aureus  sometimes  had
that  designation;  and  we  read  in  Roman  authors  of  golden
as  well  as  silver  denarii.*  But  it  is  needless  to  multiply
references  and  quotations  to  prove,  that  the  Roman  coin  of
that  name  was  primaiily  silver,  and  so  denominated  because
it  was  equal  in  value  to  ten  copper  a$;t  that  it  was  all
along  the  name  of  a  silver  coin  \%  and  was  still  so  under
the  Greek  empire,  when  the  Jwafiov  was  the  hundredth
part  of  a  large  silver  coin  termed  afyvpov^*%

•  Plin.  33.  §  13,  and  37.  §  3. Petron.  Satyr.  106. 160.

t  Plin.  33.  §  13.,  Vitb.  3.  1.,  Volus.  M^boianus,  Didymus.

I  ViTB.  and  Vol.  M^bc. §  Epiphanius,  cum  multis  aliis.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDEX.


A.
Abacus^  page  489.
Abbaci,  Liber,  435,  499.
Abdullah  ben  Mukapfa,  167)

171.
Abharana,  49,  323.
Abhidh&na,  52.
Abhidh6na  chintdmahi,  206.
Abhidhdnaratndvati,  58.
Abhijit,  341,  358.
Abhimanyu,  198.
Abhinanday  55.

AbhINAVA  SlOAflYANA, 44.

Abhira,  156,  184.

Abhiji  dialect,  68.

Abraham  ben  Esba,  383.

Abu  Hanipah  Daindwari,  513.

Abu  HiIn,  515.

Abu  HisIn,  348.

Abu KImil  ShujIa bkn As-

LAM,  512.
Abu'lfazl,  167,  168,  198.
Abu'lmala,  167,  168.
Abu  Mashab,  505,  &c.  *627.
Abu  Yahya,  445,  513.
Abu  Yusbf  al  Kbnd!,  513.
Achaladhr^ti,  155,  162.
Ac'hydnaci,  124,  160,  164.

ACUYUTA  JALLACf, 18.
AtHVUTA UPADHYAYA, 55^

Acntty  163.


Acshara  chhcmdaSf  158.

Acshara  panciiy  153,  158.

Adhydtma  RdmdyafMy  101.

Adtswara,  187.

Adivipuld,  154.

Adfr^tanaydy  163.

AgamOy  178.

Agastya, a  star,  349, 352, &c.

464,  466.
Agniy  a  star,  352,  353.
Agnipurdhay  64.
Ahdrica,  194.
Ahmed  ben  Muhammbd  of  Stir-

khas,  513.
Ahtaiy  304.
Ajaya,  59.
Ajita,  208.
Akhbiyahy  342.
Akhldki  Hindiy  173.
Albatbonius  (Al  BatanI)  384,

412.
Albumasab,  506.
Alohindus,  513,
Aldebardfiy  331.
Alfa  roan!,  384.
AlfasarI,  504,  509.
Algebra  of  the  Hindus,  417,  &c. ;

of  the  Greeks,  432,  &c. 442,

491 ;  of  the  Arabs,  504,  &c.;

of  the  early  Italians,  486,  &c.
Alhazkn  ben  Yusef,  348.  *


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


634


INDEX.


Ali-iWiiyahs,  225,  226.
Al!  MuetezI,  226,  227.
ALf  Ullah,  226,  227.
J//o^'t,203.
Almagest,  347,  &c.
Alm1m(^n,  444,  471,  509,  51?.
Alman8(^b,  444,  471,  504,  511,

515.
AlbU,  161.
Apaiahpanctiy  153.
Alphonsine  Tables,  384.
Amar&vatif  453.
Amabu,  95.
Amabu  6ataca,  95.
AmbashVha,  180.
Amera  cbsha^  17»  50,  &c.
Ambba  datta,  59.
Amera  mdid,  17,  59.
Ameba  sinha,  6,  16,  20,  39,  50,

184.
AmgdcK'hi,  279.
AmIbkhan  An  jam,  23.
Amitaoati,  53,  462,  463.
Amritadhdrd,  165.
Amritagatif  159.
Amritamatiy  159.
Inanda  laharl,  114.
AnofngacfhSlay  87, 1  hh,
Anangasic*hara,  164.
Anap'Jia,  529.
Anavasdtdy  160.

Atucdrfha  dkwam  manjariy  20.
Anga,  179,  218.
Am  01 B  AS,  197.
Angirasa  family,  305.
Ama,  375.
Antarbedy  34.
ArUyavipuld^  154.
Anubandha,  37.


AnubhOti  8wab6pIcuIbya,  44.
AnuciUd,  160.
AnugUi,  154.
Anurddhay  339,  363.
AnusMubh,  118,141,152,159,
^ntt«Ah«6As^cff,  119.
winto^rt  Suhaili,  167,  &c.
Apabkrama  dialect,  2,  32,  67.
Apdmvatsa,  star,  352.
Apardjitd,  161.
Apardnticdy  79, 155.
Aparavactrd,  124, 164,
ijDdtf ,  a  star,  352,  353.
Apatdiica,  78, 155.
ApavdhOy  164,
V<^,  165.
Api§ALf,  6,  39,  48.
Apollonius,  502.
Apyayya,  174.
Arabs, their diYisions of the

zodiac,  322,  &c.;  their  theory

of  the  motion  of  planets,  412 ;

their  algebra,  433, 444,  504,

512.
Area,  484,  485.
Area  siddhdnta,  485,  505.
Arcand,  428,  484,  485.
Abchimedes,  347,  442,  443.
Ardha  mdgadliiy  67.
Ardha  rdtrica,  427.
Ardha  slbca,  70.
Ardrd,  3?2,  363.
Arghya,  304.
Arhait,  206,  207.
Arhatas,  219.
Afyabahar,  427,  47  \.
Abjuna,  83,  &c.
Armillary  sphere,  345,  &c.
Arna,  130,  164.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


IN  DEX.


636


Ar^ava,  130, 164.

Arrian,  his  account  of  the  In-
dian sages,  200,  &c.

AruHadatta,  59.

Aryd,  72,  89, 153.

ARyABHA«A,  378, 382, 386, 392,
422,  467,  471.

ArydffUi,  73,75,154.

ArydshfoMOta,  378,  386,  467.

Iryavarta,  219, 234.

Arzael,  383.

Asamb&dhd,  161.

Ashaahd,  157,  340.

Ashtddhydya,  40.

AsKH,  162.

Ashrdt,  329.

AiUshd,  334,  355,  363,  381,  387,
465,  474.

Aibca  manjariy  164.

Asp'huta,  325,  406.

Asp^hufa  sara,  406.

Asidra  pancti,  153.

Astronomical  notions  of  the
JaifMS,  223,  393.

Astronomy,  Sanscrit  works  on,
323,  &c.

AsubOdha,  48.

Aiwagatiy  162.

Aswahlita,  163.

AiwALATANA,  108.

Aswaldyana  idc*hd,  305.
Aiwanihandhica,  245.
^woini,  328,  363,  425,  463.
At  A  Ullah  RASHfnf,  454.
AfhiUdy  156.
AticriH,  164.
AUdhriti,  163.
AHjagatly  160.
^^t/i;^<i,  156.
Atipddanivr>tt  gdyatriy  152.


^/trttc^i>4,  88, 155, 161.

Atisaccari,  161.

Atiiayaniy  162.

Atisimdard,  162.

Atr^ta,  48.

Atyashti,  162.

Auddrica,  194.

Audayaca,  427.

Aupachhandasica,  78, 80, 83, 155,

164, 165.
Avalambaca,  157.
Avantif  67.
Avanticd  dialect,  67.
AvasarpiM  age,  207,  215.
Avasafhica,  305.
Avitat'ha,  148,162.
Awwd,  337.
Ayana,  375.
-4y4r  ddnishf  167.
iyiw  -r^c^cH,  198,  287.
Aybgava^  183.
AzBM  ShIh,  23.
Azemshdhi,  23.

B.

fia^/^ca  &^<^^a,  68.
BahrIm  Shah,  I67.
Bdhuvdna  tribe,  236.
^aiW^a,  180.

Baidya  nat'ha,  14,41,  42,  43.
5fl/<i,341.
Balabhadra,  390.
Baiadevasy  218.

BlLAMBHAffA, 41.

BalarIma  PanohXnana,  48.
Bala  I^arman  PIg6ndita,  13.
54/a^,  340.
BallIla,  452,  454.
Ballala  siNA,  188,189.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


636


INDEX.


Balbchy  231.

BiNABHAff A,  98.

Bandha,  160.

Ban^ay  179, 189.

Barada  raja,  41.

BardiyOy  181.

Babdbsanes,  202.

Bartula,  184.

Babo(jtah,  167,  &c.

Bauddhar,  192,  &c.

Baudhatana,  101.

Ben  al  Adam!,  504,  510,  &c.

BuhIdur  ALf,  173.

BEHlu'LDfN,  516,  524.

Berberoy  179.

Betnu'lhUty  344.

Wiadraca,  163.

Bhadrapaddy  343.

Bhadravirdj'y  164.

Bhadricdy  159, 160, 164, 165.

BhS^abhhgay  306.

Bh&gavata  purdhay  103,  355,  362.

Bhaoubi,  20,  49,  59.

Bhdkhdy  32.

Bhamaha,  48,  66,  6?.

Bhdmani  vildstty  1 17.

Bhanudatta  miSra,  95.

Bhanu  dIcshita,  56.

BhaNUJI  DfcSHITA,  17*

BharadwXja,  48.
Bharadwaja,  188.
mdradwdja  family,  305,  310.
Bharariy  224, 330,  363.
Bharatamalla,  47,  56.
BhIrav!,  75,  78, 83,  98,  104,

106,111.
BhabtrIhari,  6,  42, 116, 174.
BhIscara, 97,  219,  224, 349,

&c.;  373,  &c.;  385,  419,  422,

450,461.


BhXsOARA  BHAffA,  42.

Bhdshdy  32.

Bhdskd  vrtttiy  40.

Bhdshd  vriUynrfha  vivHttiy  41.

Bhdshya  on  PI^ini,  7,  &c. ;  42.

Bhdshya  pradipa  vivasahay  4'^h

Bhdshya  pradipoddyotGy  40.

Bhdstvady  354.

Bhdstvati  catahay  385,  389,  390,

482,  485.
BflAff  A  Balabhadra,  470.

BHAff  AMALLA,  49.

Bha«a  NIrIya^a,  188.

Bhattdracay  303.

BhatU  cdijyay  4&y\^2y\\5y

BHA«^jf  DfcSHlTA,  12,  38,  41.
BHAff6TPALA, 353,  &c.; 387,

410,  414,  423,  457,  &c.;  473,

&c.
Bhavabh6ti,  115,131,135.
Bhdva  pracdsicd,  41.
Bha  vipuld,  158.
Bhavishya  purdhay  354.
Bhilupurdy  212.
mymay  49.
Bhbgavatiy  274.
Bh6ja  Rajay  53,  298,  483,  485,

461,462.
Bh6jad£va,22,  49.
Bhdja  prabandhoy  53.
Bu6jaraja,  55.
Bh6lanat'ha,  46.
Bh6la  nat'ha,  57.
Bhramarapaday  162.
Bhramardvatiy  161.
Bhramara  vilasiUiy  110, 160.
Bh{jdhara,  323,  324,  325.
Bhujayamttsr^tay  159.
Ehujangapraydtdy  117, 159, 160.
Bhujanyasanyaidy  159.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


IN  DEX.


637


Bhufan^  ff^r¥rnbhiia,  164.

Bkurij,  153.

Bh^ripn^^ga  cishoy  20.

Bhiisha^  s6ra  darpa^,  42.

Bh^tidatta,  182.

Bhuvana  MAI.LA  yIra,  272.

BiDPAl,  168,169,482,511.

B^hay245.

BihXbI  lXl,  23,  88.

B^imald,  159.

BmUy  159, 163.

BddhisaUwa,  198, 206, 249, 251.

B^rahsy  225.

BoMBBLLi,  431,  492,  498,  505,

516.
BoNAooi,  see  Lboma&do.
B6pXlita,  20,  59.
Brachmanes,  200,  &e.
BrahmI,  248.
Brahma,  a  star,  349,  352.
Bbahmboupta, 74, 323, &c.,

355,  378,  &c.,  422,  424,  455,

461.
Brdhma^,  178,  195.
Brahme  Mdayoy  a  star,  352.
Brahfnesiddh6nta323y  kc.y  352,

358,  .388,  kc.,  396,  407,  423,

456,  505.
Brahme  sp^hu^a  siddhinta, 74,

383,  386,  393,  397,  404,  407,

423.
Brahme  i&dra,  181.
Brahme  vaivarta  fnsrd^  354.
Brij  bhdkhd,  33.
Bucoa  Rata,  255,  257,  &c.
BuooA  RIjI  II.,  283.
Buddha,  mentioDed  by  Glbm  ens

Albxandbin  us,  203.
Boddhists, 192,  &e., Epoch  of

their  persecution,  16,  17«

VOL.  II.


Budd^ii  viidsifU,  452.
BttUdn,  330.
Butta,  203,  204.
buzbbohumibb,  167.
Buzjdni,  445,  513,  &c.  529.

C.

Cdb,  434.

CABlauDofN,  230.

Cabiti,  23.

Cacudmafi,  153.

CoK^A  (twA^UA),  152.

Cddambati,  98.

Oi/i,  182.

Caivertay  184.
Caiytata,  7,  38,  40.

Caidy  43.

C^i^,  in  mathematics,  52?.

Caldy  in  prosody,  15  L

CaldcandOy  161.

CaiahansOy  161.  '

Ctlfo  niHtayay  379.

CiiWpa,  44,  56,  57.

Caldpatattwdr^vay  45.

Cb/iage,  357,475.
Oi/iVii,  157,  161,  165.
Calidasa, 65, 70,  74.  84,  98»

100,  113,  119,  136,  173.
CalUah  tea  Dimndhy  167.
Calinoa,  54,  179.
CaUyugOy  357,475.
Ckdpoy  375,  378,  396,  414,  415'

448,  473,  474.
CaipakUdvaiM'ay  452,  453,
Caipa  siitroy  206, 207,  Bus.  315.
Cafydriy  272.

CaltIna  ohandba,  461.
Cdma,  158.
Cdmaoriffdy  161.
CdmadhinUf  44, 45,  49.
2  N


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


638


INDEX.


Gam ALACARA,  3H  369, 360.

Camatiy  158.

C&mardpay  170.

Cdm&vatdra,  159.

CdminioAntOy  159,

Caupa,  257.

CanacaprabMy  161.

Oi^ra  language,  30,  255,  261,

268,  269,  271.
Ccmda,  161.

Candarpa  siddbIvta,  47.
CanMcdra,  180.
On^i,  162.
C6ntimaiiy  100.
Cantdipdady  160.
CaAwa,  49.
Geniyii,  a  metre,  158.
amy4»  a  coiiBlettiitioo,  473.
Canydcuhfa,  286,  289,  291,  294,
466.

Cdnyacutja  dialedt,  22,  23,  69,
118.

Oinyacubfasy  22, 28.

CSnyacuifa  Br6&nm$y  179, 186,
242.

azj»^,  185.

Cbi>ftt,a04.

Cabacoi,  Raffablo,  498.

CarahandUi,  IfiS.

Cintm,  181.

Ciira^,  181,1B2,478.

€&raU oMMa,  378,  Ito.;  419.

G$ra^a9,364.

Ctfrtc^  OR  FJJtivi,  6, 4fi.

QirwdtMiri,  48L

Carc€^<h  391.

CabdanUi,  Hibbon*,  495^  &c.;
516.

Carmacdra,  182, 163, 184.

Car^  151,  403,  Ik.


CanTkiAi  iarira,  194.
CSsr^a  language,  30.
CknMtaca,  69.

CIbTICA  SIDDHlVTil^  4fi.

CIIacbYtsna,  6,  39.
CXsBM,  504.
Cash-d,  180.

CashmiTf  chronicle  of,  19S.
Cashtd  irdtrijfa  Brdhna^m^  188.
Cdsicd  vritti,  9, 10, 38, 40.
Cdsica  vritU  panficdy  40.
CSi^wma,  46,  47, 48.
Cdiuwttri  ffo^,  47-
C(Ktnaii0  Brdknu^kmy  179.
Castes,  see  Classes.
Ca§yapa,  188.
CliTAPA,  5,  48,  64, 317, 356.
Cdtanira,  44,  49.
Cdtantra  chandricdj  45.
Cdtanira  chatuihh^  prmifpa^  46.
Cdtanira  dhiiusfhi^kafVL
Catanirmffa^  dkdtUy  •^
Cdiantra  panjicd,  45.
Cdtanira  parSiMa^  45.
Caianfra  JoMifiM^t,  45.
COantra  du^tcArmkOyiiK
COtanirtt  unStU  vrHtH,  45.
Oiten/ra  vistdra,  45.
aitafifr»or)fte'lM,46.
CIttIt ANA,  i>,  6, «,  87, 40,  S3.
Caumudiy  12,  13,  57. 8m  SmU

CswfiMM^  m  metre,  165.
Cauiambha,  2J8.
CxxjiusA^  48.
GiiM<u6^13.
Cavbllv  B6BaA,  255,  270.
Co&i  co^  Aimm,  15, 46.
CbM  ctOpadgwmvifdehgd,  47.
Cavikaja,  98.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


1NJ>EX.


639


Cavirahasyafil.

Cdvjfa.156.
Cdvya  cdma  dhenUf  46.
OfyiuCha^  182, 187»  189, 236,261,
292.

CiDARA  BHAff  A,  ^,

CSmadnmay  529.
Cendra,  523,  529t
Censuiy  censoy  434.
Cesaroy  162.
CfiSAVA,  452,  454,  476.
CilAVA  DASA,  69, 102.
Ci^AVA  swiMi,  49.
Cetumati  164.
Chacitay  162.
Chacray  161.
ChacrapaUiy  161.

CalCBAVARlf  AilA,  48.

Chacravards,  215.
ChagaHy  162.
Chahuvdn  tribe,  236.
ChaiUmp6mr^tay  48.
Okit^rac6li,  46.
C%a//i,  163.
€%a/uca  tribe,  272.
(^ifiuira,  161.
a0fV9Ni,2ia.
Champaca  mdldy  110, 159.
Chan^pwriy  215.
Champdy  105, 135.
C^ancAa/<i,  162.
Chanchaldcshid,  160, 165.
Chancharicdvaiiy  161.
ChandacOy  154.
(MMdhy  183.
C;4i4^^  dialed;,  68.
Oo/i^l,  161.

C%a^^  vf^sMi  pray6tay  164.
Chandra,  6,  20,  39;  48, 188.


Chandray  163.
ChandraUc'hd,  161.
C%a»M^rafln^,  163.
Cfiandramuc'hiy  159v
Chandravartiy  110,  16L
C%aftdlrava9tf7Ui,  160.
Chandrdvady  216.
Chandricdy  15,  42.
Chandricd,  a  metre,  86, 161, 161
(rA<m;Vi,94,  155,  156,165*
a«;>aAi,  73,  74, 119,154,158.
67ii(p;)<ya,  90,  91.
Charo^  151.
Charatara  tribe,  319.
Charchariy  163.
Oirtifl^',  154.
C^arumtM^'Ai,  159.
ChdruhksMy  79, 166.
Oiirtite  sclux)!,  219.
Choturansdy  169.
Chaturbhuja,  49.
CHATURviDA, 398, 405. 8<«

PrIt'h(JDACA  SVTAMi.

Ckatushpadd,  156.
GuOushpdd  mushtuhhy  162.
Chatushpdd  gdyaifiy  162.
Chatuthpadicdy  93,  156.
Chatashpdd  panctty  153.
Chatushpdd  uskhihy  162.
Chatushpdd  vr^haiiy  162.
ChUuhdn  tribe,  236.
CkdUpdUy  156.
C%^m;>dir,  93.
C^tf/Mara,93,  J  66.
Chaura,  95.
Chaftrdnidy  159.
Chaura  panchdUcif  96, 1 17*
Chaurdhy  157
ChdHvansdy  159.
Cherdgh'cusky  236.
2  N  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


640


INDEX.


CfiiT  SiNH,  23.

Ch^handb  gbvinday  64.

OCh6ndbgya  upanUhadf  197.

Ch'handb  mdl6,  64.

Ch*handb  manjariy  64.

Ch'handb  mdrta^da,  64,  100.

Ch'handS  niviti,  64.

Ch'happddy  156.

Ck'hdtd,  46.

a'Wy^,  163.

CMdast'hifndld,  4L

Carnfl,  179.

Chinna  o6yiNDA  sfTARA  ound!,

276.
ChintdmM. See  OMta  taUwa

chirUdmafiu
ChUrOy  162.

Chitrd,  a  metre,  86, 155, 161.
Chiird,  a  star,  337, 425,  463,  481.
Chitradurg,  254,  266.
ChitraguptOy  182.
Chitraiic'hd,  162, 163.
Chitrdngadoy  182.
Chkrapada,  163.
Chiircpadd  119,  159.
Chitrasdid,  163.
Ckitratanffa,  162.
C%t^ra«^iMi,  182.
Chitraoaiif  161.

o^fo,  179, 273.

C^oro,  319.
ai<^,  87, 155.
ChMicd,  88.
CMtBUstddy  156.
aifA^,  156.
CfticliVa,  88,  155.
C%i</^^;>ail^^{,  67.
a6r^'c<i,  133.
Ci'rto,  83.

drdtdtjuniga,  83,  104,  106,  11  ]>
131.


avSto,  163.

Classes  of  the  Hindus,  177>  19^

Known  to  Greek  writers,  200,

&c.
Clbmsns  Alex  akdbinus,  203.
Cocilaca,  162.
C6N0Af  A,  54.
C6ir6A  BHAffA,  42
Condavipattan^  9^i.
Cbpavatl,  161.
Com,  434.
Cosnke,  434.

CbAM ADffwARA,  45.

Crdntd,  162.

CrdntipdtOy  374.

Craunchapadd,  1 10,  164.

Craushtica,  64.

OiSliicAafuJhi,  163.

CbIsh^a, mentioned in the

Ch^hdndtgya  upanishad , 197.

His  combat  with  diduplLA,  80,

^. His  sports  with  the  gapU,

88.
CriskhaSj  nine,  of  the  Jati»,  217*
CRYsHirA,  son  of  BallIla,  452,

453.
CRtsHirA  dIsa,  57.
CRisHif  A  PA^6lTA,  14,  41, 103.
Wti,  163.

(H(^^,  331,  358, 360.
Cshamd,^,
Cshamd,  a  metre,  161.
Cshatriyas,  128,  178.
CshaUrt,  Cshaitd,  113.
CsHf RA  swiif f,  49,  54,  55.
Cshira  tarangiM,  49.
Cudmala  danti,  110,  163.
Cula,  305.

caia,  179.

Ctt/acfl,  71,  133.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDKX.


541


CULACBANDRA,  45.

QOafhay  154.
(kOind,  154.
Culina  Br6hmafuuj  188.
C(m6r,  180.
CumIba,  44.
Cumdralalitd,  159.
Cktmdra  sambhavof  84,  102.
Cumdri,  161.
Cufnbha,  369.
CumbhacdrOf  180.
CuMalicd,  92^  156.
Om/dAi  (fcMi,  272,  273.
(kipurushajatittSf  160.
Ckirughde  dwrg^  ^3.
Cu6ala,  49.
Cusumastavacaf  164.
Gumma  vichitrdy  110,  160.
Cusumita  laid  vUHtd,  162.
0»h7i$,  161.
CMlagatiy  161.
C^oca,  460,  467.
CuHacddhydya,  419.
Ciiveri^  181.

D.

DIbishlIm,  168,  169.
Ddbistan,  226,  227.
Dacsha,  188.
DacshiMnticd,  155.
Dacshi^  Rdrdy  189.
DdcshiAdtya  dialect,  67.
DIdIbhaI,  377,  379,  387,  389.
Damanaoa,  159,  160.

DAMAYANTf,  74, 85, i05.

DamayarUi  ca^hd,  105.
Dam6dara,  198.
Do^i&iea,  130,  140,  144,  164.
ZkMacaid,  157.


DAir6!.  98,  134,  173.

Ddsa,  183.

Ddsoy  a  coinmoD  termination  of

proper  names,  190.
D(ua  cumdra  chariira, 98,  134,

173.
DaiasfUicd,  386,  467.
Daurffasinhi,  44.

DatIrXmA  VACUB8PATI,  46.

Decani,  364,  370,  526.

Deities  worshipped  by  the  early

Hindus,  197. Four  classes  of

deities distinguished by  the

Jainas,  222.
Deva,  a  common  termination  of

proper  names,  190.
D£vA,  40.
Dcvddhidevas,  206.
DivADi,  272.
Devagiriy  451.

DivALA,  5.

Devandgari,  27.
DivAPALA,  280,  &c,
D£vapXla  d£va,  17.
Dcvapalli  patianay  286.
2>£t7a«  of  the  Jainas,  206.

Di^fDASA, 46.

DifADi,  245.
Dhananjaya,  20.
Dhanapai.a,  48.
DhanishVhay  342,  355,  381,  465.
Dhanushy  208,  217.
Dhanwantari  nigha^fa^  2(h
Dhdrd,  298,  303,  309.  462,  485.
DharaHi  cbsha,  20,  58.
DhabmIditya,  249.
Dharmapala,  280,  &c.
DhdtughitsUy  46.
DhdttA  d4picdy  46,  49.
Dhdtu  pdrdyakasy  16,  49.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


543


>N»SX.


DMtu  p6ia  of  PXi^iNi,  8,  15,

43.
Dhdtuprad^,  9,  43.
Dhatu  ratnSmaiiy  47.
Dhaoalaj  163.
Dhavaldnca,  163.
DhvraUditd,  162.
DhrItasinha,  19.
DhrUaifi,  163.
Dhr^ti,  162.
Dhruvaca^  325,  466.
Dhurpedsy  33.
DhOrta  swIh!,  49.
Dhwajay  151.

Dialects  of  India,  I,  &c.  21,  66
DlgamboTOSi  220.
i>intfr,  530,  531.
DroPHANTUS,  429,  432,  &c.  443,

499,  &c.  513,  &c.  524.
DipacOy  157.
DivioARA,  450,  452.

DIVIOARA  BHAff A, 65, 132.

Divyay  48.

Db6b,  34.

Dbdhaca,  110,  160,  164.

i>6*^,  88,  92,  93, 156.

Dhhras,  23.

DonadoDs  ratified  by  pourkig
water  into  the  hand  of  the
donee,  259,  260,  275.

Dramatic  writers,  dialects  em-
ployed by  them,  66, 67, 136.

Drammoy  530b

Draviaa,  2&,  55,  67,  69.

DrdviSa  Brdhma^as,  179.

DrdviSti  dialect,  6?.

Drdviroy  weDrdvida,

DrcshcdAaSy  364,  &c.  526.

Dra^245.

JDruto  hidhu,  47.


DriUa  madhym,  164.

DnUapada,  160,

Druta  vilamlnta, 86,  117,  160,

164.
Duhc*hamd  suc^hamdy  215.
Dufntnadumd,  250.
DUBGA,  20.
DuRoi,  250.
DUROA  DA8A,  46,  49.
DUROI  DATTA, 65.
DUROAOUPTA, 45b

Durgd  mahatiwa,  185.
DcjROAsiNHA,  44,  45^  476.
Durffa  ticdy  45.
D'Jtrghidavr^Ui,J2.
Durghata  ghcHanay  46.
Durmildy  157,  163.
DurmUicdy  157.
DuTudkaray  529.
Dwdracd,  90.
Dwic'hahaicdy  155.
Dwipadiy  156.
JhDtpadicdy  94.
Dwipdd  virdj  igdyatri),  152.
Dwipafhd,  88,  156.
Dwiructi  chha.  20.
Dujiritp<h  59.
Dwivid,  305.
D'viyodhU  159<

E.

Earth,  261;  its  diurnal  revoki-

tion,  392.
Ecdcshara  cosbaj  19.
Eclipses, 276, 277,  284^ 306.

Theory  of  their  caose,  407.
JSTM,  161.
Elephants  mast  not  be  kiUcd  by

a  Cshmtiy^  undett in  batck,

128.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


I  N  B  £  3C.


543


Equinoxes,  preoeMUNi of,  3%
&c.  374,  &c.  425,  473*


FAizf,  379,454.

Feet,  in  prosody,  how  expressed,

69,  70,  151.
Fbruat,  441.
FfRijzSHAH,  229^232.


Gadhinagara,  289,  294,  295.
Gddhipura,2S6,  294.
Oadisinha,  49.
Oi^tMngani^  156.
0&h&,  72,  89,  185.
O&hini,  154.
06hu,  154.

Gf^aturangavUaaiUiy  162.
Galava,  5,  88.
Ga^ch'handas,  72,  78.
Ga^adharaSy  215.
Ga^ddhipas,  215.
Ga^p6ia,  8,  43.
Gaharatnafndhbdadhiy  38,  43.
Ga^vr^Ua,  153.
Gafiaaca,  163.
Gandhay  94.
^afu2^,  156.
GandhdnOf  94,  156.
GdndhicOy  180.
GAi^fi&A,  426,  451,  459,  476.
^ofi^^eftam/^,  J36.
GanoXdhaea,20.  Another  writer
of  that  name,  450.

GanoIdHABA  BHAff A|  90.

(?a*ito,  477.

<?^Va  caumudi,  421, 454.

Ga^Uddkjfd^  of  BBAKftTBOUPXA,

419.


Gahita  mdlaf*,  45  i .

(?a/t»to  #<l/4, 450.

^a^tVa  to^^a  cMfUamadiy 395,

396,  407,  454,  ^4.
Gaboa,  361,  410.
GXbota,  5,  48.
6^anM&x,366.
GarudarutQy  162.
(?(i/'^4,  89, 132, 153, 165.
Gdt'hini,  154.
Gauda,  see  ^^tnira;.
(rou^  Brdhmaikts^  179.
Gaudfya  dialect,  68.
Cottw,  26,  69, 187, 188, 330, 354.
Gauri,  160, 161, 164.
O^UTAMA,  196,  &c.,  315.
Gautama  Buddlqa,  251,315,  &c.
Gautama  swIm!,  315,316,317,
Gavyf^k,  217,
^4ya<r^  152, 159.

GsBBBBT  (Pope  S VLVB8TJIB  IL)^

488.
Germ<mes,%(^.
GWr,  338.
^A^r^  158.
Gha^a  carparay  75.
(?Aa»4,  94, 156.
Ghattdnanda,  94, 156*
Gh6ba,  197.
Girandra,  90,  212.
^^,  163.
GUi,  73.
^?a^V;a,  163.

GUydryd,  87,  110, 155, 162.
Gbariagi^  183,
G6bhila,  8.
Gbioffrdma,  453.
Gfdayantra,  324, 325.
G6nabda,  198.
(?6;),  183.
^^o,  181, 182,  183.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


544


INDEX.


66pIlA  CHAOBAYARTf,  46,  57*

06p1nIt'ha,  45.
aorakhpuTy  247.
Qbtra^  305.

G6VKBDHANA, 20, 49, 55, 74,
450.

G6VINDA  BHAff A,  49.

06vinda  chandba,  286.
G6vindInanda,  57*

(i^YlNDA  bImA,  46.
O6Tf0BANDBA,  46.

Graha  ISffhava, 323,  331,  352,

354, 379, 452.
Grammar,  early  writers  on,  5, 38,

48. List  of  works  on  Sanscrit

grammar,  40,  &c.
Grandam^  29.
Grants  of  land,  240,  &c.; 261,

289,  &c.
Greeks. Their  astronomy,  325,

361, 370,  393,  400,  41 1. Their

algehra,  430,  442.  Hints  which

the  Hindus  received  from  the

astronomical schools of the

Greeks,  449.
GUOLIBLMO  DI  LuNis,  490,  498.
GviJQTa  BrikmahoBy  179.
Gujrhi,  31,  228.
Gupia,  a  common  termination  of

proper  names,  190.
GiirfarOy  31.
GurviMy  72, 154.
Guzraty  see  Gujrat.
Gymnosaphiskgy  202,  &c.

H.

Hacaliy  156.

Ha66a  ohandba,  54.

Hama  odshOy  20,  58.


Hakna  vpdcara^y  44.

HajIj  bbn  Yusbf,  34a

Hakahy  332.

Hala,  89.

H(damuc'hiy  159.

Halia  character  and  language,

269.
HAMiffBA,  65,  91,  92,  &c.
Handhy  333.
Haruay  158, 162.
Hansamdidy  159.
Hdmapadiy  159.
HmuanOay  159.
HanHy  159, 163.
Hdroy  151.
Habadatta  mi§ba,  10,  16,  38,

40.
Hdrdvaliy  19,  20,  59.
HoHy  162.

Hdtiy  158.

Habiballabha,  42.
Habi  bhXsoaba,  65.
Hdricd,  158.
HabicIla  nivA,  246.
Haricdricdy  21  y  42.
HabidIoshita,  13,  41.
Haridrdy  a  river,  284.
Habidba,  284.
HarigUdy  156.
Habihaba,  255,  257,  &ec

HABlirAlGUM^SHf,  214.

Haari  ndmdmrttay  47.
HanhaplutOy  162,  166.
HarMy  112, 146, 162.
HabipbasXda,  23.

HaBIbImA  OHAOBAVABTf, 45.

HafUabandhGy  158.
Hdrwafiia  pwrd^  287.
HIb^n  ALBASHio,  515.
Hasan  BBN  SuHAiB,  171«


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDEX.


545


Hasan  Sub  AH,  226.
Hasta,  151,  336,  353,  363.
Hastmdpura,  215,  283.
Haya,  151.
H6z6rehs,  230.
HI6i,  244.
HfiLiBiJA,  21,  49.
HelIyudha,  20,  47,  58,  64,  79,

132.
H£mA  CHANDRA,  44,  50,  58,  ^,

206,  &c.
H£ma  86ri,  44.
HiBROCLES,  202,  204.
Hindevi\9nga9igef  22.
fffTuiriaDgaage,  22,  23,  kc.
Hind^pati  pnncesy  65,  258.

Hinddrdya,  258.
Hmdustdni,  23,  &c.

//^  157.

f/'irocw,  157.

Hft6padesay  166,  &c.

ff6r^,  477,  478,  526.

HoNAiN,  348.

HtmStyOnndmehy  167,  172.

HusainMIrza,  168.

HUSAIN  Waez,  167,  &c.

Hushbno,  testament  of,  167, 168,
171.

Hylohii,  203.

Hypatia,  443,  501,  503.

Hypsicles,  492.


IbrahIm  bbn  Sal  at,  348.
IctUu  'Ijebhah,  339.
ImIdi  racsuamalla,  274,  276.
Imam  Jafer,  226,  230.
Indra,  6,  39. Many  Indras  ad-
mitted by  the  Jamas ,  214.

iNDRABH<7TI, 315,  316.
VOL. II.


Indrasana,  152.

Indravajra,  160,  164.

Indravaruay  103,  160.

InduvadandtlQl*

Inscriptions,  general  remarks  on,
238,  &c.,  287.  Inscription  on
the  pillar  at  Beddl,  17;  at
Buddha  yaya,  17;  at  Cintra  in
Portugal,  241 ;  on  the  pillar  at
Delhi,  232 ;  from  Tipura,  241 ;
at  GtyrakhpuTj  247 ;  from  Chi-
tradurg,  254,  266,  284 ;  at  Cu-
rughde,  267 ;  at  Kurrah,  277 ;
at  Sdrandt'ha,  278;  in  the  dis-
trict of  DindjpuTj  279;  at
Mon^,  280,  281 ;  at  Nidiyal
and  Goujda,  283;  in  Bihar,
289;  at^Tdrdchandi,  295;  at
Ujjayani,  297.

Is'hak  ben  Honain,  345,  348.

Ismailiydhs,  225,  22^.

fgwARA  CRKshAa,  74.
fsWARANANDA, 40,

/<,  37.


JaoannIt'ha,  117.
JayaH,  152,  160.
Jagaii  (pancti),  153.
J(^aii  {trishtubh),  153.
Jaghanya  chapald,  154.
Jainas,  191,  &c.,  315,  &c.
Jaladhara,  157*
Jaladhara  mdld,  160.
Jalaharaiia,  157.
Jal6ca,  198.
Jalhddhatagatd,  110,  160.
Jctmaca,  158.
Jambudw\pa,  179.
Jambusnra,  450.
2  o


Digitized  by  VjOOQIC


546


INDEX.


Jdnaci,  163.

Janam6jaya,  283,285.

Japila,  289,  &c.

Jatacabnava,  3te,410,482,&c.

Jdtiy  88.

Jdtimdld,  177,  178,  &c.

Ja^puidy  158.

Jaumara,  45.

Jdwiddn  khird,  167,  171.

Jayachandba,  240,  286.

JayadSva,  87,  95.

Jayaditya,  9,  40,  55,  249,  &c.

Jayanta,  14,  41.

Jayapala,  280.

Jayayabma,  299,309.

Jebhah,  335.

Jebr,  435.

JEHANOfR,  396,  452.

Jhalland,  157.

Jilm6/flr,  130,  164.

Jinas,  206,  207,  &c.

JiN^NDBA,  6, 39,  40,  55.

^tw,  194.

JfvA  oh6sha  swAMf,  47.

JisHifu,  395,  427,  456,  476.

JnydndmHta,  48.

Jnyanabaja,  428,  451.

Jnyan^ndra  baraswat!,  13,41.

JUMARANANDf, 45, 46.

JytshVka,  339.

Jyotishy  the  calendar  appended  to

the  Fidas,  63.
Jybtishf  a  metre,  87, 155.
JyoHshmad  {trishfubh^  153.

K.

Kalb,  kalbu'ldkrab,  340.
Kankarafy  508.
KUas,  33,
hertan^  336.


Khuldsatu  'ikiM,  435,  489,  616,
524.

L.

Lftcshtnif  161.
LAcsHMfoASA, 220,  224,  323,

395,  423,  452,  &c.  459,  481
LacskmSdhara,  160.

LACSHMfvARHA,  299.

LI^hXohIbya,  409.
Lagdlicd,  158.
Laghu  drya  siddhdnta^  467.
Layhu  hhitshaka  cdrUi,  42.
I^Au  hbdha,  48.
Xo^Att  caumudiy  14,  42.
IrfT^Au  paribhdshd  vrtui^  42.
i>z^^t<  sabcUtratna,  13,  41.
i>z^7m  sabdindhi,  13,  41.
Laghu vaiydcara^ ndMiitt

manjitshdf  42.
L^Au  vomAFAa  siddhdnia,  377»

379,  392.
Lo^^u  vri'Wt,  44.
Lflr/afwi,110,160.
LIlasinha,  409.
Laliid,  131,  154,  160, 163, 165.
La2itapada,l60.
LaiUapurdAay  199.
Lalla,  332,  358,  359,  360.
Lancdf meridian of,  414,  &c.,

427.
Languages  used  by  Hinda  poete,

l,&c.
Latdy  162.
Lavaiiy  165.
Leonardo Bonacci,  433,  Itc,

487,  &c.,  498,  516.
Ltfier  ^56<jc«,  435.
Lild,  162.
Lildc'hm,  161.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDBX.


647


LUdvaHy  97, 157,  379,  419,  &c.
LUbpavad,  161.
Lipia,  358,  527, 52a
L6oanjlt'ha,  57.
L6CAPAT,A,  280.
Lbcdy&ta  school,  219.
J6/a,  156,161.
lubdhaca,  a  star,  352,  464'.
Lunar  race,  256.

M.

Macara^  the  symbol  of  the  Indian

cupid,  89. The  constellation

Capricorn,  369,  465.
Macaranda,  47.
MacoTcmdicdy  163.
MadaUc'hd,  159.
Madamattdy  163.
MadanaffT^ha,  157.
Madanahardy  157.
MadanalalUdy  162.
MadanapIla  d^va,  286.
Maddndhdy  160.
Madhaya  aoharya,  38,  43,  55,

60,  205,  257.
Mddhaviy  55.
Mddhavicdy  163.
Mddhaviya  vritti  on  Pacini,  9,

38,  43,  48.
Madhuy  158.
Madhubhdvtty  156.
Madhu  mddhaviy  55, 161.
Madhumafiyl59,
Madhus6dana,  46,  49.
MadhyCy  see  Medhya,
Madhydy  158.
Madhya  caumudiy  14,  41 .
Madhyacshamdy  161.
Madhyd  jyotishmaiiy  153.
Madhyamdhora^y  426.


Madhya  manbramdy  41,  42.

Mddhyandinay  427.

Madirdy  163. ;

Madruy  273.

Mdgadha  179,  182.

il%a(2^a  dialect,  1,  2,  32, 66, 213,

316.
MioHA,  75,  78,  80,  84,  98, 104,

112,120,131,132.
Maghdy  335,  355,  &c.,  360.
Mahdbhdratay  473,  475.
Mahdbhdshya  on  Pii^iNi,  7,  &c.,

21,  37,  40.
Mahdbhdshya  prad^y  40.
Mahdcdvyay  six  poems  thus  desigf-

nated,  84.
Mahdchapaldy  154.
Mahdlacshmiy  159.
Mahdmdlicdy  162.
Mahdrdshira  language, 29,  68,

103.
Mahdrdshtray  a  metre,  90, 157.
Mahardshtra  BrahmahaSy  179.
MAHAvfBA,315,316,317.
JlfaAarr^Aa^i;  152.
Mahdyuya,  4l4y4iS.

MahISwABA  VAIDYA,  58.

AToA^i,  158.

MAHlBHAff A,  44.
MAHfOHANDBA,  286.

MahIpala  DiYA,  280.
Mahishasuba,  248.
Mdhishyoy  181.
Mahratia  language,  29,  103.
Manda,  158.
Maifhila  dialect,  27.
Maifhila  BrdhmaftaSy  179, 189.
Maitb^ya,  59.

MAITBiYA  BA08HITA, 9,  38,  43»

55,
2  o  2


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


548


TNDEX.


Mdl,4M.

Mala,  305,  306.

JMoAi,  94,110,156,161.

Mdldcdra,  182.

Mamhara,  162.

MSdaft,  159, 160, 163, 164, 165.

MdlaH  rnddhavoy  115, 135.

Mdlad  moldy  160.

Mdlavi,  157.

Mali,  182.

Jtfft/mi,  115, 161.

Jtfa//f(7<i,  119,159,163.

Manahansa,  161.

Maiiamaia  bills,  241.

Md^avaca,  159.

Mdiiavaca  crm,  119, 159.

Manddcini,  160.

MxfM^(Tdn^,  112,  142,  162.

Mandari,  158.

Ma^ibandha,  a  metre,  159.

MaMbandha  tribe,  180, 183.

Mahicdra,  180.

MInTCYA  CHANDRA,  1.

MaM  guiia  nicara,  110,  161.
MMmadhyd,  159.
MaAimdld,l60.
Mahi  manjari,  163.
itfaj5i>raAA<i,  100.
Manjori,  161, 165.
Mar^Wa,  162.

ManjubhdshiM,  130,  161,  165.
Manju^Uif  154.
Manjusawabhoy  165.
ManOramdy  38,  41,  45.
Man^amd^  a  metre,  159.
Manoramd  vr^ttiy  48.
ManiiTanjanay  453.
Man6ub,  167.
Mant'hdnay  159.
Manu,  sec  Menu.


Manzils  of  the  mooD,  328.

Marahattdy  a  metre,  90,  157*

MiBAPA,  257.

Mdrichay  394,  396,  397,  454.

Marichiy  324. See  ikfiirkAa.

Matallicdy  119,  159.

Mdiangiy  159.

Mafhurdy  69.

Mat'hur^a,  56.

Matirama,  23,  95.

J»f<i/ra,  70,  71,  151.

j(fafr<i  ch'handasy  78,  153.

Mdtrdsamacay  86,  110,  155.

Matsya  puf&fuiy  350.

3fa«a,  110,  157,159.

3fa^  crkf^,  163.

3/a^  mdtanga  lildcara,  164.

3fa^  inay(tray  130,  161.

Matter,  believed  by  the  Jainas  to

be  eternal,  194.
Mauctica  ddma,  160.
Mauctica  mdldy  160.
Maulica  BrdhmakaSy  190.
Morvipuldy  158.
iWa^a,  161.
MayUra  sdriidy  159.
Mtdabhillay  184.
Medhycy  529.
MiDiNfoABA,  19,  20,  58.
M(;;m^  cd^Aa,  58.
Mroasthbnbs,  200,  204.
Meghad(Uay  84,112,113.
il/^Aa  vi$p*hurjitay  163.
Mefdlisu^lnUtmeniny  225.
Melio  Muhammed  Jais!,  23.
Menu,  177-
Menuyuffa,  414.
JI/«Afl,  328,  329,  355,  365,  473,

474.
JIfma/a  (MI-sHAA-ALtAu),  508.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


IN  D£X.


549


MiHiRA,389, 476,  482. See  Va-

rIha  miutba.
Mna,  369.  473.
MiSra,  46.
Msra  dialect,  1.
Misra,  a  soruame,  189.
Mtabhdshi/a,  452.
Mifhii6y  27,  69.
Miehunoy  381,465.
MUch'haSy  184,192,198,411.
Mbdacay  160.

MOHSEN  FlMf,  226.

M6ianaca,  160.
Mr^gaUras,  332,  353,  363.
Mrtghndray  158.
Mf^gendramuc'hay  161.
Mi^Sfh  158.
Mrita  sanj'ivini,  64.
Mttakkher,  343.
Aluc^ha  cht^aioy  154.
Muctaca,  133.
Muouf  A,  18,  54.
Mudoapa,  257*
Mitferrehu'UcuKih,  173.
Mi^dhab6dha,  15,  86.
Mugdhab6dha  parmshia,  46.
Mugdhabddhiniy  56.
MuHAMMED  Abu'lwafI  o/  J9tf;sr-
y^a,  445,  513,,  524,  &c.

MUUAMMED  AfZAL, 23.
MUHAMMBD BEN IbrIhIm ol

Fazdriy  504,  509.

MUHAMMBD BEN MuSA, 444,

498,  509,  &c.  535.
MuHAMMED  KhUni,  92.
MuHAMMED  of  Tizhi.  329.
Muhammedan  sects,  225.
Muh!  BEN  Yahta,  348.
MtihdTta  chintdmahi,  323.
MukaMah,  435,  436,  489.


Mukaddim,  343.
M^ldy  340.
MullI  Ali,  228.
MuNflwABA,  220,  224,  323,  324,

358,  376,  378,  396,  454,  467,

473.
MuNJA,  53,  462.
MunjIla, 375, 378,  379,  380,

385,  461.
MUry  Muroy  29,  60.

MuBARf,  45.
M(jroh'ha  Khan,  56.
Murdh6hhUhicta,  189.
MUtu  character,  29.

N.

Nacshatrasy  321,  &c.
Nadiy  161.
Nagalicdy  158.
Nagdniy  158.
Nmfdndy  158.
Nqgdnicd,  158.
Ndgari  writing,  27.
Ndga  stoardpiniy  118,  159.
NiofiiA,  13,  14,  41,  42.
Ndgi{gdyatri)y  152.
NlG6jf  BHAffA,  40,  41.

Ndguliy  286.
iVfli,  181.

NaishadhiyOy  84,  104,  105.
Naiydyicay  219.
iV<i;tw,  434.
Nala,  74,  &c.  105.
A^o/a  champd,  105,  135.
Nalodayoy  74,  75.
iVawa  m<i/<i,  20.
Ndmanidhdnay  20.
Ndma  pdTdyahay  16.
Ndndrt'ha  coslMy  20.
Nandaci§6ra,  46.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


650


IN  DEX.


Nandana,  162.
Nanddvarta,  211.
Nandi,  49.
NandigrSma^  450.
Nandknuc^hif  161.
iViiptto,  181,185.
Ndrdcha,  162.
Naravebm A,  298,309.

NlRATAifA BHAffA TARA, 64,

65,68,118,132.
Naraya^a  chacravart!,  56.
Narcuiaca  148, 162.
Nardhatacay  162.
NarSndra,  163.
iVarl,  158.

NAsfRUDDfN  TiUi,  345,  348.
Nasrullah,  Abulmala,  168.
JVdsHca  school,  219.
iVii^o,  184, 185.
Nidacay  185.
NaUgatiy  161.
iVahA,  329.
Navamdliniy  160.
Navdncttra,  453.
N€hvipul6, 158.
JV«ya,  181.
i%acfl,289,  291.
Natanananda,  57.
Nayapala,  280.
Nerunoala  raja,  274.
Nethrah,  334.
Nichbchcha  vrittay  399.
Nighahhiy  20,  43.
iV^ito,  162.
NlLAOAijf' HA,  57.
iVXto/mrd^flr,  198.
iVi^z  swardpoy  160.
Niructiy  20,  43.
iVin;<i»«,319.
Nishdday  180.


NiUpdlay  162.

Nivartana,  312.

iVivrJf/,  153.

Nonius,  500.

NrKsinha,  359,  376,  377,  379,

396,  426,  451,  452.
NHsinha  ckamp&y  136.
Nunez,  500.
NOrullah,  225,  227.
N(7Sh(rvJ[n,  167, 172.
Nyancu  sdriM  (vr)(h<ai)y  152.
iVy<bff,  40.
Nyaya  panchanana,  46.


oaroy  179.

Odra  diSoy  28,  69.
Q;'^a,  189.
Ordu  zebdn,  33


Paciolo,  433,  490,  &c.
Pflrffl,  70,73,  96,153.
Pada  chandricdy  18,  49,  54.
Padachaturitrdhay  165.
Pdddcuiacoy  87, 155, 156.
Pada  manjariy  13,  38,  40,  57.
Pddanivrit  gdyairiy  152.
Pdddnudhgdtay  303.
Padapancti,  153*
Paddrt^ha  caumndiy  56.
Paddvatiy  48.
Padhanabha,  422,  470.
Padmanabhadatta,  47.
Padmandbka  vifoy  422.
Padmdvatiy  156.
PajjaJCidy  156.
Paisdchi  dialect,  1,  66,  67.
Paitdmaha  bhdshga,  398.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


IN  DEX.


651


Paiidmaha  siddhdrUa,  387»  388,

396,  408,  457,  480.
Pdli,  213,  316,  317.
Palyasy  217.
PaAava,  110,  159.
Pancajdvali,  161.
Pmcdvaliy  161.
Pancha  chdmara,  162, 163.
Panchdia,  158.
Pancha  siddhdnia,  353.
Pancha siddhdnticd, 357, 390,

409,  478,  &c.
Panchatantra,  166,  &c.,  361,  482.
Panc<t,  152, 153, 159.
Pdndjfa,  273.
Panjicd  pradtpa^  49.
PI6iNi,4,&c.,  11,37,  40.
Pdhifi/tya  mata  darpaAa,  43.
Pdpdpufi,  215.
Paramahansa,  220.
Poram4rArrta,219.
farangamdy  157.
ParIsara,  353,  855,  427,  448,

473,474.
Pdrdsara siddhdnta, 180, 378,

382,  416.
Paribhdshds,  38,  42,  47.
Paribhdshdrfha  sangrahay  42*
Paribhdshd  vf^Ui,  42.
Parihhdshindu  tSc'hara,  14,  42.
Paribhdshendu  sec'hara  edited,  42.
Paricshdy  64.
Parity  154.
PariUihta  prabddha,  45.
Parmshia  siddhdma ratndcara,

45.
Pardslinih,  152.
PIrSwanat'ha,  317.
Pdrt'hc^ra,  451.
PiRVATf,  248,271.


Patanjali,  7, 37,  40,  63.

P(rt'Ay^  73, 119,154,157.

Pafhyd  (pancti),  153.

Pa<%<S  (wrAtf<0,  152.

PaHacilay  303,  306,  309.

PatiasiUra  cdra,  185.

PaUicdra,  181.

Paw/wa  siddhdnta,  387,  414,  480.

Ptfttwwj,  156.

Pdvitra,  159.

Pdwdpuri,  215,  319.

P<iyf«<i,  159.

Pay^dhara,  151.

Pehleyf  traDslation  of  the  fables

of  PiLPAY,  171.

Pe»y^«  language,  33,  69.
Persian  translation  of  the  fables

of  PiLPAY,  167,  &c.;  of  the

UpnaishadSy  197;  of  the  LiM-

vo^,  420.
Persians,  their  ancient  religion,

199,  200.
P'hdlguniy  335,  336.

PHfoAR,  504.

Philostratus,  201,  204.

Pia,  158.

PiLPAY,  fables  of,  166,  &c.,  482,

511.
Pina  nitambdy  162.
PiNOALA,  63,  &c.,  97.
Pinffola  pracdsay  66.
Pinffola  vr^tti,  65,  91,  92, 102.
PipUica  madhyd,  153.
Planets,  Hindu  theory  of  their

motions,  374,  &c.,  415.
PlavangafnUi,  157.
Pliny,  202.
Polar  star,  327,  328.
Porphyrius,  202.
Prabhdy  41.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


552


INDEX.


Prabhdf  a  metre,  160.
Prabhadracaf  161.
Frabhdvati,  161.
Prabbdha  chandrbdaya,  103.
Prab6dha  pracdsaf  48.
Prabbdhitd,  161.
Prachita,  144,  164.
Prdchya  dialect,  68.
Pr6chya  vr^tti,  or  vrJT/to,  78, 155.
Prikjrr<,  1,  &c.  21,  &c.  66,  213,

316.
Pr^r^/ measures,  88.
PrAcrita  c&madhenu,  48.
Pr&crita  chandricd,  44,  48.
Prdcr^ta  lanciswaray  48.
Pr/i^to  97km6ra97^,  22,  44.
Prdcr^ta  PingaUiy  22,  65.
Prdcr^ta  pracdia,  48.
Pracr¥ti,  163.
Pracriyd  caumudi,  10,  11,  14,  21,

38,  31.
Pracriya  ratna^  49.
Prad^'TMjmjatiy  57-
Pbadyumna,  409.
Prflf^',  154.
Prdharaha  cabitd,  161.
Pr«ifeflr«ftt^,  115, 145,  160.
Prqjdpati,  a  star,  352,  353.
PrajfeiHca,  156.
Pramaddy  154,  161.
Pramd^,  530.
Prom^^i,  74, 118.
PrcmMicd,  159, 162.
Pramitdcshardy  86, 110, 160.
Pramna,  201.
Pramudiia  vadand,  160.
Pr^^,  392.
Prasdda,  38,41,43,49.
Prrttna  c6«Aft,  479.
Prastdra  pancti,  153.


Pratapa  dhavala  DivA,  289,

&c.
Pratihdray  292.
PraHmahaalay  399.
Pratipay  49.
PratishVhay  158.
PratishVhd  ydyattl,  152.
Praiivdsudhoasy  218.
Pratydpiddy  165.
Praudhn  manoramdy  13,  41.
Pravaray  305.
Pravara  lalitdy  162.
Pravr^ttacoy  78,  79, 155.
PrIt'h(jdaca  swAMf, 380,  392,

397,  408,  414,  422,  467,  470.
PrXthuyaSas,  477.
PrU'hwiy  162.
Pnytf,  158.
Priyamvaddy  160.
Prose,  &jfMrrr<,  133.
Prosody,  writers  on,  63,  &c.
Ptolrm  y  ,  329, 347, 348, 351 ,  383.

384,  400,  411,  527.
PuliSa,  388,  415,  472,  482,
Pu/tia  siddhdntOy  388.
Punarvasuy  332,  333,  387,391.
Puiuhracoy  185.
Punjaraja,  21,44.
Purd^asy  4,  5,  18,
PurastddjybHshmatiy  153,
Purastdd  w^hatiy  152.
PurauskMhy  152.

P^RirAOHANDRA,  49.

Purbhitay  314.

PURUSHACJlRA, 48.

Purush6ttama,  19,20,390.
Puru8h6ttama oiyA,  40,  41,

47,  55,  58.
Pui'va  bhddrapada,  343.
Pdrva  p'hdlgun\,  a36.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDEX.


653


Pitrvdshdclha,  3;,T.
Purva  varsfui^  208.
Pushpaddntt,  163.
Pushpitdgrd,  124,  129,  164.
Pmhya,  334.
Pvta,  160.


Rabhasa,  53,  59.
Rabua8apIla,  20.
Racshamali.a,  274,  &c.
Racsuita,  40.
Raaa(Rdrd),  179,188,189.
RaOaha,  93,  156.

RlDHACRYsui^A, 47.

Rdjhava  pdricUiviyay  98,  102.
Raohunandana,  45.
Raohunat'ha chaokavartI,

57.
Raghu  vansa,  84,  100,  &c.  124,

&c.
/?4^«,  33.

RAHASANANof,  45.

Rajaca,  184, 185.
Raja  dtva^  55,
Raja  mdriaMoy  463.
Rdja  niffha^ia,  20.
RajapIla,  280.
Rdjapuira,  180.
RIma,  49,  197.
RImabhadra,  46.
Ramacanta,  47.
Ramachandba,  10,  &c.  41,  47,

379.
RSmachandricd,  102.
Rama  cutsHirA,  453.
Rama  caYsHifA  oivA,  454.
RamadIsa,  45.
Ramad^va  hiSra,  49.
RamXnanda,  46,  57,

VOL.  II.


Rama  nIraya^a,  48.
Ramanat'ha,  45.
Ramanat'ha tidya yachks-

PATI,  57.

RamaAi,  lp8.

RamInuja,  205.

Rama  kyayalancara,  47.

Ramapbasada  tabcalancIrA)

57.
RImapbasIda taboa vIoffiA,

46.
Rama  baja,  76.
Rama^bama,  54,  &c.
Rama  taboa  vaoI^a,  46,  57.
RdmdyaAa  of  TuLAsfoASA,  94,

102.
Rdmdyafui  of  VlLMfci,  101, 103.
Rdma  vydcarafMy  49.
Rambhd,  158,
RlMiSwARA,  47,  57.

RAifATABCA  MALLA,  345.

RaAad,l54.

Ranoanat'ha, 324, 396, 421,

452,  454.
RANTlDivA,  20,  59.

Rasamidd,  157.
Rasamanjati,  95.
Rafhbddhatd,  104, 160.
Rasi,  158.

RaTIOXnTA TABOAYAOf^A,  46.

Ratna  chsha,  20,  59.

Ratnaoarbha,  357.

Ratna  mdld,  a  dictionary,  20 ;  a

grammar,  47 ;  an  astronomical

work,  323,  363.
Ra-iiiptddy  158.
RIya  Mucuf  a  ma^i,  18,  54.
Rboobde,  Robbbt,  430,  434.
Regions  of  the  world  sacred  to

the  Jaims,  220,  &c.
2  P


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


554


INDEX.


Rikhtah,33.

Revati,  325,  328.  331,  &c.  343,

464.
R^SfveSUi,  followers  of  the,  260.
Rishd,  344.
Ji^shabha,  208,  319.
R)i$habha  gaqa  viloiita,  162.
R\ishu,  seven,  352,  255.
Rbhi^i,  331,553,358.
Rbld,  90,  92,  156.
R'amacasiddhdnta,  386,  388,  400,

411,476.
Ruchira,  115,  130,  157,  161.
Rucmavad,  110,  159.
Ru^a,  20,  59.
Rudra  ydmala  tantra,  177*
Riipamdld,  48.
Rdpamdn,  159.

8.

^bari  dialect,  68.

Sabda  caustubha,  13,  41.

^abdaghbshd,  46.

Sabd&mMaana^  44.

6abdaratna,  13,  41.

I^abda  ratndvaliy  56.

SabdaHutva,  20,  59.

^d^e^eiuittse^^A/ira,  13,  14,  41.

I^bdicdbhara^,  49.

Sdbrangicdf  161.

;§^  179.

^dcadtcipoy  179.

^icaera,  478.

§XoALYA,  5,  48,  323,  358,  359.

Sdcalya  sanhitd,  324,  333,  391,

382,  352,  358,  377.
SacamhhaH,  92,  234«
&icdr<  dialect,  68.
^aca^a  M^,  332.
SaoatIyana,  5,  6,  39,  48.


§accarif  161.
&ic'^d,  477.
Sac'yera,  180.
§acuntald,  136.

§XCTA8INHA,  198,  318.

^adikiyaht,  230.

£^tQ^  (feTTMt^,  67,  68,  98.

6ailaiic'h6, 162.

Saitava,  64.

Smvasy  197.

Salama,  515.

iS<z/^£ei  ntdAt,  163.

So/mi,  104, 160.

SXlivXbana,  59.

SalmIn,  348.

S<i/iira,  164.

Samaneans,  20.3.

.Sam^in^,74,ll8.

Samdnicd,  159, 162.

Samant6y49,

Samaibdhanaf  435.

Sdmbher,  92.

SofTiMtf,  a  metre,  164.

Sambhu,  a  metre,  163.

§AMBHU  271,  272.

&zme<  Hc'hara,  212.

Sammhhay  158.

Samudratatdf  163.

Samvatf  in  inscriptions,  sometiJiies

denotes  the  year  of  the  reign,

246,  281.
§ANOABA,  16,95,114,205.
Sdncard  dialect,  68.
Sane' ha  cdra,  180.
Sane* ha  ddraea^  180.
Sanc'handti^  159.
Sdnc'hya,  194,  219.
S&ncliya  cMcd,  74.
Sancritiy  163.
SancshiptasdrOy  45,  46,


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDBX.


656


§ancuma(i,  153.

§Ai^6lLA,  188.

Sanoama,  255,  &c.

Srni^f  154.

Sahgrahafu  ratnOf  220.

Sanhitd,  477.

Sangatd,  159.

Sanmaulica  Br6hmaha$y  189.

Sannydsisj  202.

Sansdrdvarta,  20.

Sanacdrasy  192.

StrnMr^M,  1,  &c. Derivation  of

the  word,  2.
Sanst^rd  panctihy  153.
Smsfuctd,  159.
%)to  la/^  74.
&ira,  151.
§arabha,  365,  366.
&ira6A<$,  162.
Sdrdmr^tay  48.
SABAirADivA,  49.
Sdrangay  159.
Sarangay  160.
SarangacOy  161.
Sdrangi,  159.
&ra«^,  163.
SdrasufuUtriy  56.
Sdraswata,  15.
Sdraswata  Brdhmaiiasy  VJ%  188,

213.
Sdraswata  nation  and  language,

21,69,213.
Saraswady  a  river,  21.
.S^onoo^  5^/a  ^^i,  21.
Saraswaii cttkVhdbhara^y 22,

49.
Saraswati  pracrigdy  44.
Sdravatiy  159.
^r(ft£i(i,  162, 163.
&r(/ttA7  /o/ito,  162.


§drdiila  vicrUUkty  111, 141,  143,

145, 147, 163.
harmony  see  ^0rman.

§ARNOADHARA,  236

Sdrngadhara  paddhatiy  236.
5K7^*,  159.
&ro;a,  152.
i&lru,  158.

Sarvadhaba,  20, 55.
SarvdrumdOy  55,
Sarya  varman,  44.

^iy  158.

SaUcaidy  162.

&xlt  rflkfon^,  159, 163.

idswatoy  20,  59.

&ito6Af5Aa,  342,  363.

Satacas  of  BhartrY  hari,  174.

SatahpancHy  153.

SatXnanda,  385,  390,  409,  482,

485.
Satly  158.
Sai&vrVhatiy  152.
^atrunjayay  215.
i$^Mtir,88,89.

SlTTACf,  81.

Saugatasy  219.

StR^tTi^a,  87, 155.

Sfiura  days,  415.

Smrabhacay  131, 165.

Saurasini  dialect,  66,  67.

Saurashtray  88.

Sawrdshtra  metre,  88,  90, 156.

Saiwra  siddftdnta,  381,  387,  388,

392, 480. ^
Sdv€ma  days,  414.
SAYBRifA,  188.

Satai^a  Ioharya,  9,  43,  257.
Scandhay  154.
Scandhogrhjd,  152.
Ser/ahy  336.

2  p  2


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


566


INDEX.


Serman,  a  commoD  termination  of

proper  names,  189,  303.
8KRy6RC7 TRiviof, 235, 240,

286.
S^s6y  159.
6isha,  159.
§£shanXoa,  63.
Seven  RUhis,  349,  352. Their

motion,  355.
Shadman,  230.
Shah  Jrham,319.
Mm,  434.

Sha^ImItura,  331.
Shanzebah,  169.
ShtApadd,  156.
Shatpadic&,9Q,^\.
Shauiah,  3i0.
SheratSn,  329.
ShMs,  225,  kc.
5fc7//i,  87,  94,155,156,165.
&c'Aar«l,  114, 148, 150, 162.
^hd,  43.
Siddhaca,  163.

Siddhdnta  cmmudi,  12, 21,38,  4).
Siddhdnta  chandricd,  44.
Siddhdnta  sanhiid  sdra  samuch'

chayCy  451.
Siddhdnta  sdrvahhaumay  324,  &c.,

352,359,379,396,401.
Siddhdnta  Urvmukij  324,  &c.,  350,

352,  376,  385,  393,  &c.,  396,

419.
Siddhdnta  sundaroy  325, 327, 451.
Sidd/idnta  tatttca  vivica^  453,  see

Tutttoa  vivfca,
Siddhdrt'ha,  251, 318.
kighrabbdhuy  48.
Sighrbchvha^  401.
Sikhs f  their  sacred  writings,  G9.
Silk,  185.


Silvester  II.,  pope,  488.
Simac  ul  adzil,  337.
SiMEO  Sbthus,  17)»  172.
Sind  hind,  428,  504,  509,  &c.

SlNDHU,298.

SinhdUib,  157.
Sinhandday  161 .
SinhivaUcay  157.
Sinhavicrdntay  144,  164.
^'nAtfti,  154.
Sinhhnnatdy  161.
^fRA  DBVA,  42.

Sirbmaiuy  323,  &c.

&r«A<i,  159.

Sisdy  159.

^iSupXla,  80.

§iiupdiabadhay  80, 120—124, 132.

§ivA,248,256.

Siva  BHAffA,  13.

§IVADA8A,  45,  87.

SivAoivA,  49.

SiVARAMA  CHACRAVARTf,  45.
SiVA  SWAMf,  49.

SAi«i,70,118,119.
iUhdy  163.
^blhdvaiiyie].
Solarrace,  286,  318.
SoLiNus,  202.
S6mabu(jpala,  274.

S6MACARA,  63.

Sbmandt'ha,  in  Goserat,  90.
Sbmardjiy  159.
Sbma  siddhdnioy  377, 382.
S6Mi6wARA  D£vAoi,272.
Sammonacodomy  196.
SbraiVhd  metre,  88,  90, 156.
Soul,  194.

Sp'H6f AYANA,  48.

i^'hutay  325,  395,  406,  456.
Sp'huta  suroy  406.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


INDEX.


557


Splmta  siddhdnta,  391.
Spots  in  the  moon,  244.
Sragdhard,\\&,\^.

5>-«y,  161.

^ramaha,  196,  203.
^ravacas,  195.
§ravandy  34\,35S.
§rc^cd,\60.
§ri,  158, 160.

SrIballabhachIbya,  46.
SrIbhadra,  49.
§r1chanoba  DivA,  286.
^RfDUARA,  422,  469,  500.

SrIdHARA  OHACRAVARTf,  4?.

^rIdhaba  swam!,  116,  357.
§RfHAR8HA,  64,  98, 104, 188.
SbIpIla,  286.
§BfpATi,  323,  363.
SbIpati  datta,  45.
Sriputa,  160.

§RfsH6ifA,  386,  388, 407,  476,
480.

SRjfsuflDHARA,  41.

Srivaisa,  210.

SrtOa  hbdha,  65.

Stanza  in  Sanscrit  poetry, how

composed,  70.
Stephanus  Byzantinus,  202.
Strabo;  his  account  of  Indian

classes,  200,  &c.
Siri,  158.

SuBANDHU,  98, 134, 135.
Suhhadracay  161.

§UBHANGA,  20.

Suhhdshita  ratna  sandoha,  53, 462.

SuBh6tI  CHANDRA,  49,  54.

SubddJiml,  46.
Stwesara,  161.
^uclabaias,  218.


Sucldmbaras,  220.
^itddhavirdjy  159.
^dha  virdl  Hshabha,  165.
§uddh6dana,  251.
iSi^a,  162.

SUDUACARA,  4S.

SuDHARMA  swXmf,  316,  317.

^fudha  trdtriya  Brdhmanas,  188.

Sudhdsubddha,  47*

Siidras,  178.

SuoATA,  206,  251.

Su^rui,  154.

SumdUUi,  159.

Sumdnicd,  159.

^mbhadesa,  179.

Sumttc'hi,  160.

SunandiniflQ].

Sunap'hay  529.

SUMDARA,  95.
SUNDARANANDA,  57.

Sundari,  129, 163.

SENDER,  23.

SunnUy  226,  &c.

Supadma,  47,  56,

Supadma  dhdtupdia,  47.

Supadma  macaranda,  47.

Supadma  parisishia,  47.

Supavitrdf  161.

5i//>r6<wArM,  158.

Supriydy  151.

Stfr«*<i,  163.

Surasina,  66.

S6rya,375,377.

S^BYAoisA,  421,  422,  428,  451.

5<£ryrt  pracdsa,  45 1 .

^MT^rt  siddhdnta,  323,  &c.,  349,

351,  &c.,  378,  362,  388,  &c.
SCryasuri,  451,  454.
Suryavama,  318.
5yt*rf,  342.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


£58


INDEX.


Suvadand^  116.
Suvasa,  159.
^ushamdj  159.

8u8Hii«A  OAVIRAJA,  45.

S(Ua,  182.

Sutras  of  NrYsinha,  453.

S(Uras  of  PIi«iNi,  5,  40 ;  of  Pin-

OALA,  63.

Suvadandf  163.
Sw6g(U6,  104, 130, 160.
8wlMf,  20,  49.
Swdmi,  314.
Swaraj^  153.
Swastica,  209.
^w^W,  337.

SwatampbaoIIInanda,  42.
Swe7r^gr6ma^  179.
^wiTAciTU,  251.

§wiT6TPALA,  461.

Syauras,  195.
5^eniV^,  160.


ro^^jTi,  333.
raAf^rw  'ImefetH,  345.
ToA^o/,  333.
7'4;Vico,  526.
Taijasa  iarira,  194.
Tailanga  BrdhnuHuu,  179.
Tailanga  language,  31.
Tflt/fCfl,  182.

TIjUDDfN,  173.

Tdkt,  151.
Tm,  158.

Tdmarasa^  160,  164.
Tam^r,  182.
ramrocwJa,  180.
Tafntt/  language,  29.
Tafidamy  151.
TAfj6iN,  63.


Tanlicay  182.
Tiifi/i,  180.

TarUra,  in  astronomy,  477*
TTw^nw,  18, 177, 185,  &c.
TarUraprad^  43.
Taniravdya,  180,  181, 183.
Tanumadht/d,  159.
Tanwi,  163.
r<Sr<icfl,  161.
TlRA0HAif6f,  290.
Toro/aiuiyanS,  160.
TbfOft^tVU,  49.

TI&APALA,  59.

Tajr/;  utr/ah,  335.

Tarar^tt  'Ihucamd,  510,  518.

7bto,160.

ro^rtca  66(2Am{,  13,41.

ro/^tra  Chandra,  14,  38,  41.

r^rtftoa  vivcca,  324, 352, 359, 379

453,
Torvipuld,  158.
TeHnga  language,  31.
Teppas,^.

THiBiT,345,348,383.
Thacura,  189.
Thwrayyd,  331.
TSca  MTVOMra,  55.
7Ytoca,159.
TVnni,  158.
rf>ttra,  241.
TirhuCiya  dialect,  27; writbg,

242,  247.
Tirii&y  158.
TMhancara,  213.
Tifhi,  364.
7<9<iai<i  <afi/ra,  178.
Tomara,  159.
T^cfl,  74, 110, 160.
T6rALl,292.
Tribhan^  157.


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


INDEX.


569


Tricanda,  52,  53.
TricdiiBa  chintdma^,  5?.
TricdHaa  scsha^  20,  58.
TricdikSa  vivica,  57.

TrILOOHANA  DA8A,  45,  57.

Tripdd  mushiubh,  152.
Tripddffdy(U7%\52.
Tripdd  ush^ih,  152.
Tripdd  virdj  igdyatri)^  152.
Trishtubh,  152, 153, 160.

TriVICBAMA  BHAffA,  105, 135.
Trivid^  305.
Tuld,  473.

TuLASfDASA,  94, 102.
TuAaca,  161.
Turigd,  159.
Tungabhadrd,  284.
Tunuhcas,  198.

U.

Ubhayavipuld^  154.
Uccach^hd,  156.
«7rf'^,  158.
Udatadhayala,  293.
UdayXditya,  299,  309.
Udayana,  16.
27(i(Mar«Ai^a,  161.
£/i4rfl<«,131,165.
Udgdt'hd,  154.
^7«ferl/l,  73, 154.
i7fi«<?Ayfl  tTr«t,  78, 155.
CT^fyrt,  69.
Uggdhd,  154.
Z7^-rt,  181.
£5;t»to,  2  J  2.
UjjwaTi,  160.
l^/c<S,  48.
C7/<S/fl,90,156.
U1.U0H  Bbg,  329,  &c.
Umapati,  45.


UUdi,  59.

UUdi  m^Ui,  47.

Upachitrd,  86, 155, 160  164.

UpagUi,  73, 154,

C5»a;VW,  99,  102,  &c.,  124,  160,

164.
Upamdlini,  161.
UparishtddjyotishmaH,  153.
Vparishtdd  vrihaii,  152.
Upast'hitd,  159, 160.
Upast'hita  prachupita,  165.
Upav6das^  20,

Upindravqjray  99, 130, 160, 164.
UrdvHhatl,  152.
C^M^A,  152,  159.
£^<ci,  158.
rift?/w?A7*4,  92,  156.
i7/cff/a,  28.

Z7<cfl/a  Brdhmahas,  179.
Utcalicd  prdga,  133.
i7ifcrf<i,  164.
£/ifp^mJ,20,53,161.
i7<*ara,  162.
UtsarpiM  age,  207.
^iftora  bhddrapadoy  343.
Uitarap'hdisfuni,336.
Uuardshdelha,  363.


VIOHESPATI,  19,  59.
Fac/ra,  118,  142,157.
Vdcya  pradipa^  42.
Vaicdrica,  194.
Vaidarbhi  dialect,  67.
FajV^Aa,  183.
Vaidicas,  188.
Fi/%<i,  180.
Vaijayantif  20.
VaUtshica  school,  219.
Vaishamya  caumt$d(,  57.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


560


INOBX.


Vaishhavasy  197.
Vaiswadevi,  160.
Fa%«i.9, 178. Vaisffa  c\aM  Mxaong

the  Jainas,  195.
VaUdliyay  78,  &c,  155,  164.
Vaiydcarana  bhusha^,  42.
VuiydcarahabhiishdMS&ray  42.
VaiydcaraHa  Hddh&tUa  manjitshd,

42.
VdjivdhaTMy  163.
r<%a,  309.
Fa/Zflr*,  154.
ViLMfci,  101.
VImana,  20,  38.
Vdmana  caiicd,  249.

VaMANA  JAYADITYA, 40.
V^ImANI^NOBA  SWAAlf, 13.

Vana,  131.

VANADfVA  BHAffA,  57.

Vanamdldy  162.
Vanamdlddhara,  162.
Fana  vdncd,  86, 155.
Fo^'  6^i^Aa^,  64.
Fd^mi,  162.
Vaniid,  159-
Vansapatray  162.
Vansapatrapatita,  162.
Kati«w/'Aa,  103,  105,  106,  160.
VoTimsfhavilay  160.

VANSfVADANA,  46.

VarIuamihira,  64,  173,  353,
&c.,  359,  &c.,  373,  385,  389,
424,  429,  457,  461,  475,  477,
&c.

Vdrdhl{gdyatH\\52.

Vdrdhi  sankitd,  355,  337,  409,
424,

Vardjivi,  181.

VARARUcnr,  20,  44,  45,  48,  53.

Varasundarif  161.


Varatanuy  160.
Varayuvatiy  162.
Vardhamdndy  165.
Vardhamdnd  {gdyatti)y  152.
Vardhamana,  213,  &c.
Vardhahana  mi^ra,  45.
Varendray  179,  188.
Vdrhaspatya  family,  305.
Vdrkaspatya  school,  219.
Varmauy  see  Verman,
Var^y^l.
VaHiadesandy  59.
Variia  vr^Ua,  96.
VdrticaSy  49.

Vdrticds  on  Pacini's  sutrtu,  6,
10, 37,  40,  42.

VARUifA  BHAffA,  461.

F<i*an4,  157,  324,  452.

Vdsand  hhdshyay  220,  224,  359,

376,  380,  404,  423.
Vdsand  vdrticd,  376,  396,  453.
Vasanttty  159.
Vasanta  iilacay  117, 130, 146, 149,

161.
Vdsandy  161.
Vdsavadattdy  98, 134.

VASISHf'HA,  323.

VasishVha  sidd/idntay 379, 382,

386,  &c.,  476,  480.
VdsudevaSy  215.
Vastimatiy  159.
Fa/6mi,  104, 160.
Vatsa,  188.
FiJya,  in  astronomy,  469.

V^DAOARVA,  188.

VeddjUay  193,  197.

Vedasy  their  antiquity,  197,  199,
204.  Obsolete  dialect  of  the
VedoSy  3.  Metres  peculiar  to
the  VedaSy  152, 153.  The  VSdas


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


IN  DEX.


661


rejected  by  the  Bauddhas  and

Jainasy  192.
Vedhavalaya^  325.
Veffavady  164.
Vermatiy  190,  303.
Vaya,  154.

Vetdia panchavinsaiif  87*
Vibudha  priydy  163.

ViCRAMADITYA, 20, 475.

FfVri'/i-,  163.
Ftcshipa,  466.
Viderbha,  67-
Vidyddhara,  160.
Vidydnagar,  255,  258.

VlDYiviN6DA, 116.

Vidyuiicc'hdy  159.
Vidyunmdld,  109, 159,  162.
TiflS^/,  161.
Fi>4^^,  154.
rii7(i/*A<i,  154.
Ff^W,  154.

VlGBAHAPALA ofeVA,  280,  &C.

nya,  467.

?^<;a  gaMttty  419.

Vajaprnb6dhay  453.

VlJAYA  CHANDRA,  286, &C.

Vijayapuroy  249.
ry6Aa,  159.

ViMALA  8ARASWAT1,  48.
VlNAYACA,  174.

Vindhya  vdsinU  249.
ViparUdc'hydnaciy  124, 164.
ViparUapat'hyA,  158.
Vipina  Hhca,  161.
Fi>ra,  151.

rf>iiAi,73,  119, 154,  158.
^tr4;',  153.
Ft1ac'A4,  338.
VOL.  11.


ViUshicdy  160.
Fishcumbhay  363.
ViSHiju,248,256.  His  nine  foes,

218.

ViSHijU CHANDRA, 379, 380,

386,  388,  407,  476,  480.
yishhu  dharmbUara  purdnOy  324,
389,  391,  396,  408,  457.

VlSH^U  Mf^RA, 47.
Vi8h6u  PA^6lTA, 451.

FisMu  purdiiay  357,  362.
Vishnu  &ARMAN,  166.
rislbcay  86,  155.
Fismitay  163.
Fistdra  panctiy  153.
Viiwa  cbshOy  19.
ViSwanat'ha, 57. Another

writer  of  that  name,  452,  &c.
Vihoa  pracdsGy  58.
ViIwarat'ha,  ^ti,
ViswarCpa,  454.
Fitanay  119,159.

Vlff*HALA  ACHARYA,  41.

yivdddrhavas'etUy  177-
Fivaranas  on  Pacini,  7«
V6pADf  VA, 15,  38, 44,  &c.  56.
V6pal1ta  see  B6pal1ta,
Fi'oja  bhdshdy  33.
VRtoDHA  OAROA,  355,  356.
rriddha  vdsishVhay  392.
Frthad  amara  c6shay  20.
Vrthad  draiiyacay  193.
rrihad  dharma  purdnay  177,  &c.
Vrihad  hdrdvalU  57-
VrXhad  vivdha  patahy  478.
Vf^hadydtrdy  478.
Vr^hatiy  152,  159.
Vrihatjdtacay  364,  477,  478.
2  Q


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


562


INDEX.


Vr^hat  mghakti,  20.

rr^hatsanhitd,  473,  475,  478.

Vr^hai  s^rpa  siddhdnta,  484.

VHndavema  champiif  136.

Vr^fUd,  160.

Vr^sha,  332.

rr^shabha,20S,365.

Vf^tta,  163.

Vr^Ud,  160.

FHfttn  caumudi,  64.

FrT/to  (jipyTMi^  64,  65.

VHttagandhi,  133.

FrTtta  muctdvan,  64,  65,  73.

Vrtttaretn&cara,  64,  &c.,  88, 100>

118, 132.
FHT^t  sangrahOy  38,  40.
VriUbcH  ratna,  64,  65.
Vydcira  dlpicdy  46.
Vydc^hydmrita^  55,
Vydc'hyd  pradipay  55,
Vydc^hyd  sdra^  45.
Vydc'hyd  sudhd^  55.
VYlof,  20,  53.

VTAOHBABHtfTf, 49.

VtIohbapIda,  49.
Vydla,  130,  164.
VtXsa,  101.


W.


ff^ujithy  370.


YXdava,  49.

YajNYA  NARlTAi^A,  49.

Yajur  veda,  35,  260.


KewTuioa,  158.

Yan  lug  anta  sir^maM,  43. •

YaSahpIla,  278.

YIsoA,  43,  64.

YAS6yABMA,  299,  307, 309,  312,

314.
Faiis,  195.
Yavamadhydf  153.
Yavamaii,  165.

Ydvanas,  184,  365,  &c.,  373,  410.
YavanIohabta,  365,  367,  373,

411.
Ydvaitdvatf  431.
Yarvipuld,  158.
yauvanamof^  162.
Ybdha,  159.
l%a,  362,  &c.
y&^tf  8choo),  219,
l%a  sdstra,  63.
r6^a/^ra,  323,  362.
K^a  t^o^t^Af^a,  102.
Ybf'ana,  222.

YuOHISHf  HIRA, 198.

Yuga,  410,  414,  473,  474,
yti^a  of  the  solstice,  465.
Yugma,  71.
Yuvardja,  286.

Z.

Z(^^,  341.

Z(^  'Ihaik,  345.

Ztroa,  333.

Zodiac,  its  division,  321,  449.

Zubanahy  zubdniyahy  338.

Zubrah,  336.


SND OF VOL. II.


Digkized  by  VjOOQ IC


ERRATA  IN  VOL.  I.

Page  Line

15,  11, /or  ASwalIyana  r^arf  ASwalItana.

17> 7, from  bottom,  for  CouVhumi  read  CauVhuml.

42,  12, for  5;icAi>M^  read  5ac%w^a.

54, 9, for  SwiTAofiTU  read  SwixAcfixu.

64, 3, for  Cdnwa  read  CdAwa.

76,  22, /or  YARuif  A  read  VARuiiA.

83,  14, for  prapdtacas  retid  prapdtacas.

96,  16, for  Cat'havain  read  Cdt'havain.

107,  23, /or  "  calender  "  rearf  «  calendar."

185,  22, for  kswmi  read  Aiwivi.

190,  11,  for  «  does"  reoi^  "  doest."

190,  12, from  bottom, for BrdhnkMch^handasi  read  Brdh-

fMtha  ch*handasi,

200,  15, for  "  the  white  Vajush  "  read  "  the  black  Yajushr
307, 1, for  Cau^huma  read  GdMrAwnfi.


In  vol.  II.


55, last  Wne^far MaitrIta, Raoshita r«arf Maitr£ya

RACSHITA.


LONDON:

Printed  by  J.  L.  Cox  and  Son 8»  75«  Great  Queen  Street,

Lincoln's-Inn  Fields.


Digitized  by  CjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


■c::;r ^  ^


Digitized  by  VjOOQ IC


-mrt^
