Speculum Mentis; or, The Map of Knowledge (R. G. Collingwood, 1924)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/bwb_C0-AOF-258). Collingwood's map of the forms of knowledge — art, religion, science, history, philosophy — in dialectical order.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Ss
SSS,


ees
ES


A
ao :
2

Se NU


SS
»

~
2.
os


Digitized by the Internet Archive
In 2025


https://archive.org/details/owb_CO-AOF-258


= ¥ BBAL 2000,


Oxford University Press, Ely House, London W.1


GLASGOW NEW YORK TORONTO MELBOURNE WELLINGTON
CAPE TOWN SALISBURY IBADAN NAIROBI DAR ES SALAAM LUSAKA ADDIS ABABA
BOMBAY CALCUTTA MADRAS KARACHI LAHORE DACCA
KUALA LUMPUR SINGAPORE HONG KONG TOKYO


FIRST PUBLISHED 1924


REPRINTED LITHOGRAPHICALLY IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD


1946, 1956, 1963, 1970


BE FAL BBAL 2000


7
SiG Wile w Mv
MENTIS


or


The Map of Knowledge


by


R,. G. CoLiutncwoop


Os y
BAéropev yap aprt Oi éoonrpov ev aivtypare


OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS


C146295 Fea


! <i) ee
000s Aga ;


MAS aye e |


Se i ee


2rEruaM


Bie


sgholwond ta qell Lar ”:


ied -
7. :
ae
{ a


JOOWDHLLIO ON 0) eae ae -


TO


MY FIRST AND BEST TEACHER
OF
ART, RELIGION
SCIENCE, HISTORY
AND
PHILOSOPHY


“ } - Or a —
— #20 S45 / yeaa Gta fens 7,
| 70 |
= “4olotsan ,1a4 * if her ‘
Yaoreru 248132 ~ Ve
dis. « Soe


~¥HG020RTHS >


CON TEN ASS


PREFACE
I. PROLOGUE

It. SPECULUM MENTIS

III. ART
1. Art as pure Imagination
2. The Work of Art
3. The Monadism of Art
4. Meaning in Art
5. Knowledge as Question aaa hee:
6. Art as a form of Error

Z

8


. The Dialectic of Art .
. Play


IV. RELIGION
1. The Transition from Art to Religion
2. The Growth of Religion
3. Religion and its Object
4. Symbol and Meaning in Religion
5. Convention 4
6. The Task of Betiront

7


. The Transition from Religion ta the Life of


Thought


VV. SCIENCE
1. The Life of Thought .


BBAL 2000


2. Science as the assertion of tiie Abert


Concept
. A priori or Deductive Suicice
. Utility or Abstract Ethics .
. Empirical or Inductive Science .
. Science as Supposal .


. Understanding and ‘Reason


Science as the Intujtive Roun = Tiouent PAH Kote:


. ee’ ee 7 oo Aaa ae ee


8 CONTENTS


VI. HISTORY PAGE
I. History as the Assertion of Fact : ~ 20%
2. The Growth of History. SIZES
3. The World of Fact as Absolute Object i ry
4. Duty or Concrete Ethics . . 228.
5. The Breakdown of History : 231
6. The Transition from History to Philosophes 239

VIT.- PHILOSOPHY
1. Philosophy as Self-Consciousness ‘ 247
2. Realistic or Dogmatic bias: in general 252
3. Aesthetic Philosophy . ; 260
4. Religious Philosophy : : é 2 264
5. Scientific Philosophy : F ‘ 5 27k
6. Historical Philosophy .. : L261
7. The Theory of the Forms of Ee : =; 288
8. Philosophy as Absolute iT eae : » 32Or
g. The Absolute Mind . : : ~ 1207
to. Absolute Ethics : ys é - 304

VIII. SPECULUM SPECULI : : , - 306


INDEX . : : ; , , ; « 319


rReeACE


TuIs book is the outcome of a long-growing conviction
that the only philosophy that can be of real use to anybody
at the present time is a critical review of the chief forms of
human experience, a new Treatise of Human Nature philo-
sophically conceived. Thisisa project which in itself is not
new ; but its possibilities are very far from being exhausted.
We find people practising art, religion, science, and so forth,
seldom quite happy in the life they have chosen, but generally
anxious to persuade others to follow their example. Why
are they doing it, and what do they get for their pains ?
The question seems, to me, crucial for the whole of modern
life, and I do not see the good of plunging into the systematic
exposition of logic or ethics, psychology or theology, till it is
answered.

Nor can I, even at the outset, conceal my suspicion that
a philosophy of this kind—a philosophy of the forms of
experience—is the only philosophy that can exist, and that
all other philosophies are included in it. In the present
state of opinion, I hesitate to acknowledge a belief in the
possibility of a philosophical system, and to confess the
crime of offering the reader, in the present volume, a crude
sketch of such a system. I do not expect the critic to spare
his blows: I only say ‘strike, but hear me’. The hatred
of systematic thought is not in my opinion a fault ; it is
based on recognizing two important truths, first, that no
system can ever be final, and secondly, that a coherent
system is so difficult a thing to achieve that any one who
claims to have achieved it is probably deceiving himself or
others. I do not claim to have achieved it. I only confess
that Iam aiming at it as at a counsel of perfection, and that


10 PREFACE


I regard the deliberate renunciation of this ideal as the
degradation of philosophy to a game, one of the most tedious
and stupid of games.

This book is only an outline, and I have tried to reduce
detail and sketch in my main forms as boldly and emphati-
cally as possible, not sparing repetition of the essential
points if I thought they could be usefully placed in a new
light. The conventional limitations to the size of books
have more effect upon the choice of their contents than
readers are apt to imagine; and the internal capacity of
his expected guest imposes an absolute limit on the hospi-
tality of any host. I would venture to dwell on the parallel.
The reader is partaking of a meal set before him by the
writer, and is bound to him by the tie of hospitality given
and received. Let hiin be content to eat what is set before
him in the order in which it appears, and not call for the
cheese when the fish is being served, or complain of not
being given three different entrées instead of the joint. The
host has done his best for his guests’ comfort. He has not
wittingly flouted any one’s taste, and wishes only to speak
even his enemies fair, should they appear at his table. But
he, and no one else, has the responsibility for choosing the
viands and directing how they shall be served, and the
reader is asked not to be offended if the writer’s choice of
arrangement and terminology differs from his own.

For arrangement, I have tried to make the subjects with
which I have dealt arrange themselves in an order natural
to them. For terminology, I have recognized one aim only,
to write English that a well-disposed and intelligent reader
will understand if he tries. No writer can protect himself
against the verbal pedant who tears two sentences from their
context and sets them together in the hope that, infuriated
by the pain of transplantation, they will fall to fighting.


PREFACE 11


And it is my strong belief that a philosophy which cannot
be written in plain terms, without reliance on the jargon of
any school, must be a false philosophy. I have not avoided
such jargon altogether, but I have seldom used it except
with the intention of reminding the reader of some techni-
cality as an illustration to my argument.

But I may here call attention to one or two words which,
though I think my use of them is natural and correct, may
be a stumbling-block to others beside the malicious. When
I call a thing subjective I mean that it is or pertains to
a subject or conscious mind. When I call it objective,
I mean that it is or pertains to an object of which such
a mind is conscious. I do not call a real rose objective and
an imaginary one subjective, or the rose objective and its
colour subjective, or the molecules in it objective and the
beauty of it subjective. A real rose I call real, and an
imaginary rose I call imaginary; and I call them both
objective because they are the objects of a perceiving and an
imagining mind respectively. Similarly, the molecules are
objective to a scientist and the beauty to an artist. Again,
where formal logic uses the words judge, judgement, I have
permitted myself, out of respect for English use, to substitute
assert and assertion, or state and statement, where no
confusion could result. Again, when I speak of a sensation,
imagination, thought, or the like, I sometimes mean an
object sensated, sometimes the act, habit or faculty of
sensating it, and so on. If any critic is so unaccustomed
to the English language that he finds himself confused by
this usage, I can only commend him to the mercy of heaven.
To suppose that one word, in whatever context it appears,
ought to mean one thing and no more, argues not an
exceptionally high standard of logical accuracy but an
exceptional ignorance as to the nature of language.


12 PREFACE


It would be pleasant to attempt an acknowledgement of
my debts, but this is a temptation which must be resisted.
There is hardly any philosopher whom I have read from
whom I am not conscious of having learnt something ; and
indeed one learns what one has it in one to learn, not what
one’s teachers have it in them to teach. But whatever view
of life is contained in this book has been acquired in the
main neither from teachers nor from books, but in the course
of working at things which are not called philosophy.
Looking at pictures and reading books about them qualifies
nobody for discussing the philosophy of art. For that, one
must spend much time and trouble in the actual practice of
the arts, or at least one of them, and learn to reflect on the
experience so gained. The same applies to the other forms
of thought which I have discussed in these chapters; for
to write a philosophical book is to write a commentary on
human life, and a commentary compiled out of commentaries
on an unread text is a thing of shame. I should like to be
able to persuade the reader that the things I have said about
this or that form of experience are not ingenious objections
to theories but plain information as to where in one or other
kind of life the shoe pinches. But then the stage philosopher
who does nothing but sit and think is a person whom, if he
exists, I have not met.

On the other hand, to write a commentary without con-
sulting previous commentaries would argue not scholarship
but ignorance, not sincerity but frivolity. And by greatly
adding to the bulk of this volume I could easily have pointed
out the affinities of my position with that of eminent writers
past and present, and so, perhaps, have recommended it to
readers who rightly shrink from any philosophy which is
advertised as new. If I have consistently refrained from
doing this it is only because I want my position to stand on


PREFACE 13


its merits rather than on names of great men cited as wit-
nesses for its defence. But if the reader feels that my thesis
reminds him of things that other people have said, I shall
not be disappointed: on the contrary, what will really
disappoint me is to be treated as the vendor of new-fangled
paradoxes and given some silly name like that of ‘ New
Idealist’. I do not, with presumptuous mock-modesty,
claim that the philosophy of this book is a poor thing but
mine own. Rather, with what I hope is the arrogance of
humility, I claim that it restates to the best of my power
the essence, or what I take to be the essence, of every great
philosopher’s teaching. The bickerings of philosophical sects
are an amusement for the foolish ; above these jarrings and
creakings of the machine of thought there is a melody sung
in unison by the spirits of the spheres, which are the great
philosophers. This melody, philosophia quaedam perennis,
is not a body of truth revealed once for all, but a living
thought whose content, never discovered for the first time,
is progressively determined and clarified by every genuine
thinker. To have contributed anything substantial to that
process I dare not claim ; but I at least know that by this
test, and no other, the value of my work must be judged.
BG, C.


STAPLETON’S CHANTRY,
NorTH MOoRETON.
August, 1923.


iene = if S


— es a
roawen4
tl ein


ou Bee te etree allo elie eam i


=


ties) Get coke alia india
conte 1 Ole bind sigan end eedegaids eimai aiioees
ttn. ie - ial Paar) le oe tiene gad
(oad git peta ae 3.2 Laenectae aa ea gS
~.. “Ghiv> ip: Morte =a om Mid eet
ais bn @aitow heb oe ip ei
hantiel y ted ar i tines ee
Loot ad) alieggod iene et
[rane ¥ ot recteeulonetageds


I
PROLOGUE


ALL thought exists for the sake of action. We try to
understand ourselves and our world only in order that we
may learn how to live. The end of our self-knowledge is not
the contemplation by enlightened intellects of their own
mysterious nature, but the freer and more effectual self-
revelation of that nature in a vigorous practical life. If
thought were the mere discovery of interesting facts, its
indulgence, in a world full of desperate evils and among men
crushed beneath the burden of daily tasks too hard for their
solitary strength, would be the act of a traitor : the philoso-
pher would do better to follow the plough or clout shoes, to
become a slum doctor or a police-court missionary, or hand
himself over to a bacteriologist to be inoculated with tropical
diseases.

Nor can we silence these reflections by arguing that the
passion for truth, the desire to know, is planted in the human
breast by Nature herself, and must be satisfied no less tian
the demand for food and clothing. The philosopher may
try to defend his position by comparing himself with the
producer of any commodity necessary to the health and
decency of mankind; but he knows very well that his
thoughts are not quoted on the Stock Exchange along with
corn and rubber, and that when he offers them to the world,
the world is frankly uninterested. Except by professed
students, his lectures are unattended and his books unread.
If the great public cried out for philosophy as it does cry
out for novels and cinematograph-shows, it could very soon
get all it wanted. But the demand is not there, and the


16 PROLOGUE


supply dissipates itself like an ‘ earthed’ electric current.
The philosopher cannot justify his existence as the writer
of popular novels can, by saying that he satisfies a need
universally felt.

If the philosopher pipes to a generation that will not
dance, he is in this not alone. Religion to-day is in much
the same state. There is, thanks to our various communities
and sects, a steady supply of religion laid before the public,
and a supply so varied that one would expect all tastes to
find satisfaction. But we actually see everywhere empty
churches, or churches filled only by the popularity of
a preacher or for some other personal reason, not because
the religious principles for which they stand are such as give
peace and consolation to the people who attend them.
A man who devotes his life to religion, like one who devotes
himself to philosophy, is offering wares in a market that
cannot absorb them.

Nor is art, in spite of the popular novels, in a better state.
Thousands of men and women are trying merely to live by
artistic production, and failing. It is not that their work
is bad, nor even that there is too much of it for the demand.
The actual output of pictures andstatues, poems and string
quartets does not fail of its market because of its own low
quality ; for the purchasers do not buy the best, because they
have not the skill to distinguish it ; and any one who doubts
this can prove it to himself by merely walking round an
exhibition of pictures and observing which of them are
marked with red seals. Nor are these things unpurchased
because there are too many of them ; a rich man will spend
in cigars alone a sum that would purchase the whole output
of a promising young painter. But the rich man wants
cigars, and he does not want pictures. He may buy old
masters, Rembrandt etchings, Sheraton sideboards, and


PROLOGUE 17


early Chinese porcelain, but why does he buy these, and
not the work of his contemporaries? ‘ Because his con-
temporaries cannot turn out such good work as the old
masters.’ If this is true, is it relevant? If young Jones
cannot etch as well as Rembrandt, is Sir Gorgius Midas so
exquisitely sensitive to refinements of the etcher’s art that
he values the purely aesthetic superiority of a Rembrandt
over a Jones at the difference between £1,000 and nothing ?
Every one knows that this is not so; and the disputes about
the genuineness of ‘ antiques’ are flagrant proof that the
buyer does not buy old masters because they are masters,
but because they are old. The craze for old masters is
merely a symptom of the failure of modern artists to reach
the ear of the public, and the correlative failure of the
modern public to appreciate its artists.

Is this a peculiarity of our age, or was it always so? In
part, it is a permanent and necessary feature of human life ;
but in part it is a special failing of our age. It has always
been true that prophets are without honour in their own
country ; that the great man, when he appears, is more
likely to be despised and rejected than to be crowned as
king. This is inevitable, and one would not have it other-
wise. A really great man does not take pleasure in admira-
tion, except it be the admiration of those whom he respects
as equals; he would not thank us if we offered him the
adulation of all the contemporaries whose incapacity to
judge his work is to him only too evident. There is in all
greatness something forbidding and inimical to the small,
and all great men have their enemies. It is only after many
days that mankind resolves upon canonizing them and
enters their names on the roll of those who may be invoked
and must not be criticized. It is only of the dead that


nothing is spoken but good.
2792 B


18 PROLOGUE


Great men can look after themselves. We are rather
concerned with the journeymen labourers in the fields of
art and religion and philosophy. It is these who in our age
seem out of touch with the world, unable to give the public
what it wants, And this is a new and a serious matter.
We are apt to defend our present inattention to art, to
religion, to philosophy, by bewailing the present lack of
great men. Ours, we say, is an age of little men : how can
we care for their work ? Our little poets—how can we have
patience with them? Send us another Keats, and we will
listen. Good sirs, if the soul of Keats could be re-embodied
upon earth, you would treat him as your fathers treated
him before. You have learned by now to like his Odes ;
but if he came to earth again he would not repeat them, but
write something as far in advance of this age as his Odes
were in advance of that. The lack of great men, if it is true
that we lack great men, is no excuse for our lack of interest
in art, for a great man is never recognized by his generation
for what he is, and is accepted only because he—for instance
—writes plays in a generation that cares for plays, not
because he is William Shakespeare. Indeed, this harping
upon great men is simply a parrot-cry designed by indolence
and folly as a defence against the humiliation of self-
knowledge and a means of evading responsibilities. We are
tempted to regard the great man as a miracle sent by
Heaven to extricate us from sloughs in which, till he appears,
we may wallow at our ease, cursing God for not sending us
a great man to pull us out, but in the meantime doing
nothing towards climbing out by ourselves. If God does
not send us great men, we may be sure that it is only because
we do not deserve them ; in other words, because we have
made ourselves a world in which no great man could reach
maturity and keep his greatness unimpaired. The greatest


PROLOGUE 19


painter will not do much for modern art if you keep him all
his life in a coal-mine; the greatest philosopher will not
go far towards teaching you the truth if you blow him to
pieces with a shell at the age of twenty.

Our concern is therefore with the ordinary artists, the
ordinary ministers of religion and students of philosophy,
who exist among us in great plenty and yet fail to justify,
in the world’s eyes, their very existence. These people are
not incompetent or insincere or vicious as a class; they
include men and women of every degree of virtue and
ability ; yet they fail, and fail with a thoroughness which
is a new thing in the world’s history. The general public,
and that class of rich people whose taste on the whole
faithfully represents that of the general public, is not
apathetic in matters of taste. It is keenly and wholesomely
interested in football and racing, business and wages, even
politics. But in art and religion and philosophy it is not
interested, and for the people who practise them it cares
not a straw. It is not moved to excitement by news of
an event in the world of painting or of metaphysics, as it is by
a new idea in the technique of Rugby football or a move-
ment of prices. We do not say this in any spirit of con-
tempt. The man who despises the poor for their interest
in football or the rich for their interest in grouse-shooting
is a man whose opinion on any important subject is likely
to be worthless. Wesay it because it is a fact which we are
concerned to analyse. For it is a new fact. It was not so
when young men of every degree crowded to Oxford to hear
Duns Scotus, or when Cimabue’s Madonna went through
the streets of Florence, or even when London society fell to
quarrelling about the merits of Handel and Buononcini.

But the great public is not really indifferent either to art,
or to religion, or to philosophy. Everybody wants a pretty

B2


20 PRroLoGewr


house to live in, pleasant furniture and crockery to put in it,
and nice clothes to wear. Everybody wants to see his
public-house and his town-hall well built and handsomely
decorated. Everybody wants some faith that will guide
him in his difficulties, support him in his temptations, and
comfort him in his sorrows. And everybody wants some
answer to the riddles and mysteries that beset him on every
side, some reply to the question whence he comes, whither he
goes, and what he is. These are permanent needs of man-
kind, and our age is not free from them: or why do the rich
spend great sums of money on pictures and ornaments, and
why is the cult of spiritualism and exotic religions a very
disease of society ? The demand for art, religion, philosophy,
is a real thing to-day, as real as ever it was. Nor is it a
demand incapable of at least partial and provisional satis-
faction; men have surrounded themselves with beauty,
they have found peace in God, they have come appreciably
nearer to a solution of the world’s mystery. Art and religion
and philosophy are not vain quests, they are normal activities
of the human mind.

This is the special problem of modern life. On the one
hand, there is an unsatisfied demand for art, religion, and
philosophy. On the other, there is a crowd of artists,
philosophers, and ministers of religion who can find no
market for their wares. Every street and every village in
the country contains people who are hungering for beauty,
for faith, for knowledge, and cannot find these things. And
those who have them are starving for mere bread, because
no one will buy. The producers and the consumers of
spiritual wealth are out of touch ; the bridge between them
is broken and only a daring spirit here and there can leap
the gulf. If one of the consumers finds his want intolerable,
he can satisfy it, no doubt ; he can win scholarships and


PROLOGUE 21


go to universities and schools of art to the admiration of
those who believe in education as an end in itself ; but he
has only escaped one horn of the dilemma to be impaled on
the other. He has satisfied his soul’s desire, and it only
remains for him to starve in a Chelsea attic or a slum curacy,
with the knowledge that he is perfectly useless to those whom
he left in his village at home. He has merely joined the class
of unwanted producers.

This coexistence of overproduction on the one side with
unsatisfied demand on the other I have ventured to call the
special problem of modern life. Our age is often accused of
superficiality and shallowness. It is significant that those
who so accuse it are precisely those at whose piping it will not
dance. They reveal to it their own magnificent plans for its
betterment, and it brushes them aside: they implore it to
behave in this or that way, and it persists in its old courses.
This is enough to annoy any prophet ; but a prophet scolding
to empty benches is not an edifying sight, and one may be
forgiven for suspecting that the fault lies, at least in part,
with the prophet himself. An engineer whose engine will
not go does not plead that Nature’s stores of energy are
exhausted ; but the social reformer who cannot get society
to obey him is too ready to explain the fact by accusing his
age of spiritual poverty. He ought to know better. He
ought to know—or his licence as a prophet ought to be taken
away—that the spiritual energy pent up within the breast
of hisown boot-and-knife boy is enough to overthrow empires
if the word were spoken that released it. Our age suffers
from no lack of spiritual energy. We are as capable of
shunning delights and living laborious days as the subjects
of Elizabeth or Pericles; we have been nursed upon the
self-same hill with men who have proved, not by argument
but by action, that honour and duty, courage and endurance


22 . P ROTDOGTE


to death are not gone from us. There is no degeneracy in
the human breed as yet, for all the rantings of our unsuccess-
ful reformers.

And yet the fault is not all the prophet’s. He is the son
of his age; and a generation that produces crazy prophets
must be a crazy generation. Every one knows that our
civilization is in difficulties, and the stupidity of the suggested
remedies only indicates the gravity of the disease, for a sick
society has to diagnose and cure its own complaint, and the
worse the complaint, the wilder the diagnosis is likely to be.
But no one denies the disease. On this our philosopher-
novelists, our politician-divines, our Utopia-mongers and
religious revivalists, are agreed. One sect thinks we shall
be well if we redistribute our property ; another, if we are
married by professors instead of priests ; another, if we stop
drinking wine or eating meat; another, if we abolish
machinery or war ; and there is always, by healthy reaction
against all these proposals, a party which maintains that
the disease is better than any suggested cure. But every one
agrees that our present condition is, in some peculiar way,
a morbid one.

Is this general belief a mere illusion? Is our disease
nothing but the fitful fever of life itself, that fever from
which all must suffer and for which there is only and always
a cure in death? To many critics of our civilization one
is tempted to answer that this is so; that they are seeking
to abolish things which are a necessary part of our human
lot, evils bound up with our very life. And against any one
who thinks that socialism would destroy avarice, or that
the abolition of war would put an end to the cruel waste of
human lives, this retort would hold good. But there remains
a difference between our age and earlier ages, a special
maladie du stécle which is endemic among us and which we


PROLOGUE 23


can detect if we compare our own society with that of former
times. If, for instance, we turn to the middle ages and ask
what was the most striking feature of their life, we shall
reply that medieval life was altogether governed by the
idea of institutions. The individual counted for nothing
except as the member of his guild, his church, his monastic
order, his feudal hierarchy. Within these institutions he
found a place where he was wanted, work for him to do,
a market for his wares. He could devote himself to fulfilling
the duties assigned him by his station in this great organism
within which he found himself lodged ; these duties occupied
his whole energy and his whole life, and thus the institution
acted as the safeguard of the individual’s utility and happi-
ness. In saying this we do not idealize medieval life or
hold it free from defect. We do not forget either the
corruptions to which these institutions too often succumbed,
their tendency to level downwards, or the hideous fate of
those adventurous souls who found their limits too narrow.
But the very tendency to level downwards, the very narrow-
ness of medieval institutionalism, secured one great benefit,
namely the happiness of those humble ordinary men and
women who ask not for adventure or excitement, but for
a place in the world where they shall feel themselves usefully
and congenially employed.

The men of the middle ages, as we look back on them,
appear to us half children and half giants. In the narrow-
ness of their outlook, the smallness of the problems they
faced, their fanciful and innocent superstition, their com-
bination of qualities and activities which a reflective or
critical society would find intolerably contradictory, they
are children, and it is difficult for us to believe that human
beings could be so simple. But in the solid magnitude of
their achievements, their systems of law and philosophy,


24 PROLOGUE


their creation and organization of huge nation-states, their
incredible cathedrals, and above all their gradual forging
of a civilized world out of a chaos of barbarism, they seem
possessed by a tenacity and a vastness of purpose that we can
only call gigantic. They seem to be tiny people doing colossal
things.

The secret of the medieval achievement is undoubtedly
connected with the medieval institutionalism. Cathedrals
could be built because there were guilds to do it ; because
men interested in building organized themselves into a body
where work could be parcelled out among competent
workers and where the continuity of tradition and the
community of training guaranteed that these would not
work at cross-purposes. Such guilds, as executive bodies,
were called upon to do whatever work in their line was
required : as schools, they gave his training to every young
man who wished to practise a given craft. Hence the
training of workers and the production of works were always,
through the agency of the guild, kept in touch with the
requirements of the market, and supply and demand
balanced each other. The same principle held good outside
the guilds. A man who wished to paint could devote himself
to painting miniatures in his own monastery ; his work was
valued there, and he could live his life as a painter in the
knowledge that what he was doing was of use to his world.
The systems of land tenure and military and ecclesiastical
service were essentially the same. In every case there was
an organization which gave the individual his place and
duties, told him what to do and—in a rough and ready way,
perhaps—looked after him so long as he did it. And the
great thing about these medieval institutions is that they
actually did find room for good men doing good work, work
which endures in stone and on parchment, and in the fabric
of our own life and thought.


PROLOGUE 26


Now there is no truer and more abiding happiness than
the knowledge that one is free to go on doing, day by day,
the best work one can do, in the kind one likes best, and
that this work is absorbed by a steady market and thus
supports one’s own life. The man who is rich enough to
work unnoticed and unrewarded is by comparison a savage ;
the man who can only do his own work by stealth when he
has won his daily bread elsewhere is a slave. Perfect
freedom is reserved for the man who lives by his own work
and in that work does what he wants to do. But this
freedom and happiness were in principle at least the lot of
every one in the middle ages ; and to what extent they were
actually achieved by no small number of workers we can
see when we look at the work they have left behind them.
For these works breathe visibly the air of a perfect freedom
and a perfect happiness. Chaucer and Dante are no shallow
optimists, but their tragedies are discords perpetually
resolved in the harmony of a celestial music. The funda-
mental thing in Chaucer is the ‘ mery tale’ of human life
as a heartening and lovely pageant, diversified with all the
adventures that befall upon the course

Of thilke parfit glorious pilgrimage

That highte Jerusalem celestial ;
the fundamental thing in Dante is not mere human fortitude,
the ‘ gran dispitto’ of Farinata, but


l’amor che move il sole e |’ altre stelle.


The medieval mind feels itself surrounded, beyond the
sphere of trial and danger, by a great peace, an infinite
happiness. This feeling, so clear in the poets, is equally clear,
to those who have eyes to see, in the illuminations of a missal
and the detail of stonework, in the towers of Durham and
the Vine window at Wells.

But this happiness, characteristically present in the


26 PROLOGUE


medieval mind, is characteristically absent from the
modern. And if our art, our religion, our philosophy, are
dark with foreboding and comfortless in their message, this
is not altogether unconnected with the fact that the medieval
man could be happy because his church or guild told him
what to do and could give him work that he liked; while
the modern man is unhappy because he does not know what
todo. One wishes to bean artist, but there is nothing for him
to do as an artist except to paint pictures that nobody wants.
Another wishes to devote his life to religion or philosophy,
and he can only preach sermons to which no one will listen
or write books that no one will buy. In the middle ages
the first would have worked happily at missals or churches,
the second would have passed his life in prayer and medita-
tion, the third would have helped in some nascent university
to create that medieval logic which is still the background
of all our speech and thought. This fact is so obvious that
some of our social physicians are all for reverting to a
medieval institutionalism and entrusting our welfare to
a system of guilds or a great international Catholic church
or the like, thinking that our individualism is the root of
our troubles. This is an error. Individualism is a symptom,
not a cause; and the middle ages enjoyed that degree of
happiness and success that was theirs, not because of their
institutionalism, but because of something they possessed
which made institutionalism workable. And it is not
difficult to see that the medieval man could only obey his
institution because of the childishness that was in his
disposition ; that it would be useless to reimpose the
medieval institutionalism on the modern world, because
the modern man would always be wanting to go his own way
in spite of his station and its duties.

The medieval man acquiesced in his institutionalism


PROLOGUE 27


because he had firm hold on a principle which we may call
the unity of the mind. No mental activity, for him, existed
in its own right and for itself. Art was always working hand
in hand with religion, religion hand in hand with philosophy.
This is sometimes expressed by saying that art and philo-
sophy were subordinated to religion ; but the subordination
was not, as this phrase suggests, one-sided. Art was the
handmaid of religion, but religion by this very fact acquired
an intensely artistic character. Philosophy was ostensibly
subordinated to faith; but this gave not only a religious
tinge to philosophy but a philosophical tinge to religion.
Thus religion was coloured by art and philosophy to the
same extent to which they were coloured by religion, the
fact being that there was a general interpenetration of
the various activities of the mind, in which each was
influenced by all.

If art and religion are conceived as separate activities, it
will follow that religious art is a peculiar form of art, differing
in certain specifiable ways from art pure and simple. In
the modern world this is so. A church is built in a style of
its own, and an architect accustomed to working on secular
buildings has to tune his mind to a wholly different key if
he begins designing a church. So religious paintings and
secular paintings follow different conventions, and we are
shocked, without understanding why, when we see a sacred
picture which the artist has treated in a secular style. In
the middle ages all this was unknown. The Gothic style of
churches was the Gothic style of the house and the castle ;
it was simply everyday architecture turned to the con-
struction of one building instead of another. So in the
missal-paintings what we should call sacred and secular
subjects are inextricably blended ; the fact being that the
artist never contemplated the existence of the distinction


28 Prreo.vomart


which to us is so real. All art was religious art, or, what
comes to the same thing, all art was secular art ; there was
no special kind of art used for religious purposes, because
there was no feeling that these purposes stood by themselves.

The same is true of philosophy. Nowadays we hear of
something called ‘ religious philosophy ’, and we distinguish
one kind of philosophy as dealing with religious subjects or
questions from another which does not. We accustom
ourselves to think in a special way when our philosophy
concerns religion, and regard theism as a kind of Sunday
philosophy as opposed to other, week-day, theories of the
universe. And if we required theological students to take
a course in philosophy, we should prescribe a theistic
philosophy and pass hastily over the others, even if we did
nothing so crude as to enter them on an index expurgatorius.
But to the middle ages it did not occur as a possibility that
there could be a distinction between a Sunday and a week-
day philosophy. All philosophy was felt to be equally
concerned with religion, and the philosophy officially used
by the church for its own purpose was selected for that
purpose not as having a specially religious tendency but
as being the best philosophy on the market.

Thus the medieval church had the advantage of being
able to use the best philosophy and the best art for its own
purposes, and was not limited to employing in its service
those philosophers who specialized in ‘ religious philosophy ’
or those artists who specialized in ‘ ecclesiastical art’. And
because these specialist philosophers and artists are neces-
sarily bad philosophers and bad artists—since philosophy
and art can only be good when they are just philosophy and
art unqualified by any specialization—it follows that the
medieval church was well served by both philosophers and
artists, with mutual profit. The church got the benefit of


PROLOGUE 20


service by the best men of their age, and the men got the
benefit of working for an institution which encouraged them
to do their best work and guaranteed a market for it.

This was in its way a happy state of things, especially by
contrast with our modern world. But it was only possible
by reason of what we have called the childishness of medi-
eval man. Art, religion, and philosophy are not really the
same thing: there are differences between them which need
not appear as long as they are at a comparatively low level
of development, but appear all too sharply when they reach
maturity. At first it may seem possible to be at the same
time perfectly artistic and perfectly religious ; but if you
develop these two tendencies as fully as you can, if you aim
at ever deepening and intensifying both your religious life
and your artistic life, you will sooner or later come to the
parting of the ways and find that you can be one but not
both. The monastery is an excellent place for primitive
art; but the art of the monastery can never be more than
primitive. And when the artistic mind of a race has per-
fected its primitive art, a crisis will come when either the
progress of art or its connexion with the monastery must
cease. Either the art must remain within the monastery,
cramped into a permanent primitiveness, or it must follow
its own bent, break away from its old surroundings, and
mark its maturity by asserting its independence. In the
same way, a primitive philosophy may develop as it were
in the womb of religion ; but when it is full grown the very
power of thought will bring it to the birth and philosophy
will part from religion as the child parts from its mother.
Only if the power of thought fails, if the unborn child dies
in the womb of its dead mother, will the birth never take
place. It is the very success of the first phase in producing
a healthy and progressive life in art, religion, and philosophy,


CEST


30 PROLOGUE


that ensures the coming of the moment when they must
separate and go each its own way.

In our own history we call this separation the Renaissance.
It did not happen all at once; it was long brewing, and its
premonitory tremors were felt throughout the middle ages.
But these tremors did not overthrow the medieval com-
promise, they rather stimulated men to hold more firmly
by it, and thus the greatest work of the medieval mind was
accomplished, as we can now see, after the death-warrant
of medievalism had gone forth. The art, the religion, and
the philosophy of the middle ages were all alike tinged
with childishness ; primitive, immature. But the medieval
mind was a healthy and progressive organism, and its very
progress brought it to a point at which these tendencies
came into conflict with one another. Art struggled to be
free of religion, to come out of the cloister and work for its
own hand. Thought claimed for itself the same right, the
right to follow its own ideal of truth careless of all else.
Religion too demanded its freedom, its separation from art
and thought, its recognition as a world to itself. Freedom,
the watchword of the Renaissance, meant freedom for all
the different activities of the mind from interference by each
other. Freedom in this sense means separation, the sever-
ance from each other of all man’s various interests. It is
the exact opposite of the medieval unity of the mind, the
interdependence of all these interests. But we saw that the
middle ages too had their freedom ; the freedom of occupy-
ing an ordained place which one desires to occupy and finds
happiness in occupying. This is a freedom in which there
is no conflict, a positive freedom, like the freedom of a child
at play. The freedom of the Renaissance is the freedom of
discovering that one can leave one’s ordained place and
march out into the world without being struck dead by an


PRreLoe et 31


offended God. But God is offended ; that is to say, one has
bought freedom at the price of an internal conflict, a conflict
between the self that wants to wander and the self that
wants to stay at home, the artistic self, it may be, and the
religious self. The freedom of the Renaissance is a negative
freedom, the freedom to outrage one’s own nature: it is
that impulse of which it is written
We all possess,

Like rats that ravin down their proper bane,

A thirsty evil: and when we drink, we die.

This negativity or conflict with itself is characteristic of
the Renaissance and all its fruits. It wins its freedom, but
at the price of its peace. In religion, it gives rise to the
Reformation with its puritanical and philistinic attitude to
art and to thought. The religions of the Reformation set
themselves free from art by destroying its works, and from
philosophy by banishing it from their presence ; the tendency
of puritanism was to make religion an ugly thing and a
stupid thing, a thing for the ignorant and the insensitive. The
same tendency is hardly less evident in the catholicism of the
counter-reformation. This was not allloss ; far from it ; in
this violent divorce from art and thought, religion attained
a pitch of purely religious intensity quite unknown to the
middle ages. Our own puritans may have done permanent
and incalculable damage to English art, but when it came
to religion they had the root of the matter in them and
undoubtedly surpassed the achievement of their medieval
ancestors. Similarly, art declared its independence, and
went so far, in its instinctive reaction against religion, as
to play at reverting to paganism. It did not believe in
paganism, but merely used this fashion to express its new-
found freedom from all religious connexions. Art became
definitely irreligious ; but in this moment it suddenly shot


32 PROLOGUE


up to a stature previously unimagined, and gave birth all
at once to a galaxy of artists whose very names, repeated
in a catalogue, make us wonder whether the men of that
age can have belonged to the same species with ourselves.
Yet these men, without any exception, show in their greatest
work the signs of the struggle which their liberty has entailed.
Supreme as artists, they know that other claims than those
of art press menacingly upon them, and these claims appear
in the form of a brooding tragedy that overshadows all
their work. To the medieval artist, as we saw, the terror
of the world is dissolved in wonder, and fear is but an eddy
on the surface of joy ; but the artist of the Renaissance, like
him of ancient Greece, peers into a darkness that no eye can
penetrate, and is happy only by defying his despair. Nothing
is more typical of the Renaissance than the quality of its
laughter : the way in which for Shakespeare the dreadfulness
of life lurks among the rose leaves of the lightest comedy, or
the way in which Moliére jokes like a man who watches
himself dying by inches and has nothing left to do but laugh
at his ridiculous body.

The middle ages thus represent, in their spiritual life,
a mind content with its lot, at peace with itself, growing in
sun and shower like a tree, hardly seeking ‘ to know the law
whereby it prospers so’; the Renaissance represents the
same mind coming to a new consciousness of the depth and
seriousness of life, realizing that it must choose its vocation,
making its choice and thus breaking with the easy life of
compromise when it could be in fancy, like a dreaming boy,
everything at once. Henceforth all is disunion. Priests
and artists and scientists no longer live together peaceably,
either uniting these functions in one single individual or at
least combining them without thought of friction in a single
social organism ; it is now a war of all against all, art against


BRoro Gut 33


philosophy and both against religion. Henceforth no man
can serve two masters ; he must give his whole soul to art,
or to religion, or to philosophy, and in choosing his friends
he chooses at the same time his enemies.

Hence arises a curious result. In point of fact, religion
cannot live without art and science. There must be churches
and theologies, and therefore religion must employ both
artists and philosophers. But now that art and philosophy
have parted from religion and gone their own irreligious way,
she can no longer employ them. Only one course is open
to her. She must go back instead of forwards, and use the
art and philosophy of the days before the rupture took place.
Hence when modern religion woke up to the need of in-
corporating art and philosophy into its own organism, it
saw that the contemporary artists and philosophers had
nothing that it could use; and therefore it invented neo-
Gothic and neo-Scholasticism. This tendency is common
to all our sects ; and it is strange and pathetic to see chapels
of all kinds being built to-day in the fashion of the time when
their sect was born, as if to proclaim to the world their
inability to live either with art or without it. This might
suggest that there is something especially feeble and inverte-
brate about modern religion, incapable as it certainly is of
marching with the advance of art and thought as it marched
in the middle ages. But the failure of religion to make use
of modern art is only correlative to the failure of modern
art to make use of modern religion, and the failure of both
to recommend themselves to the general public. The church
of England affects Gothic because it is old, and the rich man
buys old masters because they are old: modern art is
equally useless to both, and in neither case is one side solely
or especially to blame. They are all suffering alike from the
after-effects of the Renaissance.

~2792 Cc


34 PROLOGUE


In the first flush of that dawn, when art, religion, and
thought, strengthened by their long medieval discipline
of intimacy with each other, broke apart and suddenly began
to work miracles, men might be excused for thinking that
in their mutual separation lay the secret of their well-being.
But the contrary soon appeared. Each, cut off from the
others, tended more and more to lead its followers into some
desert where the world of human life was lost, and the very
motive for going on disappeared. Each tended to become
a specialized activity pursued by specialists for the applause
of specialists, useless to the rest of mankind and unsatisfying
even to the specialist when he turned upon himself and asked
why he was pursuingit. This is the point to which we have
come to-day. The churches, we are told, have lost touch
with the people. It is true ; and it cannot be mended either
by scolding the people or by abusing the priests. The
artists have lost touch with the people, too ; they work for
each other in a vicious circle of academicism which only
becomes more academic when it breaks down old conventions
and sets up new. This again cannot be cured by extension
lectures or by ‘ arts and crafts’ exhibitions. or by holding
up modern art to ridicule. It is only a symptom. The
philosophers have lost touch with the people so egregiously
that it is hardly worth while insisting on the point, except
to remark that it cannot be mended by manufacturing cheap
adulterated philosophies to tickle the public taste. And all
alike are asking themselves what use they are in the world,
and whether they had not better give everything up and
start a poultry-farm.

This is the fruit of the Renaissance. If the artist, or the
priest, or the philosopher complains, we can only answer -
‘tu l’as voulu, George Dandin’. He demanded freedom,
and he has got it. He wanted a real separation, art for


PROLOGUE ts


art’s sake, truth for truth’s sake, religion for religion’s sake,
each free from all claims on the part of the rest ; and now
the freedom has come home to roost, in the form of that
disruption of life which we analysed at the beginning. In
the middle ages the artist was perhaps not much of an artist,
the philosopher was by our standards only mildly philoso-
phical, and the religious man not extremely religious ; but
they were all men, whole of heart and secure in their grasp
on life. To-day we can be as artistic, we can be as philoso-
phical, we can be as religious as we please, but we cannot
ever be men at all; we are wrecks and fragments of men,
and we do not know where to take hold of life and how to
begin looking for the happiness which we know we do not
possess.

In this state of things we are sufficiently justified in
turning an eager ear to any one who promises to show us the
way out of our troubles. Indeed, we are justified in asking
every teacher and preacher whether he can help us, and
going our ways if he cannot. We can hardly be wrong in
refusing to listen to anybody, on any subject, unless he can
hold out some hope of bettering our condition. Hence we
may repeat that all thought is for the sake of action, and
that every one who offers us a philosophy must answer the
question ‘ what shall we do to be saved from these present
distresses ? ’

This book does not profess to give an answer ready made.
But it does profess to ‘ explore the avenues ’, as politicians
say, towards a possible answer. Some people, whose voice
is so sweet that we can hardly refuse them audience, assure
us that in the life of art, and there alone, we can find happi-
ness and salvation. Others, men of wisdom and authority,
say the same of religion; and others, whose gospel is
supported by the cogent argument of miracle, say the same

Cz


———<——


36 PROLOGUE


of science. From all these we shall find ourselves compelled,
with whatever reluctance and respect, to dissent. And we
shall dissent no less from advocates of history or philosophy
or any other form of experience whose adoption means the
denial of some other form. For we now recognize the nature
of our disease. What is wrong with us is precisely the
detachment of these forms of experience—art, religion, and
the rest—from one another ; and our cure can only be their
reunion in a complete and undivided life. Our task is to
seek for that life, to build up the conception of an activity
which is at once art, and religion, and science, and the rest.

In a sense, that is to say, we demand that the work of the
Renaissance shall be undone, and that the middle ages
should be brought back. But bringing back the past cannot
solve the problems of the spirit. The advance from the
middle ages to the Renaissance was a real advance;
tendencies that struggled obscurely in the depths of the
medieval mind were in the Renaissance set free and
blossomed gloriously. If we went back to the middle ages,
we should only return to childhood, and the throes of
adolescence would still be to come. The middle ages died
because their union of the various claims was too hasty, too
much of a compromise. If we are to achieve any kind of
union again, that only will satisfy us in which the full
development of art, of religion, and of philosophy is possible ;
no mere medieval compromise, but the full-grown life of
a Titian, a Luther, and a Descartes, all attained within the
limits of a single corporate mind as truly unified as ever
was that of the middle ages.

There is nothing new about this answer. It is the funda-
mental principle of Christianity that the only life worth
living is the life of the whole man, every faculty of body and
soul unified into a single organic system. Incarnation,


PROLOGUE an


redemption, resurrection of the body, only repeat this
cardinal idea from different angles. Again, it is the outer
aspect of this same principle on which Christianity insists
when it teaches that the individual man, just because of the
absolute worth of every individual, is nothing without his
fellow men; that the holy spirit lives not in this man or
that but in the church as the unity of all faithful people.
It was thus in their institutionalism and their insistence on
the unity of the mind—outer and inner sides of the same
truth—that the middle ages were distinctively Christian ;
and it was just this Christianity that, as we have already
seen, made giants of men who taken singly were children.
In the denial of this double principle, and the assertion of
its opposite, an outer individualism coupled with an inner
separatism of the activities of the mind, the Renaissance
rebelled not against medievalism so much as against
Christianity, and reverted to the pagan ideal. For the
separatist principle is the principle embodied in the pagan
world and idealized in the pagan philosophies ; whether it
takes the form of slavery or the doctrine cf the immortality
of the soul, whether it appears as a practice of religion in
which divine worship is a duty to be discharged and done
with, or as a theory of art in which pity and fear are emotions
to be got rid of, when they become troublesome, by attending
a tragedy. For the Christian, as never for any pagan,
religion becomes an influence dominating the whole of life ;
and this unity of life once achieved can never be forfeited
again. No one who has outgrown the ancient paganism
can be content with being everything by turns and nothing
long ; he must unify his life somehow, either positively, by
bringing every activity into harmony, or negatively, by
suppressing all but one. The former was the medieval way,
the latter that of the Renaissance. And thus the return to


38 PROLOGUE


paganism was really an illusion ; it was not paganism, not
a real destruction of the Christian unity, that the Renaissance
achieved, but only a kind of desperate Christianity, the
Christianity of the plucked-out eye and the lopped-off limb.

Our solution, then, can only be in principle the Christian
solution ; but it must not be the naive Christianity of the
middle ages or the self-mutilated Christianity of the Renais-
sance, but something in which the good of both these is
preserved, the bad destroyed. And even this is not a new
ideal. Ever since the negative aspect of the Renaissance
culminated in the eighteenth century, it has been clear
that some kind of revived medievalism, some new inter-
pretation of Christianity, was the only hope for the
world’s future. The Romantic movement which enshrined
that new belief made itself a little ridiculous by its assump-
tion that everything medieval was good and everything
else bad; that was the mere swing of the pendulum
from the exaggerated respect for pagan antiquity that
had marked the Renaissance. But we here claim no more
than to be following and working out the tradition founded
over a century ago by the great men of the Romantic move-
ment ; purifying it, perhaps, of some things that are worth-
less to-day, but happy if we can attain anything like the
clearness of vision and closeness of thought which they
attained, and anxious above all not to pose as repositories
of a new revelation, or vendors of any new-fangled philoso-
phical patent-medicine, but to say once more, in words
suited to our generation, something that everybody has
always known.


Li
SPECULUM MENTIS


Our task, then, is the construction of a map of knowledge.

We have already seen, in our preliminary survey, how the
field of human experience seems to be divided into provinces
which we call art, religion, science, and so forth. How many
such provinces there are we do not vet know; what their
relations to one another may be we cannot tell until our
map is made. But here we beg leave to make certain
assumptions, to be tested, and, as far as may be, justified in
the course of our inquiry. First, we shall distinguish the
provinces of art, religion, science, history, and philosophy.
Secondly, we shall assume that each of these is no mere
abstraction but a concrete form of experience, an activity
of the whole self in which every faculty, if it is permissible
to distinguish between faculties, is engaged. Thirdly,
because each is a concrete activity it follows that each is in
some sense a kind of knowledge, an activity of the cognitive
mind.

The first assumption is of little importance: the number
of provinces may be augmented or decreased without
affecting our fundamental questions. The second is no more
than a refusal, until good reason can be shown, to commit
ourselves to the schematism of a faculty-psychology. The
third is the vital point. And on this point we must begin hy
observing that every one of our forms of experience, what-
ever hostile critics say about it, makes for itself the un-
equivocal claim to be knowledge. Even art claims truth:
a truth identified indeed with beauty but not thereby ceasing
to be truth. At times we seem to find in art the one and


40 - SPpEeemLwae Viren Tis


only key to the riddle of the universe, the sole true revelation
of the mystery whose concealment is the perennial torture
of the human intellect. The great artists are unanimous in
so regarding art. For them, and for every one whose
experience of beauty whether in art or nature has attained
any kind of depth, the emotional aspect of that experience
is a mere troubling of the surface, an eddy which may or
may not serve to indicate a deep and rapid current: no
more an argument for a hedonistic theory of art than the
mathematician’s joy in discovering a new truth justifies
a hedonistic theory of mathematics. Such is at bottom the
attitude towards art of every one whose opinion is worth
taking. It is our business to examine it critically and see
to what extent, in what sense, subject to what reservations,
it justifies itself.

Of religion the same thing is more obviously true. Every
religion claims to tell us something which is not only true
but supremely true, something that lets us into the secret
of the universe. It does other things besides this ; here, as
in art, there are practical and emotional elements ; but this
at least it does. It is the mere recklessness of a disappointed
intellectualism that drives the student of religion to overlook
this claim and to analyse religion as a complex of moral or
emotional contents, a thing of ‘ the will’ or ‘ the feelings ’
to the exclusion of ‘ the intellect ’. Such analysis is always
in conflict with the view of religion maintained by religion
itself, for that view invariably bases itself on the claim to
truth. After the conflict between religion and science or
philosophy has arisen, and under the influence of the con-
viction that the truth must lie with science or philosophy,
attempts at such analysis are inevitable ; but they are the
fruit of a sophistication in which the religious attitude itself
has been lost to sight. While that attitude is preserved,


SPECULUM MENTIS Al


or even vividly remembered, it is impossible to deny that
the heart of all religion is the claim to truth. Here again
we are but quoting the opinion of those whose opinion is
worth quoting : to criticize and qualify it is the task of our
own inquiries.

That science claims to be true will hardly be denied by
any one; yet here, as in the case of art and religion, the
claim, though admittedly made, is frequently challenged.
And this applies also to history and to philosophy. All
these are believed by those who are engaged in them to afford
truth and indeed absolute truth concerning the nature of
reality ; but each is accused by its critics of being sorae-
thing quite different from this, science a mere form of
practice, history a fable convenue, philosophy the exuberance
of a mental intoxication. And here again, our task is to
face these criticisms and see how far and in what ways they
can establish a case against the prima facie claim to truth
made by each type of experience in turn.

At the outset, then, we find no less than five types of
experience, each claiming not only to give truth, but to give
the absolute or ultimate truth concerning the nature of the
universe, to reveal the secret of existence, and to tell us
what the world really and fundamentally is. But surely
there is in the last resort only one world, and there can be
only one type of theoretical activity which is really adapted
to solve the problem of its ultimate nature: If the artist is
tight, if ‘ Beauty is truth, truth beauty ’, if the world truly
is what the artist believes it to be, then it is true that ‘ the
rest may reason, and welcome ; ’tis we musicians know ’.
The secret of the universe is hidden from the scientist and
the philosopher, to be revealed exclusively to the artist.
Similarly, if religion is right, and if God is the answer to
every question, then art and science are barren quests. If


42 SPECULUM MeEnNrTIs


science is right, if the truth of the world is to be found in
the laws of nature, art and religion are toys. history and
philosophy vain delusions. And so on.

Thus the different forms of experience seem to be com-
petitors for one prize, the prize of truth. Now a prize can be
dealt with in three ways. It can be given to one competitor
and denied to the others. It can be divided between two
or more of the competitors. Or it can be not awarded at all.
So it may be suggested, as the answer to our present problem,
that one of the five forms is the one which gives us real
knowledge: that each gives one type of real knowledge :
or that all are delusions.

We will take the third alternative first. If all the forms
of so-called knowledge are delusive, if the prize is not
awarded, we must reflect that in such a competition as this
an unawarded prize falls to the judge, and that therefore
his refusal to award it is likely to result from a desire to
keep it for himself. In other words, we are asking for a type
of experience capable of giving true knowledge. Now to
say that there is no such type is to imply that one knows
both what knowledge would be if it existed, and that it does
not exist. But this is to claim for oneself the possession of
that very knowledge whose existence one is explicitly
denying. That form of experience, therefore, which denies
truth to all the five recognized forms claims to be itself
a sixth form which is the rightful claimant to truth. Hence
the refusal to allot the prize stultifies itself.

But if one of the forms is the true form, how are we to
discover it ? Any one whom we ask will no doubt give us
areply : the artist will vote for art, the scientist for science,
and so on. And if we say to the artist, ‘ This is mere pro-
fessional prejudice ; you vote for art because you are an
artist,’ he will reply, ‘On the contrary, I choose to be an


SpecuLUM MeEnrTiIs 43


artist because I believe art to be the true form of knowledge
and the rest illusions’. Every answer that can be given will
be vitiated by the suspicion which inevitably arises from
the fact that every competitor votes for himself: he does
so automatically : he votes for himself by just being him-
self, for to embrace a particular form of experience and to
believe in its validity are the same thing. It is all very well
to ask for an impartial judge; there are no impartial
judges. The scientist can judge between art and religion,
but only because he condemns both impartially and claims
for himself the prize for which they are fighting: the
philosopher offers to arbitrate between all the rest put
together, but his reign, every one knows, will be that of
King Stork. We must have an impartial decision, but no
one is qualified to give it.

But even supposing it were given, it would satisfy nobody.
Suppose it could be settled that science (say) was true and
that all the other forms were errors. This would not satisfy
art or religion. For it would not explain them ; it would
not show why anybody had adopted such errors. The
judge in this competition has not only to allot the prize, he
has to account for the existence of the unsuccessful com-
petitors, and this is a very different matter from the mere
prize-giving, which if all else fails can be done at the bidding
of caprice, prejudice, or bribery.

These difficulties can only be overcome if the judge is
himself entitled to speak in defence, and therefore in
criticism, of the various forms of experience in turn. The
word of a scientist condemning art is worthless ; but the
word of a scientist who is also an artist, comparing these
two forms of experience from within, is of extreme value.
The only slur on its value is the suspicion that in trying
to serve two masters, science and art, he is not whole-


44 SPECULUM MENTIS


heartedly committed to either and therefore not fully
entitled to speak for those whose entire life is absorbed by
one or other activity. This again can be partly overcome
if he has spent a definite portion of his life in the specialized
cultivation of one activity, if he has been an artist in such
a sense as to be acquainted with the life of art not as
a relaxation or amusement but as a discipline. If the person
to whom is committed the task of judging between art,
religion, science, history, and philosophy can prove to us
that he has lived these lives for himself, has graduated
successively in each of these schools, then we shall listen
with respect to his opinion.

Even then, however, it remains a mere opinion. A man
may say that he has lived in five countries, and that
England is his favourite; but that choice binds nobody
but himself. If he is to show that his choice of a form of
experience is not capricious but is a lead which other people
ought to follow, he must vindicate the rationality of his
choice. He must prove that the choice is inevitable, and
that each of the other forms in turn has characteristics
which drive him on to the one in which alone he claims to
find satisfaction. Now the characteristic mark by which
a form of experience is shown to be satisfactory is simply
that it is possible. We ask only for a life that can be lived,
a programme that can be carried out. Art, science and the
rest are schemes of life by adopting which we are promised
happiness and truth. Any scheme which is in itself con-
tradictory or nonsensical cannot redeem these promises,
because it cannot be put into execution ; but if there is any
scheme of life which is inherently consistent and therefore,
ideally speaking, practicable, we may safely assume that
this is the scheme to adopt.

Self-consistency, then, is our test. It might be suggested


SPECULUM MEeENTIS 45


that a better test is suitability to our human nature or the
facts of the world; but this is a mistake, because we are
raising the question what is human nature ? what are the
facts of the world? and how are we to discover them ?
We are in the position of actually doubting what the real
world is, whether it is a world of matter and motion, of
beauty, of spirits, and so forth; and we are equally in doubt
as to what we ourselves really are. We cannot assume that,
at the very beginning of our inquiry, we possess answers
to these questions so securely based that on the strength
of them we can organize our whole life. Scientists, artists
and the rest claim to possess such answers, but that is the
claim which we question.

The true form of knowledge is thus self-consistent, and
it must prove its claim by demonstrating the necessary
inconsistency of the other forms. It must, that is to say,
not so much attack and demolish these forms as exhibit
them demolishing themselves through the working of their
own inconsistencies. External criticism is valueless; the
true critic is one who can place himself at the point of view
criticized, and in his own person live out its consequences
to the bitter end. He must vivisect himself in illustration
of his own lecture.

But further, such a criticism is not merely destructive.
It is a vindication of the very experiences which it refutes,
for it exhibits them not as strange and inexplicable per-
versions of the mind, morbid types of thought indulged by
the foolish and depraved, but as stages through which the
critic has himself passed, and which he can confess without
forfeiting his claim to rationality. Had they been sheer
and unmitigated error, only an utterly deluded and imbecile
mind could have fallen into them; and in that case the
knowledge that one had fallen into them would be a stain


46 SpECULUM MeENTIS


on one’s intellectual record which nothing could remove. If
we find a man whom we respect as a sensible and thoughtful
person confessing that he was once led into materialism or
Mormonism or murder, we expect him to be able to tell us
what it was in these things that he found worthy to attract
him. If he cannot tell us that, we think worse of him than
we did before.

Our map is now beginning to take shape. It is to be
a statement of the essential nature or structure of each
successive form of experience, based on actual knowledge
of that form from within, and concentrated upon the search
for inconsistencies, rifts which when we come to put a strain
on the fabric will widen and deepen and ultimately destroy it.

But where are we to begin? It may not matter very
much, to all appearance; and yet the question of order
cannot be altogether irrelevant. We must begin some-
where.

There is an obstacle which we must here remove from our
path. This is the theory of art, religion and the rest as
co-ordinate species of knowledge, species of a genus, each ©
valid and autonomous in its own sphere but each limited
to a single aspect of reality, each constituting a single aspect
of the mind. Such a theory admits what we have already
shown to be undeniable, that they are all cognitive or
theoretical activities, none merely emotional or merely
practical. The truth of this is shown by the fact that they
all regard themselves as theoretical ; and to regard your-
self, even erroneously, as theoretical is to be theoretical,
since nothing but theory can be in error. But it is now
suggested that each is a specific type of thought concerned
with a specific type of object: art with beauty, religion
with God, science with natural law, and so forth. Each is
thus competent in its own field and impotent in any other


SPECULUM MenTIS 47


field ; for each is merely thought as such, taking on in each
case such a specific character as enables it to solve the
specific problems with which it is there faced. If this view
is sound, the prize is divided. To the question ‘ Which
form of thought gives truth?’ it is replied ‘Truth about
what ? If about beauty, the answer is art. If about God,
the answer is religion: and so forth. There is no such
thing as truth in the abstract, and every kind of thought
has its own appropriate kind of truth.’

This account of the matter is plainly sound up to a point ;
but it will not carry us far, and to accept it as a complete
answer to our problem would be to make shipwreck of our
whole work. For it amounts to this: that art, religion,
science, and the rest are all necessary to a complete and full
mental life, that each of them occupies one faculty of the
mind—a faculty, no doubt, with intellectual, practical and
emotional sides to it—-and that each serves to acquaint
us with one aspect and no more of reality. But if this is so,
the medieval view of life is simply right and the Renaissance
view simply wrong. The parts of a whole exist in mutual
support, and the aspects of an objective reality become
more comprehensible when seen in their interrelations.
It follows that the mixture of art and religion and philosophy
which we described as primitive and childish when we found
it exemplified in the middle ages was the only right state
of things, and that the specialized life of art or religion or
science is nothing but a pure error. Yet to say that science,
for example, can best thrive in a mind which equally
cultivates art and religion is to fly in the face of evident
fact in obedience to a baseless dogma.

The matter becomes worse if we turn to the objective
side of the question. Beauty, God, natural law, are said to
be aspects of a single reality. But what is this reality ?


ee a a


48 SprcuLtuM MeEnrTIS


a I noe ee


For art, it is beauty ard nothing else whatever. For religion
it is simply God, who is the beginning and the end. For
science, it is nothing but natural law. The exclusiveness
of these various objects is an essential part of their nature.
You cannot combine them, because each of them is an
implicit denial of all the rest.

This is a truth which is so often forgotten that we must
not hesitate to dwell on it. The parts of a whole, the
co-species of a genus, are modifications of a common
principle, but modifications of which to assert one is im-
plicitly to assert the others also. Assert the triangle and
you assert the square: assert the inside and you assert the
outside. Therefore a group of activities which could be
described as species of knowledge would imply each other,
as the geometry of the triangle implics the geometry of the
square ;. and a specialist in the geometry of the triangle
would regard the specialist in the geometry of the square
as a partner in a common work, a contributor to a whole
which each recognized as transcending his own work and
including with it that of his neighbour. But in the relation
of religion and science this is not the case. The scientist
‘has no need of God’ as an hypothesis, and the religious man
has no need of natural law, not because God and natural
law are distinct parts of reality but because they are rival
ways of conceiving the whole. Religion cannot tolerate the
idea that in addition to God there are also laws of nature.
The laws of nature, for him, are simply God’s will. Similarly
science cannot tolerate the suggestion of a God distinct
from the laws of nature ; the admission of a divine will into
the delicate machinery of natural law destroys the meaning
of science as completely as the admission of a physical
necessity into God’s plans destroys the meaning of religion.
So, when a benevolent third party sets himself to arbitrate


SPECULUM MenrTISs 49


in the quarrel of religion and science and tries to persuade
them that each expresses ‘one side of the truth’, the
disputants reply with perfect unanimity ‘God oy nature,
by all means: offer us the choice between religion and
science, and we will try to choose, though no doubt the
choice is hard; but do not offer us God and nature, for
that means offering us neither religion nor science, but the
corpse of religion chained to the corpse of science ’.
Religion and science know their own business a great deal
better than these impartial persons who attempt to ‘ re-
concile ’ them and only show how utterly they fail to under-
stand either. And the theory which makes them species
of a genus fails not only when we thus try to put it into
practice, but when we try to think it out coherently. For
when we do this, we find that the notion of genus and
species is a logical notion, and therefore logic is somehow
a master-science having jurisdiction over the whole field of
knowledge ; for the notion of species is applied to every one
of our five forms of experience. But in so far as logical
conceptions apply to all five forms, they are all reduced to
the same form and all judged by the same logical standards.
There is therefore only one form of knowledge, describable
in terms of logic, which is directed indifferently upon five
classes of object. This is pure intellectualism, and leads
us to look for syllogisms in music, inductions in religion,
and so forth: which precisely contradicts the thesis with
which this view began, namely the independence of these
various fields of thought. This is what really happens when
people attempt to maintain this view of the forms of
experience as co-ordinate species: they assert, without in
the least realizing it, the absoluteness of formal logic and
reduce all alike to that Procrustean standard. Of this,
however, we shall have more to say in a later chapter in
2792 D


50 SpecutumM MeENTIS


dealing with what we call ‘ scientific philosophy ’. For the
moment, it is enough to recognize that the application of
the notion of genus and species to the forms of experience
is an example of the fallacy which we shall so designate.

We must, then, begin somewhere. The five forms of
experience—and whatever others there may be—are not
species of a genus, which may be indifferently taken in any
order ; they have a natural order of their own.

If we look at the life of individual human beings, we shall
find that it normally falls into periods of predominantly
aesthetic, predominantly religious, or predominantly in-
tellectual activity. Plato laid down that poetry and fiction
were the natural food of the very young. In this he was
certainly right. Children do not as a rule crowd round their
elders clamouring for mathematical demonstrations or
historical narratives ; they seem with curious uniformity to
demand a diet of aesthetic products—stories, rhymes, songs
and so forth. ‘ Read to me’, ‘ sing to me’, and even ‘ draw
to me’ are the hourly demands of the young from about
the age of two years. They are not yet particularly religious ;
that comes later; and all parents of young children find
the right way of beginning religious education something of
a problem. No one ever found the aesthetic education of
the young a problem; they take to nursery rhymes and
fairy tales with an ease and a universality which are, if one
reflects upon them, rather striking. Religion comes next,
and a normal child of four is already tolerably at home in
the world of religious imagery ; but scientific thought sets
in later, and it is perhaps unusual for a child to interest
itself very much even in the simplest mechanical problems
before it is about six. But this is only the development of
the child; a little later, beginning at puberty, the same
process seems to repeat itself on, as it were, a higher level.


SPECULUM MeEnrTIS iu


The child, at the dawn of adolescence, becomes fiercely and
agonizingly sensitive to beauty; poetry and music shake
its very soul. This is normally followed by a violent
awakening of the religious consciousness; and when
adolescence is gradually settling down into maturity, an
eager spirit of scientific inquiry frequently displaces both
art and religion from their position of primacy. But even
beyond this again lies the mature life of the adult human
being, the life of professional work ; and here again there
seem to be a more childish type of attitude which gives rise
to the artist, a more adolescent type which gives rise to the
specifically religious vocation, and a more adult type which
gives rise to the scientific professions. Childhood, adoles-
cence, and maturity seem thus to correspond with art,
religion, and science as their proper spiritual antitypes ;
and each phase splits up into the art, religion, and science
of childhood, all tinged with the fancifulness of art, the art,
religion, and science of adolescence, all affected by the
passionate and devotional character of religion, and the art,
religion, and science of maturity, all consolidated by the
reflectiveness and stability of thought.

Such a scheme of the ‘ ages of man’ is crude and abstract
no doubt, true at best in a shadowy and schematic, kind of
way ; and yet there is some truth init. At any rate, it is
true enough to be acted upon by everybody in the practice
of education; we all educate children by developing their
aesthetic consciousness, we all believe in the importance of
religious guidance for the adolescent, and we all begin
a serious scientific training after the age at which children
normally leave school.

The same general tendency towards a series of phases
beginning with art seems to be at work in the history of
mankind, Just as we are often surprised by the excellence

D2


52 SpecuLuM MeENTIS


of children’s drawing, singing, dancing, and composition of
verses or stories in prose, so we discover with something of
a shock that palaeolithic man was a really great artist ;
a painter, a sculptor, a decorator of genius. At the very
beginning of human history we find the extraordinary
monuments of palaeolithic art, a standing problem to all
theories of human development and a delicate test of their
truth. Certain archaeologists have conjectured that palaeo-
lithic art had a religious motive. There is no evidence for
this: it is simply a confession of failure, on the part of the
archaeologists in question, to conceive a race primitively
and intensely savage throwing its whole soul into artistic
expression for its own sake. Yet no one who has a keen eye
for art can see behind the palaeolithic products anything
but the purest and most spontaneous aesthetic impulse.

Dim premonitions of religion palaeolithic man certainly
had; and, as we shall see, there is in all art such a pre-
monition of religion. But the evidence of archaeology is
clear that the full development of the religious conscious-
ness was the work of the neolith. All that we know of
neolithic man confirms us in the belief that he was keenly
religious ; and his curious lack of graphic art, so striking
when we compare him with the palaeolith, is fully accounted
for if we may suppose that his whole spiritual energy was
concentrated upon a task hitherto unattempted, the dis-
covery of religion. Artless he was not ; he had at least an
impressive and splendid architecture ; but this was an art
not free, like the palacolithic, but absorbed into the service
of religion.

The next stage took place within our own racial memory.
Science was invented by the Greeks, with what help from
Egypt and Babylon we need not stay to ask. Setting aside
a similar and roughly contemporary movement of thought


SPECULUM MENTIS 5


in India, almost everything we know as science to-day
begins among the Greeks and achieves at once in their
hands a vigorous life of its own. Other races like the Aztecs
have repeated quite independently some of the Greek
discoveries, but in the form in which they have permanently
influenced the world’s history they have been due to the
Greeks, and this—not their art, splendid as it was—is the
real debt which humanity owes to the Greek people.
History is a later invention. In the sense parallel to that
in which Euclid and Archimedes were scientists, the ancients
had no historians. As the Babylonians and Egyptians seem
to have collected observations and made measurements with-
out really achieving the scientific outlook upon astronomy
and mathematics, so Thucydides and Tacitus recorded with
industry and imagination what they had seen and heard ;
but observation and measurement are not science, and
memoirs and legends are not history. Observation and
measurement become science when they are transmuted by
the explicit emergence of the concept, the pure a priori act
of thought ; and this did not happen till the Greeks achieved
it. So memoir and legend become history when they are
lifted out of the region of authority by the birth of historical
criticism, and this is the discovery of our own modern
world, its contribution to the advancement of human
knowledge. Critical history is the child of the eighteenth
century. It began in the hands of men like Vico and Hume,
Gibbon and Lessing, and Herder and Niebuhr, and ripened
into the nineteenth century when history stood forth the
unmistakable queen of the sciences and biologists like
Darwin and Huxley, philosophers like Hegel, theologians
like Baur and Newman, and economists like Marx explicitly
resolved the problems of their special sciences into historical
problems, and all the waters of art, religion, and science


54 SpecutuM MeEnriIs


went to swell the great river of historical thought. So
gigantic has been the effect of this revolution that as yet
people hardly appreciate it. They talk of Evolution, of
Progress, of the metaphysical reality of Time, as if these were
notions of the first importance and grand discoveries of
modern science. But they are only half-understood and
mythological expressions of the concept of history. And
those among us who criticize these notions, who scoff at
progress and pour scorn on the idea of evolution, mostly do
so because the revolution has somehow escaped their notice,
because they cannot see any intrinsic difference between
the historical outlook of a Herodotus and a Mommsen, and
imagine themselves to be still living in the scientific period
of the world’s thought.

If history only found its feet a century or two ago, the next
phase can hardly yet have begun ; and if this is to be the
philosophical phase we can understand the truth of Kant’s
saying that our own philosophy is at best a poor groping
affair, like mathematics before the Greeks: justified rather
by what may come of it than by what it has already achieved.

But that is pure speculation. Of schemes like this, which
compress human life and history into an abstract formula,
we can only say that the best in this kind are but shadows.
The worst, however, are no worse, if imagination mend
them: only, as Hippolyta sagely added, it must be your
imagination, and not theirs. Such formulae are good ser-
vants but bad masters; they may give a valuable clue to
a mind active enough to seize it and careful enough of detail
to avoid being misled by it when, as all such formulae do,
it fails him. Any clever fool can make a symmetrical
philosophy, and it takes nothing more than ingenuity to
find quincunxes in the heavens above and in the earth
beneath. But at present all we want is a clue. We have


SPECULUM MeENTIS 55


seen that our forms of experience are not mere species of
a genus, because each denies the others ; and because they
are not species they have not that indifference with regard
to one another which characterizes abstract logical classifi-
cations. They must form an order of some kind ; and the
empirical order in which they seem to emerge in the life of
the individual and of the race is enough to suggest that our
discussion cannot go very far wrong if it follows the same
order. But what is even more important than the actual
order is the suggestion of serial arrangement as such. For
a series of terms implies that each term is as it were built
upon or derived from its predecessor and therefore does not
start im vacuo, is not a wholly fresh embodiment of the
universal, but is essentially a modification of the term
before. Hence even if we only recognized three terms, and
made a series by alternating them, abcabcabc . . ., there
would be no repetition, for the second a would be not the
mere first a again, but a modified by having been developed
through 0 out of c; the third a would be a modified by the
same process in the second degree ; and so on. Thus, the
art of the adolescent is not the fairy-tale art of the child
but a new type of art whose character is enriched by all that
has happened to the child between, say, the ages of three
and thirteen. To trace in detail this return of a form of
experience, recognizably itself, and yet modified by an in-
crement which is simply the accumulation of experience,
is the task of such a special study as the history of art.

Or, to quote a case which more nearly concerns the plan
of our work, we find within the professional scientific attitude
of the mature mind a distinction between science, history
and philosophy. All these are intellect self-conscious as
such; but science is aesthetic intellect, or intellect ex-
hibiting the capriciousness of art and framing to itself


56 SpecutumM Menris


imaginary objects: history is religious intellect, or intellect
submitting itself with self-forgetful devotion to the claims
of absolute fact : philosophy is intellectual intellect, think-
ing @ outrance. And even within philosophy we shall find
an aesthetic philosophy, a religious philosophy, and an in-
tellectual philosophy which splits up into scientific philo-
sophy, historical philosophy, and philosophical philosophy.

The reader need not be alarmed. We are not looking for
quincunxes, and we have no intention of holding his nose
to any dialectical grindstone. This is merely an illustration
of the fact that series means concrete novelty, the denial
both of abstract repetition and of abstract change. History
—and our work is to comment on history—is not a sheer flux
of unique and disconnected events, each absolutely new
and unprecedented. And,on the other hand, it isnot a barren
cyclical repetition of the same pattern over and over again,
still less a shuffling of rearranged units like repeated throws
of dice, every new event an arbitrary selection from a given
number of possibilities. It is a process in which method or
regularity does not exclude novelty ; for every phase, while
it grows out of the preceding phase, sums it up in the
immediacy of its own being and thereby sums up implicitly
the whole of previous history. Every such summation is
a new act, and history consists of this perpetual summation
of itself.

This may seem obscure; its further explanation must
wait for the concluding chapter. Here, all we mean by it
is to issue a warning that our five forms of experience are
not five abstractly self-identical types of event which, by
their recurrence in a fixed or changing order, constitute
human experience ; but types whose recurrence perpetually
modifies them, so that they shade off into one another and
give rise to new determinations and therefore new types
at every turn.


SPECULUM MeEnTIs 4


Then why do we distinguish five, and not any other
number ; and why these, instead of alternatives ?

Because, where any preliminary grouping of problems
would be arbitrary, we are entitled to consult the reader’s
convenience and our own by drawing upon existing and
traditional philosophies. We are accustomed to group our
problems in certain ways, under the headings of art, religion,
science, history, and philosophy: there is no harm in it,
and it gives us a convenient starting-point. But it is only
harmless so long as we recognize that it is provisional. The
life of the mind is not the rotation of a machine through
a cycle of fixed phases but the flow of a torrent through its
mountain-bed, scattering itself in spray as it plunges over
a precipice and pausing in the deep transparency of a rock-
pool, to issue again in an ever-new series of adventures.


Ill
ART


§ 1. Art as pure Imagination


THAT poetry is in a special sense the spiritual kingdom of
the child was first divined by Plato; and when the theory
of art was seriously taken up again by philosophers of the
eighteenth century, they reasserted the same notion as the
very heart and core of their new speculations on the subject.
When Hamann wrote that ‘ poetry is the mother-tongue
of mankind’, and when Vico a generation earlier laid it
down that poetry is the natural speech of children and
savages, they held in their hands the clue to the solution of
all the problems of aesthetic.

They seem to have meant that art is the simplest and
most primitive, the least sophisticated, of all possible frames
of mind. Hence it is the normal activity of those minds
whose experience has been brief and which have as yet
learnt little from others. Children and savages are not
better artists than grown and civilized men; on the con-
trary, art like all other forms of activity improves with
practice and does not spring into existence full-grown ;
but children and savages are in a special sense natural
artists; art is to them a life in which they are immersed
as in a flood of warm water which bears along in its course
passive and effortless organisms. A grown and civilized
man achieves aesthetic experience by the effort of deliber-
ately shutting out other competing interests ; he refuses to
look at a given object historically or scientifically, and will
see it aesthetically. Hence, for the civilized man, art has
become a somewhat alien thing and difficult of approach ;


Art as pure I magination 59


he bewails lost romance and thinks of the aesthetic experi-
ence as something that died with his dead childhood, or
exalts beauty into a far-away goal to which some day
a difficult uphill road may lead him. But art is difficult
for him not because it is intrinsically difficult, but because
his entire education has been designed to wean him from it ;
it is far away not because it is on the heights of the spiritual
life, but because it is in the depths. Art is the foundation,
the soil, the womb and night of the spirit ; all experience
issues forth from it and rests upon it ; all education begins
with it; all religion, all science, are as it were specialized
and peculiar modifications of it. Art is the sleep of the soul ;
as a baby does little but sleep, so the infant soul knows
hardly any experience but art ; as a grown man sleeps from
his labours, so the awakened spirit returns into art to find
new strength and inspiration, going down into that as into
the fountain in which Hera renewed her virginity.

The waking life of the soul is the distinction of truth
from falsehood, the assertion of this as real and that as
unreal. This is the logical judgement, the assertion which
claims truth. Now art, in certain of its manifestations,
contains what seem to be assertions. This feature rises to
the surface in the art of literature. A novelist’s work
consists, to all appearances, of a string of statements all
laid down precisely as if they were records of historical fact ;
the dramatist’s does not differ in any essential ; and even
the lyric poet makes sufficiently definite assertions as to the
state of his own feelings. Similarly the painter represents
people and landscapes in a way which amounts to saying
‘this is the thing as I actually saw it’; though in some
arts, notably music and pure design, this element of apparent
assertion does not exist.

It is an old observation that the statements apparently


60 ART


made and implied in literature and the plastic arts are not
necessarily true. It is not true that Catherine Morland’s
father was called Richard, for Catherine Morland never
existed ; it is not true that Tess was hanged or that Romeo
drank all the poison, for like reasons. Nor are aesthetic
statements necessarily true even when the persons about
whom they are made are, like Brutus and Cymbeline,
historically real. Hence poetry has been denounced for
a liar; and yet the statements it makes are not necessarily
false either.
Bifel that in that seson on a day


In Southwerk at the Tabard as I lay
Redy to wenden on my pilgrimage


these statements may, for all we know, be true or false, just
as Bellini’s Mocenigo may be a good likeness or a bad, and
it is not necessary for us to settle the point. The value of
the Prologue or the portrait, as a work of art, is unaffected by
it. Southwark and the Tabard, or the Doge, may never have
existed at all, and yet the work of art remain unimpaired.

In answering the question, What is art ? we must make
this our first fixed point. The aesthetic experience cares
nothing for the reality or unreality of its object. It is
neither true nor false of set purpose: it simply ignores the
distinction. There is no such thing as the so-called artistic
illusion, for illusion means believing in the reality of that
which is unreal, and art does not believe in the reality of
anything at all. Its apparent assertions are not real asser-
tions but the very suspension of assertion; and what is
called illusion is not the saying to ourselves ‘ this is truth’,
but the not saying to ourselves ‘ this is fiction’. This non-
assertive, non-logical attitude is imagination in the proper
sense of that word. The word is sometimes used with the
implication that the imagined object is necessarily unreal,


Art as pure I magination 61


but this implication is illegitimate ; the correct implication
is that in imagining an object we are indifferent to its
reality or unreality. If a novelist writes a story, it may
happen that the story is true: he may have met with
incidents which struck his imagination in such a way as
to satisfy it exactly as they stood. Yet the story, so written,
is as much a work of imagination in the proper sense as it
would have been if, as we say, he had ‘ made it all up’ ;
and the actual work done by him in the two cases is in kind
exactly the same. To make your imagination penetrate
historical facts is not essentially different from imagining
pure fictions. From the artistic point of view it is a mere
coincidence that some of the events in Julius Caesar or any
other work of art should be historical; just such a coin-
cidence as it would be did it happen that there really was
-a Catherine Morland whose father was called Richard.
The artist incorporates an incident in his work not because
it is true but because it is appropriate by aesthetic, that is,
imaginative standards. A work of art, like any work of the
spirit, must be a complete and coherent whole, systematic
through and through, and built upon one consistent principle ;
but the principle of its unity is not the same as that of the
unity of a philosophical theory or a historical narrative,
but is the principle of imagination. A philosophical theory
must be capable of being conceived as a whole, a historical
narrative, of being narrated as a whole—narrated, that is,
as true—a work of art, of being imagined as a whole.

Art, then, is pure imagination. The artist does not judge
or assert, he does not think or conceive, he simply imagines.
And this is true even of the most rigidly realistic art. The
artist never transcribes facts ‘as they are’. He only, at
most, transcribes them ‘as he sees them’, and whenever
the artist says see he means imagine. The realistic theory


62 ART


of art holds that the imagination is more highly stimulated
by a careful and close attention to facts; but when the
artist has attended to the facts it is his imagination, not
the facts, that he has to follow. Indeed, it is not altogether
true to say that art selects, alters, idealizes or adapts facts ;
for the artist as such does not first determine the facts and
then convert them into art. The raw material out of which
hé selects and adapts what will serve his purpose is an
imaginative, not a factual, raw material. We say that the
artist holds up the mirror to nature, or that he transcribes
what he has seen in real life; but this is mere error if it
means that the artist bases his work on the ascertaining
and remembering of historical facts. The real life or the
nature to which he holds up his mirror is not the world of
science or history, but the world as imaginatively appre-
hended, the world of imagination. Everybody knows that
there is one frame of mind in which one regards an object
scientifically, and another in which one regards it aesthe-
tically ; the pathologist is as blind to the beauty of the
stained section which he is examining as the landscape-
painter to the optical conditions of his sunset; and we
pass over from one of these attitudes to the other by a
deliberate and familiar act of will. But the aesthetic and
the scientific attitudes are not merely different attitudes
towards the same object, namely a sunset. The object is
different. The scientist ‘sees’ in the sunset a concrete
embodiment of certain scientific laws ; the artist ‘sees’ in
it a harmonious pattern of colours. The very word ‘see’
is ambiguous; with the scientist it means primarily to
think, with the artist primarily to imagine, and the world
of imagination which is the object confronting the artist’s
mind when he looks at a sunset is not present to the scientist’s
mind at all. Indeed, the scientist as such is committed to


Art as pure Imagination 63


the denial of its existence ; for beauty is the secret of the
universe or nothing, and for the scientist it is certainly not
the secret of the universe.

Thus the artist’s world is not a world of facts or laws,
it is a world of imaginations. He is all made of fantasy,
and the world in which he is interested is a world made of
the stuff of dreams. For him, from his point of view, these
dreams are neither real nor unreal; that is a distinction of
which he knows nothing. They are simply dreamt. The
artist as such does not know what the word reality means ;
that is to say, he does not perform the act which we call
assertion or judgement. His apparent statements are not
statements, for they state nothing; they are not expres-
sions, for they express no thought. They do not express
his imaginations, for they are his imaginations. What he
imagines is simply those fantasies which compose the work
of art.


§ 2. The Work of Art


But if art is pure imagination, it is not therefore a purely
immediate, instinctive and undifferentiated activity such as
would be implied by placing its essence in feeling, emotion,
or sensation. Art is a concrete activity; feeling and
sensation are abstract elements which can be distinguished
within any concrete activity but cannot form the whole or
essence of any. The life of art is not a facile explosion of
emotional force or the bare receptivity of sense ; it is a life
of discipline and endeavour, a struggle to realize one’s being
in this way and not in that. Hence the aesthetic experience,
like all true forms of spiritual activity, polarizes itself into
a positive and a negative. As the life of knowledge distin-
guishes truth and falsehood, as the life of action distinguishes
good and evil, so art distinguishes beauty and ugliness.


64 ART


The logic of these distinctions is the same throughout.
In every case the self-determining mind, just because it is
self-determining, distinguishes its ideals from its tempta-
tions, that which it would be from that which it is trying
not to be. For a being that was not self-determining, these
distinctions would be meaningless; for instance, if the
mind were a sensitive plate on which the object automatically
impressed a correct picture of itself, the very notion of
falsehood could not exist. Because truth is an achievement
of the mind, and because achievement implies the possibility
of failure, truth has an opposite, namely error. If now the
life of art were an immediate instead of a self-determined
activity, if it were the mere life of emotion or sensation,
it would be a thing that either happened or did not happen.
When it happened, there would be a revelation of beauty,
when it did not happen, there would be nothing. The
existence of ugliness, even in the form of an ugliness success-
fully avoided, is the standing refutation of all emotional
and sensationalistic theories of art; for ugliness is the
failure of the aesthetic experience to achieve beauty, and
this implies that the aesthetic experience is a deliberate and
constructive activity, an ordered and orderly life which is
not bare feeling but feeling individualized into a whole,
a work of art, whose parts are strictly subordinated to the
law of the whole.

The aesthetic experience is thus, in its concrete actuality,
the creation or apprehension of works of art. The terms
creation and apprehension are here synonymous, for the
essence of art is that nothing is asserted and everything
imagined, so that the question whether the work of art has
or has not an existence independent of the apprehension
of it is a question which has, for the aesthetic consciousness,
no meaning whatever. From the point of view of that


The Work of Art 65


consciousness, every work of art is real just so far as it is
imagined and no further. Now this process of imagining
a whole, or creating a work of art, is, as we have seen, no
mere rudderless drifting of images across the mind; it is
a process of unification in which the mind strives to see its
world as a whole, the ‘ world’ being just the work of art
which for the time being absorbs the whole gaze of the
mind. The various feelings, emotions, sensations, or by
whatever other name we call the subsidiary imaginations,
are modified and adapted so as to fall into such an imaginable
totality, a single coherent imaginary whole in constructing
which we tentatively imagine subsidiary parts and either
fit them in or reject them, retaining the right to modify the
whole according as a new subsidiary part suggests improve-
ments init. The whole is not first held in the mind as a whole
and then filled out in detail; for if it were ever held in the
mind (that is, imagined as a whole), the work would already
be complete; the whole comes into imaginary existence
only in the critical process of experimenting with its parts.
Nor, indeed, does the mind exist before it carries out this
self-determinative task; the mind is no machine which,
set in motion, produces works of art, but it creates itself as
the activity of imagination by creating these works of art
which are its imaginary objects. Neither the imaginary
object nor the imagining subject pre-exists to the concrete
process of imagining ; for the very being of the subject is
here to imagine; of the object, to be imagined.

The law of this process, its guiding principle, is beauty.
At every turn, the mind accepts one alternative and rejects
another for no reason whatever except that the one gives
beauty and the other does not. Now art as such has nothing
to do with principles or laws; it cares nothing for such
things, for their essence is that they cannot be imagined

2792 E


66 ART


but only conceived. Hence the dilemma that if beauty is
a concept its apprehension must, as Plato saw, belong not
to art but to science ; whereas if it is not a concept it cannot
rescue art from the immediacy of bare feeling. Either art
turns into science or it collapses into the merely natural
life of sensation; in either case its essence is destroyed.
The answer to this dilemma is that beauty is not a concept.
It is the guise under which concepts in general appear to
the aesthetic consciousness. Beauty means structure,
organization, seen from the aesthetic point of view, that is,
imagined and not conceived. This is the solution of the old
difficulty arising out of the fact that when people try to
describe the beauty of a thing they always either describe
its shape, colour and so forth, which are not beauty, or
else describe its emotional effect on them, which is not
beauty either. The first alternative leads to all the formal-
istic and intellectualistic theories of beauty, the theories
of the serpentine line, of symmetry and proportion, of
unity in diversity, of natural form or allegorical meaning ;
the latter, to all the emotionalist and hedonistic theories.
Beauty cannot be truly defined except as the correlative of
imagination ; the activity of imagining creates the objective
world of art, and creates it according to its own law, that is,
creates it as an imagined whole or thing of beauty. Thus
beauty does not exist except from the point of view of the
aesthetic experience, and the attempt to fit it into a table
of concepts or categories drawn up from the point of view
of logical science would be as contradictory as the attempt
to insert the will of God into a niche somewhere among the
causes of sidereal motion. For religion, God is not one
cause but the supreme cause of causes; so for art, beauty
is not one concept but the very soul and secret of the world.


Beauty is truth, truth beauty; that is all
Ye know on earth, and all ye need to know;


The Work of Art 67


that is the artist’s statement of his own faith. To him
beauty is what God is to religion, what truth is to science ;
it is his ‘ definition of the Absolute ’.

The concrete life of art is the creation of works of art.
But this creation is altogether the act of imagination. The
paper and ink, the paints and the clay that we handle are
not its materials, and the written page and the painted
picture are not its result. An artist paints with one motive
only: that he may help himself to see, and to see in the
sense of to imagine. His picture, when it is painted, has
done that, and he is not further interested in it. Art lives
not on canvases but in the fancy ; and only those who are
strangers to its inner life can suppose that it has any special
connexion with the objects stored in galleries and book-
shelves. The reason for this error is that persons in whom
the aesthetic life is feeble and intermittent require for its
exercise the aid of their betters, exactly as a child can be
shepherded through a theorem by its teacher or a novice
coaxed up a rock passage by his guide. The teacher’s words
are not mathematics, but a stimulus to mathematics ; and
‘the rope is not climbing, but a moral support to the climber ;
yet through their help it is evident that things can be done
by the weaker brethren which without such aid they would
not have the confidence to attempt.

Thus the work of art in the false sense, the perceptible
painting or writing, is valued not at all by its author, but
highly by the aesthetic weakling, because it helps him to
aesthetic activities which he could not have achieved alone.
And it must be added that he habitually exaggerates the
actual help which these things give him. If he is the sort
of man who could not sec for himself the dramatic force of
situations like those of Sophocles, the effectiveness of
colour-schemes like those of Titian or of modulation schemes

E2


68 ART


like those of Schubert, he will not see much of these things
when Sophocles, Titian, and Schubert thrust them under
his very nose: he will simply not notice the irony, the
contrast of colours and keys; and those parts of the work
of art which he could not in some sort have invented for
himself will pass him by unseen. ‘ How much, as one grows
older, one finds in so-and-so,’ people say, ‘ that one never
saw before!’ Yes; and how much one has not even yet
seen! For one never sees anything in anybody’s work but
what one brings to it, and it is as true of art as of nature
that


we receive but what we give,
And in our life alone doth Nature live ;
Ours is her wedding-garment, ours her shroud.


§ 3. The Monadism of Ant


In every phase of development the mind is its own place,
and it is as true in science and philosophy as in art that we
only see what we have eyes to see and only feel what we
have learnt to feel. But in full-blown intellectual activity
the mind’s limitation to the circle of its own arm’s length is
tempered by the fact that here the mind is knowing a real
world ; whatever falls inside the circle is real so far as
the mind’s thinking is true. Hence, even if the radius of
the circle is finite, it may overlap an infinite number of
other circles, so that every mind lives in a world which,
however narrow, is in principle at least common to all other
‘minds. But in art this is not so. The world of imagination
is a private world, a world inhabited solely by its author.
The artist, in the moment of aesthetic creation and enjoy-
ment, knows nothing either of a real world, whether natural
or artificial, or of minds other than his own. He lives to
himself, wholly wrapped up in his own fancies. His entire


The Monadism of Art 69


consciousness is simply the awareness of the work of art
which he is creating. Even of himself, as a_ historical
person, he is unaware; he imagines himself, just as he
imagines his world, and his own descriptions of himself
may be quite untrue to facts, to the confusion of those who
would use them as evidence for his biography. We may
call him self-absorbed, but the self in which he is absorbed
is an imaginary self. Thus he is not a solipsist or a subject
without an object ; his object may be an imaginary object,
but it is none the less an object ; he creates at his own good
pleasure an imaginary self and an imaginary world.

This utter self-absorption of the artist in the sense above
laid down is something of a scandal at a time when social
service has become a fetish ; and artists are eager to main-
tain that their work is essentially the communication of
important or beautiful messages to their fellows, hoping
thus to prove their utility to a utilitarian age. But this
attempt is necessarily a failure ; and every artist who can
recollect the actual aesthetic experience knows that in this -
experience the world of men and things is forgotten, and
that any desire to communicate or seek an audience for his
thoughts is subsequent and alien to the experience itself.
Artists do exhibit their works, and even sell them; but
neither the exhibition nor the sale is an aesthetic act.
The artist has no company, not even his own ; and he does
not feel lonely. He has all he needs, namely, his world of
imagination.

We have spoken of the world of imagination, but it must
be remembered that there are as many worlds of imagination
as there are works of art. For since a work of art is not
asserted as real but only imagined, its existence comes
abruptly to an end as soon as we cease to imagine it. The
characters in a story which I tell myself only exist for the


70 PORT:


purposes of the story, and as soon as my story is forgotten
they cease to exist and exercise, so to speak, no control over
my choice of characters in the next story. Had they been
regarded as real characters, I could not thus have ignored
them in the next story ; for the real must be coherent with
itself, and thus history, which aims at narrating real events,
can never break off and begin again quite fresh. The next
volume of my history must take up the thread of the last.
But it argues poverty of imagination if an artist is for ever
dwelling on the same theme and developing the fortunes
of the same set of characters. When one imagines, one
must imagine something; it must be a definite and not
a self-contradictory imagination, and hence the necessary
unity of the work of art. But it does not matter what one
imagines ; and it is just as easy and satisfactory to con-
tradict yesterday’s imagination as to continue it. Yet there
is a real difference between works of art in what we call
their scale or size: and it argues a more powerful mind,
a more highly-developed art, to work on a large scale than
on a small. Scale, in this sense, is not mere space and
time; excellence in art is not bulk or duration; it is
relative to the difficulty of the problem which the artist
sets himself and the extent to which his whole being and all
his resources are called into play in order to solve it. A long
and loosely organized work is in this sense a smaller, more
trivial, thing than a closely-knit work of shorter length ;
and this is why going on writing stories about the same
people is merely aesthetic indolence. Whether five years
are best spent in the concentrated effort of writing an epic
or in the intermittent and disjointed writing of a hundred
lyrics is a question which cannot be answered by rule.
Every fresh aesthetic act creates a new work of art,
though one such act may last for five years at a time. . The


The Monadism of Art 71


number of such works is therefore of necessity infinite, nor
is it possible to delimit and define their kinds. For though,
like anything else, they can be classified, this classification
must be continually adapted to keep pace with their free
production and cannot control that production, since
classification is the work not of imagination but of abstract
thought. Such schemes are for science alone ; art is simply
uninterested in them.

Every aesthetic act is an individual internally organized
by the harmonious fitting-together of subordinate aesthetic
acts; and this being so, it might be fancied that there is
a complete or absolute work of art, in which our dramas
and symphonies are but scenes and incidental music, a kind
of Platonic heaven into which all works of art are gathered
up into a coherent and systematic whole. But this cannot
be. Works of art always ignore one another and begin each
from the beginning: they are windowless monads; and
this is because they are acts of imagination, from which it
necessarily follows that they are careless of mutual consis-
tency and interested only in their internal coherence.
This is very clearly the case with regard to different per-
formers’ ‘ interpretations ’ of a single sonata or play. Such
interpretations may be infinitely various; every one has
a right to his own, and one cannot hope to find a master-
interpretation, as it were, which will embrace and include
all the others. Strictly speaking, there is therefore no such
thing as art as a whole ; we cannot say that art as a whole
gives us an imaginative view of the universe, but we must
say that this individual work of art gives us such a view,
the view given by any other work of art being incompatible
with it. Thus, in spite of the presence in art of mediation,
self-determination, and self-criticism, in spite of the presence
of the concept in the imaginative form of beauty, art is in


ve ART


one peculiar sense immediate and intuitive. It is essentially
discontinuous. It breaks off and begins again in a fresh
place. It is an infinite series of individual separate works
of art, which never coalesce into a whole, and of which each
is pitched in a different key from all the others. There is
never any reason in art why the aesthetic consciousness
should be engaged on ¢his work rather than on any other.
No doubt the history of art shows a certain continuity and
laws of development ; but it shows these to the historian,
not to the artist. The artist as such cares nothing for the
history of art. He does not necessarily know anything
whatever about it, and if he does, he must sedulously forget
it before he begins aesthetic work, for there is no more
crushing handicap to an artist than a load of scholarship.
The work of art is a monad, and monadology is the philosophy
of art.

This monadic withdrawing into itself of the aesthetic
consciousness, this ignoring of everything factual, even of
its own historical nature and situation, is the necessary
consequence of its imaginative character. Art in its pure
form is therefore unaware even that it is imagination ;
the monad does not know that it is windowless ; the artist
does not say ‘1 am only imagining’, for that would be to
distinguish imagination from knowledge, and this he does
not do. Hence the aesthetic life of children and uneducated
people results in what an unintelligent critic calls lying and
hallucination. Such people give imaginary accounts of
facts about which they are asked questions, they see ghosts
and converse with fairies, and all in good faith because
they are not awake to the distinction between imagining
and knowing, and therefore do not know that they are
imagining. The life of such people resembles that of one
who should slip continually and unawares from waking to


The Monadism of Art 73


vivid dreaming and back again. To enjoy the aesthetic
experience in this primitive form is to live in a waking
dream, to be at the mercy of nameless terrors and to find
solid ground nowhere beneath one’s feet. The fantasies of
childhood and savagery, the fairies and the fauns, are
pretty toys for the civilized man who has by long education
learnt that they are only imaginary ; but for the child and
the savage, and even to some extent for the English rustic
of to-day, they are the brood of the nightmare and black
with the perils of magic.


§ 4. Meaning in Art


The life of reason, therefore, whose first step is the develop-
ment of the aesthetic consciousness, finds its second step
in the conquest and, in some sort, the destruction of that
consciousness. In order to see how this is effected we must
go back to the beginning and consider to what extent the
account hitherto given of art is satisfactory.

The reader must have seen that it was a one-sided account.
We have described art as pure imagination; and the
characteristics which we have deduced from that description
have certainly given us a truthful picture of art, so far as
it went, but a picture which calls for modifications.

Ordinary thought has always attributed to art a power
of teaching truths, moral or religious, or philosophical,
which could not be otherwise grasped or uttered. That was
the general conviction of the ancients, and even Plato, who
opposed it in part, embraced it in the sense that he incor-
porated poetical myths in the body of his own philosophical
writing. It was widespread in the middle ages, and pre-
dominant in the Renaissance ; and how far it is from being
extinct to-day may be seen when we reflect that one of our


74 ART


most eminent philosophers, lately deceased, wrote a book on
Robert Browning as a Philosophical and Religious Teacher.
A theory so widely held and so firmly rooted is not likely
to be altogether false; and the special problem of the
philosophy of art to-day is to work out a theory which shall
do justice at once to this old ‘ pedagogic’ doctrine and to the
newer doctrine, derived from Vico and the eighteenth
century, which we have been hitherto expounding. This
has not yet been done, for the aesthetic of Hegel, which
comes nearest to doing it, has hardly absorbed into itself
the full consequences of the eighteenth-century doctrine,
which in our time has been powerfully and systematically
restated by Croce. The successors of Croce have not yet
reconsidered the somewhat peremptory way in which he
dismisses the ‘ pedagogic’ theory as a mere illusion. The
fact seems to be that in aesthetic, as in the other philo-
sophical sciences, the ancients maintained, in general and
with exceptions, a one-sided view which, after the Renais-
sance, tended to be replaced by its equally one-sided
opposite ; a tendency which culminated in the eighteenth
century: and that the special task of modern philosophy
is to overcome both exaggerations and to achieve a theory
which will do justice to both points of view. The aesthetic
of Croce, with its extremely close dependence on Vico,
seems to belong to the second of these phases rather than
the third, and the very real attempt made by Croce to reach
the third phase by identifying ‘ intuition ’ and ‘ expression ’
seems hardly to have succeeded.

The ‘ vulgar error ’ concerning imagination which empiri-
cist psychologies usually embrace is, that imagination can
do no more than redistribute or shuffle materials supplied
to it by perception. Hence is derived the false theory of
art as the more or less distorted reduplication of natural


Meaning in Art 75


fact. There is sheer confusion in such a doctrine, for it
turns on an impossible distinction between the ‘ materials’
of thought and their ‘arrangement’; and indeed it is
based not on actual study of the imagination but on the
a priort dogmas of empiricism. Yet, like all persistent
errors, it contains an important truth. For imagination
never works in the pure vacuum in which, for experimental
purposes, we have hitherto placed it. We have spoken as
if it could by itself, with no admixture of any alien element,
constitute a complete and self-contained life, which we have
called the life of art. That it can do so is precisely the error
of such as believe in the melancholy creed of art for art’s
sake, and adopt the philosophy which in a later chapter we
shall analyse under the name of aestheticism ; though this
in its turn is an error which contains truth.

Our dreams have a certain continuity with our waking
life, and imagination never cuts itself wholly adrift from
fact. This continuity is often difficult to trace ; completely
to trace it is beyond the power even of the most acute
psycho-analyst ; nevertheless, no one doubts its existence.
And some kind of continuity between an artist’s imaginings
and his experiences as a member of the world of facts is
undeniable. In part, this continuity is positive; we
imagine most successfully (that is, we find beauty in) things
that are familiar matter of fact in our non-aesthetic life.
So Scott could draw a Border shepherd better than a
Crusader, and Mr. Hardy’s dramatic power fails him
disastrously when he turns from Dorsetshire peasants to
fine ladies. But it is also negative ; for this very familiarity
breeds contempt, and the glamour of distance is simply the
imagination’s assertion of its own freedom. Pressed to
extremes, this freedom destroys itself, and in regions too
remote from fact the imagination expires for very lack of


76 ART


air to breathe. But if this freedom is not asserted at all,
we get the mere absence of art and the substitution of
photography; and that is the danger that threatens the
‘realistic’ artists who aim at transplanting historical fact
bodily into their pictures and plays.


§ 5. Knowledge as Question and Answer


Now we have already insisted that the aesthetic experience
is imaginative not in the sense that all its objects are
fictitious, but in the sense that it treats them indifferently,
whether they are fictitious or real; its attitude, whether
towards a real object or a fictitious, is the attitude which
neither asserts reality, truly or falsely, nor denies it, but
merely imagines. This attitude which makes no assertions,
and whose object is therefore as such neither real nor
unreal, has been much studied by recent philosophers, under
the name of hypothesis, intuition, supposal, representation,
and so forth. The credit of recognizing the identity of this
attitude with art belongs primarily to Croce. But all these
philosophers fall into the error of isolating this attitude and
regarding it as a self-contained phase of experience, from
which the other phases—notably the attitude of assertion
and denial—must be reached by some kind of transition.
And this transition is never successfully described. It is in
fact an impossible transition. Once the mind has succeeded
in attaining a condition in which it neither asserts nor
denies but only represents objects to itself intuitively or
imaginatively, there is no reason why it should ever pass
out of this condition. The ability to assert or deny is an
ability which it could never acquire. Hence it is customary
to fall back on some meaningless formula to bridge over the
unbridgeable gulf between supposal and assertion: to
argue that this is effected by the law of the unity of the


Knowledge as Question and Answer 77


spirit—a law which has just been openly defied and rendered
impotent ; or by the practical necessities of life—necessities
which the mind, as described by these philosophers, would
simply fail to face ; or by the intervention of the concept—
which is merely postulating that the problem has been
solved when it has not, for the question is, how can the
concept intervene ?

The fact is that imagination never thus exists in vacuo,
and therefore the problem of how it is to escape from its
vacuum is an unreal problem, and insoluble because it is
unreal. Supposal and assertion are not two independent
chapters in the history of the mind ; they are two opposite
and correlative activities which form as it were the systole
and diastole of knowledge itself. A crude empiricism
imagines that knowledge is composed wholly of assertion :
that to know and to assert are identical. But it is only when
the knower looks back over his shoulder at the road he has
travelled, that he identifies knowledge with assertion.
Knowledge as a past fact, as something dead and done with
—knowledge by the time it gets into encyclopaedias and
text-books—does consist of assertion, and those who treat
it as an affair of encyclopaedias and text-books may be
forgiven for thinking that it is assertion and nothing else.
But those who look upon it as an affair of discovery and
exploration have never fallen into that error. People who
are acquainted with knowledge at first hand have always
known that assertions are only answers to questions. So
Plato described true knowledge as ‘ dialectic ’, the interplay
of question and answer in the soul’s dialogue with itself ;
so Bacon pointed out once for all that the scientist’s real
work was to interrogate nature, to put her, if need be, to
the torture as a reluctant witness; so Kant mildly re-
marked that the test of an intelligent man was to know what


78 Ayer


questions to ask; and the same truth has lately dawned
on the astonished gaze of the pragmatists.

Questioning is the cutting edge of knowledge ; assertion
is the dead weight behind the edge that gives it driving
force. Questions undirected by positive information, ran-
dom questions, cut nothing ; they fall in the void and yield
no knowledge. Information, when it is not ground to
a keen edge of inquiry, is not knowledge but mere pedantry,
the talent buried in the earth. It ought to be put out at
interest, to yield new knowledge and so to purify and
correct itself as well as to increase its bulk, Text-books
and encyclopaedias are contemptible only when regarded as
constituting and exhausting knowledge itself; as records
of the achievement of knowledge, as constituting the body
of information which directs our further questionings, their
importance is immeasurable. Information may be the body
of knowledge, but questioning is its soul.

Supposal and questioning are at bottom the same thing ;
or rather, supposal when seen in its proper perspective as
an integral element in knowledge turns out to be questioning.
The activity of questioning is a puzzle to empiricist theories
of knowledge because in it we seem to contemplate an
object which does not necessarily exist, and empiricism
believes that it is only because an object really exists that
it has, so to speak, the force to imprint itself upon our mind
or engage our attention. But we never ask a question
without to some degree contemplating the non-existent ;
for asking a question means envisaging alternatives, and
only one at most of these alternatives can really exist. Thus
questioning is essentially a suspension of the activity of
asserting, and that is how we have defined the aesthetic
experience or imagination. But true questioning is a sus-
pension which looks forward to a renewal of this asserting


Knowledge as Question and Answer 79


activity, in the shape of the answer. In art, on the other
hand, the suspending of assertion seems to be an end in
itself, and does not look forward to its own negation, the
renewal of assertion. Art, as pure imagination, imagination
without assertion, may be paradoxically defined as a
question which expects no answer: that is, a supposal.

But a question looks back as well as forward. To ask
any question, even the silliest or most irresponsible, we
must already possess information. A mind which did
nothing but question could not even frame its questions ;
the questions which it asked would be mere marks of
interrogation, the empty form of questioning, questions
which asked nothing. And they would not be even that,
for even the empty form of questioning implies the know-
ledge that there is information to be had. Similarly, in
terms of inductive logic, you must know your facts before
you can frame your hypothesis ; and this means not only
that without knowing the facts you cannot frame a relevant
or illuminating hypothesis, but that you cannot frame any
hypothesis whatever. Any act must start somewhere, and
a pure act of imagination, just because it was completely
divorced from fact, would have nowhere to start from and
would therefore have no reason for determining itself in
any one way rather than in any other. So, even if art is
pure imagination, it must spring from a soil of concrete
fact ; the artist must really exist in a real world, and his
works of art are necessarily a kind of sublimated version of
his experience as a real person, however unconscious of this
fact he may be. The work of art is an imaginative cutting
edge to a mind whose solid backing of factual experience
may be forgotten for the moment, but is none the less very
real; or rather, it is not forgotten but distilled into the
work of art, present to the mind in this form and no other.


80 ART


Thus the imaginative activity of art is itself supported
and surrounded by a medium of fact ; but the essence of
the purely aesthetic frame of mind is that this medium or
background is overlooked. The artist necessarily overlooks
it, but that does not excuse the philosopher from doing so ;
and his attempt to build up a philosophy from a basis of
pure imagination is doomed to failure because the basis
itself is unsound. Imagination does not exist in the free
state, and itself requires a basis of fact. This basis of fact
in turn requires a basis of imagination, for no fact can be
known until it has been sought by the imaginative act of
questioning, and this question itself requires a further basis
of fact, and so ad infinitum. This is not an infinite regress
only because the two moments, question and answer, are
not actually separate. Their distinction is an ideal dis-
tinction only, and the presupposition of each by the other
is only a way of stating their inseparability. The process
of knowledge is therefore, strictly speaking, not so much an
alternation of question and answer as a perpetual restate-
ment of the question, which is identical with a perpetual
revision of the answer. If it is objected that this reduces
all the diversity of knowledge to a bare identity in which
there is only one judgement judging one truth, our answer
—to be given in full later on—will be that this identity
contains all diversity within itself.


§ 6. Art as a form of Error


Since pure imagination nowhere exists, since all imagina-
tion builds on fact and, as question, returns to fact, there
is no such thing as an autonomous and self-contained life
of art, art for art’s sake, aesthetic experience in which every
trace of fact is absent. Empirically we all know that art
for art’s sake is an illusion, that the self-contained life of


Art as a form of Error Sy


art is a mockery. The artist’s life is one of singular in-
stability ; it overreaches itself, bursts its own bonds, fails
him at every turn. His fancies are
cords of all too weak account

For Earth with heavy griefs so overplussed ;
his palace of art reveals itself a prison, and its furniture
but a pale copy of the living fact :

And that ’s your Venus—whence we turn

To yonder girl that fords the burn!

Among artists, only the utterly blind and self-complacent
fail to see the impotence of art to solve the problem of life,
talk boastfully of Art as the very crown and pearl of the
spirit, and revile a Plato or a Hegel if, Philistine that he is,
he dares to differ from them. The rest only beg to be
allowed to dream their dream out undisturbed, or else, if
they are made of stronger metal, try to wake up. Again,
far more than religion or philosophy, art is a trick, an
accomplishment, something that tells one strangely little
about the artist asa man. In art, more than anywhere else,
great gifts are unworthily bestowed : even a fine artist may
be intellectually feeble and morally depraved, and so
common is this, that the ‘ artistic temperament ’ is a term
of reproach. All this may be expressed by saying that art
employs a singularly small portion of a man’s personality,
so that a man who is competent in art is competent in
a small section only of his entire life. The artist is an artist
only for short times; he turns artist for a while, like
a werewolf, and for the rest of the time he only carries
marks by which the instructed may recognize him. In his
hour, all is well with him. The spirit is upon him, and
he is wholly absorbed in the divine work of creation. But
his hour passes, and the vision fades into the light of
common day; the artist becomes once more an ordinary

2792 F


82 ART


mortal, the poorer in that he has utterly lost the vision
which was all in all to him, and is haunted by that home-
sickness for the ideal which every artist knows too well.

The same instability which affects the life of the individual
artist reappears in the history of art taken as a whole. To
the historian accustomed to studying the growth of scientific
or philosophical knowledge, the history of art presents
a painful and disquieting spectacle, for it seems normally
to proceed not forwards but backwards. In science and
philosophy successive workers in the same field produce,
if they work ordinarily well, an advance ; and a retrograde
movement always implies some breach of continuity. But
in art, a school once established normally deteriorates as it
goes on. It achieves perfection in its kind with a startling
burst of energy, a gesture too quick for the historian’s eye
to follow. He can never explain such a movement or tell
us how exactly it happened. But once it is achieved, there
is the melancholy certainty of a decline. The grasped
perfection does not educate and purify the taste of posterity ;
it debauches it. The story is the same whether we look at
Samian pottery or Anglian carving, Elizabethan drama or
Venetian painting. So far as there is any observable law
in collective art-history it is, like the law of the individual
artist’s life, the law not of progress but of reaction. Whether
in large or in little, the equilibrium of the aesthetic life is
permanently unstable.

This instability of the aesthetic life is of its very essence.
It cannot be overcome by any effort or any trick. Flogging
the uninspired mind to work, or stimulating it with drink
and drugs and sensual excitement, can at best produce the
semblance of aesthetic experience, at worst, an end of all
experience whatever. The wise man relapses contentedly
into an ordinary humdrum existence and waits for the


Art as a form of Error 83


moving of the waters. But why should aesthetic experience
be thus intermittent and fitful? It is because the rhythm
of question and answer which constitutes the very life of the
spirit cannot suffer interruption. The pendulum cannot
swing for ever one way. The artist as such wants a life of
pure imagination. He cannot get it: it is not to be had.
But what he can do is to emphasize in an exaggerated and
one-sided way the imaginative attitude which is a necessary
part of all life. By forcing this imaginative aspect into
prominence he disturbs the balance of his life, and the
aspect which he has neglected revenges itself upon him by
reasserting itself to the exclusion of the other. But that
is a somewhat mythological statement of the facts. It
would be more accurate to say that the artist fails to analyse
his own experience correctly, and mistakes a distinction
between two correlative elements in that experience
(imagination and assertion) for a distinction between two
distinct types or sections of experience (aesthetic experience,
experience of facts). Strictly speaking all experience is
aesthetic, because imagination is a factor in every single
cognitive act ; and no experience is purely aesthetic, because
there is no concrete experience from which the logical act
of assertion is wholly absent. All life is art, but no single
moment of life is mere art. Now the artist has only one
scale of values. He judges everything aesthetically, nothing
logically : what he values in any experience is its imagina
tive, not its logical, side. Why then does he not see the
aesthetic side in all experience, and merely ignore the
logical, thus enjoying an uninterrupted flow of aesthetic
experience ?

To detect in every experience its aesthetic element
means analysing all experience in the light of a philoso-
phical conception of aesthetic activity. The artist has no

F2


84 ART


such philosophical conception. If he had, the structure of
his experience would present itself to him not as beauty but
as the exemplification of the concept. To see anything as
beautiful involves seeing it as imagination and nothing but
imagination ; and that means failing to see in it the logical
elements which it in reality contains. Now because the
imaginative apprehension of an object has been thus pur-
chased at the price of suppressing its logical apprehension,
the converse will necessarily occur. When the logical element
forces itself upon the mind, the aesthetic element will be
suppressed, and this is what happens when the aesthetic:
experience gives way to the non-aesthetic. Unless it
happened, the artist could not eat or drink, paint his pictures
on solid canvas or post his poems in a real letter-box. If
you ask him to take aesthetic pleasure in his bread and
cheese or in the colour of the letter-box, you are forgetting
that to be an artist at all is to bifurcate one’s experience
into one part set aside as aesthetic and another part in-
evitably left over as non-aesthetic. But this bifurcation
of experience is an error in philosophical analysis. The
artist’s life as such is thus irrevocably based upon a philo-
sophical misunderstanding, and is not what it takes itself
to be. The essence of art lies in the fact that the artist
regards his works as acts of pure imagination ; their raison
d’étve is to be acts of pure imagination; but there is and
can be no such thing as an act of pure imagination.

Of everything that a mind in the full sense does, it gives
itself an account as it does it; and this account is in-
separably bound up with the doing of the thing. Thus every
activity is also a theory of itself and, by implication, of
activity in general ; but not necessarily a true theory. For
instance, every scientist has some way of telling himself
what he is doing, some logical theory as to the nature of


Art as a form of Error 8 5


science ; but this logical theory may be and often is a quite
unsound one. Nor can its defects fail to influence the
immediate scientific practice of the man who holds it ; bad
fashions in logic have always had detrimental effects on
actual science.

Art in every form, from the most rudimentary organiza-
tion of passing fancies to the most elaborate aesthetic
structures, involves a certain philosophical error which,
latent at first, becomes more and more definite as the art
reaches higher and higher developments. This error is the
belief in the separateness and independence of imagination.

At the lower stages, in the child and the savage, this
belief is implicit only ;1 when the mind slips over unawares


1 The distinction between explicit and implicit is so important
that it seems desirable here to call ‘attention to it. In any given
experience there are certain principles, distinctions, and so forth of
which the person whose experience it is cannot but be aware: these
I call explicit features of the experience in question. Thus a moral
agent, in so far as he is a moral agent, is necessarily aware of the
distinction between right and wrong: to forget that distinction is to
cease to be in the full and complete sense a moral agent. On the
other hand, an observer studying a certain form of experience often
finds it impossible to give an account of it without stating certain
principles and distinctions which are not actually recognized by the
persons whose experience he is studying. Thus an artist constructs
his work on principles which are really operative in the construction,
but are not explicitly recognized by himself: in art they are implicit,
to become explicit only in the criticism of art. Similarly theology
makes explicit certain principles which are implicitly, but never
explicitly, present in the religious consciousness; and in general
what we call philosophy reveals explicitly the principles which are
implicit in what we call everyday experience. To suppose that
a principle which is really present in a given experience must be
explicitly present in it—to deny implicitness in general—is either
to confuse art with art-criticism, religion with theology, correct use
of language with grammar, and so forth, or else to deny all con-
nexion between these pairs of activities and (by calling one merely
instinctive and the other rational, or the like) to make incomprc-


86 ART


from waking to dreaming and back again, and the distinction
between asserting and imagining has not been reflected
upon, all life is art and all objects imaginary. But in the
developed and mature aesthetic consciousness, when the
artist knows that he is imagining and distinguishes his
aesthetic from his non-aesthetic experiences, the belief has
become explicit and is then an explicit error.

To correct this error is to destroy art as a specific form of
activity, to reduce it to the position of an aesthetic element
present in all experience but exclusively or predominantly
present in none. One might say that in fact no such thing
as art exists, but cither all experience is art or none is ; but
this would have to be corrected by pointing out that the
belief in a specific aesthetic experience, though an error, is
an error into which people really fall and which, when they
fall into it, produces the specific experience called art, an
experience which is unstable and irrational precisely because
it is the living embodiment of an error.

Plato, than whom few have seen deeper into the mysteries
of the human spirit, was intensely conscious of a quarrel
between two forms of experience in which he was interested,
poetry and philosophy. On such a matter he was too much
a poet and too much a philosopher to speak at random.
That fault is rather theirs who, in defiance of warnings like
his, treat philosophy and art as coexistent and distinct
activities between which there can be no conflict. Plato’s
aesthetic is as great a feat, and deserves as high a place in
the history of thought, as his logic, if only because he
realized that art is a ‘lie’ but a noble and necessary lie,


hensible the transition which is always taking place from the one
to the other. But for the detailed justification of the distinction
between implicit and explicit we must refer to the entire course of
our argument.


Art as a form of Error 87


the mother of truth, but a mother that must die in giving
birth, only to be born again every time a new human being
comes into the world.

But if art is essentially a philosophical error, it must be
at enmity not only with true philosophy but with itself.
For a philosophical error is not merely that which con-
tradicts the truth ; it is much more vitally—for those who
do not claim personal infallibility—that which contradicts
itself. Does art, then, contradict itself ?

Undoubtedly it does. Art makes for itself two claims.
First, that it is the activity of pure imagination ; secondly,
that it somehow reveals the truth concerning the ultimate
nature of the real world. Now for pure imagination there
is no real world ; there is only the imaginary world. Conse-
quently we are tempted to revise the second claim and make
it run ‘ reveals the truth concerning the ultimate nature of
the imaginary world’. But then the second claim simply
repeats the first, and adds nothing toit. This false reduction
of the second claim to the first is, unless I am mistaken, the
motive of Croce’s famous identification of intuition and
expression. The paradox of art is that it is both intuitive
(pure imagination) and expressive (revelatory of truth) :
two characteristics which contradict one another. Croce
resolves the contradiction in his own favourite way, by what
I may call pricking it, so that the opposition vanishes and
the terms collapse into an undifferentiated or immediate
identity. But because the opposition thus ‘ collapses into
immediacy ’, the outcome is merely immediate, that is, it is
just intuition over again. Intuition and expression have
not been reconciled. Expression has merely been reduced
to intuition ; in other words, expression in the true sense
has been ignored.

That which is expressed is necessarily a meaning, some-


88 ART


thing distinct from the intuitive vehicle of meaning. This
meaning is asserted as a truth. We do not assert what we
say, for what we say is simply words, but what we mean ;
the act of meaning something is thus identical with the act
of asserting something, and it is this meaning which our
words express. But because the words are a purely aesthetic
or imaginary object, it makes no difference whether we say
that we, or the words, mean that which is meant.

Now significance, meaningfulness, is certainly a character-
istic of all art, and in higher and higher degree as we reach
art’s higher developments, When Socrates asked the poets
what their poems meant, they could not tell him, and he
noticed with amusement that the bystanders were far more
ready with an answer than the writers themselves; but
neither Socrates nor the poets hesitated for a moment to
admit that the poems meant something, and something
other than what they said. The aesthetic of pure imagina-
tion would reply, as Mendelssohn replied in a similar case,
‘ they mean what they say ’ ; and the reply would be a mere
evasion, suggesting either that they meant nothing, or that
the questioner had failed to see their plain and unambiguous
meaning. In Mendelssohn’s mouth it probably amounted
to a mere refusal to go farther into the question. And this
was right; for the meaning of a work of art cannot be
restated in other terms. It is embedded in the work itself
and cannot be torn from its imaginative setting and put
down in philosophical prose. The meaning itself, the
expressed concept, exists in the work only intuitively, under
the form of beauty, and the beauty of a beautiful object
cannot be separated from the object itself. The beauty
simply is the object as aesthetically seen, or imagined.

But this is a contradiction in terms. A concept can only
be conceived, not intuited; to say that a concept exists


Art as a form of Error 89


intuitively, to speak of a meaning fused or identified with
its sensuous vehicle, is merely to contradict oneself. And
yet this contradiction is the essence of art. Art is valuable,
beautiful, just in so far as it is significant or expressive ;
but if we ask what it signifies we get no reply, because (in
defiance of the definition of significance) what it signifies
is just itself. Kant was stating this fact when he said that
beauty was purposiveness without purpose; the beautiful,
he meant, had the air of carrying out some purpose, of
meaning or intending something, and when you came to ask
what it intended, you could never say. Rather than copying
Kant by defining art as significance without signification,
one might say that it signified something, but no one could
say what. Hence the perpetual attempt to allegorize art,
to detect stratum below stratum of occult meaning beneath
its painted surface, is as inevitable as it is fruitless. People
have always asked of art ‘ what does it mean?’ and they
will never stop asking. And answers, necessarily more or
less capricious and unsatisfying, will always be found. The
facile reply that art means nothing but what it says, is the
very pedantry of despair, in which critics who begin to
weary of criticism may take refuge, but which the unin-
structed will reject for the sophistry that it is.

By emptying it of all meaning and reducing it to the pure
play of imagination, the attempt is made to place art on
a basis from which it cannot be dislodged, as a permanent
and autonomous activity of the mind. But this is propter
vitam vivendt perdere causas. The real value of art is just
its purposiveness, its significance.

True, we cannot say what precisely it purposes or signifies.
But that is because art is only art and not philosophy.
When you know what you mean, you have achieved philo-
sophy ; but when you know that you mean something, and


go ART
cannot tell what, you have already achieved something :
you have achieved art. And the first stage in knowledge is
the discovery that you mean something: the stage in which
the mind’s reach exceeds its grasp, and barely touches
a conception as yet undetermined. This stage only exists
to be superseded. When we discover what our meaning is,
the aesthetic stage in the history of that thought is over
and done with. Art must perish as knowledge grows. But
it perishes like the phoenix, to rise again from the very
ashes of its own body. To speak of the growth of knowledge
is to imply that new thoughts, new facts, are perpetually
coming to consciousness. Every one of these must begin
as the significance of a work of art ; must begin, that is to
say, by being that of which we can only say that we know
it is there but cannot tell what it is. This purely intuitive
knowledge grasps or presages its object solely as beauty ;
and thus beauty is the birthplace of truth, and art, as we
have said, the womb and night of the spirit.

The value of art as a form of experience is thus its self-
transcendence. Art is not attacked and destroyed by
philosophy as by an external enemy ; it destroys itself by
its own inner contradiction, by defining itself as at once
pure intuition and also expression, imagination and thought,
significance without definable signification, the intuitive
concept. This contradiction is not irreconcilable. On the
contrary, its reconciliation is the whole life of thought. The
very existence of the mind is a standing synthesis of in--
tuition and conception, immediacy and mediation, the that
and the what. But it is not at the level of art that the
synthesis is effected. Art is the cutting edge of the mind,
the question as yet unanswered, the antithesis as yet
unsynthesized. The fact that such an unsolved problem
exists in the reality of experience is a guarantee that other


Art as a form of Error gI


problems have in the past been raised and solved, for every
question, as we know, is weighted by a body of information
already won; and therefore the life of art is always more
than art : art rises like a flower from a soil which consists
of fact. Yet the flower, though it has absorbed the soil
into itself, knows nothing of this soil, and art thinks of itself
as a pure act of imagination, cut off and disconnected from
anything outside itself. This erroneous self-conception is
what marks the artist out and gives him his peculiar
character. Positively, he has the freedom of the world of
imagery and the mysterious power of presenting in a riddle
the solution of the world’s problem; negatively, this
freedom is paid for by all those weaknesses and miseries
which fall to the lot of the soothsayer. His life is torn in
two between the ecstasy of a fruition which, though it solve
the riddle of the universe, is itself another riddle, and the
despair of those dark hours when the universe is not even
a riddle but a tissue of meaningless fact, a tale told by an
idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing.


§ 7. The Dialectic of Art


By analysing art as a conflict of two opposing clements, we
have made possible a dynamic view of its life. If these two
elements collapse into an undifferentiated identity, the
result must follow that art is a thing—one can hardly call
it an activity—which is always and everywhere precisely
the same, a tap turned on in the mind or a number turning
up again and again in the throw of the dice. But if it is
a conflict between intuition and expression, it will change
its form and modify itself from top to bottom as this conflict
works itself out.

Pure imagination, devoid of any trace of assertion, would
be a mere chaotic riot of fantasies in which every image,


g2 ART


by its mere transitoriness, would be wholly indeterminate,
incapable of being called an image at all :
Too like the lightning, which doth cease to be
Ere one can say, It lightens.

Not this condition, but something approximating to it
by reason of the random and disconnected character, is
found in the vague day-dreaming and night-dreaming of
the mind whose control over itself is relaxed. This looseness
of control is not a thing to surprise us, but quite the con-
trary: the sanity of rational life is no gift of nature but an
immensely difficult achievement of the mind, and an effort
from which even those who most securely grasp it willingly
rest from time to time. In such repose the mind returns
most deeply into what we have called the night and womb
of its being.

Even here, in the activity which we may generically call
dreaming, there is no lapse to a mere abstract immediacy.
Not only are the separate images retained in consciousness
long enough to become definite, but there is a certain inter-
connexion running through them. Though this be madness,
yet there is method in it: this method being the element
of structure or organization which differentiates even the
wildest dream from the abstract and never actualized ideal
of a pure sensational flux. This structure, present even in
dreams, is the element which, by becoming more and more
explicit, determines the difference between a dream and
a work of art. It is not true to say that there is more
structure in the latter than in the former. Psycho-analysis
has shown us, even empirically, that there is an unlimited

amount ’ of structure, so to speak, in every dream: that
connexions can be found by the skilled eye between the
most apparently discontinuous elements of the most ap-
parently chaotic dream. But it needed not psycho-analysis


The Dialectic of Art 93


to show that a dream, merely by being regarded as a dream,
that is, as a single whole, was already recognized as possess-
ing its own unity and therefore an implicit law of its
structure. Nothing can, however, be more instructive than
the way in which psycho-analysis reveals the distinguishing
mark of this structure. It is essentially a structure which
is, in the terminology of the psycho-analyst himself, wn-
conscious. The dreamer himself is unaware of it until, in
collaboration with his psycho-analyst, he brings it to light.
The mythological way of stating this fact is to say that the
structure was ‘in the unconscious’. This is frankly non-
sense ; but there is no reason why psycho-analysts, so long
as they can actually perform miracles, should be grudged
the privilege of choosing their own language, even if it is
nonsensical, when describing them. It is nonsense because
the structure is not in the unconscious but precisely in the
dream, for it is the structure of the dream ; and the dream
is conscious enough. If it had been unconscious, that
recognition of it by the dreamer which is such a striking
incident of good psycho-analysis could not happen. The
dreamer actually says, when the structure of his dream is
explained to him, ‘I see that this was the way in which
I was actually building up my dream.’ That is to say,
the revelation made by psycho-analysis is not the bringing
into consciousness of what was unconscious, but the bringing
into explicitness of what was implicit, the noticing of some-
thing already actually experienced in a light in which it
had not been noticed before. This new light or new aspect
of an experience, separated by a false abstraction from the
experience of which it is a new aspect, is called ‘the un-
conscious’; and the result of this false abstraction is to
obscure the fact that the new light in question is nothing
but the hitherto overlooked structure of the experience in


Q4. ART


question, and to create the false suggestion that it is another
and a ‘repressed’ experience lying behind the ‘ explicit ’
experience. Since ex hypothest the repressed experience
is repressed, that is, reduced to the non-existence of un-
consciousness, the psycho-analyst can say whatever he likes
about it and adopt the most arbitrary and unscientific
canons of interpretation with perfect impunity. Thus the
mythology of the ‘ unconscious ’ frustrates the most brilliant
discovery that psychology has ever made, and covers it with
a growth of rank superstition.

The real function of psycho-analysis is to reveal the.
implicit logical or structural element in the dream. Now
this structure, as the psycho-analysts have empirically
shown, can be discovered in all dreams; but what makes
them dreams, or incoherent imaginings, is that the dreamer
is unaware of it. But unaware in the proper sense he
cannot be, for he is aware of the dream and the structure
is just the dream. The point is that his dreaming of the
dream is, so to speak, just a dream-awareness of this
structure itself. The structure is present to him in an
intuitive or immediate form, and the so-called content of
the dream is nothing but the immediacy of its own form.
This may sound abstruse and unfamiliar, but it is a common-
place of art-criticism. We all know that the meaning of
a work of art, which is just its ‘form’ or structure, is so
embedded in the work of art itself that to extricate it is
impossible: it is, in poetry, not a meaning behind the
sounds but ‘a resonant meaning or a meaning resonance ’,
as Mr. A. C. Bradley puts it. The form and the content are
indistinguishably one; and the content being imaginative,
the form is not explicitly logical but imaginative too.
The form is the beauty, and beauty as we have already seen
is nothing but the concept in its imaginative guise, thought


The Dialectic of Art 95


in the form of intuition. This may be said to be nonsense,
but if so it is nonsense to deny which makes nonsense of all
art. It is the description of a paradox, and lays an in-
tentional emphasis on its paradoxical nature. The paradox
is an actual paradox, not an imaginary one; and its
actuality depends on the fact that intuition and thought
are not distinct activities but correlative aspects of ex-
perience itself.

Intuition and thought are inseparable, being only the
immediacy (actuality, positiveness) and mediation (reflection
upon itself) of all experience. Now experience as such is
not partly intuitive and partly conceptual, it is all intuitive
and all conceptual. But the life of art is a life which falsely
conceives itself to be merely intuitive. Now this very life
must in reality be conceptual as well; and thus its con-
ceptuality is precisely what appears to it as pure intuition.
Hence the paradox that the content of the work of art is
its own form in an intuitive guise.

When the dreamer undergoes psycho-analysis he discovers
not the hidden meaning of his dreams, but the fact that
his dreams were intuitive manifestations of concepts. He
discovers that the direct experience of dreaming presents
as intuition something that is really thought. To discover
that one’s dreams thus have a structure may result in going
on dreaming as before and then, on waking, analysing their
structure ; or it may result in fusing these two processes in
one and actually constructing one’s dreams by a conscious
process of control, deliberately determining their course
according to a principle of relevance. The first alternative
splits life up into an alternation of imagination and re-
flection, which cannot be stable because the reflection is
nothing but the discovery that the imagination never was
pure imagination but contained a reflective element or


96 ART


structure implicit within itself. The second alternative is
art in the ordinary sense.

The difference between art and dreaming is that the artist
is aware that his fantasies have a structure, the dreamer is
not. Art is coherent, and this coherence is attained by
a deliberate effort. Dreaming is incoherent and thus
effortless. But the incoherence of dreaming is only apparent
and not real. The dreamer, and this is what makes him
a dreamer, does not know that he is an artist: does not
know that his dreams are actually being constructed
systematically. A dream that is constructed systematically
in an explicit manner is just a work of art.

In the true life of art, then, the presence of structure is
explicit, and a deliberate effort is made to be systematic.
But this structure is still wholly intuitive, wholly embedded
in the work itself, and incapable of being extracted from
its material and set over against it as ‘ meaning’ distin-
guished from the ‘words’. Art lives, as art, by keeping
the meaning and the words together in an immediate
unity. The abstract identity of form and content is the
keystone of the artistic consciousness, and artists who
reflect on their art are significantly unanimous in em-
phasizing this fact. Significantly, because the points
emphasized in such self-descriptions are always the points
of danger. Adam, taking visitors round the Garden of Eden,
would always have taken them first to the Tree of the
Knowledge of Good and Evil: ‘This is the tree whose fruit
we do not eat.’ The artist’s effort to be systematic already
implies a distinction between the form or system of art and
its content, the imagery systematized. If this distinction
were allowed to develop, it would split up the unity of the
work of art into form and matter, meaning and words,
conceptual element and sensuous element. This would


The Dialectic of Art 97


destroy the work of art as such altogether. The words would
lose their unique or poetic significance, and become prose,
mere counters indicative of a conceptual meaning outside
them: the life with which art vibrates would vanish, and
the whole would become a dead mechanism, a body whose
soul lay outside it in the region of disembodied spirit.

All art maintains itself in existence by staving off this
separation of body from soul. But in the creative process
by which a work of art comes into being, the separation is
already implicit: the soul always exists to some extent
in advance of the body, for it is only because the artist
already knows what his picture is aiming at that he can
continue it in one way and not in another. This does not
mean that he imagines it in advance of physically painting
it: that he may or may not do. But he conceives it in
advance of imagining it, in the sense that at any given
moment in the process of creation he has in his mind
a criterion which enables him to distinguish between the
right and the wrong way of continuing the process of
imagination itself. Otherwise, he is no real artist but only a
dreamer. Inso far as he is a real artist, his artistic creation is
a self-critical creation, and the criticizing moment or concept
—the idea of structure or relevance—is always in advance
of the criticized moment, the flow of imaginations which it
controls.

To be conscious of this control is to have broken with the
life of dreams and to have entered upon the life of art in
the ordinary sense. The rationality which distinguishes
the artist from the dreamer is nothing but the consciousness
of conirol. Not only is the result of the control conscious,
so that the work of art when complete is seen as a systematic
whole whose every part is relevant to the rest, but the
actual control itself is conscious. The dreamer doubtless


2792 G


98 joes)


works in a sense at constiucting his dream, but he does not
know that he is working at it. The artist knows he is
working : he toils at artistic creation, but because what he
is toiling at is imagining, he cannot foresee the end of his
toil; if he could, it would be achieved. So he can give no
account of the purpose and aim of his labour, and can only
compare it with the agony of childbirth, in the sense that
each is an instinctive and unreasoning act of creation
calling forth the utmost effort of a human being.

When the artist thinks about his own work and recalls
the agony of his travail, he sees that it was an agony
because it was an attempt to ‘ embody an ideal’, to carry
out a scheme or plan which was implicit before it was
explicit. To the mere passive spectator it would seem that
a work of art is nothing before it is explicit ; but that is
only the result of drifting round picture-galleries, and
saying ‘ that is a pretty picture’ or ‘ that is an ugly one’
without troubling to analyse the way in which these judge-
ments grow up in the mind. The creative artist cannot
well overlook the fact that these judgements have an origin
in which they really come into ‘being by passing from
implicitness to explicitness.

But what is the aesthetic act in its implicitness ? It can
only be the opposite of the aesthetic act in its explicitness :
abstract conception as opposed to abstract intuition. Hence
the presupposition of the birth of a work of art is the purely
abstract concept of relevance as such: aesthetic structure
in general. The painter adds another touch to his picture
—real or imaginary—because it is ‘needed’, it is ‘ what the
picture wants’; in other words it is the abstract concept
of relevance that is his explicit criterion.

The concrete life of art is thus explicitly both imaginative
and conceptual, and has thus overcome the one-sidedness


The Dialectic of Art 99


of pure imagination. And because this is so, because the
work of art is constructed on a framework of thought, art
is not the withdrawal of the soul into a purely imaginative
fairyland but is concrete fact. Hence the necessity for
physical works of art and for the recognition by the artist
of real minds other than his own—including among these
his own future and past mind—with which he desires to
communicate, teaching them and learning from them. If
art were pure intuition there could be no society of artists,
no communication, no physical works of art.

But even now there is a discord in the life of the artist.
The concept, pure relevance, is not art itself but a principle
outside art which controls it. The work of art, as achieved,
is not relevant to itself but beautiful, which is a very different
thing. For beauty is relevance become intuitive, the
concept losing its abstract conceptual character. Art is
thus an alternation between concentration on the abstract
concept of relevance (the ‘fundamental brain-work’ of
which Rossetti spoke) and flight to the abstract intuition
of beauty. The cleavage between means and end, technique
and inspiration, talent and genius, materials and result, is
inevitable in the life of art, and only those who idealize
that life by looking at it from the outside deny the dualism.
The artist knows that he can only get his work of art by
passing through a non-aesthetic world which is that of
facts, training, daily life, and so forth. The non-aesthetic
character of this world means that he regards it as non-
intuitive or purely conceptual : it is for him mere machinery,
though indispensable machinery. Of course, to call this
world of fact mere machinery is as wrong as to call the
world of art pure intuition: they are complementary errors
and one implies the other. But they are errors both essential
to the life of art.


G2


100 ART


The artist, then, realizes that abstract conceptual ma-
chinery is necessary to his art. Now the abstract concept
of aesthetic form is bare relevance, and the artist’s con-
centration of thought on this is art-criticism. Criticism is
the opposite of art; it is pure thinking where art is pure
imagination, intellect where art is feeling, and so forth.
But it is an opposite into which the artist is forced by the
life of art itself. Either the artist is an incoherent dreamer
or he is a critic; and since he cannot be the former he is
always the latter. But though every artist is a critic, he
succeeds in being an artist by forgetting and denying that
he is a critic; for to be a critic is not to be an artist. The
artist who has failed to keep up the pretence of not being
a critic is the person who becomes a critic in the ordinary
sense of the word, and hence the truth of the common
saying, intended as an insult, that a critic is a man who
has tried to be an artist and failed. He has failed because of
the vigour of his own mind, which could not be content with
the self-deception of being an artist. In the same spirit one
might describe a poet as a person who has tried to be
a dreamer and failed.

The critic’s business is to describe the abstract principles
of the genesis of art. But these principles are never really
abstract : as the principles governing the origin of this and
that particular work of art, they are always historical
concrete facts. Therefore the critic is right not to be content
with the bare minimum of criticism to which the abstract-
ness of his task might seem to condemn him: he is right to
be dissatisfied with saying: ‘ This is successful and that
unsuccessful.’ To divide works of art as merely beautiful
and merely ugly is not to avoid abstraction, it is to commit
the last and most barren of all abstractions; and that is
why a teacher of art would never make such a division in


The Dialectic of Art 101


criticizing the work of his pupils. He must describe the
specific way in which a work has succeeded or failed, and
this necessarily gives rise to all those minute classifications
of the sublime, comic, tragic, the epic, drama, lyric, the
novel, the short story, and so on ad infinitum, which to bad
critics are the mere dead weight of weapons they are too
weak to handle, and a snare to philosophers who try to
reduce them to order either by neatly arranging them in
tables or by making a clean sweep of the lot, and substituting
the one concept of beauty which unites all their faults in
itself. For their fault is just their abstractness, and the
alleged concept of beauty is nothing but the abstraction of
an autonomous and self-contained aesthetic activity.

Art by its own dialectic gives rise, over against itself, to
criticism, which is science. If art is abstract intuition, criti-
cism is abstract conception. But when it is realized that
criticism is no abstract thinking but concrete philosophy,
it follows that art is no abstract imagining but concrete
philosophy too. When these abstractions have been re-
moved, art and criticism can be identified; and then all
life will be seen to have an aspect which is aesthetic and an
aspect which is logical. The aesthetic aspect, which the life
of art mistakes for the whole, is what we have called the
mind’s cutting edge: the logical aspect is the weight of
fact as asserted, which gives the edge power to cut.

In our account of art we have thus tried to give an
account of the cutting edge of the mind, the element of
pure spontaneity or inquiry which is the true beginning of
knowledge. The so-called aesthetic experience is either
a name for all experience in so far as this element of spon-
taneity, questioning or supposal, enters into it, or else it is
a name for something that does not exist at all, namely the
alleged life of art, a specific type of experience whose exist-


102 ART


ence is asserted by the philosophical error which abstracts
the aesthetic from the logical function and erects them into
separate experiences. The consistent pursuit of this error
is what we call, empirically, the life of art ; and because it
is thus based on an error, the life of art is a futile quest and
contradicts itself at every turn. If artists actually live and
do well, that is just because they are more than artists,
and because their practice is better than their theory ;
because they have given up the attempt to live according
to their hopelessly unpractical ideal and follow, however
unconsciously, the principles of a sounder philosophy,
resolving in their life the contradictions which their art
cannot resolve.


§ 8. Play


As thought, in its most rudimentary form, is art, so action
in its most rudimentary form is play. The aesthetic con-
sciousness frames to itself an object which is not asserted
but only imagined; that is to say, the distinction between
truth and falsehood does not matter to it, and its object
is what it is only because it capriciously chooses to have it so.
But this is the very definition of play ; which is that form
of action in which the will is untroubled by any question as
to right and wrong, expedient or inexpedient, and chooses an
end which is an end only because it is thus irresponsibly
chosen. The end in play is not chosen as right, or chosen as
useful, or chosen as correct, conventional, customary ; it is
simply chosen. Hoc volo, sic iubeo ; sit pro ratione voluntas ;
the will is here an irrational will in the sense that it can give
no reason for its choice, precisely as the aesthetic con-
sciousness can give no reason for its imaginings.

Yet there is a reason, in both cases alike. The autonomy
of the aesthetic spirit is an illusory autonomy, for it is rooted


Play 103
in facts of which it does not give itself an explicit account ;
and just as, from an artist’s historical position, we can
explain the origin of his artistic prepossessions and outlook,
sO we Can give an explanation of the origin and, as it were,
the unconscious motive of any game. We can show how
the games of young animals and of children anticipate the
serious work of life and train them unawares to meet the
problems which will face them later; and in the games of
grown men we detect the expression of ancestral instincts
which civilized life on its more serious side fails to satisfy.
But all such explanations of play are in part mythological
and forced, because they ascribe to it motives which the
player, by his very character. as a player, does not feel.
From its own point of view play is motiveless, immediate,
intuitive ; what motive it has is implicit only.

Art and play are the theoretical and practical forms of the
aesthetic consciousness. But because the distinction of will
and intellect, being a merely abstract or ideal distinction,
does not become explicit till we reach the level of scientific
thought, art and play can only be distinguished from a
scientific, and not from an aesthetic, point of view. From
inside the aesthetic consciousness, no distinction between
them can be seen. Thus, from the child’s point of view, all
playing is playing ‘ at’ something—playing at robbers, at
bears, and so forth—which is imaginative or dramatic
personification ; and thus the famous identification of art
with play, which has so scandalized scientific theorists, is due
not to a philosopher but to an artist, Schiller.

Schiller’s identification has often been rejected because
art is a high and serious thing and play a childish and trivial ;
or because art is a thing of the spirit and play a thing of the
body, its source the mere exuberance of physical energy, its
aim merely physical pleasure. But these antitheses are


104 ART


totally false. Serious art is serious and trivial art is trivial ;
children’s games are for children and men’s games are for
men. But as children are naturally and instinctively artists,
so they naturally and instinctively play ; and as art for
grown men is something recaptured, a primitive attitude
indulged in moments of withdrawal from the life of fact, so
play is for grown men something to be done as a legitimate
and refreshing escape from ‘ work’. Yet the distinction of
play from work does not consist in its being less hard ;
children work astonishingly hard at their games, which do
not on that account cease to be games; and many a man
works harder on the football field or on the north face of
Scafell than ever he worked in his office. The refreshment
and relaxation of play are purely spiritual; they result
from the fact that play is capricious, that in it we choose
our end for no conscious reason whatever. Hence it is
a complete mistake to suppose that play is the overflow of
mere physical energy and aimed at merely physical pleasure.
It ought, since the work of Plato and Aristotle on the subject,
to be impossible for any one to speak of merely physical
pleasure ; and to use such language in describing the ‘ feel ’
of one’s skin after bathing is merely a sign of careless
analysis, however truthfully one may plead ignorance of the
Philebus and the Ethics in excuse. Certainly, one could
not sail a boat in half a gale unless one had a body ; neither,
for that matter, could one paint a picture. And the pleasure,
which in neither case is unmixed, but is always a struggle
with and a triumph over pain, is in both cases equally
spiritual.

The prejudice against play on this double head is therefore
groundless. What may legitimately be said in depreciation
of all play is precisely what may be said against art as such :
namely that it is a primitive, innocent and childlike attitude,


Play 105


one which has not faced the problems of life and seems to
transcend them only by evading them. Yet for this very
reason play, like art, gives one a foretaste, as it were, of that
condition in which the mind will be when it has faced its
problems and conquered them. The innocent soul that has
not sinned is merely immature and ignorant compared with
the sinner who has repented and been saved ; yet innocence
is a foretaste of salvation and far liker to salvation than it
is to sinning. So art and play have something in them which
though not really divine is a likeness of divinity; and God
may be pictured as an artist, or as playing, with far more
verisimilitude than as a scientist or a business man. Aristotle
actually raised the question whether play might not be
considered a good definition of God’s activity ; and the only
reason why it cannot is that the st pro ratione voluntas of
play is below the claims of expediency and right, the action
of God above them. God’s will, the will of absolute mind,
chooses its ends simply because it chooses them ; but this
choice includes every possible kind of rationality in itself.
Thus to describe God as playing is to make a mockery of
man, who must not play; and to degrade God to a level
below that of his creatures.

The enjoyment of play is sensuous, precisely as far as,
and in the same way in which, that of art is sensuous :
where sensuous means intuitive, immediate, innocent of
explicit reason. So the pursuit of play is capricious, like
that of art; and individualistic, like that of art. Play in
its simplest form is the solitary play of the child, which plays
‘ peep-bo ’ to itself with a cradle-blanket at the age of a few
months ; in a more complex phase the player, like the artist,
wants an audience; and later still he wants competitors.
Competition, which is sociability seen from the standpoint ot
individualism, is the form which sociability most naturally


106 ART


takes in play ; and the same thing reappears in the intellec-
tual individualism of the economic life. When team-play,
the play of a cricket or football match, begins, we have
reached a high point in the development of play and one
at which individualism is beginning to be transcended.

The love of adventure for its own sake, which leads some
men to eat their lunch out of doors and others to die in the
antarctic winds, is justified by no moral or utilitarian
standard, but by an aesthetic standard. It is not because
it is right or because it is useful that we indulge it in ourselves
and commend it in others, but because it is beautiful, dulce et
decorum even to the last extremity. That a man who had
studied the poets all his life should die looking at the sunrise
from high up on Monte Rosa is itself a poem ; and the adven-
ture of love is the mother of poetry because it is already
poetry, because the lover’s unreasoning choice of his beloved
is an act of play no less than the climbing of a mountain ;
high and serious play, both of them ; play in which life and
health are staked against the joy of the game and the faith
in a training that has schooled one to play well. Of play,
as of art, the justification is its own splendour. After listen-
ing to the tale of the Mount Everest expedition of 1922, told
with modest eloquence and illustrated by an unforgettable
lantern-show, a sharp-faced middle-aged lady was heard
to remark: ‘ Well, Z should like to know what ’s the use of
it all.” Use? the use of sunsets and symphonies, of chil-
dren’s games and lovers’ kisses, of swimming in starlit water
or finding a new way up the Pillar? One can only reply,
as a certain midshipman, questioned as to the use of battle-
ships, is said to have replied, that they are ‘ no damned use
at all’.

But the lady’s question is provocative of swear-words just
because it is right and unanswerable. All play, even the


Play 107
most splendid, is only play. Beyond it and above it stands
the world of utility, and above that again the world of duty.
Children play because they have not learnt to take up the
burden of life, because they are too young to work and
weep: their very sorrows are the sorrows of fancy, and of
the real sorrows that stand round their cradle they know
nothing. And those of every age who permit themselves
to play are permitting themselves to forget that there are
duties waiting to be done and evils crying out for correction
all round them. Nor is it an answer to protest that the bow
cannot always be bent, that the overstrained spirit must be
allowed some relief from the burden of its responsibilities ;
for these responsibilities, properly understood, are nothing
but its own highest and freest life, and to face them is to find,
not to sacrifice, our happiness.

The true defence of play is the same as the defence of art.
Art is the cutting edge of the mind, the perpetual out-
reaching of thought into the unknown, the act in which
thought eternally sets itself a fresh problem. So play, which
is identical with art, is the attitude which looks at the world
as an infinite and indeterminate field for activity, a perpetual
adventure. All life is an adventure, and the spirit of adven-
ture, wherever it is found, can never be out of place. It is
true that life is much more than this; it is never, even its
most irresponsible moments, a mere adventure; but this
it is; and therefore the spirit of play, the spirit of eternal
youth, is the foundation and beginning of all real life.


IV


RELIGION
§ 1. The Transition from Art to Religion!


THE life of art is an error. But no error can be purely and
simply erroneous ; and the claim of art to be an expression
of profound and ultimate truth is not a false claim. In art
the very secret of the universe is laid bare, and we know
those hidden things for which the scientist and the philo-
sopher are painfully searching. In good art we apprehend


1 I may perhaps be permitted here to refer to a book called
Religion and Philosophy which I published in 1916, and in which
I tried to give a general account of the nature of the religious
consciousness, tested and illustrated by detailed analyses of the
central doctrines of Christianity. With much of what that book
contains I am still in agreement; but there are certain principles
which I then overlooked or denied, in the light of which many of its
faults can be corrected. The chief of these principles is the distinc-
tion between implicit and explicit. I contended throughout that
religion, theology, and philosophy were identical, and this I should
now not so much withdraw as qualify by pointing out that the
‘empirical’ (i.e. real but unexplained) difference between them is
that theology makes explicit what in religion as such is always
implicit, and so with philosophy and theology. This error led me
into a too intellectualistic or abstract attitude towards religion, of
which many critics rightly accused me; for instance, in the inter-
pretation of religious symbolism I failed to see that for religion itself
the symbol is always an end, never a mere means to the expression
of an abstract concept. Hence I failed to give an account of the
uniqueness of Christ, of miracle, and of worship ; I failed to discover
any real ground for the concrete distinction not only between man
and God, but between man and man; and I confessed my inability
to deal either with the problem of evil or with the all-important
question of the relation between religion and art. In these and
kindred ways I would offer this chapter as a correction of the book
in question, out of the recognition of whose shortcomings it has in
fact grown. But, as required by the plan of the present book, the
whole subject is far more briefly treated.


The Transition from Art to Religion 109


the secret of the universe in its truth, in bad art we are
mocked by a lying revelation. Yet, since the work of art is
only our own imagination, there is no way of settling the
disputes concerning the merit of a particular work, though
just because art reveals truth chese disputes are inevitable.
But however truly the secret of the world is expressed
under the form of beauty, the expression is always formally
imperfect. It is of the essence of truth that the mind should
be able to say what it is, to state it in explicit terms, subject
it to criticism and attack, and watch it emerge strengthened
from the ordeal. The secret revealed in art is a secret that
no one can utter, and therefore not truly revealed ; in the
actual aesthetic experience we clasp it to our bosom in an
ecstasy of passion and try to make it inalienably ours :


Nequiquam, quoniam nil inde abradere possunt .. .


At the crowing of the cock it vanishes from our presence
and we are left to face the dawn of another day in the
knowledge that we have lost it. The soul does not want
a ghostly lover ; she asks for the fate not of Margaret :


Is there any room at your head, Saunders,
Is there any room at your feet ?

Or any room at your side, Saunders,
Where fain, fain I wad sleep ?


but of Janet:


They shaped him in her arms twa
An aske but and a snake;

But aye she grips and hauds him fast
To be her warldis make.


They shaped him in her arms twa
But and a decr sae wild;

But aye she grips and hauds him fast,
The father of her child.


The secret of the universe, in its own right nature as
rational truth, is to the soul no weird visitant from beyond


110 RELIGION


the grave, but husband, father and son at once, a lamp to
her feet and a rod and staff to comfort her. Yet, as the old
ballad-maker knew, it reveals itself to the soul in this its
true shape only after strange and terrible trials of faith.
Of these trials, which together make up the dark night of
the soul—that dead hour of the night when Janet heard the
bridles ring—the failure of art is the first, and, because the
first, the most heartrending.

The failure of art is, as we have said, not a complete
failure. Substantial truth is revealed to us; we are not
cheated of that; but it is revealed only in the equivocal
form of beauty, submerged, so to speak, in the flood of
aesthetic emotion. It is only because truth is revealed in it
that the emotion is aesthetic ; but emotional truth, truth
in the guise of beauty, is not truth at all in the formal sense.
Art asserts nothing ; and truth as such is matter of assertion.
To be itself, it demands logical form. Art fails us because
it does not assert. It is pregnant with a message that it
cannot deliver.

To overcome the failure of art, it is necessary to introduce
into it a logical element. Now we know already that art, as
pure imagination, is a thing that cannot exist, for any and
every experience as such must already contain a logical
element. The true way of overcoming art’s failure is the
discovery of this truth, the discovery that what we have
been enjoying all the time is not mere aesthetic experience
but aesthetic-logical experience, which means, as we shall see
in the sequel, philosophy. What appeared as art turns out
to be philosophy, and thus the analysis of experience travels
direct from art to philosophy, as we saw in the last chapter.

But in point of fact people become aware of the break-
down of art long before they are able to effect this new
analysis of the so-called aesthetic experience. They find


The Transition : from Art to Religion ria


that the life of art (that is, the life built up on the erroneous
belief that imagination and assertion are distinct and
separate activities) does not satisfy them. It fails to satisfy
them precisely because of this separation between imagining
and asserting ; for this separation is the root of the instability
and insecurity which are the bane of the aesthetic life.

When the artist becomes aware of this, when he achieves
in some sort the diagnosis of his own disease, even if he does
it no less instinctively than a dog eats grass, he must find
a remedy. We have already indicated the true remedy ;
but that can hardly be discovered without deep reflection
and long experience. The simplest remedy, and therefore
the one which is likeliest to be adopted in the blind gropings
of a soul which as yet knows little of its own nature, is to
reunite forcibly the activities which have been divided: to
assert what it imagines, that is, to believe in the reality of
the figments of its own imagination.

This is the definition of religion, so to speak, from beneath :
the purely abstract or formal definition whose purpose is to
give the minimum account of the lowest and most rudimen-
tary religious consciousness. It is the mere armature on
which our concrete conception of religion is to be built up,
and the reader need not trouble to point out its inadequacy
as a description of the higher religions. Here and elsewhere,
in fact, the reader is earnestly implored to resist the vice
of collecting ‘ definitions’ of this and that and the other,
as if any one but a fool imagined that he could compress
a thing like art or religion or science into an epigram which
could be lifted from its context and, so lifted, continue to
make sense. Giving and collecting definitions is not philo-
sophy but a parlour game. The writer’s definition of religion
(as of art and so forth) is coextensive with this entire book,
and will nowhere be found in smaller compass. Nor will it


112 RELIGION


be found in its completeness there ; for no book is wholly
self-explanatory, but solicits the co-operation of a reasonably
thoughtful and instructed reader.

Religion, relatively to art, is the discovery of reality. The
artist is an irresponsible child who feels himself at liberty to
say exactly what comes into his head and unsay it again
without fear of correction or disapproval. He tells himself
what story he likes and then, at the bidding of a whim,
‘scatters the vision for ever’. In religion, all this irresponsi-
bility has gone. His vision is for the religious man no toy to
make and mar at will; it is the truth, the very truth itself.
The actual object of imagination, which in art obscurely
means a truth that cannot be clearly stated, in religion is that
truth itself: the secret of the universe is revealed, no longer
merely shadowed forth in parables but mademanifest in visible
form ; and this revelation makes explicit for the first time the
distinction between reality and unreality, truth and falsehood.


§ 2. The Growth of Religion


In our study of art we found it necessary to distinguish
between various grades of aesthetic experience: first, the
unreflective fantasy of the child who does not ask himself
whether stories are true or false, whose life is therefore an
undistinguished and confused web of fancies and facts; and
secondly, the deliberate aesthetic act of the educated man
for whom this confused web has settled down into its
component parts, so that he passes from fact to fancy, and
back again, in full consciousness of what he is doing. In the
first phase the distinction between fact and fancy is implicit ;
in the second, it is explicit. Thus, it is impossible to give
a true account’ of the experience of a person who sees

Yet, of course, the truth of this account is not ultimate, because


it is tainted by the fallacious way in which the distinction is
conceived.


The Growth of Religion 113


fairies without saying ‘Now he is perceiving, now he 1s
imagining’; but the person himself does not make this
distinction, and the observer must make it for him. But an
artist in the ordinary sense does make this distinction, at
any rate in the moments of transition from aesthetic to non-
aesthetic experience and vice versa. Hence the principle
of aesthetic experience is implicit in the child and the
unsophisticated seer of ghosts and fairies, explicit in the
artist ; indeed that is what makes him par excellence an
artist ; he has made a discovery about himself which raises
his aesthetic life to a wholly new level.

This distinction is repeated in religion. There is a primi-
tive grade of religious experience in which all fantasies tend
to be asserted as real. We have spoken of the seer of ghosts
and fairies as an example of rudimentary art ; the believer in
ghosts and fairies is the parallel example of rudimentary
religion. In this primitive stage it is not easy to distinguish
the two. Even the artist, with all his reflective self-
consciousness, can hardly give you a satisfactory answer to
the question whether he believes in Hamlet or only ‘ sees’
him without believing in him. The point at which a child
begins to ask whether stories are true, and passes through
the crisis of learning to disbelieve in fairies, is by no means
an early point in its development ; and when it arrives, it
indicates the emergence of religion from art, of the primitive
religious consciousness from the primitive aesthetic con-
sciousness which is its soil and its source; till then the
question whether a given fantasy was real or unreal had
simply not occurred to the mind ; that is, art had not yet
given birth to religion. For ultimately, religion cannot mean
the assertion of all fantasies as indiscriminately real. That
is impossible, because they are in open conflict one with
another. The assertion of some as real involves the denial

2792 if


114 RELIGION


denial as applied to the world of fantasies.

Primitive religion does not yet explicitly realize the full
nature of this activity. For it ‘ all things are full of gods’ ;
that is, it begins by trying to assert all its fantasies indis-
criminately, and peoples the world not only with gods,
heroes, fairies, nymphs and so forth, but with other and less
anthropomorphic imaginings, strange energies, impersonal but
beneficent or dangerous, the power of the spell and the charm,
the mysterious significance of the hearth or the merestone,
the creative forces that lurk in the organs of sex or the world
of springing plants. Such are the gods of primitive religion,
for all primitive religion is polytheistic, in whatever shape
it conceives its gods. It is idle, in this primitive phase of the
religious consciousness, to seek for distinctions between gods
and ghosts, between spell and prayer, between the divine
and the diabolical. Religion and magic are here fused in
their primitive unity ; for magic is but the shadow of religion,
becoming sharper and blacker as religion takes on a more
and more definite shape and substance in the self-conscious-
ness of the developing mind.

Just as art solidifies out of the chaos of infantile imaginings
into the order and clarity of developed aesthetic form, so
out of this primitive welter of gods the religious mind by its
own inner dialectic rises to the higher religion. The main-
spring of this dialectic is the recognition of the true nature
of assertion. Pure fancy is monadic, tolerant: it cares for
nothing beside its momentary object, and does not even trouble
to find out whether anythiug incompatible with this object
is being fancied elsewhere. But assertion is the transcending
of this monadism, for to make any given assertion is to
commit oneself to the denial of whatever contradicts it.
Now religion is essentially assertion, belief. To believe this


The Growth of Religion IIs


is to deny that. Therefore religion by its very nature is
pledged to selectiveness, to a discrimination between the
utterances of the spirit, to a dualism between true vision
and false vision. At first, when religion in its most primitive
phase is as yet ignorant of its own nature, and asserts without
understanding what assertion means, it thinks it can assert
every fantasy that arises in the mind; and in this phase
anything may be an object of worship. Here it is only the
attitude of worship that distinguishes religion from art ;
in the indiscriminateness of their fancy they are identical.
But when the religious mind discovers that to assert one
fantasy means denying another, primitive religion and its
easy polytheism are doomed. The historical steps by which
this dialectic has worked itself out in human history are not
here our business ; we are concerned only to point out the
nature of the principle which has been at work.

The effect of this principle is to produce for the first time
a world or cosmos of imagination. Art has no cosmology,
it gives us no view of the universe ; every distinct work of
art gives us a little cosmology of its own, and no ingenuity
will combine all these into a single whole. But religion is
essentially cosmological, though its cosmology is always an
imaginative cosmology. Any given religious experience can
be fitted by this cosmology into the scheme of the whole,
and labelled as an ascent into the third heaven, a temptation
of the devil, and so forth. Hence religion is social, as art
never can be. The sociability of artists is a paradoxical and
precarious thing, and ceases the instant they begin their
actual artistic work. But the sociability of religion is part
of its fundamental nature. The life of religion is always the
life of a church. This is because religion achieves an explicit
logical structure. It is assertion, and in its higher forms
knows that it is assertion, though even in its most primitive

H 2


116 RELIGION


forms its implicit logic produces the instinctive and unre-
flective sociability of primitive cultus. Now assertion or
the logical function of the mind is the recognition of reality
as such, and reality is that which is real for all minds. If
a number of minds are engaged in imagining, they have no
common ground, for each man’s imaginations are his own.
But if they are engaged in asserting, they at once become
a society, for each asserts what he believes to be not his own
but common property, objective reality. And even when
their assertions are different, they are not merely different,
like different works of art, but contradictory ; and contra-
diction, even in its extreme forms of persecution and war,
is a function of sociability.

It is the explicitly rational character of religion that
necessitates religious controversy and persecution, for these
are only corollaries of its cosmological and social nature.
To deprecate them and ask religion to refrain from them is
to demand that it shall cease to be religion ; and the demand
is generally made by those shallow minds which hate the
profundity and seriousness of the higher religions and wish
to play at believing all the creeds in existence. This religious
aestheticism, or degradation of religion to the level of play,
for which a creed is a mere pretty picture to be taken up and
put down at will, is only one of the enemies which religion
to-day encounters, and a despicable enemy at thet. There
are others, more formidable because they are the children
of religion itself.

The development of religion, when it proceeds healthily
according to the law of its own dialectic, results in the ideal
of a single supreme God worshipped by a single universal
church. Within this God all the obscure ghosts and demons
of primitive polytheism find their account ; within this
church the most diverse impulses of savage superstition are


The» Gurus of Religion | 117


absorbed and transmuted. This transmutation of a primi-
tive formless chaos into an ordered system of belief and ritual
is the work, never quite beginning and never quite ending,
of the religious spirit in its self-critical development, a work
carried out simply by using the logical weapons of assertion
and denial. A given element of primitive religion is split
up by analysis into elements of which one can be placed on
the side of affirmation as an attribute of God, a sacrament,
a rite, and so forth, while the other is placed on the side of
denial as an attribute of the devil or a form of witchcraft,
magic, or blasphemy.

For, just as the aesthetic consciousness in its self-organiza-
tion distinguishes the positive ideal of beauty from the
negative ideal of ugliness, so the religious consciousness
polarizes its own self-development into the acts and beliefs
which it asserts and those which it denies. And over against
God with his hierarchy of angels and saints the very nature
of religion requires that there should be spirits of evil
culminating in the devil; over against the church there
must be an antichurch of idolaters or devil-worshippers
whose practices are not religious in the proper sense but
magical, that is, not non-religious but anti-religious. The
dreadful history of witchcraft is no cruel freak of the world-
spirit; it is a necessary manifestation of the religious
consciousness, and every religious age, every religious revival,
will always produce similar fruits.


§ 3. Religion and its Object
The secret of the universe, which to art only appears in
the equivocal form of beauty, is revealed to religion in the
definite and clear-cut form of God. That which art cannot
express except in its immediate intuitive shape, can by
religion be stated in words in the form of a creed. This is


118 RELIGION


because the assertive or logical element in religion has
checked the unregulated flow of images which characterized
art, and fixed one image to the exclusion of others; or
rather, this one image absorbs all others into itself, either
positively as parts of itself or negatively as elements excluded
from itself, but on that very account implied by it as its
own shadow.

Now God, as essentially describable in terms of a creed,
is a unity, but not a mere abstract unity. Had he been such
a unity, he would not have been describable, for he would
have been merely himself, as a work of art is merely itself,
and therefore only expressible by saying that he is what
he is ; this being in fact the only way in which a work of art
can be described. Thus a religion which makes of its God
a mere abstract unity does violence to its own nature as
rcligion, and falls back from religion into art. This seems
to be what has happened in the case of Mohammedanism ;
and the result, namely the Mohammedan negation of art,
confirms this; for that religion, being itself already charac-
terized by an unresolved residuum of art, regards any further
concession to art as at once unnecessary and dangerous.

The existence of a creed is thus bound up with the con-
ception of God as no mere abstract unity, but a unity which
contains in itself its own differentiation. Whenever this
conception of God tends to be lost, as is sometimes the case
in mystical religion, God tends to appear as the unutterable
or indescribable, that is to say the value of the creed, which
is the sign and guarantee of the rationality of religion, tends
to be denied.

God, we are told by theologians, is the ultimate reality,
conceived as spirit ; spirit omnipotent, omniscient, creative,
transcending all sense or immediacy, yet immanent in his
church. But this language, well enough in theology, is very


Religion and its Object 119


far from natural to religion ; and it is of the utmost impor-
tance to avoid premature identifications of religion and
theology. From the simple and unsophisticated point of
view of the religious consciousness, it is not the spirituality
nor the immanence of God that is important, nor even his
power or goodness, but his holiness, the necessity of falling
down before him in adoration. This sense of the holiness
of God is the explicit differentia of the religious experience ;
though doubtless there is much that is implicit in that
experience, to be discovered there by theological or philo-
sophical reflection, beside that or rather behind it.

This sense of holiness or attitude of worship is so far the
centre and nucleus of religion that any account of the
religious consciousness depends for its success on the way in
which it deals with this feature. It is a feature generally
recognized by modern students of religion. We are some-
times told that the essence of religion is a certain feeling for
the divine, and that any object which excites this feeling,
or (which would seem to be the same thing) possesses this
quality of divinity, is a proper object for the religious con-
sciousness. Sometimes, more explicitly, we are told that
the feeling in question is the feeling of ‘ the uncanny ’, which
seems to be a word chosen in order to embrace both poles of
the religious principle: the positively holy and the negatively
holy, the divine and the diabolical. But the writers to whom
we have alluded make no attempt to give a real account of
this feeling, whatever they call it. They simply state it as
a curious fact that religion is empirically characterized by
this feeling. Yet if it is a universal characteristic of religion,
it must be bound up with its essential nature, and capable
of being deduced from it.

Holiness is to religion what beauty is to art. It is the
specific form in which truth appears to that type of con-


120 RELIGION


sciousness. As religion, therefore, is a dialectical develop-
ment of art, so holiness is a dialectical development of
beauty. Now religion is art asserting its object. The object
of art is the beautiful, and therefore the holy is the beautiful
asserted as real. All the characteristics of holiness and of
God as holy are found to revolve round this centre. The
holy is, generically, object of aesthetic contemplation, and
as such beautiful; and this is true of all the objects of
religion. Further, holiness, like beauty, polarizes itself into
the positively holy (God) and the negatively holy, that which
we are forbidden to find holy or worship, the devil and all
his works. But specifically, holiness is asserted as real,
and therefore God is regarded as not our own invention,
not a fancy or work of art, but a reality, indeed the only
and ultimate reality. Hence that rapture and admiration
which we enjoy in the contemplation of a work of art is in
the case of God fused with the conviction that we here come
face to face with something other than ourselves and our
imaginings, something infinitely real, the ground and source
of our own being. It is this fusion which constitutes the
sense of holiness, and forms the basis and motive of worship.
Neither the real nor the beautiful is as such the proper object
of adoration: it is only the aesthetic attitude towards
ultimate reality, or conversely the elevation of beauty into
a metaphysical principle, that constitutes worship. Thus
the enemy of religion is idolatry, or the attempt to worship
an object which, however exquisite to the artist’s eye, cannot
claim to be the ultimate reality. The sin of the idolater is
to worship his own works of art known to be such. This is
not true religion, because true religion worships the real
God, no mere figment of the imagination. But it is easy to
slip into idolatry just because the aesthetic attitude and the
religious attitude are so closely akin. ‘The difference is


Religion and its Object 121


simply that in religion we believe in the reality of our object
while in art we do not; and hence in religion the mind
becomes aware that it is in danger of illusion.

God and religion are thus correlative ; and to doubt thic
reality of God is to deny the validity and legitimacy of
religion. There are no religions without a god or gods:
what have passed by that name have been either philoso-
phies, or religions whose gods have escaped the eye of the
observer, or a kind of mechanical contrivance put on the
market by a deluded or fraudulent inventor.

The life of religion is worship, and because religion is
fundamentally social this means social worship. This
worship is, naturally, at bottom an exercise of the aesthetic
consciousness. All acts of worship, whether they take the
form of singing, dancing, speech, or the like, are first and
foremost aesthetic acts. Prayer and the ritual of the mass
are developments of artistic speech and the gestures of
dancing, and bear unmistakable traces of their origin.
But worship is no more mere art than holiness is mere
beauty. Itisa dialectical development of art, and a develop-
ment of this kind involves the surrender or transmutation
of much that characterized the earlier stages of the develop-
ment. MJeligion in general parts with that freedom and
irresponsibility which are the mark of the spirit’s infancy
in art, and this gives the clue to the development which
art must undergo before it becomes worship. Worship is art
whose object is conceived as a reality. This implies that the
artist when he becomes a worshipper is no longer free to
fancy anything he likes, just because it is beautiful. He must
in all his worship glorify God, that is to say he must make
his aesthetic acts illustrate the creed of his religion. His
subject is given: he is no more free to choose it than to
choose his creed. And again, though this really comes to


122 RELIGION


the same thing, his art must be a corporate art, not one that
satisfies his own standards simply, but one that suits the
special needs of his fellow-worshippers. The musician
gravely misunderstands his place in the church if he offers
to overhaul our hymn-books and replace all the ‘ bad music ’
by good. He may be a perfectly competent judge of music,
but music and religious music are not the same thing. And
this applies equally to those forms of quasi-religious art
which express the common aspirations of a nation, a school,
or a political party. Songs and poems of this patriotic type
are almost always very bad indeed by the standards of art ;
but to condemn them for that reason would mean over-
looking the whole of the dialectical development which
separates art from religion.


§$ 4. Symbol and Meaning in Religion


Hitherto we have been describing, in the briefest possible
summary, the more superficial aspects of the religious
consciousness. But we have not yet attempted to under-
stand the inner meaning of its life.

The key to the comprehension of religion is a principle
which in religion itself exists only implicitly. This principle
is the distinction between symbol and meaning.

Religion is a structure of sensuous or imaginary elements,
like art, and—for that matter—like every other form of
consciousness. These elements in religion take the form
partly of mythological pictures and narratives, partly of
acts of worship; these two being the objective and sub-
jective sides of the same reality. The ritual of a particular
festival and its mythology are intimately bound up together,
so intimately that it has been possible to argue now that the
mythology is the source of the ritual, now that the ritual
is the source of the mythology. In point of fact they are


Symbol and Meaning in Religion 123


inseparable and come into existence together, sacred act
and sacred story ; and they attain their highest and most
rational form when the sacred story reveals itself as a creed
and the sacred act as the solemn recitation of that creed.
This combination of an act with an account of the act given
by the acting mind to itself, or—to put it the other way
round—the combination of a certain idea with actions
appropriate to that idea, is not peculiar to religion, though
under the name of ritual it is especially characteristic of
religion.

Now these acts and stories, with all their developments,
form the body of religion, and its soul lies beyond them in
their meaning. They are thus symbolic in character. Their
value and purpose lie not in what they are but in what
they signify. They are but the ‘ outward and visible signs ’
of an ‘inward and spiritual grace’, and are related to this
‘grace’ as word to meaning. We said just now that this
principle was only implicit in religion, yet we have quoted
a statement of it from the English Catechism. This state-
ment, when closely examined, will be found to miss the real
point ; and therefore our first remark holds good. We are
told that the ‘ inward and spiritual grace ’ is ‘ the body and
blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lord’s Supper’. But in the
natural and literal sense of these words, they are simply
not true. Whatever view of the Eucharist we take, it is
heretical to assert that the communicant partakes of the
body and blood of Christ naturally and literally. The sacred
body and blood are present only by a miracle, and this
implies that, in spite of the ‘ verily and indeed ’, the state-
ment that the body and blood of Christ are received by
the faithful is not a complete statement. It is not merely
that the bread means the body of Christ; the body of


124 RELIGION


Christ in its turn means something which is not explicitly
stated.

To take a simpler case, we tell little children that God
is their other father up in the sky. These words are the
outward sign of a certain imaginative act (to analyse the
case as the Catechism analyses the Lord’s Supper), and this
imaginative act reveals to the child a more or less elderly
person in a tweed suit living somewhere out of sight over-
head. But is this the meaning of the child’s religion ?
certainly not ; it is the mere imagery of it. The imaginative
picture of God is a symbol, whose value lies not in what
it is but in what it means. And this, which is so plainly true
of the pictures of God which we encourage children to form,
is equally true of all those imaginative pictures of God
which constitute the body—as opposed to the soul—of any
religious belief.

Now when we are teaching a child about God, we do-not,
if we are gifted with ordinary intelligence, say: ‘ Of course,
God isn’t really your heavenly father, because he isn't
literally your father and he isn’t literally in the sky: you
must interpret these symbols in a spiritual sense.’ We know
that this kind of qualification would prevent the child from
getting anything at al] out of our teaching, good or bad,
except a certain contempt for the whole subject. Whereas
if we boldly say to the child what we know to be literally
untrue, that it has a loving and watchful father in the sky,
what actually happens is that the child will develop simul-
taneously two lines of thought. First, it will speculate as
to how God ever came there, how he gets his dinner, and so
forth (‘I expect he has an aeroplane,’ and the like).
Secondly, it will, perhaps rather to our surprise, start
interpreting the symbolism in a spiritual sense on its own
account ; connect this heavenly father with its own moral


Symbol and Meaning in Religion 125


life, with the beauty of nature, with family affection, and
other spiritual elements in its experience. These two trains
of thought, the superstitious and the rational respectively,
the literal and spiritual interpretations of the symbol,
develop in a child’s mind side by side with no appearance
of conflict; or at least, with only minor and occasional
conflicts. What the child never does is to say clearly to
itself that the literal or superstitious element is mere fiction,
and the spiritual or rational element truth. The truth
grows up in a scaffolding of fiction within the child’s mind ;
deprive it of the scaffolding and it will never grow, or at
best, like an apple-tree that has not been properly supported
by a dead stake in its youth, will grow crooked and mis-
shapen, and fail to strike its roots firmly home.

All religion conforms to this type. It is all, from top to
bottom, a seed growing secretly, surrounded by an integu-
ment which is not itself the living germ but only its vehicle.
It is thought growing up in the husk of language, and as
yet unconscious that language and thought are different
things. The distinction between what we say and what we
mean, between a symbol or word and its meaning, is a dis-
tinction in the light of which alone it is possible to under-
stand religion ; but it is a distinction hidden from religion
itself. It is implicit in religion, and becomes explicit only
when we pass from religion to science. In science, language
is transparent and we pierce through it, throw it on one
side, in reaching the thought it conveys: in religion,
language is opaque, fused with its own meaning into an
undifferentiated unity which cannot be separated into two
levels. Lose the symbol, and in religion you lose the meaning
as well, whereas in science you merely take another symbol,
which will serve your purpose equally.

The distinction between symbol and meaning is implicit


126 RELIGION


in religion, and this is perhaps the most fundamental thing
about religion in general as distinct from other forms of
experience. All religious terms, phrases, acts, are symbolic ;
but if they were explicitly recognized to be symbolic they
would be recognized to be exchangeable with others. If
churchgoing was an explicit symbol, we should know what
it symbolized—the unity of human society as informed by
the divine spirit, or whatever it may be—and we should be
able to find the same meaning exemplified in other acts,
like waiting to be served in a shop or travelling in a third-
class carriage. These other acts would then become sym-
bolic of the same meaning, and would be substitutes for
churchgoing. If a boy learns a certain geometrical truth,
he is taught to symbolize it in terms of a particular triangle.
But if he is unable to separate it from this triangle and to
see it equally well in another, we say that he does not yet
understand it. So a truth which is only grasped under the
symbol of a particular act or phrase and cannot be freely
symbolized in other acts or phrases is as yet imperfectly
grasped.

If, with these arguments in mind, we say: ‘ To-day I will
glorify God by weeding my garden or playing tennis instead
of going to church,’ and if we defend ourselves by quoting
Scripture to the effect that God is everywhere and is not
confined within the four walls of a church, our parish
priest will reply that God has appointed his own means of
grace, which to neglect is to neglect God ; that the attempt
to sanctify the whole of life can only lead to the sanctifying
of none; and that in point of fact our real motives for
staying away from church are irreligion, indolence, and
spiritual pride. This will be his reply if he is a religious
man and knows his business ; for we have been trespassing
on the implicitness of the religious symbol and so breaking


Symbol and Meaning in Religion 127


away from the religious attitude. This is in itself a legitimate
act, and a priest will not despise it, though he may dis-
approve of it. But if it shelters itself under the cloak of
religion, it becomes hypocritical and the object of a just
contempt. It is irreligion arguing in the name of religion.

But the strange thing is that this very attitude, irre-
ligion appearing in the guise of religion, is typical of
religion itself in its highest manifestations. The great saints
really do find God everywhere, really do prove their proposi-
tion about any triangle that is presented to them, really do
transfuse with religion the whole of life. This is at once
the perfection and the death of the religious consciousness.
For in grasping the inmost meaning of ritual and worship it
deprives these special activities of their special sanctity and
of their very reason for existing ; the whole body of religion
is destroyed by the awakening of itssoul. But the awakened
soul, in this very moment of triumph, has destroyed itself
with its own body: it has lost all its familiar landmarks
and plunged into that abyss of mysticism in which God
himself is nothing. Mysticism is the crown of religion and
its deadliest enemy ; the great mystics are at once saints
and heresiarchs.

These consequences flow from the fact that the distinction
between symbol and meaning is implicit in religion. Because
the distinction is there, is not merely absent, the religious
word or act is charged with significance; it is felt to be
burdened with all the weight of an unspoken message, and
this sense of oppressive meaningfulness is the true source of
holiness and worship. For these are the character of the
mysterious and of our attitude towards it. We do not
understand or see the truth, but only the symbol which
bodies it forth ; and because this symbol does contain the
truth we regard it as infinitely precious. Yet the distinction


128 RELIGION


between symbol and meaning is not explicit, and hence,
because the truth and its symbolic vehicle are fused together,
the importance really attaching to the truth is transferred
to its symbol, and we cling to the symbol, the outward act
or image or formula, instead of trying to get behind it,
slough it off and reach the truth it conveys.

Thus for the religious consciousness the symbol is sacred.
Feeling religious in bed is no substitute for attending the
Eucharist ; and a philosopher would not be regarded as
a Christian for subscribing to a statement which he declared
to be a mere paraphrase of the Apostles’ Creed in philo-
sophical terms. Indeed, the moment he began talking
about the Absolute Spirit, all pious people would unhesi-
tatingly write him down an atheist.

But because the symbolic principle is implicit in religion,
it follows that religion itself is in constant danger of explicitly
discovering it, and this at the very moment when religion
attains its highest and purest form. Ordinary religion
maintains its equilibrium, so far as it does so, because of
its low potential. It is not religious enough to upset its
own religiosity. But an intensely religious person, one who
takes seriously the highest and deepest elements of his
own faith, is bound to come into conflict with religion itself.
Very religious people always shock slightly religious people
by their blasphemous attitude to religion; and it was
precisely for blasphemy that Jesus was crucified. But here
we touch on a subject to be dealt with in section 6.

To distinguish a symbol from its meaning is to put
oneself in the way of explaining or translating the symbol.
Now it is matter of common observation that religion never
explains itself. It states itself in the form of ritual and
imagery, and if the catechumen were to ask, ‘ What does
this language mean?’ he would get no answer, except


Symbol and Meaning in Religion 129


further imagery of the same kind. In point of fact he does
not ask the question. He picks up the meaning as best he
can, all embedded as it is in the imagery. Anthropologists
who have long forgotten, if they ever knew, what religion
really is, inquire of savages what they mean by their ritual
and get no answer, and jump to the conclusion that they
mean nothing. Such a salto mortale only proves that there
are no limits to the possibilities of misunderstanding ; for
one would have supposed no frame of mind to be more
familiar than that in which one repeats an act or phrase
in the conviction that one has expressed one’s meaning
literally when, in point of fact, one has only uttered a meta-
phor. This is the normal way in which primitive and
unsophisticated thought expresses itself. It neither explains
nor asks for an explanation. To ask for explanations is the
mark of extreme sophistication ; in other words, it is the
mark of the life of explicit thought. Thus a professor,
asked by a member of the Salvation Army whether he was
saved, replied ‘Do you mean ceowopévos, owbels OF sw o-
pevos?’ and conversely the great Dr. Johnson, great in his
simplicity of heart, revisiting Pembroke College in his old
age, once expressed a doubt to the then Master as to whether
he might not be damned. ‘ What, sir,’ said the scientific
intellect in the person of gentle Dr. Adams, ‘ do you mean
by damned?’ But Dr. Johnson was not to be beguiled.
‘ Sent to hell, sir,’ he replied, ‘ and punished everlastingly.’

Art is untranslatable, religion cannot translate itself. Art
cannot be translated because it has no meaning except the
wholly implicit meaning submerged, in the form of beauty,
in the flood of imagery. Religion cannot translate itself
not because it has no meaning, for it has a very definite
meaning, to elicit which is the progressive task of theology
and philosophy ; but because, although it has a meaning

2792 I


130 RELIGION


and knows that it has a meaning, it thinks that it has
expressed this meaning already. And so it has, but only
metaphorically ; and this metaphorical self-expression, this
fusion of symbol and meaning, requires translation just
because it thinks it does not require it. For literal language
is only language recognizedly metaphorical, and what we
call metaphorical language is language failing to realize
that it is only metaphor. Religion utters formulae of
worship and prayer in which it thinks it is saying what it
means. But what is said is never, in religion or elsewhere,
what is meant: the language never is the meaning. This
truth religion has not discovered, and it thinks that its
symbolic imagery, blood and fire, sin and redemption,
prayer, grace, immortality, even God, is the literal state-
ment of its thought, whereas it is in reality a texture of
metaphor through and through.

Hence arises a perpetual misunderstanding. Taken
literally, the statements made by religion are often false,
or at least doubtful. But religion is committed to asserting
them as true. Just as some incidents in Shakespeare’s
histories are historically true, so some incidents in the
Bible are historically true. But—and religion by its very
nature cannot see this—neither in the one case nor in the
other has this historical truth anything to do with aesthetic
or religious value. It is not important in the interests of
religion to prove by historical research that the world
was really made in seven solar days, or that Jesus was
really born of a virgin. But it is intensely important to
discover what people have meant by asserting that these
things were so. To say they meant nothing except to
assert an historical fact is to destroy the whole of religion at
a blow. It is to deny the soul of religion in order to have
the amusement of quarrelling over its body. The assertion


‘Sirabed and Meaning in Religion ee


of such facts as the existence of a person called God, this
person’s intention of judging the world at some future date,
and so forth, is not religion : religion exists only in meaning
the right thing by these assertions. But whereas the bare
assertions, without the meaning, would be not religion but
art, the bare meaning severed from the assertions would
be not religion but philosophy.

Something of this kind is symbolized by religion itself in
the concept of faith. One aspect of the great paradox of
religion is the fact that religion claims truth but refuses to
argue. Rational truth—and all truth is rational—is essen-
tially that which can justify itself under criticism and in
discussion. But religion always withdraws itself from the
sphere of discussion, leaving that sphere to its ally theology,
and claims (or at least, permits theology to claim on its
behalf) that religious truth is grasped by faith and not by
‘reason’ or the argumentative frame of mind. But ‘this
claim is a self-contradiction, and critics of religion not
altogether unjustly accuse it of trying to ‘have it both
ways’, of claiming knowledge, which means rationality,
as long as the claim can be conveniently maintained, thus
inviting criticisms which it then refuses to face, and retiring
into a shelter of agnosticism. Such a religious agnosticism
is worthy of honour and respect when it takes the form of
the mind’s sclf-abasement before divine mysteries in the
face of which all our creeds are but childish prattle and all
our worship a superstitious mummery; when, that is to
say, it represents the recognition by religion of its own
inability to solve its own problems. But when it is flaunted
by a complacent religiosity as an excuse for believing
anything it likes, in defiance of the protests made by the
scientific and historical consciousness, it deserves nothing
but the contempt which, happily, it as a rule excites.

i2


132 RELIGION


Faith is described by the writer to the Hebrews as
mpaypdtwy éeyyos ov BAeTouévwy, an Outreaching of the mind
beyond that which it immediately possesses. Now in a
sense this is simply a generic description of experience as
a whole. Experience as such is self-transcendence, and

a man’s reach must exceed his grasp,
Or what ’s a heaven for ?
where ‘heaven’ simply means the transcendent, the goal
as yet unattained. The definition quoted, therefore, is of
interest primarily as showing that the writer, like the other
great writers of the early Church,! recognized the self-
transcending character of religion, the essentially self-
destructive dialectic of the highest religious life. But faith
is the specific form of the religious reason. It is that know-
ledge of ultimate truth which, owing to its intuitive or
imaginative form, cannot justify itself under criticism.
This qualification is important, for other modes of know-
ledge—science, history—fail to justify themselves under
criticism, as we shall see, and yet are not forms of faith.
To overlook this is a common source of confusion and
sophistry. Religious apologetic, seizing upon the truth that
science depends in the last resort upon unjustifiable assump-
tions, accuses science of being in the same boat with religion,
the boat of faith. Nothing could be less true or better
calculated to confuse the whole issue. Faith is essentially
intuitive and not assumptive. God is the object of faith,
not an hypothesis: Euclidean space is an hypothesis, not
an object of faith.


1 I refer to such passages as I Cor. xiii. 12, which I have ventured
to take as the motto of this book ; Rom. viii. 18-25 ; Rev. xxi. 22


on which I have commented below ; and all the passages dealing
with the Parousia, which I interpret as, at any rate in part, a symbolic
presentation of the same thought. In St. Paul the thought breaks


the bonds of the Parousia symbolism and becomes explicit.


Symbol and Meaning in Religion 133

Faith is thus the mind’s attitude towards a symbol which
expresses a truth not explicitly distinguished from the symbol.
Hence the truth is something ‘ not seen’, for the symbol, so
to speak, occults it, it is hidden behind the symbol, which is
opaque to thought and yet is felt to be charged with the
significance of the hidden truth. By being so charged, it
acquires an intense emotional value, for it ‘reveals’ the
truth, that is, presents it in an intuitive or imaginative
form, not a form that can be justified by criticism. We
cannot argue about the truths of religion just because they
are thus occulted by their own symbols; and it is this
hiddenness, this darkness of the glass, that gives religion all
its negative characteristics.

The positive characteristics of religion are its illumination,
its freedom, its power of saving the soul; in a word, its
priceless gift of ultimate truth. Its negative characteristics
are that it lives only by faith and not by sight, that God
is not known but only worshipped, ‘reached’ but not
‘grasped’ by the mind, that it cannot justify itself to
reason or rise wholly above the level of superstition, and
that therefore in the long run and in spite of all its best
efforts it falls back into feeling, emotion—love, awe, and so
forth—and therefore, like art, is an intermittent and unstable
experience. The division of life into sacred and profane,
Sundays and weekdays, is a permanent and necessary
feature of religion, though the highest and most positive
religion always fights against it and tries to sanctify the
whole of life. For this division is the logical consequence
of the negative side of religion, that side which makes it
a matter of mere faith. This negative side reduces religion to
feeling, and therefore affects it with the necessary imper-
manence and instability of feeling.

Its negative side condemns religion to leave something


134 RELIGION


outside itself, to have an opposite standing over against
itself unreconciled. This opposite appears now in the form
of body as opposed to soul, now in the form of the devil
as opposed to God, now in the form of secular life as opposed
to sacred, or the priest as opposed to the layman, but
fundamentally and most deeply in the form of man as
opposed to God. These oppositions are the fruit of religion’s
intuitive nature; as feeling is necessarily intermittent, so
the intuitive form of truth erects into two concrete and
distinct images truths which are really not distinct but
complementary aspects of the same truth. Because religion
is rational, the specific task of religion is to overcome these
dualisms, and to this subject we shall return in the sixth
section of the present chapter.


§ 5. Convention


The truths expressed by religion are expressed in symbols
whose distinction from the truths they symbolize is not
explicitly recognized. In terms of conduct, this means that
the moral principles inculcated by religion are exemplified
through certain actions which are regarded as possessing
in their own right the sanctity which really attaches to the
principles they exemplify. Hence, where morality says
‘ act on certain principles ’, religion says ‘ do certain actions ’
Religious morality is thus a morality of commandments,
a formalistic morality, one in which the spirit in which an
act is done cannot be separated from the act itself. This
is illustrated by the fact already analysed, that religion
requires us to go to church not because hating God in
church is preferable to loving him anywhere else, but
because religion identifies the service of God with the
outward act, namely churchgoing, which symbolizes it:


Convention 15


an identification against which the highest religion, as we
have seen, struggles but struggles in vain.

To consider the same fact from the other end : religion is
art asserting its object. The object remains essentially an
image, but it is now regarded as real. Therefore religious
morality is aesthetic morality asserting as real an end which
is still essentially an imaginary or capricious end, an end
chosen in play. This assertion of its end as real makes
religion social; therefore the end is now a common end,
no longer the individualistic end of play; but essentially
the end is still the same, an end chosen not because it is
useful or morally obligatory but just because it is chosen.

Thus from both ends we reach the same conclusion, that
the morality of religion is conventional morality. This is the
type of action in which the agent does a given thing not
because he chooses it, but because his society choosesit. But
the reason why he does it is nothing more than this. If he
reflects that his society may injure him on his refusing to
follow its example, his action becomes utilitarian ; if he
persuades himself that his society has a moral claim upon
him for conformity, it becomes an act of duty. But con-
ventional action is wholly free from these ulterior motives.
A man dressing for dinner does not normally reflect on the
consequences of dining in knickerbockers or ask himself
whether he ought to defy the conventions. He does not
raise these questions at all. He dresses simply because it
is ‘the thing’; and this is the essence of conventional
action.

The reader may protest that all religion is in reality a war
against conventionality and the assertion of the spirit as
against the letter. But to say that is to confuse religion
with a special form of religion; excusably, because that
form is the highest and truest form; but yet a confusion.


136 RELIGION


Religion is a world which embraces the highest and most
spiritual Christianity, not to mention other forms of higher
religion, on the one hand, and the lowest and crudest
heathenism and superstition on the other; and in our
account of religion we are trying to start from a point of
view which embraces all these varieties of experience in
a single concept. To condemn this attempt as unduly
ambitious is absurd, for we all use the word religion in this
broad sense, and thus, unless we are using words quite at
random, actually possess just such a concept. Now the
conventionality or formalism of the lower religions is
obvious enough. It is only when we reach the higher
religions that we make the discovery that God is a spirit,
and that the spirit of our acts is in his eyes more important
than their conventional orderliness. The higher religions
always fight against conventionality; but the enemy
against which they are fighting is their own conventionality,
that formalism which they inherit from the lower religions
and which they cannot wholly expel from themselves
except at the cost of ceasing to be in any recognizable sense
religions and becoming philosophies.

The modern world, with its strong tendency to detach
itself from religion, makes a habit of decrying conventional
morality. And this is in the main right enough; for con-
ventional conduct is on a lower level than duty or even
utility ; it is unreasoning and tainted with something of the
primitiveness of play. But it has a very real importance
and value. It is pointed out in Tom Brown’s School Days,
not without a certain air of pompous self-satisfaction on
the part of a society which had invented the noble game of
Rugby football, that football is a finer game than fives
because in fives you play for yourself whereas in football
you play for your side. The end aimed at by a football team


Convention 137


is an end capriciously chosen, but here caprice ends: each
of the fifteen members makes that end his own and acts in
concert with the others for its attainment. His action
ceases in this manner to be mere play and becomes con-
vention, thereby rising to a higher level of rationality,
for in reply to the question, ‘ Why do you do this?’ instead
of the nugatory answer of pure play, ‘Because I do,’ he
can now answer, ‘ Because the others do.’ But this loyalty
to a common purpose is only rational in a low degree,
because it is circular: A does so because B and C do,
B because A and C do, C because A and B do; and there is
no reason why A, B, C all do it, and therefore no reason why
any of them do it except collective caprice.

To reduce conventional action to collective caprice is to
analyse it correctly according to the letter, but to miss its
spirit. It is in fact identical with reducing religion to
collective fantasy, which is the aim of that ‘ rationalism’
of which we shall have some hard things to say later on.
The letter of the most loyal convention is collective caprice,
precisely as the letter of the most harmonious married life
is égoisme a deux: for marriage is the conventional aspect
of that same activity whose aesthetic or play-aspect is
falling in love; but their spirit is loyalty to the ideal of
a common good. No good is really common which is the
good of one group as against another; but such a com-
petitive good symbolizes something beyond itself, namely
the harmonious life of an organic whole which includes
all reality. Such a perfect whole may be an unattained
and unattainable ideal; at the level of mere convention
it must be; yet it is an ideal, and our social institutions
have value just so far as they point towards it, as our
religious symbols have value in so far as they body forth
a reality as yet unattdinable by plain thinking.


138 RELIGION


Because of this symbolic value of convention, the popular
revolt against conventions, the commonplace cry that one
ought to ignore them and live one’s own life, is mere silliness.
The people who join in that cry argue that because conven-
tion is only collective caprice, they see no reason why on its
account they should surrender their own individual caprice.

rom the ethics of convention they wish to return to the
ethics of play. This is a backward step, at bottom identical
with that of the people who want to make up a religion for
themselves by just choosing what they please to believe.
It is a step from a position which is partly, though not
wholly, rational, in the direction of one less rational. It is
a movement away from sanity and towards idiocy. And
it admits of four answers. One is: ‘Very well: if you
won't play with other people, they won’t play with you.’
This is the retort courteous from within the limits of con-
ventional ethics. The second is: ‘If you annoy people
in this way they can and will crush you.’ This is the
countercheck quarrelsome or verdict on appeal to the
higher court of expediency. The third is: ‘Other people
have a claim on you, which you are a cad to ignore.’ This
is the verdict of duty or lie circumstantial. The fourth is
the one we have already given: ‘ You are making a fool of
yourself ; that is, doing your best to become an idiot by
your own act.’ This is the verdict of philosophy or the lie
direct.


§ 6. The Task of Religion


We have already described the path by which religion
comes into being and reaches maturity. That maturity
consists of the ideal of a universal Church worshipping
a universal God. But if and when this ideal is achieved,
religion has not thereby come safe into harbour and resolved


The Task of Religion 139


itself into the heavenly hymn of popular eschatology.’
It has come face to face with its ultimate task.

This task is the synthesis of opposites, the breaking-down
of the mid-wall of partition between man and God, the
subject and the object of the religious consciousness. There
are other oppositions at stake, for as we have just seen
they break out in religion on every hand; but this is the
key to all the others. As Christian theology rightly sees,
the reconciliation of man to God draws the devil’s teeth
without more ado ; that is to say, the contradiction between
God and the devil solves itself automatically, and so with
all the other contradictions.

The Christian solution of this great problem represents
the high-water mark of religious development, and it is
difficult to see that religion in its essential form can ever
achieve anything higher and more ultimately or absolutely
satisfying than the twin conceptions of the Incarnation
and the Atonement. In these conceptions the task of
religion is accomplished and its problem solved. Man is by
them redeemed in very truth from his sins, that is to say
from the alienation between him and God. And in these
conceptions the worship which all religion gives to God
is rightly and necessarily extended to the Son of Man in
whose holy and sinless person the redemption of all mankind
is effected, in whom ‘ God made himself man that he might
make us God ’.

The starting-point of this task is the starting-point of all


1 An eschatology not, I would remark, warranted by the highest
authorities. The hymn of Rev. iv is a prologue to the great judge-
ment, and of the New Jerusalem we are explicitly told (Rev. xxi. 22)
that there is no temple therein, that is to say, no act of worship. The
self-transcendence of religion has never been more strikingly asserted
than in this plain statement that there will be no religion in heaven.


140 RELIGION


religion. This is the assertion of God as holy, with its
implication, that the worshipper is unholy. Unholiness is
sin, which is not a moral idea but a religious idea, though
no doubt it is the symbol under which moral problems are
attacked by the religious consciousness. This antithesis or
severance between the subject and object of the religious
consciousness is a new thing. In art it does not exist.
Not that the artist is a stranger to self-consciousness. Self-
consciousness is coextensive with consciousness in general.
But the artist’s self-consciousness, like his consciousness in
general, is specifically imaginative and not assertive. Just
as in dramatic art the artist invents objective personages
whose existence he does not assert as real, and whose troubles
and trials need not therefore shake the foundations of his
entire life, so in lyrical art he invents an imaginary self and
unlocks a heart which is, in point of fact, not his real heart
but only an imaginary one. The griefs and joys of the
lyrical poet are not necessarily historical facts, any more
than the griefs and joys of other dramatis personae. If
therefore the artist feels dissatisfied with himself—and the
greatest of all artists looked upon himself and cursed his fate,

Desiring this man’s art and that man’s scope,

With what I most enjoy contented least
it is no more than a passing mood ; it is overcome even in
the act of giving it aesthetic utterance, and is thus only
asserted to be denied. But in religion this self is asserted
as real, and at the same time as other than the true reality
God. Hence the self is by the very presuppositions of the
religious consciousness alienated from God and in a state
of sin. This is the so-called Fall of Man, or original sin.
Here again, there is no question for philosophy as to whether
there was an historical fall, and Darwinism has no quarrel
with Genesis. The fall of man is his awakening to the


The Task of Religion 141


religious frame of mind, and the doctrine of original sin is his
recognition, in this frame of mind, of the fait accompli, the
severance of man as such from God.

The short and easy way of dealing with these conceptions
is simply to deny them, to point out, what is perfectly true,
that the severance of subject from object is no philosophical
truth but an error incidental to ‘ picture-thinking ’, to the
imaginative form of knowledge. To one who really con-
ceives, instead of imagining, the subject-object relation,
it is evident without more ado that this is a relation of
correlatives in which each requires the other for its own
existence. But to make this point is to pass at a leap
beyond the sphere of imaginative knowledge and to short-
circuit the whole train of development from the beginning
of religion to the end of philosophy. There is no objection
to doing this; quite the contrary; if any one can do it,
he will save himself a great deal of trouble. But he cannot
do it at all unless he is gifted with an extraordinary degree
of acuteness and elasticity of mind. In practice, people do
not adopt these heroic remedies. They answer, if any one
suggests them, ‘Need we really scrap the whole machine
for the sake of this flaw ? can’t we get over it, within the
terms of our presuppositions, by a little adjustment ?’
So the adjustment begins, and the length to which it may
proceed is infinite; and then suddenly the manipulator
turns round to find that his machine has become a wholly
different thing. The mind, if one may suggest a portman-
teau-proverb, non factt saltum praeter necessitatem.>

The religious consciousness, then, accepts original sin as
its starting-point, and in a sense the whole of religion


1 The point at which they realize the necessity for a leap is, of
course, just what distinguishes minds according to their insight or
intelligence.


142 RELIGION


represents a progressive attempt at self-purification, the
sanctifying or deifying of man. Hence the supreme blas-
phemy is to claim an immediate or natural identity of man
with God, to make oneself equal to God ; for that is to deny
the whole meaning and value of religion by asserting that
one possesses by nature what in religion we are trying to
obtain by grace. But this attempt at union with God is
futile as long as religion is in its naive polytheistic state,
for the object is here in a state of flux, god succeeding god,
and a real union is only possible with that which is itself one.
Thus the problem of reconciling man with God first begins
to be seriously attacked by the monotheistic religions, and
can only be solved by a religion which has achieved a
thorough and, so to speak, ingrained monotheism. In such
a religion the tension between God’s holiness and our sin
becomes unbearable, and we are faced with the alternative
of either shirking it—declining to recognize it, and occupying
our minds with those details of legalistic ritual which are
the symptom not of a trivial religion but of one too profound
and serious for its devotees to live up to—or else finding
a solution for it.

The solution can only come from the side of God, for we
in our fallen state are powerless. It must, that is, be an act
of unmerited grace. God must give himself to us. Now the
gift is to consist precisely of the abolition of the gulf which
separates man from God: God and man, once separate,
are to be fused in a new unity, God becoming incarnate as
man, and man becoming by redemption and adoption the
child of God. But by becoming incarnate, God does not
become sinful; for sin is precisely the separation of man
from God, and the negation of this is the negation of sin.
He takes the burden of sin upon himself ; that is, he himself,
and no other, faces the situation of the existence of sin and


The eae of Religion 143


triumphs over it. But this very triumph is achieved only
by his own sinlessness. And this result is foreordained
before the beginning of the world: it was an integral part
of God’s plan, that is to say, the inevitable dialectical result
of the very presuppositions of the religious consciousness,
though its inevitability can only be seen by us ex fost facto,
because there was never any guarantee that the religious
consciousness of a given race would have the vigour and
steadfastness to work out its salvation aright.

This solution of the problem of religion was actually
achieved, as was indeed necessary, by and within religion
itself, unaided by philosophy or science. But the very
religion which had produced it repudiated it, and repudiated
it specifically as blasphemy or irreligion. The solution of
the religious problem came to its own, and its own received
it not. And this, again, had to be. It was as necessary that
Christ should be rejected as that he should rise again on the
third day. For his message was the death-warrant of the
religious consciousness itself, and all that was strongest and
most vital in the religious consciousness rose up against
it to destroy it. The religious consciousness in its explicit
form is simply the opposition between man and God, an
opposition perpetually resolved in the actuality of worship
and perpetually renewed as the intermittent act of worship
ceases. The Christian gospel announced the ending of that
opposition once for all, not by the repetition of acts of
worship, by the blood of bulls and goats, but by the very
act of God which was at the same time the death of God.
The one atoning sacrifice of Christ swept away temple and
priests, ritual and oblation and prayer and praise, and left
nothing but a sense that the end of all things was at hand
and a new world about to appear in which the first things
should have passed away. In the death-grapple between


144 RELIGION


religion as a specific form of experience and the Christian
gospel which by solving its insoluble problem annihilated it,
it was necessary that the representatives of the Christian
gospel should be put down by force; but it was equally
necessary that their message should prevail, just because it
was the truth, in a world which at bottom desired the truth.

If the reader is tempted to reply that the view here set
forth makes Christianity not a religion at all, and thus
stultifies the implied definition either of Christianity or of
religion, he must be reminded that Christianity has here been
defined not as something different from religion in general
but as the solution of the problem whose existence con-
stitutes religion in general. To find this solution is the
work of the religious consciousness, not of any other form
of consciousness ; and the solution, being correlative to its
own problem, only continues to exist as long as the problem
continues to exist. The very existence of the religious
problem in any phase, however primitive, implies some kind
of dim and instinctive solution of it. Hence even the
darkest heathenism is, as Christians have always said, an
implicit, blind or caricatured Christianity. On the other
hand, the origin of explicit Christianity marked, not the
disappearance of religion, but the discovery by religion of
the answer to its own questions. Now a question whose
answer is given logically ceases to be asked; and that
implies the end of religion on the coming of Christianity,
and that in its turn implies the end of Christianity also.
But what is true in the logic of explicit reason is not true
in the logic of implicit reason, reason in its intuitive form.
Here the problem and its solution present themselves, not in
the form of logical question and answer, but in the imagina-
tive form of an enacted drama or sacred story. Logically
analysed, the whole point of this drama is the overcoming


The Task of Religion 145


of its own initial error; but in religion, logical analysis is
only implicit ; it solves problems, it gives knowledge, it
reveals truth, but without knowing what it is doing. Hence
religion can only satisfy itself that its problem is really
solved by restating both it and its solution in their imagina-
tive form: the cosmic mystery-play of the fall and the
atonement. Thus Christianity, which is implicitly the
death of religion, is explicitly the one true and perfect
religion, the only religion which gives the soul peace and
satisfaction by solving the specifically religious problem.

This brings us to a question with which we cannot now
refuse to deal—the place of religion in the modern world.

Religion is a hybrid of the literal and spiritual, of super-
stition and truth. Far more than art, it conveys to man
real knowledge of himself and of the world ; for whereas the
message of art is wholly obscured by its imaginative pre-
sentation, in religion the message takes definite, though
as yet only mythical, shape. But religion is not the highest
or final form of truth, even though the truth which it reveals
is substantially the highest and final truth. Its message is
formally imperfect, tainted by the displacement of assertion
from the truth to the symbol, so that religion can never say
what it means. This inability to express its own meaning
is grasped by religion itself in the form of the conviction of
sin, of alienation from its own ideal.

The philosophical error of asserting the reality of an
image instead of asserting the reality of the truth which
that image means may not be a necessary error, in the sense
of a phase through which by some law of nature every
mind must pass, but it is an error into which it would
appear that every human mind actually does fall. Mankind,
it has been said, is incurably religious. Not incurably,
perhaps, for Christianity is there to witness the contrary ;

2792 K


146 RELIGION


rather endemically. Superstitions of all kinds break out
on all hands even at this enlightened stage of the world’s
history ; and there is no reason to think that they will
soon become extinct. Now superstition of every type is
the fuel on which Christianity feeds ; for Christianity would
seem to be the only agent by which the human mind has
ever yet succeeded in liberating itself from superstition.
The direct passage from superstition to philosophy has been
tried, and it is a passage so choked with wrecks that a wise
man will hardly venture to attempt it. Christianity, the
via purgativa of the religious mind, will become out of date
for any given person or society only when in the mind of
that person or society superstition has vanished for good
and all. At that rate there are not many persons, and
certainly not any societies, that can afford to despise the
teachings of Christianity.


§ 7. The Transition from Religion to the life of
Thought


No more pitiable manifestation of thought exists than
that kind of anti-religious polemic which is known as
‘atheism’ or, as if per antonomasiam, ‘rationalism’. Its
method is to take any assertion made by religion, to assume
that it means what it says, and then to show, which is
always easy, that so interpreted it is false or at least
doubtful. Great triumphs have been won over religion by
showing that the world cannot have been made in seven
days, that Eve was probably not made out of one of Adam’s
ribs, that the age attributed to Methuselah and other
patriarchs is certainly exaggerated, and that no known
species of fish can have swallowed Jonah and cast him up
three days later. It has also been forcibly argued that there


Transition to Life of Thought 147


must be one God or three, and that you can’t have it both
ways ; that the fictitious transference of our sins to Christ
is a legal quibble quite unworthy of a righteous Judge ;
and that if God were really both powerful and good he would
have made short work of tuberculosis and the Borgia
family. Just at present this type of thought is chiefly
concerned with the birth, miracles, and resurrection of
our Lord, and we may leave it there.

The interest of this ‘ rationalistic’ thought, for us, is the
question of its origin. No one confutes Swift on the ground
that Lilliputians are physiologically impossible,! and on
the other hand no one accuses Cecil Rhodes of lying on the
ground that even if he had owned an apple-cart, Dr. Jameson
during his raid was far too busy to upset it. In the former
case every one realizes that Swift was only fancying, and
not asserting, the Lilliputians ; in the latter, it is clear that
the upset apple-cart was only a metaphor. But religion
is neither art nor explicit metaphor ; it is implicit metaphor,
metaphorical assertion mistaking itself for literal assertion.
The early Christians, when they said the end of the world
was coming, genuinely thought that they meant what they
said, and the rationalists of the day were doubtless taken in
by this and consequently, when the end of the world did
not come, condemned Christianity as a fraud. In point of
fact, the expected Parousia was only the imaginative symbol
of a spiritual event which really did take place ; so that
what the early Christians implicitly meant by it was true,
though what they said was false. Similarly the Christianity
of a century ago said, and thought it literally meant, that
the world was created in seven days. It has now learnt
not only that, so understood, the assertion was untrue, but


1 Though there is the story of the sea-captain who closed Gulliver's
Travels with the remark that he didn’t believe a word of it.


K 2


148 RELIGION


also that it was never really meant to be so understood, but
was always a symbol of something else.

Religion, in short, as by now we have abundantly seen,
always mistakes what it says for what it means. And
rationalism, so to speak, runs about after it pointing out
that what it says is untrue. The mistake of rationalism is
to think that by doing this it is refuting religion ; but that
is a mistake first made by religion, and rationalism only
errs through accepting the account given by religion of itself.
Rationalism would be justified in doing this if it claimed
a place within religion; but in fact it claims a place in
philosophy, and if it is to deserve this place it must not
naively accept religion at its own valuation but study it
afresh and work out a new theory of it. It is this elementary
misunderstanding that makes rationalism so contemptible
a thing. If the rationalist had any intelligence he would
see that his attacks on religion are too easy to be sound, and
that there must be a catch somewhere.

This ‘ catch ’ is the root of theology. The task of theology
is to convert the implicit thought of religion into explicit
thought, by disentangling the symbol from its meaning and
making clear the merely metaphorical character of religious
imagery. Theology is thus the answer to rationalism.
But just because it makes terms with rationalism, because
it so far agrees with the rationalist as to admit that the
symbol is not literally true, theology is always looked upon
with some suspicion by religion itself. The rise of theology
is inevitable, for otherwise religion lies helpless under the
guns of the most idiotic rationalist ; and yet theology is to
religion a wolf in sheep’s clothing. The theologian has
crossed the line which separates religion from philosophy,
and he is only tolerated by religion as long as, wolf though
he is, he conscientiously plays the sheep-dog. There is no


Transition to Life of Thought 149


help for this; he must be tolerated; for rationalism is no
external enemy whose attacks will perhaps never be repeated,
it is at bottom a manifestation of the religious attitude
itself. We saw that religion, as intuitive and therefore
a matter of feeling, was necessarily unstable and inter-
mittent. Every religious man has his irreligious moments,
and in these irreligious moments he is either a rationalist
or a theologian. Either the bread and wine are, in these
moments, for him just bread and wine, or else he has schooled
himself to regard them as symbols: that is, he has turned
theologian. Hence religion, by its own inner dialectic as an
intuitive form of consciousness, creates within itself first
rationalism and then the antidote to rationalism, theology.

But theology is the negation of religion. To distinguish
between the symbol and what it means is by definition to
pass outside religion, to recognize that religion by itself is
not sufficient to ensure the permanent peace of the soul,
and to condemn religion as a confusion of thought. The
task of theology is to carry on its analytic work while
rebutting the inevitable accusation of irreligion. The actual
life of theology (is there any theologian who does not know
this ?) isa life of compromise. It is taken up enthusiastically,
in the belief that there are in religion just a few unexplained
metaphors—Jonah’s whale and the seven days of creation
and so forth—and that by expounding these we can clear
all difficulties from before the feet of honest doubt. But
metaphors multiply as the theologian looks at them. He
finds that they infect the whole length and breadth of
religion, and then, if his eye is sufficiently penetrating, he
begins to see them in depth as well : when he has expounded
one metaphor, he finds that the terms in which he has
expounded it are themselves metaphorical. But he is
committed to the defence of religion, and therefore he must


150 RELIGION


take religion’s word for the point at which she finds his
analysis intolerable. Jonah’s whale and the seven days of
creation, very well; but what about the resurrection and
the virgin birth? It is easy to condemn as inconsistent
those who cry ‘ hands off’ at this point. But perhaps they
have right on their side. For—this is what the enthusiastic
young theologian does not know—theology, if it is to
remain theology, must stop somewhere. The young theo-
logian thinks that religion has a kernel of literal truth
which, if only his bishop will let him go on digging, he will
in time bring to light. But religion, as Goethe said of nature,
has neither kernel nor husk;! and those who are bent on
peeling it will some day exemplify the parable of the onion.

The ultimate logical conclusion of theology is the explana-
tion of the entire mass of religious imagery in terms of the
concept of God. The concept of God is the nucleus of
literal truth which theology assumes religion to possess.
In the last conceivable resort, the theologian might explain
every single clause of the creeds as metaphorical except
‘I believe in God’: that is the literal fact of which all the
following clauses are, so to speak, metaphorical illustrations
and expansions. I do not say that any theologian now
advocates such a position, but it is obviously the conclusion
to which much of our theology is tending, and therefore it
closely concerns us to investigate it.


' “Thought growing up in the husk of language,’ we said on p. 125;
but there is no inconsistency. To distinguish the language from the
thought, the husk from the germ, is, as we have throughout main-
tained, possible ; but it is the destruction of religion and the affirma-
tion of science. In this very destruction the spirit and truth of
religion are not quenched ; they live on, and at a higher level ; but
it is a level at which the theologian is certainly not consciously
aiming—a level at which the chalice becomes a crucible and the
church a laboratory.


Transition to Life of Thought 151


The assumption is that God is a concept, an object of
thought, the ultimate reality of philosophical analysis.
Now is this identification of God with the absolute legiti-
mate? All theology assumes that it is; but it cannot be.
God is the holy one, the worshipped, the object of faith.
The absolute is reality, the demonstrated, the object of
reason. No one can worship the absolute, and no one can
prove the existence of God. It is true that people have
tried to do both these things, but they have uniformly
failed. The proofs of the existence of God form a long and
glorious chapter in the history of human thought, but they
have always ended by proving something that is not the
existence of God. The attempt to worship the absolute
has been a not uninteresting chapter in the history of
religion, and it has always ended in the worship of something
that is not the absolute. The simple religious consciousness
is here our best guide. It knows that God is revealed not
to the intellect but to the heart, which means not the
‘practical reason’ or the ‘ emotional faculty’, but simply
the religious consciousness. God is not known, he is adored.
We cannot think him, we can only love and fear him. The
simple religious consciousness knows that when philosophers
call their ultimate reality by the name of God they are
taking that name in vain and pretending to be what they
are not. They are, in fact, as insincere as is a religion which
talks of the Supreme Being.

God and the absolute are not identical but irretrievably
distinct. And yet they are identical in this sense : God is
the imaginative or intuitive form in which the absolute
reveals itself to the religious consciousness. We are accus-
tomed to recognize that the gods of the heathen are but
mythological and perverted presentations of the true God ,
we know well that the father up in the sky of whom we


152 RELIGION


talk to children is likewise at bottom a mythological figment.
But we do not sufficiently realize that all religion, up to its
very highest manifestations, is mythological too, and that
mythology is finally extruded from religion only when
religion itself perishes and gives place to philosophy. God
as such is the mythological symbol under which religion
cognizes the absolute: he is not a concept but the symbol
of a concept. However hard we try to purify our idea of
God from mythological elements, the very intuitiveness of
our attitude towards that idea mythologizes it once more.

‘I believe in God’ is therefore a religious statement,
never a philosophical statement. It is a statement which
challenges the philosophical reply ‘What do you mean by
God?’ and when that question is asked nothing but a
deliberate stopping of the wheels of thought will arrest
the conversion of theology into philosophy. No attempt to
save theology, under the name of philosophical theism, can
resist this process

In point of fact, we have long ago left religion behind.
Theology is a manifestation not of the religious spirit but
of the scientific spirit, and to that we must now turn. In
taking this step, we leave the world of imagination and
enter upon the world of thought. The world of pine ee:
is thought implicit; the world of thought, so called,
thought explicit. In art and religion thought is nate
but it is deceived as to its own nature. In art it is so far
deceived as to be ignorant of its very existence, and to
suppose itself mere imagination: yet even in that error it
is thought, for nothing but thought can err. Thus art is the
last possible degree of the implicitness of thought. In
religion thought knows that it exists ; religion asserts and
knows that it asserts. But though hee thought knows that it
exists, it is so far ignorant of its own nature that it mistakes


Transition to Life of Thought 153


imagining for thinking, and asserts the reality of what is
really only symbol. Hence the truth is in religion only
intuitively known, not logically known, and its real nature
as truth—as concept, as object of thought—is concealed.
Religion, like art, is a philosophical error. It is specifically
the error of mythologizing reality, of taking language
literally instead of metaphorically. But in spite of this
formal error, religion is an infinitely precious achievement
of the mind and an unfailing revelation of truth. It is the
giver of freedom and salvation, because it liberates the soul
from the life of imagination, of semblance and unreality,
and leads from the things that are seen and temporal to the
things that are unseen and eternal. And in that passage the
visible world, the world of semblance, is redeemed and made
the fit temple of the spirit ; for in the very negation of this
imaginary world as the supreme reality, it is invested with
its true positive value as the vehicle of the supreme reality,
the Word of the Spirit.


V
SCIENCE
§ 1. The Life of Thought


ArT and religion, to the superficial observer, are forms
not of thought but of language. Art, it has been said, is
simply language itself, language in its pure form apart from
any meaning. Mythology has been called a disease of
language, a development from language in its purity to
language claiming a function which it does not rightly
possess, the function of thought ; and thus declaring itself
in a morbid condition. Both these descriptions we should
reject if taken as serious definitions of art and religion, for
they are descriptions of the surface instead of the solid,
definitions of the letter substituted for definitions of the
spirit. Art is not pure language, but thought failing to
recognize that it is thought, mistaking itself for imagina-
tion. Religion is not a morbid growth of language but
a dialectical development of art, art realizing that it is not
bare imagination but assertion, and then proceeding to
misinterpret its own assertions and to suppose itself to be
asserting the image or word when it is really asserting the
meaning of the word. In a special sense both art and
religion are thus linguistic functions, forms of expression
rather than forms of thought ; for though, properly under-
stood, they exist only to express thought, yet the thought
in them is concealed rather than expressed by their language,
the language becomes opaque and presents itself as if it
were the real aim and end of the activity. And thus in
a sense it is true to say that the artistic consciousness is


The Life of Thought &. 5


one struggling to master the bare technique of expression,
playing scales on the instrument of speech as a preliminary
to using it as a means for the expression of a determinate
thought ; and in the same sense it is true to say that religion
is the error of mistaking these scales for music, mistaking
speech for thought. Art and religion are both phases in the
history of a mind preceding its attainment of complete
mastery over the means of expression: they are the experi-
ence of one who is still learning language and has not yet
fully learnt it. Hence his attention is concentrated on the
language and not on the meaning; the language appears
to him, falsely, as an end in itself, and he does not realize
that while he is practising himself in the use of speech he
is all the time learning to think. The total absorption in
the technique of expression is art; the first consciousness
of the claim of thought, misinterpreted by identifying
thought with its own expression, language with reality, is
religion.

Art and religion may thus be taken together as two
phases in the development of language, first the phase of
language practised as an end in itself, mere meaningless
expression, and secondly the phase of language recognized
as a vehicle of thought, but of a thought confusedly identified
with its own vehicle. When once it has been realized that
the function of language is to be transparent to thought
and to express a meaning which is other than itself, language
falls into its proper subordinate position with respect to
thought and attention is taken off the letter and concen-
trated on the spirit, the thought or meaning. When this
happens art and religion cease to exist as self-contained and
autonomous forms of experience, and give way to a life no
longer of expression but of thought. In this life of thought
expression is not left behind. On the contrary, the life of


156 SCIENCE


thought is a life of thought as expressing itself, embodying
itself in language; and this linguistic embodiment, so far
as it is expressive, is in a sense art, and so far as it is meta-
phorical, in a sense religion. But the artistic and religious
elements in the life of thought are not felt as existing for
their own sake ; they are sunk in the thought they express,
and even tend to be overlooked and their very existence
denied.

This denial of the existence of sensuous or linguistic
elements in the life of thought would be an error, but it is
an error due to the fact that the elements thus denied are
subordinated to thought, a mere means to thought as an
end. To deny the existence of intellectual elements in the
life of art and religion is a parallel error, but an error of the
opposite kind. Here, too, in the life of sense or imagination,
thought is really the end and imagination only the means
by which we express it; but here it is the end, not the
means, that tends to be overlooked and denied. To call
art and religion mere phases in the development of language
is to commit this error, to forget that what is really develop-
ing is not bare expression but expressed thought; and
similarly if we described science and history as mere phases
in the development of thought we should be forgetting that
what here develops is not thought in the abstract but
expressed thought. The transition from religion to science .
is therefore strictly not a transition from language to thought
but a transition from one form of thought to another. But
to the person who is effecting the transition this fact is
invisible, and it can only be seen from the point of view
of philosophical reflection. To the person himself it seems
that he has passed for the first time into the region of
thought, that a pre-intellectual or infra-intellectual state of
mind has been left behind, and that now, for the first time,


Lhe Life of Thought I o


he is taking up a rational attitude towards the world. The
truth of the matter is that his previous attitude was rational
also, but he did not know it; his new attitude is peculiar
not in being rational but in being consciously rational.

This rationality consists in the freedom of thought from
its own expression, the distinction between thought and
language. In every form of experience this distinction
exists, but by art and religion it is not recognized to exist.
It exists in them, but not for them ; its existence in them
can only be discovered by an examination undertaken from
an external point of view, namely, that of philosophy.
Science for the first time recognizes this distinction from
within, that is, recognizes that it is itself making it. Hence
thought, which in its own nature always was free, discovers
its freedom first in science. Language henceforth falls into
its place as the mere servant of thought, and science treats
it despotically, making it mean just what it likes; and with
this consciousness of its own mastery over language, thought
attains its majority, and the life of the spirit may henceforth
be described as, in a special sense, the life of thought.
Henceforth the whole effort of the mind is deliberately con-
centrated on the problem of meaning, and the question of
what is said is sunk in the question of what is meant. This
is the literal, as opposed to the metaphorical, use of language.
As we have already seen, language never is its own meaning,
and is therefore always symbolic or metaphorical ; but when
this fact is as yet undiscovered by the user of language we
say that he is using it ‘ metaphorically ’, and when he
realizes that words are mere symbols and distinguishes what
they are from what they mean, then by facing and accepting
the metaphorical character of all language he has overcome
it and is henceforth using language ‘literally’. This revolu-
tion in the use of language is the birth of science.


158 SCIENCE


§ 2. Science as the assertion of the Abstract
Concept


The attempt of thought to understand the world began
by erecting a screen or veil of imagery between itself and
its object, thus frustrating its own purpose. The veil, which
in art is a fleeting impermanent tissue of fancies, in religion
becomes a solid screen of dogma and ritual, attempting in
its permanence and universality not merely to represent but
to be the real world. But this permanence and universality
are not native to the imagination, not effortless achieve-
ments or even secure possessions. They are arbitrarily and
forcibly imposed by the religious consciousness upon an
object all unsuited, with its essentially aesthetic character,
to receive them. Religion insists that its object shall be
permanent, though in fact it is always fleeting, and shall
be universally accepted, though this universality is never
attained. The claim cannot be enforced, because religion
seeks reality where it cannot be found, namely, in imagery.
But if its enforcement were not attempted, religion with all
its immense stores of truth and wisdom would disappear
and sink back to the level of art.

There is only one way out of the position in which religion
finds itself. That way is the recognition, which in the case
of theology we have already analysed, that imagery is
nothing but imagery, not thought but the symbol of thought.
When this is seen, the veil of imagery, hitherto opaque,
becomes transparent, and the thinker sees through it to the
object which it symbolizes. The transparency of the symbol
does not mean its abolition. Thought never outgrows the
_need of language, never learns to live without that immediacy
or intuitiveness which marks the aesthetic consciousness.
To lose that would be to lose its own cutting edge.


Science as the Abstract Concept 159


The life of thought is that consciousness which has freed
itself not from language but from the opacity of language.
The thinker has mastered words and bent them to his pur-
pose; he has pierced through language to that which it
means, the concept or object of thought.

The concept is not something outside the world of sensuous
appearance: it is the very structure or order of that world
itself. The arrangement and the material arranged are only
distinguished by an abstract and arbitrary distinction within
an indivisible whole. The universal is only real as exempli-
fied in the particular, the particular as informed by the
universal. The symbol is what it is because of its meaning,
the meaning is only what that symbol means. Hence the
meaning or concept or universal is not a separate object of
consciousness, other than the world of sense ; not something
seen through a veil of sense, but the structure of that veil
itself.

This is the point of view of concrete thought; and
ultimately we shall find ourselves forced to adopt it. But
to a mind struggling to free itself from the religious attitude,
such a point of view seems excessively remote and unnatural.
In religion the mind is accustomed to regard the unity of
God as standing in perfectly self-contained independence
over against the plurality of empirical facts; the one and
the many, the universal and its particulars, are thrown out-
side one another and regarded not as correlative aspects of
a single concrete whole but as independent concrete beings.
This is a consequence of the imaginative nature of religion,
which inevitably ‘ personifies abstractions ’, or presents ideal
distinctions in the guise of concrete objects. Now in
abandoning religion and turning to science the mind ceases
to personify abstractions, but it thinks this is enough: it
does not go so far in self-reformation as to stop abstracting


160 SCIENCE


them. To abstract is to consider separately things that are
inseparable : to think of the universal, for instance, without
reflecting that it is merely the universal of its particulars,
and to assume that one can isolate it in thought and study
it in this isolation. This assumption is an error. One
cannot abstract without falsifying. To think apart of things
that are together is to think of them as they are not, and
to plead that this initial severance makes no essential
difference to their inner nature is only to erect falsification
into a principle. But this is a lesson which can only be
learnt by bitter experience.

The specific character of science, its abstractness, is due
not to reflection on the alternatives and the conscious adop-
tion of abstract thought as preferable to concrete, but to,
an inheritance from religion. The concept, as it emerges
from its chrysalis state into explicit life, carries with it
a relic of its intuitive character in the shape of a bias
towards abstractness. This bias is allowed unconsciously
to control its development, and this is why the most
primitive form of explicit thought is not concrete thought
but abstract, not history but science.

Because the abstractness of science is a perpetuation of
the abstractness of religion, science most naturally arises
out of a religion which has not overcome this abstractness,
that is to say, out of a non-Christian religion. Hence
European science has its roots in the religion of pagan
antiquity, as we shall see later. Science in the modern
world is science Christianized, science fed by a religious
consciousness in which the primary abstractness of religion
has been cancelled by the notions of incarnation and atone-
ment. This gives the distinction between the a priori
science of the Greeks and the empirical science of the
modern or Christian world. But religion, even in the form


Science as the Abstract Concept 161


of Christianity, never really transcends its abstractness,
because this abstractness is nothing more than the intuitive
or imaginative character of religion. It only cancels this
abstractness by adding to itself a new series of images
whose purpose is to warn us against the inevitable abstract
interpretation of the old; but these new images (redemp-
tion, grace, &c.) are only images again and therefore liable
to the same fault. The aim of science is to avoid this fault :
Greek science aims at avoiding the specific fault of Greek
religion, modern science at avoiding that of Christianity,
namely, its liability to misinterpretation in a sense which
makes God an arbitrary tyrant, whose very gifts are an
insult to a free man.

The history of European science begins with the break-
down of a religious view of the world in the mind of ancient
Greece, and the concepts of Greek science appear as a kind
of depersonalized gods. The early Greek scientists were
trying to replace a world of religious imagery with a world
of intelligible concepts. These concepts, like the gods they
superseded, were suspended above the sensible world in
a heaven of their own; for, precisely because the dualism
of the religious consciousness was not overcome, the secret
of science was found in the absolute distinction between
the universal and its particulars, the world of thought and
the world of sense.

The world of sense, whose component objects were
regarded ! as the particulars of the universals constituting
the world of thought, was mere appearance ; neither real


1 The conceptions expounded in this paragraph are not consistently
maintained by all Greek philosophers at all times, and the reader
need not suppose me ignorant of variations and departures from
them; I am trying to give an account of what seems to me the
typical and fundamental Greek view.


2792 L


162 Sicre MOE


nor unreal; not illusion, but appearance in the sense of
being neither asserted nor denied, ‘ opined’ as Plato has it.
Reality was found in the world of universals, and unreality
in the world of what one may call counter-universals, the
empty potentialities of determination which are only the
negative aspect of the universals themselves. The universals
were abstract. Whether they were said to ‘ exist ’ in sever-
ance from their particulars or te be only thinkable in that
severance, it was agreed that they were indifferent to their
own exemplification in this particular or that, and differen-
tiated only in their specifications, these specifications being
always universals again, never particulars. Individual dis-
tinctions between the particulars did not flow from the
nature of the universal, but—since they necessarily had
a ground of some kind—they were ultimately referred to
the counter-universals. The polarized world of abstract
concepts—polarized into asserted universals and negated
counter-universals—was thus lifted bodily clear of the sen-
suous world of appearance, and this very dualism is a relic of
an unresolved intuitive or religious view of the world, as we
have seen. Indeed the constant description of the soul’s
grasp of the universals as ‘intuition’, ‘gazing’, and so forth,
betrays the imaginative character of the entire conception.
Because any given universal was, in its abstractness,
indifferent to the variations of its own particulars, these
particulars organized themselves in the form of a class.
Classification is the key-note of the scientific spirit; but
classification is nothing but the abstractness of the scientific
concept. For a class as such is a collection of individuals
without any mutual cohesion or organization except their
common membership of the class. They have no reference
to each other, but only to the universal; and each one
refers to the universal in precisely the same way as every


Science as the Abstract Concept 163


other. As soon as they refer to the universal in different
ways, or, what is the same thing, as soon as they develop
a system of mutual relations between themselves, they cease
to be a mere class and become an organized and articulated
system ; and the universal ceases to be an abstract universal
(class-concept) and becomes a concrete universal, or one to
which the differences between its particulars are relevant.
Thus classification is the most rudimentary conceivable kind
of order ; and if structure in general is the object of thought
in general, science as the explicit apprehension of class-
structure is the most abstract and primitive kind of explicit
thought that can exist.

The Greeks who worked out the theory of the classi-
ficatory universal did not, of course, deliberately proceed
by abstraction from individual facts. Implicitly no doubt
they did so; they could not do otherwise ; but their own
theory of the matter was that these universals could be
apprehended by themselves, in all their abstractness, irre-
spective of their exemplification in facts. Indeed, it is
significant that Greek philosophy has no word for ‘ fact’
or ‘individual’, distinct from its term for the abstract
particular. To describe Socrates, for instance, as using the
inductive method of modern science is a glaring anachron-
ism, and as a description of the dialectical basis of science
it is false in the same way in which the doctrine that the
artist copies historical facts is false. Artist and scientist
alike are working at levels of thought below that at which
fact in its concreteness is recognized at all.


§ 3. A prion or Deductive Science
Science is the affirmation of the abstract or classificatory
concept as real. Now because this concept is abstract, its
nature is to be apprehended by abstract thought, thought
L2


164 SCIENCE


deprived of any aid from sensation. Sensuous experience
is therefore unnecessary to the scientist, and all he has to
do is to think. If the metaphysic of science is that of the
world of forms, the methodology of science is that of pure
thought.

This is the simplest and historically the first form of the
scientific consciousness, as it was worked out by the early
Greek philosophers and described by Plato. In a sense, the
development of scientific thought does not begin here ; for
there is an important truth in the common observation
that primitive systems of magic and religion are rudimentary
forms of science. Together with much that is altogether
fanciful and irrational, such institutions as that of tabu
constantly enforce principles which are in substance scientific.
But we are here dealing with the origin, not of principles
which can be called scientific in substance, but of science
as a definite and self-conscious form of experience. It is
the very essence of a dialectical development that each
phase in it should contain the next implicitly, and it is this
implicit presence of elements which are, as it were, sub-
merged in the immediacy of a particular phase, that neces-
sitates the collapse of that phase. Every phase of experience
is implicit in its predecessor, and therefore it is not sur-
prising that science should be implicit in religion; but the
scientific content in fabu and the like is felt not as science
but as religion. .

Science in its purest and most unsophisticated form, as

‘the mere assertion of the abstract concept, is a priori or
deductive. It is built up by simply drawing out the implica-
tions of a given concept. But because the scientist’s know-
ledge of concepts.cannot be derived from sensuous experience,
the concepts which form the objects of science must be
known independently of all such experience. And when we


A priori or Deductive Science 16s


ask what concepts can be thus known, remembering that
the concept is always the abstract class-universal, it becomes
clear that because any difference between one class and
another class is empirical, the only really a priori or pure
concept is the concept of a class as such, the concept of
classification or abstraction. From this point of view the
subject-matter of science will consist of nothing but the
implications of classification: that is, the indeterminate
plurality of the members of a class—indeterminate because
the abstract class-concept is perfectly indifferent to the
number of instances in which it is exemplified—each member
being simply another instance of the universal. This in-
determinate plurality of units is precisely the numerical
series. Each unit is distinguished from the rest simply as
being another: that is, by its ordinal number; and the
common nature of units in general is simply that they are
that of which there is an indeterminate multiplicity. This
indeterminate multiplicity is the mathematical infinite,
which is therefore another name for the perfect abstract-
ness of the mathematical universal. Since all content has
been exhausted from this universal, nothing is left to deter-
mine either the nature or the interrelations of its particulars,
which therefore become a mere plurality of abstract units.
Mathematics is thus the one and only a priori science.
It has nothing to do with space or time or quantity, which
are elements of concrete experience: it is simply the theory
of order, where order means classificatory order, structure
in its most abstract possible form. The numerical series is
the residuum of that abstraction which sets thought and
sensation over against one another in false isolation ; it is
the false mutual transcendence of the one and the many.
The self-contained solidity of each unit in the numerical
series, which makes it possible to shuffle and manipulate


166 SCIENCE


them without affecting their inner nature, is nothing but
this false transcendence: it is the corollary of the self-
contained character which it is the error of science to
attribute to pure thought. Once we have, by that relic of
religious transcendence which infects all science, divorced
the world of thought from the world of sensation, the mutual
externality of these two worlds reproduces itself ad infinitum
within science itself, and gives rise to that logic of external
relations which is just the mark of science’s failure to free
itself altogether from the domination of a religious habit of
mind. Hence the inevitable failure of the claim still some-
times made, that pure mathematics must be the ultimate
arbiter of metaphysical truth.

The purely a priori or deductive ideal of science at this
stage has further results beside the genesis of mathematics.
Because the concept contains all its possible implications
within itself, waiting merely to be extracted by thought,
science consists only in turning this way and that a concept
which is always immutable and self-identical. Hence all
science is not merely mathematical but mechanistic or
deterministic. Scientific determinism is, like mathematics,
a product of the abstractness of the scientific consciousness.
Mathematics implies the ideal reduction of what are really
unique individual facts to mere units ; mechanism implies
the ignoring of the omnipresent individuality of the real and
the imposition upon it of an abstract law which determines
every case indifferently from the outside. If mathematics
means the false mutual transcendence of the one and the
many, mechanical determination means the false transcen-
dence of the condition with regard to the conditioned.

A further product of the same process is materialism.
Matter is not that which we sensate, the visible, tangible,
and so forth, but that which in its indifferent self-identity


Al priori or Deductive Science 167


underlies all immediate objects of sense. Matter is in fact,
as Berkeley once for all pointed out, simply the abstract
concept, the substantiality or reality of objects conceived
as transcendent with regard to the objects themselves.

It is sometimes fancied that modern physics, with its
tendency to resolve ‘ gross matter’ into energy, events, or
determinations of space-time, is in process of overcoming
materialism by its own dialectic. Thisisnotso. The essence
of materialism, its assertion of an indifferently self-identical
substrate behind the variety of empirical fact, is unchanged
whether this substrate is called matter, energy, or space-
time. Materialism is a logical phenomenon, it is the indif-
ference of the abstract universal to its own particulars ; and
all the popular and philosophical objections to it rest upon
this fact and are unaffected by the ‘ dematerialization of
matter’. In fact the old-fashioned gross matter was a mark
of incomplete materialism, for its grossness was just a relic
of sensible qualities not yet extruded from the pure concept.

Mathematics, mechanism, and materialism are the three
marks of all science, a triad of which none can be separated
from the others, since in fact they all follow from the
original act by which the scientific consciousness comes into
being, namely, the assertion of the abstract concept. They
are all, it may be said, products of the classificatory frame
of mind, corollaries from the fact that in this frame of mind
the universal and the particular are arbitrarily separated
and the universal asserted in its barren and rigid self-
identity. It is this barrenness and this rigidity which confer
their character upon the doctrines of scientific materialism.

Hence it is idle to imagine that materialism is justified
in some sciences and not in others. It is idle to protest
that science ought to surrender its materialistic prejudices
when it finds itself face to face with a non-material object


168 SCIENCE


such as the soul. No object is material, in the metaphysical
sense of the word, except so far as scientific thinking con-
ceives it so; for materiality means abstractness, subjection
to the formulae of mechanical determination and mathe-
matical calculation, and these formulae are never imposed
upon any object whatever except by an arbitrary act which
falsifies the object’s nature. This only appears paradoxical
when we fail to see the gulf which separates the common-
sense materiality of a table, its sensible qualities, from its
metaphysical materiality, the abstract conceptual substrate
of those qualities. It is this substrate whose transcendent
or abstract existence is asserted by materialism. Hence we
cannot distinguish objects like tables which are really
‘material’ from objects in whose presence science must
unlearn its materialistic habits of thought. Materialism is no
more the truth in physics than in psychology, and no less. It
is the truth about any object, just in so far as this object is by
abstraction reducible to terms of pure mathematics; and no
object is so reducible except by consciously or unconsciously
shutting our eyes to everything which differentiates it from
anything else. This conscious or unconscious act of abstrac-
tion is the very being of the scientific consciousness ; and
it is therefore no matter for pained surprise when science
shows a bias towards determinism, behaviourism, and
materialism generally.

It will be noticed that though we called pure mathematics
the only a priori science we have been speaking as if other
sciences might come into existence. As long as science is
rigidly a priori this cannot happen. It can only happen in
two ways, which are at bottom identical : first, if concepts
containing some empirical element are admitted into science :
secondly, if science is allowed to indulge in hypothesis. In
the first case we might obtain Euclidean geometry regarded


A priori or Deductive Science 169


as a systematic account of actual empirical space; in the
second case we might get the same science regarded as
a pure deduction from the wholly a priori hypothesis that
Euclidean space existed. But in the first case science would
not be pure, and in the second case it would not be true,
for it would merely work out the implications of hypotheses,
not those of concepts asserted as constituting the real world.
And by definition science was to be knowledge by pure
thought of the real world. This, then, can only exist in
the form of pure mathematics, or the theory of classes which
have no members. For it must be borne in mind that the
abstract concept is nothing but the abstract structure of
the sensible world, and therefore if the concept alone is real
the world whose structure it is will be mere appearance and
not reality, and therefore the concept will be a class whose
members are not real.

Reality on this view turns out to be a null class; and
this conclusion represents the breakdown of science in its
first form, the form which the Greeks struggled to give it.
The self-identity of the concept, in abstraction from the
difference of the sensible world, collapses into nothingness
and leaves us with the empty form of a thought which
thinks nothing. If modern mathematical science is not
threatened by the same fate, that is because it belongs to
a far higher stage in scientific development than the move-
ment which we have been following hitherto.


§ 4. Utility or Abstract Ethics


When the mind becomes conscious of itself as thought
it simultaneously becomes conscious of itself as action.
Thought and action, truth and freedom (‘ ye shall know the
truth, and the truth shall make you free’) are inseparable,
and are in fact correlative aspects of an indivisible reality,


170 SCIENCE


Hence they became simultaneously explicit in the mind’s
process of self-discovery. Till then, they have both been
implicit only, and in that implicitness they have not been
distinguished. Religion is no less pregnant with moral
truths than with metaphysical ; but the moral consciousness
is in religion intuitive, a mere ‘ moral sense or unreasoning
emotional spring of action, for here the moral ideal is in-
extricably fused with the concept of a supreme objective
reality, and thus knowledge and action, truth and duty, are
represented in their undistinguished identity as the love and
fear of God. Play and convention are not, from the point
of view of art and religion, distinguishable from those
activities themselves; they are not even distinguishable
elements of them, but immediately identical with them in
their entirety ; and it was only, so to speak, prospectively,
to prepare the way for the present section, that we discussed
them separately.

The distinction between intellect and will is an ideal
distinction, as is that of the universal and the particular.
But science, which discovers both these distinctions, treats
them both in the same way, by converting them erroneously
into concrete distinctions, treating as separate terms which
are only distinguishable. Terms such as inside and outside,
back and front, beginning and end, are distinguishable and
indeed distinct, but not separate; the specific error of
science would be exemplified in regard to these terms if we
tried to conceive an inside that had no outside, and so on.
The separation of knowledge from conduct is thus a result
of scientific abstraction, and it is therefore under the heading
of science that we first find a special doctrine of the will.

The will, like any other concept, is by science abstractly
conceived. It is a self-identical principle to which its own
varying manifestations are indifferent. The characteristic


Utility or Abstract Ethics 171


question of the scientific mind is ‘ What is there in or behind
all these varying instances which is one and invariable ?’
Now this question, applied to human action, can have only
one result. Action as such is purposive, and anything
purposed is an end. Hence to be means to an end is the
invariable characteristic of all action. If we approached
ethics from a concrete point of view we should see that every
action stood in a unique relation to a unique end, and that
the separation of means and end was a mere artifice of
thought: that in any given instance the means and the end
were inextricably bound up together. But such artificial
separations are the essence of scientific method. That
method, therefore, applied to the study of conduct, neces-
sarily gives the result that all actions, no matter what, aim
at something other than themselves, which may be called
their end or good. Action is not the good, it is means to the
good ; and hence action as such is not good but useful.

The ethics of the scientific consciousness is always utili-
tarian, using that word in its broadest sense. This is not
because such utilitarianism is a true account of action, for
it is true only in the very restricted sense in which its twin
brother materialism is true ; it is because, just as materialism
abstracts from concrete objects their objectivity and calls
this abstraction matter, so utilitarianism abstracts from
concrete actions their purposiveness and calls it utility.

It affords an interesting light on the passage from religion to
science if we remember that theological ethics is notoriously
a form of utilitarianism, and that in fact modern utilita-
rianism is largely a theological product. Now religious
ethics is never utilitarian. Action, for the religious man, is
not a calculation of means to end, and it is quite true that
‘high heaven rejects’ such calculation. To accuse religion
of a self-seeking morality is fundamentally to misunderstand


172 SCIENCE


the religious mind and to throw in one’s lot with ‘ rational-
ism’ But theology, by distinguishing the religious symbol
from its own meaning, opens the door to the parallel, and
indeed identical, distinction between the religious act and
its end ; and the means and end once disentangled and set
over against one another, there is no avoiding utilitarianism.
Hence theology is bound to rationalize religion by attributing
to it a self-seeking of which explicitly it is altogether innocent.

Utilitarianism, like materialism, is not untrue ; it is only
the irreducible minimum of truth. Its error lies not in what
it asserts but in what it denies; but it asserts so little and
denies so much that the error in it is a great deal more
conspicuous than the truth. The error is simply its abstract-
ness, its separation of elements which are really only distinct.
The result of this is that action appears to utilitarianism
as a mere indifferent colourless medium, any act being
analysed in exactly the same terms as any other act, and
all differences between them ignored. This ignoring of
differences is perfectly possible and in a sense perfectly
legitimate ; but it brings us into a world of abstractions and
barren formulae where all actual reality is lost to sight.
Utilitarianism, the calculus of conduct, is the most abstract
and dialectically primitive of all possible kinds of ethical
theory. The will is by it conceived as the bare abstrac-
tion of will in general, precisely as mathematics conceives
organization or structure as the bare abstraction of order in
general.

The utilitarian view of action, since its essence is to be
abstract, results not only in the false abstraction of the will
from the intellect, but in the inevitable consequence of this
false abstraction, the arbitrary distinction of men of thought
from men of action. The man of thought, in such a scheme
of things, is the scientist ; for in this context thought means


Utility or Abstract Ethics 173


abstract thought, which is science. The man of action is
similarly the man of abstract action, action regarded from
the utilitarian point of view: that is to say, the man of
industry and commerce, or in general the business man.
The full and detailed description of the business man, re-
garded as capitalist on the one hand, and wage-earner on
the other, or, in the abstract synthesis of socialism, capitalist
and wage-earner in one, as worker in a nationalized pro-
ductive machine, is the work of the science of economics,
which is in the long run identical with utilitarian ethics.
Economics is not a true description of one kind of action
but an abstract, arbitrary, and therefore erroneous descrip-
tion of all action; and the ‘economic man’ whom it
describes is not, in these days, denied to be a fictitious entity.
None the less, business men exist. Capitalists and wage-
earners are as much an element in actual society as artists
and priests; and their existence is to be explained on the
same principle. In each case an error as to the true nature
and meaning of life reacts on that life itself and produces not
indeed a reality corresponding to the error—which would
in that case cease to be an error—but a reality of a one-sided
kind, showing within itself various strains and symptoms of
faulty equilibrium resulting from the error.

It is easy, in fact it is a commonplace, to point out such
morbid symptoms in the fabric of an ‘ acquisitive society ’
based on the concept of utility. The fundamental distinction
of means and end implies that in such a society every one
regards every one else as a means to his own ends: if the
employee is regarded as a living tool, the employer is regarded
as a living machine for the payment of wages, and the
conflict of interests is an inevitable result. Interests conflict,
not by the malignity or stupidity of the persons concerned,
but by their own inherent nature: interests indeed might


174 SCIENCE


be defined as the field of conflict, for the notion of interest,
as distinct from duty, is simply the notion of abstract
‘individuals ’, the individuals of individualism, each setting
itself against the others. Even when we speak of a common
interest, this is always the interest of a group—nation, class,
race, union—setting itself against other such groups.

A second conflict is that of the business man and the
scientist, the world of utility and the world of knowledge,
the practical ideal and the speculative ideal. The scientist
is not a business man, and his aim is not to make useful
discoveries but to make discoveries ; and yet it is realized
that industry and commerce are not only dependent upon
these discoveries but are their necessary outcome, and also
to a certain extent their necessary condition, in so far as the
pure scientist is supported and subsidized! by the profits
of business. Science and business are mutually dependent ;
but though they are tied together by this mutual dependence,
their ideals are in permanent conflict. A nation of traders
is generally a nation of scientists; but the two elements
disagree.

The third conflict is between business and the state. This
is a conflict of a different kind: not between a pair of
opposites which belong to the same dialectical phase of
experience, but between one phase and the next. The state
is an historical, not a scientific, conception—a concrete, not
an abstract, universal—and its deduction is to be found in
the next chapter. Business is essentially a matter of private
enterprise, individualistic, based on the principle of Jaisser
faire. It knows nothing of the concept of duty or law : its
duty is expediency, its law the law of self-preservation.
Hence the notion of state regulation is as necessarily alien


’ For science, unlike any other form of knowledge, is expensive,
and cannot be pursued except by the rich.


Urility or Abstract Ethics 175


to that of business as the notion of scientific thought to
religion. But in the one case, as in the other, the more
primitive notion generates the more advanced by its own
dialectical movement. Business men cannot in practice
treat each other as enemies and nothing but enemies: their
very existence implies a mutual understanding, a mutual
agreement mec laedere nec violart in certain more or less
determinate ways. Thus a system of law and order is
implicit in the business world itself ; and when this becomes
explicit it takes the form, as we have suggested, of the
theory of the ‘ social contract ’.

The contractual theory of society is the ethical or political
analogue of inductive logic. As the abstractive work of
science is by inductive logicians based on the notion of an
ultimate primary abstraction, the law of universal causation
or pure notion of abstraction as such, so the work of business,
which is contractual] through and through, is by this theory
based on a primary contract, the contract to make and
observe contracts. Both theories are true in the sense that
they really express, in a mythical form, the true nature of
the abstractive consciousness ; both are false through their
failure to realize that the abstract rests, not upon a further
abstraction, but upon the concrete. Science really, as we
shall see with increasing clearness, rests upon the concrete
truth of observed fact ; and business in the same way rests
upon the concrete truth of duty or law, a claim which
overrides the claim of expediency and compels the business
man to forgo profits which, from the economic point of
view, are legitimate and reasonable. The recognition of
such a claim, under the form of the so-called social contract,
heralds the breakdown of the economic view of life and the
emergence of the political or historical view, just as inductive
logic heralds the breakdown of the purely scientific view of


176 SCIENCE


thought and the emergence of explicitly historical or con-
crete thinking.

In order to concentrate the ethical and political fruits of
the scientific consciousness into a single section we have
anticipated the rise of empirical or inductive science: to
this we must now return.


§ 5. Empirical or Inductive Science


Pure deductive science breaks down because its object
turns out to be a chimera, a structure which is the structure
of nothing, a law with no instances. This breakdown is in
part historical, in part ideal only. It is ideal in the sense
that no science has ever been wholly the analysis of pure
a priori concepts. Science has explicitly claimed to be that,
and in so far as it was what it claimed to be, its breakdown
was a foregone conclusion ; even in the infancy of science
Plato saw that the ideal of thought as purely a priori implied
that the thinker had known everything from all eternity,
that is, he saw that science had to be presupposed as already
complete before it could begin. But these difficulties, like
many others, solvuntur ambulando. Science actually ad-
vanced and prospered in the hands of the Greeks, and defied
the gloomy auguries which might have been drawn from the
account given of it by its devotees. This was simply because
the account was false.

But in part the breakdown was historical. At the close
of the middle ages the scientific mind of Europe reached the
definite and positive conclusion that scientific practice was
being vitiated by an unsound theory, and this theory was
simply the a priort or deductive ideal. Scientific research
was felt to be at a dead end, blocked by an impassable wall
of dogma. This was not religious dogma but scientific dogma,
the dogma of a priori method: No doubt theology, itself


Empirical or Inductive Science 177


an example of a priort science, played its part in the main-
tenance of that dogma, but this was not because it was
specifically theology but because it was generically science
on the deductive model.

The great scientists of the Renaissance fought a battle
which ought never to be necessary again, the battle for the
recognition of facts. Observation and experiment, they
maintained, were the true sources of scientific knowledge,
and a priori reasoning was inherently barren. They achieved
in this way what may be called the coming-of-age of the
scientific consciousness, a real revolution in thought.

It is sometimes imagined that there are two kinds of
science, a priori or deductive, and empirical or inductive ;
that mathematics belongs to the former type, and the
sciences of nature to the latter. This is a distortion of the
truth. The great scientists who laid the foundations of
the empirical method were not enemies of mathematics; and
the subsequent progress of science has not left mathematics
on one side. These men were mathematicians before every-
thing, and the advance of mathematics since their day has
been one of the most brilliant triumphs in the history of
thought. It is the purely abstract or deductive ideal of
science which, as we saw, gave birth to mathematics; but
it gives nothing more. In the atmosphere of pure deduction,
mathematics cannot live a moment. It 7s pure deduction,
but it can only have concrete reality as the deductive
element in a totality of science which supplements and
reinforces it with an inductive or empirical element. Mathe-
matics is the skeleton of the body of science ; its flesh and
blood—the very digestive organs which build up the skeleton
—are empirical.

Greek science was not in point of fact purely mathematical.
It was, in its biological, astronomical, and humanistic

2792 M


178 SCIENCE


interests, richly empirical. But it was only implicitly
empirical, and failed to recognize the empirical side of its
own character. Hence, when it inquired concerning the
origin of the concepts which it studied, it mistakenly replied
that it obtained them a priori, from a source untouched by
sensuous experience. The error of this account is obvious
if we look at the actual scientific achievements of the Greeks.
Plato thought that he was in the Republic developing the
wholly a priort concept of society, but no one can fail to see
that he was really commenting on his profound experience
of Greek political life. It was only in his theory of science,
never in his actual scientific work, that he shut his eyes to
the world of facts.

Thus the battle against ‘ Aristotle’ which marked the
Renaissance was an effort to make explicit that empirical
study of fact which in Greek thought was always implicit :
always present but never recognized. The result was on
the theoretical side the substitution of inductive logic for
deductive ; on the practical side, an immense expansion and
consolidation of scientific thought, which, because freed
from the false ideal of pure deduction, could now for the
first time realize its true nature as based on the empirical
study of fact.

But the novelty of this movement must not be exagger-
ated. Science remains science still. The emergence into
explicitness of its empirical character does not make a new
thing of it. Inductive logic does not really supersede
deductive ; it stands over against it as at once a friend and
an enemy. Observation and experiment do not supersede
a priori deduction ; rather they are said to underlie and be
presupposed by it, every deductive process resting on
a previous induction. Thus the theory arose of which Mili
is the great representative, that science proceeds by an


Empirical or Inductive Science 179


alternating rhythmical process of which induction is the
first moment and deduction the second. This theory breaks
down on discovering that induction itself rests on a principle,
variously described as the uniformity of nature, the law of
universal causation, and so forth, which, just because induc-
tion rests upon it, induction is powerless to establish. Thus
the whole of induction falls to the ground because it is
found to assume that of which it is ostensibly in search.
This principle of uniformity, which induction assumes, is
also the principle which deduction assumes, namely the
existence of abstract concepts in general; for uniformity is
nothing but the abstractness of the concept, its indifference
to the variations of its own instances. Thus induction does
not overcome the fundamental abstractness of deduction
but simply reasserts it, and this fundamental assertion in
which both agree is nothing but the definition of the scientific
consciousness. Both deductive and inductive logic are
therefore developed out of the definition of science as such.
But the abstractness of science, which posits the transcend-
ence of the universal to the particular as its first principle,
leaves science face to face with the question of the hen and
the egg. If the universal and the particular are separate,
which comes first ? Do we proceed in this direction or in
that ? Such a question has no answer, for the separation
is not real and there is consequently no process in either
direction. For this very reason, no good ground can be
given for asserting the priority of either process to the other.
Therefore science is bound to maintain both at once, and
to do what it can towards sandwiching the deductive and
inductive accounts of itself in slices as thin as possible but
never actually fused together. If this fusion took place,
which is the only possible solution of the problem of logic,
science would cease to exist, for the distinction between
M 2


180 SCIENCE


induction and deduction would have vanished, and this
would imply the denial of any distinction between the process
from particular to universal and that from universal to
particular, and this again would involve the discovery that
the universal and the particular are not separate things,
but only distinct elements of a whole which even in thought
is not divisible. This recognition is the death of science as
such, because science is the assertion of the abstract concept.
Whether this concept is called, with Plato, a form and
asserted to exist by itself in a non-sensuous world of its own,
or whether, as by medieval logicians, it is called a universal
and the precise manner of its existence is matter of debate,
or whether it is called a law of nature, and asserted to be
nothing but the manner in which the world of fact is organ-
ized, makes no difference. All the schools of thought to
which I have alluded agree in the abstractness of the concept,
that is, its pure self-identity over against the variations of
its instances ; and this is the hall-mark of science. But the
differences of view to which I refer have great importance
within the history of science, as representing the gradual
recognition by science itself of the abstractness of its own
procedure. When this abstractness becomes explicit, it is
transcended: a conscious abstraction is not a real abstrac-
tion, for it implies the recognition of a concrete truth
underlying the abstraction itself. The discovery of the
abstractness of science is, as we shall see, the birth of
history. j
§ 6. Science as Supposal
The modern world has with a curious unanimity changed


its mind as to the nature of science almost within living


memory.
In the middle of the nineteenth century it was believed


Science as Supposal 181


that science was the discovery of the laws of nature; that
is to say, the determination of the structure actually sub-
sisting in the world of facts. A generation ago, or more,
this opinion began to collapse ; not owing to the attacks
of persons hostile to the pursuit of science, if such persons
existed, but owing to the reflection upon their own work of
scientists themselves, who began to form the belief that
their scientific labours were directed to the attainment not
of truth but of something else. On the whole, this movement
received little or no encouragement from professional
philosophers, who were inclined to suggest that these
scientists should mind their own business instead of dabbling
in subjects of which they were ignorant; but even the
philosophers showed the cloven hoof in the form of a dis-
position to attack the sciences of formal logic and psychology.
But this attack, though certainly directed to showing that
logic and psychology were not true, made no attempt to
describe them except, negatively, as errors ; and the interest
of the new movement of thought among the scientists lay
in the fact that it aimed at giving a positive description of
science.

The results of this movement are well known to every one,
as indeed they deserve to be. On the one hand we have
a school which maintains that the object of science is not
the real but the possible, or that science is essentially
hypothesis; and on the other hand we have, in all its
variations and ramifications, the doctrine that science is not
true but useful.

The whole point of this critical movement—by far the
most important intellectual movement of the last half-
century—is lost if it is taken for a revival of abstract
scepticism. It is not a revolt against thought as such but
against the specific form which thought presents as science,


182 S.GCLEN GE


and this we know by now to be the abstract concept. No-
thing can be a more damning sign of philosophical obtuseness
than to regard it as an attack on the validity of knowledge
in general. It is an attempt to show, not that knowledge
in general is impossible, but that science is not knowledge.

In the form of scientific pragmatism or the economic
theory of the concept it need not delay us. This theory is
true, but it contains a tautology born of misunderstanding.
Science is useful, there is no denying it; but what is utility °
We have already seen that utility is action looked at through
the spectacles of the scientific consciousness. It is only the
fundamental abstractness of science that gives rise to the
very notion of utility; and therefore, though science can
truly be described as that point of view from which all
action, and therefore all thought, is utility, this is no better
as a definition than the statement that moles are what make
mole-hills. Such definitions are not to be despised, but they
do not go far enough.

On the other hand, one may go farther and fare worse.
If one first adopts the econemic theory of the concept and
then forgets that one has been analysing the abstract con-
cept of science, and jumps to the conclusion that the
analysis applies to knowledge in general, one becomes
a pragmatist. Yet even in this disaster all is not lost, for
the very babblings of pragmatism have a kind of method
in them, resulting from a confused attempt to overcome the
dualism of thought and action.

The movement under discussion reaches a more important,
because less tautological, position when it describes science
as hypothesis. This view, in fact, seems to be what is really
meant by those who describe science as the useful ; and it
is explicitly maintained by a very large number of eminent
people. It is, roughly, as follows.


Science as Supposal 183


Science asserts, not the actual truth, but what would be
true if something were true which is laid down as an hypo-
thesis. It asserts, never that S is P, but that if there were
an S it would be P. Its procedure therefore consists, first,
in making an assumption, secondly in deducing the conse-
quences of that assumption. Throughout this process it
never makes an assertion, in the sense of a categorical
judgement, at all. Its judgements are hypothetical from
beginning to end. The geometrician, for instance, has no
need to answer the question ‘ Are there any triangles ? ’
It is enough for him, till he turns metaphysician, to say
what would happen if there were. He need not even ask
the question ‘Does Euclidean space exist?’ but is free to
discuss the purely hypothetical implications of that or any
other kind of space. Science is a pure tissue of implications,
none of which are asserted as facts. The scientist may frame
any hypothesis he likes; the freedom of untrammelled
supposal is his; he must merely suppose something, and
then work out the consequences—all equally matter of
supposal, never of assertion—which it entails.

This theory of science as fundamentally an act of supposal
or hypothesis is not new: it was held by Plato; and we do
not propose to reject it. On the contrary, we regard it as
expressing an important truth about the scientific conscious-
ness. But it contains implications which did not indeed
altogether escape Plato, but are sometimes overlooked by
its modern supporters. A tissue of hypotheses cannot be
a self-contained and autonomous organism, for hypothesis
as such refers beyond itself, and is relative to something
which is not hypothetical but categorical.

Science therefore, as non-assertive hypothesis, can only
exist upon a background which is not hypothetical, not
therefore scientific, but assertive. We recognize this


184 SCIENCE


empirically when we say that some fact or other must
suggest the hypothesis from which we begin. There need
not be any triangles, but there must be things which set us
thinking about triangles, which remind us, as Plato says,
of triangularity. But our principle does not depend on
these empirical facts. If any one is so ignorant as to think
that he can frame hypotheses having no relation whatever
to his actual experience, so oblivious of the principles laid
down by the Renaissance scientists as to suppose that
observation and experiment, study of concrete fact, are not
necessary preliminaries of even the most abstract mathe-
matical hypotheses, he may be reminded that any hypothesis
presupposes at least one fact, namely our own freedom and
competence to frame hypotheses in general. You cannot
simply suppose that you are free to suppose; you must
assert that you are both free to suppose, and actually
supposing. The Euclidean geometrician supposes the
existence of Euclidean space, but he does not suppose that
he supposes it ; he knows that he supposes it ; his own act
of forming an hypothesis is for him an historical fact. This
act of framing hypotheses is simply the self-determination
of the mind in the form of the scientific consciousness; and
therefore the mind which so determines itself is, in that self-
determination, not acting scientifically, that is, framing
hypotheses, but categorically asserting a concrete fact.

This is recognized clearly enough by those current theories
of science which base it upon mathematical logic. A scientific
statement is never asserted as true without qualification, but
only as true subject to the given hypothesis. But all
scientific statements whatever have a common methodology,
of which an account is given by formal logic. The statements
made by formal logic are true of every possible object, no
matter what it is, that is to say, irrespective of any given


Science as Supposal 185


hypothesis. And formal logic as the theory of abstraction
is identical with mathematics, so that mathematics also is
true without qualification of the entire world, actual and
possible. Thus logic or mathematics, which is the basis and
presupposition of all scientific hypotheses, is not itself
hypothetical but a true account of the real structure of
reality.

Thus mathematical or formal logic emerges in response
to the demand for a non-hypothetical basis for the hypotheses
of empirical science. And because science as such is hypo-
thetical, mathematical logic, which is categorically true of
every possible object, is supra-scientific or philosophical,
and mathematics is declared to be the solution of the
problems of philosophy.

But we know already that this is an illusion. Mathematics
is nothing but the assertion of the abstract concept, and it
can give us no account of the presuppositions of this assertion.
Mathematical logic is only the shadow of science itself. It
is the truth, but the truth about nothing : it is the description
of the structure of anull class. Hence, though the hypotheses
of empirical science must have some kind of categorical basis,
they cannot find this in mathematics, which is the very
distilled essence of hypothesis itself. The abstract cannot
rest upon the more abstract, but only on the concrete.

This concrete basis of all scientific abstraction is something
which science itself never grasps, namely individual or
historical fact. The triumph of the Renaissance scientists
lay in bringing this implicit presupposition to light, in
discovering that science was an abstraction from the concrete
reality of history. Empirical science recognizes itself as
being what all science really is, a compressed and simplified
account of facts, and fact itself therefore permanently
eludes the grasp of science, as is indeed taught by the


186 S:cTEN CB


logical doctrine that the individual is indefinable. ‘ Scien-
tific fact’ is a phrase which aptly illustrates this; for
scientific fact is a fact purged of its crude and scientifically
scandalous concreteness, isolated from its historical setting
and reduced to the status of a mere instance of arule. It is
a fact which has been turned from an individual into a
particular. The facts with which empirical science concerns
itself are facts thus de-individualized, de-factualized, and
this is what distinguishes the sense in which even the most
empirical science uses the word ‘ fact’ from the sense it
bears in history.

Science is explicitly supposal. But supposal itself, as we
saw when discussing art, is identical with questioning, which
is the cutting edge of the mind, an activity not self-contained
or independent, but implying behind it a body of information
or assertion. This body science possesses in the form of
history. It is only, as every scientist knows, the actual
possession of an ordered body of facts that enables him to
frame those hypotheses which are the essence of the scientific
life, and these facts, as actually ascertained by observation
and experiment, are matter of history. But it is the facts
that are true; the scientific simplification of them into
instances of laws, abstract particulars of abstract concepts,
is not true but arbitrary, useful no doubt, but useful pre-
cisely because it is not asserted as true but merely entertained
in the form of a question.

Science is the question whose answer is history. To ask
that question implies that history is already in existence ;
and thus we get a process of history—science—history.
But history on its first appearance is implicit; it is not
known for what it is, and is indeed despised as the mere
world of empirical or sensuous reality. It is only when it
has been distilled into terms of science and then restored to


Science as Supposal 187


itself in the form of concepts or laws that it is recognized
for what it really is.

The scientific attitude, then, is one of two things. Either
it is the mere name for a questioning attitude which forms
the cutting edge of history, or else it is the name of a whole
activity which is a false abstraction, a philosophical error.
The scientist thinks he is working at a world of pure con-
cepts. He is not; such a world is a metaphysical mon-
strosity, and the methods by which he says he works at it
are logical absurdities. He is really working at the deter-
mination and elucidation of historical facts, and if he calls
himself a scientist instead of an historian that is only because
he is in error as to the nature of his work. Of course that
error, like all such errors, reacts on the work itself, and goes
some way to destroying its value and substituting for the
intelligent determination of historical fact the arbitrary
shuffling of fictitious entities; but this transformation is
at most partial, and at bottom the scientist is always, in
spite of himself, an historian and engaged in the study of
actual fact.

That he is so engaged he can hardly help, sooner or later,
discovering. And this discovery, begun at the Renaissance,
seems now to be coming to a head. The great scientific
discoveries of the nineteenth century are peculiarly instruc-
tive in this respect. During that period a large number of
sciences openly restated their problems in terms of history,
and by that very act achieved answers to them far sur-
passing in depth all earlier achievements. Now that
astronomy has realized that its proper task is to explore
the history of the stellar universe, now that geology and
geography have united to study the history of the earth,
now that biology has realized that the problem of species
is the problem of the origin of species, the time is


188 SCIENCE


surely at hand when science will feel the need of absorbing
itself bodily in history, re-shaping its problems throughout
in historical terms, and resolving scientific method into
historical method. This process is unmistakably going on
round us, and nothing but the downfall of civilization can
stop it.


§ 7. Science as the Intutive Form of Thought


The paradox of science may be expressed by calling it
intuitive thought. Intuition is the questioning, immediate
side of experience: thought is the asserting, explanatory
side. Science is explicit to itself as thought, but it turns
out on inquiry to be identical with the questioning activity ;
that is, it realizes the contradiction of a type of thought
which is not thought precisely because it is thought’s
opposite, intuition.

Here again, as on p. 95, we must bear in mind that the
division of experience into intuition and thought, as we find
that division in the forefront of all philosophy from Plato
to Kant, is a fiction. Intuition and thought are not two
separate activities which are somehow united in the body
of human experience. Experience is an indivisible whole
in which two sides can always be distinguished : an imme-
diate, intuitive or questioning side, which is hypostatized
by abstract psychology into the faculty of sensation, and
a mediating, reflective, logical or assertive side, which is
called thought. Thought is the one, sensation the many.
What characterizes the intuitive or sensuous side of experi-
ence is just its manyness or perpetual difference from itself,
flux, novelty or creation. What characterizes the logical
or reflective side is its self-identity, permanence, unity.
Now we have already seen that science consists in the
separation of these two distinct elements, and the attribution


The Intuitive Form of Thought 189


of reality to thought while denying it to sensation. But
division as such is the characteristic of sensation as opposed
to thought : thought unifies what sensation divides. There-
fore any given thing which is made the field of an unrecon-
ciled division is thereby placed under the head of sensation,
for the characteristic unity of thought has been denied to it.
If experience as a whole is now divided into two separate
parts, thought and sense, it becomes by this very definition
wholly sensuous, and each part of it is a sensuous, not an
intelligible, object.

Thus the attempt of science to achieve pure thought
frustrates itself, because the very cleavage of thought from
sense de-rationalizes thought and turns it into a sensuous
object. It is called thought still, but it is intuition.

This argument is more familiar, though more superficial,
when stated in terms of logic. The universal has its very
life and being in its particulars, of whose multiplicity it is
the unity. If now it is disentangled from those particulars
and set apart by itself, it becomes not their universal but
another particular object, thus losing precisely its intelligi-
bility (universality) and becoming an object of mere intuition,
a thing that we no longer think but only imagine.

It is this falling-back upon intuition that constitutes the
irrationality, the arbitrariness, of all science. The assump-
tions made by science cannot be justified under criticism ;
their only justification is the frankly irrational fiat of the
scientist’s will. The concept is for him an abstraction, that
is to say hypostatized into a thing, reified ; hence it cannot
be explained or thought, it can only be intuited, and this
intuitive attitude towards a concept is what is meant by
assumption in science. To ask the scientist to justify his
assumptions is to treat science as if it were wholly rational,
to forget that it is essentially thought falling back into the


Igo SCIENCE


immediacy of intuition. This immediacy is not identical
with the immediacy of religious vision ; it is not faith; for
the religious immediacy is the genuine immediacy of imagina-
tion; the immediacy of science is the false immediacy of
thought, which is trying not to be immediate, so that its
immediacy is the mark of its failure. Science feels that it
ought to be able to justify its assumptions; religion never
feels that it ought to be able to prove the existence of God.
That is the feeling of theology, which is not religion but
science.

The immediacy into which science collapses marks its
failure to achieve the infinity of thought. Science has a
great deal to say about the infinite, but what is by science
called the infinite is precisely the finite. It is called the
infinite because that is what it is meant to be ; it is meant
to be the object of thought, and the object of thought is as
such the infinite. But when the object of thought is set
side by side with and separated from the object of sensation,
this very separation delimits it, makes it finite, because it
places something else outside it. That which is other than
the finite can only be a second finite, however loudly it is
called the infinite. And in point of fact what science calls
infinity is nothing but indefiniteness, ambiguity in definition.

In its intuitive character, science shows certain affinities
with the life of intuition par excellence, namely art. This is
recognized by those who speak of the scientific imagination ;
and the way in which science merely supposes instead of
asserting its concepts is parallel to the way in which art
merely supposes its imagery, instead of, like religion,
asserting it as real.

Now the characteristic outcome of supposal is pluralism.
We saw that, just because the work of art is merely supposed,
the world of art was a pluralistic or monadic world, consisting


The Intuitive Form of Thought 191


of an indefinite number of works of art all ostensibly inde-
pendent of one another and having no such structure as
would make them into a single coherent world. This
individualism of art, this absence of social or historical
structure, is in point of fact tempered by the existence, even
in art, of implicit thought ; but this implicit thought, though
it enables the observer to see some general plan in art-
history as a whole, remains hidden from the artist as such.
Science shares the pluralism of art. Scientists are notoriously
careless of the history of their own sciences, and this is
inevitable and the strict consequence of the scientific point
of view. Science always believes that it has just discovered
the ultimate truth and that all past ages have been sunk in
a fog of ignorance and superstition. It has no sense of its
solidarity with and debt to its own past and other forms of
consciousness. And further, it is as impossible to classify
sciences and reduce them to a single ordered cosmos of
thought as it is to do the same with works of art.

The attempt has been made over and over again to reduce
all the sciences to such an ordered whole. It seems obvious
that there must be a table or hierarchy of sciences in which
each has its proper place; and so there would, if science
were the rational activity it believes itself to be. If there
really were a Platonic world of pure concepts, in which
every concept was dovetailed into the rest, each having
a science to expound its nature, then there would be a
corresponding world of sciences. But, as Plato himself saw
to his dismay, there are concepts of mud and filth and any-
thing one likes to name, and these can never fit into a place
in the world of absolute being. The concepts of science are
abstract and therefore arbitrary, and because any one may
make any abstraction he likes, there cannot possibly be
a system or world of the sciences.


192 SCIENCE


But because the immediacy of science is the immediacy not
of imagination—immediacy embraced and welcomed as
such—but the immediacy of thought, an immediacy felt to
be discreditable, an arbitrariness that cannot acquiesce in
itself, it follows that science cannot, like art, accept this
result with complacency. Science is trying to be thought,
and thought is unity or system, and science cannot give up
the attempt to co-ordinate itself without giving up the claim
to be thought. Hence the production of schemes for the
classification of sciences is bound to continue as long as
science continues to resist its own absorption in history.
For, it is plausibly argued, the abstract concept organizes
the world of particulars. But how is the world of concepts
organized ? Presumably it too has an organization, and the
discovery of this organization is the task of the science
which studies the classification of the sciences. But in
point of fact the members of a class are not universals but
particulars: there cannot be a class of classes, a universal
of universals, because it would be one of its own members,
being itself an example of a class. Hence even to discuss
the problem of the classification of the sciences is to fall
into the pit of hypostatization, or rather to reveal the fact
that one is already wallowing in that pit. Every science,
while it is being pursued, involves the belief that its concept
is the one and only concept in existence. To pursue one
science means at least forgetting, and in the last resort
denying, all the others, with the solitary exception of
mathematics, which forms the indispensable skeleton of all
scientific work because it expresses nothing but the abstract
nature of science in general. But the content in which this
mathematical form is embodied in this or that science
is ‘contingent’ and cannot be reduced to system, just
because the form is by definition an abstract universal or


The Intuitive Form of Thought 193


one to which the variations of its own particulars are
irrelevant.

But though the world of science as a whole, the world in
which every science has a place of its own, is a world which
science itself can never grasp, there is such a world. The
concrete unity of all works of art is not itself a work of art,
but the history of art ; and the artist as such is not concerned
with this history. In the same way, the unity of all the
sciences is not itself a scientific unity, a conceptual scheme,
but an historical unity. The history of science can show how
the various sciences have grown up one out of another, and
can make intelligible their inter-relations. Here again,
history solves the question which science asks but cannot
answer: the unity of history at once annuls and makes
intelligible the pluralism of science.

It is easy, in comparison with the wealth and profundity
of religion, to despise science for its abstractness, its air of
playing futile games with the small change of thought, its
innocent certainty of its own success in plumbing the secrets
of the universe. Comparing itself with science, religion is
not often tempted to exchange vocations. It feels as an
aged and illiterate peasant, rich in the varied knowledge of
the countryside and rooted in the soil of an immemorial
tradition, feels towards a saucy town lad fresh from the
board school. The treasures of religion are so vast and their
power over mankind so incalculable that to exchange them
for science would seem a worse bargain than Glaucus’s
exchange of armour. But the movement from religion to
science is not really a downward movement, and the reverse
movement is not really a gain. The wealth of religion is
a pearl of great price hidden in a field ; it is wheat growing
among tares. You cannot have the glory and comfort of
religion without its superstition, its magic, its brutal hatreds


2794 N


194 SCIENCE


and slavish fears. In the highest and sternest religions these
elements are kept in check, but no more. They are always
present at the back of the mind, always ready to break out
and devastate human life. Religion is always looking
forward to the day when it shall be set free from this body
of death which, as its own shadow, it perpetually carries
withit. That freedom is nothing but the self-revelation of
thought, the discovery by the mind of its own nature as
a thinking mind.

However abstract and barren may be the first-fruits of
this discovery, the discovery itself is an incalculable advance
in the history of man. As art and religion lift man above the
level of the beasts, science lifts the civilized man above the
level of the savage. The material utility of science, its
service in feeding and clothing and sheltering us, carrying
us from place to place and providing us with comforts, is
the least part of its importance. Its real gift is simply the
end of dreaming and the promise of a waking life. It sweeps
aside with a ruthless hand all mythology, all symbols that
are heavy with unrealized meanings and dark with the
terrors of dreamland, and bids the mind face the world’s
mystery armed with nothing but its five senses and the sling
of its wit. What that means, no one knows who has not long
and carefully weighed the debt which he owes to the scientific
consciousness. But when that is done, he will hardly shrink
from praising the founders of science for the gift of spiritual
freedom even in the words of the ancient poet :

Felix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas,


Atque metus omnes et inexorabile fatum
Subiecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari.


Understanding and Reason 195


§ 8. Understanding and Reason


The history of European philosophy from Greece to the
eighteenth century is the history of the self-consciousness
of the scientific spirit. The logic, the metaphysics, the
psychology of this great movement are first and foremost
an analysis of the scientific consciousness, which includes as
no small part of itself the theological consciousness. But
what is for our purpose more important, these studies have
actually been carried out from the point of view of the
scientific consciousness itself; they are properly not philo-
sophies but ‘ philosophical sciences’, a contradiction in
terms which signifies that they are fundamentally science,
but science turned upon itself, scientia scientiarum, the
scientific theory of science. Formal logic, whether in its
scholastic or mathematical form, is not only reflection upon
thought in the special sense of scientific thought, but in the
special sense of scientific reflection; and this is the fact
which divides formal logic from that dialectical logic whose
point of view is the point of view not of science but of
philosophy, and whose object is not the abstract thought
of science but the concrete thought of history and phi-
losophy. Hence all the embarrassments by which science
is beset equally affect that so-called philosophy which is only
science of the second degree.

To this we shall return in a later chapter. At present
we are concerned to point out that the revolt against formal
logic and psychology and metaphysics, and the revolt against
science, are the same thing ; and that this revolt is summed
up in the antithesis of understanding and reason.

Understanding is abstract thought, the ‘ faculty of con-
cepts’, thought spontaneously originating concepts or cate-
gories out of itself with no assistance from the world of

N 2


196 SCIENCE


fact. This is the Kantian and true account of under-
standing. The two false accounts are the Platonic, which
claims that these concepts are self-subsistent entities, free
universals, and the Baconian, which claims that they are
the actual structure of the world of fact and discovered by
the mind embedded in that world. Both these accounts
break down by overlooking the fact that because in either
case the concept, to be found, must be sought, therefore
the act of seeking it is the assertion of its existence, an
assertion proceeding from no source at all except the arbi-
trary act of the mind. The Platonist or the Baconian
imagines his forms to be realities because he overlooks the
original act of abstraction by which he has severed the
universal from its particulars. It is not the universal in
its true actuality, the universal living in its particulars, that
is the object of understanding, but the universal torn apart
from its particulars and converted into a closed and abstract
formula. Of this abstract formula as such, the original act
of abstraction is the irresponsible and arbitrary creator.

Reason is concrete thought, thought which does not
arbitrarily create to itself, by abstraction, any object it
pleases for the sake of ease in thinking it, but sets out to
study facts as they are, and to conceive a universal which
is truly the universal of its own particulars. Hence reason
thinks the concrete universal, not the bare self-identity of
science which leaves all difference outside itself, but the
identity to which difference is organic and essential. Under-
standing hypostatizes the concept into an object of intuition
by itself, outside its own particulars; and this object is
nothing real, but simply the fruit of an error. Reason finds
the concept in the particulars, forming with them an
inseparable unity.

The characteristic of reason is the unity of universal and


Understanding and Reason 197


particular, or in general the unity of opposites. The con-
crete reality of any one opposite is its union with the other ;
not a bare indistinguishable identity but a union in which
the two sides can be distinguished but not separated. The
identity, in the sense of an indistinguishable identity, of
opposites is not the principle of reason but a disease, endemic
and mortal, of understanding. From the violent and arbi-
trary separation of two opposites, the assertion that A shall
be only A and not-A only not-A, it necessarily results that
A, now falsely asserted as a self-subsistent concrete reality,
generates a not-A within itself and the not-A conversely
generates an A. Thus each of the terms, A and not-A,
produces its own opposite, and when that has happened
they cannot be any longer distinguished. This is the
coincidentia oppositorum which always dogs the footsteps of
abstract or scientific thinking. Matter and mind, affirma-
tion and negation, good and evil, truth and falsehood,
universal and particular, are no sooner resolutely separated
than they turn into each other. Hold up a stick, and
distinguish its top and bottom: there you have a concrete
synthesis of opposites in an individual whole. Take a knife
and cut it in two in the middle, into a top half and a bottom
half. You have now separated the opposites. But the
instant the separation is complete, the top half has its own
bottom and the bottom half its own top. The top half is
no longer simply a top and the bottom half no longer simply
a bottom; each is at once a top and a bottom, and there-
fore, considered in terms of top and bottom, each is indis-
tinguishable from the other. Your opposites have now
coincided. Abstract thought fends off the coincidentia
oppositorum by deliberately ignoring the bottom of the top
half and the top of the bottom half, and in defiance of facts
simply (that is, abstractly and falsely) calling the one half


198 SCIENCE


all top and the other half all bottom. Thus ‘ the universal ’
as such is a particular universal, and ‘the particular’ as
such is nothing but the universal of particularity; but
formal logic conceals this fact and makes its very living by
the pretence that it has not hypostatized (particularized)
the universal.

The antithesis of understanding and reason, or abstract
and concrete thinking, is the antithesis of science and
history. There is a certain temptation to regard under-
standing and reason as coexistent ‘ faculties of the mind’
or activities which can be alternately pursued without self-
contradiction ; and a psychology which prides itself on not
speaking of faculties adopts the same point of view when
it devotes separate treatments to scientific and historical
experience and fits them both into its theory of experience
as a whole.

But the separation of understanding from reason is itself
an act of understanding, which reason is bound to repudiate ;
it is just another example of that passion for separating
which is the peculiar vice of scientific thought. Separate
understanding from reason, and you very soon find yourself
landed in a coincidentia oppositorum in which you cannot
tell one from the other. Reason, concrete thinking, repu-
diates the abstraction and recognizes understanding as
identical with itself, in the sense of being one necessary
element in itself. Understanding as such, the scientific
consciousness, is committed by its original error to denying
its own identity with history ; but history is just the free-
dom of thought from that error, and therefore history sees
itself as science and yet more than science, sees itself as
a concrete whole of which science is one end, one pole or
moment.

From no point of view, therefore, can science and history


Understanding and Reason 199


be regarded as coexistent and equally rational or defensible
manifestations of thought. From the strictly scientific point
of view science is the only form of thought, and history
does not exist at all. From the historical point of view
science does indeed exist, but only as an element within
the body of history itself, as a mere weapon or tool of
historical thinking. The quarrel between history and science
is whether generalization is a means to knowledge or know-
ledge itself. In this quarrel philosophy is so far neutral
that the issue can and must be fought out on the ground
of science and history, which will both refuse, and rightly,
to have it settled by a third party ; but in one sense philo-
sophy cannot be neutral, because the very existence of
philosophy depends on history’s winning the battle. Just
as the defeat of science by religion would enthrone an
obscurantism in which thought was deposed by faith and
philosophy therefore destroyed unborn, so the defeat of
history by science would condemn thought to the arbitrary
irrationality of the abstract concept, and philosophy—
rational knowledge—would be pronounced in advance an
impossibility. For the greatest discovery that thought has
made since the time of Plato is that the way to philosophy
from science lies through history. This discovery, which is
the key-note of the Christian attitude towards the problem
of knowledge, was implicit from the first in the Christian
gospel as a philosophy of history, and has been becoming
progressively explicit ever since Descartes, in his cogito ergo
sum, laid down that historical fact was the absolute object
of knowledge.

The discussions concerning understanding and reason,
their distinction and relative nature, which play so large
a part in the philosophy of a century ago and more, repre-
sent the climax in this process ; for they express an attempt,


200 SCIENCE


often concealed in the mythological imagery of a faculty-
psychology, to distinguish the scientific from the historical
form of experience and to grasp the relation between them
as one of no mere difference, but as a dialectical distinction
in which one tries to be what the other is, one implies what
the other expresses, one questions where the other answers,
one overlooks what the other recognizes; and of which
therefore the more primitive is absorbed without residue in
the more advanced.


VI
HISTORY


§ 1. History as the Assertion of Fact


WHEN a mind that is in error discovers that it is in error,
the error is conquered and truth is implicitly reached. The
error of science is its abstractness; and therefore the dis-
covery by science of its own abstractness is the correction
of that abstractness and the revelation of the concrete
object. We saw that in its first or a priori phase science
did not know that it was abstract ; it believed itself to be
the apprehension of a real object in which, so to speak, its
own abstractness was already embodied, so that the abstract-
ness in question belonged not to thought but to its object.
But this separately existing universal, as an abstract entity,
was seen to be a contradiction in terms, and science recog-
nized itself as the author of its own abstraction, imposing
its abstractness upon a world which was in reality a world
of concrete facts.

This discovery, foreshadowed by Plato when he spoke of
the hypotheses on which the sciences depend, and by
Aristotle when he spoke of science as proceeding by abstrac-
tion, remained for centuries a half-realized truth, never
firmly faced or clearly stated. Neither Plato nor Aristotle,
still less their successors, recognized its consequences. In
the middle ages it was the mainspring of the debate between
nominalism and realism; but its first real fruit was, as we
have seen, the experimental method of the Renaissance
scientists. Experiment means the recognition of fact, and
experimental science means the assertion of fact, even if


202 History


only mutilated fact, as the true presupposition of scientific
thought.

When the Renaissance scientists reflected on their own
work and saw into its presuppositions, they realized what
the ancients never realized, that the hypotheses or abstrac-
tions of science rested on the knowledge of fact. In their
discussions of scientific method they made this very clear ;
but the profoundest statement of it, and therefore the most
misunderstood, was that of Descartes. All science, said
Descartes, rests upon the one indubitable certainty that
I think and that therefore I exist. Now the thought and
existence of which Descartes spoke were not abstractions—
anything thinking anything, or anything somehow getting
itself thought about—as those wiseacres believe who offer
to emend his formula to cogitatur ergo est, or cogitare ergo
esse or the like. Descartes meant what he said ; and what
he said was that the concrete historical fact, the fact of my
actual present awareness, was the root of science. He was
only going one step beyond Bacon, for whom the root of
science was natural fact: Descartes, more profoundly, saw
that before natural fact can be of any use to the scientist
he must observe it, and that the fact of his observing it is
the fact that really matters. Science presupposes history
and can never go behind history: that is the discovery of
which Descartes’ formula is the deepest and most fruitful
expression.

This discovery implicitly resolves science into history.
I say implicitly, because at first it is regarded only as
a revolution within science itself. Empirical science, science
recognizing its debt to facts, does not at once cease to be
science and become history. Before that happens, empirical
science must pass through a complete dialectic of its own,
in which the conflict between its own abstractness and the


History as the Assertion of Fact 203


concreteness of the facts upon which it rests is resolved.
The origin of history at the Renaissance is therefore only
an implicit origin. Fact is discovered, but its nature is
distorted to bring it into harmony with the abstractness of
science. The empirical scientist respects fact, but it is
a peculiar kind of fact that he respects; it is fact not as
it grows, tangled up in the undergrowth of the everyday
world, but fact passed through the sieve of his own abstract
methods, fact refined and expurgated, the fact of the
laboratory. Hence, though the Renaissance scientists did
discover the world of facts and to that extent overcame the
abstractness of science, the first result of their discovery
was, as we have seen, not real history but ‘ natural history ’,
a pseudo-history in which historical fact itself became
abstract and artificial; the mere abstract instance of
abstract law ; particular, not individual.

But this fault corrected itself in time. Once it was
recognized that science owed a debt to history, once it was
recognized that no scientist could afford, except in joke, to
say tant pis pour les faits, the deeper and deeper recognition
of the extent of this debt followed as a natural consequence,
and the triumphs which have attended the history of science
since the Renaissance have gone hand in hand with the
progressive shifting of its burdens on to the shoulder of
history.

The form of thought which we call specifically history
came to its maturity in the course of this process. History
in the special sense of the word came into being in the
eighteenth century and shot up to a gigantic stature in the
nineteenth. It is an absolutely new movement in the life
of mankind. In the sense in which Gibbon and Mommsen
were historians, there was no such thing as an historian
before the eighteenth century. There were rerum gestarum


204 Hirsromw


scriptores, annalists and compilers of memoirs; but the gulf
between a Thucydides and a Gibbon is not a mere difference
of degree between the historian of a short period and the
historian of along. It is the difference between the recorder
of those facts which happen to be directly visible from his
own empirical situation in history, and the thinker who,
defying the empirical limitations of time and place, claims
for himself, in principle, the power to recount the whole
infinite history of the universe ; restricting himself to this
part of it or that not because he happens to be planted
there, but because it is his own good pleasure so to restrict
himself. Even the slenderest monograph written from this
point of view outweighs, as an achievement of the spirit,
the whole output of the rerum gestarum scriptores ; its
writer may be a narrow and pedantic specialist, but he has
nailed his colours to the mast as a spectator of all time and
all existence.

But even behind the activity of the annalist there is an
ultimate form of historical thought which is the most rudi-
mentary of all. This is perception. The concept of per-
ception, like that of a fact, is modern; the Greeks had no
name for it, or rather they called it by a name which showed
a misconception of its nature, namely, sensation. Sensation
is the false or abstract account of perception. In perception
we are immediately aware of our object, which is a concrete
and therefore historical fact: perception and history are
thus identical. But the immediacy of perception does not
exclude mediation, it is not abstract immediacy (sensation)
but implicitly contains an element of mediation (thought).
When we say that we perceive something, we mean thereby
to assert that we are not thinking ; but this assertion is an
error, and the analysis of perception reveals inevitably the
presence of thought. A group of officers, at manceuvres on


FTistory as the Assertion of Fact 205


a misty day, perceives a moving body on a hill, and some
of the officers immediately identify it as a body of troops ;
perceive it, they would say, to be such a body. A more
skilled and careful observer, watching the movements of its
individuals, correctly identifies it as a flock of sheep. Both
identifications are described as perceptions, and so they are ;
to argue that they are erroneously thought to be percep-
tions would be to escape Scylla by falling into Charybdis,
for it would be an admission that something exists which
though not purely immediate (as perception is claimed to
be) is mistaken for something purely immediate; that is,
it admits what we wish here to assert, the existence of implicit
mediation. Perception is explicitly immediate, but it always
contains within itself mediation (thought, ‘ interpretation
of sense-data ’, ‘ inference from the immediately given’, or
whatever one likes to call it) and is therefore never abstract
immediacy. This fact is denied by those who speak of
thought as based upon the ‘ immediately given in percep-
tion ’, but their denial of it, though self-contradictory—for
given is only an obscure paraphrase for asserted (by thought)
as real—is so far correct that the thought contained in
perception is not explicit to the perceiving mind as thought.
There is no such thing as the sense-datum of psychological
mythology ; what is so described is either a false abstraction
or the object of perception, historical fact.

History is thus, as a specific form of experience, identical
with perception. But this may seem paradoxical, because
perception appears to be the very humblest and most
ordinary of cognitive activities, and we are claiming for
history a very high and important place in the life of the
mind, a place above science, far above religion, immensely
above art, whereas perception is something that precedes

1 Baden-Powell, Aids to Scouting.


206 History


and underlies all these and is in fact the very bread and
water of our spiritual diet.

We must accept the paradox, but with reservations. Our
dialectical series of forms of experience moves in a sense
forward, in a sense backward. We do not begin with the
lowest and simplest reality and make this develop into
higher and more complex forms. To attempt the logical
evolution of the complex out of the simple, the higher forms
out of the lower, is exactly the error of the ‘ synthetic
philosophy’ of Herbert Spencer, which owes its being to
a failure to understand the nature of a dialectical process.
A dialectical series means a series of terms, each one of
which is an erroneous description of the next. In a dia-
lectical series A B C, the truth is C; Bisa distorted account
of it, and A is a distorted account of B. Now if C represents
the true nature of a mind, B is a mistake—partial of course ;
no mistake is a mere mistake—which C makes about itself,
This mistake will recoil on C’s own nature, for a mind which
makes mistakes about its own nature will find its conduct,
which is its nature, affected by these mistakes. Its nature
will not be so far altered as to coincide with the false con-
ception, but it will be disturbed by that conception.! Thus
we get B, what the mind now thinks it is, and C,, what it
actually is. The next downward step will be to fail even to
get the notion B coherent, to distort and degrade it into A.
This still further lapse from truth in the self-knowledge of
the mind C is now an error of the second degree, and there-
fore reacts in the second degree on the conduct and nature
of the mind. It no longer therefore behaves as C, but as


1 A person may think he is a poached egg ; that will not make him
one: but it will affect his conduct, and for the worse. So a person
may think he is pure imagination: he can’t be pure imagination,
for there is no such thing: but he can and will be an artist.


fTistory as the Assertion of Fact 207


B,, which is equivalent to C,. In a sense we may say that
it still is C, though it does not know it; but because its
self-ignorance affects its conduct, to call it C is misleading,
for it does not behave like C but like C,.

In such a condition the only sound way of describing the
mind is to state the case in full, thus: Implicitly it is C.
But it is trying to conceive itself as B, although really there
is no such thing as B; and even this error it has further
confused, so that it now thinks of itself as A. Its true
nature C, overlaid by the successive misconceptions B and
A, comes out in the form C,. It is, if we like so to dis-
tinguish, explicitly A, actually C,, at bottom or ultimately
C. If Cis the historical experience, and A pure imagination,
a mind which calls itself an artist will still be historical at
bottom, but this historical nature will be so affected by the
description of itself as aesthetic, that even to the dis-
passionate observer it does not appear as pure or unqualified
history. When such a mind discovers its own true nature
the distortion in that nature due to error will disappear.

It follows that a mind which is ignorant of its true nature
does not in the fullest sense possess this nature. The true
nature of the mind does not exist ready-made somewhere
in the depths of the mind, waiting to be discovered. Till
it is discovered it does not exist ; but yet it does exist in
a confused and distorted form, since the errors made about
it are only partial errors, and the dialectical task of bringing
it into existence or coming to know it (the two are the
same) is simply the clearing up of these confusions, which
appear as inconsistencies, conflicts between what, at a given
stage, the mind finds itself to be and what it feels it ought
to be.

Hence all art, religion, and science rest on perception or
history, as the earlier terms of any dialectical series on the


208 History


later. But the extraordinary powers of history, the kind
of intellectual feats that can be performed by a Grote or
a Gibbon, though they are an essential part of the historical
life, are actually acquired by this life only when it recognizes
itself as historical. The less clearly it so recognizes itself,
the more these powers are obscured and lost. Nor is this
a mere matter of degree. The terms of a dialectical series
are not related to one another in terms of degree,! but by
the assertion in each term of something which in the previous
term was wrongly denied.

Now the historical consciousness asserts concrete fact.
The scientific consciousness denies the concreteness of this
fact, and therefore in its hands the fact becomes the mere
abstract instance of an abstract principle. This in history
is called ‘ elevating’ (or strictly, degrading) ‘ history to the
rank of a science’. Fact, in this type of historical error, is
supposed to be ‘ mere’ fact (particular, not individual) and
to require supplement from outside in the form of the
so-called laws of history. The discovery of these is the
work of sociology, economics, and kindred sciences. These
sciences, so long as they are incorporated within the body
of history itself, are useful to it and aid its progress, as do
archaeology, numismatics, and other historical sciences ; but
if they are conceived as ends to which history is the means—
engines to which historical fact is so much fuel—they repre-
sent a downward movement in the path of thought, an
attempt, which may easily be successful, to put back
the clock of progress, and a recommendation by the tailless
fox for a general decaudation of his brethren.


1 The reader will see from this sentence, without further discussion,
my attitude to the doctrine of ‘ degrees of truth’ ; but while I should
entirely reject the category of degree in such a connexion, I cannot
too heartily support the destructive criticisms which have been put
forward in the name of that doctrine.


Tistory as the Assertion of Fact 209


For the religious consciousness, fact appears as simply
the manifestation of the will of God. Thus religious history,
like scientific history, denies the concreteness of the fact
and subordinates it to an abstract transcendent cause, now
conceived not as an object of thought or law, but as an
object of imagination or Supreme Being. History now
appears as the operation of the divine providence, the
miraculous working-out of a foreordained plan which is not
the plan of any human agent, a drama whose author and
spectator sits aloof while his puppets blindly strut and fume
their little hour till he has done with them.

The aesthetic consciousness regards history not as a divine
drama but as a drama pure and simple. Asked for fact, it
gives fable, and honestly does not know that it is lying.
It would be invidious to give examples of these three false
forms of history; but they are common enough.

Now the false forms of any given reality betray thcir
falseness by the presence in them of unreconciled opposi-
tions. Scientific history finds its opposite in ‘the con-
tingent’, a derogatory name invented by it to describe
those facts which it cannot force into its abstract schemes.
Such facts are recalcitrant to thought simply because
thought is here abstract. For history there is no con-
tingent ; no fact is turned away from the historian’s door.
Religious history finds its opposite in ‘ nature ’, or whatever
it may call those facts which it cannot reconcile with its
notion of the divine providence. There must be some such
facts, because the imaginative way in which the idea of
God is framed, like all intuitive modes of consciousness, must
generate an opposite. It is only when God is resolved into
the absolute of philosophy that he becomes all-embracing ;
and therefore religious history bristles with natural facts,
diabolical intrusions, enemies of God and so forth, against


2792 fe)


210 History


which God’s actions stand out as miracles. Aesthetic history
finds its opposite in the unromantic light of common day,
the workaday world, which is not in itself any less dramatic
than those things which the artist finds interesting, but is
simply that in which he happens not to be interested.
History is the synthesis of all these oppositions. It
reconciles drama with hard fact by finding drama every-
where, just because its drama is the drama of fact as such ;
its aesthetic joy is the aesthetic joy of seeing not any story,
but the truth, taking shape under its hand. That is because,
setting truth above everything, it subordinates the element
of emotion or immediacy to the element of critical reflection
consciously developed. It reconciles providence with chance,
divine ordinance with diabolical intervention, because, not
being intuition but thought, it takes no sides; it enters
into the joys and griefs, the hopes and fears, of both parties
to every struggle, sees them not as saints and devils but as
striving and suffering human beings. It reconciles necessity
with contingence because it does not abstract ; it does not
come to the facts with a ready-made law in its hand and
try to force them into it, throwing them away in disgust
when they are too hard; it rejoices in their hardness and
finds its satisfaction in their very diversity and uniqueness.
But in superseding and negating the other forms of
experience, history does not proceed as if they had never
existed. The historian who handles history as if it were
mere drama is in a state of deadly sin; but unless he is
enough of an artist to see the dramatic force of it, unless
he is cunning in the use of words, a clear and an eloquent
writer, easily moved by pity and sympathy, unless the
deeds of the past speak with a trumpet tongue to his heart
and kindle within him a poet’s ardour—without all this, he
will never be an historian. Again, if he sees his theme as


History as the Assertion of Fact 21


that of the gesta Dei per—whatever his chosen people may
be, if he belittles the agency of man before some inscrutable
purpose of which God has revealed the secret to him alone,
or makes heroes and villains of his personages, he is no
better than a liar; but unless he is saturated with a sense
of obscure and mighty forces working in history for ends
which no one man completely sees, unless he is prepared
boldly to pronounce certain actions right and wrong accord-
ing as they helped and hindered such forces, and unless he
is able to see the course of history as the manifestation of
an inexorable and righteous reason, he will never be an
historian. And lastly, if he thinks he can lay down laws
a priori that govern the course of history in the past,
present, or future, if he thinks that there is any way of
determining a fact except by straightforward historical
inquiry, or that history truly repeats itself in any way
whatever, large or small, he is merely a fool; but unless
he is prepared to spend years in the inductive study of
coins and title-deeds, peculiarities of grammar and idiom,
fragments of architecture and pottery, all the pedantic detail
of scholarship and antiquarianism in its aspect as basis for
possible generalization and hypothesis—he will be at best
a transcriber of other people’s opinions, not an historian.


§ 2. The Growth of History


The object of history is fact as such. To determine facts
far distant in space and time is not the essence of history
but its climax, the very heroism and bravado of the historical
spirit in its defiance of empirical limitations. There is
a growth of history, as we have already seen that there
is a growth of art and religion and science, which proceeds
from perception through annals and memoir to history in
this highest sense. In perception we do not, as is sometimes

02


212 Las 0x


falsely supposed, apprehend merely the immediately given
in sense. To perceive is to see what we do not see, to grasp
the object as a whole in a synthesis of front and back, top
and bottom, past, present, and future; all this is implied
in my perception of the ink-pot I see before me. Thus in
perception we have, that very identical process of recon-
struction from data which is the essence of history. In the
work of the annalist this is extended. He writes what he
remembers; what he remembers, he once perceived. In
memory he carries out a further synthesis which is not
different in principle from that of perception, for this again
is a work of reconstruction from data, the data being now
explicitly perceptual. The attempt to give an account of
memory as a distinct ‘ faculty ’ is so long out of date that
this brief reference to it may suffice. Memory is an implica-
tion, not the definition, of the historical consciousness: to
be aware of a fact implies being aware of past facts in
memory. In perception, memory is already implicit ; unless
one could remember, one would not be able to fix one’s
attention on a single object for long enough to perceive it ;
but in perception this memory is not recognized as memory,
and thus we get what is called the ‘specious present ’,
which is exactly the implicitness of memory.

Perception in which memory has become explicit is remi-
niscence, the rehearsing to oneself of past facts. Such an
activity is not pure memory, but memory explicit in per-
ception, because it is the perceptual consciousness of here
and now remembering. Reminiscence, in its most sustained
and coherent form, is the activity of the annalist or writer
of memoirs. But in this form it is no longer simply personal
reminiscence ; it inevitably develops into collective remi-
niscence. The historical spirit at this stage of its career
becomes the collector of legends or tales, the historian sup-


The Growth of History 213


plementing his own private reminiscence by drawing upon
the reminiscences of other people. These other people are
the ‘sources’ or ‘authorities’ of which historians speak.
The historian is said to be at the mercy of his authorities,
unable to go behind them and so on. This is quite true,
but only as a description of the stage of historical thought
now under discussion. History in its first childhood, like
other children, is capable of believing almost any nonsense ;
at times it lapses consciously into the aesthetic attitude
with the preface ‘ this is the tale as I have heard it: of
its truth I say nothing’, at times it falls into this attitude
unconsciously and repeats a story merely because it is
effective. But even at this crude stage of historical develop-
ment, there is such a thing as scepticism ; and though in
general the ancient historians rose no higher than the ideal
of conflating their own reminiscences with those of others,
they exercised some kind of selection as to the tales they
repeated.

But the most irresponsible retailer of old wives’ gossip
does that. Even in the mere rehearsal of one’s own memories
one keeps some kind of a hold over oneself in the interests
of the distinction between remembering and imagining.
The collector of legends who compiles them into a history,
so called, does not explicitly ask himself, ‘Is this legend
credible, and is the source to which I owe it trustworthy ? ’
But none the less he has implicitly answered that question
by the mere accepting of some legends and the rejection of
others. No historian, however innocent, can proceed wholly
without a system of Quellenkritik, because his very life as
an historian is the perpetual exercise of some such criterion.
Even if he accepts every legend he hears and rejects nothing,
he has a criterion, namely (it is to be presumed), the principle
that whatever anybody says is likely to be true. That is


214 History


a very bad criterion, no doubt; but it is nevertheless
a criterion.

The historian at this stage has therefore a criterion, but
an implicit criterion, of historical truth. The explicit
criterion of mature historical thought is nothing but histori-
cal fact itself: the historian asks himself, ‘ Does this fit
in with everything I know about the world of facts, the
nature of the case, the liability of the informant to error
and mendacity, and so forth?’ Now in the immature
stage of historical thought this criterion is implicit, but its
very implicitness renders it liable to deformation. An his-
torian who does not formulate his criterion to himself is
likely to confuse the criterion of factual coherence (history)
with the criterion of aesthetic coherence (picturesqueness)
or the like.

It is therefore untrue to say that the ancients had no
Quellenkritik. It is rather correct to say that they had
a confused one: one in which the genuine historical criterion
was overlaid by other criteria which necessarily led the
historians astray. The same thing happens in all ages when
the historical conception of reality is not resolutely main-
tained in its explicitness. People nowadays believe that
their dead friends are speaking to them at ‘ spiritualistic ’
gatherings, not because the evidence would satisfy an
historian, still less because they are anxious, on such a
matter, to be deceived. They believe things of this kind
for the same reason for which women, not long ago, used
to believe that they were in communication with the Devil
and maintain that belief to the point of dying for it in
torment. It is not a matter of deception or fraud, but an

1 If the reader protests that this is a circular criterion and therefore


no criterion at all, I can only assure him that I know this as well as
he does, and ask him to wait for a later section of this same chapter.


The Growth of History 215


example of the extreme difficulty, even for civilized and
educated people, of sticking to the conception of historical
fact instead of lapsing into an imaginative attitude. Such
a lapse, a mere failure of attention or a partial ‘ going to
sleep’ of the mind, is the true source of all such illusions,
and those ‘mediums’ and thaumaturgists who really are
fraudulent know very well how to induce it and take
advantage of it.

It would be too long a task here to detail the growth of
historical thought and to show how criteria other than that
of historical fact itself have influenced writers at one period
or another. But one or two instances may, perhaps, not
come amiss. The ancients, when first they began fitting
reminiscences and legends together into history, did so under
the influence of that religious view of the world which led
them to the invention of tragedy, or the unfolding of a divine
plan for the overthrow of the proud. It is not an accident
that the history of Herodotus described the nemesis that
overtook the pride of Xerxes. Herodotus has taken care
to point out that it is not an accident, and he has concluded
his work with a chapter as pointed as the closing chorus of
a tragedy : which indeed it is. Nor is it an accident that
Thucydides, in the story of the decline and fall of the
Athenian empire, has given us a Sophoclean drama in
shaggy prose, a drama whose tragic force has been the
wonder of all ages. Are we to suppose that the bare events
of the later fifth century, recorded by a writer whose only
aim was to state was cigentlich geschehen ist, would ever
have aroused our pity and fear like the pages of Thucy-
dides? ‘Well, that only shows what a great historian
Thucydides was.’ Great certainly: one of the greatest
writers of all time. But to call him great as an historian
is to misdescribe his greatness. What every one admires,


216 History


and rightly admires, in him is the quality not of a great
historian, but of a great tragedian.

To say this is not to accuse Thucydides of lying. When
I say that Antony’s speech in Julius Caesar is great poetry,
I do not mean that Antony never delivered any such
speech. I mean that Shakespeare wrote it as he did for
its beauty, not for its truth. And one need have no hesita-
tion in saying that Thucydides selected and emphasized
incidents in his history for the sake of dramatic effect. No
one denies it; but every one knows that this is precisely
what an historian must not do. An historian must state the
facts as they happened, and if he manipulates them into
drama, that may make him a great dramatist, but it cannot
make him a great historian. The criterion actually employed
by Thucydides as the mainspring of his work was intended,
certainly, to be historical ; but it was actually tragic.

It is no reproach to a religious age that its history should
be religious, nor to a scientific age that its history should be
scientific. Such forms of history are indeed erroneous forms :
but they are better than none, because all error contains
some truth, and we are grateful to the most benighted
chronicler of an age when other sources fail us. It is only
when the concept of fact has become explicit that we
can make an end of these erroneous forms and reach, for
the first time, historians’ history. This is the meaning of
the revolution in historical thought which took place in the
eighteenth century. The pioneers of that revolution had
a very insecure grasp on its principles: even Vico thought
that historical facts could be deduced a priori in the absence
of positive evidence ; and it was effected very slowly. The
nineteenth century saw, alongside of a vast growth of
genuine history, an even vaster mass of scientists’ history,
history aping the method of inductive inquiry, deducing


The Growth of History 217


itself from geographical and racial, climatic and economic,
abstractions, which because they are scientific are always
matter of personal caprice, and even claiming to foretell the
future—that unforgiveable sin which for ever banishes the
sinner from the company of genuine historians.

The historian’s business is with fact ; and there are no
future facts. The whole past and present universe is the
field of history, to its remotest parts and in its most distant
beginnings. Over this field the historian is absolutely free
to range in whatever direction he will, limited not by his
‘authorities’ but by his own pleasure. For the maturity
of historical thought is the explicit consciousness of the
truth that what matters is not an historian’s sources but
the use he makes of them. If they mislead him, the responsi-
bility for being misled is his. It is his business not to lie
down under his authorities, but to criticize them: if they
intend to deceive him, to outwit them: if they are silent,
to invent means of making them speak. These devices of
self-reliant and self-conscious historical thought form what
is called historical method.


§ 3. The World of Fact as the Absolute Object


We have said that history is the affirmation of fact.
The business of history is to state what happens and has
happened, and that only. This may cause a difficulty ;
for, it may be said, the true historian is not content with
stating facts, but endeavours to understand them. He
must see not only what happened but why it happened ;
he must investigate causes and inquire into motives, dis-
cerning the right from the wrong.

This is perfectly true. But it adds nothing to our original
definition. The historical fact in its full concreteness—and
fact is by definition concrete—already contains all these


218 Hows TOR.


things within itself. To understand the facts is to affirm
them not in arbitrary isolation but in their actual relation
to their context. The reason why an event happened is
sought by the historian not in an abstract scientific law but
in facts, and facts again. The cause of an event in history
is its intrinsic relation to other events in history, and the
causal nexus is not external to them but lies in their very
nature. The motives of historical personages are not
psychical forces brooding above the flow of historical events :
they are elements in these events, or rather, they are simply
these events themselves as purposed and planned by the
agents. And the historian cannot escape the necessity of
judging the value of actions, not indeed as a partisan but
as the impartial spectator and judge whose very impartiality
obliges him to pronounce some actions well done and some
ill. This judgement is not an alien act performed by the
historian for motives outside his historical work; it is a part
of that work which cannot be omitted without turning the
whole into a process of false abstraction, the abstraction
which separates the event from the act. In this sense the
valuation of historical fact is identical with its determina-
tion, and the saying is true that die Weltgeschichte ist das
Weltgericht.

There is thus no feature of experience, no attitude of mind
towards its object, which is alien to history. Art rests on
the ignoring of reality : religion, on the ignoring of thought :
science, on the ignoring of fact; but with the recognition of
fact everything is recognized that is in any sense real. The
fact, as historically determined, is the absolute object.

The mark of the absolute object is individuality, for
individuality is concreteness. The object as individual is
the whole of what exists, and this is concretely articulated
into parts each of which is again individual, and so to


The World of Fact as Absolute Object 219


infinity. Within the cycle of this infinite articulation of the
absolute object, the historical spirit moves freely in all
directions, never finding anything that is not individual and
unique, never finding anything that is not, on the one hand,
composed of individual and unique parts, and, on the other,
itself a part of an individual and unique whole. The object,
as a system of fact so organized, is objective throughout,
for every part is a true microcosm, and is truly infinite.

It is this object of which the preceding forms of conscious-
ness have been in search. Each has grasped it, but in such
a way as to destroy it. The aesthetic consciousness expresses
itself in a single work of art. Here it finds a cosmos which
like the world of history is individual and unique, whose
organization is a systematic structure of parts each dis-
playing the same individuality, the same uniqueness, in its
indispensable contribution to the whole. But it is only by
an abstraction that the single work of art is a cosmos.
Outside it are other works of art, each a cosmos in itself,
and these do not combine into a totality which is itself
a single all-embracing work of art. Thus the aesthetic
consciousness, instead of systematic, is monadic; and the
monads, being windowless, are not so much reflections of the
whole universe as rival claimants to be the whole universe.
This rivalry is fatal to all the claims alike. Art is thus even
within its own limits a false form of individuality.

Religion goes a step farther and finds exactly the same
individuality in God. God is the monad of monads, a cosmos
whose structure is that of the absolute object. But God
always stands over against a world whose very nature is to
be outside him, and thus God forfeits his own absoluteness.
As long as the world stands over against him, his own
individuality is unattained. And because religion is con-
scious of this, its search for objectivity is confessed to be vain.


220 Hisrory


In science the attempt is made to bridge the gulf between
God and the world. Instead of God we find the concept
or law, which because it is the law of the world no longer
stands outside the world. Here what was transcendent has
become immanent. But in this very success, failure is
revealed ; for it becomes plain that the immanence is a false
immanence. The world is not a world of individuals but
a world of particulars, and because the concept is indifferent
to the various particulars in which it is embodied, their
diversity remains meaningless and the world is to that
extent a chaos. What is individual and organized as a
system of individuals is not the world but only the concept,
so that the failure of religion is repeated and the quest for
immanence ends in transcendence, but an abstract trans-
cendence more intolerable than the concrete transcendence
of religion.

Thus the work of art, God, and the abstract concept are
all attempts on the part of thought to reach the organized
individuality of history. Art comes nearest to success ;
religion fails more openly, and science most openly of all.
But this order of relative failure is due to am inverse order
of seriousness in facing the problem. Art ignores the real
world altogether, and constructs an arbitrary cosmos of its
own; religion contents itself with a cosmos outside the
world ; and science alone tries to bring the concrete world
into the unity, but destroys its concreteness in the attempt.
But because all are agreed that the real object must be an
absolute individual, their failure is wholly redeemed by the
success of history, which actually achieves the idea of an
object beyond which there is nothing and within which every
part truly represents the whole.

This absolute whole is the concrete universal ; for con-
crete universality is individuality, the individual being


Lhe World of Fact as Absolute Object 221


simply the unity of the universal and the particular. The
absolute individual is universal in that it is what it is
throughout, and every part of it is as individual as itself.
On the other hand it is no mere abstraction, the abstract
quality of individualness, but an individual which includes
all others. It is the system of systems, the world of worlds.
Everything in it is determined by its place in the whole, but
this is not determinism because every part determines the
whole and therefore by implication every other part: so
that each part taken separately may be regarded as the
crucial determinant of everything else, just as every separate
link bears the whole responsibility for keeping the chain
together. Everything in it is as unique as the whole, and
the uniqueness of every part is based upon the uniqueness
of every other. The principle of its structure is not classi-
fication, the abstract concept, but the concrete concept,
which is relevance, or implication. The only reason why
this notion of a concrete universal is thought puzzling or
paradoxical is that our attempts at philosophical theory
suffer from the obsession of regarding science as the only
possible kind of knowledge. For the concrete universal
is the daily bread of every historian, and the logic of
history is the logic of the concrete universal.


§ 4. Duty or Concrete Ethics


At the scientific or materialistic point of view, man
regards himself as a machine. Now to call oneself a machine
is to prove that one is not a machine, for no machine calls
itself one. By saying ‘I am a slave to mechanical law’,
man actually lifts himself above such law. But he does so
only implicitly ; he does not realize that he is doing it ;
and because he grasps his freedom only implicitly he does
not really enjoy it. He enjoys only a perverted and abstract


222 Histrory


freedom, the freedom to make the best of a bad job, the
freedom of utility. He becomes an economic agent; he
acts selfishly.

When the concrete or historical point of view is achieved,
this is effected by recognizing and so transcending the
abstractness of the scientific point of view. Man now sees
that even in calling himself a machine he had really been
vindicating his own freedom, and in that discovery he
grasps this freedom and makes it truly his own. Concrete
or historical thought is the discovery of individuality,
and individuality is freedom. Abstract thought is always
deterministic, because the universal is not contained in
the particular but thrown outside it: what determines the
particular is not itself but something else, namely, the
universal. It is useless to protest that the universal is
merely the universal of the particular, and therefore not
alien to it. The master is the master of the slave, and it is
just because of the closeness of the relation between the two
persons that the slave is a slave and not his own master,
that is, free. Separate the universal from the particular,
and you hypostatize it into a second particular whose
special nature is to be the determinant or tyrant of the first.
It is this deterministic or mechanistic tendency of abstract
thought which degrades duty into utility; for utility is
simply slave’s duty.

Restore the concrete unity of the universal and the par-
ticular, and utility is reabsorbed: the means and the end
coincide, the means becomes an end in itself and the
end becomes the means to itself. Utility, or the transcen-
dence of the end to the means, having disappeared, action
is no longer an end to something good which is beyond
itself, but is its own good. Action as thus good in itself is
not capricious or morally indifferent, for caprice means the


Duty or Concrete Ethics 223


annihilation of the end and the sole existence of the means,
which is now the means to nothing. Since the end is
absorbed in the action, the action becomes that which is
done for its own sake and as its own justification.

Every action is an integral element in the complete
world of fact, and is determined by its place in that world
as the relevant action for the given facts. The existence of
a world of fact constitutes the obligation to perform the
relevant action, and thus the ‘station’ of the agent as
a member of the world of fact dictates his ‘ duties’ as a
contributor to that world. But, on the other hand, the
action determines in its turn the rest of the world of fact,
and hence the agent is free to make his ‘ station’ what he
likes.

Here we meet with a problem which will take us beyond
the confines of this chapter. If the world of facts faces the
agent as an infinite given whole, this whole determines all
its own parts but nothing outside it, for there is nothing
outside it. But is not the agent outside it? If he is, how
can it be infinite? If he is not, he is already in it and his
action is already determined by it and reciprocally deter-
minative of it. The facts are said to oblige the agent, as his
duty, to perform the action relevant to them. But this is
absurd, for if his action is in any sense indeterminate, it
renders the whole world of facts indeterminate. If his
station dictates his duties, any question as to what his
duties are raises a doubt as to what his station is—that is,
a doubt as to the nature of the whole which is said to be
given in its infinite concreteness.

Historical ethics thus fails to give a clear answer to the
question ‘ What is duty ?’ and in practice vacillates between
two contradictory answers.

First, the subjective answer: the will is its own world


224 History


and its own law. It has nothing outside it to determine it,
but is absolutely autonomous, and duty is simply its pure
self-determination.

Secondly, the objective answer: the moral order of the
objective world as a given whole is the law which must
determine the subjective will.

Both these solutions are doomed to failure precisely
because of their distinctness. They are a pair of opposites,
as yet unreconciled. The error must lie in their very
separateness, and in accordance with the programme of
concrete thinking we must try to overcome this separateness.
Till we have done so, the conception of liberty or duty
which we have achieved is held by the most precarious
tenure ; for the whole essence of duty is the reconciliation
which it effects between the universal and the particular,
and if these are once more separated, as in effect they are
by a cleavage between the individual and society, the very
conception of duty must fall to the ground. For if my duty
is to obey society, I am a slave and my obedience is useful
but not good: if my duty is to ignore society and follow
my own bent, my defiance of society is precisely the opposite
of useful, namely, futile; for society will crush me, and
rightly. The reality of duty therefore depends on over-
coming the antithesis between these terms.

The characteristic embodiment of concrete ethics is law.
Law is nothing but the structure of society regarded as the
source of an obligation on the individual to act in certain
determinate ways. The legal mind is not scientific in its
attitude towards truth, but historical; the judge is the
‘learned judge ’—that is, his qualification is a deep know-
ledge of concrete fact, and law in its highest and most
delicately-organized form consists on the one hand of
statutes, and on the other of case-law, these two elements


Duty or Concrete Ethics 225


reacting upon one another in such a way that the body of
law which they together constitute forms an organic whole.
In so far as statutes are generalizations, the legal attitude
is often mistaken for a form of the scientific or abstract
consciousness ; but this is an error, because the generality
of law, like the generality of archaeology, is not an end in
itself but a means to an explicitly-recognized concrete end.
The ideal of law is not the self-identical immobility of this
or that statute, but its interpretation; and this inter-
pretation means using the law as an aid to the determina-
tion of concrete cases, just as the archaeologist uses his
generalized rules for the purpose of fixing the concrete date
of a building or other object. Law is thus parallel to history
in that each explicitly includes the abstract act of generaliza-
tion within itself as a subsidiary element, not the whole of
its substance.

Further, law is gravely misunderstood if it is regarded as
the field of expediency or utility, as if to obey the law were
merely to act in one’s own interests through fear of punish-
ment, as if to legislate were to assert the interests of a
legislative class, and as if government in general were an
economic function. The right to punish, which belongs to
all law, is a right not to maltreat the disobedient but to
require them to obey: it is not terror, but majesty, that is
the true attribute of law. The law punishes the disobedient
not because it can but because it ought ; not as a business
man discharges an untrustworthy clerk, on the principle
‘if you won’t work for me I won't work with you’, but as
a vindication of its own laesa matestas, because the criminal
owes it obedience as a duty. We are punished not because
we break the law, but because we ought to obey it. The
duty to obey is the correlative of all law; and obedience
rests on this duty, not on expediency or force or fear of un-

2792 E


226 History


pleasant consequences in case of disobedience. Punishment
is only legal when it is deserved ; to confuse it with educa-
tion, or (last sophistry of a corrupt utilitarianism) degrade it
to the level of a bogey, is to miss its essential nature, that
concreteness which distinguishes government from business.

If law is not utility, a fortiori it is not convention, which
is a lower ethical development than utility. And yet to
identify law with convention is in a way more excusable
than to identify it with utility. This is because the relation
between play and convention is repeated in the relation
between utility and law: in both cases we have an abstract,
individualistic point of view set over against a social or
concrete point of view. But as the individualism of play
is an intuitive individualism while that of utility is an
intellectual, so the concreteness of convention is an intuitive
concreteness, that of law an intellectual concreteness. We
obey conventions intuitively, unreflectively: we obey
laws reflectively, recognizing it, on thinking the matter over,
as a duty whose neglect deserves punishment. In the same
way we institute a convention intuitively, just because we
choose that things shall be so done ; but we institute a law
reflectively, because we think that things ought to be so
done. To defy a convention is merely to break with one’s
company, to pick a quarrel with friends; to defy a law is
to commit a crime.

Law in its whole extent includes the entire life of affairs,
as distinct from business: politics in all its legislative and
administrative branches, large and small. This field, in
virtue of its concreteness, is far out of the reach of abstract
scientific thought, which revenges itself upon it by at once
despising it for its illogicality and trying to reduce it to
order by sheer mutilation. That real life is illogical every one
admits; but that is the fault not of life but of logic, of


Duty or Concrete Ethics 227


abstract thinking. The scientist wants actual fact to behave
as if it were a mere example of some abstract law; but it is
never simply this, and the elements he has deliberately
ignored upset all his calculations. He then calls the fact
irrational, or contingent, meaning unintelligible to him
because too solid and hard to be forced into his moulds,
too heavy for his scales, too full of its own concrete logic to
listen to his abstractions. Even the life of convention
resists his methods, precisely as religion resists reduction
into terms of theology. The merest conventions, fashion in
dress, etiquette and ceremonial, are lumped together by
abstract thought as irrational; but to the eye of concrete
historical thought they reveal themselves as informed by
the most delightfully subtle intelligence, as inevitable as
the plot of a drama and as little capable of scientific or
abstract analysis: differing from the rationality of law
only in being implicit. Paris dressmakers could not tell you
why they alter a certain fashion in a certain way this
autumn, or if they did the reason would be a wrong one ;
but there is a reason, and it can be traced if the problem is
approached from an historical point of view.

What is true of the proverbial caprices of fashion is
a fortiort true of law and politics. The attempt of abstract
thought to mutilate these historical facts appears theoretically
in the attempt to construct a sociology, or science intended
to reduce history to a pattern of abstract concepts, and
practically in the attempt to oust the lawyer and the
statesman from public life and replace them with the
business man and the scientist. Thus the state, which in its
historical reality is a fabric of law, is reduced to a business
concern by an ‘ economic interpretation of history’ which
destroys the concreteness of legal fact and replaces it by
the abstractions of utilitarian ethics; and we get socialism

P2


228 HustTrory


or the substitution of economics for justice, with its natural
corollary, the destruction of that internal ‘ king’s peace’
which the political spirit has guarded through centuries as
the very flame of its domestic altar, and the declaration of
a class war which is the explicit negation of the state.
Similarly the family, just because it is a concrete spiritual
reality whose foundation is the act of spontaneous choice
in which, moved by some spirit certainly not born in the
counting-house or laboratory, one man and one woman
greet one another as co-parents of the world’s future; just
because it is the tree on which new souls grow in a manner
unpredictable to scientific calculation; just because it is
these things, the family is the object of attack by eugenists,}


1 T do not wish it to appear that my remarks on eugenics are hasty
or that they proceed from any doubts as to the value of medical
science. I therefore beg leave to add:

(i) That because it is obviously every one’s duty to do what he can
for the welfare of his unborn children, I approached eugenics with
a prepossession in its favour, and have only changed my mind as a
result of studying the utterances of its friends.

(ii) That in so far as it consists in repeating the pious wish that
people would recognize that duty, I sympathize with its propaganda.

(iii) But that it neither is nor promises to become an adequate
guide towards determining what actually can be done, because all
its facts are arbitrarily selected to support its dogmas, like ghost-
stories, which indeed they resemble in more ways than one, as
designed to produce horror rather than conviction of anything definite;
its generalizations are almost invariably, even when so favourably
founded, matter of dispute among experts; and its arguments,
regarded as argument, are, when they exist at all, usually sophistical.

(iv) That I should warmly support compulsory vaccination for
small-pox, and that if eugenics could ever produce a practical legis-
lative scheme as well supported by expert opinion and as workable
as compulsory vaccination, on that day I should begin treating it
with respect. At present, I confess, I look upon it as an aberration
on the part of certain biological speculations into a political field
from which their best friends can only wish to rescue them, and
return them to their laboratories.


Duty or Concrete Ethics 229


who are quite sure that professors of science could mate
young men and young women a great deal better than the
poor ignorant things can do it for themselves, with the
amateurish assistance of their friends and relations ; and
have the effrontery to bolster up their propaganda with facts
concerning the failure of this or that marriage, arbitrarily
selected to suit their purposes, as if a fanatic who wished
to make gramophones compulsory by law should produce
statistics showing that some people sing out of tune. For
love and marriage and the procreation of children are, every
time they happen, a voyage of discovery; and when
scientists have discovered the logic which will infallibly
produce true discoveries, it will be time enough for them
to usurp that chosen province of intuition, the business of
matchmaking. The same fallacy recurs in militarism, or
the seizure of the state by that science of war which the
state has devised to serve its own ends; commercialism,
or the overthrow of law by profit and the replacement of
statesmen by business men ; and other ailments of the body
politic, whose common nature is to deny the very essence
of the state, which is concrete freedom in the guise of
justice or right, and its replacement by one form or another
of expediency. They are alternative forms of that abstract-
ness, that hatred of concrete historical fact, which is the
fountain of all political corruption.

Yet this corruption is no external enemy ; it is inherent
in the very fabric of the political life itself. The perfect
concreteness of pure justice, of absolute right, is unattainable
in the sphere of law, for law regarded as an objective reality
over against the individual already shows the mark of that
last abstraction which divides subject from object. Society,
as distinct from the individual, is already an abstraction,
and as such cannot have that claim upon the individual


230 Hisrory


which is possessed only by an absolutely concrete principle.
Law is not the will of the individual himself; it is a com-
mand laid upon him from without, and therefore his obedi-
ence to it is always tainted with utilitarianism. Hence all
those utilitarian degradations of law to which we have
referred are in a sense inevitable. For law—and the same,
we shall see, is true of history as a whole—is an incomplete
realization of concrete thought: it is essentially a step,
but an imperfect step, from abstract to concrete, from
utility to responsibility. The very externality of law to the
agent binds it down to the world of abstract or scientific
thought, and necessitates a contradiction by which, on the
one hand, the law itself claims to embody right, while on
the other the individual conscience claims to defy the law
in the name of right. It is useless to debate the issue
between the disputants; granted their common initial
error, each is equally justified in his position. The same
contradiction reappears in external relations, where the
very fact that the state is law makes the inevitable conflict
of state with state a conflict not of mere interest but of
right against right, and therefore gives rise not to economic
rivalry but to war.

We shall see that history is an unstable attitude which
leads either back into science or forward into philosophy,
according as the intellectual vigour of the historian is
exhausted or stimulated by his attempt to get rid of the
abstractions of science. So law is an unstable attitude, and
either leads on to the position of absolute ethics, in which
the law becomes simply the act of the individual’s own will
and its abstract objectivity disappears, or else leads back
to the position of abstract or utilitarian ethics and the
politics of the scientist and the business man. The later
nineteenth century, as we shall see later on, appears to have


Duty or Concrete Ethics 231


been a time when an historical attitude, insecurely reached,
was relapsing into the abstractness of a new scientific phase
of thought; a retrograde movement in the history of the
human mind, though one which, perhaps, served only to lay
the foundation of a more secure advance. If this was so,
it is no ground for surprise that socialism, eugenics, militar-
ism, commercialism, and their like should have especially
flourished during that period, as parasites upon the political
life of the civilized world. Nor is it improbable that each
one of them may prove in time to have justified its existence
and contributed something of value to the advancement
of human life.


§ 5. The Breakdown of History


History is the knowledge of the infinite world of facts.
It is therefore itself an infinite whole of thought: history is
essentially universal history, a whole in which the knowledge
of every fact is included.

This whole, universal history, is never achieved. All
history is fragmentary. The historian—he cannot help it—
is a specialist, and no one takes all history for his province
unless he is content to show everywhere an equal ignorance,
an equal falsification of fact. But this is a fatal objection
to the claims of historical thought as we have, without
favour or exaggeration, stated them. History is the know-
ledge of an infinite whole whose parts, repeating the plan
of the whole in their structure, are only known by reference
to their context. But since this context is always incom-
plete, we can never know a single part as it actually is.

It may be said that this is hypercritical. The historical
specialist admits that where his period begins and ends
there are loose threads in his knowledge, and that these
recur where his period trenches on contemporary events


ain History


of which his knowledge is imperfect. No doubt, he will
continue, the looseness of these threads may affect the
stability of his patterns even in that part of his period in
which he feels most at home. A misconception as to the
facts preceding those of which he deals will falsify his
approach to many of the central questions of his period,
and so falsify to some extent his answers. But this, he may
say, cannot destroy very much of the value of his work,
and to suggest that it destroys the whole is fantastic.

But it is important to recognize the nature of the dilemma
with which we are here faced. If universal history is an
absolute and perfectly-organized individual whole, such that
every part in it determines every other part, there is no
escape from the conclusion that ignorance or error concerning
any one part involves an essential and radical ignorance
or error concerning every other. If we are to escape this
inference it can only be by withdrawing everything we have
said about the structure of historical fact and substituting
a new theory.

It is easy to see what this new theory will be. The
individuality of historical facts, we must now say, is not
systematic but atomic. Each fact is what it is irrespective
of all others. The relations of each to the rest do nothing
to affect their nature; for each is wholly closed within
itself and is knowable as a perfectly isolated atom. This
being so, we can apprehend the atomic facts of history
one by one, and thus build up ever-increasing structures
of fact which have nothing to fear from any unrevealed fact
that may lurk in the surrounding darkness. Thus the
possibility of historical knowledge is saved.

We may perhaps venture to ask what will be the price
of this salvation; and this with peculiar interest and
anxiety at a time when some of our most distinguished


The Bria biaun of Flistory 23%


philosophers are advocating it as the one basis for know-
ledge. What is called the ‘ theory of external relations ’
has been deliberately invented in recent years as an escape
from the difficulty just expressed. If the object is an infinite
whole whose parts are mutually interdependent and con-
ditioned, then, it is recognized, knowledge of this object or
any part of it is impossible. Let us therefore surrender the
whole, and resolve every part into a mere agglomeration of
atoms, each untouched in its real nature by any relation in
which it may stand to any other. Such is the proposal.
Now these atoms, as the word suggests, are nothing new in
the history of thought. On the contrary, they represent
a very old idea, and one from which the modern conception
of critical history has but lately and with difficulty emerged.
They are precisely the imstances of an abstract law: that
is to say, they belong, together with the allied notions of
agglomeration or addition, infinite series, and externality,
to the sphere of science. Historical: atomism saves history
by surrendering the whole thing and plunging back into the
scientific consciousness. After recognizing this, we are the
less surprised to see that its advocates are almost exclusively
mathematicians. For it is simply a proposal to purge history
of everything historical and reduce it to mathematics. It is,
in fact, only the latest and most fashionable of a large
number of attempts to ‘ reduce history to a science’. To
these in their general principle and features we have already
referred, and we need not here waste time on discussing the
merits of this latest comer. We must observe merely that
there is no question of arguing as to whether the theory of
external relations is ‘ true’. For a scientist, of course it is
true: to be a scientist is to commit yourself to abstracting
the concept from the individua! and leaving bare particulars
to which their interrelations are external. For an historian


234 History


it is of course false: history is nothing but conceiving the
object as concrete fact, fact to which its context is not
irrelevant but essential.!. But since history only comes into
being because of the breakdown of science, to suggest that
an historian should get rid of his difficulties by embracing the
theory of external relations is like suggesting to a gunner
that he might escape the problems of gunnery by adopting
the catapult.

We are therefore thrown back on the dilemma with which
we were originally faced. If history exists, its object is an
infinite whole which is unknowable and renders all its parts
unknowable. If its parts are atoms, then history does not
exist and we are thrown back on science, whose bankruptcy
we have already accepted.

There is a natural temptation to escape between the horns
of this dilemma by arguing as follows: Universal history,
as an infinite whole, is plainly inaccessible. Let us face this
fact. What have we left ? Individual histories, histories of
this or that special period or single state. These individuals
are not atoms, nor are they composed of atoms; they are
genuine individuals, microcosms of the whole. But the
whole does not exist, and these individuals do exist: here
then we find the nature of the historical object truly
expressed, none the less truly for the non-existence of that
chimerical whole whose part they are falsely imagined to be.

This argument takes us even farther back into darkness
than the last. For it reduces history to the level of art.
To be a monad, as opposed to an atom; to be a world in
itself unconnected with an indefinite number of other such


1 Lest the reader should suspect me of teasing him, let me hasten
to add that, because neither science nor history is tenable, neither
the theory of external relations nor that of internal relations is
really true.


The Breakdown of History 235


worlds, each windowless and ignorant of a whole whose parts
they nevertheless are—this is to be a work of art. Take
away the conception of a universal history in which every
special history finds its place and its justification, and you
have committed the first and deepest sin against history,
you have confused it with art: you have denied it any
concern with truth and made it a mere thing of the
imagination.

To translate our difficulty into empirical terms, we have
already seen that periods of history thus individualized are
necessarily beset by ‘ loose ends’ and fallacies arising from
ignorance or error of their context. Now there is and can
be no limit to the extent to which a‘ special history ’ may
be falsified by these elements. The writer insists upon this
difficulty not as a hostile and unsympathetic critic of his-
torians, but as an historian himself, one who takes a special
delight in historical research and inquiry; not only in the
reading of history-books but in the attempt to solve
problems which the writers of history-books do not attack.
But as a specialist in one particular period he is acutely
conscious that his ignorance of the antecedents of that
period introduces a coefficient of error into his work of whose
magnitude he can never be aware. He sees how radically
the work of others in the same field has been vitiated by
faults of the kind which he knows he must himself be com-
mitting daily, and he knows that if these faults were removed
others would of necessity remain. Nor is it mere despair,
as when one dismisses an historical problem as insoluble on
our present evidence, that induces him to assent to the
paradox that all history is quite certainly in some respects
false, but what these respects are we can never know.
To believe the contrary is simply to let oneself be hypnotized
by the repetition of statements in one book after another,


236 Hin seroay


to allow oneself to argue that because authors are unanimous
they must be right, instead of confessing the truth, that
they are unanimous because of the depth of their ignorance.
Wherever a number of people have detailed information
about any fact, their summary accounts of it will certainly
be different, according to the differential importance which
they find in this detail or that: it is only when they know
nothing, or next to nothing, that they begin to agree.
Ancient history is easy not because its facts are certain but
because we are at the mercy of Herodotus or some other
writer, whose story we cannot check ; contemporary history
is unwritable because we know so much about it, and it is
only when all the Balaclava survivors have died that we
can begin to reach an ‘ accepted version’ of the battle’s
history. Contemporary history embarrasses a writer not
only because he knows too much, but also because what he
knows is too undigested, too unconnected, too atomic.
It is only after close and prolonged reflection that we begin
to see what was essential and what unimportant, to see
why things happened as they did, and to write history
instead of newspapers. We can never see the bones of
historical fact till the flesh has dropped off them, and then
it is too late. History, which seems to be essentially
remembrance, is only possible through forgetfulness, a
forgetfulness which in destroying what it takes away makes
it impossible for us ever to understand what is left.

This fundamental self-contradiction in which all history—
and therefore all perception—is involved takes us far
beyond certain comparatively simple objections to history
based on its alleged dependence on testimony. How, it is
asked, can truth be claimed for a narrative which depends
in every detail upon stories handed down to us which may
have been, and indeed almost always are, falsified by the


The Breakdown of History 237


passions of their authors? All our historical sources are
based in this way on testimony: all testimony tells us not
what happened but what its author wanted us to believe,
or wanted to believe himself. In this way the uncertainty
of history is contrasted with the certainty of perception and
memory. But neither the criticism nor the contrast is well
founded. Granting that we cannot get the truth from our
authorities, we can at least get the expression of their own
personalities, the expression of their prejudices and desires,
and this too is history, and history of a kind not to be
despised. And further, in so far as history rests on other
things beside the actual statements of authors, upon archaeo-
logical data, upon charters and statutes, upon analysis of
the institutions of to-day, and so forth, to this extent we
have access to sources not falsified by the prejudice of any
informant. But the real prejudice against which we have
to guard is still left at large, and is the more dangerous for
the scientific rigour upon which we plume ourselves when
reconstructing history from these more recondite sources.
It is precisely our own prejudice. If ancient historians give
way to drama or edification in their narrative, are we exempt
from the same temptations in our own? We know that
this is not so. We know that just as we remember not
what happened but what we want to remember, as we per-
ceive not what is ‘there’ but what we attend to, so we
reconstruct history not as it was but as we choose to think
it was. Weare all ready to see this fault in other historians,
but we all commit it ourselves, none of us more so than
those who pride themselves on the ‘ objectivity’ of their
methods.

And yet to surrender this ‘ objectivity ’, to confess frankly
that our histories are nothing but an expression of personal
points of view, this is the very cynicism of history, the


238 History


conscious acquiescence in what has now become a deliberate
fraud. If every history is an historical romance, we may
leave out the adjective and frankly identify history with
art. As long as we pretend to write history, we must claim
access to the fact as it really was. This fact, we have seen,
is inaccessible. History as a form of knowledge cannot
exist.

Thus history is the crown and the veductio ad absurdum
of all knowledge considered as knowledge of an objective
reality independent of the knowing mind. Here for the first
time we place before ourselves an object which satisfies the
mind ; an object individual, concrete, infinite, no arbitrary
abstraction or unreal fiction, but reality itself in its com-
pleteness. This object is what we have tried and failed to
find in art, in religion, and in science. In history we have
found it; and we have found it to be an illusion. In its
perfect reality it is perfectly unknowable, and our efforts
to achieve it can do nothing but frustrate themselves. In
art, the individual work is actually enjoyed; the mind
grasps it in its wholeness, clasps it to its bosom and becomes
one with it. In religion, God is glorified and enjoyed in
a mystic union which achieves the same intimacy, but the
clamour of the world outside is never wholly forgotten and
the union is always therefore imperfect. In science the
mind grasps the concept in an act of a priori thought, but
the concept is a mere phantom and thought recognizes its
own impotence to clothe it with reality. The progressive
alienation of the mind from its object is in history complete,
The world is triumphantly unified as object, only to find
itself separated from the mind by a gulf which no thought
can traverse.

But in this process, which seems to travel at every step
farther from that intimacy of subject with object which


The Brewer of History 239


constitutes knowledge, the indispensable condition of know-
ledge is progressively and inversely realized. We know at
last in history what we never knew before, namely, what
kind of object it must be that is alone knowable. It must
be an object not merely of imagination, like the work of
art, but of thought ; but, like the work of art, it must be
concrete and individual. It must be, like the object of
religion, absolute and eternal; but unlike this again, it
must be a real object and not the imaginative or meta-
phorical presentation of an object. It must be conceived,
like the object of science ; but it must not be an abstraction.
And like the object of history, it must be fact, an absolute
concrete individual; but it must be accessible to the
knowing mind.


§ 6. The Transition from History to Philosophy


We have been discussing history on the assumption that
it was knowledge of fact—that is, concrete thought. This
assumption has not failed us; it yielded every actual mark
of historical thought and of its object, and it is not open
to us to suggest that our starting-point was an error.
Nevertheless it has brought us face to face with the difficulty
that if the object of history is such as we have described,
it cannot be known.

For an infinite given whole of fact cannot at any point
be grasped by the mind. Every part implies the whole,
and the whole is presupposed by every part. No part can
therefore be known first. No process of thought with respect
to such a whole is possible. We cannot come to know it.
We must have known it all from the beginning, have known
it as a whole before we began to learn any given part ; and
once the whole is known any given part must be known


240 History


too, and therefore cannot be learnt. There is no learning
anything.?

This cannot be avoided by saying that the whole is
roughly or confusedly known at first and by degrees known
more precisely or adequately. It is no more possible to
know a single aspect of the whole by itself than to know
a single part of it by itself. To know anything about it
whatever must be to know all about it.

Nor can it be avoided by placing the whole in time and
calling it a progressing, developing, or changing whole. This
merely adds a new difficulty. If its progress is such that
its present state implies or necessitates its future states,
then these states merely augment the number of implica-
tions which any knowledge of the whole, however superficial,
involves. But if its progress is such that its future states
are not implied in its present, then it is no longer a perfect
individual all of whose parts imply one another.

We are therefore unable to escape the dilemma that either
this infinite whole of fact is known perfectly and always by any
given mind, or else it can never by that mind be known at all.

Now this is an old dilemma. It is exactly the famous
crux of the Meno, which Plato solved in the only possible
way, by accepting the first alternative. The Platonic
‘form’ is just such an infinite whole, and Plato saw that
on that account the mind could never come to know it.
Every mind must have known it from eternity. But Plato
added to this a qualification. The mind must indeed know
the form, but it need not know that it knows it. Its know-
ledge may be implicit at any given moment, and what we
call learning may be only the bringing of this implicit
knowledge into explicitness.


* This is the truth anticipated on p. 214, where we pointed out the
vicious circle of the historical criterion.


Transition from History to Philosophy 241


Plato’s solution is powerless to save the validity of
historical knowledge. For the absolute whole of which we
are speaking is the entire world of fact, and if it is a fact
that I know something—whether I know it implicitly or
explicitly—this fact is included in the world of fact, and
therefore the entire world of fact is changed by my coming
to know it, for that event is a new fact and ex hypothest
changes the world of fact, however slightly, from top to
bottom, like any other addition to it. Therefore the facts
as I know them are by that very knowledge made different
from the same facts as I do not know them; and this
applies to the conversion of knowledge from implicit to
explicit. The universe of fact which is implicitly known
becomes objectively different by being explicitly known,
because our knowledge is part of it.

Now in the course of our inquiry the truth has from time
to time forced itself upon us that there is one object at
least of which it can be said that its nature is altered by
being known, without entailing the consequence that error
concerning it is impossible. This object is the knowing
mind. In this case, we saw, an error reacts on the mind
itself, and alters its behaviour, which (in the case of a mind)
is its nature ; for a mind is what it does. If therefore the
infinite given whole of fact is the nature of the knowing mind
as such, our problem is solved, and the possibility of know-
ledge is vindicated.

We must not accept this escape rashly. It is advisable
to follow up another hint derived from the comparison with
Plato.

The difficulty in the Meno arises from the abstractness
of the Platonic logic. If the universal is really nothing but
the structure of the individual, there is no special difficulty
as to how we come to know it. That same experience,


2792 Q


242 Hi yeno ny


historical and perceptual experience, which reveals the indi-
vidual, reveals its structure. But Plato had not attained
to the conception of historical experience or perception, and
split up its object, the individual, into the sensuous particular
and the intelligible universal. Hence the universal, set
outside the particular, transcending sensuous experience,
was set outside time and process, and therefore the cognition
of it had to be similarly thrown outside time. Now our
conception of a world of facts had led us back to Plato’s
dilemma. But Plato’s dilemma is due to the abstractness
of his thought. Can it be that our own thought has relapsed
into abstractiiess ?

We have permitted ourselves to hold somewhat boastful
language about the absolute concreteness of historical
thought ; but we find it now behaving exactly as if it were
the victim of an abstraction. And this is not the first
symptom of the disorder. At the end of section 4 we found
that history left us with an unreconciled opposition between
the individual and the community, and these are Opposites,
and therefore terms which history as concrete thought is
bound to reconcile in a synthesis.

We have hitherto been uniformly searching for an object
of knowledge. We have found that in art we get no true
object, because the ostensible object, the work of art, points
beyond itself to some hidden mystery as the real object of
which it is the symbol. In other words, art pretends to be
pure imagination but is not ; it is the implicit assertion of
something which is not explicitly asserted, and this is its
real object. But what the nature of this real object may
be, art cannot say. We went on to religion. Here again
we found that the ostensible object, God, was not the real
object. The mythology of religion does not say what it
means. It points beyond itself, even more unmistakably


Transition from History to Philosophy 243


than the work of art, to a concealed mystery, a truth which
is not stated. The real object of religion is not grasped by
religion itself. We tried science, and here we found that
the ostensible object, the abstract concept, which is indif-
ferently called the physical or material world, the realm of
(abstract) thought, pure being, or the like, is confessedly
an arbitrary construction, an expedient of thought, not the
object of thought. In history alone we found a type of
thought which, to all appearances, meant what it said, and
when it pointed to fact as its object really meant that fact
was its object. We therefore ventured to assume that fact,
this same fact which comes face to face with the mind in
history, is the hidden object not only of science—that is
admitted—but of religion and art also. But what is this
fact : fact about what?

We have assumed that it was ‘about’ an object other
than the thinking mind. We have assumed that the imagery
of art, the mythology of religion, the mechanism of science,
are successive veils hung between the mind and this object,
and that when they were torn down we should see the
object as it is in itself. That is to say, we have assumed,
without justifying or criticizing it, a distinction between
subject and object ; and not only a distinction but a separa-
tion, a relation of difference without identity.

Difference without identity is the abstract concept. Have
we all the time been vitiating the historical consciousness
by the retention in it of one relic of abstraction ?

The suggested answer to this will perhaps be, that if
subject and object are opposites, then we must indeed assert
their synthesis and deny that they can be separated; but
if they are merely different individuals, then their relation
will be a relation of distinct concrete facts to one another,
and they will not coalesce into a unity.

Q2


244 History


But this is a question of heads I win, tails you lose. If
subject and object are opposites, then they can only exist
in synthesis: well and good. But if they are distinct con-
crete facts, they both fall within the world of fact, and if
of this world it remains true that everything in it determines
the whole and everything else, it follows that subject and
object are just as inseparable on this hypothesis as on the
other. For the concept of the world of fact as the concrete
universal has destroyed any distinction between a logic of
opposition and a logic of difference.

The fundamental principle of history itself, namely, the
concreteness of the object, thus makes it impossible for the
object to ignore the subject, and compels us to recognize
an object to which the subject is organic, in the sense that
the subject’s consciousness of it makes a real difference to
it as a whole and to all its parts. The subject is thus no
mere separable part of the world of fact, but an essential
element which penetrates its whole fabric, a constitutive
element in the object itself. Being known, whether truly
known or erroneously known, must make a difference to
the object: to deny this, we can now see, is to turn one’s
back on concrete thought and revert to the fallacies of
abstraction.

This does not reduce the object of knowledge to the
position of a figment of imagination. On the contrary,
a figment of imagination is created by imagining it, not by
knowing it, and exists—in the only sense in which it does
exist—precisely as it is imagined, so that there is in its case
no such thing as error, just as there is no such thing as
truth. The conception of an object which we have now
reached is the conception of something determined by the
knowing it, in the sense that error deranges it, though not
so far as to bring it into harmony with the erroneous judge-


Transition from History to Philosophy 245


ment ; because this would then cease to be erroneous. This
object can only be the knowing mind itself. A mind’s error
about itself, we have seen, actually deranges it and causes
it to behave abnormally ; and it is only by correcting this
error that the mind can regain its true nature.

The world of fact which is explicitly studied in history
is therefore implicitly nothing but the knowing mind as
such. This is no strange or unfamiliar notion, repugnant to
plain and simple minds. It is, on the contrary, a theme
reiterated not only in all philosophy but in the implicit
philosophizing of religion and popular proverbs. The union
of God with man is the burden of all religion, and ‘ know
thyself ’ is the epitome of all proverbs. Philosophies preach
it unanimously, only differing in that some preach it, as it
were, backwards and in a riddle, like the materialists, who
after all are only trying to define knowledge as the self-
knowledge of the only reality, namely, matter, or the realists,
some of whom argue that reality gets itself known without
the intervention of anything called a mind, while some
believe that mind is only a peculiar conformation of space-
time which is able to know other such conformations, the
self-knowledge of space-time; while others again preach it
explicitly, like Socrates and Aristotle and Descartes and
almost all philosophers of the first rank, whether ancient
or modern: who with strange unanimity and for the most
various reasons! have held that in the last resort nothing
but the knower can be known.

The transition thus effected from history to philosophy
is, like our other transitions, merely the making explicit of


1 This clause may puzzle the reader, unless he reflects that a con-
crete truth has an infinity of reasons (vationes cognoscendi, and for
that matter vationes essendi as well). For instance, there is no one
mark by which one recognizes one’s own face in the glass, and the
most various reasons may be given without disagreement.


246 History


what was implicit already. But in every case the implicit
is made explicit in the teeth of a certain resistance. It is
only unwillingly that art realizes its own immanent logic,
or religion its mythological character, or science its nature
as arbitrary supposal. This is because the stability of these
activities depends on their refusal to face these facts about
their own nature. When the facts are faced the artist
becomes a critic, the religious man a theologian, the scientist
a philosopher. Similarly the realization that history or
perception is an activity which affects its own object in
such a way that the hope of discovering was cigentlich
geschehen ist is foredoomed to failure, is the breakdown of
history, its collapse before an historical scepticism to which
there is no answer.

But though, in the transition from history to philosophy,
history as such is destroyed, the transition is so brief and
so inevitable that much belonging to the historical frame
of mind is taken over almost unchanged by the philosophical.
Philosophy, like history, is essentially the assertion of con-
crete reality, the denial of all abstraction, all generality,
everything in the nature of a law or formula. For this and
similar reasons the identification of philosophy with history
is far less violent and misleading than its identification with
science, religion, or art. But all such identifications are
barren abstractions, for all these activities are in a sense
identical with philosophy and in a sense different from it.
To assert the identity without the difference or the difference
without the identity is to turn one’s back on reality and
amuse oneself with paradoxes.


VII
PHILOSOPHY


§ 1. Philosophy as Self-consciousness


THERE are two current definitions of philosophy. In the
first place it is regarded as the return of thought upon itself,
thought ceasing to contemplate an external object and
studying the process by which it comes to be aware of such
an object: thought become self-conscious. In the second
place it is regarded as the self-liberation of thought from
uncriticized assumptions, the determined attempt to believe
nothing except on good grounds, the surrender of all dogma,
hypothesis, or opinion, and the pursuit of the ideal of
knowledge as rational through and through. The first
definition defines philosophy by reference to its object: the
second by reference to its method.

Each of these definitions, taken singly, is unsatisfactory.
The first appears to imply that among the various objects
in the world are objects called minds, and that philosophy
is the study of these. But so described, philosophy becomes
psychology, which is in aim and method scientific and not
philosophical. The second merely states an ideal, and does
not tell us how to set about realizing it: indeed, we cannot
realize it, and therefore, so described, philosophy does not
exist at all.

But we have now seen that taken together these two
definitions explain each other and give a coherent result.
Philosophy is self-consciousness, but this does not mean
that there is a self standing in abstract isolation over against
a world of objects and that philosophy ignores the latter


248 PHILOSOPHY


~and studies the former. The self and its world are cor-
relative. I am the self that I am, simply because of the
nature of the world: by studying a certain kind of world
and living in it as my environment, I develop my own
mind in a determinate way. And conversely, my world is
the world of my mind: I see in it what I am able to see,
trace in it the kind of structure which my powers qualify
me for tracing, and thus determine my world as it deter-
mines me. The abstract psychology which would study
a thing called mind, having a structure and nature of its
own irrespective of what it owes to the world, is as unphilo-
sophical a quest as the abstract ontology which would study
objective reality irrespective of its debt to any and every
mind. Thus philosophy as self-consciousness includes all
possible knowledge in itself: to know what I am includes
knowing what I think.

On the other hand, the determination to think coherently
and rationally has led us to self-consciousness as to a fore-
ordained and not wholly unforeseen goal. Nothing but this
determination has led us past art, religion, science, and
history in turn: we abandoned each on discovering that
the object of each lacked something of intelligibility and
that therefore each itself Jacked something of intelligence ;
each in turn was in part an unintelligent attitude towards
an unintelligible object. And this defect was only redeemed
by the conviction, which has reappeared at every turn, that
the unintelligible object was not the real object but only
an ostensible object which pointed to a real object but did
not wholly reveal it. Of this real object we have been in
continual search ; and we seem now to have arrived at the
conclusion that it is nothing but the mind itself, Thus
the two definitions of philosophy seem to coincide. Intel-
ligence alone is absolutely intelligible, and therefore absolute


Philosophy as Self-consciousness 249


knowledge can only be the knowledge of a knowing mind
by itself.

This identification of subject and object is no mere
abstract indifference or coincidentia oppositorum. We have
left the region of abstract thought behind, and are now in
the region of concrete thought where differences are sup-
ported by unity, not swamped and lost in that unity. Mind
is here its own object; but the mind which is at once
subject and object does not cease to mean anything by that
distinction. That which is subject is also object: it is only
the one because it is the other; but the two terms retain,
and indeed now for the first time acquire, really distinct
meanings. For it is only in the synthesis of opposites that
these opposites can be distinguished. It is only by com-
paring and contrasting A with not-A, which means holding
them together in a single unity, that one can see the
difference between them.

In philosophy subject and object are identified, and this
is the differentia of philosophy ; but if that were all, philo-
sophy would be only a freak of the mind, a demonstration
that subject and object can on occasion be identified, leaving
us puzzled as to why, if this can happen at all, it happens
so seldom. Philosophy is only important and worth culti-
vating if this identity is an all-pervading principle, present
in every phase of experience but only becoming explicit in
philosophy. But this is exactly the position which we must
now maintain. In art, religion, science, and history the true
object is always the mind itself: it is only the ostensible
object that is other than the mind. That is to say, art and
the rest are themselves philosophy, but implicit philosophy.
Their true nature is to be philosophy, but this nature is
concealed beneath an error in self-knowledge whose peculiar
character produces the peculiar facies of the artistic or other


250 PHILOSOPHY


consciousness, Art and the rest are the unconscious philo-
sophies of a mind nescientis se philosophari; and this
ignorance, which is the difference between the artist and
the philosopher, is what prevents art, religion, and so forth
from consciously studying their real object, the mind, and
compels them to believe that their true aim is to contemplate
those images and abstractions which are their ostensible
objects. We have shown how any error in a mind’s know-
ledge of itself necessitates this result. The erroneous con-
ception of itself is judged, falsely, to be real: that is the
ostensible object. But the reality—its own true nature—
is still the real object, though hidden as it were behind the
ostensible object. Now if error could ever be pure and
unadulterated error, the opacity of the ostensible object
would be complete; but in fact every error is partly true
and therefore inconsistent with itself, and therefore these
inconsistencies in the ostensible object are, as it were,
rifts in the veil of illusion through which truth is always
breaking in. Or, to state it in a less metaphorical way, the
mind, having formed a false conception of itself, tries to
live up to that conception. But the falseness of the con-
ception just means that it cannot be ‘lived up to’. There
is therefore a permanent discord between what the mind
thinks it is and what, on the strength of that conception,
it does: even though this behaviour is not at all the same
thing as the behaviour of a mind that knows itself truly. The
result is an open inconsistency between theory and practice ;
and this inconsistency, as ground for dissatisfaction, is the
starting-point of the attempt at truer self-knowledge. _
Art, religion, science, and history are thus philosophical
errors, and owe all their characteristics, and the charac-
teristics attributed by them to their ostensible objects, to
the initial error on which each is based. None is a mere


Philosophy as Self-consciousness 251


or complete error, for such a thing does not exist. Each
grasps ‘one aspect of the truth’, as we say, forgetting that
truth is a whole whose aspects cannot be thus separated :
each is true, even while it is false; and only its truth
enables it to effect that self-criticism which leads to some-
thing better. If there were a complete error, the person
who fell into it could never by any means escape it, and no
one could ever tell which of two rival views was true and
which false.

All error is inconsistent with itself, and owes this incon-
sistency to the fact that it is not merely erroneous but
partly true. Truth and error are opposites which only
a false abstraction can so separate as to speak of mere
truth and mere error. All error is based on, and implicitly
contains, truth, and is therefore never quite false. All truth,
it might be hastily inferred, contains error and is never
quite true. But to say this would be to fall into the sophism
of the little boy who, on expressing a wish to marry his
grandmother and being told by his father that this was
impossible, replied, ‘ You married my mother, so why
shouldn’t I marry yours?’ Error is always present in
truth, but negatively present, that is to say, it is present
as that which is denied: as drunkenness is present to the
mind of a temperance preacher: as the enemy whose dis-
positions and tactics condition every element in the plans
of a general. Every truth, that is to say, takes the form
which it does take in order to refute or deny a particular
error. This negative presence of error in truth must not
be confused either with positive presence or with mere
absence.

This interdependence of truth and error, error containing
truth positively and truth containing error negatively, is
not only a fact easily verified in empirical observation and


252 PHILOSOPHY


well known as an article of worldly wisdom even to those
who in their philosophies try to deny it, but it is a corollary
of the fact that all knowledge is self-knowledge, and every
error an error about the knowing mind. Hence the abstrac-
tion which separates subject and object also separates truth
and error (good and evil, and so on), and, with the melo-
dramatic taste of unsophisticated youth, paints its truths
and its heroes pure white and its errors and villains pure
black. Such a melodramatic view of life is a logical con-
sequence of realism, for if there were a world of real objects
completely other than the mind, absolute errors could no
doubt be made concerning them. Only, by an inevitable
coincidentia oppositorum, no one could possibly distinguish
an absolute error from an absolute truth.


§ 2. Realistic or Dogmatic Philosophy in general

Art, religion, science, history, and whatever other forms
of thought may be distinguished, are not autonomous forms
of experience but philosophical errors. They are, that is
to say, the forms of philosophical error, and in order to
study this phenomenon we must look not at philosophy but
art and the rest.

This is, as stated, an obvious paradox. It is a half-truth
which, unqualified, is a whole falsehood. Its falsity is based
on the fact of its being an abstraction: the abstraction of
truth from falsehood. Art as such is not a simple error,
any more than, say, neo-Platonism as such is a simple
error. Each—to use a common but metaphorical phrase—
makes an indispensable contribution to the body of truth
as a whole. But each has its own besetting sin, its own
characteristic way of misstating the truth. We have
hitherto allowed ourselves to say that in art, religion, and
so forth the substance of truth was present, but was con-


Realistic or Dogmatic Philosophy 253


cealed by an inadequate form: that, for instance, religion
actually solved the riddle of life but presented its solution
in a mythological form. This implies that the task of
philosophy, regarded as the philosophy of religion, is the
simple translation of this solution of the riddle of life out
of the language of mythology into that of philosophy. In
a sense this is a true account of the matter, but it is not
wholly true. It implies that matter and form are indifferent
to one another, and that the meaning is indistinguishably
the same however it is stated. If that were so, why restate
it? Translation itself is based on the fact that the meaning
takes new colour and shines with a new light when we
express it in different words. To set the meaning as an
abstract self-identity over against the language makes
translation pointless: to swamp it in a mere immediate
union with the language itself makes translation impossible.
Meaning and language are simply the universal and the
particular. Abstract logic, the false theory of science, sets
them outside one another. Abstract aesthetic, the false
theory of art and religion, swamps the one in the other.
Concrete logic sees them as distinct yet inseparable.

For this reason thought in its concrete form is not
indifferent to its own choice of language. It realizes that
an unsuitable linguistic form affects its own inmost being,
and that what we have called merely formal error is in
reality material and essential error. Our distinction between
formal error and material truth was, in fact, only an abstract
way of stating the very important fact that no error is
wholly erroneous, but is always capable of a dialectical
development into truth by simply bringing to light what is
already implicit in it: what the thinker, as we para-
doxically say, ‘really means’, but ‘does not know that
he means’ This process of translation into progressively


254 PH hooo' Ra Y


adequate language is simply the dialectical self-criticism of
thought.

A distinction has been made between dogmatic and
critical philosophy. Dogmatic philosophy is described as
the procedure of thought without inquiry into its own
powers ; critical philosophy as the investigation by thought
itself of the limitations of its capacity. It is easy to be
clever at the expense of this distinction, by pointing out
that, because to discover a limit to one’s thought is to
transcend that limit, therefore critical philosophy is impos-
sible, since one can never get outside one’s own mind. But
the people who actually made the distinction were not
attempting to get outside their own minds. They were
attempting to criticize, not thought in general, but a peculiar
form of thought, namely, what we have called abstract
thought or science: they were struggling to achieve con-
crete thought by criticizing abstract thought. And because

they had not yet fully achieved concrete thought, their
criticism of abstract thought necessarily took the form of
a dialectical criticism of abstract thought by itself. Not to
realize this was a venial sin in themselves; it is culpable
stupidity in their modern critics.

There is not only one dogmatism; there are as many
types of dogmatism as there are types of abstraction. There
is only one type of concrete thought, namely, what we call
philosophy, the mind's explicit consciousness of itself; but
this may be reduced to a dogmatism by dogmatizing or
abstracting in an infinite variety of ways. In point of fact
we have already reviewed some of these ways. Art, religion,
science, and history are themselves precisely forms of dog-
matic philosophy. The mind recognizing its own character
as thought but affirming this thought abstractly in opposi-
tion to sensation is science, which as a kind of philosophy


Realistic or Dogmatic Philosophy 255


is scientific dogmatism; and so on. But in all these dog-
matisms there is a distinction between the direct form of
consciousness (art, religion, &c.) and the reflective form
(aestheticism, theism, &c.), and this appears as the dis-
tinction between direct or primary experience, as the
apprehension of the object and reflective or secondary
experience, as the return of the mind upon itself to study
its own primary experience. Such a distinction between
primary and secondary experience is the infallible mark of
dogmatism in all its varieties. It is indeed the logical con-
sequence of philosophical error in general, because if philo-
sophy is self-knowledge, an error in self-knowledge generates
an object other than the subject (namely, the erroneous
conception of the subject), and thus sets up a distinction
between knowledge of this object and knowledge of the
subject, or primary and secondary experience. But because
the object is nothing but an error about the subject, the
knowledge (so called) of the subject will itself be affected
by this error, and hence the secondary experience will turn
out a mere reduplication of the primary, a coincidentia
oppositorum. Thus, for instance, formal logic and meta-
physics are the scientific mind’s account of itself and its
object respectively, and it is easy to see that they are the
same thing. On the other hand, this identity of primary
with secondary experience is necessarily concealed from the
mind affected by it, by the mere fact of its dogmatism.
The philosophical system called theism or philosophical
theology is not recognized by the simple religious conscious-
ness as identical with itself, but as its own opposite, re-
flective thought as opposed to immediate intuition: yet
all theology tries to do is to think what in religion is
intuited.

Thus each of the various types of experience which we


256 PHILOSOPHY


have analysed is, as we have said, a philosophy and an
erroneous philosophy; but it is a necessary result of their
error that they do not recognize themselves as philosophies.
Their character as philosophies is essential to their being,
but it is hidden within themselves, implicit ; and comes
out into explicitness only when, from contemplating their
ostensible object, they turn back to contemplate their osten-
sible selves. I say ostensible selves, for the error which
deforms the object deforms the subject too, and hence the
account they give of themselves when they reflect upon
themselves cannot be a true account.

It is therefore inevitable that there should be an aesthetic
philosophy, a religious philosophy, a scientific philosophy,
and an historical philosophy, not to mention others corre-
sponding to any form of experience which our analysis has
passed by. The necessity of these philosophies is sophisti-
cally denied by the point of view which argues that philo-
sophy is the business of philosophers and ought to be left
in their professional and qualified hands. This academic
trade-unionism is contemptible, not because it is trade-
unionism, which in its own sphere, the economic life, is
a good and necessary thing, but because it is trade-unionism
hypocritically posing as philosophy, or in other words the
error of conceiving philosophy as one specialized form of
experience, instead of realizing that it is merely the self-
consciousness of experience in general.

‘ The world really is what, errors apart, we take it to be.’
From this unexceptionable major premiss, dogmatism gets
conclusions by framing the minor premiss ‘in such and
such a type of experience there is no error’. For instance,
in a newspaper review that catches my eye to-day, an able
young writer is pompously reprimanded for ‘ not under-
standing that Mr. Blank ’—one of our leading realists—


Realistic or Dogmatic Philosophy 257


‘is concerned with the analysis of propositions (like, this is
a table) which are quite certainly true, and that the business
of philosophy is to discover what these propositions mean ’,
Not, that is, to ask whether they are true: that is guaranteed
by something other than philosophy, whose infallibility
philosophy has to take for granted. This is the programme
of all dogmatism. An infallible non-philosophical source
vouchsafes a revelation of absolute truth, ‘ quite certainly
true ’, which philosophy is not asked to justify and is not
allowed to criticize ; and philosophy is granted the privilege
of expounding and commenting on this revelation.

On this programme we would remark that the alleged non-
philosophical form of experience is, as we now know, always
a form of philosophy, but philosophy in its implicit form,
at the mercy of abstraction and prejudice. Hence the form
of thought which is placed above philosophy differs from
philosophy only for the worse—only by being philosophical
dogma, philosophical prejudice instead of philosophy willing
to explain and if necessary modify itself. Thus, the pro-
position ‘ this is a table’ is, even at best, a mere expression
of abstract classification, and false just as far as it is abstract.
The assumption that we have in our hands an actually
achieved cognition which is ‘ quite certainly true’, which
is wholly exempt from error, cuts the ground from under
any further process of thought heterogeneous from that by
which this revelation was gained: philosophy, if that is the
name of this further process, is thrown out of work, for if
we already know that a given proposition is ‘ quite certainly
true’, it argues an unnatural simplicity of mind to suppose
that there can still be room for inquiry as to ‘ what it
means ’.

The form of experience which has here been dogmatically
asserted as infallible is perception, regarded as implying

2792 R


258 PHILOSOPHY


classification. This is a modern type of dogmatism, and to
call it dogmatic is therefore unsafe ; but the exactly parallel
dogmatism of the religious experience is sufficiently out of
date to be analysed with impunity. When philosophy
assumes the infallibility of religion and, accepting that as
its fixed point, constitutes itself the ancilla fidei, such
a philosophy must be false, and the hard things that have
been said about philosophy in bondage to religion are not
at all undeserved. But the warmest critics of such a philo-
sophy generally fail to see that its fault lies not in its choice
of masters but in its admitting a master at all, and they
lift up their voices in a plaintive protest if in their own day
philosophy refuses to swallow whole the worlds of science
and perception. They can only account for such a refusal
by accusing philosophy of ‘ malice’ towards science, pre-
cisely as the philosophy which broke with religious dog-
matism was accused of malice towards religion. In a sense,
these accusations are just. Reasoning can be met by
criticism, but dogmatism cannot. You can only argue with
a willing disputant. If you say to a convinced dogmatist,
whether religious or scientific, ‘ Come, let us reason together ’,
and offer to criticize his fundamental dogmas, he can only,
as a consistent dogmatist, refuse; and if you then, like
a wise man, shake the dust of his city from your shoes, he
is acting within the recognized conventions of abuse if he
calls you malicious, because you are refusing to share his
comfortable pigsty for no reason which he can see to be
valid.

Dogmatic philosophies cannot be refuted, because the
dogmatist has a trump card in his hand all the time,
namely, his own dogmatism or imperviousness to argument.
Thus any and every attack on a religious view of the world
can be annihilated by the reply ‘God knows best’. There


Realistic or Dogmatic Philosophy 259


is no answer to that ; you can only circumvent it by drawing
the dogmatist out and getting him to discuss the question
‘What do you mean by God?’ Similarly, modern realism
can crush any critic by pointing out that everything he
says has already presupposed its own pre-existent object,
so that ali his best arguments turn to his own destruction.
But this realistic ‘Open Sesame’ is only the original act of
abstraction whose validity is in question, and which, in
answer to any doubts as to its value, is simply repeated.

But dogmatic philosophies, though they cannot be refuted
—a truth which dogmatism, grown fat and cynical, publishes
in the form of the doctrine that all argument is circular—
can and do refute themselves. Every such philosophy con-
tains the seeds of its own destruction, and these fail to
germinate only when they are planted in a barren mind.
For a dogmatic philosophy is really nothing but a single,
blind, abstract act of will: it is the determination to remain
within the circle of a specific form of experience. Religious
dogmatism only consists in repeating to oneself ‘I will
remain at the religious point of view’, and in reasserting
this point of view in all its abstractness against all comers.
Modern realism says to itself ‘I will on every occasion
separate the object from the subject’, and that is all it
does. Now this attitude is one of resistance ; but resistance
to what ? The dogmatist thinks that he is resisting ‘ mali-
cious ’ external enemies, but that is part of his self-deception.
He is resisting his own doubts.

Dogmatism is simply the resistance which a given form
of experience presents to its own destruction by an inner
dialectic. Perhaps it would be truer to say that it is the
dead body of such a form which, as living experience, has
already been so destroyed. It is only when a given form
of experience can no longer justify itself by a vigorous and

R2


260 Pamresorny


healthy life that it shrinks into a crust of dogmatism to
die. The dogmatic philosophy which, on the face of it,
serves a tyrannical master is really nothing but the collapse
of that master’s own life into the repetitive mumblings of
senility. In his vigour he needs no such help. Then, his
justification of his own existence is that the blind receive
their sight, and the lame walk; the lepers are cleansed,
and the deaf hear; the dead are raised up, and the poor
have the gospel preached to them.

Yet senility is a part of the dispensation of nature, and
a thing venerable and not without sanctity. And since we
are commanded to honour our fathers and mothers, we
ought to treat dogmatic philosophy with reverence and
eschew the sin of Ham. For it is only by the gate of dog-
matism that any one can set forth upon the road of philo-
sophy ; and the critic of dogmatism inevitably looks back
on it not only as upon the Egypt of his bondage but as the
pit whence he was digged and the home of his youth;
home, too, of all those who, young now, may one day go
out into the wilderness as he has gone and as his fathers
went before him.


§ 3. Aesthetic Philosophy


The first of the dogmatic philosophies which we shall
briefly review is the philosophical self-assertion of the
aesthetic consciousness. This is aesthetic philosophy or
the philosophy of art, the reasoned vindication of the
aesthetic experience. All works which treat of ‘ aesthetics’
as a separate philosophical science belong to this class; for
the possibility of separating aesthetics from other philo-
sophical sciences implies a correlative separation of art from
other activities of the mind, the assertion of art as a self-
contained and autonomous form of experience. But art is


Aesthetic Philoso phy 261


really no more than the aesthetic side of all knowledge,
unintelligible in abstraction from knowledge as a whole;
and therefore the only intelligible philosophy of art is
a philosophy which places the aesthetic side of knowledge
in its right place, and this can only be a complete philosophy
of knowledge. The act of drawing a ring-fence round the
aesthetic consciousness and regarding it as a thing to itself
is an abstraction which gives birth at once to art, as a specific
experience, and aesthetic philosophy as the study of that
experience.

Aesthetic philosophy in its most primitive form is simply
art-criticism, the talk of artists about art. This is a neces-
sary development of art itself, and is of high intcrest to
the philosopher, very much as the conversation of farmers
and shepherds, with their deep knowledge of hill and dale,
is of interest to the surveyor. But as the surveyor must
rely on his own measurements for the drawing of his map,-
so the philosopher must form his conclusions upon art from
his own reflection, and cannot undertake to believe all that
the artist tells him. This is not because the artist is an
amateur in philosophy. There is no such thing in philosophy
as amateur or professional. It is because his very profession
as an artist takes its rise in a philosophical error concerning
the nature of experience in general, which necessarily vitiates
everything he says whether about art or about life.

In all forms of philosophical dogmatism, the point is not
that the dogmatist inay be right in his dogmatically-
expressed philosophy, by a lucky guess or the grace of
heaven ; the point is that the dogmatic form is itself only
the expression of a material and positive error which affects
by an iron necessity everything couched in that form, The
dogmatist is not, as it were, shooting in the dark by
“instinct ’ at a target which with luck he may hit; what


262 Panny OsS:orRne.


we call his ‘ instinct ’ is a self-frustrated form of ‘ reason’,
and the blindness of his aim is nothing but the fact that he
is aiming away from the target. These metaphors, however,
must be corrected by the proviso that in thinking there is
no such thing as a real miss, a wholly erroneous error.
Even in its simplest form, as the artist’s theory of art,
aesthetic philosophy is implicitly a theory of life as a whole
and tends to flood, so to speak, that part of life which lies
outside the aesthetic experience. When this happens we
get a true aesthetic philosophy. This is a philosophy which
reduces all philosophical problems to terms of imagination
or intuition. For such a philosophy everything is monadic,
unique in the sense of abstractly unique or free from any
taint of continuity with everything else; every event is
abstractly new, not concretely new like the facts of history,
but new in the sense of irrelevant to what went before.
Such being the real world, a world of pure change, the only
attitude which is adequate to it is the intuition of the artist
with its monadic structure or negation of structure. Philo-
sophies of this kind appear at various points of history, but
the best-known modern example represents the positive
proposal following on a destructive criticism of science.
Such a denial of the scientific intellect, followed by an
assertion of intuition as the opposite of intellect, clearly
betrays a failure to pass beyond science itself; for this
denial of A and assertion of not-A is based on logical pre-
suppositions which are precisely those of the scientific intel-
lect. A real repudiation of science would involve the
repudiation of that repudiation itself, and the absorption
of science into a concrete historical whole. The modern
philosophy of intuition is a backward eddy in the stream


of thought.
Aesthetic philosophy is the abstract assertion of imme-


Aesthetic Philosophy 263


diacy, the denial of thought. ‘ Don’t think, feel,’ is its
maxim. It is therefore, as the denial of thought, the denial
of philosophy and of itself: if, as it declares, feeling were
enough, the explicit principle which recommends feeling
would be unnecessary. A person who has to remind himself
to act on impulse has ceased to act on impulse; and one
who advises others to follow their impulses is really advising
them to follow his advice. Thus aesthetic philosophy is the
formal denial of its own existence ; and yet, in that very
denial, it exists, but only because it shows itself, by its
denial, to be doing precisely what it denies it is doing,
namely, thinking. Aesthetic philosophy is thus a living
example of the so-called ‘ Fallacy of Pseudomenos’. Like
all forms of that fallacy, it is dissipated by the discovery
that its very denial is implicitly an assertion.

It may here be observed that there is no dialectical
transition from aesthetic philosophy to religious philosophy
and so forth. These dogmatisms are only the negative
moments of the dialectic of experience, dead by-products
of the forms of consciousness which produce them, blind-
alleys in the process of thought. You cannot work forward
out of them: you must retreat backwards from them and
begin afresh from another form of experience. Aesthetic
philosophy is not the mother of religious philosophy but
the corpse of art. This is the truth for which those are
contending who say that philosophies do not come, and
cannot be emended, by reasoning; and that they depend
not on argument but upon conviction, temperament, or
experience. Such a contention is in substance true enough :
it is only false because it insists upon substituting one error
for another and interpreting ‘ temperament’ or the like in
a mythological and superstitious way.


264 Pato som


§ 4. Religious Philosophy

The second type of dogmatic philosophy which we have
to consider is that which takes its cue from the religious
consciousness. Religion affirms God as its object, and we
have seen that this affirmation is a misunderstanding of its
own true nature. For though religion expresses itself in
terms which, taken literally, imply the objective existence
of God, its meaning is only apprehended when we make up
our mind to regard these expressions as metaphorical state-
ments of something else, something which is never by
religion actually stated in literal terms, though it is capable
of being so stated.

The peculiar kind of dogmatism which we call religious
philosophy is a philosophical analysis of religion conducted
on the assumption that in the language of its creeds religion
is expressing itself not metaphorically but literally. These
creeds are then examined as if they were literal statements
of fact ; and the result is a conflict between two canons of
interpretation. First, because the religious consciousness
actually exists and finds the belief in these statements
necessary to its own existence, it is argued that they must
be true. Hence arises philosophical theism, or the attempt
to show that the statements of a creed are literally true;
and of this the most powerful weapon is the ontological
argument. It is shown that religion is not the mere assump-
tion of God as an hypothesis or probable theory, but the
actual living contact of the soul with God. Hence, to state
the argument in its simplest form, God must exist or religion
could not exist. And this argument is incontrovertible in
the sense that, since religion certainly exists, that which it
means by the term God must also exist ; but what it means
by God is not what it says, and hence the recurring objection


Religious Philosophy 265


to the ontological proof that what it proves is indeed the
existence of something, but not of the religious man’s God
(the literal God, God as an image), rather of the philosopher’s
absolute (the concept which the image of God metaphorically
means).

Such is the first canon of interpretation. The second is
the principle that because God, as naively represented in
religion, is clearly a mere imagination, a figment of mytho-
logical fancy, therefore religion, which is so intimately bound
up with his existence, is an illusion. This also can be proved
by a method which we might describe as the converse onto-
logical argument ; but here again the proof always misses
the point. Religion always replies to the arguments of
atheism that its God is wholly unaffected by such arguments,
that its own living contact with the object of its devotion
is far too close and far too convincing an experience to be
dispelled by any kind of reasoning. This is why, as we
have already seen, atheistical arguments are a peculiarly
futile and unintelligent form of sophistry, and one not
actually cultivated by any one above the intellectual level
of the tub-thumpers in public parks; who, however, may
be pardoned for their eccentricities if we remember that
their arguments, however silly, are at least incapable of
refutation by those against whom they are directed. For
atheism assumes at the start that religion means what it
says, and on this basis it is all too easy to prove the non-
existence of an infinite God who because he is distinct from
finite beings is finite; an omnipotent being who, because
his existence leaves man free to act, is not omnipotent ;
a loving and good being who because he does not exert
himself to protect us against calamity is no true friend ;
a ruler of the universe whose actual methods of rule, so far
as we can see them, are those of a mentally deranged tyrant.


266 Pani te so rany


Hence atheism has no difficulty in proving the absurd and
irrational character of religion and the desirability of stamp-
ing it out. Characteristically of a negative form of thought,
it does not trouble itself with the question why religion
exists. It contents itself with attacking, and does not aim
at understanding.

This is because atheism is the negative side of religious
dogmatism. A dogmatic philosophy does not aim at under-
standing a form of thought, and hence it falls necessarily
into two opposed halves: on the one side it asserts that
form, on the other it attacks it. The positive side of religious
dogmatism, namely theism, and the negative side, namely
atheism, are at one in not trying to understand religion,
and taking up a dogmatic attitude towards it.

Theism is much in favour at the present time, and is
defended by many writers of distinction as the last word in
philosophy. It is especially taken to be the crown and com-
pletion of something called idealism, namely, the explanation
of the entire universe in terms of mind. Idealism, in the
sense in which it leads to theism, is the doctrine that the
world is made, so to speak, of mind; and is regarded as
the opposite of materialism or the doctrine that the world
is made of matter. Both these theories begin by abstracting
the object of knowledge from the subject, and both go on
by inquiring into the nature of the object in this abstraction,
regarded as a thing in itself. Both agree in committing
the fundamental error of separating the metaphysical inquiry
as to what the world is in itself from the psychological
inquiry as to how we come to know it. Idealism in this
sense leaves unreconciled the opposition between subject
and object, and therefore sets the object outside the sub-
ject; but, feeling that this opposition must somehow be
reconciled, it tries to bridge the gap by ascribing to the


Religious Philosoph Ly 267


object some kind of consubstantiality with the subject,
turning it into another mind, a society of minds (spiritual
pluralism) or an infinite mind (theism).

With anything which deserves the name of idealism in
this sense, we have nothing to do except to reject it. We
do not ask whether the world, considered in isolation from
our mind, is material or mental, because we are engaged
on a consistent attempt to get rid of these abstract separa-
tions and antitheses. We hold that the scientist’s world,
so far as it exists, really is material, in the sense that, so
far as he is a scientist, he believes in its reality as material,
and that, so far as he succeeds in being a scientist, he is
right so to believe. But we hold that this material world,
regarded as material, is not fully intelligible, and that to
describe it as the object of scientific thought is to fall into
the error of supposing that scientific thought can maintain
itself as a stable attitude towards a real object. The
scientific attitude cannot be thus maintained: when we try
to grasp it, it dissolves in our grasp. Hence the theory that
the world or any part of the world is material is not so
much a false theory as a thcory that nobody holds, though
some people delude themselves into thinking that they hold
it. The material world of science is thus not in the last
resort a world of animate objects or minds or the like: it
is in the last resort an illusion, and its ‘ mental’ character
is just the fact that, like all illusions, it is a figment of the
mind which tries to conceive it. In the same way, any
object considered in abstraction from a mind which knows
it is neither material nor mental, but an illusion, a false
abstraction. Thus we certainly do not say that the objective
world in itself is mental. If we are asked what it is apart
from a mind that knows it, we shall answer that it is not
‘apart from’ such a mind; it is ‘with’ it in the sense of being


268 PHILOSOPHY


known by it. If we are asked what it would be apart from
such a mind, we shall answer that the very question implies
the suggestio falsi that we can describe that which by
definition is unknown.

Our enemy is abstraction. We object to materialism only
because it represents a claim to ultimate truth made on
behalf of a concept which is flagrantly abstract. For the
same reason we object to theism. Theism is a form of
realism, of the abstract separation between the knower and
the known. Philosophically, we object to it for this reason,
because it fails to live up to the ideal of concrete thought ;
but we object to it on religious grounds as well. Religion
cares nothing for philosophical theism, because religion is
not interested in argument. The existence of its God does
not require, and does not even admit, proof. For since
religion does not define what it means by God, it is impos-
sible to discover what we are to prove. We have to offer
our own definition of the ferm, and whatever definition we
offer will necessarily be rejected by religion, because the
refusal to admit that God can be defined is vital to the
religious consciousness, and to attempt such a definition is
already to pass outside the sphere of religion and to falsify,
from the religious point of view, our relation to God. For
the true God, the object of love and worship, we have set
up a false God, the object of understanding, and what we
prove is always this false God, never the true. Thus religion
rejects its would-be friend, theism, as decisively as its would-
be enemy, atheism. They fight over its head, and it goes
calmly on its way ignoring them, knowing that the only God
in whom it is interested is safe in his heaven and unaffected
by the storms of controversy raging round his empty name.

But theism, outcast from religion, is no less definitely an
outcast from philosophy. This, in spite of repeated attempts


Religious Philosophy 269


to deny it, is notorious enough. Every one whose intel-
lectual conscience is keen and untainted by sophistry, every
one who has a fine sense of values in philosophical work,
knows instinctively that the importation of God into an
argument breaks the rules of the game, upsets the table
instead of working the moves out to a finish. Philosophers
drag in the idea of God when they are conscious of coming
to the end of their tether, and not before: so that the
entry of God into a philosophical system marks unerringly
the point at which the system breaks down. Every candid
philosopher knows that this is so; and it is easy to see the
reason for it. Since the religious idea of God differs from
the philosophical concept of an ultimate reality in leaving
itself undefined, that idea may in a philosophy stand for
any concept whatever. To expound a philosophy in terms
of God is like evaluating a quantity in terms of x and
leaving x undefined. In the concrete life of religion God is
given a content by the way in which we worship him; our
attitude to him shows what sort of a God we take him to
be. But a philosophy whose ultimate appeal is to God
gives him no content whatever, and he remains a mere
cipher, an unknown which renders valueless every formula
in which it appears—that is, the whole philosophy. Thus
the word God might be replaced by any other word so far
as its philosophical value is concerned, and the controversy
between theism and atheism turns out to be a meaningless
dispute over a word. And in proportion as the idea of God
is accurately defined, so as to remove this difficulty, the
name God becomes progressively less and less applicable,
more of a misnomer.

None the less, the development of theism and atheism
out of religion seems to be inevitable. As long as religion
so far misunderstands itself as to affirm the image instead


270 PHILOSOPHY


of the meaning, it must happen that this misunderstanding
will be perpetuated and bear fruit. This is the only way
in which it can be removed. Hence religion must give rise
to theology, a form of thought which elaborates the asser-
tions of religion on the assumption that they say what they
mean, and is therefore a science; and theology, or the
scientific elaboration of religious expressions, must give rise
to the philosophical question whether these expressions, so
elaborated, are true or false. The two dogmatic answers
to this question are theism and atheism. Each is equally
tenable ; for the theistic case that religion itself guarantees
their truth precisely balances the atheistic case that they
are nonsensical. The clash between these two, however,
naturally leads to the reconsideration of the original ques-
tion. This is the critical attitude, which instead of asking
whether religion is true or false asks what it means. The
result will be the discovery of the metaphorical character
of religion, and hence the destruction of both theism and
atheism, as misinterpretations of the religious consciousness.
From this critical point of view it will be possible for the
first time to do justice to the spirit of religion instead of
quarrelling over the letter. But the critical point of view
cannot be reached by any direct path from dogmatic theism
or atheism. These empty wranglings over a dead word
which is, in fact, the corpse of the religious consciousness
must be swept aside by a resolute and open-eyed conversion
of the soul to the discipline of thought. Only in the day-
light of explicit thought, however distressingly that daylight
reveals the poverty and squalor of both disputants, can the
theist and atheist finish their battle and sign a treaty
of peace. That daylight will not come of itself. It can
only be won by rigorous training in scientific, historical,
and philosophical thought.


Scientific Philosophy 271


§ 5. Scientific Philosophy


If science is the affirmation of the abstract concept,
scientific philosophy is this affirmation raised to the level
of a philosophy, that is to say, become explicitly self-
conscious. The scientist as such assumes that in describing
the world in terms of abstract concepts he is, in principle,
describing it correctly: scientific philosophy raises this
assumption to the level of a definite assertion consciously
made and defended against criticism. The scientist thinks
abstractly : the scientific philosopher justifies him in so doing.

This justification of the scientific attitude takes a double
form. In the first place, it is logic (which throughout this
section means formal logic): in the second, metaphysics.
In the first place, it is an account of scientific thinking, an
exposition of its principles, structure, and methodology: in
the second place, it vindicates the objective validity of this
type of thinking by showing that the real world is con-
structed in such a way that, in thinking of it scientifically, we
are thinking of it as it really is. Logic and metaphysics are
necessary to each other. Without metaphysics, logic can
only show that thought has principles and abides by them ;
but these principles might be such as to falsify, instead of
verifying, the thought which obeys them. Without logic,
metaphysics can only show what the real world is like; but
it may be such a world as, to our thinking faculties, must
remain unknown and unknowable.

Now if the scientific consciousness is to be affirmed as
valid, logic and metaphysics must themselves be scientific ;
for if their fruit is the conclusion that abstract thought is in
principle sound, they must conform to the standard which
they set up or pronounce themselves bankrupt. Logic and
metaphysics are thus the vindication of science from its own


272 PHILOSOPHY


point of view ; science in them is justifying itself. Hence
logic, including metaphysics as its implied correlative, is
correctly described as scientia scientiarum, the scientific
theory of science. Thus we at once reach a position superior
to that of the aesthetic or religious type of philosophy ; for
in these the justification of art or religion is entrusted to
something which is other than art or religion itself, and is
therefore invalidated by the fact that to argue in defence
of a form of experience which itself cannot or will not argue,
is implicitly to assert not the autonomy or finality of that
form of experience but precisely its weakness, its inability
to justify itself. The aesthetician and theologian, in
ostensibly defending art and religion, are really laying bare
their defects ; but in the person of the logician it is science
itself that undertakes its own defence. Thus science achieves
the very important feat of becoming self-conscious and still
remaining itself, thereby exhibiting a stability and self-
reliance which are beyond the reach of art and religion. This
it can do because in it thought has become explicit.

But thought is in science merely abstract, and therefore
the scientific philosophy which emerges from it is abstract
also. The universal and the particular still stand over
against one another in an unreconciled dualism: hence
thought in the primary sense, or science, is merely an object
to thought in the secondary sense, or logic. As the chemist
studies the general nature of the physical elements, so the
logician studies the general nature of thought. But as
the chemist’s thought is distinct from its own object, so the
logician’s thought is distinct from that ‘ thought in general ’
which is the object of logical analysis ; for this separation
of thinking from the object thought about is presupposed
in all science. It follows that the thinking which goes on
in the logician’s mind cannot be the thought which he is


Scientific Philosophy 273


studying and describing. His object is said to be thought,
but it is by definition an object of thought—the object of
his thought—and therefore, because thought and its object
are by definition separate, he can never by his logical analysis
grasp the thought that is actually going on within his own
mind.

This difficulty cannot be evaded by protesting that, in so
far as he studies the general nature of thought, he is implicitly
studying his own thought as an instance of thought in
general. For thought in general is no thought in particular :
it is the mere abstraction of a thought which nobody thinks,
and is therefore simply not thought but the rules which
thought, when it is valid, obeys. Thought in general thus
turns out to mean the object of thought in general, and logic
is the description not of thinking as it actually goes on, but
of the general characteristics of objective reality as such.

Thus, by an inevitable coincidentia oppositorum, the
initial abstractness of scientific procedure converts the
analysis of thought as such into an analysis of its object as
such: thought comes to mean the abstract object of thought
and logic passes over into metaphysics.

But this transition only makes matters worse. Logic
distinguishes valid from invalid inferences, and lays down
certain canons which thought must obey if it is to be valid.
But these canons depend on metaphysics. It is only because
they are deduced from the structure of the real world that
they are canons at all; apart from this, they may be laws
of thinking but they are not laws of true thinking. They
may be ways in which we cannot help thinking, but that
does not prove that in thinking thus we think the truth.
Therefore we must justify them metaphysically: we must
demonstrate that what we have hitherto called logic or the
theory of thought is really metaphysics or the theory of

2792 S)


274 PHILOSOPHY


reality, and that what we have called the laws of thought
are the laws of being.

But this is precisely what we cannot do. Metaphysics is
impossible ; for its task is to vindicate the objective validity
of the ways in which we think, and if there are any flaws in
our methods of thought, these will affect our metaphysical
theory of reality and introduce into it the very mistakes
which by its help we had hoped to eradicate. Hence the
theory of being as distinct from thinking (metaphysics) will
only be the theory of thinking as distinct from being (logic)
expressed in a different terminology but subject to the same
fatal weakness, namely that just as logic can never analyse
real thinking—the thinking that, going on in the logician’s
mind, always lies behind his analysis—so metaphysics can
never analyse real being, being as it is in itself untainted
by thought.

All that is left at this point is psychology: that is to say
the study of thought as a mere phenomenon, without
attempting to raise the question whether a given thought
is true or false, valid or invalid. The distinction between
truth and falsehood, already waived by logic in so far as
logic ignores the truth of the premisses and attends only to
the validity of the inference from them, is by psychology
banished altogether, and thought now becomes something
that happens and nothing more. It is a mere event, whose
claim to be an act of knowledge is ignored. This abstraction
of thought from its own truth or falsity is the characteristic
mark of the psychology of knowledge; a similar abstraction
marks the psychology of conduct and so forth.

The limitations of psychology are quite clear and consis-
tent, but are not always recognized by those who practise
it or by those who, not being themselves psychologists, hope
to derive certain results from its pursuit. Because psycho-


Scientific Philosophy 275


logy ignores the distinction between truth and falsehood, it
gives us laws of thought which apply indifferently to both:
all its distinctions, that is to say, cut across the distinction
between truth and falsehood, and when psychology has
classified a certain process as one of association or whatever
it may be, no result ever follows as to whether this process
yields a truth or anerror. It is a fallacy, but an exceedingly
common fallacy, to imagine that by giving a psychological
analysis of any ‘mental event’ we have done anything
whatever towards either discrediting or commending it as
an attempt at achieving truth, goodness, beauty or the like.
Its character as such an attempt is precisely what psychology
ignores ; and hence thinking, as such an attempt, is not even
recognized by psychology to exist. In _ behaviourism,
psychology becomes aware of this self-imposed rule, and
asserts it explicitly. Hence it is idle to protest against the
behaviouristic tendency to regard thought as a mechanism ;
we ought rather to be grateful to the behaviourists for
revealing the true nature of psychology and pushing it to
its logical conclusion.

But this logical conclusion is nothing more nor less than
a veductio ad absurdum. If psychology is a correct account of
thinking, it is a correct account of the thinking of psycholo-
gists ; that is to say, psychology itself is only a kind of event
which goes on in the minds of people called psychologists,
a complex of mental idiosyncrasies innocent of any distinc-
tion between truth and falsehood. But no psychologist
believes that his own psychological theories and inquiries
can be described in this way. He tacitly excepts his own
activity of scientific thinking from the analysis which he is
giving of mind in general :! that is to say, the mind which

1 Behaviourism reduces thought to behaviour ; but the existence
of behaviourism implies that behaviour not only exists but is

$2


276 PHILOSOPHY


he is describing is not the mind which is doing the description,
but something not merely different but absolutely hetero-
geneous. What in his psychological works he calls mind is
not mind at all in the sense in which he is mind. It is mind
de-mentalized, materialized, and having over against it
something untouched by his analysis, namely mind itself,
as it exists in him. Thus psychology is self-condemned as
the description of a wholly fictitious entity. In ignoring the
distinction between truth and falsehood, the psychologist
has not ignored something alien to thought, namely its
accidental relation to an object other than itself, he has
simply ignored thought; for thought is nothing whatever
but the drawing of this distinction. And yet, in ignoring
the distinction, he has asserted it implicitly in his own person,
and is thus the living refutation of his own principles.
Psychology is refuted by the psychology of psychology.
The moral of this is not that we ought to abandon
psychology and return to the old logic and metaphysics.
Those sciences have been once for all criticized by and
absorbed into psychology, which has made a real advance
upon them. They were based upon a foundation incapable
of supporting them, but in the course of their existence they
collected a vast body of valuable and sound doctrine
transcending in a sense the fallacious principles on which
it was ostensibly founded. They were not pure errors, but
bodies of truth shot through with erroneous interpretations


observed. If behaviourism told us how behaviour got itself observed,
the behaviour of behaviourists would begin to be worth observing.
But at present we are put off with inanities like this: ‘ Behaviourists
say that the talk they have to listen to can be explained without
supposing that people think.’ Why not ‘the books they write’ ?
Only because the writer quoted is too keen on his joke to see that,
sauce for the goose being sauce for the gander, the joke recoils
automatically on the behaviourist.


Scientific Philosophy 277


and implications. The same is true of psychology. Its
basis is radically unsound, and this defect becomes progres-
sively important as it deals with more and more fundamental
problems ; in saying this we say no more than what is said
by the most distinguished psychologists themselves. But
the work which it has done and is doing in detail is of the
greatest value, and no one wishes to deny the fact. What
we want is not a clean sweep of psychology but a psychology
bent upon overcoming its own abstractness, a psychology of
concrete mind ; and, in a sense, that is the aim of this book.
It is all to the good that psychology attempts to conceive
mind as a self-contained system, working by its own laws
and not determined by relation to anything outside itself.
Its error is to regard this system not as thought itself but
as an object of thought, external to the psychologist as
a thing to be observed, not living in him as a thing to be
enjoyed. By this error it reasserts the very fallacy which
it is trying to avoid.

Scientific philosophy or the self-justification of the
scientific consciousness fails because its self eludes it at every
turn. Abstractive by its own chosen nature, it throws the
object outside the subject in the form of a law, a universal,
over against its own instances ; and therefore when it tries
to return upon itself it can only study, not itself, but the
abstract law of its own operations regarded as something
objective and not subjective, not itself but some alien
determinant of itself. This alien determinant, which it calls
nature or the objective world, is in reality a pure fiction, the
fiction of the hypostatized or abstract universal. Science
itself bridges the gulf between the abstract and the concrete
by its interest in empirical fact ; but scientific philosophy
has no such mitigating influence, for it simply asserts and
reasserts the gulf. This is why science hates philosophy, and


278 PHILOSOPHY


why most people regard philosophy as the acme of futility,
the abstraction of abstraction. Science hates philosophy
because what it calls by that name—scientific philosophy—
is the discovery of its own abstractness, its own self-refutation
and death. Common sense despises philosophy for the same
reason ; because in ‘ philosophy ’—scientific philosophy—
the abstractness which in science is only provisional and
partial becomes absolute. This is that ‘ philosophy ’ which
beats in vain against problems like that of body and soul,
mind and matter, evil, and so forth, which are insoluble
because they simply express its own abstractness.

The reason why the name philosophy is almost invariably
applied to what we call scientific philosophy is that, from
the days of the early Greeks to the eighteenth century, the
main effort of European thought was concentrated upon the
development and perfection of science. During this period,
therefore, philosophy meant the reflection of science upon
itself, or scientific philosophy ; and the popular opinion of
philosophy is a valuation, and in the main a just valuation,
of scientific philosophy and therefore implicitly of science.
For the philosophy of the scientific consciousness—logic,
metaphysics, and psychology—is the quintessence of that
consciousness, which here for the first time realizes to the
full its own abstract nature, and in realizing it rejects it as
a foolish error.

This rejection is visible enough in the greatest philosophers
of what we may call the scientific epoch of thought. The
lesser philosophers have been content to set up the abstract
concept as the goal of thought, the supreme reality ; but
the greatest have risen above this dogmatism and, as it were
piercing the clouds with their summits, penetrated if only
for a moment into the clear air of concrete thought. Thus
Socrates, the very father of formal logic, based his whole


Scientific Philosophy 279


life’s work on the discovery that the only true know-
ledge was to know one’s own ignorance; thus Plato,
whose doctrine of forms, with its mathematical colouring,
is the sheet-anchor of scientific dogmatism to this day,
discovered that beyond the sciences there was something
called dialectic, the conversation of the soul with itself,
whose function was precisely to annihilate the hypotheses
on which the sciences were built ; thus Aristotle, in whose
name whole armies of dogmatists have fought, worked out
the concept of a pure activity knowing no law and no end
outside itself, and found this realized in the absolute self-
knowledge of God. To these great discoveries the scientific
dogmatism of the Greeks was a mere background, a foil
which lesser disciples have mistaken for the jewel. And the
same struggle between scientific dogmatism and the concept
of self-knowledge is the key to all modern philosophy and
notoriously that of Kant, who tried with one hand to
justify the existence of science, and with the other, by
refusing to give up the thing in itself, to maintain the
possibility of a philosophy transcending the limitations of
science, a reality which in his paradoxical phrase ‘ we can
think but not know’.

This phrase gives the very essence of scientific dogmatism,
even while breaking through it. The essence of this dogma-
tism is to regard generalizing, abstracting, as synonymous
with knowing, which implies the conception of the ultimate
reality as an abstract reality. In the Platonic doctrine of
forms, this identification is explicitly made. It was already
abandoned in effect by Aristotle when he constructed his
theology, but only abandoned to be reasserted, for his God
was a transcendent God whose relation to the world was that
of an abstract law. It was abandoned again by Descartes
when he found ultimate reality in the act of thinking, and


280 PHILOSOPHY


subsequent philosophers, so far as they have effected a real
advance, have simply given body and life to Descartes’
conception. At the present day, scientific philosophy is
an anachronism; but an anachronism that still walks the
streets and seems in no haste to die. The error of asserting
an abstract generalization as lying behind and conditioning
concrete fact still takes a vast variety of shapes. It appears
in formal logic, whether that of the old text-books or that
of the mathematical logisticians; it appears in psychology,
rational and empirical, normal and abnormal ; it appears
in the attempt to draw up a table of ‘ categories’ or necessary
forms of thought, whether regarded as a cycle of a priori
concepts, a series of predetermined dialectical phases of
experience, or a system of distinct and separate forms of the
spirit ; it would appear in this book if, as we assumed at
the outset to be legitimate, we regarded art, religion, and
the rest as permanent and necessary distinctions instead of
shifting and indeterminate manifestations of thought which
might be rearranged, subdivided and grouped in ways other
than that in which we have here treated them. In fact, it
is the error of formalism in every possible shape, and its
shapes are infinite.

But formalism is not overcome by merely issuing a general
warning against it. Those who pride themselves on being
unconventional are as a rule not only snobs but hypocrites ;
they do not let themselves see how miserably conventional
they are. Formalism, like conventionality, is only the
defect of a good quality. All conduct is in part conventional,
and all thought is in part formal or systematic. The aim of
good thinking is not to evade system but to become the
master of one’s system instead of its slave; and one learns
to rule by learning to obey. Thus scientific dogmatism is
not altogether an error. It is a discipline. Hegel said that


Scientific Philosophy 281


every philosopher ought to pass through a phase of Spinozism,
which is little but a scientific dogmatism of a peculiarly
rigid kind. So the technicalities of abstract thought, though
they are not philosophy, are a gymnastic without which the
philosopher is likely to be a slack-jointed and flabby creature.

But the reverse is to-day far more important. The cry
that philosophy must accept the results of science and adopt
Scientific methods is quite sufficiently heard among us. In
fact, it is the prime obstacle to the healthy development of
modern philosophy. Philosophy has its own problems and
its own methods, and must look for its own results. Science
is the scene of remarkable triumphs; so is agriculture ;
that does not prove either that surgeons ought to perform
their operations with a plough or that philosophers ought
to attack their problems with the weapons of the scientist.
The philosophy current to-day is almost without exception
riddled with fallacies arising out of the uncritical application
to philosophical questions of methods and results derived
from the sciences ; and the progress of modern philosophy
is intimately bound up with its liberation from a scientific
dogmatism which has long ago exhausted its contribution
to philosophical thought. Happily, the very petulance
with which our dogmatists preach the gospel of scientific
method in philosophy is an indication that the battle is
going against them and that they know it.


§ 6. Historical Philosophy


The historical form of dogmatism is that represented by
modern realism. Although realism itself is as old as thought,
being in fact identical with dogmatism or error in general,
the authors of modern realism are right in claiming that it
is a new invention. It is that form of error which results
from discovering the concept of fact.


282 Pathe Soren


We shall make no attempt here at a detailed discussion of
the modern realistic school of thought. Controversy is no
part of this book’s purpose, and it does not even set out to
describe in detail the philosophy of any one except its author.
If this resembles arrogance, it is at least intended in the
spirit of a witness who, once in the box and on oath, feels
bound to tell his story as plainly as possible to the exclusion
of all else.

Historical dogmatism is the assertion of fact as ultimately
real, and fact means not only the facts of ‘history’ but the
facts of perception. Such a dogmatism may take a consider-
able variety of forms. It may concentrate on perception and
describe the world as a spatial whole composed of ‘ things ’,
variations within which are produced by a system of
perspectives ; it may refine upon this and conceive a spatio-
temporal world whose structure is made up of events or
point-instants ; it may, on the other hand, concentrate on
history and biography and treat reality as a mind or a
system of minds coexisting with a material world or creating
the material world out of itself. Or, obsessed by the pseudo-
problem of mind and matter and unable to realize that
materialism is a logical phenomenon, it may describe the
ultimate ground of both mind and matter as a non-material
and non-mental ‘ neutral stuff’, matter with a nonsense
name ; or it may work upwards instead of downwards,
and find reality in an absolute whole which cannot be
called this rather than that, because in it all differences
are included ; a whole which is non-spatial, non-temporal,
non-moral, non-material, and non-spiritual but somehow
the ground and source of all these distinctions. That which
unites all these divergent views is their common assertion
of the positivity of the object : that is, their denial that the
object is conditioned or affected by becoming known to any


Historical Philosophy 283


thinking mind or to what, with a question-begging epithet,
is sometimes called finite mind: its finiteness being just this
indifference to it on the part of its object. Such a realistic
account of the object, as positive fact indifferent to its being
known, is at first sight compatible with any theory as to
what the ultimate nature of this object may be ; and so we
get all manner of realisms, monistic and pluralistic, intuition-
ist and intellectualist, materialist and spiritualist, all equally
capable of being held in combination with the fundamental
thesis of realism, which is distinguished from them as ‘ theory
of knowledge’ from ‘metaphysics’.

Such was, at least, and to some extent still is, the belief
of eminent realists, who sum up their own position in the
negative formula that knowledge can make no difference to
its object. On the other hand, it is not possible to assert so
much as this without asserting more, namely the principle
of abstract thought ; for what is explicitly asserted is the
complete separateness of subject and object, their independ-
ence of one another: and this implies that there are facts
in existence which are thus completely independent. It is
therefore correct to maintain that realism commits its author
to the principle of pluralism ; and pluralism only means the
scientific abstraction of the universal from its particulars.
This path, therefore, leads from historical dogmatism back
to scientific dogmatism.

If, on the other hand, we concentrate on the positive
statement of realism, the concrete reality of its object, we
arrive at the opposite conclusion. All facts fall into their
place in a single all-embracing system of fact, and this
system is the absolute, the ultimate reality. Thus we arrive
at a monistic instead of a pluralistic realism. But it is
equally self-contradictory. For either the thinker himself
falls inside the absolute whole or he does not. If he does,


284 PHILOSOPHY


then differences in his thought about it make a difference to
it, and the more concretely real—that is, organized and
interconnected in all its parts—it is, the more fundamental
these differences will be and the more completely the posi-
tivity of fact is lost. If he does not, then the monistic
doctrine is surrendered and we return to pluralism.

In spite of the simplicity of these difficulties, they have
as yet not been fairly faced by a single realist with whose
work the present writer is acquainted. In practice, realists
merely play a kind of puss-in-the-corner with these problems,
running across from one alternative to the other when it
seems to be safe, and adopting whichever view suits the
need of the moment. They are just pluralistic enough to
distinguish anything from anything else when they want
to do so, and just monistic enough to assert relations when-
ever relations are required. They are not to be blamed for
this. It is inevitable; unless they did it, their philosophy
would extinguish itself and they would have to take to
another occupation ; but the observer of their movements
is affected with some astonishment when he finds that these
movements are quite unconscious. The reason why he is
surprised is that the whole essence and heart of the realistic
position is the logic of abstraction which denounces as
a stupid and trivial confusion anything in the nature of
a synthesis of opposites. In point of fact, it is perfectly
harmless to be a monist and a pluralist in alternate half-
minutes, because they are the same thing : there is no reason
why one should not insist on the objectivity of fact and yet
argue for the subjectivity of value, because objectivity and
subjectivity are as inseparable as fact and value ; but the
realist is a realist precisely by denying this and setting up
for himself a whole entanglement of abstract dilemmas on
the understanding that he is to wriggle through them on one


Fiistorical Philosophy 285


horn of each. It cannot be done, and no realist makes even
a sporting attempt at bringing it off ; but he is so deeply in
love with the rigour of his own game that if one points out
that these old dilemmas, monism and pluralism, objective
and subjective, appearance and reality, perception and
conception, are on a level with the question of the hen and
the egg, he feels morally outraged and regards one as little
better than a pickpocket.

The fact is that modern realism is essentially inconsistent.
It is a halt, or rather a confused running to and fro, between
two principles, the abstract concept and the concrete fact.
It springs from the scientific realism which asserts reality
in the form of the abstract concept and, by implication,
reduces the opposite of the concept, namely immediacy or
sensation, to the level of mere appearance. This one-sided
rationalism inevitably recoiled into a one-sided sensational-
ism which regarded immediate sensation as the only reality
and treated the concept as a mere figment of the understand-
ing. It was the merit of Kant to see that each of these
opposites succeeded in existing only by implicitly assuming
the other, and to show that what they both aimed at was
a view in which sensation and thought existed together in
an inseparable unity. But this unity was for Kant an
attribute of ‘ consciousness in general ’, and this generality
of the notion of consciousness marked the collapse of Kant’s
philosophy into another abstract rationalism, by his failure
to identify the ‘empirical ego’ with the ‘ transcendental
ego ’, mind in its immediacy with mind in its ideal perfection.
Hegel succeeded in bridging this gulf, but the very act by
which he bridged it became for him a transcendent norm or
ideal of all experience, and this meant once more parting the
actuality of mind from its own true nature. No subsequent
philosopher improved on Hegel’s solution, of which modern


286 PHILOSOPHY


realism is indeed the child, though not a child of the kind
which proverbially knows its own father. The Kantian
synthesis of intuition and conception enriched philosophy
with one priceless possession, historical fact or the concrete
universal. But the failure of Kant and his successors to
effect the further synthesis of mind in its empirical imme-
diacy with mind in its ideal perfection deprived their legacy
of half its value by setting this fact over against the conscious
mind as a transcendent object. The result was that one of
two things was bound to happen. Either the concreteness
of the fact, or its transcendence, was bound to go; for its
concreteness implied the absolute immanence of every reality
in every other, and its transcendence was simply a reaffirma-
tion of the principle of abstraction.

In the sequel, the historical positivism of the nineteenth
century stuck to the transcendence of the historical fact and
let its concreteness go. It became, from Marx and Comte
onwards, less and less historical, more and more scientific,
tillin the modern realists only the slightest traces of historical
concreteness remain, and in a very large number of them
these traces are practically invisible. We are back in a pure
scientific dogmatism.

This relapse of historical idealism into a realism almost
wholly scientific seems to underlie the tragedy of the
nineteenth century, its slide backwards into materialism
and superstition, and the breakdown of its political life into
that international and social chaos to which no one nowadays
is blind. But it is fair to remember, when we complain of
the reactionary and obscurantist character of most modern
philosophy, that it is due in the last resort to the unsoundness
of the foundations laid by the great German idealists. Their
achievement of the concrete universal was one of the supreme
events in the history of thought. It meant the foundation


Historical Philosophy 287


of modern science, of modern history, and of modern
philosophy, at a single blow. It initiated in the minds of
men like Hegel, Darwin or Mommsen a truceless war against
all abstractions, a hatred of all formalism, an attention to
facts in all their detail, which have never been equalled.
The very decay and senility of this movement, in men like
Herbert Spencer and the positivists, is impressive in its
passion for facts, even doubtful facts, and for gigantic, even
if top-heavy, structures. But the movement was vitiated
from the first by the failure to live up to the example of
Descartes and see the objective fact as the inseparable
correlative of the subject’s thought. The abstract, formalistic
positivism which so soon dominated the followers of Hegel
was present, sorely against his own better judgement, in Hegel
himself; and hence the modern realist, if he takes the trouble
to investigate the history of his own thought, need not fear
the reproach of degeneracy. For hecanreply that the princi-
ples on which he takes his stand were never effectively denied
even by the idealists of the past ; that these were idealists
only in name, in fact crypto-realists; and that the idealism
which they reject has actually never been maintained.

We shall not try to refute such allegations. On the
contrary, we wish to support them whole-heartedly. But
we do not agree with the implication that realism is the only
possible philosophy. German idealism may have been
unsuccessful as a positive movement, but as a negative
movement we venture to think it was final. It killed scientific
realism—the popular philosophy of to-day—as dead as
a door-nail. Ghosts walk, of course. They walk when the
survivors have no healthy occupation for their minds. But
they can be exorcised. Only you do not exorcise a ghost
by arguing with it: ghosts rely for effectiveness not on
argument but on their victims’ quite unfounded timidity.


288 PHILOSOPHY


§ 7. The Theory of the Forms of Error


We are now in a position to realize more clearly than
hitherto the meaning and value of our list of dogmatisms.

The dogmatic philosophies are identical with philosophical
errors. Every error is a lapse from concreteness into
abstraction, and all abstraction is dogmatism. We err
because we dogmatize—because we do not criticize our own
assumptions—and we dogmatize because we err, because
we think they are not assumptions.

To compile an exhaustive table of errors, a list of all the
possible forms of false philosophy, is a programme whose
very attractiveness reveals. its weakness. Such a table
would be a system of pigeon-holes in which we could without
more ado arrange all philosophies except our own, and
so excuse ourselves from any further criticism of them:
‘So-and-so is a scientific dogmatist : fundamental error,
abstraction of universal from particular: necessary con-
sequences, this and that’: nothing more need be said.
So-and-so’s philosophy is thus disposed of because it is
a mere instance of a type, not an individual but an abstract
particular. But so to regard any concrete fact is to falsify
it and to lapse into the most vicious kind of abstract formal-
ism. The pigeon-hole table of errors is itself an example
of what we have condemned as scientific philosophy. It is
a labour-saving device, like all abstraction ; but in philoso-
phy the saving of labour means the saving of thought, and
that implies the deliberate abandonment of the possibility
of truth.

Nor is this fallacy avoided if we rearrange our list of
errors so as to form a series of errors through which thought
in general must necessarily pass on its way to the truth.
Such a view has the merit of recognizing that errors have


The Theory of the Forms of Error 289


some mutual connexion, that one leads to another; but
the ‘ phenomenology of error ’ so achieved is only a labyrinth
instead of a set of pigeon-holes, and this labyrinth forms
a kind of predetermined scheme, ordained before any actual
thinking begins, in which thought is to play the game of
pigs in clover. This is simply the error of deducing history
a priori and expecting the facts to come to heel, which they
can never be trained to do.

There are two senses, and only two, in which a table of
errors can be legitimately drawn up. First, as a history of
thought. In its actual course, thinking moves by the
dialectical criticism of errors—the criticism of an error by
itself, its break-up under the stress of its internal contra-
dictions—to their denial: this denial is a truth, so framed
as to negate the error just exploded, but generally falling into
a new and opposite error by an exaggerated fear of the
old. Any element of error in this new truth will, if thinking
goes vigorously forward, initiate a new dialectical criticism
and the process will be repeated on a higher plane. Thus
thought in its progress—a progress not mechanical or
predestined but simply effected by the hard work of thinking
—moves through a series of phases each of which is a truth
and yet an error, but, so far as the progress is real, each
a triumph of truth over a preceding error and an advance
to what may be called a truer truth. Such a progress,
however diversified by stagnant backwaters and cross-
currents, has actually been exemplified at least in the
history of European thought as known to us; and a history
of this thought shows the unfolding of a dialectical drama
in which every phase has grown out of its predecessor with
a kind of dramatic inevitability. But this inevitability is
not abstract or predetermined necessity: it is only the
inevitability of a well-constructed plot or fugue, the in-

2792 T


290 P HItho $s OR MY


evitability of concrete rational fact. A history of thought,
then, gives a series of errors not exhausting the possibilities
of unreason nor forming a predetermined scheme for thought,
but recounting the errors that have actually been made
and showing how each has contributed something to the
state of knowledge to-day: a felix culpa, in so far as it has
been the occasion of our rise to higher things.

Secondly, a table of errors may mean a critical review
of the philosophies now current and a summary of results,
in which it is shown that certain types of thought found
among ourselves are subject to certain types of fallacy.
The word type need not frighten us with an accusation of
abstractness ; for we need not forget that every philosophy
is more than a mere example of a type, is an individual
creation which exemplifies even its typical error in a unique
and instructive way.

But these two legitimate senses of a table of errors are
not mutually exclusive. Modern philosophy is based on
its own past, and modern errors are always to a great
extent atavistic reversions to type, recurrences of mistakes
which have been made before and which the progress of
thought has already in principle refuted. In criticizing
a contemporary error one always finds it to be based on
ignorance or superficial knowledge of the history of thought :
it is always at bottom a view which somebody has already
worked out and somebody has already refuted. It is, of
course, always more than this. But this at least it is ;
and hence the criticism of contemporary error is simply the
application to modern problems of lessons learnt in the
school of philosophical history.

Our own table of errors is primarily intended as a review
of the erroneous tendencies in modern thought. But this
review is undertaken in no spirit of controversy. It is


Lhe Theory of the Forms of Error 291


undertaken for our own guidance. The writer is aware of
certain temptations to error, certain ways of thinking
which, though they attract him, do not satisfy him. In
order to arrive at his own philosophy he must face these
temptations, think them out, and discover what it is in
them that is attractive. This, on pain of certain shipwreck,
he must absorb into his own philosophy while rejecting the
elements which make them unsatisfactory. Hence a table
of errors is the philosopher’s personal confession of sin.


§ 8. Philosophy as Absolute Knowledge


To describe philosophy as the mind’s knowledge of itself
is only a formal or abstract description, and likely to cause
misunderstanding. We shall not blame the reader if he
sees a picture, first of a mind contemplating an entire
universe, rich in detail of every kind—the picture being
entitled ‘ Realism’; secondly, the universe blotted ruth-
lessly out and the mind reflecting on its own forlorn con-
dition, this picture bearing the title ‘Idealism’. The mind,
as conceived by the idealist, seems to have lost everything
that makes life worth living.

But the reader who feels this difficulty must not be
offended if he is answered as people answer a child who says
“When I am in heaven, I shall want a Rolls-Royce and
a salmon-rod’. The correct answer is, we understand,
“If you want them when you get to heaven, you shall have
them’. If the mind feels cold without an object other than
itself, nothing is simpler for it than to create a palace of
art, a world of mythology, a cosmos of abstract conceptual
machinery, and so forth. In fact that is precisely what
it does when it cannot achieve what it really wants—self-
knowledge—without the help of these things. But it is
not these things that it wants: it is self-knowledge. For

T2


292 PHILOSOPHY


when it has its works of art, what it values in them is not
themselves but the glimpses they give it of hidden and
mysterious beauty. What it worships in the figures of its
gods is not these figures themselves in their externality to
itself but the revelation through them of something really
divine; and so on. If then any one feels that the ideal of
knowledge, as we present it, is cold and unattractive,
abstract and barren, we reply: How would you like to
enjoy for ever what in the highest art you glimpse, half-
concealed in the torrent of sensation? How would you
like to live face to face with that which now and then you
have felt stir your heart in mcments of worship and prayer ?
And if he is so simple as to believe that the very evanescence
of these moments is what gives them their value, the answer
is that to prefer them in the form of evanescent emotion is
just to create the world of art and religion. To feel the
need of an external world is already to possess such a world ;
for the error of thinking one needs it is the same as the error
of thinking that it exists. This is parallel to the familiar
truth that to look on virtue as cold and unattractive is not
to wish one were vicious, but to be vicious.

Not that such creation of an external object is capricious.
The mind cannot simply think whatever it pleases, or even
imagine whatever it pleases. It is bound by the laws of its
own nature to this extent, that even though it can deform
its nature by misconceiving it, it can never deform it out of
recognition, because misconceiving is after all a kind of
conceiving. Its scientific concepts, its religious imagery,
its aesthetic imaginings must grow out of the soil of fact,
and that fact is just its own nature as that stands for the
time being. This necessity of all its actions, ignored in the
life of imagination, is though ignored not done away. It is
transformed, by being ignored, from a rational necessity to


Philosophy as Absolute Knowledge 293


the blind necessity of instinct, obedient to a law which it
does not understand. The discovery of necessity—not
indeed an alien necessity, but the necessity of its own
nature, which appears as external only so long as the
figment of an external world remains—is the achievement
of the religious consciousness ; but this necessity is there
from the first.

All externality is imaginary ; for externality—a mutual
outsideness in the abstract sense of the denial of a mutual
insideness—is as such abstraction, and abstraction is always
intuition or imagination. It is only to the imagination that
the mind is ever outside its object ; but to the imagination
it is always outside its object, even when that object is
itself, as in fact it always is. Therefore, since the externality
of the object is only imaginary, the act by which we create
the object is never capricious: we only imagine it to be
capricious: in point of fact it is necessary and an integral
part of the life of reason.

Philosophy therefore does not mean the negation of all
other forms of experience and the reduction of all life to the
dead-level of cold ‘thinking’. That, no doubt, would
“strike as chill as the coldest materialism’; in fact it
would simply be materialism, for it would be the assertion
of the abstract concept. The progressive reduction of art,
religion, science and history to philosophy means nothing
but the exposition of the life of philosophy as the lives of
art, religion, science and history. In a sense, each one of
these lives disappears ; but philosophy itself disappears as
completely as any Certainly, it is not our doctrine that
professional ‘ philosophers’ are the only people who are
really alive!

Art has turned out to be philosophy; and concrete
philosophy is therefore art. That beauty which is the


2.94 PHILOSOPHY


fleeting quarry of the artist is no stranger to the philosopher.
His thought must clothe itself in speech, and to him all the
quire of heaven and the furniture of earth becomes a divine
language, symbolizing in sensuous imagery the eternal
truths of thought. Nor is this imagery to him mere art ;
for art in his mind is enriched and deepened into religion
in the knowledge that what he was taught in his youth, and
in his haste perhaps rejected as fable, is true: that God
really lives and is his father, that the voice that speaks in
nature is truly the voice of her creator, and that this very
God became man to die for him and to atone by a full,
perfect and sufficient sacrifice for the sins of the whole world.
And this knowledge is not, for him, in any conflict with the
regularity and uniformity of nature, with the fact that he
can and does abstract, generalize, conceive everything as
matter and motion or in modern language as space-time ;
for this abstract conception of the world is to him only the
schematic order which, without doing it violence, he detects
in that infinite whole which is at once spirit and nature,
the whole of which the starry heavens above him and the
moral law within him are parts. And in learning to know
this whole, a whole of truly objective fact in which art and
religion and science all play their parts—so, and only so, he
comes to know himself. Its true objectivity is not the
abstract objectivity of a world in which the knower himself
has no place, but the concrete objectivity which is only the
correlative of his own subjectivity. It is Ais world that he
knows in this way: if he were not, this world of reality as
he sees it would not be. Other worlds would no doubt
exist, and in their very difference these would be in a sense
identical with his, versions of it; but they could never
replace it.

This enjoyment of the entire world of fact, released alike


Philosophy as <n Knowledge 295


from the intermittence of art and religion, the abstractness
of science and the indifferent externality of history, is the
life of philosophy. The philosopher can be a philosopher
all his life, not only in his moments of inspiration. Every-
thing, not merely the selected experiment, comes as grist
to his mill, for his philosophical thought is infinite in its
application. And he knows what the historian does not
know, that his own knowledge of facts is organic to the
facts themselves, that his mind is these facts knowing
themselves and these facts are his mind knowing itself.
Everybody enjoys this life, and enjoys it unceasingly ; but
those who do not know that they are doing so, and give
a false account to themselves of their own experience, so
deform that experience that it loses its highest qualities
and actually becomes something not altogether unlike what
they falsely think it.

This is called the life of absolute knowledge not because
it is secure from error: that is impossible ; but because in
it there is no element of necessary and insurmountable
error, as there is in the lives of art, religion, science and
history in the restrictive sense. In these lives the mind is
by its very self-determination as aesthetic, religious, and
so on, committed to certain errors and forced—always by
its own act—to distort any truth it achieves, however great
this truth may be, into conformity with them. In the life
of philosophy such distorting media are done away: the
mind here says what it means, and therefore can for the first
time say what is absolutely true. If it errs, the smallest
error as to a matter of fact infects to some extent its whole
life: to misjudge the tiniest fact is as if a cloud went over
the sun and darkened the face of the world. And since
every error is abstraction, this darkening of its world is the
self-alienation of the philosophical mind, its degradation


296 PHILOSOPHY


into the life of history or even lower. Consequently there
is no such thing as a mere error of fact. Any such error
distorts the whole mind and must be eradicated not by the
correction of a detail but by the recovery of the balance of
the whole.

It follows that the concrete life of philosophy is no mere
haven of rest, but a ceaseless act of achieving this balance.
The balance is achieved not by the static contemplation by
mind of its own fixed given nature—mind has no fixed given
nature—but by the self-creation of this nature in a perpetual
discovery of fact which is at the same time the creation of
fact : the creation of the fact of its discovery, which is only
the indispensable subjective side of the fact itself. The life
of absolute knowledge is thus the conscious self-creation of
the mind, no mere discovery of what it is, but the making
of itself what it is.

Now in error (and the same is true, of course, in wrong-
doing) the mind also creates itself: determines itself in
this way, just as in knowledge it determines itself in that.
Whatever the mind does, therefore, it cannot escape that
self-creation which is moral responsibility. But in error it
creates in itself a nature which it conceals from itself : quite
literally, error and evil are the mind knowing not what it
does, creating itself in one shape while it thinks of itself in
another. Thus it cannot be said that an idealistic view of
mind finds no place for error and evil. On the contrary, it
requires their continual presence in the form of that which,
by conscious reflection, the mind in knowledge and in duty
rejects ; and inasmuch as its whole life is a process of self-
determination, the past in any such process is the evil which
is rejected, good when it was brought into being but now
outworn and therefore evil if it had been retained.

But what is most fundamental is that the mind can not


Philosophy as Absolute Knowledge 297


only commit error but can redeem itself from error. This
is because any error it makes concerning its own nature
(and every error is that) creates two conflicting results :
a new state of itself, and a new notion of itself. But because
its own state is a state of consciousness, this new state, even
though only implicitly, contradicts the newly formed notion.
Thus there are two conflicting notions of itself in the mind,
and this conflict is the mark of error and the signal that
a return to the road of truth is required. Thus the equi-
librium of thought is a stable equilibrium like that of a
gyroscope ; but it is only the energy of the gyroscope that
keeps it upright.


§ 9. The Absolute Mind


It is customary to ask people who speak as we have been
speaking about ‘the mind’, what mind are you talking
about ?

It is no reply to say, that mind which is at once subject
and object of the absolute experience. It remains to be
asked what this mind is.

In the first place we may reasonably reply: We are
speaking of any mind you please, mind in general. We are
discussing the behaviour of the mind as you might discuss
the behaviour of the trout or the potentilla. What we have
said is true of every mind that exists, wherever and when-
ever you please, and by whatever name it is known.

That might stand as a provisional answer ; but it evades
the real problem. For it implies that we are discussing the
abstract common nature of all minds as such, irrespectively
of the question what minds, if any, there are. And we may
very well be asked, are there any minds in your sense of
the word ? And if so, where are they to be found? Thus
our ‘theory of knowledge’ is referred beyond itself to


298 PHILOSOPHY


a ‘metaphysics’, or statement as to the nature of real
existence. But this is a flagrant collapse into the scientific
fallacy and a fall from even the historical standard of truth.
Mind in general is merely an abstract concept, and in
appealing to it we are convicted of psychology.

The absolute mind, then, must be an historical fact, not
a generalization. Is it the world-spirit, the mind whose life
is gradually being developed as the universe evolves ?
Hardly, for the world-spirit is mere mythology. If there is
such a thing, we know nothing of it. Moreover, a world-
spirit embodied in the universe ‘ whose body nature is, and
God the soul’ is a quite confused conception belonging to
a primitive dualism of body and soul which history, and
a fortiort philosophy, cannot for a moment tolerate.

The mind of which we are speaking is an absolute fact,
one of which there can never in anybody’s mind be any
doubt. That is to say, it must at least be the mind of each
one of us, for each his own particular mind. But if it is my
own particular mind, it is not the same mind as yours ; and
hence my philosophy of it is a description not of mind as
such but of my own individual mind, and all my knowledge
is of my own mind and not of anything other than my own
mind ; and philosophy becomes mere autobiography.

This is solipsism; the answer to which is, from the
idealistic point of view, easy. Realists are always afraid of
solipsism, because it is a difficulty which they cannot
answer except by an arbitrary refusal to listen to it. It
alarms them because it contains two elements, a realistic
background and an idealistic foreground, and these cannot
be brought into focus together. The realist cannot explain
away the idealistic element, but the idealist can point out
that the realistic element is a false abstraction and so lay
the spectre. The background is the realistic separation of


Ths Absolute M a, oie


subject and object into two independent things ; the fore-
ground, the idealistic principle of self-knowledge. Put them
together, and you get the disastrous consequence that the
self-knowledge of the mind excludes all knowledge of any-
thing else. The realist is helpless before this suggestion, and
it drives him to all sorts of strange expedients such as
denying the reality of self-knowledge ; but the idealistic
answer (as Kant once for all pointed out) is that the mind’s
knowledge of itself is its knowledge of everything else:
in knowing itself it knows its world, and in knowing its
world it knows itself. Thus solipsism, which is a disease
endemic among realists—as is clear from their morbid
interest in its symptoms—leaves our withers unwrung. In
knowing my mind, I know yours afid other people’s: these
reveal me to myself and I simultaneously explain them to
myself. My mind is obviously a product of society, and
conversely the society I know is the product of my mind,
as thinking it according to its lights.

The absolute mind, then, unites the differences of my
mind and other people’s, but not as the abstract universal
unites : rather as the concrete universal of history unites. The
absolute mind is an historical whole of which mine is a part.

Yet the category of whole and part is false, for the part
in its externality to other parts is but a reassertion of abstract
difference. The absolute mind is not ‘ one stupendous whole’.
It lives in its entirety in every individual and every act of
every individual, yet not indifferently, as triangularity is
indifferently present in every triangle, but expressing itself
in every individual uniquely and irreplaceably. This is its
necessary nature as concrete: it cares, so to speak, how
many individual reduplications of itself there are, and will
have so many as form a real organic whole in which every
element is essential to the being of the whole.


300 PHILOSOPHY


To demonstrate in detail this necessity of every individual
to the whole is precisely the work of history. It is in the
nature of the case a work permanently incomplete ; but
that is only because it grows upon itself and every fresh
thought is a fresh individual fact.

The philosophical conception of such an absolute mind
requires that we should see it as concrete, that is, to banish
solipsism and pantheism (abstract assertion and abstract
denial of the individual), determinism and indeterminism
(abstract assertion and abstract denial of the whole), and in
general every form of the two complementary abstractions
one of which denies the whole to assert the part, while the
other denies the part to assert the whole. It requires us to
conceive the whole as totum 1n toto et totum in qualibet parte,
and the part as performing a function in the whole without
which the whole would simply not exist. This is not a
difficult feat, except to minds hide-bound in the habits of
abstract thought: it is simply thinking historically, and
every historian enjoys it as the very breath of his life.

The absolute mind has nothing over against itself as
a necessity by which it is bound: not even the laws of its
own nature. These laws it creates by acting upon them,
and this creation is not the arbitrary act of a divine tyrant
who could make twice two into five if he pleased—as if
that could mean anything—but the necessity of reason itself.
The thoughts of this absolute mind, in so far as they are
true, are known as true not by any so-called correspondence
with fact but simply by being justifiable under criticism,
which of course is always self-criticism, and from which
there can be no appeal. Anything which is by definition
non-mental is an object of this mind which it creates by
lapsing into error concerning its own nature.

Thus, the reader may have imagined that when we spoke


Lhe Absolute Mind 301


of the process of thought we were presupposing the reality
of time, since every process is a process in time. Hence
time would appear to be something external to the absolute
mind, the necessity which stands over Zeus himself. But
so to regard time is to forget that the process of which we
are speaking is a process not of mechanical change but of
thought : a self-knowing process. A mind which knows its
own change is by that very knowledge lifted above change.
History—and the same is true of memory and even per-
ception—is the mind’s triumph over time. It is a common-
place of philosophy that whereas sensation is temporal,
thought is eternal or extra-temporal : sensation apprehends
the here and now, thought apprehends the everywhere
and the always. Hence the abstract psychology which splits
the mind up into a sensitive and an intellectual faculty
paradoxically presents us with a picture of man as standing
with one foot in time and the other in eternity. This is
mythology, but true mythology. All concrete thought is,
in its immediacy, temporal, but im its mediation extra-
temporal. The mind in its actual thinking at once recog-
nizes and defies temporal (and spatial) limitations. The
opposites, time and eternity, are necessary to one another.
Time is not a mere appearance ; it is perfectly real; but
like all opposites it can be real only as the correlative of its
equally real opposite, eternity. Time in fact is the ab-
straction of the externality to one another of the phases of
a process: eternity is the opposite abstraction of the con-
tinuity of this process, the identity of the whole in its
process. To describe the life of man as temporal or finite
and the life of God as eternal or infinite is only a way of
saying that time is not real in abstraction, but real only in
relation to its opposite. In the absolute process of thought
the past lives in the present, not as a mere ‘ trace’ or effect


302 PHILOSOPHY


of itself in the physical or psychical organism, but as the
object of the mind’s historical knowledge of itself in an
eternal present.

This is the solution of all those problems concerning
finitude and infinity which have so vexed abstract thought.
Man recognizes himself as finite and knows that, if he really
is finite, he is thereby debarred from that infinity to which
he aspires. But just as a being really limited in time could
not know of its own limitation—for it could have no con-
ception of a past and a future if it lived wholly in the present
—so a being really finite could not know itself as finite.
The self-knowledge of man as finite is already his assertion of
himself as infinite. In the very act of abstraction by which
psychology asserts the existence of finite centres of con-
sciousness it is rising above its own theory and making a con-
crete act of thought which refutes its own ostensible content.

Religious imagery cannot prove the truth of any philo-
sophy, because the interpretation put upon such imagery
is already the work of philosophy ; but it will illustrate, if
it does not help to demonstrate, our conception of the
absolute mind to point out the way in which one religion
at least has expressed itself, when dealing with the ultimate
questions which here concern us.

God is conceived as the absolute spirit, alpha and omega,
the beginning and the end. Behind him, beyond him, apart
from him, there is nothing: neither matter nor law, neither
earth nor heaven, neither space nor time. In the beginning,
by an absolute act which was not itself subject to any
determination of time or space, God created the heavens
and the earth: the visible world, with all its order and
furniture, even the very space in which it floats and the
time in which it endures and changes, is the work of this
absolute act. But this world is no mere toy shaped by


Lhe Absolute Mind 303


God and thrown off from himself in contemptuous aliena-
tion. His spirit moves upon the face of the waters, even the
waters of chaos, and this same breath becomes the soul of
life in the man whom he creates in his own image. Man
is one with God, no mere part of a whole, but informed by
the indwelling of the divine spirit. Now man, by his mis-
guided thirst for knowledge, partakes of that knowledge
which is forbidden, namely error, or the human wisdom
which negates God’s wisdom. This error deforms his own
true, that is divine, nature, and the deformation takes
the shape of banishment from the presence of God into the
wilderness of the visible world. Having thus lost even the
sight of God, the knowledge of what he himself ought to be,
he cannot recover his lost perfection until he comes to know
himself as he actually is. But not knowing himself as he
ought to be, he cannot know himself as he is. His error is
implicit just because it is complete. It can only become
explicit if God reveals himself afresh, if the true ideal breaks
in upon the soul clouded by error. This, in the fullness of
time, is granted. Human nature sunk in error is confronted
by the confutation of its own error, and thus, through a fresh
dialectical process, redeemed.

Now in this imagery there is one flaw, namely the tran-
scendence of God. God standing aloof from the drama of
human sin and redemption, a mere stage manager, is no
true symbol of the absolute mind in its concreteness. But
this is exactly where the truth of our religious imagery
shines most brilliantly. It is God who accepts the burden
of error, takes upon himself the moral responsibility for the
fall, and so redeems not his creature but himself.

The absolute mind, if our account of it is true, can never
be more profoundly or impressively pictured than in this
drama of the fall and redemption of man.


304 Pu ros or Ba


§ 10. Absolute Ethics


With the disappearance of the last remnant of abstraction
in the form of the distinction between the individual and
society, the obstacle to the realization of perfect freedom is
removed. The agent is now conscious of himself as absolute
mind, and of every other agent, whether in agreement with
himself or not, as coequal with himself. This means that
he ceases to regard himself or his country or his party as in
the right and everybody else in the wrong, but he regards
all actions as manifestations of a will which is always and
necessarily rational even when ‘ in the wrong ’, and therefore
never wholly in the wrong. He thus sympathizes even with
his opponents, and in proportion as he becomes truly
rational he ceases to regard any one as an unmitigated
opponent, but sees in every one a fellow-worker with himself
in the cause of the good.

This is the attitude of which universal love is the intuitive
or emotional expression. In itself, however, it is not emo-
tional but rational. Caricatured by abstract thought, it
becomes humanitarianism or the mere indifference of
people’s actual aims and performances to the way in which
they are regarded (abstract equality, rights of man, &c.).
Such abstract humanitarianism is the true object of criticism
when realists fulminate against concrete or idealistic ethics
as taking away all motive to action, destroying the distinc-
tion between good and evil, and so forth. There is in point
of fact all the difference in the world between the concrete
attitude which determines what precisely a man has done and
judges it as in certain ways right and in certain ways wrong,
and the abstract attitude which says that what he has done
and whether it is right or wrong does not matter. The former
attitude is the only possible basis for just and appropriate


Absolute Ethics 305


action: the latter cannot be the basis of any action what-
ever.

In absolute ethics the agent identifies himself with the
entire world of fact, and in coming to understand this world
prepares himself for the action appropriate to the unique
situation. This is not an act of duty, because the sense of
an objective and abstract law, whether lodged in the indi-
vidual ‘conscience’ or in the political ‘sovereign’, has
disappeared. The agent acts with full responsibility as
embodying and identifying himself with the absolute mind,
and his act is therefore the pure act of self-creation. This
act is identical with self-knowledge, and thus the abstract
distinction of the will and the intellect is transcended.

The claim to have attained this position is the essence of
the claim made by and on behalf of ‘ conscientious objectors’
and similar persons who on the strength of an immediate
divine mandate defy the laws of the society to which they
belong. The falsity of their claim is evident from the fact
that they regard the law of the land as an irrational external
object, and call it ‘ force’ and the like (force being the false
abstraction of willseen from the outside). They are thus by
their own confession inhabitants not of the heaven of freedom,
but of the earth of bondage and heteronomy, and differ
from others only in their failure to recognize the fact. To
recognize the fact—to obey the law in the spirit of intelligent
and cheerful co-operation—is to transcend it, and to have
reached, if only implicitly, the position of absolute ethics.


2794 U


Vill
SPECULUM SPECULI


WE set out to construct a map of knowledge on which
every legitimate form of human experience should be laid
down, its boundaries determined, and its relations with its
neighbours set forth. We assumed that such a map could
be made: imperfect and abstract, like all maps, but none
the less valuable to those whose task it is to explore and
cultivate the country of the mind. We assumed, that is to
say, the real existence of art, religion, and so forth as
distinct forms of experience, forms not wholly separable or
independent, but at least mutually exclusive, relatively
autonomous and capable of some kind of delimitation.

Such a map of knowledge is impossible ; and our trouble
is well spent if it produces no other result than the recognition
that this is so. There are no autonomous and mutually
exclusive forms of experience, and, what is more, it is in no
one’s interest to assume that there are.

The artist does not want a map of knowledge: he only
wants a map of art, and this map is art itself. For him art
and life are the same thing : art is long and life is short, his
own actual span of work lies wholly within the all-embracing
universe of art. The religious man, again, just in so far as
he is really religious, in his truly religious moments, knows
that nothing but religion exists. All experience is religious
experience, even that of the heathen and the atheist. He
does not ask for a holiday from his religion: his holiday
would be to dwell in the house of the Lord for ever. The
moralist, again, sees the whole of life as duty. Every claim
is for him the claim of duty, and he is not to be deceived
when the devil offers him a ‘ moral holiday’ or poses him


SPECULUM SPECULI 307


with sophistries about the relation of morality to art. For
him, art, when it ought to be pursued, is a duty: when it
ought not, it is a crime. That is all. The scientist again is
by the principles of his own thought compelled to interpret
everything in scientific terms, as the working of abstract and
iron laws. Any one who pleads for the least little bit of
back-lash in the working of his machine, an exiguum
clinamen, at certain moments and at certain points wne
certaine élasticité, is simply as a publican and a sinner:
a stink in the nostrils of the scientific conscience. The
scientist does not want a map of the forms of knowledge.
There is for him only one legitimate form, science ; and that
is its own map. All other forms are not other territories
but false maps of the same territory.

Every person who is actually absorbed in any given form
of experience is by this very absorption committed to the
opinion that no other form is valid, that his form is the only
one adequate to the comprehension of reality. Hence
arise discords; for when artists and scientists, who after
all do inhabit a common world of fact, meet and discuss their
aims, each is apt to accuse the other of wasting his life on
a world of illusions. The ‘ ancient quarrel between poetry
and philosophy ’ is only one of a whole series of such quarrels
in a ceaseless international war in which every country on
our map is eternally embroiled with every other ; for all,
‘because of their independency, are in continual jealousies
and in the state and posture of gladiators, having their
weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another...
which is a posture of war’. This war is complete even down
to the existence of pacificists of the mind, getting between
the legs of the combatants and kindly offering to explain to
‘ religion and science ’, or whatever the combatants may be,


that they are fighting about nothing.
U2


308 SPECULUM SPECULI


On this scene of international warfare the philosopher
pictures himself as looking down calmly, enthroned on a
cloud audessus de la mélée, seeing perhaps that it is God’s will
for these deluded mortals to fly at one another’s throats, or
perhaps, in a voice of authority, bidding them be still, with
a result suggestive rather of Canute than of Christ. For
they, poor things, do not recognize the philosopher’s super-
human status: they actually think he is one of the com-
batants. ‘ Philosophers ’, wrote a great historian to a young
friend appointed to a philosophical tutorship, ‘are my
natural enemies.’ And this is perfectly just; for the
philosopher asserts philosophy as the only legitimate form
of experience, and not only condemns the others as illusory
but adds insult to injury by giving reasons for his condem-
nation, which goes against all the maxims of civilized
warfare. Philosophers are justly, therefore, the objects of
universal dislike. They fight their own professional battle
and claim to be defending the ark of God.

This, roughly speaking, is the situation with which we
began. We hoped that the proper construction of a map of
knowledge, by a kind of international boundary commission,
might do something to stop the fighting. It was a vain hope.
Plenty of such maps have been made already, in the form
of philosophies of the human mind and so forth, and they
only arouse suspicion, because they are not international
documents but the propaganda of one combatant.

Beginning, then, with our assumption of the separateness
and autonomy of the various forms of experience, we have
found that this separateness is an illusion. Each form is at
bottom identical with all the others. It is only an error that
makes some people ignore one element of their experience
and others ignore another, and thus come to the conclusion
that their experiences are of a fundamentally different kind.


RI NEE SE os
SPECULUM SPECULI 309


They are different, but it is only the error of thinking they
are different that makes them different. Artists and scientists
must fight ; it is their nature to; but they have acquired
this nature by committing themselves to the error of regard-
ing art and science as independent things.

The various countries on our initial map, then, turn out
to be variously-distorted versions of one and the same
country. No one accustomed to maps compiled from
travellers’ reports will be surprised at that. What, then,
is this one country ? It is the world of historical fact, seen
as the mind’s knowledge of itself. Can we, then, sketch this
country’s features in outline ?

We cannot. To explore that country is the endless task
of the mind ; and it only exists in being explored. Of such
a country there is no map, for it is itself its own map. The
explorer, the country explored, and the map are one and
the same thing.

There is and can be no map of knowledge, for a map
means an abstract of the main features of a country, laid
before the traveller in advance of his experience of the
country itself. Now no one can describe life to a person who
stands on the threshold of life. The maxims given by age
to youth are valueless not because age means nothing by
them but because what it means is just its own past life.
To youth they are empty words. The life of the spirit cannot
be described except by repeating it : an account of it would
just be itself. This is equally the case whether we present
our map in the form of a group of categories or concepts
which are supposed to reappear as units of thought in the
texture of experience; or a group of laws somehow sus-
pended above it which govern its course; or a group of
presuppositions which lie beyond and behind its very
beginning, and condition, through its beginning, its whole


310 SPECULUM SPECULI


development ; or a world of objects over against it, in
beating itself against which it comes to the use of its own
powers ; or a series of stages through which, as along a
railway line, it necessarily runs. All these assertions of
something other than the absolute mind itself are versions
of a single error: the error of abstraction, of failing to
realize that subject and object, condition and conditioned,
ground and consequence, particular and universal, can only
be distinctions which fall within one and the same whole,
and that this whole can only be the infinite fact which is
the absolute mind. A fact which has anything outside it is
not the concrete fact. If that which falls outside it is its
own law or nature, we have fallen into the abstraction which
tears apart the individual into particular and universal ;
if another fact, we have torn apart the individual into two
individuals unrelated and therefore both fictitious.

Our inquiry has not only abolished the notion of a map
of knowledge distinct from knowledge itself: it has also
abolished the notion of an external world other than the mind.
It has not, of course, abolished the distinction between
subject and object: on the contrary, it has established our
right to use that distinction by showing its necessity in the
life of thought. It isno more abolished than are the distinc-
tions between truth and error, good and evil, particular and
universal: these distinctions are only abolished by the
coincidentia oppositorum which is the suicide of abstract
thought, and conserved by the synthesis of opposites which
is the life of concrete thought. Just as we began by assuming
a map of knowledge, so we began by assuming an external
world, a world of which we could say with the realists that
it really is what, errors apart, we think it to be: a world of
which we could even say that it was what it was quite
irrespective of any ignorance or error of our own about it.


SPECULUM SPrErecuLt 311


Our position at the start was wholly realistic, and there is
a sense in which it is realistic to the end. But we did not—
and this is where realists tend to go wrong—assume that
“ errors apart ’ is a clause which need not be taken seriously.
We did not assume that any one form of experience could be
accepted as already, in its main lines, wholly free from error.
Led by this principle, we found that the real world was
implied, but not asserted, in art ; asserted, but not thought
out, in religion ; thought out, but only subject to fictitious
assumptions, in science ; and therefore in all these we found
an ostensible object—the work of art, God, the material
universe—which was confessedly a figment and not the real
object. The real object is the mind itself, as we now know.

But in abolishing the notion of an external world other
than the mind we do not assert any of the silly nonsense
usually described by unintelligent critics as idealism. We
do not assert that the trees and hills and people of our world
are ‘unreal’, or ‘mere ideas in my mind ’, still less that
matter is nothing but a swarm of mind-particles. The very
essence of trees and hills and people is that they should be
not myself but my objects in perception: they are not
subjective but objective, not states of myself but facts that
I know. None the less, my knowing them is organic to
them: it is because they are what they are that I can
know them, because I know them that they can be what
to me they really are. They and I alike are members of one
whole, a whole which the destruction of one part would in
a sense destroy throughout, as the death of our dearest
friend darkens for us the very light of the sun.

A philosopher once refuted idealism by begging his
audience to watch his desk and see whether, when he left
the room, it continued to exist or not. It was a pretty piece
of buffoonery, whose chief merit was to show that he imagined


352 SPECULUM SPECULI


them to see in his desk everything that he saw in it himself :
in other words, that he took his stand firmly on the abstract
point of view which cannot see that any given fact makes
any difference to the whole. Now such an act of abstraction,
error though it is, really creates its own world, though not
a wholly rational world. To dispose of this world by calling
it a mere idea is no more intelligent than to call a temptation
to sin, or a nightmare, or a toothache, a mere idea in the
hope of dispelling it. The world of abstract concepts—the
material world—is an objective world called into existence
indeed by an error of the mind, but by that very error
asserted as real. Wence to make the abstraction and to
regard the reality of its object as self-evident are one and
the same thing, and these farcical refutations of idealism
are only successful as showing, what nobody doubts, that
it is as possible to put your blind eye to a microscope as to
a telescope.

Now the construction of such an abstract world is not
a pointless or purposeless waste of energy on the part of the
mind. To suppose that this is so, that religion is only a fiction
and science only an arbitrary play of abstractions, is the
error of those critics, whether of religion or science, who
unintelligently praise one by unintelligently condemning the
other. In the toil of art, the agony of religion, and the
relentless labour of science, actual truth is being won and
the mind is coming to its own true stature. This is simply
because the ostensible object whose apparent articulations
are being so patiently traced is not the real object, and
because every new touch given to the determination of the
former does not obscure, but rather illustrates, the latter.
For the true object is not concealed behind the ostensible as
behind a veil. Had that been so, the elaboration of the veil
could but make its density deeper, and religion or science


SPECULUM SPECULI ang


would be the prison-house of a self-frustrated mind whose
very effort to see the world only resulted in its enclosure
within a thicker and thicker crust of illusion. But the true
object is not
our great roof, its gilt carving and groining,
Under yon spider-webs lying.

It is the mind itself. And thus the external world is not
a veil between it and its object, but a picture of itself, drawn
to aid its own self-vision ; a picture which as it grows firmer
and harder, takes surface and polish and steadiness, becomes
the Mirror of the Mind ; and all the detail visible in it is seen
by the mind to be the reflection of its own face.

Knowledge polarizes itself into abstract or erroneous
and concrete or true. Abstract knowledge is the same as
error, because, separating what is thought to be from what
is, it erects that which it thinks into a false object over
against itself, an external world. To err, and to believe in
an external world over against the mind, are one and the
same thing. Now if error were mere error, the mind would
merely assert the external object, which is what it thinks
itself to be, and thereby deny itself, and resolve the dualism.
But all error contains an element of truth, and the conflict
between the truth and the error appears as the externality
of the object, its otherness with respect to the mind. Because
these two are really one, all knowledge of the external
object is really the mind’s knowledge of itself. But all this
knowledge, however true it may be, is affected by the fact
that it is projected upon am external world: it is, so to
speak, reversed like the face we see in the glass. This reversal
constitutes its falsity ; as long as we do not know that we are
looking at our own reflection, we see not ourselves but a dis-
torted caricature of ourselves, in some ways strangely like,
in some ways opposite. Hence we can never resolve the


314 SPECULUM SPECULa


doubt whether nature is our tender mother or a tigerish
Kali; whether God is love or tyranny ; whether matter is
embodied reason or embodied irrationality. This doubt is
the mind’s wonder whether the face it sees is that of its twin
brother or its opposite. All externality breeds this ambiguity,
for the ambiguity is the equivocation of error as such.

To see in a glass and to see darkly are the same. But in
concrete knowledge the mind sees itself face to face, and
knows even as it is known. Here the object is the subject,
not in the sense of a that is thou which is the mere negation
of individual distinction, but in the sense that the object
finds its very life in being known by the subject, the subject
in knowing the object. Of this experience it is said that
number here in love is slain: not distinction, not indivi-
duality, but separateness, the externality of abstract units
to one another. The whole objective world is concentrating
its energies into the creation of this one act of consciousness,
and this one act greets the whole world as its own world, not
because it cannot see the difference between one thing and
another, which is precisely the attitude of the abstract
concept, but because it can see the identity which is the
basis of this difference.

This absolute experience of concrete knowledge has
nothing to do with any professional distinctions, any more
than with distinctions of social class or physical race. The
enjoyment of it has nothing to do with that ‘ philosophy ’,
a confused mixture of scientific abstractions and historical
facts, which is professionally expounded by people called
philosophers. It lives in a unity above all professional
distinctions, and the philosopher may well achieve it in
greater perfection when sailing a boat or telling stories to
a child than when discoursing technicalities to a class. But
it is not an intuitive or emotional experience, a mood whose


SPECULUM SPECULI als


precious visits illuminate the waste of life: it is just life
itself in its infinite self-conscious development, a develop-
ment which sees every detail of itself as organic to the whole.

This life has no map and no object other than itself: if
it had such an object, that would be its map, for the features
of the object would be its own features. Thus the external
world, whose origin, growth, and structure we have been,
throughout this book, investigating, is the Mirror of the
Mind and the Map of Knowledge in one.

But to make such a cleavage as we have suggested between
concrete and abstract knowledge, truth and error, is to
commit another abstraction. Concrete knowledge is not
generically different from abstract knowledge, it is abstract
knowledge freed from its own abstractness by simply
recognizing that abstractness. The mind is not one among
a number of objects of knowledge, which possesses the
peculiarity of being alone fully knowable: it is that which
is really known in the ostensible knowing of any object
whatever. In an immediate and direct way, the mind can
never know itself: it can only know itself through the
mediation of an external world, know that what it sees in the
external world is its own reflection. Hence the construction
of external worlds—works of art, religions, sciences, struc-
tures of historical fact, codes of law, systems of philosophy
and so forth ad infinitum—is the only way by which the
mind can possibly come to that self-knowledge which is its
end. Such a constructive process is one of abstraction and
error so long as the external world in question is not realized
to be the mind’s own work. It is perhaps not possible to
carry out this process in the full consciousness of what one
is doing: the illusion of abstract objectivity is essential to
it: it must be done in good faith, in the belief that one is
now at last discovering the ultimate truth, coming into


316 SPECULUM SPECULI


contact with a pre-existent and absolute reality. But when
it is done, when the work of art or system of philosophy or
what not is achieved, the mind, in so far as this exercise has
really strengthened instead of exhausting it, realizes that
it has been not exploring an external world but tracing its
own lineaments in a mirror. In this realization it sees the
abstraction of its previous work to be an abstraction and
nothing more, and the abstraction, the error, is thus van-
quished, The truth is not some perfect system of philosophy :
it is simply the way in which all systems, however perfect,
collapse into nothingness on the discovery that they are
only systems, only external worlds over against the knowing
mind and not that mind itself.

This process of the creation and destruction of external
worlds might appedr, to superficial criticism, a mere futile
weaving and unweaving of Penelope’s web, a declaration of
the mind’s inability to produce solid assets, and thus the
bankruptcy of philosophy. And this it would be if know-
ledge were the same thing as information, something stored
in encyclopaedias and laid on like so much gas and water in
schools and universities. But education does not mean
stuffing a mind with information ; it means helping a mind
to create itself, to grow into an active and vigorous contribu-
tor to the life of the world. The information given in such
a process is meant to be absorbed into the life of the mind
itself, and a boy leaving school with a memory full of facts
is thereby no more educated than one who leaves table with
his hands full of food is thereby fed. At the completion of
its education, if that event ever happened, a mind would step
forth as naked as a new-born babe, knowing nothing, but
having acquired the mastery over its own weaknesses, its
own desires, its own ignorance, and able therefore to face any
danger unarmed.


SPECULUM SPECULI 217


The collapse of a system of thought is therefore not equiva-
lent to the cancellation of the process by which it came into
being. It collapses, but it does not perish. In constructing
and destroying it, the mind has learnt a permanent lesson :
it has triumphed over an error and so discovered a truth.
The destroyed system collapses not into bare nothingness
but into immediacy, into a characteristic or attribute of the
mind itself, passes as it were into the muscle and bone of the
mind, becomes an element in the point of view from which
the mind raises its next problem.

For the life of the mind consists of raising and solving
problems, problems in art, religion, science, commerce,
politics, and so forth. The solution of these problems does
not leave behind it a sediment of ascertained fact, which
grows and solidifies as the mind’s work goes on. Such
a sediment is nothing but the externality of a half-solved
problem: when the problem is fully solved the sediment
of information disappears and the mind is left at liberty to
go on. Philosophy, therefore, is not a prerogative kind of
knowledge immune from this reabsorption into the mind’s
being : it is nothing but the recognition that this reabsorp-
tion is necessary and is indeed the end and crown of all
knowledge, the self-recognition of the mind in its own mirror.


~ ae y helt
SPA qed 7


. rey tiuak -


womey tind Sideaeiialll
toy siiestieatanaial
ta Jorn om teeter? ioeiged:
irs Meteo Sem anenstes tien Bale a
abe de} citdpreGei ge steiptor: Sat Papas
ee Riientiekanh Jert.rtetqe sa
ype Gar pe go abclen sl dbdt Va w
ei i |
nad aarti txf m=" te (eh Chao ult Avil ne bong
Poni ek: Ace Saran igh Wits NEloes GBR nd
om ‘ag on wi ‘we ‘gale a hee
Pee ete “esut ee eibaad ypibieas (teal


ecco - sce Yanda meatnees ~ ae
a : :

aoe a ih at eh Gall eee tho ee a ee

<— cA 4 pare Sar

ow

Dienpens tye ee oa ees. c=
pinay pel ei EP CR ars wae - ies
—_ ——, Pt ae a a ee
<3 -lgap an tin iced Sede Tc taleneeee
<a, OY Te Sar oe


INDEX}!


absolute, the 67, 128, 151, 265, 283
ethics 230, 304-5
experience 297, 314
individual 221
knowledge 249, 291-7
mind 297-303, 310
object 217-21
work of art, alleged 71
abstract concept 158-63, 180, 189,
285, 298, 312, 314
ethics, 169-76
knowledge 313-15
thought 222
universal 277, 299
abstract concept)
abstraction 159, 268, 288, 310, 312
academicism in modern art 34
acquisitive society’ 173
act of will 62, 259
action, life of 63
nature of 171
thought and 15, 35
utilitarian view of 172
Adams, Dr. (Master of Pembroke)
129
adolescence 51
adventure, spirit of 106-7
aesthetic experience, polarization of
63
history 209
morality 135
philosophy 74-5, 256, 260-3
“ aesthetics ’ 260
ages of man, scheme of 51
agnosticism, religious 131
agriculture 281
Aids to Scouting 205
amateur and professional in philo-
sophy 261
annals 204, 211-12
antiques 17
Apostles’ Creed 128
appearance and reality 285
archaeology 225, 208
Archimedes 53
architecture 27, 33, 52
argument said to be necessarily
circular 259
Aristotle 104-5, 201, 245, 279


(see also


ART 58-107 passim (see Table of
Contents)
apparent assertions in 59, 63, 110
children and 50, 58, 72, 112-13
claims truth 39
criticism 100, 261
failure of 110
for art’s sake 34, 75, 80
history and 210
history of 55, 72, 82, 191, 193
individuality in 219
language and 154
life of 44, 64, 295 (see also life of
artist)
medieval 27, 30
Mohammedan negation of 118
object of 238, 242-3, 249-50
paganism of Renaissance 31
palaeolithic 52
philosophy and 86-7, 293-4
philosophy of 12, 72, 260
present state of 16, 19, 34
religion and 108-12, 154—5
religious opposed to secular 27-8,
122
science and 190-1
self-consciousness in 140
artist, the, his false analysis of
experience 83
lifey Of 61—259 67,5 60,8 Si—4,, O1,
98-9, 102, 111, 207 (see also
life of art)
self-consciousness of 68-9
world of 63
artistic temperament 81
“aspects of truth’ 251
assertion apparent in art 59, 63, 110
essential in religion 114-15, 152
its relation to knowledge 77
supposal and 76-7
assumption in science 189 (see also
supposal)
astronomy 187
atheism, see rationalism
atomic theory of historical fact
232-3
Atonement 139, 160
authorities of historian, see sources
Aztecs 53


1 For the compilation of this Index the author is indebted to the kind-


ness of Mr. T. M. Knox.


220


“


Babylon 52

Bacon 77, 202

Baden-Powell : Aids to Scouting 205

Baur 53 :

beauty, concept present in art in
the form of 71, 84, 88, 94, 99,


293-4
false theories of 66
not a concept 66, 101
behaviourism 168, 275, 275-6 note
Bellini 60
Berkeley 167
biology 187
Bononcini 19
Bradley, A. C. quoted 94
Bradley, F. H. quoted 293
breakdown of history 231-9
Browning quoted 32, 41, 81, 132,
313
business men 173, 175
science and 174
state and 174, 226, 230


caprice 102, 137

categories, table of 280, 309
cathedrals, building of 24

Chaucer quoted 25, 60

childishness of middle ages 26, 29-


30, 47
children and art 50, 58, 72, 112-13
and play 103, 107
and religion 50
Christ 108, 123, 143, 147, 308
Christianity 36-8, 139, 144, 147, 161
church, early 132
of England 33
medieval 28
necessary to religion 115
churchgoing 126, 134
Cimabue 19
classification 71, 101, 162, 165, 258
of sciences 191-2
class war 228
Clerk Saunders, Ballad of, quoted
109
coincidentia oppositorum 197-8, 249,
252, 2555273,1910
Coleridge quoted 68
commercialism 229, 231
competition 105
compromise, theology a 749
concept, abstract 158-63, 165, 180,
182, 189, 278, 285, 298, 312, 314
economic theory of 181-2
God an image of the 151-2
nature of the 53, 159-60, 285


Index


of relevance as controlling art 99
present in art as beauty 71, 84,
88, 94, 99, 293-4 _
conception and perception 285-6
concrete ethics 221-31
knowledge 313-15
universal 196, 220-21, 244, 286,
299
conflict in art 91
in society 173-5
of poetry and philosophy 307
of religion and science 40, 49,
: 193, 307
conscience’ 305
conscientious objectors 305
‘contingent’, the 192, 209, 227
controversy, religious 116
convention 134-8, 170, 226-7, 280
Corinthians, 1st Epistle to, cited 132
correlative terms 77, 141, 169-70,
248
corruption in politics 229
cosmology I15, 258
creed, necessary to religion 116, 118
criterion, the historical 213-16, 240
critical philosophy 254, 257-8
criticism 45, 53, 100, 261
Croce 74, 76, 87


Dante quoted 25
Darwin 53, 287
Darwinism 140
deductive logic
formal logic)
science 163-9
definitions 111, 247
‘ degrees of truth’ 208 note
Descartes 199, 202, 245, 279, 287
determinism 166, 168, 221, 300
devil, the 117, 134, 139, 214
dialectic, the, of art 91-102, 121
of experience 263
inner, of dogma 259
the, of religion 114, 116, 149
of science 202, 164
Plato’s 77, 279
dialectical logic 195
process, nature of 80, 164, 206-8
dogma, inner dialetic of 259
in religion 259
dogmatic philosophy 252-62, 266
dreams 63, 75, 92-7
dualism 99, 298
Duns Scotus 19
Durham cathedral 25
duty 135-6, 174-5, 221-31, 305


178-9 (see also


Index


321
early Church 132 and imagination 80
ecclesiastical art 28 and knowledge 77-8, 239-41,


“economic interpretation of his-
tory’ 227
man 173
theory of the concept 181-2
economics 173, 208, 227-8
education 50, 316
Egypt 52
eighteenth century 38, 53, 58, 195,
203, 216, 278
Elizabeth, age of 21
empiricism 75, 77-8
English Catechism quoted 123
error (see also falsehood, philo-
sophical error, truth) 45-6, 75,
108, 145, 201, 216, 249-51, 253,
262, 295-7, 308-10, 313, 317
art as a form of 80-91
in psychology 277
necessary in historical research
235, 237
theory of the forms of 288-91
eschatology 139 and note
eternity 301-2
Ethics (of Aristotle) 104
ethics 169-76, 221-31, 304-5
Eucharist 123-4, 128, 149
Euclid 53
Euclidean geometry 168
space 132, 169, 183-4
eugenics 228 note, 228-9, 231
evil and good, nature of 296-7
evolution 54
expensiveness of science 174
experience, absolute 297, 314
artist’s false analysis of 83
dialectic of 263
forms of 306 (as species of genus
46, 49-50, 55)
explicit and implicit, nature of
distinction 85 note
instances of distinction 93, 98,
112, 125, 144, 170, 240-1, 246,
256
Saas, oo one intuition (in Croce)
74, 87,9
external feted theory of 233,
234 note
externality, imaginary character of


293
external world, notion of 292, 310-
II, 313, 315


fact and art 61, 74-5, 79, 91, 99
and hypothesis 79, 184


2792


x


244-5
and science 175, 177, 185-6, 227
as the absolute object 217-21
history as the assertion of 201-11,
282
faculty psychology 39, 188, 198,
200, 301
failure of art 110
fairies 72-3, 113-14
faith and knowledge 131-3
and ‘reason’ 131
distinguished from hypothesis
132, 190
Fallacy of Pseudomenos 263
fall of man 140, 145
falsehood, truth and 112, 197, 275-6
family 228-9
fashion 227
feeling 63, 263
fiction 50, 61, 70
‘force’ 305
form and matter 253
formalism 280, 287-8
formal logic 11, 49, 181, 184-5, 195,
226, 255, 271-81
forms of error 288-91
experience 46, 49-50, 55, 306
Platonic theory of 191, 196, 240,


279
freedom (see also absolute ethics,
concrete ethics) 30, 75


Genesis, book of 140

German idealism 286-7

genus and species 48

theory of forms of experience as

46, 49-59, 55

geography 187

geology 187

ghosts 72, 113, 287

Gibbon 53, 203-4

God 126-7, 130-1, 133-4, 136, 139,
142,211, 245; 258-9, 294, 301-3,


314
and play 105
not a concept 150-2
the object of religion 48, 116-22,
158-9, 219-20, 238, 242-3,
264, 268, 311
proofs of the existence of 151,
264-5
will of 66, 209, 308
Goethe quoted 150
good and evil, nature of 296-7


322


Gothic architecture 27, 33

government distinguished
business 226

great men 17-18

Greeks, the, and science 52, 160-3,
169, 176-7, 279

guilds 24

Gulliver's s Travels 147


from


hallucinations, alleged, of children


a2
Hamann quoted 58
Handel 19
happiness 25-6, 35, 44
Hardy, Mr. Thomas 75
heathenism 144
Hebrews, Epistle to, quoted 132
Hegel 53, 74, 81, 150, 280, 285, 287
Herder 53
Herodotus 54, 215, 236
quoted 213
hierarchy of sciences 191-2
historian 210-11, 217-18, 231, 235-6
historical criterion 213-16, 240
criticism 53
fact, false theories of 232-4
philosophy 281-7
scepticism 246


HISTORY 201-46 passim (see
Table of Contents)
and science 186-7, 193, 198-200,
202-3, 209


and time 309
a process 56
claims truth 41
fact in 186, 282 (see also object
of history)
invented in eighteenth century
53, 203, 216
life of 295
object of 201-11, 217-21, 238,
242-3, 249-50
of art 55, 72, 82, 191, 193
of science 191, 193
of thought 289-90
work of 300
Hobbes quoted 307
holiness 119-20, 127
humanitarianism 304
Hume 53
Huxley 53
hypothesis 76-80, 132, 168-9, 180-
8, 190


ideal of knowledge 292
religion 116, 138


Index


idealism 266-7, 286-7, 291, 298-9,
311-12
idolatry 120-1
illusion 60, 121, 265, 267
imagery of religion 302-3
imagination and philosophy 262
art as pure 58-63
empiricist error concerning 74
freedom of 75
its relation to fact 80
present in all cognition 83
sense in which used 11, 60
world of 65
immediacy, assertion of 262-3
in science 190
in thought 301
implicit see explicit
incarnation 36, 139, 160
indeterminism 300
India 53
individual and society 174, 224,
229, 242, 300, 304
individualism 26, 37
individuality 218-19, 222, 239
and art 219
and religion 219
and science 220
inductive logic 175, 178-9
science 176-80
infinite of science 165, 190
information, its relation to know-
ledge 78, 316-17
instability of artist’s life 81-2, 111
instances of abstract law 233
institutions, medieval 23-4, 26, 37
intellect and will 103, 170, 305
intellectualism 40, 49
interests, conflicting 173-4
internal relations, theory of 234
note
interpretation as ideal of law 225
of art 71
talon, ang, expression in Croce
74, 87,9
and py: 95, 188, 262, 286
irreligion 127, 143


Jameson, Dr. 147

Jesus 128, 130

Johnson, Dr. 129

Jones, Sir Henry, quoted 74
Julius Caesar 61, 216


Kant 54, 77, 89, 188, 279, 285-6, 299
Keats 18
quoted 41, 66


Index


‘ king’s peace’ 228
knowing mind 241, 245, 311, 313,


315
knowledge, absolute 249, 201-7
abstract 313, 315
and fact 77-8, 239-41, 244-5
and faith 131-2
and information 78, 316-17
and science 182
as question and answer 76-80
concrete 313, 315
growth of 90
imagination present in all 83
life of 63
map of 39, 46, 306-9, 315
object of 239, 241-2, 244, 248,
283, 311-12
problem of 199


language II, 125, 130, 154-5, 157-9,


253
law, concept of (in politics) 174-5,
224-7, 229-30
medieval 23
of nature see nature
laws of absolute mind 300
thought 273, 275
Lessing 53
life of action 63
art 44, 62-4, 295
artist 61, 67, 69, 81-4, 91, 98-9,
102, III, 207
history 295
knowledge 63
mind 317
philosophy 295-6
religion 295
science 295
spirit 309
thought 146-57, 159, 317
logic and science 84-5
as a master science 49, 272
deductive 178-9
dialectical 195
formal 11, 49, 181, 184-5, 195,
226. 255, 262, 271-81
inductive 175, 178-9
mathematical (see formal)
medieval 26
Lord’s Supper see Eucharist
love 106, 137, 229, 304
Lucretius, quoted 109


magic 114, 117, 164, 193
map of knowledge 39, 46, 306, 308-9,
315


6*5


marriage 137, 228-9
Marx 53, 286
materialism 46, 166-8, 171-2, 245,
267, 282, 286, 293
mathematical logic see formal logic
infinite 165
mathematics 165, 167-9, 177, 192
claim of, to determine philo-
sophical truth 166, 185
matter, modern view of 167
nature of 166
meaning and language 157, 253
and truth 256-7
in art 73-6, 88-9, 94, 96, 98
in religion 122-34
mechanism 167
mediation in art 171
of thought 301
memoir 53, 204, 211
memory 212, 301
Meno 240-1
men, great 17-18
of business 173, 175
of thought and action 172
Mendelssohn 88
‘mental event’ 275
metaphor 130
metaphysics 195, 255, 271, 273-4,
276, 278, 283, 298
method of historian 217
middle ages 23, 26-30, 32, 36-7, 47,
we73 870
militarism 229, 231
Mill (J. S.) 178
mind, the 250, 291-3
absolute 297-303, 310
and knowledge 241, 245, 311,
313, 315
and psychology 276-7
life of the 315
self-creation and determination
of the 296
unity of the 27, 30, 37
miracles 210
modern art 16, 19, 34
life, special problem of 20-1,


35-6
philosophy 9, 15, 19, 34, 278,
280-1, 286, 290
physics 167
realism 259, 281~2
religion 16, 19, 33-4
science 180-8, 160
world, place of religion in 145-6
Mohammedanism 118
Moliére 32


324


~ Mae


moments of dialectical process 80,
263
Mommsen 54, 203, 287
monadic view of history 234-5
monadism of art 68-73, 190
monadology 72
monads 71, 219
monastery, life in 24, 29
monism 283, 285
moralist, the 306
morality aesthetic 135
religious 134, 171
utilitarian 135
(see also ethics)
moral responsibility 296
‘moral sense’ 170
Mormonism 46
Mount Everest expedition 106
murder 46
music, religious 122
mysticism 127
mythology 122, 194


nature 48, 62, 209, 277, 294
necessity 293, 300-1
neo-Gothic 33
neolithic architecture 52
man 52
neo-Platonism 252
neo-Scholasticism 33
‘ New Idealist’ 13
Newman 53
Niebuhr 53
nineteenth century 53, 187, 203,
230-1, 286
nominalism and realism 201
non-assertive character of art 60
-logical character of art 60
number 314
numismatics 208


object and subject relation 141,
243-4, 249, 252, 285, 298-9, 314
fact as the absolute 217-21
of art 238, 242-3, 249-50
of history 201-11, 217-21, 238,
242-3, 249-50
of knowledge 239, 241-2, 244,
248, 283, 311-12
of religion see God
of science 238, 249-50, 242-3
of thought 273, 277
objective, meaning of 11
Teality 47, 238
world 312


objectivity and

world 294
of history 237

observation, method of 53, 177-8,
202

ontological argument 264

ontology 248

opposites, nature of 64, 77, 91, 139,
197, 242-4, 249, 251, 284, 301,
310

original sin 140-1

Oxford 19


subjectivity of


paganism of Renaissance art 31
separatist principle of 37
palaeolithic art 52
pantheism 300
paradox 252
in art 95
in history 205, 235
Paris dressmakers 227
Parousia 132, 147
part and whole, distinction between
47, 299-300
particular and universal see uni-
versal
pedagogic theory of art 73
perception 204-5, 211, 257, 282,
301, 311
and conception 285-6
Pericles, age of 21
persecution 116
“ phenomenology of error’ 289
Philebus 104
philosophers disliked 278, 308
philosophical error of art 85, 87,
102, 261
history 250, 252
religion 145, 153
science 187
sciences 74, 195
PHILOSOPHY — 239-305
(see Table of Contents)
advance of 82
and art 86-7, 293-4
distinction between language
and thought 157
poetry, conflict between 307
claims truth 41
of art 12, 72, 260
medieval 23, 27-30
modern 9, 15, 19, 34, 278, 280-1,
286
not a prerogative kind of know-
ledge 317


passim


Se


Index


See)


a ee


truth of, guaranteed by mathe-
matics 166, 185
physics, modern 167
* picture thinking’ 141
Plato 66, 81, 104, 188, 199
his dialectic 77, 279
his theory of art 50, 58, 73, 86
forms 180, 191, 196, 240-2, 279
science 162, 164, E70 178,
183-4, 201
play 102-7, 170, 226
pleasure 104
pluralism 190-1, 283-5
poetry 50, 58
and philosophy 307
polarization of aesthetic experience
6


3
holiness 120
religion 114, 119
politics 226, 229-30
Pope quoted 298
positivism 286-7
pragmatism 78, 182.
prayer 121, 130
Primary and secondary experience
255, 272
primitive religion 114, 117
Process of thought 301
history 56
(see also dialectic)
professional and amateur in philo-
sophy 261
progress 54
Prologue (of Chaucer) 60
proofs of the existence of God 151,
264
psycho-analysis 75, 92-4
psychology 168, 181, 195, 247-8,
274-8, 280, 298, 302
error of 277
(see also faculty-psychology)
punishment 225-6
puritanism 31


Quellenkritik 213-14

questioning, its relation to fact 79
knowledge 76-80
supposal 78, 186


rationalism 137, 146-8, 172, 265-6,
269-70

realism 201, 245, 252, 259, 268,
281-7, 291, 298-9

realistic art 61-2, 76

reality, Greek scientific view of
161-3, 169


and appearance 285
as matter 267
as object independent of knower
238
Kant’s view of 279
modern realistic view of 285
reason 131, 195-200, 300
reconciliation 139, 142
redemption 37, 130
Reformation 31
refutations of idealism 312
relations, external 233, 234 (note)
internal 234 (note)
relevance, concept of, and art 98-9
RELIGION 108-53 passim (see
Table of Contents)
act of will in 259
and art 154-5
and children 50
and fact 209
and language 154
and science 40, 49, 193, 307
claims truth 39
dogma in 259
God as the object of 48, 116-22,
158-9, 219-20, 238, 242-3, 264,
268, 311
imagery of 302-3
individuality of 219
life of 295
medieval 27-8, 30
present state of 16, 19, 33-4, 145-6
supposed illusory nature of 265
Religion and Philosophy 108 note
religious agnosticism 131
art, opposed to secular 27, 122
controversy 116
cosmology 115, 258
ethics 171
history 209, 216
morality 134
philosophy 28, 258, 264-70 (see
also theism)
reminiscence 212
Renaissance, aftermath of 33-4, 74
Christianity of 38
freedom of 36-1
laughter of 32
life of 36-7, 47
science 177-8, 184-5, 187, 201-
view of art 31, 73
Republic (of Plato) 178
resurrection 37
Revelation, Book of 132, 139
Rhodes, Cecil 147
rights of man 304


326


Index.


ritual 121-3, 127, 143, 158 |
of savages 129

Robert Browning as a philosophical

and religious teacher 74

Romans, Epistle to 132

Romantic movement 38

Rossetti, quoted 99

Rugby football 19, 136


St. John, Gospel of, quoted 169
St. Pauler32
savages 58, 73, 129
scepticism 181, 213, 246
Schiller 103
Schubert 68
SCIENCE 154-200 passim
Table of Contents)
advance of 82
and fact 227, 277
and language 125
and logic 84-5
and philosophy 281
and religion 40, 49, 193, 307
claims truth 41
dialectic of 164, 202
individuality of 220
invented by Greeks 52 (see also
Greeks and science)
life of 295
object of 181-8, 238, 242-3, 249-
50
sciences, classification of 191-2
philosophical 74, 195
scientific history 208-9, 216
philosophy 50, 258, 271-81
scientist, really an historian 187
Scott 75
secondary experience (see primary
experience)
self-absorption of artist 69
self and its world 248
self-consciousness in religion 140
of artist 68-9, 140
philosophy as 247-52, 291
self-consistency 44-5
self-contradiction of art 87-9
history 236-7
self-creation of mind 296
self-criticism in art 71
of absolute mind 300
of thought 251, 254
self-determination 64
in art 71
of mind 296
self-transcendence of art 90
senility 260


(see


sensation II, 204
-and thought 188-9, 166
sense-datum 205
series, dialectical 206-8
notion of 55
numerical 165
Shakespeare 18, 32, 130, 216
quoted 31, 54, 91, 92, 140
significance 88
sin 140, 142
philosopher’s confession of 291
social character of religion 121
social contract, theory of 175
socialism 22, 227-8, 231
society and individual 174, 224, 229,
242, 300, 304
conflicts in 173-5
economic view of 173
sociology 208, 227
Socrates 88, 163, 245, 278
solipsism 298-300
Sophocles 67, 68
soul 59, 168 (see also psychology)
sources of history 213, 217, 236-7
‘sovereign’ 305
space-time 167, 245, 282, 294
species and genus 48
theory of forms of experience as
46, 49-50, 55
Spencer (Herbert) 206, 287
Spinozism 281
spirit, God conceived as 118
life of 153, 309
spiritualism 20, 214
state, the, and business 174, 226, 230
‘ station and its duties’ 23, 26, 223
statutes 225
structure in art 66
dreams 92-5
subject and object relation 141,
243-4, 249, 252, 285, 298-9, 314
subjective, meaning of 11
subjectivity of the world 294
superstition 146, 193, 286
supposal 76-80, 180-8
Swift 147
symbol 108, 122-34, 158, 194
synthetic philosophy 206
system, philosophical 9


tabu 164
Tacitus 53
Tam Lin, Ballad of, quoted 109
‘temperament’ 263
artistic 81
terminology 10-11


Index


theism 28, 150, 255, 264-70 (see
also religious philosophy)
theological ethics 171
theology a compromise 149
a science 1§2, 176-7, 190, 270
and religion 119, 172 (see also
theism)
Christian 139
task of 129, 148, 158
theory of forms of error 288-91
knowledge 283
Thompson, Francis, quoted 81
thought and action 15, 35
and intuition 95, 188-94, 262
and language 157-9
and sensation 166, 188-9
history of 289-90
laws of 273, 275
life of 146-57, 159, 317
modern 290
nature of 158, 160, 273, 276
object of 273, 277
progress of 289
self-criticism of 251, 254
sense in which used 11
(see also knowledge, philosophy)
Thucydides 53, 204, 215-16
time 54, 301
Titian 67, 68
Tom Brown’s School Days 136
trade-unionism 256
transcendence of God 303
truth and error 64, 251, 289, 313,


317
and falsehood 112, 197, 275-6
and meaning 256-7
and religion 130-1, 145, 153, 312
claimed by art &c. 39-41
degrees of 208 ;
nature of 109-10, 131, 316
supposed aspects of 251


ugliness 64, 117
“uncanny ’, the 119


3A7


“unconscious ’, the 93-4
understanding 195-200
unity of the mind 27, 30, 37
work of art &c. 61
universal, abstract (sce also abstract
concept) 163, 277, 299
and particular 159, 162, 167, 170,
179-80, 189, 192, 196-8, 222,
22A, 242, 25351272, 277; 310
concrete 196, 220-1, 244, 286, 299
history 231-2, 234
utilitarian ethics 171-3, 227
morality 135
utilitarianism 172, 226, 230
utility 169-76, 182, 222, 225-6
alleged, of art 69


vaccination, compulsory 228
value of art 89-90

Vico 53, 74, 216

Virgil quoted 194


war 22, 228, 230
Wells cathedral 25
whole and part 47, 299-300
will, act of 62, 259
and intellect 103, 170, 305
concept of 170, 172
of God 66, 209, 308
witchcraft 117
work of art 63-71, 79, 99, 191, 193,
292, 311
the absolute, alleged 71
world of artist 63
religious view of 153 (sce also
cosmology)
spirit 298
(see also nature, external world)
worship I15, 119-21, 127, 130,
151-2, 269


Xerxes 215


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS, OXFORD
BY VIVIAN RIDLER
PRINTER TO THE UNIVERSITY


gts PA er y & ae 4


Toga


6187 00014 6


B Collingwood, Robin
1618 George, 1889-1943.
C73

S6é Speculum mentis; Or,


The map of
knowledge


As: Corb
