Religion and Philosophy (R. G. Collingwood, 1916)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/religionphilosop00colluoft). Collingwood's early study of the relation between religious faith and philosophical reason.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

RELIGION  AND PHILOSOPHY


MACMILLAN  AND  CO.,  Limited

LONDON  •  BOMBAY  •  CALCUTTA  •  MADRAS
MELBOURNE

THE  MACMILLAN  COMPANY

NEW YORK  •  BOSTON  •  CHICAGO
DALLAS  •  SAN FRANCISCO

THE  MACMILLAN  CO.  OF  CANADA, Ltd.

TORONTO


RELIGION
AND PHILOSOPHY


BY

V
R.  G.  COLLINGWOOD

FELLOW AND LECTURER OF PEMBROKE COLLEGE, OXFORD


MACMILLAN AND CO., LIMITED

ST.  MARTIN'S  STREET,  LONDON  nO


COPYRIGHT


PREFACE

It  was  my  intention  to  write  this  book  as  an  essay  in
philosophy,  addressed  in  the  first  instance  to  philosophers.
But  the  force  of  circumstances  has  to  some  extent  modi-
fied that  plan.  To  make  of  it  an  academic  treatise,
armed  at  all  points  against  the  criticism  of  the  professed
specialist,  would  require  time  far  beyond  the  few  years
I  have  spent  upon  it.  The  claims  of  a  "  temporary  "
occupation,  very  different  from  that  in  which  I  began
to  write,  leave  no  opportunity  for  the  rewriting  and
careful  revision  which  such  a  work  demands,  and  I  had
set  it  aside  to  await  a  period  of  greater  leisure.  But
the  last  year  has  seen  a  considerable  output  of  books
treating  of  religion  from  a  philosophic  or  intellectual
rather  than  either  a  dogmatic  or  a  devotional  point  of
view  ;  and  I  believe  that  this  activity  corresponds  to  a
widespread  reawakening  of  interest  in  that  aspect  of
religion  among  persons  not  specially  trained  in  techni-
cal philosophy  or  theology.  In  the  hope  of  making
some  small  contribution  to  this  movement,  I  venture  to
publish  this  book  as  it  stands.

No  one  can  be  more  conscious  than  myself  of  its
shortcomings  ;  that  they  are  not  far  greater  is  largely


vi  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

due  to  the  patience  with  which  certain  friends,  especi-
ally E.  F.  Carritt,  F.  A.  Cockin,  and  S.  G.  Scott  have
read  and  criticised  in  detail  successive  versions  of  the
manuscript.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  however,  that
they  are  in  agreement  with  all  my  views.


69  Church  Street,  Kensington,  W.,
July  30,  1 91 6.


CONTENTS


PAGE


Introduction  ...... xiii

PART I
THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION

CHAPTER I

Religion  and  Philosophy .....  3

1.  The intellectual element in all Religion (creed). Anti-

intellectual  theories  of*  Religion  : —

(a)  Religion  as  Ritual.

(b)  Religion  as  Conduct.

(c)  Religion  as  Feeling.

2.  Identity  of  creed  with  Theology.

3.  Identity  of  creed  with  Philosophy  : —

(a)  Negation  of  a  special  Philosophy  of  Religion.

(b)  Identity  of  Religion  and  Philosophy.

(c)  The  supposed  irreligious  elements  in  Science.

CHAPTER II

Religion  and  Morality .  .  .  .  .21

1.  The  existence  of  a  practical  content  in  all  Religion. Contra-
dictory views  : —
(a)  An  historical  argument.
(6)  An  anthropological  argument,
(c)  Religious  determinism.
{d)  Antinomianism.
(e)  Quietism.

vii


V


viii  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

2.  The  mutual  dependence  of  thought  and  action  : —

(a)  Action  always  presupposes  thought.

(b)  Thought  always  presupposes  will.

3.  The  identity  of  thought  and  action  : —

(a)  Religious  expression  of  this  identity  in  the  term  "love."

(b)  Criticisms  of  the  ordinary  distinction.

(c)  The  identity  does  not  destroy  real  differences  between

different  kinds  of  life.


CHAPTER III

Religion  and  History .  .  .  .  -37

i.  One-sided  historical  views  of  Religion  (historical  positivism): —

(a)  Psychology  and  Comparative  Religion.

(b)  History  of  Dogma  or  of  the  Church.

2.  Anti-historical  views  : —

(a)  Anti-historical  scepticism.

(b)  Dualism  of  History  and  Philosophy.

3.  The  mutual  dependence  of  Philosophy  and  History  : —
(a)  History  depends  upon  Philosophy.
(Z>)  Philosophy  depends  upon  History.

4.  The  identity  of  Philosophy  and  History.

5.  Application  to  Religion  :  doctrine  cannot  be  severed  from  its
historical  setting.


PART II
RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

CHAPTER I

On  Proving  the  Existence  of  God  .  .  .59

1.  Theology  must  prove  the  existence  of  God  : —

(a)  Attempt  to  evade  this  difficulty  by  the  analogy  of  physics.

(b)  Physics proves the existence not of matter in the

abstract,  but  of  this  or  that kind  of  matter  ; this
proof,  in  fact,  is  physics  itself.

(c)  In  the  same  way  theology  has  to  prove  not  the  exist-

ence of  any  and  every  God,  but  of  some  particular  God.


CONTENTS  ix

2.  The  traditional  Theistic  Proofs  : —

(a)  They  are  not  the  illicit  product  of  thought  in  bondage

to  authority,  but  serious  philosophical  arguments.

(b)  Their  method  is  reasonable  and  inevitable.

3.  Scheme  of  the  remaining  Chapters  of  Part  II.


CHAPTER II

Matter .......

1.  The  dualism  of  Matter  and  Mind  : —

(a)  Not  satisfactory  as  a  working  hypothesis.

(b)  Interaction  between  the  two  is  impossible.

(c)  They  cannot  be  distinguished.

2.  Materialism  : —

{a)  Materialism  derives  no  support  whatever  from  physics.
(b)  The  paradox  of  causation  : —

i.  Nothing  is  a  cause  or  an  effect  except  a  total  state

of  the  universe.
ii.  The  explanation  given  by  causal  methods  is  either

a  tautology  or  an  infinite  regress.
iii.  Nothing  is  ever  explained at  all  unless  it  is  first
assumed  that  the  universe,  though  material,  can
cause  its  own  states,  i.e.  is  not  subject  to  the  law
of  causation.

3.  Materialism  and  Idealism  (or  Immaterialism)  : —

(a)  The  scientist's  objection  to  Idealism  :  uniformity.

(b)  The  plain  man's  objection  :  objectivity.

(c)  Idealism  and  the  higher  Materialism.


CHAPTER III

Personality

*  •  •  •  •

1.  The  identity  of  persons  with  each  other  : —

(a)  In  communication.

(b)  In  co-operation.

2.  Identity  and  difference  : —

(a)  This  identity  rests  on,  does  not  destroy,  the  freedom

of  the  various  wills  concerned.

(b)  Nor  does  it  destroy  the infinite  differences of  truths

and  aims.

3.  Abstract  and  concrete  identity  : —

(a)  The  necessary  identity  of  parts  in  a  whole,  distinct  as
abstract  identity  from  the  concrete  (contingent)  iden-
tity above  described.


72


96


RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

PAGE

(b)  Importance  of  this  distinction  in  philosophy  or  religion.

An  "Absolute,"  or  a  God,  must  be  concrete.

(c)  A  perfectly  good  and  wise  God  is  conceivable,  but  it

seems  necessary  to  conceive  him  as  finite,  i.e.  qua  God
non-existent. This  is  the  Problem  of  Evil.


CHAPTER IV
Evil  .  .  .  .  .  .  .122

1.  Statement  of  the  problem  : —

(a)  The  problem  not  peculiar  to  religion  ; it  is  a  philo-

sophical problem,  and  therefore  not  insoluble.

(b)  Subordinate  questions  : —

i.  Pain.

ii.  How  does  evil  arise  ?

iii.  What  is  evil  ? — Failure  to  answer  this  question  ;
how  far  fatal  to  the  inquiry.

2.  Some  inadequate  views  of  evil  : —

(a)  As  non-existent.

(b)  As  a  finite  point  of  view  : —

i.  Morality  relative  to  the  social  isystem.
ii.  "  Goodness  "  not  the  only  value.
iii. Sceptical  theory  of  knowledge.

(c)  As  means  to  good.

(d)  As  merely  negative.

(e)  As  a  superseded  phase  of  evolution.

3.  The  main  problem  : —

(a)  The  elimination  of  error  by  truth.

(b)  The  elimination  of  evil  by  good.


PART III

FROM  METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

CHAPTER I

The  Self-Expression  of  God  in Man .  .  . 147

1.  The  Person  of  the  Christ  in  relation  to  God  : —

(a)  The  two  senses  of  identity  :  (i.)  the  abstract  identity
of  every  man  with  God  ;  (ii.)  the  concrete  identity  of
thought  and  will  in  the  Christ.


CONTENTS  xi


PAfiK


(A)  Objection,  that  the  infinite  cannot  be  completely  mani-
fested in  the  finite. Criticism.

(c)  Objection,  that  such  a  person  would  be  like  God  only,
not  divine. Criticism.

(</)  Objection,  that  to  appear  as  human,  God  must  undergo
"self- limitation."  Criticism.  Omnipotence  and
omniscience  ;  their  nature.

2.  The  Christ  in  relation  to  Man  : —

(a)  The  complete  reality  of  his  manhood,  i.e.  his  personal

human  individuality.

(b)  His  complete  unification  with  his  disciples.

(f) His  union  with  fellow-workers  not  nominally  disciples.

3.  The  Christ  as  unique,  universal  and  all-inclusive  : —

(a)  Objection  from  pantheism,  that  there  are  infinite  sides
to  God's  nature. Criticism.

(/;)  Objection  from  logic,  that  every  particular  equally  dis-
plays the  universal. Criticism.

(c)  The  historical  uniqueness  of  Christ.

(d)  As  the absolute experience  he  summarises  all  reality

and  all  history. The  problem  of  immortality.


CHAPTER II

God's  Redemption  of  Man  .  .  .  .169

1 .  The  contradictory  duties  of  Punishment  and  Forgiveness  :—

{a)  Forgiveness  cannot  be  dismissed  as  an  illusion.
(b)  Neither  can  punishment  : —

i. Breakdown  of  revenge  theory,
ii.  Breakdown  of  deterrent  theory,
(f)  The  contradiction  is  absolute.

2.  The  solution  of  the  contradiction  : —

(a)  Further  analysis  of  punishment.

(b)  Identity  of  punishment  and  forgiveness.
(f)  Empirical  distinction  between  them.

3.  The  conception  of  redemption  : —

(a)  Objectively  as  grace  of  God.

(b)  Subjectively  as  effort  of  man.

(c)  Identity  of  the  two  sides.

4.  The  principle  of  vicarious  penitence  : —

{a)  Its  reality  in  the  mind  of  God.
(b) Its  mediation  through  man.


xii  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER III

PAGE

Miracle ....... 194

1.  The common definition,  God's interference with Nature.

General  objections  to  such  a  dualism,  philosophical  and
theological  : —

(a)  The  common  definition  denies  God  by  implication.

(b)  It  also  denies  Nature.

2.  Two  possible  methods  of  escape  from  the  dualism  : —

(a)  Nature  the  sole  reality. Miracle  now  defined  as  emer-
gence of  a  higher  law. This  conception  inconsistent
with  the  idea  of  Nature  and  law.
(/>)  God the sole reality. Miracle  now  defined  as  one
special  type  of  divine  activity  : —

i.  e.g.  abnormal  as  opposed  to  normal.  Criticism
of  the  ideas  of  normality  and  of  a  normative
code  of  conduct.  Rules  of  conduct  either  empty
or  not  true  ;  valueless  in  proportion  to  agent's
perfection,
ii.  Immediate  as  opposed  to  mediate.  This  is  neither
a  tenable  distinction  nor  a  relevant  one.

3.  The  conception  of  miracle  as  a  separate  category  abandoned  : —

(a)  This  agrees  with  the  religious  view  of  life  and  is  necessi-

tated by  the  fact  of  human  freedom.

(b)  It  does  not  conflict  with  the  uniformity  of  Nature  as

rightly  understood  :  for

i. Mind  shows  the  same  uniformity  as  nature,  and

uniformity  does  not  prove  determinism,
ii.  Uniformity  is  relative  to  the  point  of  view  ;  where
superficial  knowledge  sees  identity  and  mono-
tony only,  deeper  knowledge  sees  differentiation
and  freedom.


INDEX 215


INTRODUCTION

This  book  is  the  result  of  an  attempt  to  treat  the
Christian  creed  not  as  dogma  but  as  a  critical  solution
of  a  philosophical  problem.  Christianity,  in  other
words,  is  approached  as  a  philosophy,  and  its  various
doctrines  are  regarded  as  varying  aspects  of  a  single
idea  which,  according  to  the  language  in  which  it  is
expressed,  may  be  called  a  metaphysic,  an  ethic,  or  a
theology.

This  attempt  has  been  made  so  often  already  that  no
apology  is  needed  for  making  it  again.  Every  modern
philosophy  has  found  in  Christianity,  consciously  or
unconsciously,  the  touchstone  by  which  to  test  its  power
of  explanation.  And  conversely,  Christian  theology  has
always  required  the  help  of  current  philosophy  in  stating
and  expounding  its  doctrines.  It  is  only  when  philosophy
is  at  a  standstill  that  the  rewriting  of  theology  can,  for
a  time,  cease.

But  before  embarking  on  the  main  argument  it
seemed  desirable  to  ask  whether  such  an  argument  is
really  necessary :  whether  it  is  right  to  treat  Christianity
as  a  philosophy  at  all,  or  whether  such  a  treatment,  so
far  from  being  the  right  one,  really  misses  the  centre
and  heart  of  the  matter.  Is  religion  really  a  philosophy?
May  it  not  be  that  the  philosophy  which  we  find
associated  with  Christianity  (and  the  same  applies  to
Buddhism  or  Mohammedanism)  is  not  Christianity  itself
but  an  alien  growth,  the  projection  into  religion  of  the
philosophy  of  those  who  have  tried  to  understand  it  ?

xiii


xiv  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

According  to  this  view,  religion  is  itself  no  function
of  the  intellect,  and  has  nothing  to  do  with  philosophy.
It  is  a  matter  of  temperament,  of  imagination,  of  emotion,
of  conduct,  of  anything  but  thought.  If  this  view  is
right,  religion  will  still  be  a  fit  and  necessary  object  of
philosophic  study  ;  but  that  study  will  be  placed  on
quite  a  different  footing.  For  if  Christianity  is  a
philosophy,  every  Christian  must  be,  within  the  limits
of  his  power,  a  philosopher  :  by  trying  to  understand
he  advances  in  religion,  and  by  intellectual  sloth  his
religion  loses  force  and  freshness.  Above  all,  if
Christianity  is  a  philosophy,  it  makes  a  vital  difference
whether  it  is  true ;  whether  it  is  a  philosophy  which  will
stand  criticism  and  can  face  other  philosophies  on  the
field  of  controversy.

On  the  other  hand,  if  religion  is  a  matter  of  tempera-
ment, then  there  are  no  Christian  truths  to  state  or  to
criticise  :  what  the  religious  man  must  cultivate  is  not
intellectual  clearness,  but  simply  his  idiosyncrasy  of
temperament  ;  and  what  he  must  avoid  is  not  looseness
of  thought  and  carelessness  of  the  truth,  but  anything
which  may  dispel  the  charmed  atmosphere  of  his
devotions.  If  Christianity  is  a  dream,  the  philosopher
may  indeed  study  it,  but  he  must  tread  lightly  and
forbear  to  publish  the  results  of  his  inquiry,  lest  he
destroy  the  very  thing  he  is  studying.  And  for  the
plain  religious  man  to  philosophise  on  his  own  religion
is  suicide.  How  can  the  subtleties  of  temperament  and
atmosphere  survive  the  white  light  of  philosophical
criticism  ?

It  is  clearly  of  the  utmost  importance  to  answer  this
question.  If  religion  already  partakes  of  the  nature  of
philosophy,  then  to  philosophise  upon  it  is  to  advance
in  it,  even  if,  as  often  happens,  philosophy  brings  doubt
in  its  train.  He  knows  little  of  his  own  religion  who
fears  losing  his  soul  in  order  to  find  it.  But  if  religion
is  not  concerned  with  truth,  then  to  learn  the  truth
about  religion,  to  philosophise  upon  it,  is  no  part  of  a


INTRODUCTION  xv

religious  man's  duties. It  is  a  purely  professional  task,
the  work  of  the  theologian  or  the  philosopher.

These  issues  have  been  raised  in  the  First  Part  of
this  book,  and  it  may  be  well  to  anticipate  in  outline
the  conclusions  there  advanced.

In  the  first  place,  religion  is  undoubtedly  an  affair  of
the  intellect,  a  philosophical  activity.  Its  very  centre
and  foundation  is  creed,  and  every  creed  is  a  view  of
the  universe,  a  theory  of  man  and  the  world,  a  theory
of  God.  If  we  examine  primitive  religions,  we  shall
find,  as  we  should  expect,  that  their  views  of  the  universe
are  primitive  ;  but  none  the  less  they  are  views  of  the
universe.  They  may  be  rudimentary  philosophies,  but
they  are  philosophies.

Secondly,  religion  is  not,  as  philosophy  is  generally
supposed  to  be,  an  activity  of  the  "mere"  intellect.  It
involves  not  only  belief  but  conduct,  and  conduct
governed  by  ideals  or  moral  conduct.  Religion  is  a
system  of  morality  just  as  much  as  a  system  of  philo-
sophical doctrines.  Here,  again,  systems  vary  :  the
savage  expresses  a  savage  morality  in  his  religion,  but  it
is  a  morality ;  the  civilised  man's  religion,  as  he  becomes
more  civilised,  purges  itself  of  savage  elements  and
expresses  ideals  which  are  not  yet  revealed  to  the  savage.

Thirdly,  the  creed  of  religion  finds  utterance  not
only  in  philosophy  but  in  history.  The  beliefs  of  a
Christian  concern  not  only  the  eternal  nature  of  God
and  man,  but  certain  definite  events  in  the  past  and  the
future.  Are  these  a  true  part  of  religion  at  all  ?  could
not  a  man  deny  all  the  historical  clauses  in  the  Creed
and  still  be  in  the  deepest  sense  a  perfect  Christian  ?  or
be  a  true  Moslem  while  denying  that  Mohammed  ever
lived  ?  The  answer  given  in  Chapter  III.  is  that  no  such
distinction  can  be  drawn.  Philosophy  and  history,  the
eternal  and  the  temporal,  are  not  irrelevant  to  one
another.  It  may  be  that  certain  historical  beliefs  have
in  the  past  been,  or  are  now,  considered  essential  to
orthodoxy  when in fact they  are  not,  and are even


xvi  RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

untrue  ;  but  we  cannot  jump  from  this  fact  to  the
general  statement  that  history  is  irrelevant  to  religion,
any  more  than  we  can  jump  from  the  fact  that  certain
metaphysical  errors  may  have  been  taught  as  orthodox,
to  the  statement  that  metaphysics  and  religion  have
nothing  in  common.

A  fourth  question  that  ought  to  be  raised  concerns
the  relation  between  religion  and  art.  The  metaphorical
or  poetical  form  which  is  so  universal  a  characteristic  of
religious  literature  seems  at  first  sight  worlds  removed
from  theology's  prose  or  the  "  grey  in  grey "  of
philosophy.  Is  the  distinction  between  religion  and
theology  really  that  between  poetry  and  prose,  meta-
phorical and  literal  expression  ?  And  if  so,  which  is  the
higher  form  and  the  most  adequately  expressive  of  the
truth  ?

To  deal  with  these  questions  we  must  enter  at  length
into  the  nature  of  poetry  and  prose,  literal  and  meta-
phorical expression,  and  the  general  philosophy  of
language.  And  having  raised  the  problem,  I  must  ask
the  reader's  pardon  for  failing  to  deal  with  it.  The
existence  of  the  problem  must  be  noticed  ;  but  its
complexity  and  difficulty  are  so  great  that  it  was  found
impossible  to  treat  it  within  the  limits  of  a  single  chapter.
I  have  accordingly  omitted  any  detailed  treatment  of
these  questions,  and  can  only  add  that  I  hope  to  make
good  the  deficiency  in  a  future  volume.

Philosophy,  morality,  art  and  history  do  not  exhaust
all  the  sides  of  human  life,  because  no  list  of  faculties
or  activities  can  ever,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be
exhaustive.  They  are  taken  as  typical  ;  and  if  each  is
found  to  be  necessary  to  religion,  it  is  perhaps  not  very
rash  to  conclude  that  whatever  others  exist  are  equally
essential.  Thus  religion  is  not  the  activity  of  one
faculty  alone,  but  a  combined  activity  of  all  elements  in
!  the  mind.  Is  it,  then,  a  true  unity  ?  Must  we  not  say,
"  Philosophy  I  know,  and  history  I  know,  but  religion
seems  to  be  merely  a  confused  name  for  a  combination  of


INTRODUCTION  xvii

activities,  each  of  which  is  really  distinct  and  separate"?
Does  not  religion  dissolve  into  its  component  elements
and  disappear  ?

No  ;  because  the  elements  will  not  dissolve.  They
contain  in  themselves  the  power  of  natural  attraction
which  forbids  us  ever  to  effect  the  separation.  Or
rather,  each  by  its  own  internal  necessity  generates  all
the  others,  and  cannot  exist  as  a  concrete  thing  till  that
necessity  has  run  its  course.  And  religion  is  a  concrete
thing,  a  life,  an  activity,  not  a  mere  faculty ;  and  there-
fore it  must  consist  of  all  at  once.  So  far  from  religion
decomposing  into  its  elements,  every  individual  element
expands  into  a  concrete  fulness  in  which  it  becomes
religion.

"  Then  is  there  no  other  life  than  religion  ? '  So
it  would  appear.  Just  as  every  man  has  some  work-
ing theory  of  the  world  which  is  his  philosophy,  some
system  of  ideals  which  rule  his  conduct,  so  every  one  has
to  some  degree  that  unified  life  of  all  the  faculties  which
is  a  religion.  He  may  be  unconscious  of  it,  just  as
every  man  is  unconscious  of  having  a  philosophy  before
he  understands  what  the  word  means,  and  takes  the
trouble  to  discover  it ;  and  it  may  be  a  good  or  a  bad
religion,  just  as  a  man's  system  of  conduct  may  be  a
good  or  bad  morality.  But  the  thing,  in  some  form,  is
necessarily  and  always  there  ;  and  even  the  psychological
accompaniments  of  religion — though  they  must  never
be  mistaken  for  religion  itself — the  feeling  of  awe  and
devotion,  of  trust  in  powers  greater  than  oneself,  of
loyalty  to  an  invisible  world,  are  by  no  means  confined
to  persons  gifted  with  the  "  religious  temperament."

"  But  at  least,"  it  will  be  replied,  "  that  is  not  the
way  we  use  the  word  ;  and  you  can't  alter  the  usage  of
words  to  suit  your  own  convenience."  I  am  afraid  we
cannot  escape  the  difficulty  by  any  method  so  simple  as
recourse  to  the  dictionary.  The  question  is  not  what
words  we  use,  but  what  we  mean  by  them.  We  apply
the  term  religion  to  certain  types  of  consciousness,  and


xviii RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY

not  to  others,  because  we  see  in  the  one  type  certain
characteristics  which  in  the  others  we  suppose  to  be
absent.  Further  investigation  shows  that  the  character-
istic marks  of  religion,  the  marks  in  virtue  of  which  we
applied  the  term,  are  really  present  in  the  others  also,
though  in  a  form  which  at  first  evaded  recognition.
To  refuse  to  extend  the  term  on  the  ground  that  you
have  never  done  so  before  is  as  if  one  should  say,  "  I
mean  by  a  swan  a  bird  that  is  white  ;  to  describe  this
black  bird  as  a  swan  is  merely  abusing  language."

We  must  make  up  our  minds  what  we  really  do
mean  by  religion  ;  and  if  we  choose  to  define  it  super-
ficially, by  the  colour  of  its  feathers  instead  of  by  its
comparative  anatomy,  we  must  renounce  the  attempt  to
philosophise  about  it,  or  to  preach  it,  or  to  put  our
whole  trust  in  it ;  because  none  of  these  things  can
decently  apply  to  superficialities.  But  if  we  really  try
to  discover  what  is  the  inward  heart  and  essence  of  the
thing  we  call  religion,  we  must  not  be  alarmed  if  we
find  that  our  practised  vision  sees  it  in  places  where,  till
now,  we  had  not  expected  to  find  it.


PART  I
THE  GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION


B


CHAPTER I

RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY

To  determine  the  relation  in  which  religion  stands  to
the  other  activities  of  the  mind,  philosophy,  conduct,
and  so  on,  might  seem  impossible  without  previously
defining  both  religion  itself  and  the  other  activities  or
forms  of  consciousness.  But  we  cannot  frame  a  defini-
tion until  we  have  investigated  these  relations  ;  and  to
offer  it  dogmatically  at  the  outset  would  be  to  beg  the
very  question  we  wish  to  solve.  This  is  a  difficulty
common  to  all  philosophical,  and  indeed  in  the  last
resort  to  all  other  investigations.  <No  science  is  really
in  a  position  to  define  its  subject-matter  until  it  has
brought  its  discoveries  to  a  close.)

Consequently  we  offer  no  definition  of  religion  at
the  beginning,  but  hope  to  arrive  at  one  in  the  course
of  our  inquiry.  In  fact,  these  introductory  chapters
are  intended  to  lead  to  a  general  conception  of  religion  ;
abstract  indeed,  because  its  content  will  only  be  examined
in  the  latter  part  of  this  book,  but  sufficient  for  the
purpose  of  preliminary  definition.  We  start  here  with
only  one  presupposition  :  namely,  that  the  form  of  con-
sciousness called  religion  really  does  exist.  What  it  is,
and  of  what  it  is  the  consciousness,  are  questions  we
shall  try  to  answer  in  the  course  of  our  inquiry.

i.  The  first  relation  to  be  examined  is  that  between
religion  and  the  intellect,  that  activity  of  the  mind  by
which  we  think  and  know.  The  question  before  us  is
whether  religion  involves  this  activity  or  not ;  whether

3


4 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION  PT.  i

or  not  the  intellect  has  a  part  in  the  religious  life.  At
present  we  do  not  ask  whether  it  constitutes  the  whole
of  religion,  and  whether  religion  contains  also  non-
intellectual  elements.  We  only  wish  to  determine
whether  it  has  an  intellectual  element ;  and  if  so,  what
is  the  general  nature  of  this  element.

This  question  naturally  leads  us  to  investigate  certain
views  of  religion  which  place  its  essence  in  something
other  than  thought,  and  exclude  that  faculty  from  the
definition  of  the  religious  consciousness.  It  has,  for
instance,  been  held  that  religion  consists  in  the  per-
formance of  ritual  acts,  and  that  all  else  is  secondary
and  irrelevant ;  or  that  it  is  neither  more  nor  less  than
a  system  of  practice  or  morals  ;  or  again  that  it  is  a
function  of  a  mental  faculty  neither  intellectual  nor
moral,  known  as  feeling.  We  shall  examine  these
views  as  mere  types,  in  the  abstract,  not  criticising
any  particular  exposition  of  them,  but  rather  treating
them  on  general  grounds  as  alternative  possible  theories.

(a)  The  view  that  religion  consists  in  ritual  alone
does  not  result  from  a  study  of  the  more  highly
developed  religions.  In  these  ritual  may  be  very  im-
portant and  have  a  prominent  place  ;  but  no  one,
probably,  would  maintain  that  they  ever  make  ritual
their  sole  content  to  the  exclusion  of  creed.  The
theory  springs  rather  from  an  examination  of  the
religions  of  the  lower  culture  :  the  evidence  for  it  is
"  anthropological "  in  the  common  sense  of  that  word.
Anthropologists  sometimes  lay  down  the  principle  that
the  beliefs  of  primitive  peoples  are  less  worth  studying
than  their  practices.  All  ceremonial,  whether  of  primi-
tive or  advanced  religion,  is  definite  and  instructive  ;
but  to  question  a  savage  as  to  his  creed  is  at  best  a
waste  of  time,  since  his  powers  alike  of  self-analysis
and  of  self-expression  are  rudimentary,  and  at  worst,
for  the  same  reasons,  positively  misleading.  How
valuable  this  principle  is  every  one  must  recognise  who
has  compared  its  practical  results  with  those  of  the  old-


CH.  I


RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY


fashioned  catechising  method.  But  in  order  to  explain
its  value,  anthropologists  have  sometimes  been  led  to
assert  that  religion  primarily  consists  in  ritual  alone,
and  that  dogma  or  creed  is  at  first  non-existent,  and
only  arises  later  through  the  invention  of  "  aetiological
myth."  The  important  thing,  we  are  told,  is  that  a
savage  does  such  and  such  actions at  such and  such

O  ...

times  ;  the  story  he  tells,  when  pressed  by  an  inquiring
neophyte  or  a  privileged  stranger  to  explain  why  he
does  them,  is  a  subsequent  accretion  and  no  part  of
the  real  religious  impulse.  Now  this  explanatory  story
or  aetiological  myth  is  supposed  to  be  the  germ  which
develops  into  creed  ;  and  therefore  it  follows  that  creed,
with  all  its  theological  and  philosophical  developments,
is  not  an  integral  part  of  any  religion  at  all.

Such  a  position,  however  plausible  it  may  seem  at
first  sight,  involves  a  host  of  difficulties.  To  begin
with,  it  is  at  least  unsafe  to  assume  that  religion  in  us
is  essentially  the  same  as  religion  in  the  savage.  No
proof  of  this  is  forthcoming.  It  may  well  be  the  case
that  the  emphasis  we  lay  on  creed  has  quite  transformed
religion,  so  that  it  is  to  us  a  different  thing,  incapable
of  explanation  by  analogy  with  that  of  the  savage.
Thus  anthropologists  tell  us  that  the  purpose  of  cloth-
ing, in  the  most  primitive  culture,  is  to  attract  the  eye,
evil  or  otherwise,  of  the  spectator  ;  not  to  keep  out
the  weather.  Am  I  therefore  to  resist  the  inclination
to  wear  a  greatcoat  when  I  go  to  the  post  on  a  wet
night,  on  the  ground  that  it  is  a  mere  freak  of  vanity,
and  useless  because  no  one  will  see  me  ?

Even  if  the  account  of  savage  religion  is  true,  it
does  not  follow  that  it  is  a  true  account  of  the  religion
of  other  cultures.  It  is  useless  to  appeal  to  the  principle,
if  principle  it  is,  that  to  understand  a  thing  we  must
know  its  history  and  origin  ;  for  if  religion  has  really
undergone  a  radical  change,  that  principle  is  a  mere
cloak  for  giving  irrelevant  information  :  the  history
offered  is  the  history  of  something  else.


6 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION  PT. ,

Secondly,  such  an  account  of  savage  religion  itself
seems  to  be  incomplete.  It  fails  to  give  any  reason
why  the  savage  practises  his  ritual,  for  ex  hypothesi  the
aetiological  myth  only  gives  a  fictitious  reason.  No
doubt  it  is  possible  to  say  that  there  is  no  reason  at
all,  that  he  has  no  motive,  no  special  feelings,  impelling
him  to  these  ceremonies.  And  it  may  be  true  that  the
accounts  given  by  savages  of  their  motive  in  ritual  are
unsatisfactory  and  inconsistent.  But  ritual  is  not  mere
motiveless  play.  If  it  is  ritual  at  all,  some  definite  im-
portance is  attached  to  it  ;  it  is  felt  to  have  a  value
and  to  be  obligatory  or  necessary.  What  is  the  nature
of  this  importance  which  the  savage  attaches  to  his
ritual?  It  cannot  be  a  mere  "feeling  of  importance"
in  the  abstract  ;  such  a  feeling  is  not  a  possibility.
However  difficult  it  may  be  to  explain  why  we  feel
something  to  be  important,  there  must  be  an  expressible
reason  for  our  feeling  ;  for  instance,  the  belief  that  this
ritual  averts  evil  consequences  of  actions  done,  or  en-
sures benefits  of  some  kind.  It  is  not  necessary  that
the  conception  be  very  sharply  defined  ;  but  some  such
conception  necessarily  underlies  every  ritual  action,  and
indeed  every  other  action  that  is  not  regarded  as  an  end
in  itself.  Ritual  is  not  in  this  sense  an  end  in  itself;
it  is  not  performed  as  a  pleasure  but  as  a  necessity  ;
often  as  practised  by  savages  a  most  painful  and  ex-
pensive necessity.

If  we  could  get  at  the  savage's  real  mind,  he  would
surely  reply,  when  we  asked  him  why  he  performed
certain  ceremonies,  that  otherwise  crops  would  fail,  rain
would  not  fall,  the  spirits  which  surrround  his  path  and
his  bed  would  turn  against  him.  These  fears  constitute,
or  rather  imply  and  express,  the  savage's  creed.  They,
and  not  aetiological  myth,  are  the  germ  which  develops
into  creed  as  we  know  it.  They  differ  from  aetiological
myth  precisely  in  this,  that  whereas  they  are  the  real
motive  of  ritual,  the  latter  expresses  not  the  real  motive
but  a  fanciful  motive,  invented  when  the  self-analysis


ch.  i RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  7

of  the  primitive  mind  has  failed  to  discover  the  real
one.  That  it  should  try  to  discover  its  motive  is  in-
evitable ;  that  it  should  fail  to  do  so  is  not  surprising.
Nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  give  a  reasonable
answer  to  the  question  why  we  behave  as  we  do.  And
the  anthropologist  is  right  in  refusing  to  take  such
myths  as  really  accounting  for  ritual  ;  he  is  only  wrong
if  his  dissatisfaction  with  fanciful  accounts  makes  him
doubt  the  possibility  of  a  true  and  adequate  account.

The  point,  then,  which  is  independent  of  any  view
as  to  the  relation  of  magic  and  religion,  because  it  applies
to  both  alike,  is  that  ceremonial  is  based  on  creed.  It
is  not  the  foundation  of  creed  ;  it  depends  upon  it.
The  word  creed  is  here  used  in  a  quite  rudimentary
sense,  as  indicating  any  theory  of  the  nature  of  the
power  which  governs  the  universe.  You  perform  a
ritual  act  because  you  believe  that  it  pleases  that  power
and  induces  it  to  make  rain,  or  compels  it  to  make  rain,
or  simply  makes  rain  come  automatically  ;  whatever
particular  form  your  creed  takes,  it  is  always  creed  and
nothing  but  creed  that  impels  you  to  ritual.

The  principle  of  the  centrality  of  ritual  and  the
secondary  nature  of  belief  seems  thus  to  be  a  result  of
insufficient  analysis  ;  and  though  we  have  examined  it
only  in  its  relation  to  savage  religion,  it  is  equally  true
of  all  religion  that  ritual  is  explicable  by,  and  founded
in,  positive  creed  ;  and  that  apart  from  creed  ritual
would  always  be  meaningless  and  unmotived.

(J?)  The  second  anti- intellectual  view  of  religion
asserts  that  it  is  exclusively  a  matter  of  conduct,  and
that  doctrine,  so  far  as  it  does  not  immediately  bear
upon  conduct,  is  no  true  part  of  religion  at  all.  Now
we  may  grant  at  once  that  religion  has  much  to  do  with
conduct ;  we  may  even  say  that  no  part  of  it  is  irrelevant
to  conduct  ;  and  yet  we  may  be  right  in  refusing  to
expel  the  intellectual  element  from  it.  For  truth  and
conduct  are  not  absolutely  unrelated.  Every  piece  of
conduct  depends  on  the  realisation  of  some  truth,  since


8 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION «.  i

we  could  not  act  efficiently,  or  indeed  at  all,  without
some  knowledge  of  the  situation  with  which  we  are
dealing.  The  problem  "  How  am  I  to  act  ? "  is  only
soluble  in  the  light  ot  knowledge.  And  conversely
there  is  no  piece  of  knowledge  which  has  not  some
practical  corollary  ;  either  it  supplies  us  with  the  solu-
tion of  a  practical  problem,  or  it  suggests  a  new  problem
for  future  solution.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  conduct
divorced  from  knowledge  or  knowledge  divorced  from
conduct.

The  view  we  are  considering  seems  to  depend  upon
a  form  of  scepticism.  It  admits  (and  we  should  agree)
that  one  action  is  better  than  another  and  that  there  is
a  duty  to  promote  good  actions ;  and  it  asserts  that  the
best  religion  is  that  which  promotes  the  best  life.  But
it  goes  on  to  maintain  that  the  doctrines  of  religion
have  no  other  value  except  their  moral  value  ;  that  to
describe  one  religion  as  true  and  another  as  false  is
meaningless.  This  implies  that  the  intellectual  problems
of  religion  are  insoluble  and  that  no  one  answer  to  them
is  truer  than  any  other ;  whereas  the  practical  difficulties
of  the  moral  life  are  real  and  can  be  overcome  or
alleviated  by  religious  means.  Or  if  it  is  not  main-
tained that  the  problems  are  insoluble,  it  is  denied  that
religions  solve  them  ;  it  is  perhaps  supposed  that  they
are  soluble  by  means  of  another  kind  of  thinking ;  by
science  or  philosophy.

Empirical  difficulties  against  this  purely  moral  view
of  religion  arise  from  the  fact  that  atheists  and  persons
who  differ  from  their  neighbours  in  religion  do  not
necessarily  differ  in  morality.  If  a  man  living  in  a
Christian  society  rejects  Christianity,  on  this  theory
the  only  possible  meaning  of  his  action  is  that  he
rejects  the  Christian  morality,  for  Christianity  is  defined
as  being  precisely  the  Christian  morality.  But  in
practice  this  does  not  necessarily  follow  ;  his  morality
may  remain  what  it  was  before.  The  theory  can  only
deal  with  such  a  case  in  two  ways. Either  it  must  say


ch.  i RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  9

that  he  rejects  Christianity  in  name  only,  while  un-
willing to  uproot  it  out  of  his  heart  ;  or  else  it  must
maintain  that  he  rejects  not  the  real  Christianity  (the
morality)  but  Christianity  falsely  so  called,  the  in-
tellectual system  which  is  arbitrarily  annexed  to  it.
Both  these  are  unsatisfactory  ;  the  first,  because  it
makes  a  virtuous  atheist  into  a  mere  hypocrite,  and  the
second  because  the  "  arbitrary  "  connexion  of  an  in-
tellectual system  with  a  moral  one  is  precisely  the  fact
that  requires  explanation.

If  the  intellectual  system  (though  false)  is  really
necessary  as  a  psychological  basis  for  morals,1  how  can
the  former  be  rejected  and  the  latter  kept  ?  If  not,
why  should  the  two  ever  be  united  at  all  ?  The  moral-
istic theory  of  religion  comes  to  grief  over  the  fact  that
there  is  such  a  thing  as  creed.  On  the  theory,  there
ought  not  to  be  ;  but,  nevertheless,  it  is  there.  Why
is  it  there  ?  Because — we  cannot  evade  the  answer — it
is  believed  to  be  true.  Creed  may  be,  among  other
things,  a  means  to  morality  ;  but  it  cannot  be  a  means
to  anything  unless  it  is  first  held  as  true.  For  a  belief
that  no  one  believes  can  have  no  influence  on  any  one's
conduct.  A  morality  assisted  by  creed  is  a  morality
founded  upon  the  intellect  ;  for  to  judge  something  as
true  is  the  characteristic  function  of  the  intellect.

Further,  if  the  action  induced  by  a  belief  is  to  be
really  good  as  well  as  really  due  to  the  belief,  then
the  belief  must  be  true.  We  may  stimulate  our  moral
consciousness  by  fictions,  as  that  this  day  is  our  last  on
earth  ;  but  the  resulting  action,  so  far  as  it  is  good,  is
due  not  to  the  belief  but  to  the  reawakened  moral  con-
sciousness. Any  action  really  due  to  the  belief,  such
as  taking  farewell  of  our  families  and  making  arrange-

1  "  It  is  necessary  to  most  people,  but  not  to  every  one  "  is  a  useless  answer,  not
only  because  it  implies  that  different  people's  minds  may  be  constructed  on  absolutely
and  radically  divergent  lines — an  assumption  which  any  one  is  at  liberty  to  make  if
he  likes,  and  if  he  will  take  the  trouble  to  see  where  it  leads  him — but  because  it
begs  the  question.  Necessary  for  some  people  but  not  for  others,  as  regular  exercise,
or  a  nap  after  lunch,  or  a  thousand  a  year,  means,  as  we  are  using  terms,  not
necessary.


io GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  t

ments  for  the  funeral  next  day,  would  be  merely  silly.
So,  if  our  creeds  are  not  truths  but  only  means  to  good
action,  those  actions  which  are  good  are  not  really  due
to  them,  and  those  which  are  due  to  them  are  a  waste
of  labour.  That  is  to  say,  they  are  a  hindrance,  rather
than  a  help,  to  right  conduct.

This  form  of  scepticism,  like  most  other  forms  of
the  same  thing,  is  in  fact  less  a  philosophy  than  a  pro-
paganda. It  is  not  a  theory  of  what  religion  is  ;  it  is
a  proposal  to  reconstitute  it  on  the  principle  of  leaving
out  the  creed  and  only  keeping  the  commandments.
There  might,  perhaps,  be  such  a  thing  as  non-religious
moral  teaching.  We  will  not  at  present  deny  that.
But  it  would  not  be  religion.  And  we  are  not
asking  what  improvements  might  be  made  in  religion,
or  what  better  thing  might  be  substituted  for  it  ;
we  only  want  to  discover  what  it  is.  This  humbler
inquiry  may  possibly  be  of  value  even  to  those  who,
without  asking  what  it  is,  have  decided  to  abolish  or
reform  it.

(c)  The  recognition  of  religion  as  having  an  intel-
lectual content  throws  it  open  to  intellectual  criticism  ;
and  in  order  to  withdraw  it  from  such  criticism  it  has
sometimes  been  placed  in  that  faculty  of  the  mind
whose  function  is  feeling.

The  term  feeling  seems  to  be  distinctively  applied
by  psychologists  to  pleasure,  pain  and  emotions  in
general.  But  emotion  is  not  a  totally  separate  function
of  the  mind,  independent  of  thinking  and  willing  ;  it
includes  both  these  at  once.  If  I  feel  pleasure,  that  is
will  in  that  it  involves  an  appetition  towards  the
pleasant  thing ;  and  it  is  also  knowledge  of  the  pleasant
thing  and  of  my  own  state.  There  is  no  emotion  which
does  not  entail  the  activity  of  the  other  so-called
faculties  of  the  mind.  Religion  is  doubtless  an  emotion,
or  rather  involves  emotions  ;  but  it  is  not  emotion  in
the  abstract  apart  from  other  activities.  It  involves,  for
instance,  the  love  of  God. But  the  love  of  God  implies


RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  1 1

knowing  God  on  the  one  hand  and  doing  his  will  on
the  other.

Moreover  the  term  itself  is  ambiguous.  The  word
feeling  as  we  use  it  in  ordinary  speech  generally  denotes
not  a  particular  kind  of  activity,  but  any  state  of  mind
or  a  somewhat  vague,  indefinite  or  indistinct  character.
Thus  we  have  a  feeling  of  the  truth  of  something  when
we  hardly  say  yet  that  we  are  convinced  of  its  truth  ;
a  feeling  of  the  right  treatment  of  a  recalcitrant  picture
or  sonnet,  when  we  are  not  quite  convinced  of  the  right
treatment  ;  a  feeling  that  we  ought  to  do  something
when  we  are  not  really  sure.  In  this  sense  religion
is  decidedly  not  a  matter  of  feeling.  Some  people's
religion  is  doubtless  very  nebulous  ;  but  religion  as  a
whole  is  not  distinguished  from  other  things  by  its
vagueness  and  indefiniteness.  Religion  is  sometimes
said  to  be  a  "  low  "  degree  of  thought  in  the  sense  that
it  contains  half-truths  only,  which  are  in  time  super-
seded by  the  complete  truths  of  philosophy  or  science  ;
but  in  the  meantime  it  errs  (if  the  description  is  true)
not  by  being  vague  but  by  being  much  more  definite
than  it  has  any  right  to  be.  To  define  religion  as  mere
feeling  in  this  sense  would  amount  to  complaining  that
it  is  not  sufficiently  dogmatic.

In  another  commonly-used  sense  of  the  word,  feeling
implies  absolute  and  positive  conviction  coupled  with
inability  to  offer  proof  or  explanation  of  the  conviction.
In  that  case,  to  "feel"  the  truth  of  a  statement  would
merely  mean  the  same  as  to  know  it  ;  and  this  use
of  the  word  therefore  already  asserts  the  intellectual
content  of  religion.  The  problem  of  the  relation  of  this
conviction  to  proof  is  noticed  below  (Part  II.  Ch.  I.).

2.  These  types  of  theory  all  seem  to  fail  through
the  same  fault  ;  namely,  their  common  denial  of  the
necessity  of  creed  in  religion.  They  describe  character-
istics which  religion  does  undoubtedly  often  or  always
possess  ;  but  they  try  to  explain  it  as  consisting  chiefly
or  only  of  these  characteristics,  and  to  avoid  admitting


12 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION pt.  i

its  basis  in  positive  creed.  Without  examining  further
theories  of  the  same  kind,  therefore,  .we  may  venture
to  assert  that  religion  cannot  exist  without  a  definite
belief  as  to  the  nature  of  God.  This  contention  would
probably  be  borne  out  by  any  careful  investigation  of
actual  religions  ;  every  religion  claims  to  present  as
true  and  intellectually  sound  a  doctrine  which  may  be
described  as  a  theory  of  God.

This  statement  of  belief  as  to  the  nature  of  God,
which  of  course  includes  beliefs  as  to  the  relations  of
God  and  the  world,  God  and  man,  and  so  forth,  is  the
intellectual  content  of  religion  ;  and  it  is  not  a  thing
outside  or  different  from  the  religion  itself.  It  may  be
only  one  aspect  or  element  of  religion  ;  but  at  least  it
is  an  element,  and  an  indispensable  element.  I  call  it
intellectual,  even  if  it  has  not  been  reached  by
"  scientific  "  processes,  because  the  intellect  is  the  name
of  that  activity  by  which  we  think,  know,  hold  con-
victions or  draw  inferences ;  and  a  non-intellectual
conviction  would  be  a  contradiction  in  terms.1

Now  the  Doctrine  of  God  is  of  course  theology  ;  it
is  in  fact  the  translation  of  that  word,  Accordingly,  a
creed  is  a  theology,  and  there  is  no  distinction  whatever
between  Theology  and  Religion,  so  far  as  the  intel-
lectual aspect  of  religion  is  concerned.  My  theology
is  the  beliefs  I  hold  about  God,  that  is  to  say,  my  creed,
the  intellectual  element  of  my  religion.

This  identification  is  often  controverted.  In  the
first  place,  a  distinction  is  sometimes  made  between
religion  and  theology  with  a  view  to  reconciling  the
claims  of  criticism  with  those  of  ecclesiastical  authority.
Criticism  (it  is  supposed)  merely  affects  theology  ;
orthodoxy  is  a  matter  of  religion  and  is  untouched  by
critical  arguments.  Such  a  distinction  enables  us  to
make two promises  : first, to believe whatever the

1  The  word  intellect  is  sometimes  used  to  distinguish  one  type  of  cognition  from
other  types  called  reason,  intuition  and  so  on.  Such  distinctions  are,  in  my  belief,
based  on  mistaken  psychology  ;  and  accordingly  I  use  the  various  words  indiscrimin-
ately to  cover  the  whole  of  the  facts  of  knowing.


[


■ch.  i RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  13

church  believes  ;  and  secondly,  to  accept  whatever
criticism  proves.  But  the  two  spheres  cannot  be
separated  in  this  way.  There  is  an  abstract  possibility
that  criticism  should  prove  the  Gospel  a  forgery  and
that  philosophy  should  demonstrate  God  to  be  an
illusion  ;  and  the  second  promise  involves  readiness  to
accept  these  results  as  promptly  as  any  others.  But
this  implication  already  denies  any  weight  to  the
authority  of  the  church  ;  for  no  church  would  allow  its
members  to  accept  such  conclusions.  The  proposed
modus  vivendi  is  as  valueless  in  practice  as  it  is
indefensible  in  theory.

Some  writers,  again,  distinguish  theology,  as  the
thought  which  takes  religion  as  its  starting-point  and
builds  a  superstructure  upon  it,  from  the  religion  upon
which  it  builds.  But  this  is  no  distinction  at  all  ;  for
if  religion  supplies  the  premisses  from  which  theology
infers  other  new  truths,  the  two  are  only  related  as
premisses  and  conclusion  in  one  syllogism,  and  one  and
the  same  syllogism  cannot  be  split  up  into  two  distinct
kinds  of  thought.  Rather,  this  argument  would  prove
the  identity  of  the  two  ;  for  there  is  no  difference
between  putting  together  the  premisses  and  drawing  the
conclusion.  It  is  only  in  the  abstractions  of  formal
logic  that  they  are  separated.  The  distinction  therefore
would  be  an  entirely  abstract  one;  we  could  never
point  to  two  different  concrete  things  and  say  "  this  is
religion  and  that  theology."

The  same  objection  would  apply  to  the  opposite
distinction,  according  to  which  theology,  instead  of
using  religion  as  its  starting-point,  takes  its  pronounce-
ments as  conclusions,  and  endeavours  to  provide  proofs
for  them.  This  does  seem  to  be  a  way  in  which  the
word  theology  is  sometimes  used  ;  thus  the  conviction
of  the  existence  of  God  might  be  described  as  religion,
and  the  proofs  of  his  existence  as  theology.  But  in
that  case  theology  would  include  the  whole  intellectual
side  of  religion  in  itself,  and  religion  would  be  merely


\


14 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  1

the  name  for  an  incomplete  and  mutilated  fragment  of
theology — the  conclusion  without  the  evidence — which
when  its  deficiencies  were  made  good  would  coincide
with  theology.

A  somewhat  similar  distinction  is  that  between
religion  as  the  personal  experience  of  the  individual  and
theology  as  the  systematic  statement  of  religious  experi-
ence as  a  whole.  If  religion  means  "  that  fragment  of
theology,  of  whose  truth  I  have  had  personal  experience,"
the  distinction  between  the  two  can  never  be  made  at
all.  Theology  is  the  whole  ;  religion  my  particular
part  of  it.  For  me — within  my  knowledge — the  two
are  in  every  way  identical.  Whatever  theology  I  know
is  to  me  religion  ;  and  the  rest  I  do  not  know.

There  is  certainly  a  kind  of  thought  which  takes
religious  dogmas  and  tries  to  discover  their  logical
result  ;  and  one  which  tries  to  prove  their  truth  ;  and
one  which  arranges  and  expresses  them  all  in  a  systematic
way.  And  if  we  like  to  call  any  or  all  of  these
theology,  we  have  no  doubt  a  right  to  do  so.  But  we
must  remember,  if  we  use  the  term,  that  theology  so
described  is  not  different  from  religion.  A  religious
truth  does  not  cease  to  be  religious  truth  and  turn  into
theological  truth  because  it  is  proved,  or  arranged  in  a
system,  or  reflected  upon.

In  general,  then,  it  does  not  seem  that  we  can
distinguish  religion  as  creed  from  theology  at  all.
Each  of  the  above  distinctions,  as  we  have  said,  does
correspond  to  a  real  difference  in  the  way  in  which
we  use  the  words  ;  and  they  may  be  summed  up  by
saying  that  in  ordinary  language  religion  means  some-
thing less  deliberate,  less  consciously  logical,  than
theology.  Religious  experience  gives  us  a  number  of
truths  arranged  anyhow,  just  as  they  come  to  the
surface  ;  all  is  knowledge,  all  the  fruit  of  intellectual
activity,  since  intellect  means  nothing  but  the  attain-
ment of  knowledge  ;  but  it  is  knowledge  unsystematised.
Theology  then,  according  to  this  view, arranges and


ch.  i RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  15

classifies  the  truths  already  given  in  religion  ;  it  creates
nothing  new,  but  rather,  so  to  speak,  tidies  up  the
workshop  where  religion  has  finished  work  for  the
day.  But  even  this  simile  overstates  the  difference ;
for  in  the  apparent  chaos  of  the  unsystematised
experience,  system  is  in  fact  already  present.  The
work  of  co-ordination  which  we  have  ascribed  to
theology  is  already  characteristic  of  religion  itself ;  it
supplies  us  not  with  a  number  of  disconnected  con-
ceptions of  the  nature  of  God,  but  with  a  conception.

3.  {a)  If  religion  as  creed  is  identical  with  theology,
it  remains  to  consider  the  further  conception  of  the
philosophy  of  religion.  The  philosophy  of  any  subject
means  careful  reflexion  upon  that  subject  ;  thus  we
have  the  philosophy  of  art,  of  conduct,  of  science  and
so  on.  To  do  a  thing,  and  to  understand  what  one
is  doing  and  how  one  does  it,  seem  to  be  different
things  ;  and  this  distinction,  it  is  thought,  can  be
applied  to  intellectual  as  well  as  practical  processes.
To  commit  a  crime  is  action  ;  to  reflect  upon  one's
crime  is  ethics.  Similarly,  to  conduct  an  argument  is
science,  to  reflect  upon  it  is  logic  ;  to  be  conscious  of
God  is  religion,  to  analyse  that  consciousness  is  the
philosophy  of  religion.  Such  is  the  common  doctrine  ;
but  it  does  not  seem  to  provide  us  with  a  basis  for
distinguishing  the  philosophy  of  religion  from  other
philosophies.  Consciousness  of  truths  is  common  to
religion  and  all  other  kinds  of  thought  ;  the  only
distinction  between  religious  and  other  knowledge
would  be  that  they  were  concerned  with  different
objects.  But  the  theory  of  knowledge  or  logic  does
not  consider  differences  of  the  object,  but  only  pro-
cesses of  the  subject  ;  and  therefore  there  is  no  dis-
tinction between  the  philosophy  of  religion  (as  theory
of  religious  knowledge)  and  the  theory  of  knowledge
in  general.  If  there  is  a  general  philosophy  of  know-
ing, it  includes  religious  knowledge  as  well  as  all
other  kinds  ;  no  separate  philosophy  is  required.


1 6 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION  PT.  i

Similarly,  if  religion  involves  certain  types  of
conduct,  the  whole  theory  of  conduct  in  general  is
treated  by  ethics.  That  side  of  the  philosophy  of
religion  merges  in  ethics  precisely  as  the  intellectual  side
merges  in  the  general  theory  of  knowledge  or  logic.
There  can  only  be  a  distinct  philosophy  of  religion
if  religion  is  a  quite  separate  function  of  the  mind
involving  neither  knowledge,  volition,  or  any  other
specifiable  activity.  But  unless  this  hypothesis  can  be
maintained  (and  we  know  already  that  it  cannot),  we
must  give  up  the  idea  of  a  special  departmental
philosophy,  the  philosophy  of  religion,  and  hand  over
the  study  of  religion  to  philosophy  in  general.

(£)  If  the  philosophy  of  religion  is  indistinguish-
able from  philosophy  as  a  whole,  what  is  the  relation
of  philosophy  as  a  whole  to  religion  or  theology  ?
Philosophy  is  the  theory  of  existence  ;  not  of  existence
in  the  abstract,  but  of  existence  in  the  concrete  ;  the
theory  of  all  that  exists  ;  the  theory  of  the  universe.
This  is  frequently  denied  ;  it  is  said  that  philosophy
has  problems  of  its  own,  and  science  has  problems  of
its  own  ;  that  they  progress  by  attending  each  to  its
own  business  and  using  its  methods  where  they  are
suitable,  and  that  when  philosophy  tries  to  answer  the
questions  proper  to  science  the  result  is  chaos.  The
example  of  natural  science  under  the  domination  of
Aristotelian  philosophy  in  the  later  middle  ages  is
quoted  as  a  warning  to  philosophy  to  confine  its
activities  within  its  own  province. — Such  a  view  seems
to  depend  on  a  misconception  as  to  the  nature  of
philosophy.  Sciences  live  by  the  discovery  and  em-
ployment of  methods  which  facilitate  their  particular
operations  and  are  inapplicable  to  other  kinds  of
research.  Differentiation  of  problems  and  methods  is
the  very  essence  of  the  natural  sciences.  It  is
important  to  realise  that  philosophy  has  in  this  sense
no  methods  of  its  own  at  all  ;  that  it  is  through  and
through  homogeneous,  straightforward  thinking  where


ch.  i RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  17

formulas  and  labour-saving  devices  are  not  used.  This
absence  of  definite  and  ready-made  method  is  at  once
the  strength  and  the  weakness  of  philosophy  ;  its
weakness,  because  it  makes  philosophy  much  more
difficult  than  any  of  the  sciences  ;  its  strength,  because
failure  through  defects  in  the  apparatus  is  avoided,  and
there  is  no  limitation  to  one  particular  subject  such
as  is  necessarily  entailed  by  a  fixed  method.  Philosophy
is  the  free  activity  of  critical  thought,  and  is  applicable
to  any  problem  which  thought  can  raise.  The  chaos
of  which  the  scientist  complains  is  partly  his  own
feeling  of  helplessness  when  confronted  by  philosophical
questions  to  which  his  methods  supply  no  answer,  and
partly  real  blunders  like  those  of  mediaeval  science,
whose  cause  he  imagines  to  be  the  invasion  of  science
by  Aristotelian  philosophy  ;  whereas  they  are  really  due
not  to  the  overbearingness  of  Aristotelian  philosophy
but  to  the  defects  of  Aristotelian  science.

Now  if  philosophy  is  the  theory  of  the  universe,
what  is  religion  ?  We  have  said  that  it  was  the
theory1  of  God,  and  of  God's  relations  to  the  world
and  man.  But  the  latter  is  surely  nothing  more  nor
less  than  a  view  of  the  universe.  Indeed  religion  is
quite  as  comprehensive  as  philosophy.  For  the
religious  consciousness  in  its  true  and  complete  form
nothing  is  irrelevant,  nothing  is  without  its  own  unique
and  individual  value.  Religion  and  philosophy  alike
are  views  of  the  whole  universe.

But  are  they  therefore  (it  may  be  asked)  identical  ?
May  they  not  be  views,  but  conflicting  views  ?  or
views  from  different  points  of  view  ?  Not  the  latter,
because  it  is  the  aim  of  each  alike  to  transcend  par-
ticular points  of  view,  to  overcome  the  limitations  of
individual  interest. And  to  ask  whether  religion  and

1  It  is  possibly  worth  while  to  guard  against  a  verbal  pitfall.  "  Philosophy  is
theory,  but  religion  is  not  ;  it  is  Fact."  This  common— and  wrong— use  of  the
word  seems  to  imply  that  a  theory  ceases  to  be  a  theory  when  it  is  true,  or  when  it
is  a  matter  of  vital  interest  or  strong  conviction.  It  was  Mephistopheles  who  said,
"  Grau,  theurer  Freund,  ist  alle  Theorie,  und  gru'n  des  Lebens  goldner  Baum."


C


1 8 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION

philosophy  may  not  di- agree  is  to  assume  a  general
agreement  among  religions,  which  certainly  does  not
exist,  and  the  same  among  philosophies,  which  exists
if  possible  even  less.  No  doubt  this  or  that  philosophy
would  conflict  with  this  or  that  religion.  The  religion
of  Homer  is  inconsistent  with  the  philosophy  of
Auguste  Comte  ;  but  Comte's  own  religion  and  his
philosophy  are  fully  consistent  with  one  another  ;  they
are  indeed  identical.  If  religion  and  philosophy  are
views  of  the  same  thing — the  ultimate  nature  of  the
universe — then  the  true  religion  and  the  true  philosophy
must  coincide,  though  they  may  differ  in  the  vocabulary
which  they  use  to  express  the  same  facts.

But,  it  may  be  insisted,  we  have  at  least  by  this
enforced  agreement  condemned  unheard  all  philosophies
but  those  which  believe  in  a  God  ;  for  we  have  defined
religion  as  the  theory  of  God,  and  many  philosophies
deny  or  doubt  or  never  mention  God.  This  difficulty
may  perhaps  be  cleared  up  by  recollecting  that  we
have  not  assumed  the  "existence  of  God"  hitherto  in
any  definite  and  concrete  sense  ;  we  have  not,  for
instance,  assumed  a  personal  God.  The  God  of  whom
we  have  been  speaking  was  a  purely  abstract  one,  a
mere  name  for  the  philosophical  Absolute,  the  solution
of  the  cosmological  problem.  Thus  we  said  that
savage  ritual  (religious  or  magical)  implies  a  creed  ;
but  it  may  not  imply  anything  we  should  call  a  theistic
creed.  The  savage  may  believe  that  his  ritual  operates
directly  on  the  rain  without  any  intervention  on  the
part  of  a  single  supreme  will.  This  is  his  "  theory  of
God";  his  "God"  is  not  a  person  but  a  principle.
The  Buddhist  believes  in  no  personal  God  at  all,  but
he  has  a  definite  scheme  of  the  universe  and  doctrine
of  salvation  ;  he  believes  in  certain  eternal  principles  ;
that  is  his  "  theory  of  God."  Atheism  itself,  if  it  is  a
positive  theory  and  not  mere  scepticism,  is  in  this
abstract  sense  a  "  theory  of  God  "  ;  the  only  thing  that
is  not  a  theory  of  God  is  scepticism,  that  is  to  say,  the


RELIGION  AND  PHILOSOPHY  19

refusal  to  deal  with  the  problem  at  all.  God,  so  far
as  our  conception  has  travelled,  is  merely  at  present  a
name  for  the  unifying  principle  of  the  world,  however
that  principle  is  regarded.  Every  philosophy  has  a
God  in  this  sense,  just  in  so  far  as  it  is  a  philosophy
and  not  a  mere  collocation  of  disconnected  doctrines  ;
in  which  case  it  has  a  number  of  different  Gods  whose
relations  it  has  not  yet  determined.  And  this  is  the
only  sense  in  which  some  religions  (such  as  Buddhism)
have  a  God.  In  the  sense,  then,  in  which  all  religions
require  a  God,  one  is  equally  required  by  all  philosophy.

(7)  Since  religion,  on  its  intellectual  side,  is  a
theory  of  the  world  as  a  whole,  it  is  the  same  thing  as
philosophy  ;  the  ultimate  questions  of  philosophy  are
those  of  religion  too.  But  can  we  say  the  same  of
science  ?  Is  not  science,  at  least  as  interpreted  by  many
of  its  exponents,  anti-religious  in  its  materialism  and  its
frequent  atheism ;  and  even  if  these  characteristics
were  not  present,  does  it  not  differ  necessarily  from  both
religion  and  philosophy  in  being  a  view  of  the  universe
not  as  a  whole  but  in  minute  particular  details  only  ?

To  the  first  question  it  must  be  replied  that,  para-
doxical though  it  may  seem,  materialism  and  atheism
are  not  necessarily  irreligious.  Philosophy,  as  well  as
science,  may  be  both  materialist  and  atheist ;  indeed
there  may  be,  as  we  have  said,  religions  which  show
the  same  features.  We  may  even  be  so  bold  as  to
assert  that  atheism  and  materialism  are  necessarily
religions  of  a  kind  ;  for  not  only  do  they  spring  from
the  impulse  to  solve  the  intellectual  problem  of  the
universe,  but  they  owe  their  form  to  an  essentially
religious  dissatisfaction  with  existing  solutions.  Thus
an  atheist  may  well  be  an  atheist  because  he  has  a
conception  of  God  which  he  cannot  reconcile  with  the
creeds  of  other  people  ;  because  he  feels  that  the
ground  of  the  universe  is  too  mysterious,  too  august
to  be  described  in  terms  of  human  personality  and
encumbered with mythological impertinences. The


20 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT. ,

materialist,  again,  may  find  in  matter  a  real  object  of
worship,  a  thing  more  worthy  of  admiration  than  the
God  of  popular  religion.  The  materialist  Lucretius
adores  not  the  careless  gods  of  the  interstellar  space,
but  the  "  alma  Venus,"  the  immanent  principle  of
nature  itself.  And  can  we  deny  that  such  materialism
or  atheism  is  more  truly  religious,  does  more  honour
to  the  true  God,  than  many  theistic  superstitions  ?

The  materialism  and  atheism  of  modern  science — if
indeed  these  qualities  are  rightly  ascribed  to  it,  which
is  very  doubtful — may  or  may  not  be  preferable,
considered  as  a  view  of  the  universe,  to  that  offered  by
traditional  Christianity.  But  whichever  is  right,  each
alike  is  a  religion,  and  it  is  only  because  of  this  fact
that  they  can  ever  come  into  conflict.

In  reply  to  the  second  question,  the  suggestion  that
science,  as  the  knowledge  of  detail,  is  irrelevant  to
philosophy  the  knowledge  of  the  whole,  and  therefore
not  itself  religious  in  character,  it  must  be  remembered
that  we  cannot  have  a  whole  which  is  not  a  whole  of
parts,  nor  parts  which  are  not  parts  of  a  whole.
Philosophy,  as  well  as  science,  is  concerned  with  detail  ;
it  does  not  exist  in  the  rarefied  atmosphere  of  a  world
aloof  from  facts.  Nor  does  science  take  its  facts  in
absolute  isolation  one  from  another  and  from  a  general
scheme  of  the  world  ;  it  is  essential  to  science  that  the
facts  should  be  related  to  one  another  and  should  find  each
its  place  in  the  scientist's  view  of  the  whole.  And  any
religion  must  take  account  of  detail  ;  for  it  is  only  in
the  details  that  the  nature  of  the  whole  is  manifested.

It  is  no  doubt  possible  to  forget  the  whole  in  laying
stress  on  isolated  parts,  as  it  is  possible  to  forget  details
in  the  general  view  of  a  whole.  But  each  of  these  is
a  false  abstraction  ;  we  cannot  identify  the  former  with
science  and  the  latter  with  religion  or  philosophy.
The  ideal,  alike  for  philosophy  and  science,  is  to  see
the  part  in  its  place  in  the  whole,  and  the  whole
perfectly  exemplified  in  the  part.


CHAPTER II

RELIGION AND MORALITY

We  have  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  all  religion  has
an  intellectual  element  ;  that  this  element  is  a  creed  or
theology  and  at  the  same  time  a  cosmology  or  philo-
sophical theory  of  the  world  ;  and  that  therefore  religion
is  so  far  identical  with  philosophy.  But  we  have  still
to  determine  what  other  elements  it  contains,  and  how
these  elements  are  related  to  one  another.

Religion,  we  are  told  again  and  again,  is  more  than
mere  intellect,  more  than  mere  thought,  more  than
philosophy.  It  may  indeed  find  room  within  itself  for
an  intellectual  element,  but  that  is  not  the  whole
of  religion  ;  there  are  other  elements  of  equal  value.
Indeed,  intellect  is  only  one  single  aspect  of  life  ;  and
if  philosophers  sometimes  treat  it  as  if  nothing  else
existed,  that  is  only  because  philosophers  are  human
enough  to  magnify  their  office.  Granting  freely  that
religion  has  its  intellectual  side,  it  has  also  a  practical
side  which  is  no  less  important.

If  this  language  is  justified,  religion  is  not  merely
a  theory  of  the  world  ;  it  is  also  a  system  of  conduct.
Just  as  any  definite  religion  prescribes  to  its  adherents
certain  definite  convictions,  so  it  inculcates  certain
definite  modes  of  action.  We  have  to  ask  whether
this  is  true  ;  and  if  we  find  that  religion  does  really
contain  these  two  distinct  elements,  we  shall  be  com-
pelled to  determine  so  far  as  possible  the  nature  of  their
connexion.

21


22 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION pt.i

i.  Parallel  to  the  anti-intellectual  theories  examined
in  the  preceding  chapter  are  certain  anti-moral  theories
of  religion.  These  are  directed  to  proving  that  religion
does  not  dictate  definite  actions  at  all,  or  that  if  it  does,
this  is  not  because  these  actions  are  moral  but  for  some
other  reason.

(a)  As  a  matter  of  common  experience,  it  is  often
said,  religion  sometimes  inculcates  actions  which  are
flagrantly  at  variance  with  the  principles  of  a  sound
morality.  Can  we  look  back  on  all  the  crimes  done
in  the  name  of  religion,  the  human  sacrifices,  the  per-
secutions, the  horrors  of  religious  warfare,  the  corrupt
connivance  at  wickedness,  the  torture  inflicted  on  simple
minds  by  the  fear  of  hell — tantum  relligio  potuit  suadere
malorum — and  still  maintain  that  religion  stands  for
morality  ?  Undoubtedly  we  can.  The  argument  is  a
rhetorical  jump  from  half-understood  instances  to  an
unfounded  generalisation.  We  might  equally  well
quote  the  absurdities  of  ancient  and  the  errors  of
modern  scientists  as  proof  that  science  does  not  aim
at  truth.  If  a  great  scientist  makes  a  mistake,  the
importance  of  that  mistake,  its  widespread  effect,  is  due
to  the  very  fact  that  the  man  who  makes  it  is  a  high
intellectual  authority  ;  it  is  the  exception  which  proves
the  rule  that  you  can  generally  believe  what  he  says.
Religious  persecution  may  be  a  crime,  but  it  happens
only  because  the  persecutor  believes  it  to  be  a  duty.
The  crimes  of  the  Church  are  a  testimony  to  the  fact
that  religion  does  dictate  duties,  and  is  believed  to  do
so,  for  the  most  part,  in  a  worthy  manner.

Nor  can  we  draw  a  distinction  between  the  two  cases
on  the  ground  that  religious  crimes  are  sometimes
already  condemned  by  their  contemporaries  and  are
therefore  doubly  unjustifiable,  whereas  the  mistakes  of
a  great  scientist  represent  a  point  in  the  progress  of
thought  as  yet  unattained  by  any  one,  and  are  therefore
pardonable.  This  would  be  to  reduce  the  argument
to  a  mutual  recrimination  between  Church  and  State,


ch.  ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  23

each  trying  to  fasten  upon  the  other  the  odium  of
being  the  worse  sinner.  Into  such  a  discussion  we  can
hardly  be  expected  to  enter.  Our  distinction  is
between  right  and  wrong,  truth  and  falsehood  ;  and
if  science  teaches  error  or  religion  inculcates  crime,
extenuating  circumstances  are  beside  the  mark.

If  the  argument  were  successful,  it  would  prove  not
that  religion  was  irrelevant  to  conduct  (for  the  cases
quoted  prove  the  reverse  ;  they  are  cases  of  religion
definitely  dictating  conduct),  but  that  it  devoted  its
energies  to  the  positive  pursuit  of  immoral  ends.  And
this  would  be  to  admit  our  main  contention,  that
religion  has  a  practical  side  ;  while  maintaining  that
this  practical  side  was  the  apotheosis  not  of  good  but  of
evil.  But  this  fantastic  notion  would  be  advanced  by
no  serious  student  of  the  facts,  and  we  need  not  trouble
to  refute  it.  We  are  not  concerned  to  prove  that  every
particular  mouthpiece  of  every  particular  religion  is
morally  infallible  ;  just  as  we  do  not  assume  it  to  be
intellectually  infallible.  We  tried  to  show  in  the  last
chapter  that  it  was  an  essential  note  of  religion  to  lay
down  certain  statements,  and  to  say,  "  Believe  these  "  ;
and  that  could  only  mean,  "  Believe  these,  for  they  are
true."  Truth  is  the  governing  conception,  even  if  the
dogmas  propounded  fail  of  reaching  it.  Similarly,
religion  always  lays  down  certain  courses  of  action  and
says,  "  Do  these,"  that  is  to  say,  "  Do  these,  because  they
are  right."  Not  merely  "because  they  are  God's  will,"
for  God  is  a  righteous  God  ;  nor  merely  "  for  fear  he
should  punish  you,"  for  his  punishments  are  just.

Historically,  religions  may  have  been  guilty  of
infinite  crimes  ;  but  this  condemnation  is  a  proof,  not
a  disproof,  that  their  fundamental  aim  is  moral.  They
represent  a  continual  attempt  to  conform  to  the  good
will  of  God,  and  the  fact  that  they  err  in  determining
or  in  obeying  that  will  does  not  alter  the  fact  that  the
standard  by  which  they  test  actions  is  a  moral  standard.
But  is  the  will  of  God  always  conceived  as  good  ? May


24 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION ft.  i

it  not  be  conceived  as  simply  arbitrary  ?  One  phase  of
this  question  is  considered  in  the  next  section.

(/;)  A  second  argument,  of  a  type  somewhat  akin
to  the  last,  is  drawn  from  anthropology.  It  appears
that  in  primitive  societies  the  morality  of  the  tribe
develops  on  lines  independent  of  its  religion.  It  is
therefore  supposed  that  morality  and  religion  are  two
quite  different  things,  which  only  in  course  of  time
come  to  be  united  in  what  is  called  the  "  moralisation
of  religion."  This  argument  takes  it  for  granted — and
indeed  it  can  hardly  be  questioned — that  the  higher
religions  are  moralised  ;  that  they  conceive  God's  will
as  necessarily  good.

As  in  the  last  chapter,  we  may  dismiss  this  argument
by  showing  that  it  is  irrelevant.  For  us  religion  is
already  moralised,  and  we  must  accept  it  as  it  is  and
not  pretend  that  religion  as  known  to  us  is  still  the
same  thing  that  (on  the  theory)  it  is  to  the  savage.

But  as  in  the  case  of  the  anti-intellectual  argument
from  anthropology  we  were  not  content  with  dis-
missing it  as  irrelevant,  but  found  it  necessary  to
inquire  more  carefully  into  its  own  statements,  so  here
it  is  desirable  not  simply  to  dismiss  but  to  examine
the  argument.  The  word  "  moralisation  "  is  the  real
difficulty.  If  a  thing  has  at  the  outset  nothing  to  do
with  morality,  no  jugglery  or  alchemy  will  bring  it
into  relation  with  the  moral  consciousness.  You
cannot  arbitrarily  impose  a  category  on  a  thing  which
is  unfitted  to  receive  it.  And  to  suggest  that  "  social
evolution "  can  confer  a  moral  value  on  a  type  of
activity  which  has  as  yet  no  moral  bearings  whatever,  is
calling  in  a  deus  ex  machina  to  perform  feats  which
involve  a  contradiction  in  terms.

The  moralisation  of  religion — the  bringing  of  it
into  conformity  with  our  moral  standards — is  certainly
a  real  thing.  But  it  is  not  a  single  event,  once  for  all
accomplished,  in  which  religion  leaves  behind  its  old
indifference  to  morality  and  learns  to  take  cognisance


ch.ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  25

of  moral  values.  It  is  a  continual  process  in  which
old  standards  are  left  behind  and  better  ones  adopted.
If  we  look  at  the  conduct  of  a  class  or  nation  or  culture
very  different  from  our  own,  we  are  apt  to  imagine
for  a  moment  that  it  has  no  morality  at  all.  But  what
we  mistake  for  an  absence  of  morality  is  really  the
presence  of  a  different  morality.  Primitive  religion
does  not  inculcate  civilised  morality  ;  why  should  it  ?
It  inculcates  primitive  morality  ;  and  as  the  one  grows
the  other  grows  too.

(c)  We  now  pass  to  a  group  of  theories  which  arise
not  from  the  external,  historical  or  psychological,
investigation  of  the  religious  consciousness,  but  within
that  consciousness  itself.  These  are  determinist,
antinomian,  and  quietist  respectively.

Religious  determinism  results  from  a  conviction  of
the  omnipotence  and  universality  of  God,  so  inter-
preted that  no  power  of  initiation  whatever  is  left  to
the  human  will.  All  that  is  done  is  done  by  God  ;
God's  plans  are  not  conditional  upon  man's  co-operation
or  overthrown  by  his  rebellion,  because  God  knew
these  things  before,  and*  indeed  was  himself  the  cause
of  them.  This  creed  lays  upon  its  adherent  no
commands  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word,  for  it
does  not  hold  him  free  to  execute  them.  On  the
other  hand,  it  does  issue  commands  in  the  only  sense
in  which  it  allows  itself  to  do  so  ;  it  teaches  that  one
type  of  conduct  is  pleasing  to  God  and  another
unpleasing,  so  that,  if  a  man  were  free  to  choose,  it
would  not  hesitate  to  point  out  the  kind  of  behaviour
that  ought  to  be  chosen.  And  indeed  those  who  hold
views  of  this  kind  often  surpass  all  others  in  the
rigorism  and  puritanism  of  their  actual  lives.  This
theory  therefore  does  not  really  banish  conduct  from
religion.

(d)  Antinomianism  springs  from  the  same  con-
ception, as  to  the  relation  between  God's  will  and
man's,  which  underlies  determinism. It  causes,  there-


26 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION pt.  ,

fore,  no  fresh  difficulty.  But  it  is  perhaps  desirable
to  point  out  the  element  of  truth  which  it  contains.
If  morality  is  conceived  as  what  St.  Paul  calls  a  "  law
of  works,"  an  external  and  apparently  unreasonable
code  of  imperatives,  then  such  a  morality  is  certainly,
as  the  antinomian  believes,  superseded  and  done  away
by  religion.  The  external,  compulsive  law  has  been
replaced  by  an  inner  spring  of  life.  If  a  man  is
perfectly  religious  it  is  true  that  it  does  not  matter
what  he  does  ;  not  in  the  sense  that  he  may  commit
crimes  with  impunity,  but  in  the  sense  that  he  will  not
commit  them,  even  if  you  forget  to  tell  him  not  to.
Thus  religion  appears  as  a  release  from  the  servitude  of
morality.

But  this  view  depends  on  a  false  description  of
morality.  The  man  to  whose  mind  a  moral  law  is  a
mere  external  command,  grudgingly  obeyed  under
compulsion,  falls  short  not  merely  of  religion  but  of
morality.  He  is  not  really  moral  at  all.  He  is  in  a
state  of  heteronomy  ;  it  is  not  his  own  will,  freely
acting,  that  produces  the  result  but  the  imposition
upon  his  will  of  alien  force.  "The  very  nature  of  the
moral  law  is  this,  that  it  is  not  imposed  upon  us  from
without.  We  do  not  merely  obey  it  ;  we  make  it.
The  member  of  the  "  kingdom  of  ends,"  the  truly
moral  society,  is  not  a  mere  subject  ;  he  is  a  sovereign.
Thus  the  moral  law  has  already  that  character  of
spontaneity,  that  absence  of  compulsion,  which  is
typical  of  religion.  The  transition  from  heteronomy
to  autonomy  which  for  St.  Paul  is  marked  by  the
passage  from  Judaism  to  Christianity — from  the  law  of
works  to  the  law  of  faith — is  not  a  transition  from
morality  to  religion,  but  a  transition  into  morality
from  some  infra-moral  state.

What,  then,  is  this  infra-moral  state  ?  We  might  be
tempted  to  describe  it  as  the  stage  of  positive  law,  of
civil  law.  But  this  would  be  equally  unsatisfactory.
Just  as  the  really  moral  consciousness  makes  its  own


ch.  ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  27

laws,  and  does  not  merely  obey  them  blindly,  so  the
really  social  will  finds  in  the  law  of  its  society  its  own
self-expression,  and  is  sovereign  as  well  as  subject  in
the  state  in  which  it  lives.  This  is  an  ideal,  doubtless,
to  which  few  societies  attain  ;  but  it  is  the  ideal,  none
the  less,  of  civil  life  as  such.  And,  therefore,  we
cannot  distinguish  civil  from  moral  law  as  characterised
by  heteronomy  and  autonomy  respectively.

The  difference  is  not  between  two  types  of  law  but
between  differences  of  attitude  to  one  and  the  same  law.
The  law  may  be  divine,  moral,  or  civil  ;  in  each  case
there  are  two  ways  of  obeying  it,  either  from  within,
when  the  law  becomes  the  free  self-expression  of  the
acting  will,  or  from  without,  the  law  appearing  as  a
tyrannical  force  blindly  and  grudgingly  obeyed.  This
is  the  distinction  which  the  antinomian  has  in  mind.

Antinomianism  in  the  commonest  sense,  however,
makes  the  mistake  of  supposing  that  the  transition  to
autonomy  cancels  the  duties  which  heteronomy  enforced.
Even  this  is  in  one  sense  true,  for  any  "  law  of  works  "
contains  numbers  of  superfluous  commands,  presenting
as  duties  actions  which  the  autonomous  will  rightly  sees
to  be  valueless.  But  in  so  far  as  the  external  law  enjoins
real  duties,  the  internal  law  comes  not  to  destroy  but  to
fulfil.  Thus  whatever  in  morality  is  really  moral  is  taken
up  into  religion  ;  and  the  state  of  mind  which  marks  it
as  religious,  the  free  and  joyful  acceptance  of  it,  is  not
peculiar  to  religion  as  distinct  from  morality.  It  is
essential  to  morality  as  such.

(e)  It  remains  to  examine  the  view  known  as
quietism.  This  view  may  be  analysed  as  a  development
from  certain  types  of  expression  very  common  in  all
religion  ;  for  instance,  that  religion  is  not  self-assertion
but  self-surrender  ;  that  in  the  religious  life  we  wait
upon  God  and  accept  his  good  will  instead  of  imposing
ours  upon  him  ;  that  the  individual  is  lost  in  union
with  God,  and  is  no  longer  an  independent  will.  Such
language  is  often  called  mysticism,  and  the  word  may


28 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION pt.i

be  usefully  employed  in  this  sense.  It  is,  however,
well  to  remember  that  the  experience  to  which  this
language  refers  is  an  experience  not  peculiar  to  certain
people  called  mystics,  but  common  to  every  religious
mind.  Subject  to  this  caution,  we  may  use  the  word
mystical  as  a  description  of  that  aspect  of  the  religious
life  which  consists  in  the  fusion  of  the  individual  with
God.

This  question  is  one  which  we  shall  treat  at  length
in  a  later  chapter  ;  and  we  shall  there  see  reason  to
believe  that  this  mystical  language,  so  far  from  being
a  fanciful  or  confused  description  of  the  facts,  gives  a
perfectly  accurate  account  of  that  relation  to  God  which
is  the  essence  of  personal  religion.  At  present  we  are
concerned  not  with  mysticism  but  with  its  offshoot,
or  rather  perversion,  quietism.  Mysticism  asserts  the
union  of  my  will  with  the  will  of  God,  the  total  and
complete  fusion  of  the  two  into  one.  Quietism  asserts
that  my  will  is  negated,  that  it  has  simply  disappeared
and  the  will  of  God  has  taken  its  place.  I  am  utterly
lost  in  the  infinity  of  God.  The  two  things  are  really
quite  distinct  ;  the  former  asserts  a  union  of  two  wills
in  one  person,  the  latter  asserts  that  the  person  has  only
one  will,  and  that  not  his  own  but  God's.  Theologians
will  recall  the  relation  of  the  Monothelite  heresy1  to
the  orthodox  Christology  of  the  Church;  and  indeed  we
may  suggest  that  quietism  was  only  a  revival  in  another
context  of  the  essential  doctrine  of  Monothelitism,
whereas  mysticism  exactly  expresses  the  orthodox  view
as  to  the  relation  of  the  divine  and  human  wills.

Quietism  thus  denies  that  conduct  is  a  part  of
religion,  because  it  believes  that  in  religion  the  individual
will  disappears ;  religion  is  a  state  of  complete  passivity.
This  doctrine  is  due  to  the  assumption  (which  we  shall
criticise  later)  that  two  wills  cannot  be  fused  into  one,

1  Consisting  in  the  assertion  that  Christ  had  not  (as  laid  down  at  Chalcedon)  two
wills,  one  human  and  one  divine,  but  one  only,  the  divine,  and  no  human  will  at
all.  This  was  heretical  as  destroying  the  humanity  of  Christ.  The  subject  is
treated  below  in  Part  III.  Ch.  I.


CH. II


RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  29


and  therefore,  feeling  bound  to  preserve  the  unity  of
the  individual,  the  quietist  denies  the  human  and  keeps
the  divine.  Pending  our  inquiry  into  the  underlying
principle,  it  is  enough  to  point  out  certain  objections,
(i.)  The  act  of  self-abnegation  is  definitely  an  act  of
will,  and  is  represented  as  a  duty,  and  a  religious  duty  ;
therefore  the  practical  content  of  religion  is  not  in
point  of  fact  denied,  (ii.)  This  act  is  not  done  once
for  all  ;  it  is  a  continual  attitude  of  the  self  to  God,
an  attitude  capable  of  being  discontinued  by  an  act  of
will,  and  therefore  itself  maintained  by  an  act  of  will,
(iii.)  The  union  with  God  thus  attained  does  not
deprive  the  individual  of  all  activity.  Rather  it  directs
and  makes  more  fruitful  and  potent  this  activity.  It
affords  a  solution  of  all  his  practical  difficulties,  and
gives  him  the  strength  to  carry  out  the  solution  ;  but
it  does  not  remove  them  from  his  consciousness  and
place  him  in  a  simply  inactive  sphere  of  life.  In  a
word,  the  self-dedication  of  the  will  to  God  is  not  the
end  of  the  individual  life,  but  the  beginning  of  a  new
and  indeed  of  a  more  active  life.  The  union  with  God
is  a  real  union,  not  the  annihilation  of  the  self.

2.  We  have  perhaps  sufficiently  shown  that  religion
never  exists  apart  from  conduct.  Just  as  all  religion
involves  thought,  as  every  religion  teaches  doctrine  and
a  true  religion  teaches  true  doctrine,  so  all  religion  in-
volves conduct  ;  and  whereas  a  good  religion  teaches
good  conduct,  a  bad  religion  teaches  bad.  And  further,
just  as  we  found  that  all  knowledge  was  already  in
essence  religious,  so  we  must  now  say  that  all  morality
is  already  religious  ;  for,  as  we  have  seen,  morality
properly  understood  already  shows  in  itself  the  freedom,
the  autonomy  and  devotion,  of  religion.  It  seems,  there-
fore, that  religion  is  not  a  simple  but  a  complex  thing,
containing  two  (or,  for  all  we  yet  know,  more)  different
elements.  It  is  necessary  that  we  should  do  something
towards  determining  the  relation  of  these  elements  to
one  another. If  they  are  really  separate  ingredients  of


30 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION


PT. I


a  compound,  then  religion  is  merely  the  name  for  a  life
which  contains  both  thought  and  action  side  by  side  ;
it  is  no  third  thing  over  and  above  these,  but  simply
the  one  plus  the  other.  Such  a  conclusion  really  negates
the  conception  of  religion  altogether  ;  for  the  different
independent  elements  of  which  it  is  composed  are
capable  of  complete  analysis  and  description  each  by
itself,  and  there  is  no  whole  (religion)  but  only  parts
(thought,  action).

As  a  means  of  approach  to  this  difficulty,  it  would
be  well  to  ask  whether  it  is  necessary  that  the  two
elements  should  always  coexist ;  or  whether  they  are
alternative  modes  of  operation  which  can  only  exist  one
at  a  time,  so  that  to  speak  of  a  kind  of  consciousness
which  unites  the  two,  as  we  maintain  that  religion  does,
is  meaningless.

(a)  In  any  case  of  action,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  some
thought  must  be  present.  When  we  discussed  the
ritualistic  theory  of  religion  we  found  that  unless  ritual
was  simply  meaningless  and  unmotived  play  it  must  be
based  on  some  definite  creed.  We  may  extend  this
principle  further.  Unless  action  is  based  on  some
knowledge  it  cannot  take  place  at  all.  The  most  that
can  happen  is  some  automatism  of  which  the  person,
whose  action  we  call  it,  is  unconscious.  An  action  is
necessarily  based  on  a  large  number  of  judgments,  or
which  some  must  be  true  or  the  action  could  not  be
carried  out  ;  while  others  may  be  true  or  false  but  must
at  least  be  believed.  If,  for  instance,  a  man  wants  to
drown  himself,  he  must  know  "  here  lies  the  water  :
good  :  here  stands  the  man  :  good  "  :  otherwise  he  is
not  able  to  do  it ;  and  also  he  must  believe  rightly  or
wrongly  that  he  will  improve  his  circumstances  and  get
rid  of  his  present  miseries  by  putting  an  end  to  his
life  ;  otherwise  he  will  not  desire  to  do  it.  Thus  every
act  depends  for  its  conception  and  execution  upon
thought.  It  is  not  merely  that  first  we  think  and  then
we  act  ;  the  thinking  goes  on  all  through  the  act. And


ch.  ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  31

therefore,  in  general,  the  conception  of  any  activity  as
practical  alone,  and  containing  no  elements  of  knowing
or  thinking,  is  indefensible.  Our  actions  depend  on  our
knowledge.

(£)  The  converse  is  equally  true.  If  we  can  only
do  what  we  know  how  to  do,  we  only  know  what  we
wish  to  know.  Knowing  is  an  activity  just  as  walking  is,
and,  like  walking,  requires  to  be  set  in  motion  by  the
operation  of  the  will.  To  think  requires  effort ;  it  can
be  described  as  harder  or  easier  ;  it  is  the  outcome  of
a  choice  which  deliberately  determines  to  think  and
selects  a  subject  of  thought.  There  can  be  no  activity
of  thought  apart  from  activity  of  the  will.

If  this  is  so,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  uphold  the
familiar  distinction  between  a  life  of  thought  and  a  life
of  action.  The  man  of  action,  the  statesman  or  the
soldier,  would  never  be  able  to  act  at  all  but  for  his
intellectual  grip  on  the  problems  of  his  profession.  The
best  man  of  action  is  not  simply  the  man  of  iron  will,
dear  to  the  popular  imagination,  but  the  man  who  has
the  clearest  insight  into  the  necessities  and  peculiarities
of  the  given  situation.  Indeed  the  notion  of  a  strong
will  in  itself,  apart  from  strength  of  intellect,  and  still
more  the  worship  of  an  abstract  "will  to  power"  or
"  blind  will,"  are  mere  absurdities.  A  will  to  power
must  know  what  kinds  of  power  there  are  to  have,  and
which  kind  it  wants ;  and  a  blind  will  that  did  not  know
what  it  was  doing  or  what  there  was  to  be  done  would
never  do  anything  at  all.  The  student  or  man  of  con-
templation, on  the  other  hand,  does  not  simply  know
without  willing.  He  wills  to  know  ;  and  his  knowledge
is  the  result  of  positive  hard  labour.  No  moment  of
thought  is  conceivable  which  is  not  also  a  volition,  and
no  moment  of  will  is  possible  which  is  not  also  an  act
of  knowledge.

Thus  if  there  is  such  a  thing  as  the  religious  life,  it
must  be  one  which,  like  any  other,  involves  both  think-
ing and  acting  ;  and  the  religious  life,  so  conceived,  is


32 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION

not,  any  more  than  a  philosopher's  life  or  a  states-
man's, the  mere  sum  of  two  different  lives.  For  of
the  two  ingredients  neither  can  ever  exist  by  itself.  It
must  exist  in  union  with  the  other  or  not  at  all.  Any
real  life  must  contain  both  elements,  each  playing  as
important  a  part  as  the  other.

3.  But  although  the  duality,  of  which  religion  now
seems  to  consist,  cannot  be  broken  up,  in  the  concrete,
into  two  separable  elements,  it  is  still  a  duality.
Thought  and  action  remain  simply  side  by  side  and
absolutely  distinct,  though  each  is  necessary  to  the
other.  Religion,  it  appears,  is  simply  a  compound  of
philosophy  and  morality,  though  philosophy  always  in-
volves morality  and  morality  can  never  exist  without
philosophy  ;  and  therefore  all  life,  as  such,  shows  the
composite  character  which  is  the  mark  of  religion.  It
is  not  simply  religion,  but  all  the  life  of  the  mind,  that
is  now  subject  to  the  dualism  ;  and  therefore  there  is
the  greater  need  of  understanding  it.  What  is  this
dualism  between  thought  and  action  ?  We  have  seen
that  the  two  things  mutually  depend  upon  one  another,
but  we  have  not  inquired  very  minutely  into  the  nature
of  this  dependence.

(«)  In  the  theory  of  the  religious  life  offered  by
religion  itself,  there  is  no  dualism  at  all  between  know-
ing and  acting.  The  two  things  are  united,  for  instance
by  the  author  of  the  fourth  Gospel,  in  such  a  way  that
they  are  absolutely  indistinguishable.  The  term  used
to  express  their  unity  is  "  love,"  an  activity  which  in
its  perfect  manifestation  is  represented  as  the  perfection
of  the  religious  life.  The  whole  of  the  great  final
discourse  in  John  is  an  exposition  of  this  conception  ;
nothing  can  be  clearer  than  the  way  in  which  the  spirit
of  love  is  identified  on  the  one  hand  with  that  of  truth,
and  on  the  other  with  that  of  morality  or  obedience.
And  the  two  elements  are  not  connected  merely  ex-
ternally ;  knowledge  is  the  way  of  obedience  and
obedience the approach to truth. The connexion


ch.  ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY


33


between  the  two  is  the  most  intimate  conceivable  ;
just  as  the  perfect  life  involves  the  denial  of  all  distinction
between  man  and  man,  so  it  involves  the  denial  of  all
distinction  between  man's  two  faculties  of  thought  and
will.

(b)  Such  denials  of  our  ordinary  distinction,  even  if
they  cannot  in  themselves  be  taken  as  conclusive,  serve
at  least  to  arouse  doubts  as  to  its  sufficiency.  And  if
we  ask  how  thought  and  action  are  actually  distinguished,
the  answer  is  not  very  satisfying.  They  are  not  the
operations  of  two  different  parts  of  the  mind  ;  that  is
admitted  on  all  hands.  The  whole  self  wills,  and  the
whole  self  thinks.  Then  are  they  alternative  activities,
like  sleeping  and  waking  ?  No  ;  we  have  already  seen
that  they  are  necessarily  and  always  simultaneous.  The
only  thing  we  can  say  seems  to  be  that  thinking  is  not
willing  and  willing  is  not  thinking.  And  this  is  simply
to  assert  the  existence  of  a  distinction  without  explaining
wherein  the  distinction  consists.  We  cannot  say  that
in  willing  we  do  not  think,  or  that  in  thinking  we
do  not  will,  for  both  these,  as  we  have  seen,  we
certainly  do.

If  I  will  to  think,  there  are  not  two  elements  in  this
act  but  one.  When  I  will  to  walk,  I  do  not  separately
experience  an  internal  resolve  on  the  one  hand,  and  a
movement  of  my  legs  on  the  other  ;  the  act  of  will  is
the  voluntary  moving  of  the  legs.  To  say  "  I  will  to
walk  "  is  the  same  thing  as  saying  "  I  walk  of  my  own
initiative,"  that  is,  "  I  walk."  And  so  "  I  will  to
think  "  means  not  two  things  but  one  thing  :  "  I  think."
We  never  simply  will  in  the  abstract ;  we  always  will
to  do  something  ;  what  we  turn  into  a  separate  organ
and  call  "  the  will "  is  only  the  fact  of  free  activity,  the
voluntary  doing  of  this  thing  or  that.  Walking  is
thus  not  something  distinguishable  from  willing,  a
result,  so  to  speak,  of  the  operation  of  "  the  will  "  ;  it
is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  willing  itself,  the
particular  form  which, on this  occasion,  free  activity

D


34 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

takes. Thus  walking  is  a  kind  of  willing,  not  some-
thing else  ;  and  equally,  thought  is  a  kind  of  willing.

But  is  there  any  other  kind  of  willing  ?  Walking
is  only  one  kind  ;  is  thinking  only  one  kind  ?  No  ;
for  if  it  were,  there  would  be  kinds  of  willing  in  which
thought  was  not  present.  This,  we  have  already
admitted,  there  cannot  be;  and  therefore,  just  as  all
thinking  is  willing,  so  all  willing  is  thinking.  Or,  to
put  it  in  other  words,  there  is  neither  consciousness
nor  activity  considered  as  a  separate  reality,  but  always
the  activity  of  consciousness  and  the  consciousness  of
activity.  Nor  can  we  say  that  in  this  second  case  there
is  a  dualism  between  the  activity  of  a  mind  and  its  own
consciousness  of  that  activity  ;  for  an  activity  is  already
by  its  very  nature  conscious  of  itself,  and  if  it  were
not,  it  would  be  not  an  activity  but  a  mechanism.

We  conclude,  therefore,  not  that  one  and  the  same
thing,  mind,  has  two  manifestations,  consciousness  and
volition,  and  that  these  two  always  exist  side  by  side,
but  that  all  consciousness  is  volitional,  and  that  all
volition  is  conscious.  The  distinction  between  the  two
statements  is  not  merely  verbal.  The  former  way  of
putting  it  suggests  that  there  is  such  a  thing  as  a  mind,
regarded  as  a  thing  in  itself ;  and  that  this  thing  has
two  ways  of  behaving,  which  go  on  at  once,  as  a
machine  might  have  both  a  circular  and  a  reciprocating
motion.  This  idea  of  the  mind  as  a  thing  distinguish-
able from  its  own  activities  does  not  seem  to  be  really
tenable  ;  the  mind  is  what  it  does  ;  it  is  not  a  thing
that  thinks,  but  a  consciousness  ;  not  a  thing  that  wills,
but  an  activity.

(c)  This  somewhat  tedious  discussion  was  necessary
in  order  to  vindicate  the  real  unity  of  the  religious  life
against  the  view  that  it  is  a  falsely  conceived  juxta-
position of  heterogeneous  functions  with  no  unity  and
no  interconnexion.  There  is,  we  have  argued,  only
one  kind  of  activity  ;  namely,  that  which  is  at  the  same
time  thought  and  will,  knowledge  and  action ;  and  if


ch.  ii  RELIGION  AND  MORALITY  35

religion  is  the  name  of  this  activity,  then  all  true  life  is
religion.  We  cannot  distinguish  three  kinds  of  life,
the  thinking  life,  the  active  life,  and  the  religious  life
that  unites  the  two.  So  far  as  anybody  thinks,  he  wills
to  .think,  and  is  so  far  already  in  possession  of  the
complete  or  religious  life  ;  and  the  same  is  true  of
any  one  who  wills.

It  may  be  desirable  to  remark  at  this  point  that  to
say  there  is  only  one  possible  complete  life,  and  that
the  religious,  does  not  in  the  least  abolish  the  differences
between  different  people's  abilities  and  ideals,  or  set
up  one  out  of  a  number  of  lives  as  the  one  to  which
all  ought  to  conform.  In  a  sense,  it  is  to  do  the  very
opposite  of  this  ;  for  we  have  pointed  out  that  what-
ever life  is  really  livable,  whatever  is  a  life  at  all,  is
already  for  that  very  reason  religious  in  its  degree  ;
and  that  no  one  type  of  life  has  any  right  to  claim  for
itself  the  title  of  religious  at  the  expense  of  any  other.

In  one  sense  we  do  certainly  make  a  restriction  in
the  variety  of  ideals  ;  not  in  the  number  of  possible
lives,  but  in  the  ways  in  which  such  lives  may  be
classified.  While  fully  agreeing  that  there  is  a  difference
between  the  work  of  a  statesman  and  that  of  a
philosopher,  for  instance,  we  should  not  admit  that
this  difference  is  of  such  a  kind  that  the  former  can  be
correctly  described  as  a  man  of  action  and  the  latter  as
a  man  of  thought.  And  in  the  same  way,  we  should
not  wish  to  deny  the  difference  between  a  priest  and  a
layman  ;  but  we  should  deny  that  the  life  of  the  one
was  religious  and  the  life  of  the  other  secular.  As
every  life  includes,  and  indeed  is,  both  thought  and
action,  so  every  life  is  essentially  religious  ;  and  the
secular  life,  if  that  means  a  life  negatively  defined  by
the  mere  absence  of  religion,  does  not  exist  at  all.  If,
however,  the  "  secular "  life  is  defined  positively  as
consisting  of  interests  from  which  priests  are  excluded,
or  of  interests  lying  altogether  outside  the  sphere  of
religion,  we  shall  reply  that no legitimate  interest is


36 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION


PT.  I


foreign  to  all  religious  life  ;  and  that  the  question
what  is  and  what  is  not  lawful  for  a  priest,  though  a
perfectly  legitimate  question,  cannot  be  decided  by
an  appeal  to  the  conception  of  religion.  Every  man
has  his  own  duties,  and  every  class  of  men  has  duties
proper  to  itself  as  a  class  ;  but  just  as  the  "  man  of
action  "  is  not  freed  from  the  obligation  to  truth,  nor
the  "  man  of  contemplation "  from  the  obligation  to
morality,  so  the  layman  is  as  much  bound  as  the  priest
by  the  ideals  of  the  religion  which  in  some  form  or
other  he  cannot  help  professing.


CHAPTER III


RELIGION AND HISTORY


We  have  till  now,  in  our  treatment  of  the  intellectual
side  of  religion,  confined  our  attention  to  the  philosophic
or  theological  content  ;  but  if  we  are  right  in  suppos-
ing the  religious  life  to  be  all-inclusive,  it  must  also
include  the  activity  of  historical  thought.  Religion,  as
Coleridge  says,  must  contain  "  facts  "  as  well  as  "  ideas."

The  historical  aspect  of  religion  is  not  likely  to
suffer  neglect  at  the  present  time.  The  application  to
religious  problems  of  historical  research  has  been  the
most  conspicuous  and  brilliant  feature  in  the  theology
of  the  last  half-century.  Even  thirty  years  ago,  so
little  was  generally  known  of  the  origins  and  antecedents
of  Christianity  that  when  the  Apocalypse  of  Enoch
was  first  produced  in  English  in  1883,  its  editor  could
gloat  with  an  almost  comic  delight  over  the  publication
of  "  the  Semitic  romance  from  which  Jesus  of  Nazareth
borrowed  his  conceptions  of  the  triumphant  return  of
the  Son  of  Man."  To-day  no  writer,  however  ignorant
of  recent  research,  could  compose  such  a  sentence.
Every  one  knows  that  Christianity  was  deeply  rooted  in
Judaism,  and  the  relations  of  the  two  can  be  discussed
without  shocking  the  orthodox  or  causing  malicious
glee  to  the  critics.

This  great  historical  movement  in  theology  has
taken  two  chief  forms.  They  cannot  indeed  be  sharply
separated,  but  they  may  be  broadly  distinguished  for
the  sake  of  convenience. One  is  Comparative  Religion,

37


38 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION ft.  i

with  its  anthropological  and  psychological  branches  ;
the  other  is  Historical  Theology,  concentrating  upon
the  antecedents,  origin,  history,  and  development  of
Christian  doctrine.  Each  of  these  has  made  enormous
and  most  valuable  contributions  to  theology  ;  indeed
whatever  progress  has  been  made  in  the  last  fifty  years
has  been  due  almost  entirely  to  their  help.

i.  The  danger  at  the  present  time  is  not  so  much
that  the  religious  importance  of  history  may  be  for-
gotten as  that  it  may(be  overrated.  The  great  successes
of  historical  theology  and  of  comparative  religion
sometimes  lead  theologians  to  expect  more  from  these
methods  than  they  ever  really  supply.  There  is  a
tendency  to  regard  historical  methods  as  the  only
respectable  approach  to  religious  truth  ;  to  suppose
that  the  vexed  questions  of  theology  are  soluble  by
historical  means  or  not  at  all  ;  in  fact  to  imagine  that
theology  has  tried  the  method  of  speculation  and
found  it  wanting,  and  that  it  has  now  at  length  found
the  right  method,  a  method  which  properly  used  will
yield  all  the  truth  that  can  ever  be  known.

This  theory  I  shall  describe  as  historical  positivism,
by  analogy  with  Comte's  view  that  human  thought  was
in  his  time  emerging  from  a  "  metaphysical "  stage
and  entering  on  a  "  positive "  ;  casting  aside  barren
a  priori  speculation  and  waking  up  at  last  to  the  reality
and  all-sufficiency  of  a  posteriori  science  ;  passing  out
of  the  region  of  ideas  into  the  region  of  facts.  Comte's
forecast,  it  may  be  observed  in  passing,  was  just.
Thought  did  from  his  time  assume  for  a  while  a  notably
less  metaphysical  and  more  positive  character.  It  had
been  well  frightened  by  its  own  philosophical  daring  in
the  previous  period.  It  had  jumped  in  and  found
itself  out  of  its  depth  ;  and  Comte  was  the  mouthpiece
by  which  it  recorded  its  vow  never  to  try  to  swim
again.  Who  has  not  made  a  similar  vow  ?  and  who,
after  making  it,  has  ever  kept  it  ?

As in the case of Comtian positivism, so this


ch.  in  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  39

historical  positivism  in  theology  seems  to  imply  a
definitely  anti-philosophical  scepticism  ;  it  is  a  merely
negative  attitude.  It  is  characteristic  of  two  religious
types  which  at  first  sight  seem  to  have  little  in  common.
On  the  one  hand,  it  is  expressed  by  that  extreme  anti-
speculative  orthodoxy  which  takes  its  stand  on  the  bald
historical  fact  "so  the  Church  believes  and  has  believed";
on  the  other,  it  is  found  in  the  extreme  anti-dogmatic
view  of  many  Liberal  Protestants,  to  whom  "metaphysic"
is  anathema.  These  positions  we  shall  not  criticise  in
detail.  We  have  already  laid  down  in  a  former  chapter
the  necessity  to  religion  of  a  speculative  creed,  and
there  is  no  need  to  repeat  the  arguments  there  used.
Instead  of  proving  the  impossibility  of  a  totally  un-
philosophical  theology,  we  shall  consider  two  instances
of  unphilosophical  representations  of  religion  and  try
to  show  where  and  why  they  break  down.  These
instances  are  abstract  or  one-sided  forms  of  the  two
sciences  mentioned  above  ;  namely,  (a)  comparative
religion,  and  (£)  historical  theology.

(a)  Comparative  religion  is  the  classification  and
comparison  of  different  religions  or  of  different  forms
of  the  same  religion.  Its  aim  is  to  determine  the
precise  beliefs  of  such  and  such  a  people  or  sect.  It  is
therefore  on  the  one  hand  anthropological,  as  involving
the  comparison  of  different  human  types,  and  on  the
other  psychological,  as  determining  the  religious  beliefs
of  this  or  that  individual  considered  as  a  member  of  a
certain  class,  sect,  or  nation.  Comparative  religion  or
religious  anthropology  is  therefore  not  really  to  be
distinguished  from  the  Psychology  of  Religion.

If  we  ask  what  constitutes  psychology  and  dis-
tinguishes it  from  other  sciences,  we  cannot  answer
merely  that  psychology  is  the  study  of  the  mind  or
soul.  The  philosophical  sciences, — logic,  ethics,  and  so
forth, — attempt  to  study  the  mind  ;  and  they  are  not
psychological.  Nor  can  we  say  (as  some  psychologists
say) that this is the reason of  their unsatisfactory


4o GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION rr.  i

character  ;  for  these  sciences  exist  on  their  own  basis,
and  it  is  no  criticism  of  one  science  to  point  out  that
it  is  not  a  different  one.  Again,  we  cannot  define
psychology  as  the  study  of  conduct ;  because  that  title
is  already  claimed  by  ethics.  From  these  philosophical
sciences  psychology  is  distinguished  not  by  its  subject
but  by  its  method.

The  method  peculiar  to  psychology  may  perhaps  be
described  as  follows.  The  psychology  of  knowing
differs  from  logic  or  the  philosophical  theory  of  know-
ledge in  that  it  treats  a  judgment — the  act  of  knowing
something — as  an  event  in  the  mind,  a  historical  fact.
It  does  not  go  on  to  determine  the  relation  of  this
mental  event  to  the  "  something  ':  known,  the  reality
beyond  the  act1  which  the  mind,  in  that  act,  apprehends.
Such  a  further  investigation  would  be  metaphysical  in
character  and  is  therefore  avoided  by  psychology.  Now
this  formula  can  be  universalised,  and  thus  gives  us  the
definition  of  psychological  method.  Take  the  mental
activity  as  a  self-contained  fact ;  refuse,  so  far  as  that
is  possible,  to  treat  of  its  metaphysical  aspect,  its  relations
with  real  things  other  than  itself;  and  you  have
psychology.  Thus  in  scientific  thought  as  studied  by
logic  we  have  a  judgment  in  which  the  mind  knows
reality  :  psychology,  treating  the  judgment  as  a  mere
event,  omits  its  reference  to  reality,  that  is  to  say,  does
not  raise  the  question  whether  it  is  true.2  In  religion,
we  have  people  holding  definite  beliefs  as  to  the  nature
of  God.  Psychology  studies  and  classifies  those  beliefs
without  asking  how  far  they  correspond  with  the  real
nature  of  God.  In  conduct  generally  we  have  certain
actions,  individual  or  social,  designed  to  attain  the  ends
of  morality,  utility,  or  the  like  ;  psychology  will  study

1  The  description  of  judgment  as  a  mental  event  or  act  which  refers  to  a  reality
beyond  the  act  is  borrowed  from  Mr.  F.  H.  Bradley's  Logic.  I  use  Mr.  Bradley's
language  not  because  I  entirely  accept  such  a  description  of  the  judgment,  but
because  I  believe  it  to  express  the  view  on  which  psychology  is  based  ;  and  therefore
psychology  cannot  be  defined  without  reference  to  it.

!  The  same  omission  or  abstraction  is  made  by  Formal  Logic,  which  I  take  to
be  a  psychological  rather  than  a  philosophical  science.


ch.  in  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  41

these  actions  without  asking  whether  they  are  right  or
wrong,  but  taking  them  merely  as  things  done.  In
general,  the  characteristic  of  psychology  is  the  refusal
to  raise  ultimate  questions.  And  since  that  is  so,  it  is
plainly  not  in  a  position  to  offer  answers  to  them  :  or
rather,  in  so  far  as  it  does  offer  answers  these  rest  on  an
uncritical  and  quite  accidental  attitude  towards  the
problems.  For  instance,  the  psychology  of  religion,
consisting  as  it  does  in  the  collection  of  beliefs  about
God  without  determining  their  truth,  evidently  does
not  aim  at  discovering  what  God  is  and  which  opinions
give  the  best  account  of  his  nature.  The  psychology
of  religion,  therefore,  unlike  the  philosophy  of  religion,
is  not  itself  a  religion  ;  that  is,  it  has  no  answer  of  its
own  to  the  question  "  What  is  God  ?  "  It  has,  in  fact,
deliberately  renounced  the  investigation  of  that  question
and  substituted  the  other  question,  "What  do  different
people  say  about  him  ?  "

Of  course  a  religious  psychologist  may  be  willing
to  offer  an  answer  of  his  own  to  the  first  question.
But  in  so  far  as  he  does  that  he  is  abandoning  the
psychology  of  religion  and  falling  back  on  religion  itself;
changing  his  attitude  towards  religion  from  an  external
to  an  internal  one.  When  I  describe  the  attitude  of
psychology  as  "  external  "  my  meaning  is  this.  There  is
an  air  of  great  concreteness  and  reality  about  psychology
which  makes  it  very  attractive.  But  this  concreteness
is  really  a  delusion  and  on  closer  inspection  vanishes.
When  a  man  makes  a  statement  about  the  nature  of
God  (or  anything  else)  he  is  interested,  not  in  the  fact
that  he  is  making  that  statement,  but  in  the  belief,  or
hope,  or  fancy  that  it  is  true.  If  then  the  psychologist
merely  makes  a  note  of  the  statement  and  declines  to
join  in  the  question  whether  it  is  true,  he  is  cutting
himself  off  from  any  kind  of  real  sympathy  or  participa-
tion in  the  very  thing  he  is  studying — this  man's  mental
life  and  experiences.  To  take  an  example,  a  certain
mystic  says,  "  God  is  a  circle  whose  centre  is  everywhere


42 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

and  whose  circumference  is  nowhere."  The  psycho-
logist, instead  of  answering,  "Of  course,"  or,  "Really?"
or,  "  I  don't  quite  see  what  you  mean,"  replies,  "  That
is  an  example  of  what  I  call  the  Religious  Paradox."  *

The  mind,  regarded  in  this  external  way,  really
ceases  to  be  a  mind  at  all.  To  study  a  man's  conscious-
ness without  studying  the  thing  of  which  he  is  conscious
is  not  knowledge  of  anything,  but  barren  and  trifling
abstraction.  It  cannot  answer  ultimate  questions,
because  it  has  renounced  the  attempt  ;  it  cannot  enter
into  the  life  it  studies,  because  it  refuses  to  look  with
it  eye  to  eye  ;  and  it  is  left  with  the  cold  unreality  of
thought  which  is  the  thought  of  nothing,  action  with
no  purpose,  and  fact  with  no  meaning.

These  objections  against  the  ideal  of  religious  psy-
chology or  of  the  science  of  comparative  religion  only
hold  good  so  long  as,  from  such  collections  of  opinions,
the  philosophical  impulse  towards  the  determination  of
their  truth  is  completely  excluded.  And  the  fact  that
this  impulse  is  never  really  absent  is  what  gives  re-
ligious value  to  such  studies.  Indeed,  this  impulse  alone
gives  them  scientific  value  ;  for  some  degree  of  critical
or  sympathetic  understanding  is  necessary  before  the  bare
facts  can  be  correctly  reported.  It  is  notorious  that
the  unintelligent  observer  cannot  even  observe.  It  is
only  owing  to  surreptitious  or  unconscious  aberrations
from  its  ideal  of  "  objectivity  "  that  psychology  ever
accomplishes  anything  at  all.

(b)  The  ideal  of  a  history  of  the  Church  as  a
substitute  for  philosophical  theology  is  plainly  open  to
the  same  general  objections.  It  profits  nothing  to
catalogue  the  heresies  of  early  Christianity  and  get
them  ofF  by  heart,  unless;  one  enters  with  some  degree
of  sympathy  into  the  problems  which  men  wished  to
solve,  and  tries  to  comprehend  the  motives  which  led
them  to  offer  their  various  answers.  But  this  sympathy
and understanding are purely religious, theological,

1  This  instance  is  not  imaginary.


ch.  ,ii  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  43

philosophical  ;  to  understand  a  heresy  one  must
appreciate  the  difficulty  which  led  to  it  ;  and  that
difficulty,  however  expressed,  is  always  a  philosophical
difficulty.  The  merely  external  history  of  dogma
killeth  ;  it  is  the  internal  history — the  entering  into
the  development  of  thought — that  maketh  alive.

The  same  applies,  again,  to  the  origins  of
Christianity.  The  "  historical  Jesus '  can  never
solve  the  problem  of  Christianity,  because  there  never
was  a  "  historical "  Jesus  pure  and  simple ;  the  real
Jesus  held  definite  beliefs  about  God  and  himself  and
the  world  ;  his  interest  was  not  historical  but  theological.
By  considering  him  as  a  mere  fact  in  history,  instead
of  also  an  idea  in  theology,  we  may  be  simplifying
our  task,  but  we  are  cutting  ourselves  off  from  any
true  understanding  and  sharing  of  his  consciousness.
Historical  theology  is  always  tempted  to  lose  itself  in
the  merely  external  task  of  showing  what  formulas  he
took  over  from  current  religion,  and  what  he  added
to  them,  and  what  additions  and  alterations  were
superadded  by  the  early  Church  ;  whereas  all  this  is
but  the  outward  aspect  of  the  reality,  and  the  true
task  of  historical  theology  is  to  find  out  not  only  what
was  said,  but  what  was  meant ;  what  current  Judaism,
to  begin  with,  meant  by  its  formulae,  and  how  far  its
meaning  was  a  satisfactory  theology.  Then  we  should
be  in  a  position  to  understand  from  within  the  new
doctrines  of  Jesus,  and  really  to  place  ourselves  at  the
fountain-head  of  the  faith.  To  speak  of  studying  the
mind  of  Jesus  from  within  may  seem  presumptuous  ;
but  no  other  method  is  of  the  slightest  value.

2.  Historical  positivism  thus  fails  to  give  any
answer  to  theological  questions.  It  can  tell  us  that
the  Church  has  anathematised  certain  doctrines.  But
what  those  doctrines  mean,  or  why  any  one  ever  held
them,  or  what  the  Church  meant  to  assert  by  con-
demning them,  or  even  why  it  follows  that  we  ought
to  condemn  them  too,  pure  history  can  never  tell  us.


44 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION pt.  i

For  the  solution  of  these  problems  we  are  thrown  back
on  speculative  thought.

Hence,  through  condemnation  of  the  over-emphasis
laid  on  historical  truth,  emerges  a  contrary  theory  :
namely,  that  history  is  useless  as  a  basis  for  theology.
This  anti-historical  view  may  take  two  forms  :  (a)  that
history  is  itself  too  uncertain  to  bear  such  an  important
superstructure  as  theology  ;  (£)  that  the  two  things  are
truths  of  different  orders,  so  that  one  cannot  have  any
bearing  on  the  other.

(a)  However  well  attested  a  historical  fact  may  be,
it  is  never  more  than  merely  attested.  It  is  always
possible  that  it  may  be  wrong  ;  we  have  no  means  of
checking  it  ;  it  is  always  conceivable  that  evidence
might  turn  up  sufficient  to  discredit  the  best  established
historical  belief.  And  —  still  worse  —  the  evidence
might  never  turn  up,  and  we  should  simply  go  on
believing  what  was  totallv  untrue.  Seeing,  then,  how
desperately  uncertain  history  must  always  be,  can  we,
dare  we,  use  it  as  the  foundation  for  all  our  creeds  ?

This  argument  introduces  a  new  form  of  scepticism,
which  we  may  describe  as  anti-historical  scepticism.
It  is  in  essence  a  statement  of  the  unknowability  of
past  fact  simply  as  such,  on  the  abstract  ground  that
failure  of  memory,  breach  of  the  tradition,  is  always
possible.  This  is  entirely  parallel  to  the  anti-
philosophical  scepticism  which  declares  that  no  inference
is  sound  because  of  the  unavoidable  abstract  possi-
bility of  a  logical  fallacy.  Each  is  a  fantastic  and
hypercritical  position,  and  neither  is  really  tenable.
If  inference  as  such  is  to  be  distrusted,  the  evidence
that  leads  us  to  distrust  it  is  discredited  with  the  rest.
If  attested  fact  as  such  is  liable  to  be  misreported,  the
facts  on  which  we  base  this  generalisation  are  as  doubt-
ful as  any  others.  Indeed  the  theory  puts  a  stop  to
every  kind  of  activity  ;  for  if  the  human  memory  as
such  is  the  seat  of  the  supposed  fallacy,  we  cannot
count upon any continuity whatever in our mental


CH. Ill


RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  45


life  ;  it  may  always  be  the  case  that  my  memory  of
five  minutes  ago  is  completely  misleading.  If  I  may
not  base  a  theory  on  facts  reported  in  books  of  history,
am  I  more  entitled  to  trust  those  recollected  by
myself  ?  Plainly  there  is  no  difference  of  kind  here.
But  if  the  sceptic  falls  back  on  a  question  of  degree
and  says  that  some  facts  are  better  attested  than  others,
then  of  course  one  agrees  with  him  and  admits  that
one  is  always  bound  to  ask  whether  these  facts  are
well  enough  attested  to  serve  as  basis  for  this  theory  ;
whether  the  facts  are  two  thousand  years  or  two
minutes  distant  in  time  makes  no  real  difference.

(b)  The  other  argument  against  the  use  of  history
in  theology  asserts  that  there  are  two  categories  of  fact,
historical  and  philosophical  ;  and  that  since  they  are
totally  distinct,  theological  propositions,  which  are
essentially  philosophical  in  character,  cannot  be  proved
or  disproved  or  in  the  least  affected  by  historical
arguments  ;  just  as  discussions  about  the  authorship
of  a  poem  do  not  in  the  least  affect  its  beauty.

This  argument  is  plainly  right  if  it  merely  means
that  you  cannot  as  if  by  magic  extract  a  philosophical
conclusion  from  non-philosophical  premisses.  If  you
understand  history  as  something  entirely  excluding
philosophical  elements,  then  any  philosophical  con-
clusion which  you  "  prove '  by  its  means  will  be
dishonestly  gained.  But  in  this  sense  the  statement
is  no  more  than  the  tautology  that  you  cannot  extract
from  an  argument  more  than  its  premisses  contain  ;
it  does  not  help  us  to  recognise  a  purely  historical  or
philosophical  argument  when  we  meet  one,  or  even
convince  us  that  such  things  exist.

It  may,  secondly,  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  when
we  cite  instances  in  support  of  philosophical  views  the
philosophical  conclusion  depends  not  on  the  historical
fact  but  on  the  "  construction,"  as  it  is  called,  which  we
put  upon  the  fact.  We  look  at  the  fact  in  the  light  of
an  idea  ;  and  the  philosophical  theory  which  we  describe


46 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

as  proved  by  the  fact  is  due  not  to  the  fact  but  to  the
idea  we  have  read  into  it.  Here  again  there  is  a  certain
truth.  When  A  finds  his  pet  theory  of  human  selfish-
ness borne  [out  by  C's  action,  and  B  uses  the  same
action,  as  an  illustration  of  his  own  theory  of  human
altruism,  it  seems  natural  to  say  that  each  starts  from
the  same  fact  but  with  different  preconceived  ideas  :
and  that  the  fact  is  really  equally  irrelevant  to  both  the
theories  which  it  is  used  to  prove.  But  this  account  of
the  matter  is  quite  inaccurate.  A's  "idea"  is  that  C's
act  was  a  selfish  act  ;  B's  "  idea  "  was  that  it  was  altru-
istic. But  of  these  ideas  neither  was  a  mere  "idea"  ;
one  was  a  historical  fact  and  the  other  a  historical  error.
Thus  the  distinction  between  the  fact  and  the  construc-
tion put  upon  it  is  false  ;  what  we  call  the  construction
is  only  our  attempt  to  determine  further  details  about
the  fact.  And  since  the  question  whether  C  was  acting
selfishly  or  not  is  a  question  of  historical  fact,  the
doctrine  that  people  act  in  general  selfishly  or  altruistic-
ally is  based  entirely  on  historical  fact,  or  on  something
erroneously  imagined  to  be  historical  fact.  The  attempt
to  dissociate  philosophy  and  history  breaks  down  because,
in  point  of  fact,  we  never  do  so  dissociate  them.  One
simply  cannot  make  general  statements  without  any
thought  of  their  instances.

3.  Positivism  and  scepticism  both  break  down  under
examination.  We  cannot,  it  appears,  do  without  either
philosophical  or  historical  thought.  We  seem  therefore
to  have  here  a  distinction  within  the  region  of  the
intellect  parallel  to  that  of  intellect  and  will  in  the  mind
as  a  whole  ;  and  consequently  we  must  investigate  the
relation  between  philosophy  and  history  with  a  view  to
determining  as  accurately  as  possible  the  nature  of  the
distinction.

(#)  In  the  first  place,  it  appears  that  history  cannot
exist  without  philosophy.  There  is  no  such  thing  as
an  entirely  non-philosophical  history.  History  cannot
proceed  without  philosophical  presuppositions  of  a  highly


RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  47

complex  character.  It  deals  with  evidence,  and  there-
fore makes  epistemological  assumptions  as  to  the  value
of  evidence  ;  it  describes  the  actions  of  historical  char-
acters in  terms  whose  meaning  is  fixed  by  ethical
thought  ;  it  has  continually  to  determine  what  events
are  possible  and  what  are  not  possible,  and  this  can
only  be  done  in  virtue  of  some  general  metaphysical
conclusions.

It  is  not,  of  course,  implied  that  no  historian  is
qualified  for  his  work  without  a  systematic  education
in  academic  philosophy.  Still  less  is  it  to  be  supposed
that  a  philosopher  dabbling  in  history  is  better  able
than  the  historians  to  lay  down  the  law  as  to  the  value
of  such  and  such  a  historical  argument.  It  must  be
remembered  that  by  philosophy  we  mean,  here  as  else-
where, thought  concerned  with  metaphysical  problems  :
not  acquaintance  with  technical  literature  and  the
vocabulary  of  the  specialist.

(F)  It  is  equally  certain  that  philosophy  is  impossible
without  history  ;  for  any  theory  must  be  a  theory  of
facts,  and  if  there  were  no  facts  there  would  be  no
occasion  for  theory.  But  in  asserting  the  necessity  of
history  to  philosophy  we  must  guard  against  certain
misunderstandings.

In  the  first  place,  the  above  statement  may  be  inter-
preted to  mean  that  philosophy  develops  or  evolves
along  fixed  lines,  has  a  definite  history  of  its  own  in
the  sense  of  a  movement  in  which  each  phase  emerges
necessarily  from  the  preceding  phase,  and  therefore
philosophy  {i.e.  the  state  of  philosophical  thought  now)
depends  absolutely  upon  history  {i.e.  its  own  previous
history).

As  against  such  a  view  it  must  be  pointed  out  that
philosophy  is  a  human  activity,  not  a  mechanical
process  ;  and  is  therefore  free  and  not  in  any  sense
necessitated  either  by  its  own  past  or  anything  else.
Doubtless  every  philosopher  owes  much  to  his  pre-
decessors ; thought  is  a  corporate  activity,  like  every


48 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

other.  But  the  dependence  of  Hegel  upon  Kant,  say,
is  of  quite  a  different  kind  from  the  dependence  in-
dicated by  the  above  theory.  Hegel's  work  is  based
upon  Kant,  in  the  sense  that  many  of  Kant's  truths  are
Hegel's  truths  too  ;  but  Kant  also  makes  errors  which
Hegel  corrects.  The  error  is  not  the  basis  of  the  truth
but  the  opposite  of  it.  It  may,  and  indeed  in  a  sense
must,  lead  to  it  ;  because  an  error  cannot  be  refuted  till
it  has  been  stated.  But  the  statement  of  the  error  is
not  the  cause  of  its  refutation.  The  word  "cause"  is
simply  inapplicable  ;  for  we  are  dealing  with  the  free
activity  of  the  mind,  not  with  a  mechanical  process.
And  therefore  this  theory  uses  the  word  dependence  in
a  misleading  sense.

Secondly,  philosophy  may  be  said  to  depend  on
history  in  the  sense  that  history,  the  gradual  and
cumulative  experience  of  facts,  is  necessary  before  we
can  frame  philosophical  theories  on  a  broad  enough
basis.  The  wider  a  man's  experience,  the  more  likely
his  generalisations  are  to  be  true.  The  same  applies  to
the  human  race  in  general  ;  we  have  been  accumulating
facts  little  by  little  for  centuries  now,  and  consequently
we  are  a  great  deal  better  equipped  for  philosophising
than  were,  for  instance,  the  Greeks.

This  theory  expresses  a  point  of  view  which  is
always  widely  held  ;  it  is  an  attitude  towards  the  world
whose  technical  name  is  empiricism,  and  of  which  the
dominant  note  is  the  abstract  insistence  on  mere  number
or  size.  It  reckons  wisdom  by  the  quantity  of  different
things  a  man  knows,  and  certainty  by  the  number  of
different  times  a  statement  comes  true  ;  it  holds  that  a
man  broadens  his  views  by  travelling,  and  stunts  them
by  living  at  home  ;  it  measures  everything  in  two
dimensions,  and  forgets  the  existence  of  a  third.  As
a  matter  of  fact — one  is  almost  ashamed  of  having  to
utter  such  truisms  —  he  who  accumulates  information
alone  is  very  likely  to  accumulate  not  merely  sorrow
but  indigestion  of  the  mind  ;  if  he  cannot  understand


ch.  in  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  49

himself,  he  is  not  necessarily  the  wiser  for  trying  to
understand  others  ;  if  he  cannot  learn  truth  at  home,
he  will  certainly  not  learn  it  abroad.  It  is  true  that
more  facts  of  some  kinds  are  known  to  the  learned
world  now  than  in  the  time  of  Socrates  ;  but  it  does
not  follow  that  we  are  all  wiser  than  Socrates.  The
notion  of  establishing  theories  on  a  broad  basis  is,  in
short,  an  error  ;  itself  based  upon  a  broad,  but  ex-
tremely superficial,  theory  of  logic.  What  matters  in
the  foundations  of  a  theory  is  not  their  breadth  but
their  depth  ;  the  thorough  understanding  of  a  single
fact,  not  the  feverish  accumulation  of  a  thousand.

History  must  be  regarded  not  as  a  mechanical  process,
nor  yet  as  a  gradual  accumulation  of  truths,  but  simply
as  objectivity  ;  as  the  real  fact  of  which  we  are  conscious.
History  is  that  which  actually  exists;  fact,  as  something
independent  of  my  own  or  your  knowledge  of  it.  In
this  sense  there  would  be  no  philosophy  without  it  ;
for  no  form  of  consciousness  can  exist  without  an  object.
We  are  not  expelling  from  history  the  notion  of  move-
ment ;  for  if  we  are  asked,  what  is  the  nature  of  this
reality  of  which  we  are  conscious  ?  we  shall  reply  that
it  is  itself  activity,  growth,  development  ;  but  not
development  in  any  automatic  or  mechanical  sense.

4.  We  are  now  able  to  suggest  more  fully  the
relation  of  history  to  philosophy.  Neither  can  exist
without  the  other  ;  each  presupposes  the  other.  That
is  to  say,  they  are  interdependent  and  simultaneous
activities,  like  thought  and  will.  The  question  is
whether,  like  thought  and  will,  they  are  fully  identical.

Each  is  knowledge  ;  and  if  they  are  different,  they
must  be  the  knowledge  of  different  objects.  How  can
we  distinguish  these  objects  ?  History,  it  is  sometimes
said,  is  knowledge  of  the  particular,  philosophy  know-
ledge of  the  universal.  But  the  particular  is  no  mere
particular  ;  it  is  a  particular  of  this  or  that  universal  ;
and  the  universal  never  can  exist  at  all  except  in  the
form  of  this  or  that  particular. "  The  universal  "  and

E


50 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION FT.  i

"  the  particular  "  considered  as  separate  concrete  things
are  fictions  ;  and  to  equate  the  distinction  of  philosophy
and  history  with  such  a  fictitious  distinction  is  to  admit
at  once  that  it  is  untenable.

Nor  can  we  distinguish  them  as  the  knowledge  of
the  necessary  and  of  the  contingent  respectively.  This
distinction  is  due  to  the  fact  that  a  theory  explains
some  things  but  leaves  others  unexplained  ;  and  this
remnant,  relatively  to  the  theory,  appears  as  "  the
contingent."  Contingent,  therefore,  is  only  a  synonym
for  unexplained  ;  it  cannot  mean  inexplicable,  for  if
there  is  a  sense  in  which  anything  is  explicable,  we
cannot  assume  that  anything  is  in  this  sense  not
explicable.  In  the  last  resort  necessary  probably  means
no  more  than  real :  when  we  say  that  a  thing  is
necessarily  so,  we  mean  that  we  understand  it  to  be
really  so.  And  therefore  whatever  is  real  is  neces-
sarily real.  In  point  of  fact,  it  is  possible  that  the
distinction  between  necessity  and  contingence  is  only
a  restatement  of  that  between  the  universal  and  the
particular.

It  would,  again,  be  a  repetition  of  the  same  idea  if
we  tried  to  distinguish  things  that  happen  in  time
(history)  from  things  that  are  true  independently  of
time  (philosophy).  For  there  is  one  sense  in  which
every  truth  is  temporal  ;  as  for  instance  the  nature  of
God  is  historically  revealed,  and  the  fact  that  twice  two
is  four  is  grasped  by  adding,  on  a  definite  occasion,
two  and  two  ;  and  there  is  another  sense  in  which
every  fact  is  independent  of  time  ;  as  it  is  still  true  and
always  will  be  true  that  the  battle  of  Hastings  was
fought  in  1066.  The  difference  between  a  temporal
event  and  a  timeless  truth  is  a  difference  not  between
two  different  classes  of  thing,  but  between  two  aspects
of  the  same  thing.  This  attempt  to  distinguish  philo-
sophy and  history  suggests  a  dualism  between  two
complete  worlds  ;  the  one  unchanging,  self- identical,
and  known  by  philosophy,  the  other  subject  to  change


ch.  in  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  51

and  development,  and  known  by  history.  But  a  world
of  mere  self-identity  would  be  as  inconceivable  as  a
world  of  mere  change  ;  each  quality  is  the  reverse  side
of  the  other.  To  separate  the  two  is  to  destroy  each
alike.

History,  like  philosophy,  is  the  knowledge  of  the
one  real  world  ;  it  is  historical,  that  is,  subject  to  the
limitation  of  time,  because  only  that  is  known  and
done  which  has  been  known  and  done  ;  the  future,  not
being  mechanically  determined,  does  not  yet  exist,  and
therefore  is  no  part  of  the  knowable  universe.  It  is
philosophical,  that  is,  all-embracing,  universal,  for  the
same  reason  ;  because  historical  fact  is  the  only  thing
that  exists  and  includes  the  whole  universe.  History
a  parte  objecti — the  reality  which  historical  research
seeks  to  know — is  nothing  else  than  the  totality  of
existence  ;  and  this  is  also  the  object  of  philosophy.
History  a  parte  subjecti — the  activity  of  the  historian —
is  investigation  of  all  that  has  happened  and  is  happening  ;
and  this  is  philosophy  too.  For  it  is  incorrect  to  say
that  philosophy  is  theory  based  upon  fact ;  theory  is  not
something  else  derived,  distilled,  from  facts  but  simply
the  observation  that  the  facts  are  what  they  are.  And
similarly  the  philosophical  presuppositions  of  history
are  not  something  different  from  the  history  itself :
they  are  philosophical  truths  which  the  historian  finds
historically  exemplified.

History  and  philosophy  are  therefore  the  same  thing.
It  is  true,  no  doubt,  that  each  in  turn  may  be  interpreted
abstractly  ;  abstract  history  being  the  mere  verbal
description  of  events  without  any  attempt  at  under-
standing them,  philosophy  the  dry  criticism  of  formal
rules  of  thinking  without  any  attempt  at  grasping  their
application.  Abstract  history  in  this  sense  is  a  failure
not  because  it  is  unphilosophical,  but  because  it  is  un-
historical  ;  it  is  not  really  history  at  all.  And  similarly
abstract  philosophy  becomes  meaningless,  because  in
eliminating the historical element it has unawares


52 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

eliminated  the  philosophical  element  too.  Each  alike
must  also  be  the  other  or  it  cannot  be  itself ;  each  in
being  itself  is  also  the  other.

5.  The  value  of  historical  theology,  then,  consists
in  the  fact  that  it  is  already  philosophical.  It  does  not
merely  supply  philosophical  theology  with  materials  ;
it  is  itself  already  grappling  with  the  philosophical
problems.  Religion  cannot  afford  to  ignore  its  historical
content,  nor  can  it  treat  this  content  as  something  in-
essential to  the  establishment  of  its  speculative  doctrines.
History  must  bear  the  weight  of  speculative  super-
structure to  the  best  of  its  ability  ;  but  in  return  it
may  derive  help  from  philosophical  light  thrown  there-
by on  its  own  difficulties.  In  this  way  the  distinction
between  philosophical  and  historical  theology  disappears  ;
there  is  seen  to  be  only  one  theology,  which  is  both
these  at  once.  It  may  be  presented  with  comparative
emphasis  on  constructive  doctrine,  as  in  the  later
chapters  of  this  book  ;  but  if  so,  it  does  not  omit  or
ignore  history.  It  is  woven  of  strands  each  of  which
is  historical  in  character,  and  the  whole  presents  itself
as  a  historical  fact.  Similarly,  theology  may  be  written
from  a  historical  point  of  view,  with  the  emphasis  on
temporal  development  ;  but  it  is  only  theology  so  long
as  it  is  clear  that  the  thing  that  is  developing  is  really
doctrine  all  the  time.

An  illustration  may  serve  to  indicate  the  necessity
to  theology  of  its  historical  aspect.  In  view  of  the
criticisms  often  brought  against  the  records  of  the  life
of  Jesus,  many  are  inclined  to  take  up  a  sceptical
attitude  and  to  declare  that  our  tradition  is  hopelessly
incorrect.  But,  they  go  on  to  ask,  what  then?  We
learn  many  valuable  lessons  from  the  Good  Samaritan,
though  we  do  not  believe  him  to  have  existed.  We
learn,  too,  from  Homer,  even  if  Homer  never  wrote
what  we  ascribe  to  him.  We  have  the  tradition  in
black  and  white  ;  it  bears  its  credentials  on  its  face  ;
all  else  is  a  side-issue. Is  there  anything  we  learn  from


ch.iii  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  S3

the  Christ-history  that  we  could  not  equally  learn  from
the  Christ-myth  ?

The  simple  religious  mind  would,  I  believe,  emphati-
cally reject  such  a  suggestion.  And  this  would  be
perfectly  right.  It  is  easy  to  say  that  the  "  Christ-
myth  "  embodies  facts  about  God's  nature  which,  once
known,  are  known  whether  they  are  learnt  from  one
source  or  from  another.  That  is  by  no  means  the
whole  truth.  The  life  of  Christ  gives  us,  conspicuously,
two  other  things.  It  gives  us  an  example  of  how  a
human  life  may  satisfy  the  highest  possible  standards  ;
and  it  puts  us  in  contact  with  the  personality  of
the  man  who  lived  that  life.

The  whole  value  of  an  example  is  lost  unless  it  is
historical.  If  an  athlete  tries  to  equal  the  feats  of
Herakles,  or  an  engineer  spends  his  life  trying  to
recover  the  secret  of  the  man  who  invented  a  perpetual-
motion  machine,  they  are  merely  deluding  themselves
with  false  hopes  if  Herakles  and  the  supposed  inventor
never  lived.  The  Good  Samaritan's  action  is  the  kind
of  thing  that  any  good  man  might  do  ;  it  is  typical  of
a  kind  of  conduct  which  we  see  around  us  and  know
to  be  both  admirable  and  possible.  But  if  the  life  of
Jesus  is  a  myth,  it  is  more  preposterous  to  ask  a  man
to  imitate  it  than  to  ask  him  to  imitate  Herakles.
Any  valid  command  must  guarantee  the  possibility  of
carrying  it  out  ;  and  the  historical  life  of  Jesus  is  the
guarantee  that  man  can  be  perfect  if  he  will.

Further,  in  that  perfection,  or  the  struggle  towards
it,  the  religious  man  somehow  feels  that  he  is  in
personal  touch  with  a  risen  Christ.  We  do  not  at
present  demand  an  explanation  of  this  feeling,  or  ask
whether  there  is  a  real  intercourse  ;  it  is  enough  that
the  feeling  exists  and  is  an  integral  part  of  the  Christian
consciousness.  The  presence  of  Christ  is  as  real  to  the
believer  as  the  love  of  God.  But  it  can  hardly  be  real
if  Christ  is  a  myth.

It  must  be  observed  that  we  are  not  arguing  to  the


54 GENERAL  NATURE  OF  RELIGION PT.  i

reality  of  Christ's  presence  now,  or  his  historicity  in
the  past,  on  the  strength  of  this  feeling.  Such  an
argument  would  be  extremely  hazardous.  We  are
merely  concerned  to  show  that  Christianity  would  not
be  absolutely  unchanged  by  the  demonstration  that
these  things  were  mythical.  The  belief  that  Christ
really  lived,  whether  it  is  true  or  false,  colours  the
whole  consciousness  of  the  believer.

The  same  holds  good  even  of  purely  "  intellectual "
doctrine.  If  a  doctrine  is  simple  and  easy,  containing
nothing  very  new  or  paradoxical,  a  fiction  is  enough
to  drive  it  home.  But  if  it  is  difficult  to  grasp  and
conflicts  with  our  preconceived  notions,  our  first
impulse  is  to  challenge  the  reality  of  the  fact  which
serves  as  an  instance.  A  scientist  propounds  some
new  and  revolutionary  doctrine  ;  at  once  we  ask
whether  the  experiments  on  which  it  is  based  were
fairly  carried  out  as  he  describes  them.  If  not,  we
dismiss  the  doctrine.  No  doubt  to  an  absolutely
perfect  mind  a  fiction  would  be  as  illuminating  as  a
fact,  because  ex  hypothesi  such  a  mind  would  have  no
special  difficulty  in  grasping  any  truth,  however  subtle,
and  would  stand  in  no  need  of,  so  to  speak,  forcible
conviction.  A  person  who  was  the  equal  or  superior
of  Jesus  Christ  in  spiritual  insight  could  give  up  his
historicity  and  not  lose  by  it.  But  such  a  description
only  applies  to  God.  And  in  God,  we  can  no  longer
distinguish  between  the  historical  and  the  imaginary.
If,  speaking  in  a  Platonic  myth,  we  describe  the  course
of  history  as  a  story  told  to  himself  by  God,  it  makes
no  difference  whether  we  say  the  story  is  imaginary
or  true.

But  for  us  objective  fact,  history,  is  necessary.  We
all  have  something  of  the  spirit  of  Thomas,  and  must
know  a  thing  has  happened  before  we  can  believe  its
teaching.  Is  this,  perhaps,  one  reason  for  the  difference
between  the  parables  that  Jesus  spoke  and  the  parable
he  acted  ? He  knew  the  limitations  of  his  audience  ;


cH.ni  RELIGION  AND  HISTORY  SS

he  saw  what  they  could  understand  and  what  they  could
not.  Some  things  about  God  he  could  tell  them  in
words,  and  they  would  believe  his  words  ;  but  one  last
thing — how  could  he  tell  that  ?  and  if  he  could  find
words  to  tell  it,  who  would  not  mock  him  for  a  visionary
or  shrink  from  him  as  a  blasphemer  ?  There  was  only
one  way  ;  to  act  the  parable  he  could  not  speak.  We
are  accustomed  to  think  of  the  death  of  Jesus  as  the
sacrifice  for  our  sins.  Was  it  not  also,  perhaps,  a
sacrifice  for  our  stupidity  ?


PART II
RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS


57


CHAPTER I

ON PROVING THE EXISTENCE OF GOD

i.  It  might  be  maintained  that  the  first  duty  of  a
philosophical  theology,  indeed  of  any  theology,  is  to
prove  the  existence  of  the  God  whose  nature  it  professes
to  expound.  The  difficulty  of  this  preliminary  task  is
so  great  that  theology  tries  in  general  to  escape  it  ;
pointing  out  that  every  science  starts  from  some  data,
some  fact  taken  for  granted.  The  physicist  is  not
called  upon  to  prove  the  existence  of  matter,  nor  the
historian  to  prove  the  existence  of  his  documentary
authorities.  Granted  that  matter  exists,  the  physicist
will  tell  you  what  it  is  like  ;  and  theology  must  claim
to  exercise  the  same  freedom  in  the  choice  of  a  starting-
point.

(a)  This  defence  is  in  part  justified,  and  in  part,  I
think,  mistaken.  It  may  be  true  that  no  empirical
science  would  submit  its  foundations  to  such  rigorous
criticism  as  is  here  applied  to  theology.  And  if  theology
is  to  be  a  merely  empirical  science,  it  has  a  correspond-
ing right  to  make  uncriticised  assumptions.  But  the
sting  of  the  criticism  lies  in  the  fact  that  theology  claims
to  be  more  than  this.  It  presents  itself  as  a  philosophy,
a  view  of  the  universe  as  a  whole,  the  ultimate  ground
of  reality  ;  and  philosophy  can  take  nothing  for  granted.
A  historian  may  say,  "  I  give  you  here  a  sketch  of  the
character  of  Julius  Cassar.  It  is  based  on  all  the
available  evidence  ;  but  though  I  have  weighed  the
documents as well as  I could, and allowed for the

59


60  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.n

partisanship  of  one  writer  and  the  prejudice  of  another,
I  still  feel  that  the  evidence  is  very  slight  and  scanty,
and  that  no  high  degree  of  certainty  is  possible.  We
have  to  remember  in  dealing  with  remote  history  that
no  proof  of  a  statement  can  ever  be  offered  which  will
stand  against  the  objections  of  a  determined  scepticism."
If  a  theologian  prefaced  his  account  of  the  nature  of
God  by  a  statement  in  terms  analogous  to  these,  he
would  doubtless  win  the  approval  of  many  for  his
toleration  and  breadth  of  mind ;  but  all  sincerely
religious  people  would,  I  am  convinced,  feel  that  his
detached  and  judicial  attitude  was  not  merely  an  outrage
on  their  feelings  but  exhibited  a  certain  intellectual
obtuseness  and  incapacity  to  appreciate  the  point  at
issue.  We  should  have  the  same  feeling  if  a  philosopher
said,  "Such,  in  my  opinion,  is  the  nature  of  morality.
We  must  not,  however,  forget  that  some  people  deny
the  existence  of  morality  altogether,  and  it  is  quite
possible  that  they  are  right."  To  such  language  we
should  reply  that  a  philosopher  has  no  right  to  construct
the  nature  of  morality  out  of  his  inner  consciousness,
and  end  in  the  pious  hope  that  the  reality  may  corre-
spond with  his  "  ideal  construction."  His  business  as
a  philosopher  is  to  discover  what  actually  are  the  ideals
which  govern  conduct,  and  not  to  speak  until  he  has
something  to  tell  us  about  them.  In  the  same  way,  the
theologian's  business  is  to  understand,  at  least  in  some
degree,  the  nature  of  God  ;  if  he  cannot  claim  to  do
this,  he  has  no  claim  on  our  attention.  A  hypothetical
science,  one  which  says,  "  These  are  the  characteristics  of
matter,  or  number,  or  space,  granted  that  such  things
really  exist " — may  be  incomplete,  but  it  is  at  any  rate
something  ;  a  hypothetical  philosophy  or  theology  is
not  merely  mutilated  but  destroyed.

If  we  say  to  a  scientist,  "  First  prove  to  me  that
matter  exists,  and  then  I  will  hear  what  you  have  to  say
about  it,"  he  will  answer,  "  That  is  metaphysics,  and  I
have  nothing  to  do  with  it." But  theology  is  already


ch.i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 61

metaphysical  through  and  through  ;  so  it  would  appear
that  when  we  say  to  a  theologian  "  I  must  have  proof
that  God  exists  before  I  can  be  expected  to  listen  to
your  description  of  him,"  the  theologian  is  bound  to
supply  the  proof,  and  his  science  must  stand  still  until
he  has  done  it.  But  this  is  at  least  not  what  theologians
actually  do  ;  and  though  it  may  be  replied  that  none
the  less  they  ought  to  do  it,  is  the  demand  quite  fair
either  to  them  or  to  the  scientists  ?

(J?)  The  scorn  with  which  the  scientist  utters  the
word  "  metaphysics  "  shows  that  he  does  not  think  the
worse  of  physics  for  refusing  to  embark  upon  the  argu-
ments so  entitled.  And  yet  surely  the  physicist  cannot
suppose  that  it  makes  no  difference  to  physics  whether
matter  exists  or  not.  Nor  is  it  strictly  true  to  say,  as
is  often  said,  that  he  assumes  matter  to  exist ;  that  is  to
say,  begs  the  metaphysical  question  in  his  own  favour.
His  real  position  is  quite  different  from  this.  "  How
can  I  prove  the  existence  of  a  thing  "  (he  might  say)
"  whose  nature  is  totally  undefined  ?  Did  Newton  first
prove  to  a  mystified  world  the  existence  of  fluxions,  and
only  afterwards  deign  to  explain  what  he  meant  by  the
word  ?  If  you  will  listen  to  me  and  hear  what  I  have
got  to  say  about  matter,  you  can  then  go  on  to  criticise
it,  that  is,  to  ask  whether  the  thing  which  I  call  matter
really  exists.  But  this  metaphysics,  arguing  about  the
reality  or  unreality  of  a  thing  you  have  never  tried  to
describe,  seems  to  me  a  waste  of  time."

(c)  The  theologian,  I  think,  ought  to  put  in  the  same
plea.  A  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  is  all  very  well,
but  there  are  "  Gods  many,"  if  by  God  you  understand
whatever  this  or  that  man  happens  to  mean  by  the  word.
Would  a  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  prove  that
Apollo  and  Hathor  and  Krishna  and  Mumbo  Jumbo
all  existed  ?  and  if  so,  what  becomes  of  any  religion,  if
every  other  is  exactly  as  true  ?  Plainly,  if  the  God  of
one  religion  exists,  the  God  of  a  contradictory  religion
cannot  exist  ;  and  the  proof  of  one  is  the  disproof  of


62  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.h

the  other.  Let  us  first  determine  what  we  mean  by
God,  and  then  and  only  then  we  can  profitably  ask
whether  he  exists.

This  second  demand  is  more  reasonable  than  the
first  ;  but  it  still  has  one  grave  defect.  The  determina-
tion of  what  I  believe  (about  God  or  about  anything
else)  is  not  a  different  thing  from  the  question  whether
that  belief  is  true.  To  believe  a  thing  is  to  regard  it
as  true  ;  and  to  attach  a  meaning  to  a  word,  to  believe
that  this  and  no  other  is  the  right  meaning,  is  to  assert
that  the  thing  which  you  so  name  exists,  and  exists  in
this  form  and  no  other.  Nor  can  we  escape  this  con-
clusion by  quoting  the  time-honoured  instance  of  the
dragon,  in  which,  it  is  supposed,  we  attach  a  meaning
to  a  word  without  believing  that  the  thing  so  named
really  exists  ;  for  dragons  do  exist  in  Fairyland,  and  it
is  only  in  Fairyland  that  the  word  has  any  meaning.

To  attach  a  meaning  to  a  word,  then,  is  to  claim
that  this  meaning  is  the  right  one  :  that  is,  that  the
thing  whose  name  it  is  really  exists,  and  that  this  is  its
actual  nature.  To  distinguish  between  the  question,
"  What  do  I  mean  by  God  ?  "  and  the  question,  "  Does
God  exist,  and  if  so  what  is  he  like  ?  "  is  impossible,  for
the  two  questions  are  one  and  the  same.  It  is,  of
course,  possible  to  distinguish  the  meaning  I  attach  to
the  word,  or  my  conception  of  God,  from  another
person's  meaning  or  conception;  and  it  may  be  possible,
comparing  these  two,  to  discover  which  is  the  better
and  to  adopt  it.  But  in  any  case,  the  statement  of
what  we  mean  by  God  (or  anything  else)  is  not  the
mere  expression  of  a  "  subjective  idea  "  or  of  the  "mean-
ing of  a  word"  as  distinct  from  the  "nature  of  a  thing."
It  is  already  critical,  so  far  as  we  have  the  power  of
making  it  so  ;  it  presupposes  that  we  have  reasons  for
believing  that  idea,  that  meaning,  to  be  the  right  one.

Thus  the  proof  of  the  existence  of  God  is  not
something  else  without  which  theology  is  incomplete  ;
it  is  theology  itself. The  reasoned statement  of  the


ch.i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 63

attributes  of  God  is  at  the  same  time  the  proof  that  the
God  who  has  those  attributes  is  the  God  who  exists.
Similarly,  physics  does  not  require  to  be  supplemented
by  a  metaphysical  proof  that  matter  exists  ;  it  already
supplies  that  proof  in  the  form  of  an  answer  to  the
question,  "  What  conception  of  matter  is  the  right
conception  ? "

It  may  be  objected  to  this  way  of  putting  it  that
the  existence  of  matter  in  the  one  case  and  God  in  the
other  really  has  been  dogmatically  assumed  :  and  that
thus  we  are  falling  into  the  very  error  which  we  set  out
to  avoid.  This  is  not  the  case.  The  assumption  that
some  form  of  matter  exists  is  only  an  assumption  if  a
meaning  is  already  attached  to  the  word  matter  ;  and
since  to  supply  the  meaning  is  the  function  of  physics,
the  word  cannot  mean  anything  at  the  outset.  Actually,
of  course,  this  vacuum  of  meaning  never  exists,  because
the  science  is  never  at  its  absolute  starting-point  ;  each
new  scientist  begins  with  the  meaning  conferred  on  the
word  by  his  predecessors.  But  does  he  therefore  assume
that  matter  exists  in  a  form  precisely  corresponding  to
that  meaning  ?  If  so,  it  would  indeed  be  a  monstrous
assumption.  But  he  does  not.  If  he  did,  he  would
not  be  a  scientist.  His  whole  function  as  a  scientist  is
to  ask  whether  the  matter  conceived  by  his  predecessors
exists  at  all.  He  may  discover  that  their  conception
was  radically  false,  in  which  case  there  is  no  limit  to
the  degree  of  change  which  the  meaning  of  the  word
"  matter  "  will  undergo  in  his  hands.

The  answer  to  the  question  what  we  mean  by  the
word  God,  then,  is  identical  with  that  to  the  question
whether  God  exists.  "  What  do  we  mean  by  the  word
God  ?  "  resolves  itself  into  the  question,  "  What  is  the
right  meaning  to  attach  to  the  word  ? '  and  that  again
is  indistinguishable  from  the  question,  "  What  sort  of
God  exists  ? "  To  suppose  that  this  doctrine  rules  out
atheism  is  merely  to  misunderstand  it  ;  for  it  might
quite  well  be  that  the  word  God,  like  the  word  dragon,


64  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  h

means  something  which  exists  only  in  the  realm  of  the
imagination.

It  follows  that  we  shall  not  begin  by  proving  the
existence  of  God,  nor  indeed  offer  any  formal  proof  at
all.  But  this  is  not  because  the  existence  of  God
cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  be  proved.  It  is  often
maintained  that  ultimate  truths  are  incapable  of  proof,
and  that  the  existence  of  God  is  such  an  ultimate  truth.
But  I  venture  to  suggest  that  the  impossibility  of  proof
attaches  not  to  ultimate  truths  as  such,  but  only  to  the
truths  of  "  metaphysics  "  in  the  depreciatory  sense  of
the  word  ;  to  truths,  that  is,  which  have  no  definite
meaning.  We  cannot  prove  that  Reality  exists,  not
because  the  question  is  too  "  ultimate  "  (that  is,  because
too  much  depends  on  it),  but  because  it  is  too  empty.
Tell  us  what  you  mean  by  Reality,  and  we  can  offer  an
alternative  meaning  and  try  to  discover  which  is  the
right  one.  No  one  can  prove  that  God  exists,  if  no
definite  significance  is  attached  to  the  words  ;  not
because — as  is  doubtless  the  case — the  reality  of  God
transcends  human  knowledge,  but  because  the  idea  of
God  which  we  claim  to  have  is  as  yet  entirely  inde-
terminate. In  the  same  way,  we  cannot  prove  or
disprove  the  existence  of  matter  until  we  know  what
sort  of  matter  is  meant  ;  but  something  can  certainly
be  done  to  prove  the  existence  or  non-existence  of  the
matter  of  Democritus  or  Gassendi  or  Clerk  Maxwell.

I  do  not  wish  to  imply  that  hesitation  and  diffidence
are  mistaken  attitudes  in  which  to  approach  these
questions.  There  is  a  false  mystery,  which  consists  in
the  asking  of  unreasonable  and  unanswerable  questions  ;
but  there  is  also  a  true  mystery,  which  is  to  be  found
everywhere  and  supremely  in  that  which  is  the  centre
and  sum  of  all  existence.  In  approaching  these  hardest
of  all  problems,  only  the  most  short-sighted  will
expect  to  find  their  full  solution,  and  only  the  least
discriminating  will  think  at  the  end  that  he  has  found
it. Herein  lies  the  real  ground  for  humility  ;  not  that


ch.  i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 65

our  faculties  exhaust  themselves  in  a  vain  struggle  to
compass  the  unknowable,  but  that  however  well  we  do
we  have  never  done  all  we  might  or  all  we  could  ;  and
are,  after  all,  unprofitable  servants  of  the  supreme
wisdom.

2.  The  common  charge  of  inconclusiveness  brought
against  the  traditional  proofs  of  God's  existence  is  thus
to  a  certain  extent  justified  ;  for  these  proofs  are,  in
their  usual  forms,  isolated  arguments,  detached  from
any  positive  theology  and  attempting  to  demonstrate
the  existence  of  a  God  whose  nature  is  very  vaguely
conceived.  This  fact  is  sometimes  expressed  by  saying
that  they  are  purely  negative.  It  would  be  better  to
say  that  they  are  highly  abstract,  and  that  a  full  state-
ment of  any  one  of  them  would  amount  to  the  con-
struction of  a  complete  theological  metaphysic.  No
argument  can  be  purely  negative,  for  it  is  impossible  to
deny  one  principle  except  by  asserting  another,  however
little  that  other  is  explicitly  developed.

(<?)  But  there  is  another  charge  often  brought  against
these  proofs,  which  relates  less  to  their  positive  value
than  to  the  temper  in  which  they  are  conceived.  It
is  supposed  that  they  are  the  fruit  not  of  free  specula-
tion but  of  an  illicit  union  between  dogmatism  and
philosophy,  authority  and  criticism.  They  are  believed
to  be  typical  of  a  benighted  period  when  ecclesiastical
tradition  fixed  not  only  the  limits  but  the  very  con-
clusions of  metaphysical  thought  ;  when  reason  was
so  debased  as  to  submit  to  accepting  its  results  blindly
at  the  hands  of  an  unquestioned  dogmatism,  and  to
demean  itself  to  the  task,  apologetic  in  the  worst  sense,
of  bolstering  up  by  sophistical  ingenuity  these  un-
criticised  beliefs.

This  view  of  the  traditional  proofs,  though  popular
at  the  present  time,  is  neither  historical  nor  fully  reason-
able. The  Middle  Ages  were  undoubtedly  a  period
when  the  authority  of  the  Church  counted  for  much  ;
but  these  proofs  are  so  far  from  being  typically  mediasval

F


66  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

that  they  run,  in  one  form  or  another,  through  the
whole  of  philosophy.  If  the  history  of  speculation
begins  with  Socrates,  Socrates  was  the  first  person
known  to  us  who  definitely  formulated  the  Argument
from  Design  ;  and  Socrates  was  no  blind  supporter  of
dogma.  The  Ontological  proof,  first  I  believe  clearly
stated  by  the  sceptical  philosopher  Sextus  Empiricus  in
refutation  of  the  reckless  dogmatism  of  contemporary
atheists,  enters  modern  philosophy  indeed  with  Anselm
in  the  Middle  Ages,  but  was  not  accepted  by  the  orthodox
scholastic  tradition,  and  the  recognition  of  its  importance
was  left  to  Descartes  in  the  full  tide  of  the  Renaissance.
Since  then  it  has  never  lost  its  place  as  one  of  the
central  problems  of  the  theory  of  knowledge.  The
third  traditional  proof,  from  the  contingency  or  im-
perfection of  the  world  to  some  cause  outside  the
world,  is  mediaeval  only  because  it  was  already  Aristo-
telian, and  Aristotle,  whatever  his  shortcomings,  cannot
any  more  than  Socrates  be  represented  as  an  example
of  the  priest-ridden  intellect.

The  objection  seems  to  consist  in  the  notion  that
a  proof  of  some  belief  which  is  itself  held  on  other
grounds  is  illegitimate  and  insincere.  Let  us — so  the
notion  runs — employ  our  reason  in  the  discovery  of
new  truths,  not  in  the  invention  of  proofs  for  truths,
if  truths  they  be,  which  we  learnt  from  another  source
and  shall  continue  to  believe  even  if  the  proof  breaks
down.  By  the  latter  course  we  learn  nothing  new,
even  if  it  is  successful ;  we  only  delude  ourselves
into  mistaking  the  source  from  which  our  beliefs  are
derived.

But  this  objection  will  not  stand  examination.  In
the  first  place,  it  would  apply  with  equal  force  to  the
discovery  of  a  proof  in  the  case  of,  let  us  say,  a  mathe-
matical theorem  ;  where  we  often  see  the  thing  to
be  true  but  cannot  offer  any  proof  of  it.  Here  the
discovery  of  a  proof  is  subsequent  to  the  existence  of
the  belief,  and  the  belief  does  not  disappear  if  we  fail


ch.  i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 67

to  discover  any  proof  at  all. Why  then  is  it  desirable
to  prove  the  theorem  ?

First,  perhaps,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  our
original  conviction  was  not  a  mere  error.  If  we  never
tested  our  first  impressions  by  such  means,  the  mistakes
of  which  we  make  quite  enough  already  would  be
indefinitely  multiplied.  Secondly,  in  order  that  by
means  of  the  proof  we  may  impart  our  conviction  to
persons  less  gifted  than  ourselves  with  the  faculty  of
mathematical  intuition.  And  thirdly,  because  in  dis-
covering the  proof  we  really  do  attain  new  knowledge.
Even  if  we  do  no  more  than  make  explicit  the  steps
by  which  our  mind  leapt  to  its  first  conclusion,
knowledge  of  our  mental  processes  is  gained  ;  and,
moreover,  no  proof  can  be  constructed  without  discover-
ing new  facts  about  the  relation  of  this  theorem  to
other  things  which  we  already  knew.  And  the  dis-
covery that  one  truth  necessitates  another  is  a  discovery
worth  making.

"The  parallel,"  it  may  be  said,  "is  unfair.  The
discovery  of  a  proof  is  in  this  case  valuable  precisely
because  it  is  homogeneous  with  the  original  intuition.
Each  was  an  example  of  mathematical  thinking,  and
therefore  each  bears  on  and  is  relevant  to  the  other.
But  the  belief  in  the  existence  of  God  is  not  the  fruit
of  the  same  kind  of  thought  as  the  formal  proof  of
his  existence.  The  one  is  passively  taken  on  authority,
the  other  critically  constructed  by  the  reason."

Authority  does  enter  largely  into  the  formation  of
all  our  beliefs,  not  excluding  those  of  religion.  But  it
is  not  peculiar  to  religion.  Even  in  mathematics,  a
surveyor,  an  astronomer,  a  navigator  uses  countless
formulas  which  he  has  never  proved  and  never  dreams
of  testing.  In  science,  the  learner  takes  a  vast  pro-
portion of  his  beliefs  on  the  authority  of  his  teacher  or
the  writer  of  his  handbook.  It  would  be  strange  if  in
religion  alone  there  were  no  place  for  authority.

(J?)  And  it  is  doubtless  true  that  there  is  a  distinction


68  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

between  believing  a  thing  because  one  is  told  it  by  an
expert,  and  believing  it  because  one  has  been  into  the
evidence  for  oneself.  It  is  precisely  the  distinction
between  the  man  in  the  street  and  the  original  investi-
gator, philosopher,  physicist,  mathematician,  or  whatever
he  may  be.  But  the  objection  which  we  are  consider-
ing puts  a  peculiar  interpretation  on  this  distinction.
Because  a  man  has  once  been  a  learner,  it  maintains,  he
cannot  become  an  independent  investigator  unless  he
first  forgets  what  he  has  learnt.  If  he  attempts  to  philo-
sophise about  God,  he  must  first  cease  to  believe  in
his  existence.  But  is  this  reasonable  ?  Must  we  cele-
brate the  beginning  of  our  research  into  a  subject  by
denying  all  we  have  been  taught  about  it  ?  "  Not
perhaps  by  denying,  but  certainly  by  questioning."
Yes,  no  doubt  :  by  asking  whether  we  do  believe  :
and,  if  we  find  we  still  do,  by  asking  why  we  believe.
Philosophy  may  start  as  well  from  one  place  as  from
another  :  and  the  fact  that  a  man  does  actually  believe
in  the  existence  of  God,  or  of  his  fellow-man,  or  of  an
external  material  world,  is  no  barrier  to  his  becoming
a  philosopher.  The  modern  "broad-minded"  critic
would  have  him  dissimulate  these  convictions,  if  he
cannot  get  rid  of  them  ;  and  maintains  that  to  come
on  the  field  with  opinions  ready  made  is  to  be  hopelessly
prejudiced.  But  the  alternative,  to  come  on  the  field
with  no  opinions  at  all,  is  unfortunately  impossible.  It
does  not  matter  where  you  start,  but  you  must  start
somewhere  ;  and  to  begin  by  making  a  clean  sweep  of
all  your  beliefs  is  only  to  deprive  yourself  of  all  material
on  which  to  work.  Or  rather,  since  the  feat  can  never
be  really  accomplished,  it  is  to  put  yourself  at  the  mercy
of  those  surreptitious  beliefs  and  assumptions  which  your
broom  has  left  lurking  in  the  darker  corners.

We  are  dealing  not  with  abstract  ideals,  but  with
the  ways  and  means  of  ordinary  life  and  everyday
thinking.  No  actual  man  can  ever  claim  that  his  mind
is, thanks  to his  sedulous avoidance of  prejudice, a


ch.  i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 69

perfect  and  absolute  blank  as  regards  the  matter  he
proposes  to  investigate.  There  is  only  one  course  open
to  any  critic  :  to  discover  what  he  actually  does  think,
and  then  to  find  out,  if  he  can,  whether  his  first  idea
was  just  or  not  ;  that  is,  to  prove  it  or  to  disprove  it.
Systematic  scepticism  is  the  essence  of  all  philosophy
and  all  science  ;  but  scepticism,  if  it  means  pretending
not  to  entertain  convictions  which  in  fact  one  finds
inevitable,  soon  passes  over  into  systematic  falsehood.

Bearing  in  mind,  then,  that  the  preliminary  state-
ment of  belief  must  be  already,  to  some  extent,  critical,
we  can  see  that  the  method  of  argument  to  which  ex-
ception was  taken  is  not  only  inevitable  in  practice,
but  theoretically  sound.  The  kind  of  thinking  which
accepts  truths  on  authority  is  not  "  passive,"  not  funda-
mentally distinct  from  that  which  criticises  every  step
in  detail.  The  authority  is  not  accepted  without  some
reason,  and  the  fact  that  it  is  accepted  does  not  in-
capacitate us  from  analysing  the  reasons  for  acceptance
and  from  discovering  further  reasons.

3.  This  may  serve  to  explain  the  scheme  of  the  re-
maining chapters  of  this  book.  We  shall  not  formally
lay  down  the  Christian,  or  any  other,  theory  of  God  and
then  attempt  to  prove  it  either  in  itself  or  against  alter-
natives. This  would  be  both  wearisome  and  artificial ;
for  the  exposition  cannot  be  separated  from  the  criticism.
Neither  shall  we  attempt  a  metaphysical  construction,
free  from  all  presuppositions,  which  should  demonstrate
a  priori  the  truth  of  the  Christian  theology  ;  for  this
would  entail  the  same  arbitrary  separation  of  the  two
things,  even  if  it  were  not  setting  ourselves  an  initial
task  far  beyond  our  power.

I  intend  rather  to  state  as  simply  as  possible  certain
beliefs  concerning  God  and  the  world  which  are  at
least  central  to  the  Christian  theology,  and  then  to
examine  certain  alternatives  to  these,  or  objections
alleged  against  them,  which  are  familiar  to  modern
readers. In  this  way  it  may  be  possible  to  develop  in


7o RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  n

the  following  three  chapters  a  general  view  of  the
nature  of  God  ;  and  in  the  remaining  part  I  shall  apply
the  results  so  obtained  to  some  problems  which,  I
imagine,  would  be  commonly  described  as  belonging
less  to  metaphysics  than  to  theology.  The  distinction
between  these  two  spheres,  however,  must  not  be
insisted  upon.  The  problem  of  the  Incarnation  is
simply  that  of  the  true  nature  of  man  and  his  relation
to  the  absolute  spirit  ;  the  Atonement  presents  in  theo-
logical terms  the  purely  ethical  question  of  the  relation
between  the  good  will  and  the  bad  ;  and  the  problem
of  Miracle  is  not  in  the  last  resort  to  be  distinguished
from  that  of  the  freedom  of  the  will.

The  points  I  wish  to  examine  in  this  part  are  as
follows.  Christian  theology  regards  God  as  spirit,
exercising  creative  power,  however  conceived,  over  the
world  of  matter.  This  material  world  is  supposed  truly
to  exist,  that  is,  to  be  no  mere  illusion  :  but  yet  to  be
not  self-existent  but  to  depend  for  its  existence  and
nature  on  will.  This  view  brings  it  into  conflict  with
materialism,  which  regards  matter  as  self-existent  and
indeed  as  the  only  true  reality.  This  antithesis  will
form  the  subject  of  the  next  chapter.

Secondly,  God  is  conceived  as  a  person  ;  but  a
person  not  exclusively  related  to  other  persons.  His
spirit — his  mind — may  enter  into,  may  become  an
element  of,  indeed  the  very  self  of,  a  given  human
mind.  And  this  is  attained  without  loss  of  freedom  or
individuality  on  the  part  of  that  human  mind.  This
paradox  is  in  conflict  with  the  popular  view  of  person-
ality as  always  exclusive  and  independent,  which  makes
every  person  absolutely  self-contained  and  autonomous  :
and  the  distinction  between  the  Christian  and  this  latter
or  individualistic  theory  of  personality  will  be  discussed
in  Chapter  III.

Thirdly,  God  is  perfectly  good  and  yet,  as  omnipo-
tent, he  is  the  ruler  or  creator  of  a  universe  in  which
good  and  bad  exist  side  by  side. Christianity  can  give


ch.  i ON  PROVING  EXISTENCE  OF  GOD 71

up  neither  of  these  doctrines  ;  it  is  equally  hostile  to  a
theism  which  restricts  God's  power,  that  is,  makes  him
only  one  of  a  number  of  limited  or  finite  beings,  for
the  sake  of  preserving  his  goodness,  and  to  a  pantheism
which  denies  his  goodness  in  the  interest  of  his  infini-
tude. This  dilemma  must  be  faced  to  the  best  of  our
ability  in  Chapter  IV.

These  three  inquiries  do  not  exhaust  even  the  lead-
ing points  and  difficulties  in  the  Christian  conception
of  God  ;  but  they  are  enough  to  take  us  into  the
most  perilous  regions  of  metaphysics,  where  the  angelic
doctors  fear  to  tread.  The  problem  of  matter  has
hardly  yet  been  settled  by  the  advance  of  philosophy  :
that  of  personality  is  the  subject  of  continual  con-
troversy :  and  that  of  evil  is  often  given  up  as  in-
soluble. We  cannot  expect  to  achieve  at  best  more
than  a  partial  solution  of  the  infinite  questions  which
these  problems  raise  :  and  that  not  only  because  philo-
sophy still  has  far  to  go,  but  because  it  is  the  nature
of  truth  to  present  itself  under  infinite  aspects  and  to
ofFer  an  endless  variety  of  problems  where  at  first  only
one  is  seen.


CHAPTER II


MATTER


Popular  metaphysic  distinguishes  two  categories  of
reality,  mind  and  matter.  Mind  is  a  reality  whose
qualities  are  thought,  will,  and  so  forth  ;  it  is  not
extended  over  space  or  divisible  into  parts.  Matter,
on  the  other  hand,  occupies  space,  and  is  homogeneously
subdivisible  into  smaller  parts  ;  it  has  no  consciousness
of  itself  as  mind  has,  nor  can  it  originate  any  train
of  events  of  its  own  free  will.  Mind  is  active,  and
acts  according  to  its  volitions  ;  matter  is  passive,  and
the  changes  in  its  condition,  all  of  which  are  forms  of
motion,  must  be  brought  about  either  by  the  influence
of  other  portions  of  matter,  or  by  that  of  mind.
Matter  is  thus  subject  to  the  law  of  causation,  the
law  that  whatever  happens  has  a  cause,  external  to
itself,  which  determines  it  to  happen  in  this  way  and
in  no  other.  This  law  of  causation  does  not  apply
to  mind,  whose  changes  of  state  are  initiated  freely
from  within,  in  the  form  of  acts  of  will.  These  acts
of  will  may  influence  matter,  but  they  cannot  alter  or
in  any  way  affect  the  operation  of  the  laws  which
govern  the  movements  of  matter.

The  importance  of  this  distinction  from  our
point  of  view  is  that  most  religions,  and  notably
Christianity,  teach  a  metaphysic  different  from  this.
They  hold  that  whatever  happens  in  the  world  is
brought  about  not  by  automatic  causation  but  by
the free  activity  of  one  or more  spirits  ;  and  conse-

72


CH.  II


MATTER  73


quently  they  place  mind  not  side  by  side  with  matter
as  a  co-ordinate  reality  but  above  it.  On  the  other
hand,  materialism  reverses  this  order,  ascribes  every-
thing to  the  operation  of  matter,  or  causation,  and
denies  to  spirit  any  arbitrament  in  the  course  of  the
world's  history.  We  have  thus  three  hypotheses
before  us.  Either  the  world  is  entirely  material,  or  it
is  entirely  spiritual,  or  it  is  a  compound  of  the  two.
When  it  is  said  that  the  world  is  "  entirely  "  material
or  spiritual  it  is  not  meant  that  the  phenomena
commonly  described  as  mind  or  matter  are  simply
illusory  ;  it  is  of  course  allowed  that  they  exist,  but
they  are  explained  in  such  a  way  as  to  reduce  them
to  the  position  of  instances  of  the  opposite  principle.
Thus  materialism  will  admit  the  existence  of  thought,
but  will  try  to  explain  it  as  a  kind  of  mechanism  ;  the
opposite  theory  (which  for  the  sake  of  convenience  I
shall  call  idealism) l  will  admit  the  existence  of
mechanism,  but  will  try  to  describe  it  in  such  a  way
that  its  operation  is  seen  to  be  a  form  of  spiritual
activity.

i.  Of  these  three  alternatives  we  shall  begin  by
examining  the  most  popular  ;  that  is  to  say,  the
dualism  which  regards  the  world  as  composed  of  two
different  and  clearly-distinguishable  things,  mind  and
matter.  This  theory,  or  some  theory  of  the  kind,
may  be  described  as  the  plain  man's  metaphysic.  And
as  such,  it  has  all  the  strength  and  all  the  weakness
of  an  uncritical  view.  It  is  not  led  by  a  desire  for
unity,  illegitimately  satisfied,  to  neglect  or  deny  one
class  of  fact  because  it  seems  irreconcilable  with
another.  The  temper  which  gives  every  fact  its  full
weight  is  necessary  to  any  one  who  pretends  to  scientific
thought  ;  but it is one-sided and dangerous  to the

1  This  sense  of  the  word  must  be  carefully  distinguished  from  Idealism  as  a
theory  of  knowledge.  The  former,  concerned  with  the  antithesis  between  mind  and
matter,  has  no  connexion  whatever  with  the  latter,  which  concerns  the  quite
different  antithesis  of  subject  and  object,  and  is  opposed  not  to  Materialism  but  to
Realism.


74  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  n

truth  unless  balanced  by  its  apparent  opposite,  the
determination  to  draw  the  right  conclusions  from
premisses  even  if  these  conclusions  seem  to  contradict
the  facts.  Faith  in  facts — the  belief  that  every  fact,
if  correctly  observed,  has  its  own  unique  value — is  not
really  antithetical,  but  rather  identical,  with  the  faith
in  reason  which  believes  that  any  rightly-drawn  in-
ference is  as  true,  as  much  knowledge  of  reality,  as  the
observed  fact  from  which  it  started.  It  is  a  common
mistake  to  imagine  that  the  philosopher  who  says,
"  This  fact  is  incompatible  with  my  theory,  and  there-
fore my  theory  is  probably  wrong,"  is  superior  in
intellectual  honesty  to  him  who  says,  "  This  fact  is
incompatible  with  my  theory,  and  therefore  1  must
ask  whether  it  is  a  fact."  The  only  true  intellectual
honesty  would  lie  in  putting  both  these  points  of
view  at  once.  This  may  seem  a  truism  ;  but  there
is  a  real  danger  of  treating  "  facts "  with  so  much
respect  that  we  fail  to  inquire  into  their  credentials,
and  into  the  fine  distinction  between  observed  fact
and  inferred  or  imagined  implication.

The  plain  man's  dualism,  then,  seems  to  be  an
example  of  one  half  of  this  attitude  without  the  other.
It  shows  a  genuine  desire  to  do  justice  to  all  the  facts,
but  fails  to  supply  them  with  that  interrelation  apart
from  which  it  is  hardly  yet  a  theory  at  all.  In  other
words,  the  plain  man's  dualism  is  always  conscious  of
an  unsolved  problem,  the  problem  of  the  relation  of
mind  and  matter  ;  and  this  problem  is  not  a  mere
by-product  of  the  theory,  not  a  detail  whose  final
settlement  is  of  comparatively  small  importance  ;  it  is
the  theory  itself.  Until  some  solution  of  the  problem
has  been  suggested,  the  dualistic  theory  has  never  been
formulated.  For  that  theory  cannot  be  the  mere
statement  that  there  are  two  things,  mind  and  matter  ;
to  be  a  theory,  it  must  offer  some  account  of  the  way
in  which  they  are  related  ;  and  that  is  just  what  it
seldom  if  ever  does.


CH.  II


MATTER  75


(a)  But  a  theory  which  has  not  solved  all  its
difficulties — even  one  which  has  not  solved  the  most
elementary  and  conspicuous  of  them — may  still  be
practically  useful,  and  may  indeed  contain  a  certain
amount  of  philosophical  truth.  It  remains  to  be  seen,
therefore,  whether  dualism  has  these  advantages.  In
the  first  place,  it  may  be  represented  as  a  working
hypothesis,  if  no  more  ;  a  method  of  classifying  the
sciences  and  of  distinguishing  two  broad  types —
sciences  of  matter  and  sciences  of  mind.  Such  a
distinction  is  a  matter  of  convenience,  whether  it  does
or  does  not  represent  a  metaphysical  truth  ;  and  we
must  ask  whether  from  this  point  of  view  the  dis-
tinction is  of  value.

Considered  as  a  working  hypothesis,  it  is  almost
painfully  evident  that  the  distinction  between  matter
and  mind  does  not  work.  The  division  of  sciences
into  those  of  mind  and  those  of  matter  does  not  give
satisfaction  to  the  practical  scientist  ;  it  baulks  and
hinders,  rather  than  helps,  his  actual  work.  A  few
examples  will  perhaps  make  this  clear.

If  we  take  the  case  of  biology,  we  find  a  remarkable
instance  of  an  entire  province  of  knowledge  claimed  on
the  one  hand  by  mechanists  in  the  name  of  the  material
sciences,  and  on  the  other  by  vitalists  old  and  new  in
the  interest  of  the  sciences  of  mind.  The  former  point
out  that  the  essence  of  all  vital  functions  is  contained  in
the  facts  studied  by  bio-physics  and  bio-chemistry,  and
they  further  maintain  that  there  is  no  ultimate  distinc-
tion between  bio-physics  or  bio-chemistry  and  physics
or  chemistry  in  general  ;  material  substances  are  not
absolved  from  the  operation  of  their  normal  laws
because  for  the  time  being  they  happen  to  be  parts  of
an  organism.  The  vitalists,  on  the  other  hand,  assert
that  no  kind  of  machine  whose  operation  was  limited
by  the  nexus  of  cause  and  effect  could  possibly  behave
as  a  living  body  behaves.  We  are  not  concerned  to
ask  which  side  is  in  the  right  ;  the  point  is  merely  that


76  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS rr.n

to  the  question  "Is  an  organism  mind  or  matter?"
biologists  have  no  unanimous  answer  ready.  And  this
is  enough  to  show  that  the  methods  actually  used  in
biology,  the  existence  and  progress  of  the  science,  do
not  absolutely  depend  on  an  answer  being  given.  That
is  to  say,  the  practical  scientist  so  far  from  finding
dualism  a  help  to  his  work,  finds  that  it  creates  new
difficulties,  and  therefore  he  simply  ignores  it.

A  still  more  curious  case  is  that  of  empirical  psycho-
logy, where  the  functions  of  the  mind  itself  are  treated
by  methods  which  have  been  developed  in  connexion
with  the  sciences  of  matter.  Mind,  according  to  these
methods,  is  treated  exactly  as  if  it  were  matter  ;  and
psychologists  claim  that  by  these  methods  they  have
solved  or  can  solve  problems  with  which  the  philosophy
of  mind  has  for  ages  grappled  in  vain.

We  need  not  ask  whether  these  claims  are  justified  ;
whether  psychology  is,  as  some  believe,  a  new  and
brilliantly  successful  method  of  determining  the  true
nature  of  mind,  or  whether  as  others  maintain  it  is  only
an  old  fallacy  in  a  new  guise.  It  is  enough  for  our
present  purpose  to  point  out  that  it  exists  ;  that  the
distinction  proposed  by  dualism  as  a  working  hypothesis
is  not  actually  accepted  as  helpful  by  the  scientific  men
for  whose  benefit  it  is  propounded.

Nor  is  it  possible  for  dualism  to  step  in  and  prevent
these  things,  by  compelling  each  method  to  keep  to  its
own  side  of  the  line  and  prosecute  trespassers.  The
difficulty  is  that  the  distinction  between  mind  and
matter,  which  seems  so  clear  to  the  plain  man,  vanishes
precisely  according  to  his  increase  of  knowledge  about
either.  Until  he  has  studied  physics,  physiology,  psycho-
logy, he  thinks  he  knows  the  difference  ;  but  as  soon
as  he  comes  to  grips  with  the  thing,  he  is  compelled  to
alter  his  opinion.  The  plain  man  in  fact  bases  his
dualism  on  a  claim  to  knowledge  far  more  sweeping
than  that  made  by  any  scientist,  and  indeed  the  know-
ledge which  the plain man claims seems actually  to


CH.  II


MATTER  77


contradict the scientist's most careful and mature
judgment.

(£)  Nor  can  we  entirely  pass  over  the  difficulty  of  the
relations  between  mind  and  matter,  even  though  we
have  been  warned  in  advance  that  the  theory  does  not
undertake  to  solve  this  problem.  For  it  does,  as
commonly  held,  make  certain  statements  about  their
relations.  It  holds  that  mind  can  know  matter,  that  it
can  move  matter  by  an  act  of  will,  and  that  it  is  some-
how connected  with  a  piece  of  matter  known  as  the
body  of  that  particular  mind  ;  also  that  matter  by  its
motions  can  produce  certain  effects  in  mind,  for  instance,
pleasure  and  pain,  derangement  and  death.  These  are
merely  examples  ;  it  matters  little  what  examples  we
choose.

But  is  it  really  so  easy  to  conceive  how  two  things,
defined  in  the  way  in  which  we  have  defined  matter
and  mind,  can  act  on  each  other?  Matter  can  only
operate  in  one  way,  namely,  by  moving  ;  and  all  motion
in  matter  is  caused  either  by  impact  or  by  attraction  or
repulsion  ;  influences  exerted  in  either  case  by  another
piece  of  matter.1  If  therefore  mind  influences  matter,
that  is  to  say,  moves  it,  it  can  only  do  so  by  impinging
on  it  or  attracting  it.  But  we  do  not  associate  these
powers  with  mind  as  ordinarily  conceived.  They  can
(we  should  say)  only  belong  to  a  thing  which  is  spacial,
possesses  mass,  and  is  capable  of  motion.  Therefore
mind  cannot  affect  matter  in  any  way  in  which  matter
can  be  affected,  unless  mind  has  properties  characteristic
of  matter  itself.  That  is  to  say,  only  matter  can  affect
matter  :  mind  can  only  affect  matter  if  mind  is  itself
material.

Can  matter  then  influence  mind?  clearly  not  ;  for
its  influence  consists  in  causing  motion,  and  this  it  can

1  Attempts  have  been  made  to  reduce  the  cause  of  all  motion  to  impact  ;  but
these  have,  I  believe,  never  been  entirely  successful,  and  are  quite  foreign  to  modern
physics.  Nor  are  they  of  much  value  as  a  simplification  ;  for  if  the  origin  of  motion
by  gravitation  and  by  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  electric  charges  is  hard  to
understand,  its  communication  by  impact  is,  properly  considered,  no  less  so  ;  though
we  have  no  space  here  to  develop  in  detail  the  obscurities  involved  in  the  conception.


78  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS „.„

only  do  in  something  capable  of  motion,  something
spacial  ;  that  is,  in  matter.  The  two  halves  of  the
universe  go  each  its  own  way,  each  alike  uninfluenced
by  the  other.  Mind  cannot,  by  an  act  of  will,  move  a
piece  of  matter  as  I  imagine  that  I  am  moving  my  pen  ;
and  no  change  in  the  position  of  a  material  body  can
disturb,  still  less  annihilate,  the  activity  of  a  mind.
The  difficulty  is  not  merely  that  the  dualistic  theory
omits  to  explain  how  these  things  happen,  or  that  it
offers  an  unsatisfactory  account  of  them  ;  it  definitely
implies  that  they  cannot  happen  at  all.

(r)  There  is  still  a  third  difficulty  in  connexion  with
the  dualistic  theory  ;  namely,  the  question  how  matter
and  mind  are  to  be  distinguished.  At  first  sight  this
question  is  ridiculous  ;  for  the  whole  theory  consists  of
nothing  but  the  clear  and  sharp  distinction  between
the  two.  But  it  does  not  follow  that  this  distinction  is
satisfactory.  Matter  is  conceived  as  having  one  group
of  qualities,  position  and  motion  :  mind  as  having  a
different  group,  thought  and  will.  Now  we  distinguish
two  different  pieces  of  matter  by  their  having  different
positions  ;  and  we  distinguish  mind  from  matter  as  a
whole,  presumably,  by  its  having  no  position  at  all.
But  has  mind  really  no  position  ?  If  that  were  the
case,  position  would  be  irrelevant  to  consciousness  as  it
is,  for  instance,  to  time  ;  and  my  consciousness  would
be  all  over  the  universe  precisely  as  11.15  a.m.
Greenwich  time  is  all  over  the  universe.  But  my
consciousness  is  not  all  over  the  universe,  if  that  means
that  I  am  equally  conscious  of  all  the  universe  at  once  ;
when  I  look  out  of  the  window,  I  see  only  Wetherlam,
not  Mont  Blanc  or  the  satellites  of  Sirius.  There  may
be,  and  doubtless  is,  a  sense  in  which  the  mind  rises
above  the  limitations  of  space  ;  but  that  is  not  to  say
that  space  is  irrelevant  to  the  mind.

It  would  appear,  in  fact,  that  things  can  only  be
distinguished  when  they  are  in  some  way  homogeneous.
We can distinguish two  things  of  the same  class  or


CH.  II


MATTER  79


type  without  difficulty  :  we  can  point  out  that  the
difference  lies  in  the  fact  that  one  weighs  a  pound  and
the  other  two  pounds,  or  that  one  is  red  and  the  other
blue.  Differentiating  things  implies  comparing  them  :
and  if  we  are  to  compare  things  they  must  be  compar-
able. If  two  things  have  no  point  of  contact,  they  are
not  comparable,  and  therefore,  paradoxical  as  it  may
seem,  they  cannot  be  distinguished.  Now  in  our
original  definitions  of  mind  and  matter,  there  was  no
such  community,  no  point  of  contact.  Each  was  de-
fined as  having  unique  properties  of  its  own,  quite
different  in  kind  from  the  properties  of  the  other  :  and
if  this  is  really  so,  to  compare  and  distinguish  them
becomes  impossible.

But  in  practice  the  dualistic  view  is  more  lenient
than  this.  It  is  not  at  all  uncommon  to  hear  mind
described  as  if  it  were  a  kind  of  matter  ;  for  instance,
as  a  very  subtle  or  refined  matter  :  and  it  is  equally
common  to  hear  matter  spoken  of  as  if  it  had  that
self- consciousness  and  power  of  volition  which  are
characteristic  of  mind.  These  are  dismissed  as  con-
fusions of  thought,  mythological  and  unscientific  ;  but
even  if  they  cannot  be  defended  they  may  be  used  as
illustrations  of  the  difficulty  which  mankind  finds  in
keeping  the  ideas  of  matter  and  mind  really  separated.
Once  grant  that  mind  is  a  kind  of  matter,  and  it
becomes  for  the  first  time  possible  to  distinguish  them ;
you  have  only  to  say  what  kind  of  matter  mind  is.

But,  strictly  interpreted,  it  seems  that  we  can  hardly
accept  the  dualistic  view  whether  as  a  metaphysic  or  as
a  hypothesis  of  science.  It  seems  more  hopeful  to
examine  the  other  alternatives,  materialism  and  idealism.

2.  Materialism  has  been  for  many  centuries,  if  not
the  most  popular  of  all  philosophies,  at  least  among  the
most  popular.  Its  popularity  in  all  ages  seems  to  be
due  very  largely  to  the  simplicity  of  the  theory  which
it  offers.  Simplicity  and  clearness,  the  conspicuous
characteristics  of  most  materialistic  theories,  are  very


80  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS „.u

high  merits  in  a  philosophy,  and  no  view  which  is  not
simple  and  clear  is  likely  to  be  true  ;  but  the  search
after  these  qualities  may  easily  lead  to  the  false  sim-
plicity of  abstraction  and  the  false  clearness  of  arbitrary
dogma.

The  most  familiar  criticism  of  materialism  is  that
which  points  out  its  failure  to  account  for  certain  facts
in  the  world,  and  demonstrates  the  inadequacy  of  all
materialistic  explanations  of  such  things  as  thought,
action,  aesthetic  and  moral  values.  Such  a  criticism
emphasises  not  the  fact  that  no  materialistic  explanation
of  these  things  has  ever  yet  proved  satisfactory  ;  for
that  would  be  a  superficial  and  unfair  method  of  attack,
seeing  that  no  theory  can  claim  to  account  for  every-
thing ;  but  rather  the  fact — for  it  does  seem  to  be  a
fact — that  the  very  method  and  presuppositions  of
materialism  prevent  it  from  ever  coming  any  nearer  to
an  adequate  description  of  these  things.  To  take  one
case  only,  that  of  action  :  the  peculiarity  of  action  is
that  it  is  free  and  self-creative,  not  determined  by  any
external  circumstance  ;  but  according  to  the  materialistic
presupposition,  action  must  be  a  kind  of  motion  in
matter,  and  therefore,  like  all  other  motion,  cannot  be
free  and  must  be  causally  determined  by  external
circumstances.  This  is  not  to  explain  action,  but  to
deny  its  existence.  And  therefore  materialism  seems
to  be  an  instance  of  the  opposite  error  to  dualism  ;  the
error  of  denying  the  existence  of  a  fact  because  it  will
not  fit  into  a  system.  But  it  must  not  be  forgotten
that  this  error  too  is  half  a  virtue  ;  and  the  respect
with  which  philosophers  such  as  Hegel  treat  materialism
is  due  to  the  recognition  that  the  materialist  has  the
courage  of  his  convictions  and  faith  in  his  logic.

We  shall  not  develop  this  criticism  at  length.  It
has  been  often  and  brilliantly  done  by  abler  hands.
We  shall  confine  our  attention  to  certain  difficulties
which  arise  not  from  the  deficiencies  of  materialism  in
its  relation  to  the  facts  of  life,  but  from  its  own  internal


CH.  II


MATTER  8 i


obscurities.  The  theory  itself,  in  its  simplest  terms,
seems  to  consist  of  two  assertions  :  first,  that  all
existence  is  composed  of  a  substance  called  matter,  and
secondly,  that  all  change  is  due  to  and  controlled  by  a
principle  known  as  causation.  The  simplicity  and
clearness  of  the  theory,  therefore,  depend  upon  the
simplicity  and  clearness  of  these  two  conceptions,  matter
and  causation  ;  and  we  shall  try  to  find  out  whether
they  are  really  as  simple  and  as  clear  as  they  appear
to  be.

(a)  Materialism  offers  us  a  philosophy,  an  explana-
tion of  the  real  world.  It  aims  at  showing  the  under-
lying unity  of  things  by  demonstrating  that  everything
alike  is  derived  from  the  one  ultimate  matter  ;  that
everything  is  one  form  or  another  of  this  same  universal
principle.  Now  to  explain  a  thing  by  reference  to  a
principle  implies  that  the  principle  itself  is  clear  and
needs  no  explanation  :  or  at  least  that  it  needs  so  little
explanation  that  it  is  more  readily  comprehensible  than
the  things  which  it  is  called  in  to  explain.  If  it  were
no  more  comprehensible  than  these,  it  would  not  serve
to  explain  them,  and  the  explanation  would  take  us  no
further.

At  first  sight,  matter  does  seem  to  be  perfectly
simple  and  easy  to  conceive.  If  it  is  regarded  as  a
homogeneous  substance,  always  divisible  into  portions
which,  however  small,  are  still  matter — divisible,  that  is,
in  imagination,  even  if  not  physically  separable — we
can  no  doubt  imagine  such  a  thing,  and  its  simplicity
makes  it  very  well  fitted  to  serve  as  a  metaphysical
first  principle.  And  this  conception  of  matter  was
certainly  held  at  one  time  by  physicists.  According  to
the  ancient  atomic  theory,  matter  was  in  this  sense
homogeneous  and  infinitely  divisible,  in  thought  if  not
in  fact ;  that  is  to  say,  you  could  not  actually  cut  an
atom  in  half,  but  it  had  halves,  and  each  half  was  still
a  piece  of  matter.  But  this  is  not,  I  believe,  held  by
scientists  at the  present  time. The  whole  subject  of

G


82  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

the  composition  or  structure  of  matter  is  one  of  extreme
difficulty  ;  but  if,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  we  accept
the  view  most  widely  held,  we  shall  be  compelled  to
say  that  matter  is  not,  so  far  as  we  know,  homogeneous,
but  is  differentiated  into  a  large  number  of  distinct
elements  ;  that  these  elements  do  seem  to  be  made  of
the  same  stuff,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  all  composed  of
similar  electrons  arranged  in  groups  of  different  types  ;
but  that  the  way  in  which  these  different  arrangements
give  rise  to  the  different  characteristics  of  the  elements
is  a  profound  mystery.  Further,  the  electron  does  not
seem  to  be  itself  a  minute  mass  of  matter,  like  the  old-
fashioned  atom  ;  it  has  none  of  the  properties  of  matter,
which  are  produced  only  (if  I  understand  the  theory
rightly)  by  the  collocation  of  electrons.  Thus  matter
is  a  complex  of  parts  which  are  not  in  themselves
material.  If  we  are  pressed  to  describe  these  smallest
parts,  we  shall  perhaps  have  to  say  that  they  consist  of
energy. At  any  rate,  they  do  not  consist  of  matter.

The  tendency  of  modern  physics,  then,  if  a  layman's
reading  of  it  is  to  be  trusted,  seems  to  lie  in  the
direction  of  abandoning  matter  as  a  first  principle  and
substituting  energy.  This  at  least  may  be  said  without
fear  of  contradiction  :  that  matter  is  for  physics  not  a
self-evident  principle  of  supreme  simplicity,  but  some-
thing itself  highly  complex  and  as  yet  very  imperfectly
understood.

The  simplicity  of  matter  as  conceived  by  ordinary
materialism  seems  to  be  merely  the  simplicity  of  ignor-
ance. Matter  was  supposed  to  be  the  simplest  and
least  puzzling  thing  in  the  universe  at  a  time  when
physics  was  in  its  infancy,  when  the  real  problems  that
surround  the  nature  and  composition  of  matter  had
not  yet  arisen.  To-day,  as  Mr.  Balfour  says  in  a
characteristic  epigram,  we  know  too  much  about  matter
to  be  materialists.

(F)  But though the composition or structure of
matter  is  thus  too  obscure a  problem to serve as a


CH.  II


MATTER  83


support  for  materialism — so  that  even  if  everything  is
made  of  matter  we  are,  metaphysically  or  in  the  search
for  comprehension,  no  further  advanced,  since  we  cannot
say  what  matter  is — it  may  still  seem  that  the  operation
of  matter  is  comprehensible  and  clear.  The  behaviour
proper  to  matter  is  that  controlled  by  causality  ;  its
motions  are  due  not  to  its  own  spontaneous  initiation
but  to  external  compulsive  causes.  Matter,  if  we
cannot  define  it  by  its  structure,  can  at  least  be  defined
as  the  field  in  which  efficient  causes  are  operative,  in
which  we  find  the  nexus  of  cause  and  effect  universally
maintained.  We  must  turn  therefore  to  this  concep-
tion of  causality,  to  see  how  far  it  will  serve  as  an
ultimate  principle  of  explanation.

(i.)  Causation  is  not  merely  a  general  principle  of
connexion  between  events  ;  it  is  particular,  not  general,
concrete,  not  abstract.  That  is  to  say,  it  does  not
simply  account  for  the  fact  of  change,  but  for  the  fact
that  this  particular  change  is  what  takes  place.  One
of  the  objections  brought  by  the  Renaissance  scientists
against  the  "  final  causes  "  or  teleological  explanations
of  Aristotelian  science  was  that  they  supplied  only
general  explanations,  and  gave  no  reason  why  the
particular  fact  should  be  what  it  is  ;  whereas  according
to  the  conception  of  efficient  causes  each  particular  fact
has  its  own  particular  cause,  and  there  is  a  definite
reason  why  every  single  thing  should  be  exactly  what
it  is.

If  we  search  for  the  particular  cause  of  a  given
particular  effect,  we  shall  find  this  cause  to  be  invariably
complex,  even  when  it  is  often  described  as  simple.
Thus,  the  gale  last  night  blew  down  a  tree  in  the
garden.  But  it  would  not  have  done  so  except  for
many  other  circumstances.  We  must  take  into  account
the  strength  of  the  tree's  roots,  its  own  weight,  the
direction  of  the  wind,  and  so  on.  If  some  one  asks,
"  why  did  the  tree  fall  ? "  we  cannot  give  as  the  right
and sufficient answer, "  because of  the wind." We


84  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

might  equally  well  give  a  whole  series  of  other  answers :
"because  the  wind  was  in  the  north-west"  ;  "because
the  tree  had  its  leaves  on "  ;  "  because  I  had  not
propped  it "  ;  and  so  on.  Each  of  these  answers  is  a
real  answer  to  the  question,  but  none  of  them  is  the
only  answer  or  the  most  right  answer.  No  one  of  them
can  claim  to  give  the  cause  in  a  sense  in  which  the
others  do  not  give  the  cause.  Is  there  then,  we  may
ask,  such  a  thing  as  the  cause  at  all  ?  is  there  not  simply
a  number  of  causes  ?  No,  there  does  seem  to  be  one
cause  and  no  more  ;  but  that  cause  is  not  one  simple
event  but  a  large,  indeed  an  infinitely  large,  number
of  events and conditions all converging to the one

result.

If  we  really  wish  to  know  the  whole  truth  when  we
ask  for  the  cause  of  an  event,  then,  it  seems  that  we
shall  have  to  enumerate  all  the  conditions  present  in
the  world  at  the  time  ;  for  we  cannot  assume  any  of
them  to  be  irrelevant.  The  only  real  cause  seems  to
be  a  total  state  of  the  universe.

Further,  if  the  whole  present  state  of  the  universe
causes  the  fall  of  the  tree,  it  also  for  the  same  reason
causes  everything  else  that  happens  at  the  same  time.
That  is  to  say,  the  cause  of  the  fall  of  my  tree  is  also
the  cause  of  an  earthquake  in  Japan  and  a  fine  day  in
British  Columbia.  But  if  one  and  the  same  cause
accounts  for  all  these  things,  we  can  no  longer  suppose
that  one  particular  event  or  set  of  events  causes  another
particular  event,  as  such.  Just  as  the  only  true  cause
is  a  total  state  of  the  universe,  so  the  only  true  effect
is  a  total  state  of  the  universe.  To  say  that  this  gale
causes  this  tree  to  fall  is  doubly  inadequate  ;  we  should
say  that  the  total  state  of  the  universe  of  which  this
gale  is  a  part  causes  the  total  state  of  which  the  fall
of  this  tree  is  a  part.  The  nature  of  the  connexion
between  the  gale  and  the  fall  of  the  tree  in  particular
has  receded  into  impenetrable  mystery.  The  only  sense
in  which  causation  explains  the  fall  of  the  tree  is  that


CH.  II


MATTER  85


we  accept  that  event  as  part  of  the  effect-complex  and
the  gale  as  part  of  the  cause-complex  ;  though  why  this
should  be  so  is  quite  unintelligible.

(ii.)  Instead  of  many  chains  of  cause  and  effect
running  as  it  were  parallel,  there  is  now  only  one  such
chain.  But  here  again  a  very  difficult  problem  arises.
We  generally  think  of  the  cause  as  preceding  the  effect ;
the  chain  is  a  temporal  chain,  spread  out  over  time.
Indeed,  this  is  the  only  possible  way  of  regarding  the
matter  ;  for  if  we  regarded  the  cause  as  simultaneous
with  the  effect,  since  each  is  a  total  state  of  the
universe,  each  must  be  the  same  state  ;  and  therefore
the  cause  and  the  effect  are  not  two  different  things  but
absolutely  identical,  and  the  law  of  causation  would
merely  mean  that  the  state  of  the  universe  at  any  given
moment  is  what  it  is  because  it  is  what  it  is.

To  avoid  such  a  tautology  we  must  define  the  cause  as
preceding  the  effect.  This  certainly  involves  difficulties ;
for  of  the  causes  we  could  enumerate,  not  all  are  events,
and  therefore  it  does  not  seem  that  they  could  precede
the  effect.  The  weight  of  the  tree,  for  instance,  does
not  in  the'  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  precede  its
fall.  We  speak  of  permanent  causes,  meaning  such
things  as  gravitation,  which  are  never  conceived  as
events.

But  if  we  dismiss  these  difficulties  and  regard  the
cause  as  an  event  preceding  the  effect,  we  are  equally
far  from  explaining  the  effect.  Admitting  it  to  be
comprehensible  how  the  total  state  A  causes  the  total
state  B,  and  B,  C,  we  have  merely  explained  C  as  the
effect  of  A  ;  and  this  is  only  an  explanation  if  we
understand,  and  do  not  need  an  explanation  of,  A.
And  yet  if  C  is  a  total  state  of  the  universe  and  A  is
another  such  state,  why  should  one  need  an  explanation
and  the  other  not  ?  We  have,  it  seems,  avoided  the
absurdity  of  tautology  at  the  expense  of  falling  into  the
equal  absurdity  of  infinite  regress.  It  is  important,
though  at  first  sight  not  easy,  to  realise  that  this  is  an


86  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  n

equal  absurdity.  There  is  a  tendency  to  which  we  are
all  subject,  to  imagine  that  by  deferring  a  problem  we
have  made  some  progress  towards  solving  it  ;  that  if
we  are  asked  what  made  C,  it  is  more  scientific  to
answer  "  B  made  C,  and  A  made  B,  but  I  don't  know
what  made  A,"  than  to  reply,  "  It  made  itself."  One
answer  may  be  true,  and  the  other  false  :  but  if  we
are  in  search  of  an  explanation,  there  is  no  a  priori
superiority  in  either.  Possibly  the  latter  is  slightly
preferable,  as  it  is  better  to  give  up  a  question  one
cannot  answer  than  to  answer  it  with  an  empty
phrase.

(iii.)  The  view  of  causation  as  successive,  then,  does
not  seem  really  superior  to  that  which  regards  it  as
simultaneous.  The  latter  interpretation  would  make  C
its  own  cause,  which  contradicts  the  very  definition  of
causality  ;  the  former  makes  it  the  effect  of  something
equally  unexplained.  That  is  to  say,  the  causal  view
of  the  universe  only  accounts  for  the  present  state  of
things  if  it  is  allowed  to  take  for  granted,  without  ex-
planation, the  state  of  things  in  the  past.  Allow  it  to
assume  the  universe  as  a  going  concern,  and  it  can
deduce  you  its  successive  states.  The  assumption  is  no
doubt  enormous  ;  but,  after  all,  a  theory  is  judged  not
by  what  it  assumes  but  by  what  it  does  with  its  assump-
tions ;  and  if  materialism  really  shows  the  connexion
between  difFerent  successive  states  of  the  universe,  it
has  good  reason  to  be  proud  of  its  achievement.  But
on  closer  inspection  it  appears  that  this  result  is  only
attained  by  means  inconsistent  with  the  materialistic
assumptions.

Whether  causation  be  regarded  as  simultaneous  or
as  successive,  the  ultimate  result  is  the  same.  The
universe  considered  as  a  whole — whether  a  simultaneous
or  a  successive  whole — is  conceived  as  causing  its  own
states.  There  is  in  fact  one  supreme  cause,  which  is
the  cause  of  everything,  namely,  the  total  universe.
Now  on  the  principles  of  materialism,  on  the  principle,


CH.  II


MATTER  87


that  is  to  say,  that  everything  is  caused  by  something
else,  we  must  go  on  to  ask  what  causes  the  universe.
Plainly  nothing  can  do  this  ;  for  there  is  nothing  out-
side the  universe  to  cause  it.  It  seems,  then,  that  in
order  to  make  any  progress  at  all,  materialism  has  to
conceive  the  universe  as  an  exception  to  its  own  funda-
mental laws.  The  first  law  of  matter  is  that  it  cannot
originate  states  in  itself.  But  the  universe  as  a  whole,
if  it  has  any  states,  must  originate  them  itself ;  and  yet
if  it  does  so  it  breaks  the  first  law  of  matter  ;  for  it  is
itself  a  material  thing.  But  the  universe  only  means
all  that  exists  ;  so  if  the  universe  is  an  exception  to  the
law  of  causation,  everything  is  an  exception  to  it,  and
it  never  holds  good  at  all.

It  is  hardly  possible  to  avoid  the  conclusion  that
materialism  only  succeeds  as  far  as  it  does  by  implicitly
abandoning  its  own  principles.  If  it  were  rigidly  held
down  to  the  axiom  that  everything  must  be  accounted
for  by  reference  to  something  else,  it  could  never  make
headway.  As  it  is,  it  tacitly  assumes  that  self-creation,
self-determination,  is  real  and  omnipresent ;  and  this
assumption  underlies  all  its  progress.

(c)  The  materialist  is  not  unconscious  of  this  diffi-
culty ;  he  tries  to  evade  it  by  pointing  out  that  the  series
of  causes  is  infinite,  and  that  therefore  the  problem  of
ultimate  causation  does  not  arise  ;  because  there  is  no
such  thing  as  "  the  universe  as  a  whole."  This  argu-
ment does  not  really  remove  the  difficulty.  There  are
certainly  very  famous  and  very  difficult,  problems  in-
volved in  the  conception  of  an  infinite  series  whether
of  causes  and  effects  or  of  anything  else.  And  it  is
true  that  these  problems  are  not  solved  by  breaking  the
series  and  interpolating  a  "  first  cause."  That  would  be
simply  to  lose  patience  with  the  problem  and  to  upset
the  chess-board.  But  if  I  understand  the  argument,
its  purport  is  that  we  cannot  really  ever  supply  an
explanation  at  all  ;  that  we  have  presented  to  our  gaze
a  mere  fragment  of  a  reality  which  stretches  away  into


88  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  u

darkness  on  either  side  of  it  ;  the  fragment  being  in
itself,  in  the  isolated  condition  in  which  we  know  it,
necessarily  incomprehensible  because  depending  for  its
meaning  on  data  which  are  concealed  from  us.

This  sceptical  turn  to  an  argument  which  has,  till
now,  erred  rather  on  the  side  of  confidence  in  its  own
simplicity  need  not  greatly  surprise  us  ;  but  it  would
perhaps  be  ungracious  to  acclaim  it  as  marking  the
conscious  bankruptcy  of  materialism  and  to  pass  on
without  further  thought.  It  is  doubtless  true  that  all
our  knowledge  is  partial,  and  that  unless  we  to  some
degree  know  everything  we  do  not  know  anything  fully.
This  is  a  difficulty  which  no  theory  can  entirely  avoid,
and  no  theory,  perhaps,  can  entirely  solve.  But  in
spite  of  its  universality,  it  is,  I  cannot  help  thinking,
more  fatal  to  materialism  than  to  other  theories.
Materialism  presents  us  with  a  whole  formed  by  the
mere  addition  of  parts  which  remain  absolutely  external
to  one  another  :  and  if  this  is  so,  it  certainly  seems  that
the  infinite  whole  is  unknowable,  never  really  attained
and  therefore  really  non-existent.  And  the  incompre-
hensibility or  non-existence  of  the  whole  destroys  the
intelligibility  and  reality  of  the  parts.  If,  on  the  other
hand,  it  is  possible  to  conceive  a  whole  which  is  some-
how not  a  mere  sum  of  an  infinite  number  of  parts,  but
implicit  in  each  single  part  while  each  part  is  implied  in
the  rest,  then  such  a  whole  would  be  knowable  in  spite
of  this  sceptical  argument  ;  for  to  the  dilemma  "  either
know  the  whole  or  do  not  pretend  to  know  even  this
one  part "  we  could  reply  that  the  knowledge  of  this
single  part  is  already  knowledge  of  the  whole.  If  we
ask  the  time-honoured  question,  "  How  is  knowledge
possible?"  we  can,  I  think,  reply  that  if  the  universe
were  as  the  materialist  depicts  it,  an  infinite  whole  of
finite  parts  in  endless  series,  then  knowledge  of  it
would  be  impossible  ;  and  that  if  the  universe  is  to  be
knowable  at  all,  it  must  be  a  different  kind  of  whole,
one  of  which  we  could  say  that  each  part  by  itself  was


CH.  II


MATTER  89


already  in  some  sense  the  whole.  But  a  whole  of  this
kind  cannot  be  a  merely  material  body.

3.  It  seems  that  the  term  matter  is  highly  ambiguous.
In  one  sense,  it  means  merely  something  objective,  some-
thing real,  something  which  one  handles  or  thinks  about
or  uses,  as  we  speak  of  the  subject-matter  of  a  book  or
the  raw  material  of  an  industry  ;  these  things  may  be
either  "material"  or  "spiritual."  Secondly,  it  means
the  reality  studied  by  physics  in  particular  ;  the
chemical  elements  and  their  structure  and  relations.
Thirdly,  it  means  a  homogeneous,  inert  and  passive
substance,  whose  changes  are  mechanically  caused.

In  the  first  sense,  a  colloquial  rather  than  a  philo-
sophical sense,  matter  means  merely  reality.  It  is  not
opposed  to  mind  ;  mind  is  one  class  of  it.  Everything
is  matter  in  this  sense.

In  the  second  sense,  the  scientific  sense,  matter  is
equally  real  and  perhaps  equally  universal.  The  third
sense  alone  is  philosophical  ;  and  in  this  sense  it  would
appear  that  matter  does  not  exist  at  all.  If,  therefore,
we  deny  the  existence  of  matter,  it  must  not  be  sup-
posed that  we  wish  to  deny  the  reality  of  this  chair  and
this  table  ;  nor  yet  that  we  are  casting  doubt  on  the
truth  of  physics.  The  view  to  which  we  seem  to  be
led  is  that  these  things  exist,  but  are  not  in  the  philo-
sophical sense  material  ;  that  is  to  say,  they  are  not
composed  of  that  homogeneous  matter  whose  existence
has  been  disproved  by  physics,  and  their  behaviour  is
not  dictated  by  the  mechanical  causation  which  we  have
criticised.

(a)  This  last  point  may  create  difficulty.  It  may
be  said  that  the  whole  work  of  the  scientist  consists
of  determining  causes ;  how  then  can  we  maintain
that  there  are  no  causes,  and  not  imply  that  his  work
is  valueless  ?

But  it  seems  to  be  very  doubtful  whether  science  is
really  the  search  for  causes,  or  even  whether  scientists
themselves so conceive it. They would, perhaps,


9o  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS n.  n

say  that  they  were  more  concerned  with  the  "  how "
of  things  than  with  their  "  why "  :  that  they  would
be  satisfied  with  accurately  describing  observed
sequences,  and  rather  suspect  than  welcome  attempts
to  explain  the  underlying  causes.  Such  attempts
smack  not  of  true  scientific  method  but  of  the  "  occult
qualities  "  of  an  unscientific  age.  In  a  word,  science  is
the  study  of  behaviour,  the  behaviour  of  men,  plants,
animals,  or  metals :  and  in  no  case  need  it  advance
any  hypothesis  as  to  why  the  behaviour  of  a  certain
thing  should  be  what  it  is.  It  is  difficult,  perhaps
impossible,  to  avoid  framing  such  hypotheses  ;  but  the
hypothesis  itself  is  not  science  but  philosophy.  Modern
science  is  generally  associated  in  practice  with  a
materialistic  philosophy ;  but  there  is  nothing  in
physics  incompatible  with  the  hypothesis  that  the
complex  of  behaviour  which  the  physicist  calls  matter
is  the  outcome  of  a  will  or  society  of  wills  ;  that  the
personality  which  directs  our  own  bodily  movements
is  present  to  some  degree  in  each  material  atom,  and
that  every  event  in  the  universe  is  willed.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  at  the  present  time
scientists  are  very  reluctant  to  accept  such  a  hypo-
thesis. It  may  be  (they  say)  that  some  such  view  is
widely  held  among  philosophers  ;  or,  at  least,  that
few  philosophers  will  accept,  a  plain  and  sensible
materialism.  So  much  the  worse  for  the  philosophers.
— The  position  is  a  curious  one,  and  perhaps  worth
brief  consideration.  The  scientist  does  not  regard
the  philosopher  as  an  expert  in  his  own  line,  whose
opinion  on  a  metaphysical  point  can  be  accepted
without  question,  just  as  an  astronomer's  would  be
accepted  by  a  chemist.  He  regards  philosophy  as  a
subject  on  which  he  is  entitled  to  an  opinion  of  his
own  :  and  he  expresses  that  opinion  with  perfect
confidence,  in  defiance  of  the  expert.

Such  an  attitude  is  really  rather  gratifying  to  the
philosopher,  who  is  always  maintaining  that  philosophy


ch.  ii  MATTER  91

is  everybody's  interest,  and  not  the  private  preserve  of
academic  specialists.  Most  philosophers,  however,  are
ungrateful  enough  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  the  scientist's
overtures,  and  recommend  him  to  mind  his  own
business.  But  the  scientist  genuinely  regards  philo-
sophy as  vital  to  his  own  science  ;  though  he  may
not  use  the  word,  which  he  tends  to  reserve  as  a  term
of  opprobrium  for  other  people's  philosophy.  More
especially,  he  seems  to  regard  materialism  as  the  very
foundation  of  his  methods.  Now  if  this  were  so,
science  would  be  in  a  highly  precarious  position  ;  for
its  methods  would  be  founded  on  a  theory  which
criticism  has  long  ago  discredited.  For  that  materialism
is  discredited  no  student  of  philosophy  can  doubt.

On  the  other  hand,  materialism  would  never  have
arisen  at  all,  unless  it  had  to  some  extent  satisfied  the
need  for  a  theory.  It  may  be  wrong,  but  no  theory
is  wrong  from  end  to  end.  And  this  particular  theory
does  rightly  emphasise  certain  truths  which  are  of
great  importance  to  the  scientist.  If  it  is  asserted
that  all  events  are  due  to  free  volition,  the  scientist
will  very  likely  object  to  such  a  view  because  it  seems
to  destroy  the  order  and  regularity  of  the  universe.
Make  everything  a  matter  of  free  choice,  he  would  say,
and  you  get  chaos.  Now  this  is  not  really  true.  A  free
will  is  not  inherently  chaotic  ;  to  suppose  that  it  is  so
is  to  confuse  freedom  with  caprice  and  the  absence  of
compulsion  for  the  absence  of  rationality.  But  it  is
true  that  a  free  will  may  lapse  into  chaos,  and  that
freedom  may  degenerate  into  caprice.  A  science,  then,
which  is  concerned  primarily  with  regularities  and
generalisations  depends  for  its  very  existence  on  the
fact  that  the  object  it  studies  does  not  exhibit  caprice  :
and  this  fact  might  be  expressed  by  saying,  "  these
things  may  be  free,  and  act  in  this  way  because  they
choose  to,  but  they  act  as  uniformly  and  regularly  as  if
they  could  not  help  it."

Science,  however,  does  not  remain  permanently  in


92  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.h

this  stage  of  observing  uniformities  only.  In  its
higher  developments  it  comes  to  deal  less  with  the
general  and  more  with  the  particular  ;  less  with
abstract  classes  and  more  with  concrete  individuals.
This  does  not  force  it  to  abandon  the  hypothesis  of
mechanical  causation  ;  for  such  a  hypothesis  is  quite
compatible  with  recognising  that  every  individual  is
unique  and  must  react  in  a  unique  way  to  the  causes
which  move  it.  And  in  this  uniqueness  different
individuals  may  still  show  resemblances.  All  this  is
true  whether  the  changes  that  take  place  are  willed
or  caused  ;  for  as  mechanism  does  not  exclude  unique-
ness, so  liberty  is  not  incompatible  with  resemblance.
The  recognition  that  this  is  so  removes  the  most
reasonable  and  deeply  rooted  of  all  the  prejudices  in
favour  of  materialism.

(b)  Another  merit  of  materialism  is  its  insistence
on  fact,  on  reality  as  something  beyond  the  power  of
the  individual  mind  to  create  or  alter.  Matter  is
supremely  objective.  And  when  it  is  said  that  mind
is  the  only  reality,  the  suggestion  at  once  arises  that
the  world  is  less  solid,  less  satisfying,  less  "  real "  than
we  believed.  Not  that  we  do  not  think  of  mind  as
real  ;  the  plain  man  knows  that  his  sorrows  are  mental,
but  does  not  think  them  any  the  less  real  for  that.
But  he  feels  that  to  call  his  boots  mental  would  be
ridiculous.  Some  things,  he  supposes,  are  states  of
mind,  and  others  not.  And  the  attempt  to  define
a  non-mental  thing  (or  "thing"  par  excellence)  as  a
state  of  mind  can  only  lead  to  the  conception  of  some-
thing like  it  which  is  a  state  of  mind — namely,  the
"  mental  picture  "  or  imagination  of  a  boot.

This  consequence,  the  dissolution  of  the  objective
world  into  mere  images  or  illusions,  is  one  of  the
dangers  against  which  materialism  is  very  properly
concerned  to  protest.  But  we  have  already  argued
that  the  distinction  between  two  categories  of  reality,
mind  and  matter,  is  no  real  help. And the danger


ch.  ii  MATTER


93


against  which  the  protest  is  made  may  perhaps  be
removed  or  diminished  by  pointing  out  that  a  con-
fusion is  implied  between  two  senses  in  which  we
commonly  use  the  word  "  thinking."  In  the  first
place,  we  use  the  word  of  real  knowing,  actual  con-
sciousness of  some  real  thing  ;  in  the  second,  of
imagination,  fancy,  dreaming,  or  the  mere  play  of
opinion  as  opposed  to  knowledge.  Now  the  imaginary
boot  belongs  to  the  category  of  thinking  only  in  the
second,  the  inferior,  sense  of  the  word  ;  it  is  not
thought  at  all  as  the  term  is  used  in  philosophy.  The
"  real  "  boot  alone  is  in  this  sense  fully  worthy  of  the
name  thought  ;  it  is  the  embodiment  of  the  boot-
maker's mind  ;  the  "  imaginary  "  boot  is  not  a  thought,
only  a  fancy.  What  is  wrong  with  it  is  not  that  it  is
only  mental,  but  that,  so  to  speak,  it  is  not  mental
enough  ;  just  as  a  cheap  and  superficial  argument  fails
not  because  it  is  mere  logic,  but  because  it  is  not  logical
enough.

In  the  case  of  human  products,  indeed,  we  get
nearer  to  their  reality,  not  further  away,  by  describing
them  as  mental.  A  boot  is  more  adequately  described
in  terms  of  mind — by  saying  who  made  it  and  what  he
made  it  for — than  in  terms  of  matter.  And  in  the  case
of  all  realities  alike,  it  seems  that  the  materialistic
insistence  on  their  objectivity  is  too  strong  ;  for  it  is
not  true  that  we  are  unable  to  alter  or  create  facts,
or  even  that  we  cannot  affect  the  course  of  purely
"  inanimate "  nature.  Materialism,  in  short,  is  right
as  against  those  theories  which  make  the  world  an
illusion  or  a  dream  of  my  own  individual  mind  ;  but
while  it  is  right  to  insist  on  objectivity,  it  goes  too  far
in  describing  the  objective  world  not  only  as  something
different  from,  and  incapable  of  being  created  or
destroyed  by,  my  own  mind,  but  as  something  different
and  aloof  from  mind  in  general.

(c)  It  appears,  then,  that  we  cannot  conceive  matter
without ascribing to it some qualities  of  mind, nor


94  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  ..

mind  without  ascribing  to  it  some  qualities  of  matter.
Matter  cannot  be  subject  to  the  law  of  causation,
because  that  law  itself,  if  our  analysis  can  be  trusted,
breaks  down  under  examination.  Causation  is  pure
passivity,  and  therefore  cannot  exist  except  relatively
to  some  activity.  If  matter  exists,  mind  must  exist
too.  But  we  cannot  conceive  them  as  existing  side  by
side  ;  we  have  already  tried  and  failed  to  do  so.  We
must  think  of  matter  as  active  as  well  as  passive,  and
mind  as  passive  as  well  as  active.  In  one  sense,  then,
everything  is  mind,  for  everything  has  in  some  degree
the  consciousness  and  volition  which  we  described  as
mental.  In  another  sense  everything  is  material  :  for
the  real  world  does  show  that  orderliness  and  objectivity
for  which  materialism  is  fighting.  But  can  we  say  that
everything  is  matter  with  the  same  confidence  with
which  we  can  say  that  everything  is  mind  ?

Only  if  we  bear  in  mind  the  ambiguity  of  the  word.
We  distinguished  three  senses.  In  the  first,  the
colloquial  sense,  all  is  certainly  matter,  for  all  is  real
and  the  possible  object  of  knowledge.  In  the  second
or  scientific  sense,  it  may  be  true  that  everything  is
ultimately  resolvable  into  the  chemical  elements,  and
that  nothing  exists  except  the  matter  of  physics  ;  but
we  cannot  (I  think)  assert  this  at  the  present  stage  of
our  knowledge.  To  ask  whether  mind  is  a  form  of
matter  or  matter  a  form  of  mind  is  very  largely  a
question  of  words.  The  important  thing  is  that  we
should  be  able  to  bring  the  two  into  relation  at  all ;
that  we  should  hold  such  a  conception  of  matter  as
does  not  prevent  us  from  admitting  truth,  morality,
and  life  as  a  whole  to  be  real  facts,  and  that  we  should
hold  such  a  conception  of  mind  as  does  not  reduce  the
world  to  an  illusion  and  experience  to  a  dream.

The  first  of  these  errors  is  that  of  crude  materialism,
and  the  second  that  of  an  equally  crude  idealism.  The
view  for  which  we  are  contending  would  claim  the
title of  idealism rather than materialism, but only


ch.  ii  MATTER  95

because  the  current  conception  of  mind  seems  a  more
adequate  description  of  the  world  than  the  current
conception  of  matter.  We  are  laying  stress  on  the  fact
that  the  world  is  the  place  of  freedom  and  consciousness,
not  of  blind  determinism  ;  and  at  present  this  can  best
be  conveyed  by  saying  that  mind  is  the  one  reality.
On  the  other  hand,  we  do  not  wish  to  exclude,  and
should  indeed  warmly  welcome,  a  higher  materialism
which  could  proceed  on  the  understanding  that  the
world  while  fully  material  was  a  conscious  will  or
society  of  wills,  and  that  its  changes  were  not  caused
but  chosen.  Such  a  view  would  place  matter  neither
above  mind  nor  below  it,  would  make  it  neither  the
eternal  background  nor  the  transitory  instrument  of
spirit.  It  would  regard  matter  as  nothing  else  than
mind  itself  in  its  concrete  existence,  and  mind  as  the
life  and  operation  of  matter.

The  realisation  of  this  higher  materialism  must  wait
till  physics  has  advanced  to  a  fuller  conception  of  the
nature  of  matter.  No  one,  of  course,  can  claim  to
possess  now  the  knowledge  which  that  fuller  conception
would  bring  ;  but  it  may  be  possible  to  discern  the
direction  in  which  progress  is  likely  to  come,  and  this
we  have  attempted  to  do.  The  principle  that  all
matter  is  in  its  degree  a  form  of  life  seems  to  be
continually  suggesting  itself  as  the  solution  of  many
problems  in  modern  science,  and  appears  in  the  most
varied  forms  ;  underlying  both  the  assertion  that
nothing  exists  but  matter  and  the  counter-assertion
that  reality  as  we  know  it  is  not  material  at  all.


CHAPTER III


PERSONALITY


We  found  in  the  last  chapter  that  the  issue  lay  less
between  materialism  and  idealism,  in  the  sense  of
theories  describing  the  world  as  matter  and  mind
respectively,  than  between  the  passivity  which  we  found
to  be  falsely  associated  with  the  idea  of  nature,  and  the
conscious  freedom  of  mind.  The  former  we  found
unsatisfactory  as  an  account  of  the  world,  whether
regarded  from  the  side  of  science  or  that  of  philosophy  ;
physics,  as  well  as  metaphysics,  seeming  only  possible  if
the  notion  of  blind  causality  were  abandoned.

But  if  the  universe  is  a  whole  of  consciousness,  of
activity,  of  something  that  is  at  least  better  described
as  mind  than  as  matter,  in  what  relation  does  each  part
of  it  stand  to  the  other  parts  and  the  whole  ?  Is  every
part  an  independent  and  entirely  individual  mind  (or
piece  of  matter,  if  we  prefer  to  call  it  so),  or  is  there
only  one  mind,  of  which  every  separate  thing  in  the
universe  is  a  fragment  and  no  more  ?

These  two  alternatives  are  generally  known  as
pluralism  and  monism  respectively.  A  thorough-going
pluralism  is  intended  to  preserve  at  all  costs  the  freedom
and  reality  of  the  individual  :  but  it  does  not  tell  us  in
what  relation  the  individual  stands  to  other  individuals ;
indeed,  it  does  not  tell  us  what  in  the  first  place
constitutes  individuality.  For  if  the  human  being  is  an
individual,  what  of  the  atoms  of  which  his  body  is  com-
posed, or  the  many  acts  which  make  up  the  history  of

96


ch.  in  PERSONALITY


97


his  mind  ?  Are  they  not  individuals  also  ?  And  if  so,
how  can  he  be  at  once  a  single  individual  and  a  group
of  individuals  ?

It  is  equally  easy  for  a  thorough-going  monism  to
assert  the  reality  of  the  whole  at  the  expense  of  the
parts  ;  to  deprive  the  human  being  of  all  true  freedom
and  self-existence,  and  to  reduce  him  to  the  position  of
a  mere  incident  in  the  life  of  the  universe.  Of  these
extreme  theories  neither  is  satisfactory;  and  in  the
present  chapter  we  shall  attempt  to  reach  a  less  one-sided
view  of  the  nature  of  personality.

What  constitutes  the  self-identity  of  a  person  ?
What  is  it  that  makes  him  one  ?  And  what,  on  the
other  hand,  is  the  bond  which  makes  a  society  one  ?
Are  these  two  bonds  at  bottom  the  same  ;  that  is,  can
a  mind  be  at  the  same  time  one  person  and  many
persons,  or  is  the  self-identity  of  a  person  one  thing  and
that  of  a  society  something  totally  different  ?

i.  In  order  to  answer  these  questions  we  shall  not
inquire  into  the  abstract  meaning  of  the  word  personality.
Many  people  maintain  that  personality,  in  its  very
meaning,  implies  limitation,  finitude,  imperfection,
distinction  from  other  persons,  and  the  like  ;  and  to
make  or  to  reject  such  assumptions  at  the  outset  would
be  to  beg  the  question  which  we  wish  to  answer.  We
shall  begin  by  examining  the  relations  which  subsist
between  different  persons  as  we  know  them,  in  the  hope
of  thereby  throwing  some  light  on  the  nature  of
personality  itself ;  and  these  relations  are  the  facts  which
we  describe,  on  the  side  of  thought,  as  communication,
and  on  the  side  of  will,  as  co-operation.  For  this
purpose  we  can  define  a  personality  as  this,  if  nothing
more  :  the  unity  of  a  single  consciousness  ;  while  a
society  might  be  defined  as  the  unity  of  different  and
co-operating  consciousnesses.  These  definitions  are
only  provisional  ;  but  more  than  this  we  cannot  say  at
the  present  stage  of  the  inquiry.

(a)  The  fact  of  communication  seems  to  be  that  two

H


98  RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  n

or  more  persons  can  actually  share  the  same  knowledge.
The  condition  is  not  satisfied  by  supposing  that  the  one
has  a  piece  of  knowledge  merely  resembling,  however
closely,  the  knowledge  possessed  by  the  other  ;  the  two
pieces  of  knowledge  must  be  the  same.  There  is  a
theory  of  knowledge  which  maintains  that  what  I  know
is  always  peculiar  to  my  mind,  an  "  idea,"  as  it  is  some-
times called,  not  an  "  object "  ;  a  state  of  my  own
consciousness,  not  an  independently  existing  thing.  If
this  were  the  case,  no  two  people  could  have  the  same
knowledge,  any  more  than  two  objects  can  have  the  same
weight ;  their  weights  might  be  equal,  but  the  weight  of
each  would  be  its  own  weight  and  not  the  other's.  One
thing  cannot  communicate  its  weight  to  another  ;  but
one  mind  can,  as  we  believe,  communicate  its  thoughts
to  another.  If  this  belief  is  true,  knowledge  is  not  a
state  or  attribute  of  my  mind  in  the  sense  in  which
weight  is  an  attribute  of  objects.

But  is  the  belief  really  true  ?  Is  there  such  a  thing
as  this  communication  at  all  ?  Is  it  not  rather  the  case
that  no  two  people  ever  quite  understand  one  another,
or  ever  see  eye  to  eye  ?  Do  not  the  facts  rather  favour
the  view  that  every  one  is  sealed  up  in  a  world  of  his
own  ideas  from  which  there  is  no  egress  and  no  channel
of  communication  into  the  mind  of  any  one  else  ?  There
is  much  truth  in  these  contentions  ;  and  we  may  grant
— at  least  for  the  sake  of  argument — that  no  two  people
ever  quite  understand  one  another,  that  A  never  thinks
in  exactly  the  same  way  as  B.  But  is  the  inference
just,  that  communication  is  impossible  ?  We  may  not
succeed  in  conveying  our  deepest  thoughts  to  each  other,
but  we  continue  to  try  ;  and  if  the  thing  were  an
axiomatic  and  self-evident  impossibility,  how  shall  we
account  for  the  continuance  of  the  attempt  ?  After  all,
a  theory  of  knowledge  must  accept  the  fact  of  know-
ledge as  a  starting-point  ;  and  it  cannot  be  denied  that
partial,  if  not  complete,  communication  is  a  fact.  Nor
can  it  be  argued  that  this  partial  communication,  which


ch.  in  PERSONALITY


99

is  all  we  can  attain,  is  satisfied  by  the  theory  that  my
knowledge  may  resemble  yours  without  being  identical
with  it.  For  however  incomplete  our  communication
may  be,  we  have  before  us  the  ideal  of  complete  com-
munication ;  and  the  very  imperfection  of  our  attainment,
our  consciousness  of  its  imperfection,  proves  that  this
ideal  is  really  our  constant  aim.

We  are  justified,  then,  in  dismissing  these  sceptical
objections  with  the  remark  that,  if  they  were  true,  they
would  falsify  not  only  all  else  but  themselves  ;  for  the
sceptic  cannot  seriously  believe  his  own  contentions  so
long  as  he  tries  to  communicate  his  scepticism  to  us.

The  unity  of  an  individual  was  defined  as  the  unity
of  a  single  consciousness.  But  if  two  people  are
conscious  of  the  same  object,  have  they  not  thereby  the
same  consciousness  ?  We  may  be  answered,  no  ;
because  there  is  more  in  any  act  of  knowing  than  the
mere  object.  The  knowing  mind  (says  the  objector)
does  not,  so  to  speak,  lose  itself  in  the  thing  it  contem-
plates. If  it  did,  then  there  would  be  no  difference
between  my  mind  and  yours  so  far  as  we  were  conscious
of  the  same  thing  ;  but  as  it  is,  knowing  is  a  relation
between  two  things,  the  subject  and  the  object,  the
knowing  mind  and  the  thing  known.  To  forget  the
object  makes  communication  impossible  ;  but  to  forget
the  subject  makes  all  knowledge  impossible.

This  objection  brings  up  one  of  the  most  difficult
problems  in  philosophy,  and  one  which  it  may  seem
both  indiscreet  to  raise  and  presumptuous  even  to  attempt
to  answer  in  brief.  But  the  attempt  must  be  made,  if
we  cannot  hope  to  give  a  very  satisfactory  solution.
To  say  that  the  mind  is  one  thing  and  the  object  another
is  doubtless  true  ;  but  we  cannot  rest  content  with  the
statement.  It  is  true  also  that  the  relation  between
them  is  unique,  and  that  attempts  to  describe  it  by
analogy  with  other  relations  must  always  be  as  misleading
as  they  have  been  in  the  past.  But  it  does  not  follow
that,  because  it  cannot  be  described  by  analogy,  therefore


ioo RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

it  cannot  be  described  at  all  ;  still  less  that  because  it  is
unique  therefore  it  cannot  be  understood.

Even  to  say  that  the  mind  is  one  thing  and  the  object
another  may  mislead.  The  mind  is  specifically  that
which  knows  the  object;  and  to  call  it  a  "thing"
already  suggests  conceiving  it  as  an  object  one  of  whose
qualities  is  that  it  knows  other  objects — as  this  table  is
an  object  one  of  whose  qualities  is  that  it  holds  my
paper — or,  still  worse,  as  a  machine  which  turns  out  a
kind  of  work  called  thinking,  as  a  typewriter  or  a
dynamo  turns  out  its  own  peculiar  product.  The  mind
seems  to  be  not  so  much  that  which  thinks  as  the
thinking  itself;  it  is  not  an  active  thing  so  much  as  an
activity. Its  esse  is  cogitare.

Again,  just  as  the  mind  is  not  a  self-identical  thing
persisting  whether  or  no  it  performs  its  functions,  but
rather  is  those  functions ;  so  the  consciousness  in  which
it  consists  is  not  an  abstract  power  of  thought  which
may  be  turned  to  this  object  or  that,  as  the  current  from
a  dynamo  may  be  put  to  various  uses.  All  conscious-
ness is  the  consciousness  of  something  definite,  the
thought  of  this  thing  or  of  that  thing  ;  there  is  no
thought  in  general  but  only  particular  thoughts  about
particular  things.  The  esse  of  mind  is  not  cogitare
simply,  but  de  hac  re  cogitare.

I  hardly  think  that  any  one  will  deny  all  this  ;  but  it
may  still  be  said  that  though  A's  mind  is  nothing  but
his  consciousness  of  x,  and  B's  mind  nothing  but  his,
yet  A's  mind  and  B's  remain  absolutely  different  and
individual ;  since,  though  the  object  is  the  same  and
each  admittedly  knows  the  object,  A's  thought  of  it  is
distinct  from  the  object  itself  and  therefore  from  B's
thought  of  the  same  object.  It  has  already  been
admitted  that  each  knows  the  same  thing,  but  it  is  now
argued  that  each  knows  it  by  having  a  "  thought  about
it "  which  is  peculiar  to  himself.  I  suspect  this  dis-
tinction between  the  object  and  the  thought  about  it
to  be  an  instance  of  the  confusion  noted  in the  last


CH. Ill


PERSONALITY  101


chapter  between  thinking  in  the  sense  of  knowing  and
thinking  in  the  sense  of  imagining.  My  imagination
of  a  table  is  certainly  a  different  thing  from  the  table
itself,  and  to  identify  the  two  would  be  to  mistake
fancy  for  fact  ;  but  my  knowledge  of  the  table,  my
thought  of  it  in  that  sense,  is  simply  the  table  as  known
to  me,  as  much  of  the  table's  nature  as  I  have  discovered.
In  this  sense,  my  "thought  about"  the  table — what  I
think  the  table  to  be — only  differs  from  the  table  itself
if  and  in  so  far  as  I  am  ignorant  of  the  table's  real
nature.  My  thought  of  the  table  is  certainly  not
something  "  like  "  the  table  ;  it  is  the  table  as  I  know
it.  Similarly,  your  thought  of  the  table  is  what  you
know  of  the  table,  the  table  as  known  to  you  ;  and  if
we  both  have  real  knowledge  of  the  table,  it  seems  to
follow  that  our  thoughts  are  the  same,  not  merely
similar  ;  and  further,  if  the  mind  is  its  thoughts,  we
seem  to  have,  for  this  moment  at  least,  actually  one
mind  ;  we  share  between  us  that  unity  of  consciousness
which  was  said  to  be  the  mark  of  the  individual.1

If  it  is  said  that  the  mark  of  the  individual  is  not  so
much  consciousness  of  an  object  as  self-consciousness,
and  that  each  person's  self-consciousness  is  unique,  this
is  in  one  way,  I  think,  true.  It  is  true  in  the  sense
that  in  all  knowing  I  am  conscious  of  myself  as  knowing,
and  also  in  the  sense  that  I  am  aware  of  my  own
history  as  an  active  and  conscious  being.  But  I  am
not  aware  simply  of  my  own  awareness  in  general,  but

1  I  believe  that  the  argument  I  have  tried  to  express  contains  little  if  anything
which  contradicts  the  principles  of  either  Realism  or  Idealism  in  their  more
satisfactory  forms.  There  is  an  idealism  with  which  I  feel  little  sympathy,  and
there  is  a  so-called  realism  which  seems  to  me  only  distinguishable  from  that
idealism  by  its  attempt  to  evade  its  own  necessary  conclusions.  But  I  do  not  wish
to  appear  as  a  combatant  in  the  battle  between  what  I  believe  to  be  the  better  forms
of  the  theories.  Indeed,  if  they  are  to  be  judged  by  such  works  as  Joachim's
Nature  of  Truth  on  the  one  hand  and  Prichard's  Kant's  Theory  of  Knowledge  and
Carritt's  Theory  of  Beauty  on  the  other,  I  hope  I  have  said  nothing  with  which  both
sides  would  not  to  some  extent  agree  ;  though  I  can  hardly  expect  to  avoid  offending
one  or  other — or  both — by  the  way  in  which  I  put  it.

The  reader  who  has  not  studied  the  latter  works  should  be  warned  that  the
"New  Realism"  criticised  in,  e.g.,  Professor  Watson's  Philosophical  Basis  of  Religion,
pp.  1 1 3- 1 3  5,  has  no,  connexion  with  the  realism  which  they  defend.


102 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  n

of  this  object  as  a  thing  I  am  thinking  about ;  I  may
know  that  I  am  thinking,  but  not  that  I  am  thinking
in  the  abstract  ;  only  that  I  am  thinking  about  this
thing.  Self-consciousness  is  not  in  this  sense,  so  far  as
I  can  see,  distinguishable  from  consciousness  of  reality
in  general.  In  the  other  sense,  self-consciousness
being  taken  as  knowledge  of  myself  as  a  historical
person,  this  knowledge  is  by  no  means  confined  to
myself ;  others  may  in  this  sense  know  me  better  than
I  know  myself.

Another  possible  objection  depends  on  distinguishing
two  elements  in  knowledge,  or  two  senses  in  the  word
knowing.  There  is,  first,  knowledge  in  the  sense  of
what  I  know,  the  object  ;  and  secondly,  there  is  the
activity  of  knowing,  the  effort  which  is  involved  as
much  in  knowing  as  in  anything  else.  Knowledge  as
a  possession — the  things  we  know — may  be  common  to
different  minds,  but,  it  may  be  said,  knowledge  in  the
sense  of  the  activity  of  knowing  is  peculiar  to  the
individual  mind.  It  may  perhaps  be  replied  that  since
knowledge  is  admittedly  an  activity,  an  effort  of  the
will,  there  is  no  difference  between  thinking  and
willing  to  think.  And  if  two  minds  are  identical  in
thinking  the  same  thing,  they  are  equally  and  for  the
same  reason  identical  in  willing  to  think  the  same  thing.
All  knowing  is  the  act  of  knowing,  and  therefore
whatever  is  true  of  thinking  sans  phrase  is  true  of  the
act  or  volition  of  thinking.

But  the  objection  leads  on  to  the  second  part  of  our
subject.  To  distinguish  thought  as  the  consciousness
of  an  object  from  thought  as  an  act  of  the  will  is  to
appeal,  as  basis  for  the  absolute  plurality  between
persons,  from  the  conception  of  knowledge  to  that  of
action  ;  and  with  this  point  we  must  proceed  to  deal.

(F)  Every  person,  like  every  other  fact  in  the  world,
is  unique  and  has  its  own  contribution  to  make  to  the
whole  ;  a  contribution  which  cannot  be  made  by  any
other. This need not be emphasised, and certainly


ch.iii  PERSONALITY  103

cannot  be  questioned.  It  is  as  true  of  the  intellect  as  of
the  will  ;  and  yet  we  found  that  the  statement  "  my
knowledge  is  my  knowledge "  must  not  be  so  inter-
preted as  to  exclude  the  complementary  statement  that
my  knowledge  may  also  be  yours.  This  fact,  the  fact
of  communication,  led  us  to  the  conclusion  that  if  and
when  knowledge  became  in  this  way  common  property,
the  minds  concerned  became  the  same  mind.  But  if
two  people  can  by  communication  share  their  know-
ledge, it  seems  equally  certain  that  they  may  by  co-
operation share  their  aims  and  volitions.  My  actions
are  my  actions ;  but  yet  they  are  not  exclusively  mine.

Just  as  our  intellectual  life  consists  very  largely  of
the  acquisition  of  knowledge  from  one  person  and  the
passing  it  on,  when  we  have  added  what  we  can,  to
others,  so  our  active  life  consists  very  largely  of  working
at  ideals  which  are  the  common  property,  if  not  of  all
mankind,  at  least  of  our  particular  society.  Man  does
not  struggle  with  either  his  intellectual  or  his  moral
problems  in  solitude.  He  receives  each  alike  from  his
environment,  and  in  solving  them  he  is  doing  other
people's  work  as  well  as  his  own.

Now  if  there  is  in  this  sense  co-operation  of  wills,  if
two  or  more  wills  are  bent  on  the  same  object,  what  is
the  consequence  ?

A  will  is  not,  any  more  than  an  intellect,  an  engine
which  produces  certain  results.  We  are  sometimes
tempted  to  think  of  the  will  as  a  central  power-installa-
tion somewhere  in  the  depths  of  our  personality,  which
can  be  connected  up  with  a  pump  or  a  saw  or  any
other  machine  we  may  desire  to  use.  In  this  sense  we
distinguish  the  will  from  the  faculties,  the  one  as  the
motive  power  and  the  other  as  the  machine  which  it
operates.  But  the  will  is  not  simply  crude  energy,
indifferently  applicable  to  this  end  or  to  that.  Will  is
not  only  the  power  of  doing  work  but  the  power  of
choosing  what  work  to  do.  It  is  not  in  need  of  another
faculty  to  direct  and  apply  its  energy. Will  is,  in  short,


104 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS n.n

always  the  will  to  do  this  or  that  :  it  is  always  particular,
never  merely  general.  The  distinction  between  the
will  and  the  things  which  it  does  is  a  quite  abstract
distinction,  like  that  between  human  nature  and  men.
Human  nature  simply  means  the  various  kinds  of  men  ;
and  my  will  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than  the  things
I  do.

We  seem  therefore  to  be  led  to  the  same  conclusion
here  as  in  the  case  of  thought.  If  two  people  will  the
same  thing,  the  personal  distinction  between  them  has
given  way  to  an  identity,  in  virtue  of  which  the  two  can
be  described  as  one  mind.

2.  It  may  be  asked,  if  this  identity  were  ever  really
established  would  it  not  be  in  fact  self-destructive  ?  If
the  distinction  between  the  two  persons  was  absolutely
cancelled,  of  what  elements  would  the  unity  be  com-
posed ?  For  a  unity  that  is  composed  of  no  elements
at  all  cannot  be  anything.  Not  only  does  it  like  Saturn
devour  its  own  children  but  like  the  Kilkenny  cats  it
devours  itself.  In  short,  the  stress  laid  on  the  com-
pleteness of  the  unity  is  fatal  to  the  theory  ;  for  it
turns  the  communion  of  different  minds  into  a  mere
blank  identity  which  is  indistinguishable  from  a  blank
nothingness.

There  are,  I  think,  two  answers  to  this  question.
We  have  already  admitted  elsewhere  that  every  whole
must  be  a  whole  of  parts,  and  that  all  identity  must
therefore  be  an  identity  of  differences.  But  if  we  look
for  the  differences  in  this  identity,  they  appear  in  two
different  ways,  one  from  the  side  of  the  subject  and  one
from  that  of  the  object.

(a)  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  unity  we  have
described  is  a  unity  of  minds.  Its  very  existence
depends  on  the  harmony  between  the  minds  ;  and  if
by  means  of  the  unity  one  mind  ceased  to  exist,  the
possibility  of  the  union  would  vanish  with  it.  For
this  reason  the  identity  of  wills  does  not  result  in  a
Spinozistic  determinism  of  the  one  substance  ;  for  the


ch.  m  PERSONALITY  105

identity  consists  in  the  fact  that  each  wills  the  same  thing  ;
it  is  an  identity  not  existing  as  a  fixed  unchangeable
fact  but  depending  for  its  existence  on  the  continued  harmony
of  the  two  persons.  It  does  not  unite  them  in  spite  of
themselves,  but  because  they  choose  to  be  united.

— Then  the  distinction  is  not  absolutely  cancelled,
if  the  parties  are  free  to  dissolve  it  ;  and  if  so,  they
retain  their  exclusive  individuality  all  the  time. — This
looks  unanswerable  at  first  sight ;  but  I  think  that  it  is
really  a  quibble.  The  argument  involved  is,  that  if  a
mind  or  society  is  capable  of  becoming  something,  that
proves  that  it  really  is  that  something  all  the  time.
This  seems  to  me  to  imply  principles  and  consequences
which  I  cannot  accept.  Because  a  good  man  may  some
day  forget  himself  and  commit  a  crime,  that  proves
(says  the  argument)  that  he  was  not  really  good  at  all  :
it  shows  that  he  had  in  him  the  germ  of  the  crime.
Undoubtedly  he  had,  if  by  the  germ  is  meant  the
freedom  of  will  which  makes  crime  possible  ;  but  to
describe  that  as  a  germ  of  crime  is  most  misleading,
since  the  same  thing  is  equally  the  germ  of  virtue.  If
by  "  germ  "  is  meant  any  more  than  this — if  it  means
a  tendency  which  irresistibly  grows  into  crime — then
one  must  boldly  reply  that  minds  are  not  made  like
that  ;  what  they  do,  they  do  not  in  virtue  of  irresistible
"  tendencies  "  but  because  they  choose  to  do  it.

So  we  should  admit  that  because  of  its  freedom  a
mind  may  forfeit  the  unity,  whether  with  itself  or
another,  to  which  it  has  attained.  But  that  does  not
mean  that  it  never  attained  it.  For  all  the  conquests
of  mind  are  made  and  held  by  its  own  freedom,  held  no
longer  than  it  has  the  strength  to  hold  them  ;  and  it
can  only  lose  this  strength  by  its  own  self-betrayal.

(F)  The  identity  also  includes  differences  from  the
side  of  the  object.  If  the  object  of  the  two  minds
was  an  abstract,  undifferentiated  one,  then  the  two
minds  would  also  be  a  blank  unity  without  difference.
But  this  is  not  the  case,  for  such  an  undifferentiated


106 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

unity  nowhere  exists.  In  a  sense,  no  two  people  ever
do,  or  ever  could,  think  or  will  exactly  the  same  thing.
This  is  not  because  unity  is  impossible  ;  it  is  not
because  under  the  conditions  of  this  imperfect  world
we  can  never  get  more  than  an  approximation  to  it.
If  an  ideal  were  not  fully  attainable  by  us  here  and  now
it  would  not  be  a  valid  ideal  for  us  here  and  now.
There  is  never  an  obligation  to  achieve  the  impossible.

Any  truth  or  ideal  of  conduct  expresses  itself  under
infinitely  various  aspects.  A  single  truth  never  means
quite  the  same  thing  to  different  minds  ;  each  person
invests  it  with  an  emphasis,  an  application,  peculiar  to
himself.  This  does  not  mean  that  it  is  not  the  same
truth  ;  the  difference  does  not  destroy  the  identity  any
more  than  identity  destroys  difference.  It  is  only  in
the  identity  that  the  differences  arise.

The  same  is  true  of  conduct.  My  own  duties  are
the  duties  dictated  by  my  situation  ;  no  one  else  is
in  precisely  my  situation  and  therefore  no  one  else  can
have  the  same  duties.  And  for  the  same  reason  no  one
else  can  have  exactly  my  desires.  But  there  is  a  com-
munity of  aims  ;  and  this  community  is  not  the  barren
transmission  of  unchanging  ideals,  good  or  bad,  in
which  social  life  is  sometimes  thought  to  consist,  nor
yet  the  equally  abstract  identity  of  the  categorical
imperative,  which  only  applies  to  everybody  and  every
situation  because  it  abstracts  from  all  the  intricacies  of  real
life.  The  community  of  aims  consists  in  the  fact  that
what  I  want  is  something  which  I  cannot  have  except
with  your  help  and  that  of  every  one  else.  The  object
ot  my  desire  is  one  part  of  a  whole  which  can  only
exist  if  the  other  parts  exist  :  or,  if  that  way  of  putting
it  is  preferred,  I  desire  the  existence  of  a  whole  to
which  I  can  only  contribute  one  among  many  parts.
The  other  parts  must  be  contributed  by  other  people  ;
and  therefore  in  willing  my  part  1  will  theirs  also.

3.  The  unity  whose  possibility  we  are  concerned
to prove  is  the  fully concrete  identification,  by  their


ch.  in  PERSONALITY  107

own  free  activity,  of  two  or  more  personalities.  This
is  not  a  universal  condition,  but  an  ideal  ;  it  is  the
goal,  not  the  starting-point,  of  human  endeavour.
But  every  real  advance  is  like  the  spiral  tunnel  of
an  Alpine  railway  ;  it  ends,  if  not  where  it  began,  at
least  immediately  above  it.  The  end  is  not  the
antithesis  of  the  beginning,  but  the  same  thing  raised
to  a  higher  power.  The  end  is  a  unity,  and  the
beginning  is  also  a  unity  ;  but  they  are  not  the  same
unity.  There  is  one  perfectly  concrete  identity  which
consists  in  the  highest  degree  of  co-operation  and  the
freest  interchange  of  activities,  and  is  destroyed  when
these  fail  :  and  there  is  another,  an  abstract,  irreducible
and  indefeasible  identity  or  union  which  subsists
between  any  two  parts  of  the  same  whole,  and  must
continue  to  subsist  as  long  as  they  remain  parts.  The
whole,  in  each  case  alike,  may  equally  be  a  society  or  a
single  person.  We  cannot  maintain  that  a  person  is
simply  a  necessary,  indefeasible  unity  of  those  things
which  constitute  his  character,  while  a  society  is  entirely
dependent  for  its  unity  on  the  positive  and  conscious
co-operation  of  its  members,  failing  which  it  is  no
longer  a  society  at  all.  A  person  is  undoubtedly  him-
self, and  can  never  help  being  himself,  whatever  he
does  ;  but  this  merely  abstract  unity,  this  bare
minimum  of  self-identity,  is  much  less  than  what  we
usually  call  his  character  or  personality.  That  is  rather
constituted  by  the  definite  and  concrete  system  of  his
various  activities  or  habits.  When  we  say,  "  I  know
his  character,  I  am  sure  he  will  do  this  and  not  that,"
we  mean  that  there  is  this  systematic  relation  1  between
the  different  things  he  does,  so  that  we  can  argue  from
one  of  them  to  the  others  ;  that  the  connexion  between
his  various  actions  is  not  the  purely  abstract  connexion
that  they  happen  all  to  have  been  done  by  the  same
person. If there were no more than this abstract

1 Not  deterministic,  because  dependent  foi its  very  existence,  as  we  said  above,
on  his  will  ;  and  therefore  capable  of  being  infringed  by  his  will.


108 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  u

unity,  we  could  not  say  that  a  man  had  any  positive
"  character"  at  all.  To  say  "  he  is  not  himself  to-day  '
appears,  if  we  hold  to  the  purely  abstract  sense  of
"  self,"  merely  ridiculous  ;  but  in  the  concrete  sense
of  "  self,"  the  sense  in  which  the  self  is  conceived  as  a
co-operating  unity  of  purpose,  it  has  a  perfectly  real
meaning.

The  same  distinction  applies  to  the  unity  of  a
society.  In  one  sense,  any  kind  of  relation  between
two  people  produces  a  kind  of  social  union  and
identification  ;  in  another  sense,  only  the  right  kind  of
relation  unifies  them,  and  a  different  relation  would
destroy  the  unity.  In  the  first  case,  their  union  is
what  I  call  the  purely  abstract  unity  ;  in  the  latter,  it
is  the  concrete  unity  that  has  to  be  maintained  by
positive  and  harmonious  activity.  We  cannot  there-
fore say  that,  of  these  two  kinds  of  unity,  one  is  the
kind  proper  to  a  person,  and  the  other  the  kind
proper  to  a  society  ;  for  each  alike  may  apply  to
either.  But,  having  examined  the  nature  of  the  con-
crete unity,  it  is  necessary  that  we  should  also  examine,
and  indeed  demonstrate  the  existence  of,  this  abstract
unity.

(a)  But  is  unity  the  same  as  identity  ?  There  seems
at  first  sight  to  be  a  very  decided  difference  between
saying  that  two  things  are  part  of  the  same  whole,
and  saying  that  they  are  the  same  thing  ;  the  parts  of
one  thing  seem  to  be  themselves  quite  separate  and
self-existent  things,  possibly  depending  on  each  other,
but  each  being  what  it  is  itself,  and  not  the  others  ;
while  the  whole  is  simply  their  sum.

We  have  already  expressed  doubts  as  to  the  strict
truth  of  this  conception.  We  said  in  the  last  chapter
that  if  a  whole  was  to  be  knowable,  it  must  be  of
such  a  kind  that  the  parts  are  not  simply  added  in
series  to  one  another,  but  interconnected  in  such  a  way
that  we  can  somehow  say  that  each  part  is  the  whole.
In  that  case  each  part  would also  be in  a sense  the


ch.  in  PERSONALITY


109


others.  At  the  time  this  may  have  seemed  highly
fanciful,  if  not  a  counsel  of  despair.  What  right,  it
will  be  asked,  have  we  to  lay  down  a  priori  what  must
be  the  nature  of  reality  merely  on  the  ground  that
if  it  is  not  thus,  it  is  not  knowable  ?  How  do  we
know  that  reality  is  knowable  ?  And  even  if  we  are
assured  on  that  point,  and  legitimately  assured,  is  it
not  a  monstrous  inversion  of  the  true  order  to  argue
from  knowability  to  reality  ?

I  am  not  sure  that  it  is.  Knowledge  is  as  much  a
fact  as  any  other  ;  and  if  the  business  of  a  sound
theory  is  to  account  for  the  facts,  a  theory  which  does
not  admit  of  the  world's  being  completely  known  is,
to  say  the  least  of  it,  incomplete.  The  modern
impatience  with  such  forms  of  argument  may  be
partly  based  on  their  connexion  with  false  theories
of  what  knowability  means,  but  it  is  certainly  due  in
part  to  the  prejudice  that  the  facts  of  the  external
world  are  certain,  while  the  nature  of  knowledge  and
the  processes  of  mind  are  unknown  ;  so  that  to  argue
to  the  nature  of  the  real  world  from  the  nature  of  the
mind  is  arguing  from  the  unknown  to  the  known,
attempting  to  lay  down  by  insecure  deductions  from
a  discredited  metaphysic  things  which  could  be  easily
ascertained  by  appealing  to  the  natural  sciences.  This
"  positivistic  "  attitude  is  lamentably  self- contradictory  ;
for  if  we  are  not  to  believe  in  the  full  knowability  of
the  world,  what  becomes  of  the  facts  of  science  ?  And
if  we  are,  why  should  we  hush  the  matter  up  ?  We
cannot  pretend  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  knowing
while  we  claim  that  science  gives  us  real  knowledge
and  philosophy  only  a  sham.

I  think  therefore  that  we  need  not  retract  the
argument.  But  as  it  stood  it  was  incomplete  ;  for
it  merely  sketched  the  conditions  of  a  satisfactory
view  of  the  relation  of  the  whole  to  its  parts,  without
explaining  how  they  can  be  fulfilled.

Let  us  take  as  an  instance  any  whole  consisting  of


no RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS


PT. II


three  parts,  x>  jy,  z.  It  makes  no  difference  whether
it  is  a  machine  with  three  working  parts,  a  society  of
three  members,  a  stanza  of  three  lines,  or  a  syllogism
containing  three  propositions.  Each  part  has  its  own
nature,  its  own  individuality,  which  is  in  the  strictest
sense  unique  ;  and  apart  from  the  contribution  made
by  each  several  element  the  whole  would  not  exist.
Change  one  part,  and  the  whole  becomes  a  different
whole.  Not  only  does  the  whole  change,  but  the
apparently  unchanged  parts  change  too.  Substitute,
in  a  tragic  stanza,  a  grotesque  last  word,  and  the
opening  lines  become  suddenly  instinct  with  ridiculous
possibilities.  Substitute  in  the  society  a  new  third
man,  and  not  only  is  it  now  a  different  society  but  the
social  value  and  function  of  the  unchanged  members  is
altered.

On  the  other  hand,  the  part  that  is  removed  is  no
longer  what  it  was.  A  man  may  resign  his  place  in
a  society  because  he  feels  that  he  is  no  longer  what  the
society  requires  him  to  be ;  and  in  that  case  his
resignation  gives  him  a  new  freedom.  If  he  leaves
it  with  no  such  reason,  his  personality  is  mutilated  by
the  separation ;  one  side  of  his  character  is  cut  off
and  frustrated.  The  separation  of  the  part  from  the
whole  destroys  part  and  whole  alike.  The  part  survives
only  as  something  different  from  what  it  was  ;  it  has
to  readjust  itself,  if  it  can,  and  become  something  else.
If  it  cannot  do  this,  it  dies  outright.  The  whole  must
in  the  same  way  readjust  itself  to  the  new  conditions
and  become  a  different  whole  : otherwise  it  also  dies.

It  follows  from  this  closeness  of  interconnexion
between  the  whole  and  its  parts  that  the  question
"  what  is  #?'  cannot  be  answered  merely  by  saying
"  x  is  x."  X  only  exists  as  x  in  relation  to  y  and  z.
If  y  or  z  were  removed,  x  would  no  longer  be  what
it  was  :  it  would  have  to  become  something  else,  or
failing  that,  cease  to  exist  at  all.  Consequently  if  we
ask  for  a  definition  or  description  of  x  the only  true


CH. Ill


PERSONALITY  1 1 1


reply  is  to  describe  it  in  its  full  relations  with  y  and  z.
That  is  to  say,  a  definition  of  x  can  only  take  the
form  of  a  definition  of  the  whole  system  xyz.  To
explain  the  nature  of  the  part  we  have  to  explain  the
nature  of  the  whole  ;  there  seems  to  be  no  distinction
between  the  part  and  the  whole,  except  that  the  part
is  the  whole  under  one  particular  aspect,  seen  as  it
were  from  one  point  of  view.  In  the  same  way  and  in
the  same  sense  y  and  z  are  identical  each  with  the
whole  and  with  each  other  and  x.  Each  part  is  the
whole,  and  each  part  is  all  the  other  parts.

A  distinction  is  sometimes  drawn  which  avoids  this
conclusion.  There  is,  we  are  told,  a  difference  between
what  a  thing  is  in  itself  and  what  it  is  in  relation  to  its
context  or  to  the  whole  of  which  it  is  a  part.  X  as  a
thing  in  itself  remains  (it  is  said)  the  same  :  it  is  only
its  relations  with  other  things  that  change,  and  these
are  merely  external,  and  do  not  affect  its  real  nature.
It  is  true  that  nothing  is  really  destroyed  by  depriving
it  of  its  context.  But  this  is  only  because  we  cannot
deprive  it  of  all  context.  A  lintel  taken  out  of  its
place  in  a  house  and  laid  on  the  ground  has  a  context,
though  not  an  architectural  context  :  and  Robinson
Crusoe  in  his  solitude  has  a  perfectly  definite  environ-
ment, though  not  a  human  environment.  However
much  we  try  to  remove  all  context  from  a  thing,  we
can  do  no  more  than  to  invest  the  thing  with  a
different  context.  Indeed,  there  is  a  sense  in  which  we
may  still  call  the  stone  a  lintel  and  Robinson  Crusoe
the  member  of  a  human  society  ;  for  the  history  of  a
thing  in  the  past  and  its  capabilities  for  the  future  are
as  real  as  its  present  situation,  though  in  a  different
way.  The  isolated  stone  lying  on  the  ground  may
still  be  called  a  lintel  ;  but  this  is  so  only  on  account
of  the  house  from  which  it  came  (strictly,  it  is  a
stone  that  was  a  lintel),  or  into  which  it  will  be
built  (it  is  a  stone  that  will  be  a  lintel),  or  even  be-
cause of  the  imaginary  house  which  we  can,  so  to  speak,


ii2 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS


PT. II


construct  round  it  now  (it  is  a  stone  that  might  be  a
lintel).

The  character  or  self  of  a  thing,  what  it  is,  cannot
be  distinguished  from  its  relations.  Architecturally,  the
stone  is  a  lintel  ;  that  is  its  own  character.  But  this
character  only  consists  in  the  fact  that  it  stands  in  a
certain  relation  to  other  stones  which  together  with  it
make  up  the  doorway.  Geologically,  the  description  of
the  stone  is  identical  with  the  description  of  its  place  in
the  geological  series.  Every  characteristic  of  the  thing
turns  out  to  consist  in  a  relation  in  which  it  stands  to
something  else  ;  and  similarly,  if  we  began  at  the  other
end  we  should  find  that  every  relation  consists  in  a
quality  of  the  thing  itself.  This  double  movement  is
only  not  a  vicious  circle  because,  of  the  two  things
which  thus  turn  into  one  another,  each  is  already
identical  with  the  other.

The  inner  nature  of  the  part  x,  then,  is  entirely  con-
stituted by  its  relations  to  y  and  z.  And  therefore  x
is  simply  one  way  of  looking  at  the  whole  xyz  ;  and
y  and  z  are  other  aspects  of  the  same  whole.  The
part  is  not  added  to  other  parts  in  order  to  make
the  whole:  it  is  already  in  itself  the  whole,  and  the
whole  has  other  parts  only  in  the  sense  that  it  can
be  looked  at  from  other  points  of  view,  seen  in  other
aspects.  But  in  each  aspect  the  whole  is  entirely
present.

If  we  take  the  case  of  a  musical  duet,  we  have  a
whole  which  is  analysable  into  two  parts.  At  first
sight,  we  might  be  tempted  to  describe  the  relation
between  them  in  some  such  way  as  this  :  there  are  two
separate  things,  two  musical  compositions,  one  called  the
treble  and  the  other  the  bass.  Each  is  an  independent
reality,  has  a  tune  of  its  own,  and  can  be  played
separately.  On  the  other  hand,  they  are  so  arranged
that  they  can  also  be  played  both  at  once  ;  and  when
this  happens,  they  produce  an  aesthetic  value  greater
than  either  can  produce  by  itself. The  whole  is  the


ch.iii  PERSONALITY  113

sum  of  its  parts  ;  and  the  parts  in  combination  remain
exactly  what  they  were  before.

This  description  seems  at  first  sight  reasonable  ;  and
it  is  familiar  as  underlying,  for  instance,  the  Wagnerian
view  of  opera.  If  you  take  two  arts  and  add  them
together — so  that  view  runs — you  produce  a  new  art
twice  as  great  as  either.

But  is  the  aesthetic  value  of  a  duet  really  equal  to
the  sum  of  the  values  of  its  parts  played  separately  ?
No  such  thing.  The  query  of  one  instrument  may
indeed  be  in  itself  a  beautiful  phrase,  independently  of
the  answer  given  by  the  other  ;  but  as  seen  in  relation
to  that  answer  it  acquires  a  totally  different  emphasis,
a  meaning  which  we  never  suspected.  The  accompani-
ment part,  or  even  the  solo  part,  played  by  itself,  is
simply  not  the  same  thing  that  it  is  when  played  in  its
proper  relation  to  the  other.  It  is  this  relation  between
the  two  that  constitutes  the  duet.  The  performers  are
not  doing  two  different  things,  which  combine  as  if
by  magic  to  make  a  harmonious  whole  ;  they  are  co-
operating to  produce  one  and  the  same  thing,  a  thing
not  in  any  sense  divisible  into  parts  ;  for  the  "  thing  "
itself  is  only  a  relation,  an  interchange,  a  balance  between
the  elements  which  at  first  we  mistook  for  its  parts.
The  notes  played  by  the  piano  are  not  the  same  notes
as  those  played  by  the  violin  ;  and  if  the  duet  was  a
merely  physical  fact,  we  could  divide  it  into  these  two
elements.  But  the  duet  is  an  aesthetic,  not  a  physical
whole.  It  consists  not  of  atmospheric  disturbances,
which  could  be  divided,  but  of  a  harmony  between
sounds,  and  a  harmony  cannot  be  divided  into  the
sounds  between  which  it  subsists.

The  same  is  true  of  any  really  organic  whole.  A
scene  of  Shakspere  can  be  regarded  as  so  much  "  words,
words,  words,"  and,  when  so  regarded,  it  can  be  divided
into  what  Hamlet  says  and  what  Polonius  says.  But
the  real  scene  is  not  mere  words  ;  it  is  the  interplay
of  two  characters. It  is  one  thing,  not  two. To  sub-

1


1 14 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS „.  n

divide  it  would  be  not  to  halve  but  to  destroy  its  value.
Even  a  baby  can  be  cut  in  two,  if  it  is  regarded  as  a
mere  piece  of  flesh  ;  but  the  resulting  portions  would
be  the  halves  not  of  a  baby  but  of  a  corpse.

A  unity  of  this  kind  exists  not  only  in  harmonious
and  fully  co-operative  wholes,  but  equally  in  everything
that  can  be  called  a  whole  at  all.  Whatever  the  par-
ticular relation  in  which  x  stands  to  y  and  z,  it  is  still
true  that  each  part  is  but  an  aspect  of  the  whole  and
identical  with  the  other  parts.  X,  jy,  and  z  may  be
parties  to  a  quarrel  ;  but  they  are  in  that  case  just  as
much  parts  of  the  same  whole,  just  as  closely  identified
with  one  another,  as  if  they  were  allies  in  a  common
cause.  This  kind  of  identity,  therefore,  is  to  be  sharply
distinguished  from  the  contingent  unity,  the  unity  of
co-operation,  which  we  described  at  the  beginning  of
this  chapter.  Upon  this  distinction  turns  the  whole
argument  of  this  and  the  succeeding  chapters.

(£)  The  universal  and  necessary  identity,  the  abstract
identity  of  mere  co-existence,  is  often  taken  as  supplying
the  key  to  all  the  difficulties  with  which  the  religious
or  philosophical  mind  feels  itself  beset  when  it  deals
with  the  problem  of  personality.  All  personalities  are
components  of  a  whole,  the  universe  ;  and  therefore,  by
the  above  argument,  they  are  all  necessarily  identified
with  each  other  and  the  whole,  that  is,  with  the
universe  considered  as  homogeneous  with  them,  an
absolute  mind,  God.  The  line  of  thought  seems  to  be
simple  and  impossible  to  refute  :  and  if  this  is  really
so,  it  establishes  at  a  blow  the  existence  of  God  and  his
perfect  immanence  in  humanity,  and  leaves  nothing
more  to  be  achieved  or  desired.

To  reject  such  an  argument  altogether  would
certainly  be  a  mistake.  It  is  true  that,  whether  we  like
it  or  not,  whether  we  live  up  to  our  position  or  deny
our  responsibilities,  we  are  so  intimately  connected  with
each  other  and  the  divine  mind  that  no  act  concerns  the
doer  alone. This  assumption  is  fundamental. But  the


ch.  in  PERSONALITY  115

error  lies  in  mistaking  this  fundamental  assumption  for
the  final  conclusion  ;  in  assuming  that  this  elementary,
abstract  unity  is  the  only  one  which  concerns  us.  In
point  of  fact,  it  concerns  us,  if  at  all,  certainly  in  the
very  lowest  possible  degree.  In  practical  matters,  a
constant  which  is  always  present  and  can  never  be
altered  is  best  ignored  ;  and  indeed  this  purely  abstract
identity  is  so  shadowy  a  thing  that  it  is  hard  to  see
what  else  to  do.  To  call  this  formless  and  empty
abstraction  "the  Absolute"  is  merely  to  abuse  language ;
and  to  suppose  that  this  is  all  philosophy  has  to  offer
in  place  of  the  concrete  God  of  religion  is  completely
to  misunderstand  the  nature  and  aim  of  philosophy.
There  have  been  and  no  doubt  still  are  people  who
claim  the  title  of  philosophers  on  the  ground  that  they
habitually  amuse  themselves  with  abstractions  of  this
kind.  But  it  is  a  pity  that  their  claims  have  been  and
still  are  taken  seriously.

The  Absolute,  as  that  word  is  used  by  any  philo-
sophy worthy  of  the  name,  is  not  a  label  for  the  bare
residuum,  blank  existence,  which  is  left  when  all  dis-
crepancies have  been  ignored  and  all  irregularities  planed
away.  An  arbitrary  smoothing-down  of  the  world's
wrinkled  crust  is  not  philosophy,  but  the  vice  against
which  all  philosophy  wages  an  unceasing  war.  A  real
philosophy  builds  its  Absolute  (for  every  philosophy
has  an  Absolute)  out  of  the  differences  of  the  world  as
it  finds  them,  dealing  individually  with  all  contradictions
and  preserving  every  detail  that  can  lend  character  to
the  whole.

Here  as  elsewhere  the  instinct  of  religion  is  the
deliberate  procedure  of  philosophy  at  its  best.  When
religion  demands  a  personal  God,  a  God  who  has  a
definite  character  of  his  own  and  can,  as  the  phrase
goes,  take  sides  in  the  battles  of  the  world,  it  is  really
asserting  the  necessity  for  this  concrete  characterised
Absolute,  as  against  a  sham  "  philosophy,"  the  philo-
sophy of  abstractions,  which  assures  it  that  since  God


n6 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  n

is  all,  he  cannot  have  any  one  attribute  rather  than  its
opposite ;  that  since  he  is  infinite,  he  cannot  be  a
person  ;  that  since  he  is  the  strength  of  both  sides,  the
slayer  and  the  slain,  he  cannot  himself  fight  on  either
side.  In  the  Absolute,  we  are  told,  all  contradictions
are  resolved,  and  therefore  all  distinctions  vanish ;  good
and  evil  are  no  more,  for  that  of  which  each  is  a
manifestation  cannot  itself  be  either.  A  personal  God,
creating  the  world  and  sustaining  it  by  the  might  of
his  will,  is  a  mythological  fiction.  A  God  who  is  in
any  sense  transcendent  and  not  purely  immanent  is
inconceivable,  and  even  imaginable  only  to  the  half-
savage  mind  which  anthropomorphises  everything  it
does  not  immediately  understand.

So  "  philosophy  "  browbeats  common  sense  till  the
latter  for  very  shame  yields  the  point  ;  tries  to  recast
its  religion,  if  it  still  ventures  to  have  one,  on  lines  of
pure  immanence,  and  if  it  cannot  make  the  immanent
God  seem  as  real  and  vivid  as  the  transcendent,  humbly
puts  the  failure  down  to  its  own  philosophical  short-
comings. For  "philosophy"  has  assured  it  that  Reality,
properly  faced  and  understood,  will  more  than  console
it  for  its  lost  fairyland.  There  is  little  ground  for
surprise  if  after  such  experiences  religion  hates  and
despises  the  very  name  of  philosophy.  The  formless
and  empty  Absolute  of  this  abstract  metaphysic  perished
long  ago  in  the  fire  of  Hegel's  sarcasm  ;  and  it  is  curious
to  find  the  very  same  pseudo-Absolute,  the  "  night  in
which  all  cows  are  black,"  still  regarded  as  being  for
good  or  evil  the  essence  of  philosophical  thought.

(c)  It  is  time  to  leave  these  abstractions  and  turn  to
the  other  kind  of  identity,  the  concrete  identity  of
activity.  A  mind  is  self-identical  in  this  sense  if  it
thinks  and  wills  the  same  things  constantly  ;  it  is  identical
with  another,  if  it  thinks  and  wills  the  same  things  as
that  other.  This  might  seem  to  imply  that  in  the  first
case  there  was  no  possibility  of  change  or  process  within
the  limits  of  the  self-identity  ;  and  in  the  second  case


ch.  in  PERSONALITY  1 1 7

that  the  personal  distinction  between  the  two  minds  was
reduced  to  a  mere  illusion.  But,  (i.)  so  far  is  it  from
being  true  that  a  thing  to  be  self-identical  must  not
change,  the  very  fact  of  change  proves  its  continued
identity ;  for  only  a  thing  which  is  still  itself  can  be  said
to  have  changed.  This  however  is  abstract  identity  only,
and  it  might  be  imagined  that  concrete  identity  was  not
compatible  with  change.  But  this  is  a  mistake.  It  is
the  property  of  truth  to  present  itself  under  the  aspect
of  innumerable  differences  ;  and  yet  within  these  differ-
ences it  is  still  one.  If  we  reflect  upon  some  particular
fict,  we  can  see  it  take  under  our  eyes  a  hundred  different
forms,  emphases,  shades  of  meaning.  In  following  out
this  process,  it  does  in  a  quite  concrete  sense  change  ;
and  the  thinking  of  this  change  is  a  real  mental  process,
in  the  only  sense  in  which  any  thought  can  bear  that
name,  (ii.)  The  identity  of  two  minds  which  think  the
same  thing  does,  as  we  have  already  seen,  in  one  sense
abolish  the  difference  between  them  ;  but  this  very
abolition  is  only  possible  through  the  free  and  independent
activity  of  each  separate  mind.  Difference  is  not  simply
absent  ;  it  is  overcome.

Now  these  two  cases  are  typical  first  of  the  self-
identity  of  God,  and  secondly  of  his  identity  with  the
human  mind.  God  is  not  a  mere  abstract  unity  ;  he  is
a  mind,  and  as  such  he  can  possess  the  higher  unity  of
self-consistency.  This  attribute  must  necessarily  belong
to  him  if  we  are  right  in  regarding  him  as  omniscient
and  perfectly  good.  An  omniscient  mind  is  one  whose
beliefs  are  never  false,  and  whose  field  of  knowledge  is
not  limited  by  any  ignorance.  This  is  the  only  type  of
mind  which  can  be  described  as  entirely  consistent  with
itself.  Any  false  belief,  introduced  into  a  system  of
judgments  otherwise  true,  must  breed  contradiction;  for
its  implications  cannot  be  developed  to  infinity  without
coming  into  conflict  with  some  other  belief.  Again,
any  limitation,  any  gap  in  one's  knowledge,  may  have
the  same  result  ; for  different truths often seem to


n8 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  .,

conflict  until  new  knowledge  explains  them  both  and
shows  them  to  be  harmonious.  But  two  truths  can  never
in  reality  contradict  one  another,  and  therefore  a  mind
which  believed  all  truths  would  have  within  itself  no
contradiction  at  all.

In  the  same  way,  we  can  conceive  a  mind  which
willed,  not  indeed  all  the  actions,  but  all  the  good  actions
in  existence.  Of  the  different  actions  in  the  world,
some  are  in  antagonism  to  others,  and  therefore  it  is
impossible  for  a  mind  to  will  both  except  at  the  cost  of
losing  its  concrete  unity,  its  own  positive  nature,  and
becoming  a  formless  something  indistinguishable  from
nothing.  A  mind  which  willed  all  the  good  in  existence
would  display  this  concrete  unity  to  the  full ;  for  two
duties,  two  good  things,  can  no  more  conflict  than  two
true  things.

Each  of  these  conflicts  does  often  seem  to  take  place.
Two  statements  which  contradict  each  other  do  very
often  seem  to  be,  each  from  its  own  point  of  view  and
within  its  own  limitations,  true.  And  two  people  who
are  supporting  opposed  causes  may  seem  to  be  both  in
the  right.  But  in  the  former  case  we  know  that  the
conflict  is  only  apparent ;  that  if  each  disputant  under-
stood the  other,  it  would  in  so  far  as  each  is  right
disappear.  And  similarly  in  the  other  case,  though  the
fact  is  not  such  a  universally  recognised  axiom  in  ethics
as  the  "  law  of  contradiction  "  is  in  logic,  it  is  true  that
of  the  two  opponents  one,  or  possibly  both,  must  be  in
the  wrong  ;  or,  if  that  is  not  the  case,  the  opposition
between  them  must  be  illusory.  Good  is  self-consistent
just  as  truth  is  ;  and  just  as  a  mind  which  believes  all
truth  is  supremely  self-consistent  and  self-identical,  so
it  is  with  a  mind  which  wills  all  good.

Further,  this  divine  mind  will  become  one  with  all
other  minds  so  far  as  they  share  its  thought  and  volition ;
so  far,  that  is,  as  they  know  any  truth  or  will  any  good.
And  this  unity  between  the  two  is  not  the  merely
abstract  identity  of  co-existence,  but  the  concrete  identity


ch.  in  PERSONALITY  n9

of  co-operation.  The  abstract  unity  would  remain  even
in  the  case  of  a  mind  which  (if  that  be  possible)  knew
nothing  true  and  did  nothing  right.  There  is  a  sense
in  which  whether  we  will  it  or  not  we  are  indissolubly,
by  our  very  existence,  one  with  God  ;  that  bond  it  is
not  in  our  power  to  break.  But  the  highest  and  most
real  identity  with  him  we  can  only  possess  in  the  know-
ledge of  truth  and  the  pursuit  of  goodness.

Thus  God  is  at  once  immanent  and  transcendent  ;
and  man  can  be  regarded  as,  on  the  one  hand,  a  part  of
the  universal  divine  spirit,  and  on  the  other,  as  a  person
separate  from  God  and  capable  of  opposition  to  him.
God  is  immanent  because  all  human  knowledge  and
goodness  are  the  very  indwelling  of  his  spirit  in  the
mind  of  man  ;  transcendent  because,  whether  or  not
man  attains  to  these  things,  God  has  attained  to  them  ;
his  being  does  not  depend  upon  the  success  of  human
endeavour.

Such  a  mind  as  this,  omniscient  and  perfectly  good,
is  conceivable  ;  but  the  conception  may  be  called  a  mere
hypothesis.  I  think  it  is  more  than  this.  Every  good
man,  and  every  seeker  after  truth,  is  really,  even  if
unconsciously,  co-operating  with  every  other  in  the  ideal
of  a  complete  science  or  a  perfect  world  ;  and  if  co-
operating, then  identified  with  the  other  and  with  an
all-embracing  purpose  of  perfection.  There  really  is
such  a  purpose,  which  lives  in  the  lives  of  all  good  men
wherever  they  are  found,  and  unifies  them  all  into  a  life
of  its  own.  This  is  God  immanent  ;  and  it  is  no  mere
hypothesis.  Is  it  equally  certain  that  he  also  exists  as
transcendent,  or  does  that  remain  a  hypothesis,  incapable
of  proof?  Is  God  only  existent  as  a  spirit  in  our  hearts,
or  is  he  also  a  real  person  with  a  life  of  his  own,  whether
we  know  him  or  not  ?

The  difficulty  of  answering  this  question  is  bound  up
with  a  well-known  philosophical  puzzle,  the  puzzle  of
how  to  prove  the  existence  of  anything  except  as  present
to  the  mind. If  it  is  true  that  things  cease  to  exist  when


120 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS „.  i,

we  are  not  thinking  of  them,  and  that  the  people  whom
we  generally  suppose  to  be  real  independently  of  our
dealings  with  them  exist  only  as  and  when  we  are  con-
scious of  them,  then  it  follows  by  the  same  argument
that  God  is  immanent  only,  and  exists  nowhere  but  in
the  minds  of  men.  But  we  cannot  really  believe  that
these  things  are  so.  And  to  suppose  that  the  spirit  of
goodness  of  which  we  are  conscious  in  our  hearts  has  its
being  there  and  there  alone  is  no  less  fantastic  than  to
suppose  that  the  friends  with  whom  we  converse  are  only
the  projection  upon  nothingness  of  our  own  imagination.
The  arguments  for  pure  immanence  are  at  bottom
identical  with  the  philosophical  creed  of  subjective  ideal-
ism, and  with  that  creed  they  stand  or  fall.

This  conception  of  God  as  perfectly  wise  and  good
avoids  at  least  the  faults  of  an  indefinite  and  empty
abstraction.  But  is  it  any  more  than  the  other  horn  of
an  inevitable  dilemma?  God,  as  we  have  conceived  his
nature,  is  good  indeed,  but  not  omnipotent ;  wise,  but
unable  entirely  to  control  the  world  which  he  knows.
He  is  the  totality  of  truth  and  goodness,  the  Absolute
of  all  the  good  there  is  ;  but  the  world's  evil  remains
outside  this  totality,  recalcitrant  to  the  power  of  God
and  superior  to  his  jurisdiction.

Here,  it  is  sometimes  said,  lies  the  parting  of  the
ways  between  religion  and  philosophy.  Religion  must
at  all  costs  have  a  God  with  a  definite  character  of  his
own  ;  philosophy  must  have  an  all-embracing  totality,
a  rounded  and  complete  universe.  And  when  it  is  found
that  God,  to  be  good,  cannot  be  all,  then  religion  and
philosophy  accept  different  horns  of  the  dilemma,  and
from  this  point  travel  in  different  directions.

But  such  a  solution  really  annihilates  both  philosophy
and  religion.  The  "  universe "  which  philosophy  is
supposed  to  choose  is  again  the  empty  abstraction  of  a
something  which  is  nothing  definite  ;  it  is  not  an  Ab-
solute, but  only  the  indication  of  an  unsolved  problem.
And  for  religion  too  the  problem  is  unsolved  ; for  it


ch.  in  PERSONALITY  121

refuses,  and  rightly  refuses,  to  believe  that  a  limited
God  is  its  last  word.  It  cannot  accept  the  antithesis
between  God  and  the  world  as  final.  Either  it  declares
its  faith  in  his  ultimate  omnipotence,  in  the  final  identi-
fication of  the  seemingly  opposed  terms,  or  it  relapses
into  the  pessimism  of  a  forlorn  hope  which  can  do  no
more  than  hurl  defiance  at  a  world  of  evil  which  it
cannot  conquer.  Of  these  alternatives,  the  highest  re-
ligious faith  unhesitatingly  chooses  the  first,  at  the  risk
of  being  accused  of  a  sentimental  optimism.  But  the
attitude  so  chosen  is  the  only  consistent  one  ;  for  the
pessimist's  defiance  of  the  world  already  achieves  in  some
degree  that  very  victory  which  he  pronounces  impossible.

Each  solution,  then,  the  undefined  Absolute  and  the
limited  God,  is  provisional  only,  a  working  hypothesis
and  no  more.  An  undefined  Absolute  is  not  an  Ab-
solute, and  a  limited  God  is  not  a  God.  Each  alike  can
only  be  made  satisfactory  by  acquiring  the  character
of  the  other  ;  and  hence  the  problems  of  religion  and
philosophy  are  one  and  the  same.

This  brings  us  face  to  face  with  the  question  of  evil.
How  can  a  world  whose  elements  are  at  variance  with
one  another  be,  except  in  a  merely  abstract  sense,  one
world  at  all  ?  How  can  the  existence  of  a  perfectly
good  God  be  reconciled  with  the  reality  of  minds  whose
will  is  the  very  antithesis  of  his  own  ?


CHAPTER IV


EVIL


I.  The  difficulty  with  which  we  have  to  deal  is
expressed  by  the  simple  religious  mind  in  the  form  of  the
question,  "Why does  God,  being  good,  allow  the  existence
of  evil  in  his  world  ?  "  And,  in  the  absence  of  any  im-
mediate answer,  the  solution  is  suggested  with  almost
irresistible  force  that  God,  if  omnipotent,  cannot  be
really  good.  We  have  indicated  in  outline  the  conception
of  a  God  who  united  in  himself  all  goodness  ;  but  the
existence  of  evil  seems  to  prove  that  if  he  exists  he  is  no
more  than  one  among  many  limited  minds,  good  so  far
as  he  goes  but  not  able  to  expel  all  evil  from  the  universe.
If  it  persists  in  the  refusal  to  exchange  a  real  God  for  a
colourless  Absolute,  religion  seems  forced  to  accept  a
God  who  is  hardly  more  than  another  good  man.

(a)  We  are  apt  to  suppose  that  this  is  the  nemesis
of  a  peculiar  weakness  in  religion.  If  it  had  adopted
the  more  rigorous  and  thoughtful  methods  of  philosophy,
we  imagine,  it  would  have  avoided  these  dilemmas  and
perplexities.  It  has  committed  itself  to  a  mythological
and  fanciful  procedure,  half-way  between  thinking  and
dreaming,  and  this  is  the  result.  I  think  such  an  ex-
planation is  entirely  superficial  and  untrue.  The  prob-
lem expressed  above  in  religious  language  can  be  readily
translated  into  terms  of  philosophy,  and  constitutes  for
philosophy  as  serious  a  difficulty  as  it  does  for  religion.
It  may  be  roughly  sketched  from  this  point  of  view  as
follows  :


122


ch.  iv  KVIL


123


If  the  world  is  will,  it  must  be  a  will  of  some  definite
kind  ;  a  good  will,  for  instance,  or  a  bad  will.  But
things  are  done  in  the  universe  which  fall  under  each  of
these  classes.  If  one  part  is  bad,  how  can  we  call  the
whole  good,  or  vice  versa  ?  We  may  try  to  evade  the
difficulty  by  replying  that  the  world  is  not  one  will  but
many  wills  ;  or  (which  comes  to  the  same  thing)  a  single
will  fluctuating  between  good  and  bad.  This  is  no
doubt  true  ;  but  is  it  a  society  of  wills  ?  and  if  so,  why
is  its  behaviour  not  social  ?  Again,  we  may  reply  that
it  is  not  really  will  at  all  in  the  ordinary  sense,  but  mere
matter  or  a  "  blind  will,"  which  does  not  know  what  it
is  doing,  or  a  "super-moral  will,"  which  does  not  care.
But  we  cannot  escape  by  taking  refuge  in  materialism  ;
for  a  materialistic  universe  could  never  give  rise  to  the
conflicts  of  which  we  complain.  A  universe  which  was
purely  mechanical  would  be  perfectly  smooth  and  self-
consistent  in  its  behaviour  ;  for  machines  only  "  go
wrong  "  relatively  to  the  purpose  of  their  makers.  Nor
do  the  other  hypotheses  improve  matters ;  for  they  do
not  explain  how  the  conflicting  elements  came  into  exist-
ence. If  the  universe  had  a  "  blind  will,"  it  could  not
include  in  it  my  will  which  is  not  blind.  If  the  Absolute
were  superior  to  moral  distinctions,  it  would  exclude
instead  of  including  the  consciousness  of  a  moral  person.

And  indeed  a  "  blind  will "  is  a  contradiction  in
terms,  for  a  will  which  did  not  know  what  it  was  doing
would  be  not  a  will  but  an  automaton,  a  mechanism.
And  a  "super-moral  Absolute"  is,  I  think,  a  no  less
contradictory  idea  ;  for  it  implies  that  the  Absolute  is
something  which  does  not  explain  but  merely  contradicts
the  things  we  know  ;  that  reality  is.  not  richer  or  fuller
than  experience  but  simply  different,  so  that  experience
is  illusory  and  reality  unknowable.

Philosophy  has,  no  doubt,  some  answer  for  these  ques-
tions. But  so,  within  its  own  system  of  ideas,  has
religion.  For  each,  the  problem  is  one  of  extreme  diffi-
culty ; for neither  is  it literally  insoluble. A  philo-


i24 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

sophical  problem  cannot  be  insoluble,  though  it  may  be
too  hard  for  you  or  me  to  solve  satisfactorily,  and  it
may  quite  well  be  insoluble  in  terms  of  a  certain  theory
which  is  so  framed  as  to  ignore  or  deny  the  facts  on
which  the  solution  depends.  But  a  theory  which  shows
this  kind  of  deficiency  is,  strictly  speaking,  incapable  of
solving  not  only  that  particular  problem  but  all  problems
connected  with  it,  that  is  to  say,  since  all  philosophical
problems  are  interconnected,  all  problems  whatever.  A
question  is  only  unanswerable  when  the  data  for  answer-
ing it  are  not  in  our  possession  ;  for  instance,  we  may
ask  in  vain  for  historical  information  about  a  fact  of
which  there  are  no  records.  But  in  philosophical  ques-
tions the  data  are  ready  to  our  hand,  and  only  require
analysis  and  description.  The  same  is  true  of  theological
problems.  In  the  language  of  orthodoxy,  God  has  re-
vealed his  nature  to  man,  if  man  will  receive  the  revela-
tion ;  in  philosophical  terms,  the  character  of  the  perfect
or  ideal  mind  is  implicit  even  in  the  imperfections  of
mind  as  we  know  it.  We  must  assume  then  that  the
problem  is  soluble  and  see  what  we  can  do  towards
solving  it.

(F)  It  is  important  to  state  as  clearly  as  possible
wherein  the  problem  consists.  I  think  we  may  dis-
tinguish three  different  questions,  each  of  which  may  be
asked  about  three  different  things  ;  and  all  these  ques-
tions are  liable  to  be  presented  simultaneously  as  the
Problem  of  Evil.  Ultimately,  no  doubt,  they  cannot  be
separated  ;  but  it  does  not  promote  their  solution  if  we
fail  to  distinguish  them  at  all.  The  three  things  are
error,  pain,  and  evil ;  understanding  always  by  evil  the
badness  of  a  will.  The  three  questions  are,  first,  How  is
the  thing  to  be  defined  or  described  ?  second,  How  does
it  come  to  exist  ?  and  third,  What  does  it  prove  ?  what
can  be  the  character  of  the  whole  of  which  it  forms
a  part  ?

(i.)  I  think,  though  not  without  great  hesitation,  that
the  problem  of  pain  in  general  is  not  the  same  as  the


ch.  iv  EVIL


125


problem  of  the  other  two  forms  of  evil.  When  people
speak  of  the  "  problem  of  pain,"  they  seem  generally  to
mean  by  it  some  question  like  this  :  "  Why,  if  God  is
as  you  assert  both  omnipotent  and  benevolent,  does  he
permit  his  creatures  to  suffer  things  which  any  kindly-
disposed  man  would  give  his  life  to  prevent  ?  Either
God  allows  these  things,  in  which  case  he  is  less  bene-
volent than  man,  or  else  he,  too,  would  like  to  stop
them,  in  which  case  he  is  as  impotent  as  ourselves."

Now  it  is  not  difficult  to  see  that  this  question
assumes  as  obvious  a  certain  theory  of  God  which  may
be  described  as  purely  transcendent  theism.  God  is
conceived  as  a  ruler  imposing  his  will  on  a  passive
creation  by  means  of  laws  in  whose  effect  he  does  not
share.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  sting  of  the  problem
entirely  vanishes  if  the  distinction  between  activity  and
passivity  is  removed  ;  if,  in  other  words,  we  conceive
God  not  as  imposing  his  will  on  the  world  from
without,  but  as  himself  sharing  in  all  the  experiences  of
other  minds.  Some  such  view  as  this  we  are  now  assum-
ing as  proved  ;  for  the  result  of  the  last  two  chapters
will  not  permit  us  to  regard  the  creator  as  severed
from  his  creation,  or  the  whole  as  external  to  its  parts.

It  is  sometimes  said  that  all  pain  is  due  to  an
evil  will,  which  inflicts  it  directly  upon  sufferers  or,
indirectly,  upon  the  wrongdoer  himself.  All  pain  is
thus  either  the  natural  consequence  of  sin,  recoiling  on
the  head  of  the  sinner,  or  else  the  effect  of  his  sin  on
others.  If  that  were  so,  pain  would  be  absent  from  a
universe  in  which  there  was  no  evil,  in  the  strict  sense
of  that  word  ;  and  the  problem  of  pain  would  be
identified  with  the  problem  of  the  bad  will.

This  is  a  position  which,  as  I  suggested  above,  I  do
not  feel  able  to  accept.  Evil  wills  are  responsible  for
a  vast  proportion  of  existing  pain  :  for  much  more,
perhaps,  than  we  generally  imagine.  And  empirically,
I  suppose,  the  nearest  approach  to  a  painless  life  is
to be  found  in the  companionship  of  persons  whose


i26 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

attitude  towards  one  another  most  nearly  approaches
to  perfect  love  and  harmony.  On  the  other  hand —
empirically  once  more — the  attainment  of  any  fulness
and  depth  of  experience  seems  to  be  necessarily  painful
as  well  as  pleasant,  even  for  the  noblest  minds.
Esthetic  experiences  like  hearing  music  (or,  again,
seeing  a  play  finely  acted)  involve  a  kind  of  pain
which  is  very  acute,  and  cannot  be  confused  with  the
pain  of  hearing  bad  music  or  music  badly  played.
There  seems  to  be  something  of  this  nature — what  we
might  call  a  tragic  element — in  all  the  highest  forms
of  life.  It  does  involve  pain  ;  but  it  also  involves
pleasure,  which  transfuses  the  pain  while  it  does  not
for  a  moment  disguise  its  painfulness.

If  this  view  of  the  matter  is  right,  the  practical
problem  of  pain  is  not  how  to  avoid  it  but  how  to  lift
it  to  a  heroic  level  ;  and  the  presence  of  pain  in  the
world  is  not  a  contradiction  or  an  abatement  of  the
world's  value  and  perfection.  Pain  may  make  the
world  difficult  to  live  in ;  but  do  we  really  want  an
easier  world  ?  And  if  we  sometimes  think  we  do,  do
we  not  recognise  that  the  wish  is  unworthy  ?

At  any  rate,  the  wish  is  useless.  I  do  not  think  it
serves  any  purpose  to  imagine  hypothetical  worlds  in
which  this  or  that  element  of  the  real  would  be  absent.
And  it  does  seem  to  me  that  'pain  is  such  an  element.
Whether  or  no  it  is  always  due  to  our  own  imperfection
or  sin  or  the  sin  or  imperfection  of  others,  it  cannot
ever  be  eliminated,  simply  because  a  perfection  of  the
type  required  can  surely  never  exist  in  a  world  of  free
agents  ;  because  even  if  no  one  did  wrong,  the  effort
of  doing  right  would  still  be  difficult  and  painful  just
so  long  as  the  practical  problems  offered  by  the  world
were  worth  solving.  Pain  seems  to  involve  imperfection
only  in  the  sense  in  which  any  one  who  has  a  thing  to
do  and  has  not  yet  done  it  is  imperfect  ;  and  in  that
sense  imperfection  is  only  another  name  for  activity
and  perfection  for  death.


CH.  IV


EVIL  127


(ii.)  Error  and  evil  are  more  difficult  even  than  pain
to  assign,  as  they  stand,  to  a  place  in  the  universe.  It
is  sometimes  taken  as  self-evident  that  a  good  world
cannot  contain  pain.  I  have  said  that  I  think  this
assumption  is  mistaken.  But  I  do  think  it  is  self-
evident  that  a  good  universe  cannot  contain  either
evil  or  error  just  as  they  stand.  This  is  the  problem
with  which  we  shall  deal  in  detail.  The  other  two
questions  must  be  also  raised  :  first,  What  are  these
things,  and  secondly,  How  do  they  arise  ?

The  latter  question  can  be  answered  easily  or  not
at  all,  according  to  its  meaning.  In  one  sense,  the
answer  simply  is,  "  Because  people  do  them  "  ;  that  is
to  say,  there  is  nothing  to  prevent  any  one  from  doing
wrong  or  from  making  a  mistake,  and  it  depends  on
himself  whether  he  does  so  or  not.  A  man  does  right
not  only  because  it  is  God's  will  but  because  it  is  also
his  own  will  ;  God  could  not  make  him  do  right  if  he
did  not  want  to.  And  therefore  God  cannot  prevent
his  doing  wrong.  In  another  sense,  the  question
implies  a  desire  to  go  behind  this  freedom  of  the
individual,  and  to  discover  why  he  chooses  to  do  this
and  not  that.  But  in  this  sense  the  question  is  meaning-
less ;  for  there  is  nothing  behind  the  will  which  makes
it  do  one  thing  rather  than  the  other.

(iii.)  The  other  question  would  seem  at  first  sight
easy.  An  error  is  defined  as  thinking  something  that
is  not  true;  and  a  bad  action  as  doing  something  wrong.
But  we  have  denned  thinking  as  the  consciousness  of
a  reality  ;  and  therefore  error  is  not  thought,  for  if  it
were  consciousness  of  realitv  it  would  not  be  error.
But  what  can  error  be  if  it  is  not  thought  ?  How  can
you  make  a  mistake  without  thinking  ?  It  might  be
ingeniously  replied,  when  you  make  a  mistake  you  are
nor  really  thinking  at  all  :  you  only  think  you  are  think-
ing. But  alas  !  we  are  no  further  ;  for  if  all  thinking
is  true,  then  in  thinking  that  I  thought  I  must  really
have thought. Nor is it any better to say that I


128 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS


PT. II


imagined  that  I  thought  ;  for  if  so  the  point  is  that  I
mistook,  on  this  occasion,  imagining  for  thinking.  Nor
can  we  say  that  I  felt  as  if  I  had  done  a  piece  of  thinking
when  really  I  had  not  ;  granted  that  there  is  a  peculiar
flavour  in  real  thinking,  how  does  it  come  to  be  associ-
ated with  something  that  is  not  thinking  ?  and  if  it  is
liable  to  be  so  associated,  why,  knowing  this,  should  I
let  it  mislead  me  ?

We  cannot  avoid  the  difficulty  by  defining  error  as
an  act  not  of  the  intellect  but  of  the  will  :  for  instance,
the  arbitrary  assertion  of  a  thing  which  the  evidence
does  not  warrant.  If  this  were  so,  there  would  be  no
difference  at  all  between  making  a  mistake  and  telling  a
lie.  A  man  may  be  blamed  for  his  mistakes,  and  a
mistake  may  be  described  as  a  moral  offence,  perhaps
with  justice;  but  that  does  nothing  to  clear  up  its  nature.

It  may  be  replied,  all  this  comes  of  committing
yourself  to  a  faulty  theory  of  knowledge.  First  you
propound  a  theory  on  which  error  cannot  possibly  exist,
and  then  you  are  illogical  enough  to  complain  that  you
cannot  understand  error.  It  is  a  well-known  fact  that
there  are  theories  of  knowledge  of  this  sort  ;  yours  is
one  of  them  ;  and  you  had  much  better  give  it  up. — I
should  be  most  willing  to  do  so,  if  any  other  theory
were  more  successful.  But  the  critics  who  use  the
language  I  have  just  quoted  have  as  a  rule  nothing
better  to  offer  in  exchange  than  an  empiricism  which,
while  carefully  designed  to  admit  the  possibility  of
error,  omits  to  allow  for  the  possibility  of  truth.
Indeed  a  cynic  might  be  tempted  to  divide  theories  of
knowledge  into  those  which  admitted  the  possibility  of
truth  but  denied  the  existence  of  error,  and  those  which
admitted  error  but  denied  the  existence  of  truth.
Neither  type  of  theory  can  be  satisfactory  ;  but  it  may
be  argued  that  a  theory  which  at  least  admits  the
existence  of  truth  is  likely  to  contain  more  of  it  than
the  one  which  does  not.  The  only  third  alternative  is
the  refusal  to  admit  a  theory  of  knowledge  at  all. And


ch.  iv  EVIL


129

this  too  I  cannot  accept  ;  for  we  do  talk  about  know-
ing, and  our  statements  about  it  must  mean  something,
and  be  either  true  or  false.

The  same  difficulty  arises  in  connexion  with  the
definition  of  wrongdoing.  To  put  the  dilemma  briefly,
a  person  doing  wrong  must  know  that  it  is  wrong  ;  for
otherwise,  though  we  may  blame  him  for  culpable  negli-
gence or  obtuseness,  we  do  not  blame  him  in  the  full
moral  sense  as  deliberately  guilty.  And  yet  it  would
seem  that  the  essence  of  doing  wrong  is  to  persuade
oneself  somehow  that  it  is  really  right,  or  excusable,  or
not  so  very  wrong.  The  fact  seems  to  combine  two
contradictory  attitudes — the  doing  a  thing  although  you
know  it  is  wrong,  and  the  thinking  that  it  is  right  when
it  is  not.

One  is  sometimes  tempted  to  say  that  these  things,
evil  and  error,  are  really  self-contradictory  attitudes  of
mind,  mental  confusions  ;  and  that  therefore  it  is  no  use
trying  to  have  a  clear  theory  of  them,  since  the  facts
themselves  are  not  clear.  But  is  it  so  ?  If  a  state  of
mind  were  self-contradictory,  how  could  it  exist  ?  If  it
is  coherent  enough  to  exist,  why  should  it  not  be
coherent  enough  to  be  described  ?  Superficial  thought,
we  must  repeat,  finds  no  difficulty  in  describing  them
because  it  does  so,  na'ively,  in  self-contradictory  terms  ;
it  is  only  analysis  of  the  terms  used  that  reveals  the
difficulty.

Even  if  it  is  impossible  to  define  them,  need  that
hinder  our  inquiry  ?  No  one  has  ever  defined  good-
ness, for  instance,  and  yet  moral  philosophy  exists.
The  parallel  is  comforting,  but  I  fear  misleading.  The
famous  difficulty  in  defining  goodness  does  not  exclude
the  possibility  of  conceiving  goodness.  We  know
perfectly  well  what  it  is,  and  the  only  sense  in  which
it  is  indefinable  is  that,  being  unique,  it  cannot  be
described  in  terms  of  anything  else.  But  I  do  not  think
the  same  is  true  of  error  and  evil.  The  difficulty  here
seems  to  be  not  that  we  know  what  they  are  but  cannot

K


130 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS PT.  n

give  a  formal  definition  of  them,  but  rather  that,  though
we  recognise  them  when  we  see  them — sometimes — we
do  not  know  what  they  are  at  all.

Having  no  answer  to  offer  to  such  a  fundamental
question,  would  it  not  be  best  to  put  up  the  shutters
and  go  home  ?  Is  it  not  mere  trifling  to  offer  theology
the  assistance  of  so  impotent  a  metaphysic  ?  The
criticism  is  perfectly  just.  We  cannot  hope  to  solve,
or  even  usefully  to  discuss,  the  problem  of  evil  unless
we  know  what  evil  is.  But  our  real  position  is  worse
than  the  criticism  suggests.  It  implies  that  there  is  a
retreat  open  to  us  ;  that  we  can,  and  in  fairness  ought
to,  renounce  our  attempt  to  solve  these  problems  ration-
ally and  take  refuge  in  a  decent  agnosticism.  This  we
cannot  do  ;  for  it  is  not  unequivocally  true  even  that
we  are  ignorant  of  the  nature  of  evil.  We  do  recognise
it  when  we  see  it  ;  and  we  can  make  some  statements
about  it,  or  at  least  show  that  some  accounts  of  its
nature  are  false.  The  only  escape  from  our  situation
is  to  build  on  these  facts,  however  slight  they  may
appear.  An  agnostic  withdrawal  from  the  argument
would,  by  denying  their  existence,  commit  itself  to  a
falsehood  no  less  than  the  dogmatic  denial  of  the
difficulties.

This,  then,  must  be  our  course.  In  the  first  place,
we  shall  examine  and  criticise  certain  current  concep-
tions of  evil  ;  secondly,  we  shall  try  to  determine  the
relation  of  evil  to  good  within  the  universe.  Such  a
procedure,  after  the  admission  that  we  cannot  define
evil,  is  illogical,  absurd,  perhaps  even  dishonest  ;  its
only  excuse  is  that  the  alternative  is  worse.

2.  The  theories  of  evil  which  I  intend  to  criticise
agree  in  treating  evil  as  somehow  illusory  or  non-
existent. The  universe,  according  to  this  type  of  view,
is  perfectly  good,  and  everything  is  good  just  so  far
as  it  exists  ;  evil  is  non-existence,  deficiency,  negativity,
the  past  stage  of  a  process,  and  so  on.  I  shall  treat
these  views  in  some  detail  because  I  believe  that  there


ch.  iv  EVIL  131

is  a  certain  amount  of  truth  in  them,  and  that  they  fail
in  general  through  not  successfully  denning  what  they
mean  by  real  and  unreal  ;  whereas  their  opposites,  the
pessimistic  views,  contain  I  think  less  truth  and  are
sufficiently  dealt  with  by  the  main  argument  in  §  3.

It  is  perhaps  worth  remarking  that  optimism  and
pessimism  alike  create  a  spurious  unity  by  denying  one
side  of  the  contradiction  ;  each  is  a  symptom  of  exactly
the  same  fault.  It  is  often  said  that  optimism  results
from  a  sentimental  temper  which  refuses  to  face  facts  ;
and  this  is  perfectly  true.  But  it  is  equally  true  of
pessimism.  To  deny  the  existence  of  facts  simply
because  they  are  pleasant  is  no  less  sentimental  than  to
deny  their  existence  because  they  are  unpleasant.  It  is
one  kind  of  sentimentality,  and  not  an  attractive  kind,
that  refuses  to  see  anything  outside  itself  but  one  all-
embracing  Weltschmerz,  and  anything  within  but  its  own
"  spasms  of  helpless  agony."  x

It  ought  also  to  be  said  that  in  criticising  views  of
this  type  I  am  not  criticising  those  philosophers  such  as
Plato,  Spinoza,  or  Hegel,  to  whom  they  often  owe  the
language  in  which  they  are  expressed,  if  no  more.
I  am  rather  criticising  tendencies  of  popular  thought
which  have  a  certain  superficial  resemblance  to  their
philosophies.

{a)  The  simplest  type  of  optimism  is  perhaps  to  be
found  in  the  not  uncommon  statement  that  evil  does
not  exist  at  all ;  that  there  is  no  such  thing.  As  stated,
this  is  merely  a  paradox  which  has  no  meaning  until  it
has  been  explained  :  and  to  explain  it  generally  involves
explaining  it  away.  The  only  sense  in  which  it  is  a
serious  theory  is  that  it  sometimes  takes  the  form  of
asserting  that  no  one  ever  really  does  wrong,  and  our
beliefs  to  the  contrary  come  from  misinterpreting  the
actions  of  others,  and  indeed  our  own.  That  is  to  say,
there  is  no  evil  ;  there  is  only  error,  the  erroneous
belief  that  evil  exists.

1 W.  James,  Varieties  of  Religious  Experience,  p.  163.


132 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  n

While  granting  fully  that  a  completer  knowledge
would  explain  as  good  many  actions  which  we  imagine
to  be  bad,  I  cannot  think  this  view  plausible.  Led  by
the  difficulty  of  conceiving  how  a  bad  action  can  exist,
it  suggests  that  none  do  exist,  and  that  the  apparent
cases  to  the  contrary  are  really  cases  of  false  judgment.
It  can  only  advance  this  conclusion  because  it  has  never
realised  that  exactly  the  same  difficulty  attaches  to  the
conception  of  the  false  judgment.  If  the  moralist  had
by  chance  been  a  logician  instead,  he  would  have  raised
the  question  how  people  make  mistakes  :  and  he  might
have  answered  that  they  do  not  ;  they  only  tell  lies.
What  appears  to  be  an  error,  he  might  triumphantly
say,  is  only  a  moral  obliquity.

If  this  seems  a  far-fetched  objection,  it  may  be  simply
expressed  thus.  Evil  does  exist.  People  do  wrong.
There  is  no  reasonable  doubt  on  that  point.  But  as
soon  as  we  begin  thinking  about  it,  we  find  it  so  difficult
to  understand  that  we  are  tempted  to  explain  it  by
appeal  to  a  parallel  difficulty,  that  of  error.  The  two
are,  I  think,  parallel  ;  but  neither  throws  much  light
on  the  other  because  each  is  equally  obscure.  And  if
we  deny  the  existence  of  the  one,  the  same  difficulties
when  we  faced  them  would  compel  us  to  deny  the
existence  of  the  other.

(£)  An  argument  closely  resembling  this  admits
that  bad  actions  are  done,  and  does  not  flatly  say  that
we  are  mistaken  in  calling  them  bad  ;  but  merely  that  in
so  doing  we  are  expressing  a  limited  point  of  view.
From  this  finite  point  of  view  we  are  right,  it  is  said,
in  calling  them  evil ;  but  from  a  wider  point  of  view
either  they  would  be  seen  as  good  or  perhaps  the
difference  between  good  and  bad  would  disappear.

We  cannot,  however,  dispose  of  the  distinction
between  right  and  wrong  by  saying  that  it  is  relative
to  particular  points  of  view.  The  argument  seems
to  confuse  several  different  things  ;  and  it  is  perhaps
worth  while  to  distinguish  at  least  some  of  these.


CH. IV


EVIL  133


(i.)  "  What  is  right  for  one  society,"  we  are  told,
"  is  wrong  for  another.  It  would  be  sadly  narrow-
minded  to  wish  that  every  portion  of  the  human  race
could  live  under  the  same  kind  of  social  organisation.
On  the  contrary,  to  confer  the  blessings  of  civilisation
upon  the  savage  often  means  nothing  but  to  force
him  into  a  mould  for  which  he  is  quite  unfitted  and
in  which  he  can  never  be  either  happy  or  prosperous.
His  institutions  are  the  best  for  him,  and  ours  are
the  best  for  us  ;  and  when  we  ask  what  is  the  right
manner  of  life,  the  question  always  is,  for  whom  ?
Nothing  is  right  in  itself,  in  isolation  from  the
circumstances  which  make  it  right."

Much  of  this  is  perfectly  true.  Not  only  is  one
people's  life  not  good  for  another  people,  but  even
one  man's  meat  is  another  man's  poison.  Every  race,
every  person,  every  situation  is  unique,  presents  unique
problems  and  demands  unique  treatment.  And  if
the  argument  means  no  more  than  that  we  must  not
impose  the  treatment  proper  to  one  case  on  another
(as  we  frequently  do),  it  is  legitimate.  But  those  who
use  it  seem  often  to  imply  that,  since  every  evil  is
relative  to  some  situation,  a  perfectly  free  man  who
had  no  particular  prejudices  and  no  merely  parochial
interests  would  be  superior  to  the  distinction  between
good  and  bad.  This  of  course  is  absurd  ;  for  every
man  must  be  an  individual  and  stand  in  some  definite
relation  to  other  individuals  ;  and  these  relations  will
determine  what  is — and  really  is — right  and  wrong
for  him.

(ii.)  The  argument  may  also  be  taken  to  imply
that  there  is  a  specifically  moral  way  of  looking  at
things,  which  is  one  out  of  a  large  number  of  possible
ways,  and  not  the  truest.  We  may  approach  actions
with  the  question  on  our  lips,  "  are  they  right  or
wrong  ? "  and  in  that  attitude  we  shall  understand
less  of  their  real  nature  and  value  than  if  we  asked,
"  are  they  adequate,  or  fitting,  or  noble,  or  splendid  ;


134 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.h

do  they  show  a  grasp  of  the  situation,  a  penetrating
intellect,  a  determined  will,  a  subtle  sense  of  beauty  ?  "

We  do  certainly  feel  a  sense  of  irritation  with  people
who  insist  upon  raising  the  moral  issue  to  the  exclusion
of  all  others.  They  seem  to  think  that  it  only  matters
if  a  person  had  good  intentions,  and  makes  no  differ-
ence whether  he  is  a  competent  man  or  a  muddler.  *  It
does  make  a  difference  ;  and  either  goodness  is  only  real
goodness  when  united  with  competence,  or  else  there  are
other  things  to  value  a  man  by  besides  his  goodness.

But  these  other  things  do  not  outweigh  goodness,
still  less  make  it  disappear.  Whatever  other  things
there  may  be,  there  is  morality  ;  but  the  argument
seems  to  suggest  that  because  there  are  other  standards
of  value,  therefore  the  moral  standard  cannot  be
maintained.  If  this  is  its  meaning,  it  is  no  more
than  an  attempt  to  distract  attention  from  one  question
by  raising  others.

(iii.)  Thirdly,  it  may  mean  that  morality  is  a
"  category  "  of  the  human  mind  as  such,  which  would
be  absent  from  a  better  or  more  highly-developed  type
of  mind.  It  is  a  limitation,  but  a  necessary  limitation
of  humanity.  We  cannot  deal  fully  with  a  contention
of  this  kind  without  examining  its  presuppositions  in
a  theory  of  knowledge  derived  more  or  less  from
Kant.  But  I  think  such  an  examination  would  bear
out  the  plain  man's  feeling  that  an  argument  like  this
is  not  playing  the  game  ;  that  it  is  not  fair  to  tell  him
that  the  construction  of  his  mind  is  such  that  he  cannot
help  having  convictions  which  nevertheless  are  not
really  true.  The  philosopher  who  tells  him  so  seems
to  imagine  himself  as  behind  the  scenes,  privileged  to
criticise  and  correct  the  workings  of  the  mind  which
after  all  is  just  as  much  his  mind  as  the  plain  man's.
If  the  conviction  is  inevitable,  how  is  scepticism  as  to
its  truth  possible  ?  The  critic  of  the  mind  is  doing
something  which  looks  very  like  playing  fast  and
loose  with  his  convictions.


ch.  iv  EVIL


l3S


(c)  Another  appeal  to  ignorance  is  contained  in
the  view  that  evil  is  justified  by  becoming  a  means
to  good.  This  argument  is  reinforced  by  the  parallel
of  pain.  The  dentist  inflicts  pain  ;  but  he  only  does
so  to  save  us  from  a  much  greater  amount  of  pain  in
the  future.  Our  condemnation  of  the  evil  in  the  world
is  thus  explained  as  the  rebellion  of  ignorance  against
the  surgery  of  an  all-wise  Creator.

As  applied  to  pain,  the  argument  is  not  without
great  value.  But  even  so,  it  should  be  observed  that
the  pain  of  dentistry  remains  pain,  and  is  not  made
pleasant  by  the  fact  that  it  absolves  us  from  future
pain.  And  the  really  skilful  dentist  can  almost,  if
not  entirely,  banish  pain  by  means  of  anaesthetics.
Is  God  less  skilful  ?

In  point  of  fact  the  parallel  does  not  apply  to  evil
at  all.  The  evil  consequences  of  an  evil  act  might  well
be  so  thwarted  by  circumstance  or  overridden  by
omnipotence  that  they  never  afFected  the  person  whom
they  were,  perhaps,  intended  to  harm.  But  the
moral  evil  of  the  act  lies  not  in  its  success  but  in  the
intention,  and  no  overruling  can  afFect  the  intention  or
make  it  less  evil.  A  bad  action  may  be  providentially
a  means  to  good  ;  but  that  does  not  destroy  the  agent's
badness  of  will.  The  problem  of  moral  evil  remains
untouched.

(d)  Another  common  account  of  evil  appeals  to  the
logical  conception  of  negation,  asserting  that  evil
though  real  is  merely  negative.  I  do  not  think  that
this  does  much  to  clear  it  up.  If  two  things  are
conceived  as  opposites,  either  indifferently  may  be
described  as  the  negation  of  the  other  ;  but  neither  is,
so  to  speak,  inherently  negative.  The  distinction
between  affirmative  and  negative  is  a  distinction  of
words,  not  of  things.  A  "  negative  "  reality  would
be  quite  as  positive  as  an  "  affirmative "  reality.  I
imagine  that  this  theory  really  means  that  good  is
normal  or  natural  or  something  of  the  sort,  while  evil


136 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS

is  abnormal  and  only  exists  as  an  exception,  and  could
never  by  itself  make  a  world.  This  idea  seems  to  me
to  be  sound,  and  we  shall  meet  it  again  ;  but  I  do  not
think  that  it  is  well  expressed  by  saying  that  evil  is
merely  negative.

(e)  The  last  theory  we  shall  examine  defines  evil  by
reference  to  the  conception  of  evolution.  Our  sins,
according  to  this  theory,  are  the  habits  proper  to  a  past
stage  in  the  evolutionary  process,  lingering  on  like
rudimentary  organs  into  our  present  life.  Here  again
there  is  a  fact  at  the  bottom  of  the  theory.  It  is  true
that  the  particular  way  in  which  we  go  wrong  is  often
explicable  by  reference  to  past  habits  of  which  we
have  never  entirely  got  rid.  But  the  question  still
remains  unanswered  why  we  should  go  wrong  at  all.
Nor  is  the  theory  fully  true  even  so  far  as  it  goes  ;  for
atavism  is  not  a  crime,  and  just  so  far  as  our  "  crimes  "
are  really  cases  of  atavism  they  are  not  culpable  ;  unless
indeed  it  is  supposed  that  our  evolution  is  entirely  in
our  own  hands.  But  if  that  is  so,  morality  must  be
called  in  to  account  for  evolution,  not  vice  versa.

It  is  a  striking  fact  that  the  biological  conception  of
evolution  has  never  yet  produced  anything  but  confusion
when  applied  to  philosophical  questions.  The  reason
seems  to  be  that  it  gives,  in  the  form  in  which  it  is
commonly  held,  no  answer  to  the  one  question  with
which  philosophy  is  concerned.  As  we  said  in  a  former
chapter,  science  (including  the  theory  of  evolution)  is
simply  a  description  of  behaviour,  and  advances  no
hypothesis  as  to  why  things  behave  as  they  do.  The
theory  of  evolution  is  a  purely  historical  statement  about
the  way  in  which  life  has  developed  ;  ethics  is  concerned
with  the  force  of  will  which  lies  behind  all  merely
descriptive  history.  It  makes  little  difference  to  the
scientist  whether  he  regards  evolution  as  a  purely
mechanical  process  or  as  directed  by  the  volition  of
conscious  agents ;  but  until  this  question  is  answered,
evolution  is  simply  irrelevant  to  ethics.


CH. IV


EVIL  137


In  this  case,  for  instance,  there  are  three  conceivable
hypotheses,  either  of  which  might  be  adopted  by  science
without  greatly  altering  its  particular  problems ;  but  for
ethics  they  are  poles  asunder.  (i.)  If  the  process  is
really  mechanical,  the  habits  may  be  explained,  but  they
are  not  sins,  (ii.)  If  a  central  mind  such  as  that  of  God
directs  the  process,  then  the  habits  in  question  are  not
our  sins  but  God's,  (iii.)  If,  as  above  suggested,  the
process  is  in  the  hands  of  the  evolving  species,  the  bad
or  superseded  habits  are  sinful,  but  they  are  not  explained.
Thus  the  evolutionary  view  of  the  question  only  restates
the  problem  in  terms  which  conceal  the  fact  that  no
solution  is  offered.

3.  We  can  now  proceed  to  the  last  and  for  our
purpose  the  most  important  question,  namely,  how  evil
and  error  can  coexist  in  the  same  universe  side  by  side
with  truth  and  goodness,  and  how  a  universe  so  composed
can  be  described  ;  whether,  that  is,  we  can  call  it  either
good  or  evil.  The  answer  to  this  question  can  only  be
reached  by  drawing  out  the  implications  of  two  state-
ments :  (i.)  that  the  universe  contains  good  and  evil
side  by  side  ;  (ii.)  that  everything  in  the  universe  stands
in  some  relation  to  everything  else.

(a)  Suppose  I  intend  to  write  a  complete  account  of
any  subject  concerning  which  there  is  in  existence  a
considerable  body  of  scientific  information  and  opinion.
There  are,  broadly  speaking,  two  ways  in  which  I  can  go
to  work.  Either  I  can  simply  collect  all  the  opinions,
false  and  true,  which  have  been  held  on  the  subject,  and
write  them  down  side  by  side  ;  or  else  I  can  sift  them
out,  correcting  the  false  by  the  true,  and  presenting  a
body  of  statements  which  is,  so  far  as  I  can  make  it  so,
absolutely  true.  These  two  methods  typify  two  senses
in  which  we  can  speak  of  a  totality  :  first,  a  mere  juxta-
position of  conflicting  details,  and  secondly,  an  organised
and  coherent  whole.  Which  of  these  is  in  the  truest
sense  a  totality,  and  in  which  sense  do  we  speak  of  the
totality  of  the  universe  ?


138 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.h

The  mere  collection  would  be  repugnant  to  the
scientific  mind,  It  is  the  work,  a  critic  would  say,  not
of  a  thinker  but  of  a  sciolist  ;  the  book  that  quotes
infinite  contradictory  authorities  and  "  leaves  the  reader
to  choose  between  them "  is  not  history,  but  the
gratification  of  a  jackdaw's  collecting-mania.

It  appears  on  examination  that  the  scientist's  prejudice
is  well  founded.  The  mere  collection  misrepresents  the
facts  which  it  pretends  to  describe.  A's  opinion  took
its  form  through  the  detection  of  an  error  in  B's,  and
B's  by  refuting  C's.  Simply  to  quote  A,  B  and  C  side
by  side  is  precisely  to  miss  the  historical  development
and  continuity  on  which  all  three  depend.  The  mere
collection  is  not  a  totality  ;  it  is  a  number  of  different
things  whose  relation  to  one  another  is  denied,  an
abstract  plurality  which  is  not  a  unity.  Unity  can  only
be  introduced  into  it  in  one  way  :  by  thinking  out  the
relations  of  each  opinion  to  the  rest.  When  this  is
done,  as  it  is  done  by  the  true  historian  of  thought,  it
is  found  that  even  where  one  opinion  contradicts  another
there  is  the  closest  of  relations  between  them  ;  that  they
are  successive  attempts  to  reach  the  truth  on  this  subject,
and  that  each  statement  sums  up  in  itself  the  truth
expressed  by  previous  statements  and  is  itself  the
starting-point  for  further  research.  This  way  of  putting
it  is  not  affected  by  the  breaks  and  discontinuities  which
there  must  be  in  any  tradition.  We  are  not  arguing
that  there  is  a  steady  and  continual  progress  towards
truth,  independent,  as  it  were,  of  intellectual  effort  ;  but
that  every  truth  takes  its  form  by  correcting  some  error,
and  that  therefore  in  the  totality  of  the  science  the  error
does  not  stand  alongside  the  truth,  but  is  corrected  by
it  and  disappears.  Consequently  to  the  historian  of
thought  these  errors  do  not  form  part  of  the  science
at  all.  He  knows  and  records  the  fact  that  they
have  been  made  ;  but  as  the  science  comes  to  him
they  have  been  eliminated  by  the  thought  which  has
supplied  their  correction. (It is not implied  that  at


CH. IV


EVIL  139


any  given  point  of  history  all the errors have been
eliminated.)

In  brief,  truth  and  error  cannot  coexist  in  relation
with  one  another.  If  they  are  brought  into  contact,  the
error  is  abolished  by  the  truth.  A  truth  and  an  error
about  one  and  the  same  subject  can  only  exist  so  long
as  they  are  kept  separate  in  water-tight  compartments  ;
that  is,  so  long  as  the  person  who  believes  them  both  is
unconscious,  while  believing  one,  that  he  also  believes
the  other,  or  so  long  as  the  person  who  believes  one
does  not  come  into  contact  with  the  person  who  believes
the  other.

Our  problem  was  something  of  the  following  kind.
God  is  conceived  as  omniscient ;  all  his  beliefs  are  true.
But  there  are  also  many  false  beliefs  in  existence.  These
are  ex  hypo  the  si  not  shared  by  God.  Therefore  the
totality  of  the  universe,  including  as  it  does  the  false
beliefs  as  well  as  the  true,  is  more  inclusive,  larger,  so
to  speak,  than  God  who  only  includes  the  true  ones.
God  therefore  is  not  all-inclusive,  not  universal  ;  he  is
only  one  among  many  minds.  To  a  person  who  argued
thus  we  might  now  answer,  are  you  in  earnest  with  the
idea  that  the  world  is  a  totality  ?  Do  you  believe  that
it  is  a  society  of  spirits  in  communication  with  one
another  ?  If  so,  you  are  convicted  out  of  your  own
mouth.  For  if  the  world  is  a  totality  it  already  shows
the  same  perfection  which  is  ascribed  to  God.  The  true
opinions  in  it  eliminate  the  false,  leaving  nothing  but
truth.  And  therefore  the  all-inclusive  universe  is  not
larger  than,  but  identical  with,  the  perfect  God.

According  to  this  conception  the  universe  includes
all  error  and  yet  it  includes  no  error.  Every  error  is  a
fact  that  happens  in  history,  and  so  is  part  of  the
universe  ;  but  the  false  opinion  in  which  the  error
consists  disappears  from  the  universe  when  faced  with
the  truth  which  contradicts  it.

Two  objections  at  once  suggest  themselves.  First,
why  should  it  be  assumed  that  truth  must  drive  out  error  ?


i4o RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS pt.  n

Why  should  not  error  drive  out  truth  ?  Certainly  this
may  happen.  But  I  do  not  think  any  one  would  believe
that  this  is  the  way  in  which  any  science  has  actually
progressed  for  long  together.  A  mind  which  really
grasps  a  truth  is  not  shaken  in  its  belief  by  denials,
because  it  sees  the  point  of  view  from  which  the  denial
proceeds  and  can  formulate  the  truth  so  as  to  include
that  point  of  view.  In  doing  this  it  would  not  become
less  true.  But  if  error  embarked  on  the  process  of
including  other  points  of  view,  even  if  these  others
were  themselves  erroneous,  the  error  would  gradually
approach  nearer  to  the  truth,  for  to  believe  all  the
different  errors  about  any  subject  may  come  very  near
to  knowing  the  truth.

The  second  objection  is  this  :  Why  assume  that  the
universe  is  a  unity  at  all  ?  how  do  you  know  that  its
parts  are  all  in  some  relation  to  each  other  ?  Indeed,
are  you  not  arguing  in  a  circle  by  first  assuming  it  to
be  a  whole  or  system,  and  then  arguing  that  it  must  on
that  account  be  systematic  ?  It  may  be  that  we  are
wrong  in  assuming  that  there  is  one  universe.  But  I
do  not  think  that  it  is  a  mere  assumption.  The  alterna-
tive hypothesis  would  be  that  there  are  within  it  elements
entirely  out  of  relation  to  one  another  ;  that  is,  in  terms
of  our  view,  that  there  are  minds  which  are  concerned
with  objects  so  entirely  disparate  that  they  cannot  either
agree  with  or  contradict  one  another.  But  in  the  nature
of  the  case,  if  there  are  minds  which  have  no  character-
istic and  no  object  of  thought  in  common  with  ours,
we  cannot  possibly  conceive  them,  far  less  prove  or
disprove  their  existence.  And  if  we  are  right  in  thinking
that  our  philosophy  concerns  the  nature  of  mind  as
such,  it  must  be  a  description,  whether  true  or  false,
of  any  mind  that  exists.

In  one  sense,  it  is  perhaps  true  to  say  that  the
universe  is  not  a  totality.  Taken  at  any  given  moment,
it  is  incomplete.  There  are  still  undissolved  errors,
unfinished  thought-processes. The  world  we  see  around


ch.  iv  KVIL  1 1 1

us  is  not  a  stationary,  already-existing,  "  given  "  totality,
but  a  totality  in  the  making  :  its  unity  consists  only  in
the  striving  towards  unity  on  the  part  of  the  minds
which  constitute  it.  This  does  not  mean  that  its  com-
pletion lies  at  some  point  in  the  future  ;  it  is  a  completion
that  never  is  and  never  will  be  attained  for  good  and
all,  but  one  which  is  always  being  attained.  The  life
of  the  world,  like  the  life  of  a  man,  consists  in  perpetual
activity.

(b)  As  the  new  knowledge  supplied  by  true  judg-
ments eliminates  from  the  mind  and  annihilates  erroneous
judgments,  so,  it  would  appear,  a  good  motive  arising.
in  the  will  annihilates  a  bad.  This  conception  is  at
first  sight  not  so  clear  as  the  other.  If  I  have  acted
upon  a  bad  motive,  how  can  I  then  entertain  a  good
motive  bearing  on  the  same  situation  ?  For  I  have
already  done  the  bad  thing,  and  I  cannot  now  do  its
good  alternative.  The  bad  act  is  a  historical  fact,  and
nothing  can  now  change  it.  That  is  true,  but  the  same
is  true  of  a  false  judgment.  If  I  have  made  a  mistake
and  published  it,  I  cannot  by  discovering  my  error  undo
all  the  harm  which  my  statement  may  have  done.  Nor
can  I  even  change  the  fact  that  I  did  believe  it.  The
most  I  can  do  is  to  cease  to  believe  it,  and  substitute  a
true  belief.  In  the  case  of  a  wrong  act  this  change  of
attitude  is  also  possible.  I  may  be  what  is  known  as  a
hardened  sinner,  that  is  to  say  I  may  refuse  to  admit
that  I  was  wrong  to  act  as  I  did  ;  but  I  may  also  change
my  attitude  towards  my  own  conduct  from  one  of  self-
approval  or  excuse  to  one  of  condemnation.  The  evil
with  which  we  are  concerned  is,  as  we  said  above  (§  2,  c),
not  the  consequence  but  the  badness  of  the  will  itself ;
and  this  can  only  be  overcome  in  one  way,  by  the  turn
of  the  will  from  evil  to  good.  This  attitude  of  a  will
which  in  virtue  of  its  own  goodness  condemns  an  evil
act  is  called,  when  the  evil  act  is  a  past  act  of  its  own,
repentance  ;  but  it  is  essentially  not  different  from  the
choosing  of  the  good  and  rejection  of  the  bad  among


i42 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS kt.h

two  alternatives  offered  to  the  will  as  present  possibilities.
It  is  thus  parallel  to  that  judgment  of  the  truth  which
either  overthrows  one's  own  past  mistake,  or  avoids  a
mistake  in  the  present.

The  two  cases  seem  to  be  parallel  throughout.  Just
as  one  cannot  believe  at  once  the  truth  and  the  error,
so  one  cannot  at  once  embrace  the  bad  and  the  good
motive  ;  and  just  as  the  truth  drives  out  the  error,  so
the  good  motive  expels  the  bad.  If  then  we  put  once
more  the  original  problem,  it  will  reappear  in  the
following  shape.  God  is  the  absolute  good  will :  his
will  includes  all  good  actions  and  nothing  else.  How
then  can  we  identify  him  with  a  universe  which  includes
both  good  and  bad  ?  The  answer  will  be  that  within
the  same  totality  of  will  there  cannot  be  both  good  and
bad  motives  bearing  on  the  same  action  or  situation.
Just  so  far  as  totality  is  attained,  the  good  will  must
eliminate  the  bad,  and  therefore  the  universe  conceived
as  a  totality  of  will  must  be  entirely  good.  Nor  is  this
argument  dependent  on  the  hypothesis,  if  it  is  a  hypo-
thesis, of  a  perfectly  good  God  ;  for  it  follows  from  the
conception  of  the  universe  as  containing  both  good  and
evil,  without  any  assumption  except  that  the  parts  of
the  universe  are  in  relation  to  one  another.

Here  again,  however,  there  are  two  points  which
must  be  emphasised.  The  first  is  that  we  have  not,  by
a  dialectical  juggle,  swept  evil  out  of  existence  or  proved
that  the  universe  is  perfect  just  as  it  stands,  and  con-
sidered at  any  given  moment.  The  perfection  of  the
universe  depends  on  its  being  a  totality  ;  and,  as  we
have  already  said,  it  is  only  a  totality  in  posse,  not  a
totality  in  esse.  The  non-existence  of  evil,  its  destruc-
tion by  goodness,  is  neither  an  accomplished  fact  nor  an
automatic  and  inevitable  conclusion.  It  is  a  process,
and  yet  not  a  process  if  that  means  something  never
actually  fulfilled  ;  rather  an  activity,  a  process  like  that
of  seeing  or  thinking,  which  is  complete  at  every
moment  and  is  not  a  sum  of  successive  states. The


ch.  iv  EVIL,


H3


triumph  of  good  over  evil  is  not  a  foregone  conclusion
but,  as  it  were,  a  permanent  miracle,  held  in  position  by
the  force  of  the  good  will.

The  other  point  relates  to  the  possibility  of  an
advance  in  the  other  direction  ;  of  the  elimination  not
of  evil  by  good  but  of  good  by  evil.  Is  it  not  possible
for  all  good  to  disappear  and  for  the  universe  to  become
entirely  bad  ?  It  is  certainly  possible  within  limits  for
error  to  drive  out  truth  and  for  vice  to  drive  out  virtue.
A  man  may  become  worse  and  worse,  and  lapse  into  a
quagmire  of  wickedness  from  which  it  is  progressively
harder  to  escape,  just  as  he  may  become  more  and  more
deluded  till  he  lapses  into  idiocy.  But  it  would  seem
that  his  very  delusions  must  be  based  on  some  lingering
remnant  of  truth ;  that  gone,  there  would  be  no  more
hallucination,  for  the  mind  would  simply  have  vanished.
A  man  who  knew  nothing  at  all  could  hardly  be  said
to  make  mistakes.  And  so  I  think  vice  always  exists
in  a  will  which  is  not  only  potentially  but  actually  to
some  extent  virtuous  ;  that  the  impulses  of  which  evil
is  made,  the  faculties  which  carry  it  into  effect,  are
themselves  virtues  of  a  sort.  It  is  often  said,  but  I  find
it  hard  fully  to  believe  it,  that  impulses  and  faculties
are  in  themselves  neither  good  nor  bad,  but  indifferent  :
the  mere  material  out  of  which  goodness  or  badness  is
made.  I  may  be  wrong,  but  I  cannot  help  feeling  that
the  admiration  with  which  we  regard  the  skill,  resource,
and  devotion  of  a  great  criminal  is  a  partly  moral
admiration,  and  that  the  evil  which  fights  against  good
is  itself  fighting  in  defence  of  a  good.  Can  we  call  it
a  perverted  good,  or  a  right  ideal  wrongly  followed  ?
These  may  be  meaningless  phrases,  but  they  seem  to
me  to  express  something  that  is  missed  by  the  sharp
dualistic  distinction  between  good  and  evil.

It  seems  clearer  that  evil  can  only  exist  in  an
environment  of  good.  No  society  is  ever  utterly
depraved,  and  crime  owes  its  existence  to  the  fact  that
it  is  exceptional. The  success  of  a  fraud  lies  in  the


i44 RELIGION  AND  METAPHYSICS n.  n

victim's  being  off  his  guard  ;  if  he  was  expecting  it  and
trying  to  do  it  himself  it  would  not  be  a  fraud,  any
more  than  to  deceive  an  opponent  at  chess  is  a  fraud.
The  same  applies  to  crimes  not  obviously  social  ;  they
necessarily  stand  out  against  a  background  of  normal
life  which  is  not  criminal.  Good  acts,  on  the  other
hand,  do  most  emphatically  not  require  a  background
of  evil.

It  seems  then,  if  these  arguments  are  justified,  that
there  cannot  be  even  a  totally  bad  person,  and  a  fortiori
not  a  totally  bad  society  or  universe.  If  coherence  and
totality  are  to  be  attained  at  all,  they  must  be  attained
by  complete  goodness.  And,  if  we  are  right,  they  can
be  thus  attained.  A  will  may  be  absolutely  good  ;  not
in  the  sense  that  it  is  ignorant  of  evil,  but  in  the  sense
that  it  knows  the  evil  and  rejects  it,  just  as  a  sound
intellect  is  not  ignorant  of  possible  errors,  but  sees
through  them  to  the  truth.  This  state  is  equally
perfection,  whether  it  has  been  won  through  error  and
sin,  or  without  them  ;  for  the  mind  is  not  in  bondage
to  its  own  past,  but  may  use  it  as  the  means  either  of
good  or  evil.

There  is  much  concerning  the  manner  in  which  evil
is  overcome  by  good  that  belongs  to  a  later  chapter  ;
but  we  can  already  give  some  kind  of  answer  to  the
question  with  which  we  began.  We  asked,  why  does
God  permit  evil  ?  He  does  not  permit  it.  His
omnipotence  is  not  restricted  by  it.  He  conquers  it.
But  there  is  only  one  way  in  which  it  can  be  conquered  :
not  by  the  sinner's  destruction,  which  would  mean  the
triumph  of  evil  over  good,  but  by  his  repentance.


PART III

FROM  METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


CHAPTER I

THE SELF-EXPRESSION OF GOD IN MAN

In  this  third  part  we  shall  attempt  to  use  the  results  of
the  foregoing  chapters  as  an  approach  to  some  of  the
more  technical  problems  of  theology.  We  shall  take
what  I  suppose  to  be  the  central  doctrine  of  the
Christian  faith,  and  ask  what  light  is  thrown  upon  it
by  the  conclusions  we  have  reached  as  to  the  relation
between  God,  man,  and  the  world  on  the  one  hand,  and
between  good  and  evil  on  the  other.  By  the  central
doctrine  of  Christianity  I  mean  that  taking-up  of
humanity  into  God  which  is  called  the  Incarnation
or  the  Atonement,  according  as  the  emphasis  is  laid
on  God's  self-expression  through  humanity  or  man's
redemption  through  the  spirit  of  God.

It  must  be  understood  that  I  approach  this  subject
from  a  single  definite  point  of  view.  I  shall  make  no
attempt  to  state  in  detail  the  beliefs  of  the  Church,  or
of  any  other  body.  Some  initial  statement  is  necessary,
but  this  may  be  very  brief  and  can  perhaps  be  presented
in  a  form  to  which  no  school  of  Christian  thought
would  very  strongly  object.  The  details  will  then  be
developed  by  applying  to  these  statements  the  general
principles  set  forth  in  the  second  part.  It  follows  that
these  chapters  aim  not  at  orthodoxy  but  at  the  faithful
translation  into  theological  terms  of  the  philosophy
already  expressed  in  the  preceding  pages.  I  might,  no
doubt,  have  gone  on  to  consider  whether  the  ultimate
theological  results  were  in  agreement  with  the  beliefs  of

147


148 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY ft.  m

orthodox  Christianity.  But  I  have  not  done  this ;  not
through  any  indifference  to  the  question,  for  it  would
be  hypocritical  to  conceal  my  hope  that  the  conclusions
here  advanced  may  really  agree  with  the  deepest  inter-
pretation of  the  Christian  creed,  but  because  the  task
involved  in  such  a  comparison  would  take  me  far
beyond  the  limits  of  this  volume.

i.  The  doctrine  of  the  Incarnation,  in  its  most
central  characteristics,  may  perhaps  be  outlined  in  some
such  way  as  this.  There  was  a  certain  historical  person
who  was  both  divine  and  human.  He  was  truly  and
actually  divine  with  the  full  characteristics  of  Godhead,
and  fully  and  completely  human  in  all  the  individuality
of  manhood.  He  was  not,  however,  a  compound  of
two  different  personalities,  but  one  single  personality.

This  statement  of  two  natures  in  one  person  may
be  taken  as  our  starting-point.  It  represents  approxi-
mately the  "  formula  of  Chalcedon  "  ;  and  it  must  be
noticed  in  passing  that  this  formula  is  no  more  than  a
starting-point.  As  stated,  it  puts  the  problem  without
offering  any  solution  at  all.  It  is  our  task  to  discover
how  such  a  problem  can  be  solved.  The  problem,
more  precisely,  is  not  for  us,  "  Was  such  and  such  a
person  both  divine  and  human?''  but,  "How  is  it
possible  for  a  person  to  be  both  ?  "  That  is  to  say,
we  are  setting  aside  all  questions  as  to  the  "  historical
Jesus  "  and  attending  merely  to  the  necessary  implica-
tions of  the  doctrine.  Our  answer  will  be  in  the  form,
"  if  any  man  fulfilled  such  and  such  conditions,  he  was
perfectly  divine  as  well  as  perfectly  human  ;  but  it  is
not  our  purpose  to  inquire  whether  the  conditions  have
been  fulfilled."

(a)  How  can  there  be  an  identity  between  a  human
being  and  God  ?  There  are  two  types  of  answer  to
this  question.  The  first  type  runs  thus  :  Man,  simply
as  man,  is  already  divine.  Man  is  spirit,  and  God  is
spirit,  and  between  the  two  there  is  no  sharp  line  of
demarcation. This truth, the divinity of  man, the


ch.i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 149

fatherhood  of  God,  is the  message  of  Jesus  and the
creed  of  Christendom.

The  second  type  of  answer  lays  stress  not  on  the
nature  of  mankind  as  a  whole,  but  on  the  nature  of
the  one  man  who  alone  is  believed  to  have  been  truly
and  fully  divine.  He,  and  no  other,  has  lived  a  perfect
life  ;  he  and  no  other  has  set  before  the  world  in  his
own  person  an  example  of  love  and  power  which  it
cannot  choose  but  worship.

These  two  answers  seem  not  only  different,  but  utterly
and  radically  hostile  ;  representative  of  points  of  view
between  which  there  can  be  no  truce.  The  first  is  the
purest  immanent  Pantheism,  the  second  an  absolutely
transcendent  Theism.  If  all  men  are  equally  divine  by
their  very  manhood,  then  the  claim  of  one  to  be
especially  so  is  indefensible.  The  claim,  then,  must
be  explained  away  or  boldly  pronounced  a  mistake.
Perhaps,  it  is  sometimes  suggested,  "  the  divine  man  '
means  no  more  than  "  the  man  who  first  discovered  the
divinity  of  man."  On  the  other  hand,  if  one  man  alone
is  divine,  it  cannot  for  a  moment  be  admitted  that  the
same  is  true  of  all  other  men ;  for  that  would  be  to
sacrifice  the  whole  value  of  the  one  unique  life.

It  is  clear  that  if  the  first  type  of  answer  is  adopted,
the  original  question  falls  to  the  ground.  We  need  no
longer  ask,  how  is  it  possible  for  a  man  to  be  divine  ?
because  no  man  is  anything  else.  But  we  are  left  with
two  difficulties.  In  the  first  place,  can  such  a  view  be
made  to  square  with  the  words  or  the  spirit  of  the  New
Testament  narratives  ?  and  secondly,  is  the  view  itself
a  sound  and  reasonable  one  ?

With  the  first  difficulty  we  have  nothing  to  do.
We  have  to  ask  whether  it  is  reasonable  to  hold  that  all
men  are  divine  in  such  a  way  that  no  one  is  more  divine
than  any  other.  And  here  we  may  recall  the  two  senses
in  which  the  word  identity  was  found  to  be  used.
There  is,  it  will  be  remembered,  a  purely  abstract
identity,  an  identity which cannot be diminished or


150 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.  m

increased,  which  subsists  merely  in  virtue  of  the  con-
tinued existence,  in  whatever  relation,  of  the  things
identified.  There  is  also  another  identity,  not  abstract
but  concrete,  subsisting  in  virtue  of  an  identity  of
thought  or  purpose  between  the  persons  concerned,  and
existing  only  so  long  as  that  identity  is  maintained.

Now  in  the  first  sense  every  man  must  be,  so  far  as
he  exists,  identical  with  every  other  and  with  God.
There  must  be  some  relation  between  God  and  any  man,
even  a  man  ignorant  of  God  or  hostile  to  him.  And
where  there  is  some  relation  there  is  some  identity.
Not  indeed  a  low  degree  or  small  amount  of  identity,
for  identity  only  exists  absolutely  :  it  is  either  complete
or  non-existent.  According  to  this  kind  of  identity,
then,  every  man  is  already  and  fully  divine,  and  it  is
not  possible  that  any  one  man  should  be  more  so  than
any  other.

But  the  other  kind  of  identity  depends  not  on  bare
existence  but  on  the  kind  of  existence  which  a  free  being
chooses  to  have.  According  to  this  kind  of  identity,
it  is  clear  that  any  man  who  fully  knew  the  mind  of
God,  and  whose  will  was  bent  on  the  same  ends  as  the
divine  will,  would  be  himself  both  man  and  God  in  one,
completely  human  and  completely  divine.  In  this  sense
not  every  man  is  divine  ;  indeed  it  is  rather  to  be
doubted  whether  any  man  ever  has  been  or  ever  could
be. This  question  we  shall  raise  later.

The  position  which  we  described  as  Pantheism,  then,
namely  that  every  man  is  necessarily  and  unchangeably
divine,  is  very  far  from  being  false  ;  but  is  equally  far
from  being  the  whole  truth,  and  to  represent  it  as  the
whole  truth  is  to  make  a  serious  mistake.  The  divinity
of  every  man,  simply  as  man,  is  no  more  than  an  abstract
divinity,  the  guarantee  of  a  fuller  and  more  concrete
union.  And  this  concrete  union  is  only  to  be  attained
in  and  by  the  identification  of  the  self  in  all  its  aspects
with  the  perfect  mind  of  God.

The  kind  of  identity  which  we  are  to  consider  is  the


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 151

latter  kind  only.  Of  the  former,  there  is  indeed  nothing
more  to  say;  it  is  a  pure  abstraction,  and  of  an  abstraction
we  can  say  no  more  than  that — in  its  own  abstract  way
— it  exists.  The  divinity  for  the  possession  of  which
we  reverence  the  Founder  of  Christianity,  the  union
with  God  which  we  ourselves  desire  to  attain,  is  no
abstraction  ;  it  is  a  concrete  and  living  activity,  and
therefore  it  depends  on,  or  rather  consists  in,  not  the
bare  unchangeable  nature  of  man  as  man,  but  the  positive
character  of  his  life,  his  individual  thoughts  and  actions.

God  and  man  are  identified  in  one  person,  concretely
identified,  that  is  identified  not  only  fully  but  also  in  the
highest  possible  sense,  when  a  human  being  has  an
individuality  of  his  own,  identified  with  that  of  God  in
the  unity  of  all  his  thought  and  action  with  the  divine
knowledge  and  the  divine  purpose.  This  ideal  person,
in  whom  Godhead  and  manhood  not  only  coexist  but
coincide,  I  shall  call  the  Christ  ;  but  without,  for  the
purposes  of  this  chapter,  assuming  his  identity  with  the
Jesus  of  history,  or  indeed  assuming  that  such  a  person
has  ever  lived  at  all.

(P)  It  may  be  objected  to  such  a  conception,  that  the
supposed  union  is  impossible  because  no  one  man — no
single  individual  —  can  comprehend  completely  the
nature,  and  identify  himself  with  the  purpose,  of  God
the  absolute  mind.  The  knowledge  and  manifestation
of  God  are,  it  may  be  said,  attained  little  by  little,
through  an  infinite  process  of  historical  growth  and
development.  Not  one  man,  but  the  whole  of  humanity
is  necessary  to  reveal  God  ;  and  not  humanity  only,
since  in  any  one  class  of  facts  God  can  only  reveal  as
much  of  his  nature  as  that  kind  of  fact  will  express.  A
single  man  can  only  express  one  very  limited  side  of  the
divine  character,  which  is  too  large  to  be  confined  within
the  circle  of  a  finite  personality.

This  objection  carries  great  weight  and  seems  very
convincing  ;  and  it  has  often  led  to  the  adoption  of  a
view  according  to  which  the  revelation  in  Jesus  is  only


152 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY w.  m

one  of  an  infinite  number  of  revelations,  each  and  all
contributing  something  to  the  total  knowledge  of  the
infinite  God.  And  yet  if  God  is  infinite  and  each
manifestation  of  him  is  finite,  how  can  any  number  of
manifestations  come  any  nearer  to  expressing  his  full
nature  ?  A  large  number  of  units  is  no  nearer  infinity
than  a  single  one.  Again,  is  it  really  justifiable  to
describe  a  human  personality  as  finite  at  all  ?  We  saw
reason  to  maintain  in  a  former  chapter  that  a  mind  was
only  definable  in  terms  of  the  object  of  which  it  was
conscious  ;  and  if  God  is  infinite  and  man  is  really
conscious  of  God,  it  seems  to  follow  that  man  thereby
becomes  infinite.  It  is  sometimes  said  that  for  this  very
reason  man  can  never  know  God  ;  but  to  lay  down
a  ■priori  what  a  given  mind  can  and  what  it  cannot  know
in  virtue  of  its  own  constitution  is  to  begin  at  the  wrong
end.  The  mind  is  what  it  makes  itself  ;  and  its  finitude
or  infinity  (if  the  words  mean  anything)  consists  merely
in  its  failure  or  success  in  the  attainment  of  its  desire.

The  objection  in  fact  is  precisely  an  instance  of  the
materialistic  type  of  thought  which  we  criticised  in  a
former  chapter.  It  represents  God  as  a  whole  composed
of  separate  and  mutually-exclusive  parts,  one  of  which
is  handled  at  a  time  ;  when  humanity  has  examined  one
part,  it  goes  on  to  another  ;  and  so  on.  Whereas  God
is  not  subdivisible  ;  he  is  a  true  whole,  with  no  separ-
able parts  ;  each  part  is  an  aspect  of  the  whole,  and  to
know  one  "  part  "  is  to  know  implicitly  all.  The  idea
of  progressive  revelation  is  only  a  new  materialism.

(V)  Another  objection  of  the  same  kind  asserts  that
a  man  whose  knowledge  and  will  were  divine  in  content
would  be  himself  only  God-like,  not  actually  one  with
God.  He  would  be  not  identical  but  similar.  This
again  depends  on  principles  which  we  have  already  criti-
cised. It  is  based  on  abstracting  the  personality  of  a
mind  from  its  content ;  I  am  I,  whatever  I  do  and  say
and  think,  and  on  the  same  terms  you  are  you.  The
individual self-identity  of  the  particular  mind  is  un-


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 153

changeable  and  underlies  all  changes  of  activity  ;  and
therefore  since  A's  ideas  happen  in  A's  mind  and  B's
ideas  in  B's  mind,  A  and  B  cannot  have  the  same  con-
sciousness but  only  a  similar  one.

We  have,  as  I  said,  already  considered  this  view  in
detail.  Our  objection  to  it  may  be  put  shortly  by  saying
that  it  admits  at  once  too  much  and  too  little.  If
A's  consciousness  is  only  very  like  B's  instead  of  being
identical,  there  is  no  real  communion  between  them  ;
for  that  requires  an  identity.  But  even  this  inadequate
similarity  cannot  be  maintained  ;  the  same  argument
which  destroyed  the  identity  is  fatal  to  it  also.  In  fact
this  view  is  a  compromise  with  materialism  (in  the  form
of  psychological  individualism  or  abstract  pluralism),
and  any  such  compromise  must  be  fatal  to  the  whole
truth.

{d)  We  must  maintain,  then,  that  it  is  possible  for  a
human  being  to  be  identified  with  God  in  the  concrete
sense,  as  having  a  full  and  real  intuition  of  the  divine
nature  in  its  completeness,  not  of  one  side  of  it  only,
and  a  full  harmony  and  agreement  with  the  divine  will  ;
not  abandoning  his  own  will  and  adopting  the  false
negativity  of  quietism,  but  acting  in  complete  union
with  God,  so  that  where  there  might  be  two  wills  there
is  one,  not  by  the  annihilation  of  one  but  by  the  activity
of  both  at  once  in  a  single  purpose.  Such  a  man  would
be  rightly  described  as  perfect  God  and  perfect  man,
for  the  distinction  would  in  his  personality  have  no
further  meaning.  He  would  therefore  show  in  comple-
tion the  powers  of  God  in  thought  and  in  action.

This  last  statement  may  cause  difficulty.  It  seems
that  the  very  fact  of  human  life  limits  and  circumscribes
the  man,  and  makes  it  impossible  for  him  to  exercise
the  full  powers  of  the  infinite  mind  of  God.  A  par-
ticular man,  it  appears,  cannot  be  omnipotent  or  omni-
scient, though  he  might  be  entirely  sinless  ;  and  there-
fore theories  have  arisen  to  the  effect  that  in  becoming
man  God  would  find  it  necessary  to  abandon  certain  of


154 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY n.m

his  attributes.  Such  a  self-sacrifice  seems  to  be  an
additional  and  very  strong  proof  of  the  love  of  God
towards  humanity.

But  it  is  not  easy  to  see  what  can  be  meant  by  the
renunciation  of  some  of  the  divine  attributes.  The  life
of  the  mind  is  whole,  without  seam,  woven  from  the  top
throughout  ;  the  only  sense  in  which  we  can  separate
one  attribute  from  the  others  is  that  we  may  abstract  it,
that  is,  have  a  false  theory  that  is  separate  ;  we  can
never  actually  employ  one  faculty  alone.  The  concep-
tion of  the  self-limitation  of  a  will  may  in  fact  mean
two  things  ;  either  volition  itself,  which  by  accepting
one  end  involves  renunciation  of  another,  or  a  volition
in  which  it  is  determined  not  to  will  at  all.  Now  in
the  former  sense,  self-limitation  or  self-sacrifice  is  the
negative  side  of  all  acting  ;  nothing  can  be  done  at  all
without  the  sacrifice  of  something  else.  Thus  the
temptation  of  Jesus,  for  instance,  represents  a  true  self-
limitation  ;  he  decides  not  to  adopt  certain  courses  of
action,  not  as  a  mere  act  of  abstract  self-sacrifice  but
because  he  is  determined  on  a  course  with  which  these
others  are  incompatible.  In  the  second  sense,  self-
limitation  cannot  exist  at  all ;  for  every  act  of  will  is
the  will  to  do  something,  and  a  will,  whose  sole  end  was
the  abstract  decision  not  to  will,  cannot  be  imagined.
We  never,  strictly  speaking,  decide  "  not  to  do  any-
thing "  ;  when  we  use  that  phrase  we  always  mean  that
we  decide  not  to  do  some  definite  thing  A  or  B,  but  to
go  on  doing  C.

The  self-limitation  of  God,  then,  cannot  be  inter-
preted in  this  abstract  way  as  the  mere  renunciation  of
certain  faculties.  And  it  is  not  true  that  such  things  as
omniscience  and  omnipotence  are  "  faculties "  at  all,
distinguishable  from  the  faculties  of  knowing  and  acting
in  general.  The  question  is  whether  human  life  as  such
is  incompatible  with  the  exercise  of  the  divine  attributes,
wisdom  and  goodness,  at  all.  No  impassable  gulf
separates  divine  knowledge  from  human  ;  God  has  not,


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 155

in  addition  to  his  power  of  knowing,  another  power
denied  to  man  and  called  omniscience.  Omniscience
is  merely  the  name  for  the  complete  and  unremitting
employment  of  the  faculty  of  knowing.  This  faculty
man  certainly  possesses.  If  it  were  not  so,  the  possi-
bility of  a  divine-human  life  would  doubtless  be  at  an
end.  Man  could  neither  know  God  nor  obey  his  will  ;
and  the  divine  spirit  could  only  operate  in  man  by  losing
all  its  essential  character.  All  human  thought  would
be  illusion,  and  all  human  activity  sin,  and  to  make  it
otherwise  would  be  beyond  the  power  of  God  himself.
Rather  than  accept  such  conclusions,  we  shall  do  right
in  maintaining  that  all  God's  nature,  without  any  reser-
vation or  abatement,  is  expressible  in  human  form.

The  human  being  in  whom  God  is  fullv  manifested,
then,  must  have  God's  powers  and  faculties  fully
developed,  and  if  fully  developed  then  fully  employed,
since  an  unemployed  faculty  has  no  real  existence  at  all.
He  must  be  omnipotent  and  omniscient.  Whatever
God  can  know  and  do,  he  also  can  know  and  do.  This
is  a  grave  difficulty  if  we  think  of  omnipotence  and
omniscience  in  an  utterly  abstract  way,  involving  such
things  as  the  power  to  make  twice  two  into  five  or  the
knowledge  of  an  action  which  has  not  yet  been  decided
upon.  But  omnipotence  does  not  mean  power  to  do
absurdities.  The  compulsion  of  another's  will  is  such
an  absurdity  ;  and  therefore  no  real  omnipotence  could
force  such  a  compulsion.  Omnipotence  is  spiritual,  and
spirit  acts  not  by  brute  compulsion  but  by  knowledge
and  inspiration.  The  omnipotence  of  God,  his  kingdom
over  men's  minds,  consists  in  their  allegiance  to  his
purposes,  their  answer  to  his  love,  their  repentance  and
return  from  sin  to  his  side.  And  this  omnipotence —
the  universal  kingdom  which  is  planted  in  the  hearts  of
men — can  indeed  be  wielded  by  God  in  human  form.
To  say  that  God  cannot  compel  is  not  to  deny  him
omnipotence  ;  it  is  to  assert  his  positive  nature  as  spirit.
But  since  spirit  is  self-creative  and  makes  its  own  nature,


156 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.hi

this  absence  of  compulsion  is  in  one  sense  a  self-limita-
tion of  the  will  of  God.  But  (i.)  it  is  a  self-limitation
of  God  as  God,  not  of  God  as  incarnate  in  man  ;  (ii.)  it
is  only  self-limitation  in  the  sense  in  which  any  deter-
mination, e.g.  of  a  good  man  to  abstain  from  taking
mean  advantages,  is  a  self-limitation.

In  the  category  of  knowledge  we  must  also  hold  that
the  omniscience  of  God  is  shared  by  the  Christ  in  whom
his  nature  is  manifested.  It  might  be  thought  that
this  was  unnecessary  ;  that  the  divine  man  would  know
God  as  he  is,  but  would  not  know  the  things  God
knows.  But  such  a  plea  is  based  on  the  false  distinction
between  the  mind  and  its  content,  the  individual
consciousness  and  the  knowledge  of  which  it  is  conscious.
To  know  some  one's  mind  is  nothing  more  nor  less  than
to  see  eye  to  eye  with  him,  to  look  at  reality  as  he  looks
at  it,  to  know  what  he  knows.  His  mind  is  not  an
object  in  itself;  it  is  an  attitude  towards  the  real  world,
and  to  know  his  mind  is  to  know  and  share  that
attitude.  The  Christ,  then,  must  be  omniscient  as
God  is.

This  again  is  a  serious  difficulty.  How  can  an
individual  man,  whose  consciousness  is  bounded  by  his
age  and  time,  be  omniscient  or  even  approximate  to
such  a  state?  Is  not  that  a  fallacy  now  happily  ex-
ploded and  consigned  to  the  theological  rubbish-heap  ?
Omniscient  in  a  quite  abstract  sense  the  Christ  cannot
be,  just  as  he  cannot  be  in  the  same  sense  omnipotent.
That  is  to  say,  looking  at  history  as  a  succession  of
detached  events  temporally  distinct,  he  cannot  know
the  future  ;  future  history,  actions,  and  events  gener-
ally he  cannot  foretell.  But  this  is  simply  because,
taking  history  in  this  abstract  way,  the  future  is
positively  undetermined,  non-existent  as  yet,  unknow-
able ;  God  himself  cannot  know  it.  On  the  other  hand,
if  history  means  the  discovery  of  absolute  truth  and  the
development  of  God's  purposes,  the  divine  man  will
stand  at  the  centre  of  it  and  know  it,  past  and  future,


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 157

from  within,  not  as  a  process  but  as  a  whole.  This  means
not  that  he  will  be  acquainted  with  details  of  scholarship
and  history,  but  that  he  will  know  as  from  its  source
the  essential  truth  at  which  wise  men  have  aimed,  so
that  whatever  is  of  permanent  value  in  knowledge,
ancient  or  modern,  is  already  summed  up  in  his  view
of  the  world.

If  God's  purposes  can  be — as  we  have  said — really
hindered  and  blocked  by  evil  wills,  then  God  himself
cannot  know  in  advance  their  detailed  history.  He
knows  their  ultimate  fate  ;  he  sees  them  as  a  composer
sees  his  symphony  complete  and  perfect  ;  but  he
cannot  know  beforehand  every  mistake  of  the  per-
formers. Those  irruptions  of  the  evil  will  into  God's
plans  are  no  part  of  the  unity  of  the  world,  no  part  of
the  plan  ;  it  is  only  by  destroying  them,  wiping  them
out  of  existence,  that  God's  purposes  can  be  fulfilled.
God  himself  strives  against  evil,  does  not  merely  look
down  from  heaven  upon  our  conflict  ;  and  if  he  does
not  blast  the  wicked  with  the  breath  of  his  mouth,
neither  does  he  set  them  up  as  mere  puppets,  targets
for  virtue's  archery.  The  existence  of  evil,  if  it  can  be
called  a  real  abatement  of  God's  omnipotence,  is  equally
so  of  his  omniscience  ;  not  merely  of  that  of  his  human
manifestation.  But  as  we  said  in  a  former  chapter  that
evil  does  not  truly  limit  God's  omnipotence,  because  he
conquers  it  in  his  own  way,  so  the  freedom  of  the
future  is  not  truly  a  detriment  to  his  omniscience.

So  far,  then,  it  seems  that  the  expression  of  deity  in
a  human  being  is  definitely  possible,  because  in  whatever
sense  we  can  conceive  God  to  be  omnipotent  and  omni-
scient, in  the  same  sense  it  is  conceivable  that  his  human
incarnation  should  be  so.  There  will  be  no  failure  to
express  in  bodily  form  the  whole  fulness  of  God's
nature  ;  every  aspect,  every  potentiality  of  his  being
will  be  included  in  the  life  of  the  perfect  man  who  is
also  perfect  God.

2.  But if  these  are  the  relations  of  the  Christ  to


158 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

God,  how  shall  we  describe  his  relations  with  humanity  ?
In  what  sense  can  he  be  called  perfect  man,  and  what  is
the  relation  of  his  life  and  consciousness  to  those  of  the
human  race  in  general  ?

(a)  The  first  point  is  the  reality  of  his  manhood.
There  is  a  real  difficulty  in  this  point  owing  to  the
vagueness  of  the  term  "  manhood."  Many  Christo-
logical  discussions  suffer  from  lack  of  reflexion  on  this
point.  The  conception  of  deity  is  thought  to  be  a
difficult  and  abstruse  one,  to  elucidate  which  no  pains
are  sufficient ;  that  of  humanity,  on  the  other  hand,  is
often  passed  over  as  too  simple  to  need  investigation.
Yet  if  we  ask,  Does  a  man  who  is  identical  with  God
thereby  cease  to  be  a  man  ?  it  is  clear  that  he  does  or
does  not  according  to  different  senses  of  the  word.
Many  people  are  ready  to  say  that  the  notion  of  finitude,
fallibility,  sinfulness,  is  "  contained  in  the  very  idea  of
manhood."  If  that  is  really  so,  then  the  perfect  man
cannot  be  called  a  man  ;  and  any  man  becomes  less  and
less  human  as  he  becomes  better  and  better.  If,  on  the
other  hand,  we  mean  by  man  nothing  more  than  a  person
living  in  human  relations,  then  the  perfect  man  is  clearly
a  man  among  his  fellow-men  ;  a  better  man,  but  a  man.
The  question  is  what  name  we  give  to  manhood  purged
of  its  imperfections  ;  and  so  far,  it  is  a  merely  verbal
question.

But  the  point  at  issue  is  not  entirely  verbal.  Granted
his  divinity,  his  perfection  and  absoluteness,  it  may  be
said,  he  cannot  be  the  member  of  a  society  in  which
every  part  is  limited  by  and  dovetailed  into  every  other.
He  will  burst  the  bonds  of  any  society  into  which  he  is
put  ;  and  inasmuch  as  he  is  anti-social  in  this  way  he
cannot  be  called  a  man  among  men.  After  what  we
have  already  said,  this  argument  need  not  detain  us
long.  It  is  true  that  he  will  certainly  burst  the  bonds
of  any  society,  that  his  appearance  heralds  the  overthrow
of  the  world's  powers,  that  he  comes  to  bring  a  sword.
But  it  is  society  that is  anti-social,  and  not  he  ; he


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN i  59

destroys  it  because  of  his  humanity  and  its  inhuman
mechanisms  and  deadnesses.  Destruction  must  always
be  the  effect  of  any  new  truth  or  new  impulse  ;  but
what  it  destroys  is  man's  idolatries,  not  man  himself.

The  most  important  difficulty  in  the  way  of  con-
ceiving the  Christ  as  truly  human  is  in  the  last  resort
identical  with  that  which  formed  the  subject  of  our  last
section  (§1,  d).  As  long  as  human  and  divine  nature  are
regarded  simply  as  different  sets  or  groups  of  qualities,
to  assert  their  inherence  in  one  individual  is  really
meaningless,  as  if  we  should  assert  the  existence  of  a
geometrical  figure  which  was  both  a  square  and  a  circle.
This  does  not  mean  that  those  who  asserted  "two
natures  in  one  person  "  were  wrong  ;  but  it  does  mean
that  they  were  trying  to  express  a  truth  in  terms  that
simply  would  not  express  it.  If  any  one  said  that  he  did
not  see  how  such  a  union  of  natures  could  take  place,
he  was  necessarily  told  that  it  was  a  mystery  past  under-
standing. But  the  mystery,  the  element  which  baffles
the  intellect,  lies  not  at  all  in  the  truth  to  be  expressed,
but  solely  in  its  expression  by  improper  language  ;  that
is  to  say,  the  combination  with  it  of  presuppositions
which  contradict  it.  We  start  by  assuming  human
nature  to  be  one  definite  thing  and  divine  nature
another  ;  and  the  language  which  is  framed  on  such
a  basis  can  never  serve  to  express  intelligibly  the  fact
which  it  implicitly  denies,  namely  the  union  of  the  two.
This  assumption  we  have  by  now  criticised  and  found
to  be  inadequate  ;  we  have  rejected  the  idea  of  a  mind
as  having  a  "  nature "  of  its  own  in  distinction  from
what  it  does  ;  and  by  doing  so  we  have  removed  in
advance  the  abstract  argument  that  a  divine  person,  by
his  very  nature,  cannot  be  truly  and  completely  human.

(J?)  But  the  impulse  of  the  divine  spirit  is  not
exhausted  by  any  one  man.  His  followers,  so  far  as
they  attain  discipleship,  share  his  spirit  and  his  life  ;  his
knowledge  of  God  becomes  theirs,  and  his  identification
of  God's  will  with  his  own  is  also  theirs. To  this  extent


160 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT.  Ill


they  have  precisely  the  relation  to  him  which  he  has  to
God  ;  and  through  him  they  attain  the  same  relation  to
God  in  which  he  lives.  That  is  to  say,  their  mind  actually
becomes  one  with  his  mind,  his  mind  lives  in  them  and
they  in  him.  This  must  be  true  of  every  one  who
learns  from  him  and  follows  him.  The  union  with
God  which  he  enjoys  is  imparted  to  them  ;  they  become
he,  and  in  so  doing  they  equally  with  him  become  God.

Here  again,  we  do  not  ask  whether  anybody  has
ever  attained  discipleship  in  this  absolute  degree  ;  we
merely  say  that  if  any  one  did  truly  follow  the  light
given  by  the  divine  incarnation  he  would  live  literally
in  God  and  God  in  him  ;  there  would  be  no  more
"  division  of  substance "  than  there  is  between  the
Father  and  the  Son.  Thus  the  Christ  appears  as
Mediator  of  the  divine  life  ;  he  enjoys  that  life  to  the
full  himself,  and  imparts  it  fully  to  his  disciples.
Through  learning  of  him  and  following  him  it  is  possible
to  attain,  by  his  mediation,  the  same  divine  life  which
we  see  in  him.

(c)  But  such  a  union  of  life  with  life  can  hardly  be
confined  to  the  definite  disciples  of  any  historical  person.
Among  the  countless  numbers  who  know  nothing  of
his  life  as  a  historic  fact,  to  whom  his  words  and  example
have  never  penetrated,  are  certainly  many  who  have
true  knowledge  of  reality  and  the  real  attainment  of  a
good  life.  What  is  the  relation  of  these  to  the  divine
incarnation  ?

The  spirit  of  truth  is  not  circumscribed  by  the  limits
of  space  and  time.  If  a  real  community  of  life  is
possible  between  two  men  who  share  each  other's  out-
ward presence  and  inward  thoughts,  it  is  possible  no
less  between  two  who  have  never  met  ;  between  the
ancient  poet  and  his  modern  reader,  or  the  dead
scientist  and  the  living  man  who  continues  his  work.
The  earlier  in  point  of  time  lives  on  in  the  life  of  the
later  ;  each  deriving  the  benefit  from  such  intercourse.
Even  if  we  did  not  suppose  the  individual  conscious-


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 161

ness  of  the  dead  to  remain  with  us,  we  should  at  least
admit  that  all  that  was  left  of  them — their  work — profits
by  our  carrying  it  on  ;  and  we  profit  by  using  it  as  our
starting-point.  In  this  sense  there  is  a  real  community
between  the  Christ  and  the  predecessors  whose  lives
have,  historically  speaking,  led  up  to  and  made  possible
his  own.

Again,  there  is  a  union  of  mind  between  persons
who  are  in  the  order  of  history  unaware  of  each  other's
existence  ;  between  Hebrew  prophet  and  Greek  philo-
sopher;  between  two  scientists  who  cannot  read  each
other's  language.  This  union  consists  in  the  fact  that
both  are  dealing  with  the  same  problems  ;  for  in  so  far
as  any  two  minds  are  conscious  of  the  same  reality,  they
are  the  same  mind.  Thus  there  is  a  certain  spiritual
intercourse  between  men  who  have  no  outward  point  of
contact  whatever  ;  and  even  if  it  is  true,  as  Aristotle
says,  that  bodily  presence  is  the  fulfilment  of  friendship,
men  may  still  be  friends  when  neither  knows  the
other's  name.

The  life  of  the  Christ  then  is  shared  not  only  by  his
professed  disciples  but  by  all  who  know  truth  and  lead
a  good  life  ;  all  such  participate  in  the  life  of  God  and
in  that  of  his  human  incarnation.  But  whereas  we  say
that  his  disciples  enjoy  the  divine  life  through  his
mediation,  it  seems  at  first  sight  that  we  cannot  speak
of  mediation  in  this  other  case.  If  mediation  means
simply  example  and  instruction  of  one  historical  person
by  another,  that  is  true.  But  there  is  no  ultimate
difference  between  the  two  cases.  In  each  case  the
spirit  of  God,  whose  presence  in  the  heart  is  truth,  is
shared  by  men  as  it  was  shared  by  the  Christ  ;  and  to
speak  of  reaching  him  through  God  or  God  through
him  is  to  introduce  a  conception  of  process  or  transition
which  is  really  indefensible.  As  the  disciple  finds  God
in  the  Christ,  so  the  non-disciple  finds  the  Christ  in  God  ;
in  the  fact  that  he  knows  God  he  is  already  one  with  the
Christ  whom,  "according  to  the  flesh,"  he  does  not  know.

M


1 62 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.hi

The  conception  of  mediation,  then,  does  not  stand
in  the  last  resort.  The  experience  which  it  designates
is  perfectly  real  ;  but  the  word  itself  implies  a  division
of  the  indivisible.  We  speak  of  reaching  God  through
Christ  when  we  rather  mean  that  we  find  him  in  Christ.
And  therefore  the  relation  of  the  Christ  to  those  who
do  not  know  him  as  a  historical  man  is  as  intimate,
granted  that  in  their  ignorance  they  do  lead  a  life  of
truth  and  endeavour,  as  his  union  with  those  who  call
themselves  his  followers.  In  the  language  of  religion,
he  saves  not  only  his  disciples  but  those  who  lived
before  his  birth  and  those  who  never  knew  his  name.

3.  Whether  such  an  incarnation  has  ever  happened
at  all  is,  we  repeat,  a  question  for  history.  And  if
so,  it  is  equally  for  history  to  decide  whether  it  has
happened  once  or  many  times.  But  on  this  question
certain  a  priori  points  must  be  considered.  There  are
certain  arguments  which  seem  to  prove  the  plurality  of
incarnations.

{a)  The  first  is  the  pantheistic  argument.  God  is
exemplified  not  simply  in  one  man  but  in  everything.
There  is  no  fact  which  does  not  reveal  God  to  any  one
who  is  able  to  see  him  there.  And  consequently  it  is
idle  to  talk  of  one  final  revelation.  There  are  countless
revelations.

This  is  almost  a  restatement  of  the  view  in  §  1,  b,
which  required  an  infinite  number  of  revelations  to
express  the  infinite  aspects  of  God's  character.  It
springs  from  the  thought  that  since  God  is  all,  every
individual  reality  has  an  equal  right  to  stand  as  a  revela-
tion of  him.  This  is  the  view  which  we  define  as
Pantheism.  Our  answer  to  that  general  position  is  that
God  is  not  every  isolated  thing,  but  only  that  which  is
good  and  true ;  or,  which  comes,  as  we  have  seen,  to
the  same  thing,  reality  as  a  whole,  in  an  ordered  and
coherent  system.  That  which  is  good  reveals  God
directly  ;  that  which  is  evil  reveals  him  indeed  no  less,
but  only  indirectly,  through  its  relations  with  the  good.


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 163

A  wicked  man  does  not,  by  his  wickedness,  reveal  the
nature  of  God  ;  but  if  we  understood  the  whole  history,
the  beginning  and  end,  of  his  sins,  we  should  realise
that  he,  no  less  than  the  good,  stands  as  an  example
of  God's  dealings  with  the  world.

(b)  Secondly,  there  is  a  logical  argument.  God  is
regarded  from  this  point  of  view  as  the  universal,  and
man  as  the  particular.  Now  every  particular  expresses
the  universal,  and  each  expresses  it  completely.  The
whole  universal  is  expressed  in  each  particular,  and  the
whole  of  the  particular  expresses  the  universal  and
nothing  else.  Every  particular  number  is  equally  an
example  of  number,  and  nothing  but  number.  Therefore
every  man  really  expresses  the  universal,  God,  equally
well.  It  may  be  that  one  particular  expresses  it  to  us
more  clearly  than  another  by  reason  of  certain  con-
ventionalities and  habits  of  our  mind  ;  as  for  instance  a
schoolboy  might  be  unable  to  prove  of  a  cardboard
triangle  what  he  can  perfectly  well  prove  of  one  in  chalk
on  the  blackboard.  But  this  is  a  fault  of  the  schoolboy,
and  no  merit  in  the  chalk  triangle.  One  particular  may
seem  to  represent  the  universal  in  so  uniquely  perfect
a  way  that  it  and  it  alone  may  be  taken  as  the  full
representation  of  it;  but  this  is  never  really  a  justifiable
proceeding. It  is  a  prejudice  and  an  error.

On  the  other  hand,  the  universal  itself,  which  as  a
matter  of  fact  exists  only  in  various  particulars,  is
sometimes  falsely  conceived  as  if  it  were  itself  another
particular  ;  and  thus  arises  the  notion  of  an  archetype
or  ideal  specimen  of  a  class,  to  which  every  less  perfect
member  is  an  approximation.  These  two  tendencies  of
false  logic,  the  tendency  to  elevate  one  particular  into  the
standard  and  only  real  instance  of  a  universal,  and  the
tendency  to  hypostasise  the  universal  into  a  perfect  and
ideal  particular,  together  give  (it  is  supposed)  the  rationale
of  the  process  by  which  one  man  has  been  elevated  into
the  sole  and  perfect  revelation  of  the  divine.  The
truth  rather  is  (according  to  this  view)  that  every  man,


i64 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY ft.  m

as  a  particular  instance  of  the  nature  of  spirit,  whose
universal  is  God,  is  equally  an  instance  of  that  nature
and  a  manifestation  of  the  essence  of  God.

This  view  is  based  on  assuming  that  God  is  the
universal  of  which  man  is  the  particular.  But  this  can
hardly  be  the  case  ;  for  God  and  man  would  then  be  as
inseparable  as  triangularity  from  a  given  triangle.  The
fact  of  evil,  that  is  to  say,  the  alienation  of  man  from
God,  becomes  on  such  a  view  mere  nonsense,  as  if  one
should  talk  of  the  de-triangularising  of  triangles.  The
assumption  involved,  that  every  man  as  such  is  completely
and  in  the  fullest  sense  divine,  begs  the  question  at  issue.
Indeed  it  is  an  unwarranted  assumption  that  because  we
call  a  given  set  of  individuals  men  therefore  they  equally
well  manifest  even  the  nature  of  men.  If  human
nature  means  virtues — what  man  ought  to  be — it  is
not  common  to  every  man  equally.  Some  men  in  that
sense  are  human  and  others  inhuman.  And  if  it  merely
means  the  bare  qualities  which  every  man  has  in
common,  such  qualities  considered  in  abstraction  are
nothing  definite  at  all  ;  for  the  quality  which  one  man
makes  a  means  to  crime  another  may  use  as  a  means  to
virtue  ;  and  the  crime  or  the  virtue  are  the  really
important  things,  the  character  of  the  individual  men.
But  these  are  not  common  to  all  men,  and  therefore  not
"  human  nature "  in  this  sense.  In  fact  there  is  no
such  thing  as  human  nature  in  the  sense  of  a  definite
body  of  characteristics  common  to  every  one,  and  if
there  were  it  would  not  be  by  any  means  the  same  thing
as  God.

If  the  universal  is  a  quality  or  attribute  exemplified
by  individuals  which  are  called  its  particulars,  according
to  the  doctrine  of  logic,  then  the  relation  between  God
and  men  is  not  one  of  universal  and  particular.  If  God
were  considered  as  simply  the  quality  goodness  instead
of  being  a  person,  then  he  would  be  the  universal  of  all
good  actions ;  but  on  that  account  he  would  not  be  the
universal  of  bad  ones,  and  since  bad  actions  are  real  acts


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 165

of  will,  God  would  not  be  the  universal  of  minds  as
such.  The  ordinary  logical  conception  of  the  universal,
the  one  quality  of  many  things,  is  in  fact  inapplicable
to  the  relation  between  God  and  other  minds.  And
therefore  we  cannot  argue  that  any  particular  mind
shows  the  nature  of  God  as  well  as  any  other.  The
question  to  be  asked  about  mind  is  not  what  it  is,  but
what  it  does  ;  a  question  with  which  the  logic  of  things
and  qualities  does  not  deal.

(c)  Beyond  these  objections  the  question  of  Christ's
uniqueness  passes  into  the  region  of  history.  It  is  only
necessary  to  add  one  warning  :  that  if  he  is  the  means
of  communicating  the  divine  life  to  man  and  raising
man  into  union  with  God,  the  very  success  of  his  mission
will  in  one  sense  destroy  his  uniqueness.  Any  one  who
fully  learns  his  teacher's  lesson  has  become  spiritually
one  with  his  teacher  ;  and  therefore  the  teacher's
experience  of  the  truth  is  no  longer  unique.  The
teacher  remains  unique  only  as  the  first  discoverer  of
the  truth  in  the  order  of  time,  or  as  the  mediator  of  it
in  the  order  of  education  ;  in  the  completion  of  his  life
this  uniqueness  disappears  into  absolute  unity  with  his
disciples.  If  therefore  we  try  to  define  the  uniqueness
of  the  Christ  in  such  a  way  as  to  make  his  experience
incapable  of  real  communication  to  man,  we  shall  be
preserving  his  divinity  at  the  expense  of  his  humanity,
and  making  the  supposed  manifestation  of  God  to  man
an  illusion.  The  revelation  —  any  revelation  —  sets
before  us  an  ideal  ;  if  the  ideal  is  not  literally  and  com-
pletely capable  of  attainment,  it  is  not  an  ideal  at  all.
It  is  an  ignis  fatuus.

But  if  this  is  so,  it  will  be  asked,  why  does
history  tell  us  of  one  and  only  one  life  in  which  it  has
been  fully  attained  ?  Does  not  the  isolated  position  of
Jesus  Christ  in  history,  his  infinite  moral  superiority  to
all  the  saints,  prove  that  there  was  in  his  nature  some
element  that  is  denied  to  us  ;  and  are  we  not  driven  by
the  facts  to  suppose  that  his  uniqueness  lay  not  so  much


166 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY n.  m

in  the  use  he  made  of  human  faculties  as  in  the  possession
of  superhuman  ?

To  this  we  must  reply  that  the  possession  by  any
person  of  faculties  inherently  different,  whether  in  nature
or  integrity,  from  our  own,  makes  our  attempts  to  live
his  life  not  merely  vain  but  unreasonable  ;  as  if  a  man
should  emulate  the  strength  of  an  elephant  or  a  hereditary
consumptive  the  physique  of  his  untainted  ancestors.
If  it  is  answered  that  these  higher  faculties  can  indeed
be  possessed  by  man,  but  only  as  bestowed  by  divine
grace,  we  shall  reply  that  this  is  exactly  the  position  we
have  been  maintaining  :  for  we  believe  that  a  man's
human  nature  consists  in  no  definite  and  circumscribed
group  of  qualities,  but  precisely  in  those  achievements
to  which  the  divine  grace  may  lead  him,  or  those  sins
into  which  he  may  fall  by  the  rejection  of  such  guidance.
But  to  explain  why  one  man  attains  and  another  fails  is
no  part  of  our  task.

\d)  The  Christ  has  absolute  experience  of  the
nature  of  God  and  lives  in  absolute  free  obedience  to
his  will.  So  far  as  anybody  attains  these  ideals  in  the
pursuit  of  truth  and  duty,  he  shares  the  experience
with  Christ  in  absolute  union  with  him,  that  is,  with
God.  Such  moments  of  attainment,  in  even  the
greatest  men,  are  no  doubt  rare  ;  but  they  are  the
metal  of  life  which,  when  the  reckoning  is  made,  is
separated  from  the  dross  and  is  alone  worth  calling  life
at  all.  Separate  out  from  the  total  of  experience  all
errors,  all  failures,  all  sins  ;  and  the  gold  that  is  left
will  be  entirely  one  with  the  Christ-life.  We  thus  see
from  a  new  point  of  view  the  absolute  unity  of  Christ
and  God  ;  for,  as  we  said  earlier,  God  is  the  reality  of
the  world  conceived  as  a  whole  which  in  its  self-realisa-
tion and  impulse  towards  unity  purges  out  of  itself  all
evil  and  error.  History  regarded  in  that  way — not  as
a  mere  bundle  of  events  but  as  a  process  of  the  solution
of  problems  and  the  overcoming  of  difficulties — is
altogether summed up in the infinite personality of


ch.  i SELF-EXPRESSION  OF  GOD  IN  MAN 167

God  ;  and  we  can  now  see  that  it  is  equally  summed
up  in  the  infinite  personality  of  the  God-Man.

If  Christ  is  thus  the  epitome,  the  summary  and
ordered  whole,  of  history,  the  same  is  true  of  every
man  in  his  degree.  The  attainment  of  any  real  truth
is  an  event,  doubtless,  in  time,  and  capable  of  being
catalogued  in  the  chronologies  of  abstract  history  ;  but
the  truth  itself  is  not  historically  circumscribed.  A
man  may  come  to  know  God  through  a  sudden
"  revelation  "  or  "  conversion  "  ;  but  God  is  the  same
now  and  for  ever.  In  the  knowledge  of  God,  then,
which  means  in  all  true  knowledge,  man  comes  into
touch  with  something  out  of  time,  something  to  which
time  makes  no  difference.  And  since  knowledge  of
God  is  union  with  God,  he  does  not  merely  see  an
extra-temporal  reality ;  he  does  not  merely  glance
through  breaking  mists  at  the  battlements  of  eternity,
as  Moses  saw  the  promised  land  from  the  hill  of  re-
nunciation. By  his  knowledge  of  eternity  he  is  one
with  eternity  ;  he  has  set  himself  in  the  centre  of  all
time  and  all  existence,  free  from  the  changes  and
the  flux  of  things.  He  has  entered  into  the  life  of
God,  and  in  becoming  one  with  God  he  is  already
beyond  the  shadow  of  changing  and  the  bitterness
of  death.

There  is  a  faint  analogue  to  this  immortality  in  the
work  by  which  a  man  leaves  something  of  himself
visibly  present  on  earth.  The  workman  in  a  cathedral
sets  his  own  mark  upon  the  whole  and  leaves  his
monument  in  the  work  of  his  hands.  He  passes  away,
but  his  work — his  expressed  thought,  his  testimony  to
the  glory  of  God — remains  enshrined  in  stone.  Even
that  is  liable  to  decay,  and  in  time  such  earthly  immor-
tality is  as  if  it  had  never  been.  But  if  a  man  has
won  his  union  with  the  mind  of  God,  has  known  God's
thought  and  served  God's  purpose  in  any  of  the  count-
less ways  in  which  it  can  be  served,  his  monument  is
not  something  that  stands  for  an  age  when  he  is  dead.


1 68 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.hi

It  is  his  own  new  and  perfected  life  ;  something  that  in
its  very  nature  cannot  pass  away,  except  by  desertion  of
the  achieved  ideal.  This  is  the  statue  of  the  perfect
man,  more  perennial  than  bronze  ;  the  life  in  a  house
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens.


CHAPTER II
god's  redemption  of  man

i.  Whatever  else  is  involved  in  the  doctrine  of
the  Atonement,  it  includes  at  least  this  :  that  the  sins
of  man  are  forgiven  by  God.  And  here  at  the  very
outset  a  difficulty  arises  which  must  be  faced  before  the
doctrine  can  be  further  developed.  Forgiveness  and
punishment  are  generally  conceived  as  two  alternative
ways  of  treating  a  wrongdoer.  We  may  punish  any
particular  criminal,  or  we  may  forgive  him  ;  and  the
question  always  is,  which  is  the  right  course  of  action.
On  the  one  hand,  however,  punishment  seems  to  be  not
a  conditional  but  an  absolute  duty  ;  and  to  neglect  it  is
definitely  wrong.  Justice  in  man  consists  at  least  in
punishing  the  guilty,  and  the  conception  of  a  just  God
similarly  emphasises  his  righteous  infliction  of  penalties
upon  those  who  break  his  laws.  The  very  idea  of
punishment  is  not  that  it  is  sometimes  right  and  some-
times wrong  or  indifferent,  but  that  its  infliction  is  an
inexorable  demand  of  duty.

On  the  other  hand,  forgiveness  is  presented  as  an
equally  vital  duty  for  man  and  an  equally  definite
characteristic  of  God.  This,  again,  is  not  conditional.
The  ideal  of  forgiveness  is  subject  to  no  restrictions.
The  divine  precept  does  not  require  us  to  forgive,  say,
seven  times  and  then  turn  on  the  offender  for  reprisals.
Forgiveness  must  be  applied  unequivocally  to  every
offence  alike.

Here, then, we have an absolute contradiction

169


iyo METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY n.  m

between  two  opposing  ideals  of  conduct.  And  the
result  of  applying  the  antithesis  to  the  doctrine  of
atonement  is  equally  fatal  whichever  horn  of  the
dilemma  is  accepted.  Either  punishment  is  right  and
forgiveness  wrong,  or  forgiveness  is  right  and  punish-
ment wrong.  If  punishment  is  right,  then  the  doctrine
that  God  forgives  our  sins  is  illusory  and  immoral  ;
it  ascribes  to  God  the  weakness  of  a  doting  father  who
spares  the  rod  a<nd  spoils  the  child.  If  punishment  is
wrong,  then  the  conception  of  a  punishing  God  is  a
mere  barbarism  of  primitive  theology,  and  atonement  is
no  mystery,  no  divine  grace,  but  simply  the  belated
recognition  by  theology  that  its  God  is  a  moral  being.
Thus  regarded,  the  Atonement  becomes  either  a  fallacy
or  a  truism.

And  it  is  common  enough,  in  the  abstract  and  hasty
thought  which  in  every  age  passes  for  modern,  to  find
the  conception  of  atonement  dismissed  in  this  way.
But  such  thought  generally  breaks  down  in  two  different
directions.  In  its  cavalier  treatment  of  a  doctrine,  it
ignores  the  real  weight  of  thought  and  experience  that
has  gone  to  the  development  of  the  theory,  or  broadly
condemns  it  as  illusion  and  dreams  ;  and  secondly,  it
proceeds  without  sufficient  speculative  analysis  of  its
own  conceptions,  with  a  confidence  based  in  the  last
resort  upon  ignorance.  The  historian  of  thought  will
develop  the  first  of  these  objections ;  our  aim  is  to
consider  the  second.

The  dilemma  which  has  been  applied  to  theology
must,  of  course,  equally  apply  to  moral  or  political  philo-
sophy. In  order  to  observe  it  at  work,  we  must  see
what  results  it  produces  there.  Punishment  and  for-
giveness are  things  we  find  in  our  own  human  society ;
and  unless  we  are  to  make  an  end  of  theology,  religion,
and  philosophy  by  asserting  that  there  is  no  relation
between  the  human  and  the  divine,  we  must  try  to
explain  each  by  what  we  know  of  the  other.

(a)  The  first  solution  of  the  dilemma,  then,  might  be


ch.ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 171

to  maintain  that  punishment  is  an  absolute  duty  and
forgiveness  positively  wrong.  We  cannot  escape  the
rigour  of  this  conclusion  by  supposing  forgiveness  to  be
"  non-moral,"  for  we  cannot  evade  moral  issues  ;  the
possibility  of  forgiveness  only  arises  in  cases  where
punishment  is  also  an  alternative,  and  if  punishment  is
always  right,  then  forgiveness  must  always  be  a  crime.

Forgiveness,  on  this  view,  is  a  sentimental  weakness,
a  mere  neglect  of  the  duty  to  punish.  It  is  due  to
misguided  partiality  towards  an  offender  ;  and  instead
of  cancelling  or  wiping  out  his  crime,  endorses  it  by
committing  another.  Now  this  is  a  view  which  might
conceivably  be  held  ;  and  if  consistently  held  would  be
difficult  to  refute,  without  such  a  further  examination
of  the  conceptions  involved  as  we  shall  undertake  later.
At  this  stage  we  can  only  point  out  that  it  does  not
deserve  the  name  of  an  ethical  theory  ;  because  it  em-
phasises one  fact  in  the  moral  consciousness  and  arbit-
rarily ignores  others.  The  fact  is  that  people  do  forgive,
and  feel  that  they  are  acting  morally  in  so  doing.  They
distinguish  quite  clearly  in  their  own  minds  between
forgiving  a  crime  and  sentimentally  overlooking  or  con-
doning it.  Now  the  theory  does  not  merely  ignore  this
fact,  but  it  implicitly  or  even,  if  pressed,  explicitly
denies  it.  To  a  person  who  protested  "  But  I  am  con-
vinced that  it  is  a  duty  to  forgive,"  it  would  reply,
"  Then  you  are  wrong ;  it  is  a  crime."  And  if  asked  why
it  is  a  crime,  the  theory  would  explain,  "  Because  it  is
inconsistent  with  the  duty  to  punish."  But  the  duty  to
punish  rests  on  the  same  basis  as  the  duty  to  forgive  ;
it  is  a  pronouncement  of  the  moral  consciousness.  „  All
the  theory  does  is  to  assume  quite  uncritically  that  the
moral  consciousness  is  right  in  the  one  case  and  wrong
in  the  other  ;  whereas  the  reverse  is  equally  possible.
The  two  duties  may  be  contradictory,  but  they  rest  on
the  same  basis  ;  and  the  argument  which  discredits  one
discredits  the  other  too.

(b)  The  same  difficulty  applies  to  the  other  horn  of


i72 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

the  dilemma,  according  to  which  forgivemess  is  always
right  and  punishment  always  wrong.  Just  as  we  cannot
say  that  forgiveness  is  a  crime  because  punishment  is
a  duty,  so  we  cannot  say  that  punishment  is  a  crime
because  forgiveness  is  a  duty.  But  the  theory  of  the
immorality  of  punishment  has  been  worked  out  rather
more  fully  than  is  (I  believe)  the  case  with  the  theory
of  the  immorality  of  forgiveness.

(i.)  Just  as  forgiveness  was  identified  with  sentimental
condoning  of  an  offence,  so  punishment  has  been  equated
with  personal  revenge.  This  view  has  been  plausibly
expressed  in  terms  of  evolution  by  the  hypothesis  that
revenge  for  injuries  has  been  gradually,  in  the  progress
of  civilisation,  organised  and  centralised  by  state  con-
trol ;  so  that  instead  of  a  vendetta  we  nowadays  have
recourse  to  a  lawsuit  as  our  means  of  reprisal  on  those
who  have  done  us  wrong.  But  such  a  statement  over-
looks the  fact  that  punishment  is  not  revenge  in  the
simple  and  natural  sense  of  that  word.  The  difference
is  as  plain  as  that  between  forgiveness  and  the  neglect  of
the  duty  to  punish.  Revenge  is  a  second  crime  which
does  nothing  to  mitigate  the  first  ;  punishment  is  not  a
crime  but  something  which  we  feel  to  be  a  duty.  The
"  state  organisation  of  revenge  "  really  means  the  annihi-
lation or  supersession  of  revenge  and  the  substitution  for
it  of  equitable  punishment.  And  if  we  ask  how  this
miracle  has  happened,  the  only  answer  is  that  people
have  come  to  see  that  revenge  is  wrong  and  so  have
given  it  up.

(ii.)  A  less  crude  theory  of  punishment  as  merely
selfish  is  the  view  which  describes  it  as  deterrent,  as  a
means  of  self-preservation  on  the  part  of  society.  We
are  told  that  crime  in  general  is  detrimental  to  social
well-being  (or,  according  to  more  thorough-going  forms
of  the  conception,  what  is  found  to  be  detrimental  is
arbitrarily  called  crime),  and  therefore  society  inflicts
certain  penalties  on  criminals  in  order  to  deter  them  and
others  from  further  anti-social  acts. It  is  the  function


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 173

of  "justice"  to  determine  what  amount  of  terror  is
necessary  in  order  to  prevent  the  crime.

Punishment  so  explained  is  not  moral.  We  punish
not  because  it  is  a  duty  but  because  it  preserves  us
against  certain  dangers.  A  person  has  done  us  an  injury,
and  we  maltreat  him,  not  out  of  a  spirit  of  revenge,  far
from  it,  but  in  order  to  frighten  others  who  may  wish
to  imitate  him.  The  condemned  criminal  is  regarded
as  a  marauder  nailed  in  terrorem  to  the  barn-door.  One
feels  inclined  to  ask  how  such  a  combination  of  cruelty
and  selfishness  can  possibly  be  justified  in  civilised
societies  ;  and  if  the  theory  is  still  possessed  by  a  linger-
ing desire  to  justify  punishment,  it  will  perhaps  reply
that  the  criminal  has  "  forfeited  his  right  "  to  considerate
treatment.  Which  means  either  that  he  has  cut  himself
off  from  our  society  altogether  (which  he  plainly  has  not)
or  that  there  is  nothing  wrong  in  being  cruel  to  a
criminal  ;  which  is  monstrous.  If  society  is  trying  to
be  moral  at  all,  it  has  duties  towards  a  criminal  as  much
as  towards  any  one  else.  It  may  deny  the  duties,  and
have  its  criminals  eaten  by  wild  beasts  for  its  amuse-
ment, or  tortured  for  its  increased  security  ;  perhaps  the
former  is  the  less  revolting  practice  ;  but  in  either  case
society  is  demonstrating  its  own  corruption.

The  deterrent  theory,  then,  must  not  be  used  as  a
justification,  but  only  as  an  impeachment,  of  punishment.
But  even  if  punishment  is,  as  the  theory  maintains,  a
purely  selfish  activity,  it  must  still  be  justified  in  a  sense;
not  by  its  rightness  but  by  its  success.  The  question
therefore  is  whether  as  a  matter  of  fact  punishment  does
deter.  Now  a  "just"  penalty,  on  this  theory,  is  defined
as  one  which  is  precisely  sufficient  to  deter.  If  it  does
not  deter,  it  is  condemned  as  giving  insufficient  protection
to  society,  and  therefore  unjust.  Society  will  accordingly
increase  it,  and  this  increase  will  continue  till  a  balance
is  established  and  the  crime  is  stamped  out.  Those
crimes  therefore  happen  oftenest  whose  statutable  penalties
are  most  in  defect  of  this  ideal  balance. The  fact  that


i74 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

they  happen  proves  that  the  penalty  is  inadequate.
Therefore,  if  the  deterrent  view  is  correct',  society  must
be  anxious  to  increase  these  penalties.  But  we  do  not
find  that  this  is  the  case.  If  criminal  statistics  show  an
increase,  we  do  not  immediately  increase  the  penalties.
Still  less  do  we  go  on  increasing  them  further  and  further
until  the  crime  is  no  longer  attractive.  If  we  may  argue
from  empirical  evidence,  such  as  the  infliction  of  the
death-penalty  for  petty  thefts,  it  is  simply  not  the  case
that  increased  severity  necessarily  diminishes  crime ;  and
yet  on  the  theory  it  ought  to  do  so.  On  the  contrary,  it
sometimes  appears  that  higher  penalties  go  with  greater
frequency.  To  reply  to  this  that  the  frequency  of
crime  is  the  cause,  not  the  effect,  of  the  greater  severity,
would  be  to  confess  the  failure  of  punishment  as  deter-
rent ;  for,  on  that  view,  severity  ought  to  be  the  cause  of
infrequency>  not  the  effect  of  frequency.  The  plea  would
amount  to  a  confession  that  we  cannot,  as  is  supposed,  con-
trol the  amount  of  crime  by  the  degree  of  punishment.

Thus  the  view  that  punishment  is  a  selfish  act  of
society  to  secure  its  own  safety  against  crime  breaks
down.  Its  plausibility  depends  on  the  truth  that  the
severity  of  punishments  is  somehow  commensurate  with
the  badness  of  the  crime  ;  that  there  is  a  connexion  of
degree  between  the  two.  If  we  ask  how  this  equation
is  brought  about,  the  theory  disappears  at  once.  In
punishment  we  do  not  try  to  hurt  a  man  as  much  as  he
has  hurt  us  ;  or  even  as  much  as  may  induce  him  not
to  hurt  us.  The  "  amount  "  of  punishment  is  fixed  by
one  standard  only  ;  what  we  suppose  him  to  deserve.
This  is  difficult  to  define  exactly,  and  common  practice
represents  only  a  very  rough  approximation  to  it  ;  but
it  is  that,  not  anything  else,  at  which  the  approximation
aims.  And  the  conception  of  desert  reintroduces  into
punishment  the  moral  criterion  which  the  theory  tried
to  banish  from  it.  To  aim  at  giving  a  man  the  punish-
ment he  deserves  implies  that  he  does  deserve  it,  and
therefore  that  it  is  our  duty  to  give  it  him.


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 175

(V)  Both  these  escapes,  therefore,  have  failed.  We
cannot  say  that  either  punishment  or  forgiveness  is
wrong,  and  thus  vindicate  the  necessity  of  the  other.
Though  contradictory  they  are  both  imperative.  Nor
can  we  make  them  apply  to  different  cases;  maintaining
for  instance  that  we  should  forgive  the  repentant  and
punish  the  obdurate.  If  we  only  forgive  a  man  after
he  has  repented,  that  is  to  say,  put  away  his  guilt
and  become  good  once  more,  the  idea  of  forgiveness
is  a  mockery.  The  very  conception  of  forgiveness
is  that  it  should  be  our  treatment  of  the  guilty  as
guilty.

Nor  can  we  escape  by  an  abstraction  distinguishing
the  sinner  from  the  sin.  We  punish  not  the  sin,  but
the  sinner  for  his  sin  ;  and  we  forgive  not  the  sinner
distinguished  from  his  sin,  but  identified  with  it  and
manifested  in  it.  If  we  punish  the  sin,  we  must  forgive
the  sin  too  :  if  we  forgive  the  sinner,  we  must  equally
punish  him.

2.  This  absolute  contradiction  between  the  two
duties  can  only  be  soluble  in  one  way.  A  contradiction
of  any  kind  is  soluble  either  by  discovering  one  member
of  it  to  be  false,  an  expedient  which  has  already  been
tried,  or  by  showing  that  the  two  are  not  really,  as
we  had  supposed,  incompatible.  This  is  true,  whether
the  contradiction  is  between  two  judgments  of  fact  or
between  two  duties  or  so-called  "judgments  of  value"  ;
for  if  it  is  axiomatic  that  two  contradictory  judgments
cannot  both  be  true,  it  is  equally  axiomatic  that  two
incompatible  courses  of  action  cannot  both  be  obligatory.
This  fact  may  be  obscured  by  saying  that  on  certain
occasions  we  are  faced  with  two  alternatives  of  which
each  is  a  duty,  but  the  question  is  which  is  the  greater
duty.  But  the  "  greater  duty  "  is  a  phrase  without
meaning.  In  the  supposed  case  the  distinction  is
between  this  which  we  ought  to  do,  and  that  which  we
ought  not  ;  the  distinction  between  ought  and  ought  not
is  not  a  matter  of  degree.


176 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


VT.  Ill


Granted,  then,  that  in  any  given  situation  there  can
be  only  one  duty,  it  follows  necessarily  that  if  of  two
actions  each  is  really  obligatory  the  two  actions  must  be
the  same.  We  are  therefore  compelled  to  hold  that
punishment  and  forgiveness,  so  far  from  being  incom-
patible duties,  are  really  when  properly  understood
identical.  This  may  seem  impossible  ;  but  as  yet  we
have  defined  neither  conception,  and  this  we  must  now
proceed  to  do.

(a)  Punishment  consists  in  the  infliction  of  deserved
suffering  on  an  offender.  But  it  is  not  yet  clear  what
suffering  is  inflicted,  and  how  it  is  fixed,  beyond  the
bare  fact  that  it  must  be  deserved.  If  we  ask,  Why  is
that  particular  sort  and  amount  of  pain  inflicted  on  this
particular  man  ?  the  answer,  "That  is  what  he  deserves,"
no  doubt  conveys  the  truth,  but  it  does  not  fully  explain
it.  It  is  not  immediately  clear  without  further  thought
that  this  must  be  the  right  punishment.  Punishment  is
fixed  not  by  a  self-evident  and  inexplicable  intuition,
but  by  some  motive  or  process  of  thought  which  we
must  try  to  analyse.  The  conception  of  desert  proves
that  this  motive  is  moral ;  and  it  remains  to  ask  what
is  the  moral  attitude  towards  a  crime  or  criminal.

If  we  take  the  case  of  a  misdeed  of  our  own  and
consider  the  attitude  of  our  better  moments  towards  it,
we  see  that  this  attitude  is  one  of  condemnation.  It  is
the  act  of  a  good  will  declaring  its  hostility  to  a  bad  one.
This  feeling  of  rejection,  condemnation,  or  hostility  is
in  fact  the  necessary  attitude  of  all  good  wills  towards
all  evil  acts.  The  moral  action  of  the  person  who
punishes,  therefore,  consists  primarily  in  this  condemna-
tion. Further,  the  condemnation,  in  our  own  case,  is
the  act  in  and  through  which  we  effect  our  liberation  or
alienation  from  the  evil,  and  our  adherence  to  the  good.
If  a  person  is  in  a  state  of  sin,  that  he  should  feel  hostility
towards  his  own  sin  is  necessary  to  his  moral  salvation  ;
he  cannot  become  good  except  by  condemning  his  own
crime. The condemnation of  the crime is not  the


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 177

means  to  goodness  ;  it  is  the  manifestation  of  the  new
good  will.

The  condemnation  of  evil  is  the  necessary  manifesta-
tion of  all  good  wills.  If  A  has  committed  a  crime,  B,
if  he  is  a  moral  person,  condemns  it.  And  this  con-
demnation he  will  express  to  A  if  he  is  in  social  relations
with  him  ;  for  social  relations  consist  of  sharing  thoughts
and  activities  so  far  as  possible.  If  B  is  successful  in
communicating  his  condemnation  to  A,  A  will  thereupon
share  it  ;  for  A's  knowledge  that  B  condemns  him,
apart  from  his  agreement  in  the  condemnation,  is  not
really  a  case  of  communication.  But  if  A  shares  the
condemnation  he  substitutes  in  that  act  a  good  will  for
an  evil.  The  process  is  now  complete  ;  A's  sin,  B's
condemnation,  B's  expression  to  A  of  his  feelings,  A's
conversion  and  repentance.  This  is  the  inevitable  result
of  social  relations  between  the  two  persons,  granting  that
A's  will  is  good  and  that  the  relations  are  maintained.

Now  this  self-expression  of  a  good  will  towards  a
bad  is,  I  think,  what  we  mean  by  the  duty  of  punish-
ment. It  is  no  doubt  the  case  that  we  describe  many
things  as  punishment  in  which  we  can  hardly  recognise
these  features  at  all.  But  examination  of  such  cases
shows  that  precisely  so  far  as  these  facts  are  not  present,
so  far  as  the  punishment  does  not  express  moral  feelings,
and  does  not  aim  in  some  degree  at  the  self-conviction
of  the  criminal — so  far,  we  are  inclined  to  doubt  whether
it  is  a  duty  at  all,  and  not  a  convention,  a  farce,  or  a
crime.  We  conclude,  therefore,  that  punishment — the
only  punishment  we  can  attribute  to  God  or  to  a  good
man — is  the  expression  to  a  criminal  of  the  punisher's
moral  attitude  towards  him.  Hence  punishment  is  an
absolute  duty  ;  since  not  to  feel  that  attitude  would  be
to  share  his  crime,  and  not  to  express  it  would  be  a
denial  of  social  relations,  an  act  of  hypocrisy.

(b)  The  pain  inflicted  on  the  criminal,  then,  is  not
the  pain  of  evil  consequences,  recoiling  from  his  action
in  the  course  of  nature  or  by  the  design  of  God  or  man

N


178 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

upon  his  own  head  ;  still  less  is  it  the  mere  regret  for
having  done  something  which  involves  himself  or  others
in  such  consequences.  These  things  are  not  punishment
at  all,  and  ought  never  to  be  confused  with  it,  though
they  may  well  be  incidental  to  it.  The  pain  of  punish-
ment is  simply  the  pain  of  self-condemnation  or  moral
repentance  ;  the  renunciation  of  one  aim  and  the  turning
of  the  will  to  another.  That  is  what  we  try  to  inflict
upon  him  ;  and  any  other,  incidental  pains  are  merely
the  means  by  which  we  express  to  him  our  attitude  and
will.  But  why,  it  may  be  asked,  should  these  inci-
dental pains  be  necessary  ?  Why  should  they  be  the
only  means  of  communicating  such  feelings  ?  The
answer  is  that  they  are  not.  The  most  perfect  punish-
ments involve  no  "  incidental "  pains  at  all.  The
condemnation  is  expressed  simply  and  quietly  in  words,
and  goes  straight  home.  The  punishment  consists  in
expression  of  condemnation  and  that  alone  ;  and  to
punish  with  a  word  instead  of  a  blow  is  still  punishment.
It  is,  perhaps,  a  better  and  more  civilised  form  of
punishment  ;  it  indicates  a  higher  degree  of  intelligence
and  a  more  delicate  social  organisation.  If  a  criminal
is  extremely  coarsened  and  brutalised,  we  have  to
express  our  feelings  in  a  crude  way  by  cutting  him  off
from  the  privileges  of  a  society  to  whose  moral  aims  he
has  shown  himself  hostile  ;  but  if  we  are  punishing  a
child,  the  tongue  is  a  much  more  efficient  weapon  than
the  stick.

Nor  does  the  refinement  of  the  penalty  end  there.
It  is  possible  to  punish  without  the  word  of  rebuke  ;  to
punish  by  saying  nothing  at  all,  or  by  an  act  of  kind-
ness. Here  again,  we  cannot  refuse  the  name  of
punishment  because  no  "  physical  suffering  "  is  inflicted.
The  expression  of  moral  feelings,  or  the  attitude  of  the
good  will  to  the  bad,  may  take  any  form  which  the
wrongdoer  can  understand.  In  fact,  it  is  possible  to
hold  that  we  often  use  "  strong  measures  "  when  a  word
or  a  kind  action  would  do  just  as  well,  or  better. "  If


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 179

thine  enemy  hunger,  feed  him  ;  for  in  so  doing  thou
shalt  heap  coals  of  fire  on  his  head."  Sentimentalists
have  recoiled  in  horror  from  such  a  refinement  of
brutality,  not  realising  that  to  heap  coals  of  fire,  the
fires  of  repentance,  upon  the  head  of  the  wrongdoer  is
the  desire  of  all  who  wish  to  save  his  soul,  not  to
perpetuate  and  endorse  his  crime.

But  at  this  stage  of  the  conception  we  should  find  it
hard  to  discriminate  between  punishment  and  forgive-
ness. If  punishment  is  to  express  condemnation,  it
must  be  the  condemnation  of  a  bad  will  by  a  good  one.
That  is  to  say,  it  is  the  self-expression  of  a  good  will,
and  that  good  will  is  expressed  as  truly  in  the  act  of
kindness  as  in  the  block  and  gallows.  But  if  the
punisher's  will  really  is  good,  he  continues,  however
severe  his  measures,  to  wish  for  the  welfare  and  regenera-
tion of  the  criminal.  He  punishes  him  not  wholly  with
a  view  to  "  his  good,"  because  the  punishment  is  not
consciously  undertaken  as  a  means  to  an  end,  but  as  the
spontaneous  expression  of  a  moral  will  ;  yet  the  aim  of
that  will  is  not  the  criminal's  mutilation  or  suffering  as
such  but  the  awakening  of  his  moral  consciousness.  And
to  treat  the  criminal  as  a  fellow-man  capable  of  reforma-
tion, to  feel  still  one's  social  relation  and  duty  towards
him,  is  surely  the  attitude  which  we  call  forgiveness.

If  forgiveness  means  remission  of  the  penalty,  it  is
impossible  to  a  moral  will.  For  the  penalty  is  simply
the  judgment  ;  it  is  the  expression  of  the  moral  will's
own  nature.  If  forgiveness  means  the  remission  of  the
more  violent  forms  of  self-expression  on  the  part  of
the  good  will,  then  such  restraint  is  not  only  still
punishment  but  may  be  the  most  acute  and  effective
form  of  it.  But  if  forgiveness  means — as  it  properly
does — the  wise  and  patient  care  for  the  criminal's
welfare,  for  his  regeneration  and  recovery  into  the  life
of  a  good  society,  then  there  is  no  distinction  whatever
between  forgiveness  and  punishment.

(c) Punishment  and  forgiveness  are  thus  not  only


180 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY PT.  m

compatible  but  identical  ;  each  is  a  name  for  the  one
and  only  right  attitude  of  a  good  will  towards  a  man
of  evil  will.  The  details  of  the  self-expression  vary
according  to  circumstances  ;  and  when  we  ask,  "  Shall
we  punish  this  man  or  forgive  him  ?  "  we  are  really
considering  whether  we  shall  use  this  or  that  method  of
expressing  what  is  in  either  case  equally  punishment
and  forgiveness.  The  only  important  distinction  we
make  between  the  two  words  is  this  :  they  refer  to  the
same  attitude  of  mind,  but  they  serve  to  distinguish  it
from  different  ways  of  erring.  When  we  describe  an
attitude  as  one  of  forgiveness,  we  mean  to  distinguish
it,  as  right,  from  that  brutality  or  unintelligent  severity
(punishment  falsely  so  called)  which  inflicts  pain  either
in  mere  wantonness  or  without  considering  the  possi-
bility of  a  milder  expression.  When  we  call  it  punish-
ment, we  distinguish  it  as  right  from  that  weakness  or
sentimentality  (forgiveness  falsely  so  called)  which
by  shrinking  from  the  infliction  of  pain  amounts  to
condonation  of  the  original  offence.

3.  The  identity  of  punishment  and  forgiveness
removes  the  preliminary  difficulty  in  the  way  of  any
doctrine  of  atonement.  So  far  as  we  can  now  under-
stand God's  attitude  towards  sin,  it  may  be  expressed
thus.

God's  attitude  towards  the  sins  of  men  must  be  one
which  combines  condemnation  of  the  sinful  will  with
love  and  hope  for  it ;  these  two  being  combined  not  as
externally  connected  and  internally  inconsistent  elements
of  a  state  of  mind,  but  as  being  the  single  necessary
expression  of  his  perfect  nature  towards  natures  less
perfect,  but  regarded  as  capable  of  perfection.  This
attitude  on  the  part  of  God  is,  further,  the  means  of
man's  redemption  ;  for  by  understanding  God's  attitude
towards  sin  man  comes  himself  to  share  in  that  attitude,
and  is  thus  converted  to  a  new  life  in  harmony  with
God's  good  will.

Here we seem to have  a relation involving two


cr.ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 181

separate  activities,  the  divine  and  the  human.  On  the
one  hand  there  is  the  initiation  of  the  repentance,  the
act  of  punishment  or  forgiveness  on  the  part  of  God  ;
and  on  the  other,  the  response  to  God's  act,  the  repent-
ance of  man  in  virtue  of  the  original  self-expression  of
God.

These  are  two  inseparable  aspects  of  one  and  the
same  process  ;  the  tendency  to  lay  exclusive  emphasis
on  one  or  the  other  leads  to  two  main  types  of  theory,
each  equally  unsatisfactory  because  each,  while  really
one-sided,  claims  to  be  an  account  of  the  whole  truth.
These  views  I  call  the  objective  and  subjective  theories
respectively.

(a)  The  objective  theory  of  atonement  points  out
that  whatever  change  takes  place  in  the  human  will  is
due  to  the  free  gift  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  Man  can  do
nothing  good  except  by  virtue  of  God's  grace,  and
therefore  if  the  evil  will  of  a  man  is  converted  into  a
good  will,  the  whole  process  is  an  act  of  God.  The
Atonement,  the  redemption  of  man,  is  a  fact  entirely
on  the  side  of  God,  not  at  all  on  the  side  of  man  ;  for
without  God's  help  and  inspiration  there  would  be
nothing  good  in  man  at  all.

This  view  lays  the  emphasis  on  God's  attitude  to
the  world  ;  and  concerns  itself  chiefly  with  the  question,
What  change  did  the  Incarnation  mark  in  the  develop-
ment of  God's  plans  ?  We  cannot  suppose  that  there
was  no  change  at  all,  that  it  merely  put  a  new  ideal
before  man,  because  man  always  had  high  ideals  ;  he
had  Moses  and  the  prophets,  and  had  not  listened  to
them.  The  divine  grace  of  the  Atonement  consists  in
the  imparting  not  of  a  new  ideal  but  of  a  new  power
and  energy  to  live  up  to  the  ideal.  Man,  in  a  word,
cannot  redeem  himself ;  his  redemption  comes  from
God  and  is  God's  alone.

Now  this  "  objective  "  view  is  exposed  to  the  danger
of  forgetting  that  redemption  must  be  the  redemption
of  a  will,  the  change  of  a  will  ;  and  that  in  the  last


1 82 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT.  Ill


resort  a  will  can  only  be  changed  by  itself.  If  this  is
forgotten,  the  objective  theory  lapses  into  an  abstract
legalism  according  to  which  grace  becomes  a  fictitious
and  conventional  restoration  to  favour  without  any
corresponding  renovation  of  character.  These  two
things  must  never  be  allowed  to  fall  apart  in  such  a  way
that  the  Atonement  consists  in  one  to  the  exclusion  of
the  other ;  for  unless  the  grace  of  God  awakes  a
response  in  the  will  of  man  there  is  no  true  atonement.
But  this  response  is  just  the  fact  which  this  type  of
theory  tends  either  to  overlook  or  at  least  to  describe
with  insufficient  accuracy.

In  examining  actual  theories  of  the  Atonement,
however,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  a  verbal  statement
which  appears  to  be  one-sided  does  not  necessarily  either
neglect  or  exclude  the  other  side.  The  objective  view
is  perfectly  true  so  far  as  it  goes  ;  and  the  criticism
often  directed  against  it,  on  the  ground  that  redemption
is  a  matter  of  the  individual  will  alone  and  must  arise
entirely  from  within,  is  due  to  a  fallacious  theory  of
personality.

(b)  The  "  subjective  "  theory  insists  on  the  attitude
of  man  to  God,  and  lays  down  that  since  redemption
involves  an  attitude  or  state  of  the  subject's  will  it
cannot  without  violence  to  his  freedom  be  brought
about  by  the  act  of  another  person,  even  if  that  other
person  be  God.  Grace  as  something  merely  proceed-
ing from  God  is  not  only  a  hypothesis,  but  a  useless
hypothesis  ;  the  fact  to  be  explained  is  the  change,
repentance,  reformation  of  the  individual,  and  this  fact
cannot  be  explained  by  reference  to  another's  actions.
Nobody  can  change  my  mind  for  me  except  myself.
The  question  in  short  is  not,  What  change  has  occurred
in  God  ? — since  God  is  and  always  was  long-suffering
and  merciful.  It  is  rather,  What  difference  has  the  life
of  Christ  made  in  me  ?  How  has  his  example  fired  me
to  imitate  him,  his  life  challenged  me  to  new  effort,  his
love  called  forth  love  in  me  ?


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 183

This  view  is  attended  by  a  parallel  danger.  It
insists  on  the  reality  and  inviolability  of  the  individual  ;
and  the  least  over-emphasis  on  this  truth  leads  to  the
theory  that  no  real  help,  no  real  stimulus,  can  pass  over
from  one  individual  to  another.  In  short,  it  brings  us
to  the  exclusive  or  individualistic  theory  of  personality
for  which  every  person  is  a  law  to  himself,  supplies
himself  with  his  own  standards  of  right  and  wrong,  and
draws  upon  his  own  resources  in  order  to  live  up  to
them  ;  for  which  the  influence  of  one  person  on  another
is  either  impossible  or — inconsistently  with  the  theory —
possible,  but  an  "  infringement  of  the  rights  "  of  the
individual.  From  such  a  point  of  view  it  might  be
replied  to  one  who  spoke  of  Christ's  life  on  earth,
"  What  good  can  it  do  ?  He  lived  nobly,  you  say,  and
died  a  martyr  ;  but  why  should  you  tell  me  these
things  ?  I  can  only  do  what  lies  in  my  power ;  I
cannot  behave  like  a  hero,  being  the  man  I  am.  It  is
useless  for  you  to  set  up  an  ideal  before  me  unless  you
can  give  me  strength  to  live  up  to  it.  And  the  strength
that  I  do  not  possess  nobody  can  give  me."  And  if
the  instructor  goes  on  to  expound  the  doctrine  of  grace
and  the  indwelling  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  in  his
Church,  the  reply  will  be  that  these  things  are  dreams  ;
impossible  from  the  very  nature  of  personality,  which
is  such  that  "  one  consciousness  " — that  of  the  Holy
Spirit — "cannot  include  another  " — that  of  an  individual
human  being  ;  or  else  that  if  these  things  are  possible
they  involve  an  intolerable  swamping  of  one's  own
personality,  a  surrender  of  one's  freedom  and  individu-
ality which  can  only  be  a  morbid  and  unhealthy  state
of  mind.

We  have  dealt  with  this  individualistic  theory  else-
where, and  shall  now  only  repeat  that  it  implies  the
negation  not  merely  of  atonement  in  the  sense  of
redemption  of  man  whether  by  man,  Christ,  or  God,
but  also  of  social  life  as  a  whole  ;  and  therefore  destroys
by  implication  the  very  individual  whose  reality  it  hoped


1 84 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.  m

to  vindicate.  It  presents  us  with  the  portrait  of  an  ideal
man  who  stands  in  no  need  of  any  external  stimulus  or
assistance  in  working  out  his  own  salvation.  If  such  a
person  existed,  he  would  be  independent  of  God  and
man  alike,  and  would  justly  feel  insulted  by  the  offer  of
an  atonement.  But  the  portrait  is  untrue,  not  simply
because  no  actual  man  ever  attains  this  complete  self-
dependence,  but  rather  because  it  is  a  false  ideal  ;  the
perfect  life  for  man  is  a  life  not  of  absolute  isolation  but
of  absolute  communion.  A  man  shows  his  greatness
not  in  ignoring  his  surroundings  but  in  understanding
and  assimilating  them  ;  and  his  debt  to  his  environment
is  no  loss  to  his  individuality  but  a  gain.

(c)  It  must  be  obvious  by  now  that  of  the  two
theories  sketched  above,  each  is  an  abstraction  ;  each
emphasises  one  side  of  a  reality  in  which  both  sides  are
present  and  in  which,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  both  sides  are
one.  The  two  sides  must  be  united  ;  but  this  cannot
be  effected  by  a  compromise.  A  compromise  is  a
middle  path  between  two  extremes,  and  includes  neither.
The  combination  at  which  we  must  aim  will  assert  both
theories  to  the  full  while  avoiding  the  errors  which  alone
keep  them  apart.  As  often  happens  in  such  cases,  the
two  opposing  theories  are  based  on  the  same  error,  and
a  little  further  analysis  will  show  wherein  this  error
consists.

The  danger  of  objectivism  was  to  assume  that  grace
could  pass  from  God  to  man  leaving  man's  inmost  will
untouched.  The  legalistic  conception  of  grace  depended
on  the  separation  of  the  human  personality  from  the
divine  as  two  vessels,  one  of  which  might  receive  "  con-
tent "  from  the  other  while  its  nature  remained  unaltered.
The  theory  clings  to  the  omnipotence  of  God  and  the
fact  that  from  him  comes  man's  salvation,  but  conceives
this  omnipotence  as  God's  power  of  imposing  his  own
good  will  upon  man.  But  this  is  no  true  redemption  ;
the  man's  own  will  is  merely  superseded  by,  not  unified
with,  the  will  of  God. That  is  to  say  the  good  will


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 185

which  is  manifested  is  solely  God's  and  not  in  any  sense
man's. The  human  will  is  not  redeemed  but  annihilated.

In  order  to  avoid  this  conclusion  subjectivism  lays
stress  on  the  point  which  the  above  theory  was  led  to
deny,  namely  the  fact  that  redemption  is  a  free  state  of
man's  own  will.  It  rightly  asserts  that  whatever  reform
takes  place  in  the  character  must  be  the  work  of  the
character  itself,  and  cannot  be  thrust  upon  it  by  the
operation  of  another.  But  it  goes  on  to  deny  that
redemption  is  in  any  sense  the  work  of  God,  and^to
maintain  that  no  act  of  God  can  have  any  influence  on
the  moral  destiny  of  man.  Thus  the  conception  of  a
divine  will  disappears  altogether  from  the  world  of
human  morality.

The  implication  in  each  case  seems  to  be  the  same  ;
for  to  assert  the  will  of  God  and  deny  man's  inner
redemption,  or  to  assert  man's  redemption  and  deny  the
will  of  God,  equally  implies  conceiving  God's  power  and
man's  freedom  to  be  inconsistent.  This  is  the  fallacy
common  to  the  two  views.  Each  alike  holds  that  a
given  action  may  be  done  either  by  God  or  by  man,  in
either  case  the  other  being  inactive.  This  separation  of
the  will  of  God  from  that  of  man  is  fatal  to  any  theory
of  the  Atonement,  where  the  fact  to  be  explained  is  that
man  is  redeemed  not  merely  by  his  own  act  but  also  and
essentially  by  God's.

A  satisfactory  theory  of  the  Atonement  seems  to
demand  that  the  infusion  of  grace  from  God  does  not
forcibly  and  artificially  bring  about  but  actually  is  a
change  of  mind  in  man.  It  is  an  event  which  only  co-
operation of  the  various  wills  involved  can  effect  at  all.
The  error  of  the  objective  theory  (or  rather  the  error
into  which  that  way  of  stating  the  truth  is  most  liable
to  fall)  is  to  regard  God  as  wholly  active,  man  as  wholly
passive  ;  and  to  forget  that  God's  purpose  of  redemp-
tion is  powerless  apart  from  man's  will  to  be  redeemed.
The  tendency  of  subjectivism  on  the  other  hand  is  to
assume  that  the  righteousness  of  man  is  independent  of


1 86 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT.  Ill


his  relation  to  God  ;  that  man's  will  is  sanctified  by  his
own  effort  whether  he  is  justified  in  the  eyes  of  God  or
not.  Here  again  the  fault  lies  in  the  absolute  separation
of  man  from  God.  God  is  not  realised  as  the  one  and
only  source  of  goodness  ;  it  is  not  understood  that  to
will  the  right  is  to  unify  one's  will  with  God's.  The
two  things — righteousness  and  reconciliation  with  God
— are  really  one  and  the  same,  and  to  represent  one  as
means  to  the  other  or  vice  versa,  or  to  insist  on  one  and
neglect  the  other,  implies  forgetting  their  identity  and
making  an  arbitrary  and  false  separation  of  the  two.

Neither  is  it  enough  merely  to  combine  the  two  sides
which  the  foregoing  theories  have  separated.  That
would  be  to  make  the  Atonement  a  combination  of  two
different  acts — God's  forgiveness  and  man's  repentance
— of  which  each  is  peculiar  to  its  own  agent ;  it  would
fail  to  account  for  the  essential  unity  of  the  whole  pro-
cess, and,  taking  the  two  sides  as  co-ordinate  and  equally
vital,  would  substitute  an  unintelligible  dualism  for  what
is  really  one  fact.  In  other  words,  any  theory  must
show  exactly  how  the  forgiveness  of  God  is  related  to
the  repentance  of  man  ;  how  it  is  possible  for  the  one  to
bring  about  the  other  ;  and  the  dualistic  view  would  be
nothing  more  than  a  restatement  of  this  central  difficulty.

The  failure  of  the  theories  hitherto  examined  has
been  in  every  case  due  to  this  distinction  within  the
Atonement  of  two  sides,  God's  and  man's.  Each  agent,
it  is  supposed,  makes  his  own  individual  contribution  to
the  whole  process  ;  God's  contribution  being  the  act  of
forgiveness,  man's  that  of  repentance.  Now  our  pre-
vious analysis  of  the  idea  of  co-operation  suggests  that
this  distinction  needs  revising.  We  found  in  a  former
chapter  that  in  the  co-operation  of  two  wills  we  could
only  disentangle  the  respective  contribution  to  the  whole
of  each  separate  personality  by  an  act  of  forcible  and
arbitrary  abstraction  ;  that  in  point  of  fact  the  two
minds  became  identified  in  a  common  experience  of
which  each  willed  the  whole  and  neither  a  mere  part.


CH.  II


GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 187


If  we  mean  to  apply  this  principle  to  the  present  diffi-
culty, we  must  find  a  statement  of  the  case  which  will
no  longer  distinguish  God's  contribution  from  man's  ;
which  will  enable  us  to  say  that  God's  punishment  of
man  is  man's  own  self- punishment,  and  that  man's
repentance  is  God's  repentance  too.  If  we  can  hold
such  a  view  we  shall  have  identified  the  part  played  by
God  in  redemption  with  that  played  by  man  ;  and  we
shall  be  able  to  define  the  Atonement,  in  terms  con-
sistent with  our  general  theory,  as  the  re-indwelling  of
the  divine  spirit  in  a  man  who  has  previously  been
alienated  from  it.

4.  We  have  to  make  two  identifications  ;  first  to
show  that  God's  punishment  of  man  is  man's  punishment
of  himself,  and  second  that  man's  repentance  is  God's
repentance  also.

The  first  point  causes  little  difficulty  after  our
examination  of  the  meaning  of  punishment.  We  have
already  seen  that  the  essence  of  punishment  is  the  com-
munication to  the  offender  of  our  condemnation  of  his
act  ;  and  that  therefore  all  punishment  consists  in  trying
to  make  a  criminal  punish  himself,  that  is  inflict  on
himself  the  pain  of  remorse  and  conversion  from  his
evil  past  to  a  better  present.  It  is  clear  therefore  without
further  explanation  that  in  God's  punishment  of  sin  the
sinner,  through  repentance,  punishes  his  own  sin.  God's
activity  is  shared  by  man  too  ;  man  co-operates  with
God  in  punishing  himself.  And  just  as  he  punishes
himself,  he  forgives  himself,  for  he  displays  in  repentance
just  that  combination  of  severity  towards  the  past  and
hope  towards  the  future  in  which  true  forgiveness
consists.

(a)  The  conception  of  divine  repentance  is  at  first
sight  less  easy  to  grasp  ;  but  this  is  because  we  have
not  yet  asked  what  is  the  precise  nature  of  the  experience
to  which  we  attach  the  name.  We  are  in  the  habit  of
defining  repentance  as  the  conversion  of  an  evil  will  to
good  ;  a  condition  only  possible  to  one  who  has  been


1 88 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

sinful  and  is  in  process  of  renouncing  his  own  sin.  And
if  we  accept  this  definition  as  final,  we  can  only  say  that
the  conception  of  divine  penitence  is  self-contradictory.
Repentance  is  peculiar  to  a  sinner ;  God  is  not  a  sinner,
therefore  he  cannot  feel  repentance.

But  we  must  ask  whether  the  account  offered  of
repentance  is  really  satisfactory.  Repentance  is  a
particular  state  of  mind,  a  feeling  of  a  quite  individual
kind  ;  and  it  is  notoriously  difficult  to  define  a  feeling
in  so  many  words.  In  point  of  fact,  we  generally  give
up  the  attempt,  and  substitute  for  a  definition  of  the
thing  itself  a  description  of  the  circumstances  in  which
we  feel  it.  If  we  are  asked  what  we  mean  by  the
feelings  of  triumph,  sorrow,  indignation  and  so  on,  we
reply  as  a  rule  by  explaining  the  kind  of  occasion  which
excites  them  :  "  triumph  is  what  you  feel  when  you
have  succeeded  in  spite  of  opposition."  But  this  is
quite  a  different  thing  from  stating  what  triumph  feels
like.  This  method  of  description  is  very  common.
We  apply  it  for  instance  to  such  things  as  smells,  for
which  we  have  practically  no  descriptive  vocabulary.
We  generally  define  a  scent  not  by  its  individual  nature
but  by  its  associations  ;  we  state  not  what  sort  of  smell
it  is  but  what  it  is  the  smell  of.

Definition  by  circumstances  (as  we  may  call  it)  is  apt
to  mislead  us  seriously  in  any  attempt  to  describe  our
feelings.  We  think  we  have  described  the  feeling  when
we  have  only  described  the  occasions  on  which  it  arises ;
and  since  in  consequence  of  this  habit  we  apply  names  to
feelings  rather  in  virtue  of  their  occasions  than  because
of  their  own  characters,  we  are  often  ready  to  assert
a  priori  who  can  and  who  cannot  experience  a  given
emotion,  merely  on  the  ground  that  if  such  and  such  a
person  felt  it  we  should  call  it  something  else.

In  the  case  of  repentance  we  are  being  misled  by
words  if  we  argue  that  repentance  is  the  conversion  of  a
sinful  will  and  therefore  impossible  to  God.  Repentance
is  a  perfectly  definite  feeling  with  a  perfectly  definite


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 189

character  of  its  own :  when  we  experience  it,  we  recognise
it  as  we  recognise  a  smell,  not  because  of  any  external
circumstances  but  simply  because  of  something  which
we  may  call  its  own  peculiar  flavour.  In  asking  whether
a  sinless  person  feels  repentance  we  must  try  to  fix  our
minds  on  this  flavour,  not  on  its  external  associations.

We  must  notice  that  even  the  occasion  of  repentance
has  not  been  very  well  described.  Its  occasion  is  not
the  mere  abstract  point  of  junction,  so  to  speak,  between
two  states,  a  bad  state  and  a  good  state.  We  do  not
cease  to  repent  when  our  will  becomes  good.  Indeed
if  that  were  the  case  we  should  never  repent  at  all  ;  for
the  moment  of  transition  from  a  bad  will  to  a  good  is
not  a  positive  experience  ;  it  is  the  mere  chink  or  joint
between  two  experiences.  Conversion  is  not  a  neutral
moment  between  being  bad  and  being  good  ;  it  is  a
feeling  set  up  by  the  inrush  of  positive  goodness.
Repentance,  then,  must  be  re-defined  by  its  circumstances
as  the  peculiar  feeling  of  a  converted  person  towards
his  own  evil  past.  A  person  only  repents  in  so  far  as
he  is  now  good  ;  repentance  is  necessarily  the  attitude
of  a  good  will.  It  does  not  precede  conversion;  it  is
the  spirit  of  conversion.

If  repentance  is  the  feeling  with  which  a  person
contemplates  the  evil  past  he  has  left  behind  him,  the
problem  is  to  distinguish  it  from  the  feeling  with  which
he,  or  any  good  person,  contemplates  the  misdeeds  of
another.  If  we  can  maintain  such  a  distinction,  we
cannot  admit  the  reality  of  divine  penitence.

Now  if  we  look  at  the  matter  solely  from  the  psycho-
logical point  of  view;  if  we  simply  reflect  on  the  feeling
with  which  we  look  at  the  sins  we  have  ourselves  com-
mitted, and  compare  it  with  our  feeling  towards  the
sins  of  others,  we  shall,  I  think,  only  find  a  difference  in
so  far  as  one  or  other  of  these  feelings  is  vitiated  by  our
own  limitations  of  knowledge  or  errors  of  attitude.  In
an  ideal  case,  when  we  have  struck  the  true  balance
between  harshness  and  laxity  of  judgment,  we  feel  to


i9o METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY

our  own  sins  exactly  as  we  feel  to  those  of  any  other
person.  We  do  not  feci  sorry  for  our  own  sins  and
indignant  at  other  people's ;  the  sorrow  and  the  indigna-
tion are  both  present  in  each  case.  A  good  man's
feeling  towards  the  sins  of  others  is  exactly  the  same
kind  of  emotion  as  that  which  he  feels  towards  his  own.
The  fact  that  we  call  this  feeling  one  of  penitence  when
it  regards  himself  and  one  of  forgiveness  (or  punishment)
when  it  regards  others  must  not  mislead  us  ;  for  this
is  merely  an  example  of  the  distinction  according  to
circumstances  of  two  emotions  which  when  considered
in  themselves  are  seen  to  be  one  and  the  same.

But,  it  may  be  asked,  can  we  really  abstract  emotions
in  this  way  from  their  circumstances  ?  Is  not  any
emotion  simply  the  attitude  of  a  will  towards  a  particular
event  or  reality  ?  And  if  this  is  so,  we  are  right  in
defining  emotions  by  reference  to  their  circumstances ;
because  where  circumstances  differ  there  must  be  some
difference  in  the  state  of  mind  which  they  evoke.  The
objection  is  perfectly  sound  ;  and  our  merely  psycho-
logical argument  must  be  reinforced  by  asking  whether
the  circumstances  in  the  two  cases  really  are  different.
In  the  one  case  we  have  a  good  man's  attitude  towards
the  actions  of  his  own  evil  past  ;  in  the  other,  his
attitude  towards  another  man  who  is  doing  evil  now.
The  difference  of  time  is  plainly  unimportant ;  we
do  not  think  differently  of  an  action  merely  as  it  is
present  or  past.  The  real  question  is  the  difference  of
person.

We  must  remember  that,  since  a  will  is  what  it  does,
we  cannot  maintain  that  this  good  man  is  in  every  sense
the  same  man  who  was  bad.  The  bad  will  has  been
swept  out  of  existence  and  its  place  taken  by  a  good
will  ;  the  man  is,  as  we  say,  a  new  man  ;  a  new  motive
force  lives  in  him  and  directs  his  actions.  This  does
not  mean  that  he  is  not  "  responsible  "  in  his  present
state  for  the  actions  of  his  past.  It  means,  if  we  must
press  the  conclusion,  not  that  he  can  shirk  the  responsi-


CH.  II


GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 191


bility  for  his  own  actions,  but  that  he  is  bound  to  accept
the  responsibility  for  those  of  others  ;  and  this  is  no
paradox  if  we  rid  the  word  of  its  legal  associations  and
ask  what  moral  meaning  it  can  have.  For  to  call  a
man  responsible  means  that  he  ought  to  be  punished,
and  the  punishment,  the  sorrow,  that  a  good  man
undergoes  for  his  own  sins  he  does  certainly  undergo
for  the  sins  of  other  men.

Thus  God,  who  is  perfectly  good,  must  feel  repent-
ance for  the  sins  of  men  ;  he  bears  in  his  own  person  the
punishment  which  is  their  due,  and  by  the  communica-
tion to  them  of  the  spirit  of  his  own  penitence  he  leads
them  to  repent,  and  so  in  self-punishment  to  work  their
own  redemption.  The  divine  and  human  sides,  the
objective  and  subjective,  completely  coincide.  What
God  does  man  also  does,  and  what  man  feels,  God  feels
also.

(J?)  All  human  redemption  thus  comes  from  God,
and  is  the  re-birth  in  man's  will  of  the  original  divine
penitence.  But  in  this  immediate  communication  to
man  of  the  spirit  of  God,  mediation  is  not  excluded.
In  one  sense,  all  right  acting  and  true  knowing  involves
utterly  unmediated  communion  of  the  soul  with  God.
As  Elisha  lay  upon  the  dead  child,  his  mouth  upon  his
mouth,  and  his  eyes  upon  his  eyes,  and  his  hands  upon
his  hands,  till  the  child  came  to  life  again,  so  the  soul  is
quickened  by  complete,  immediate  contact  with  God,
every  part  at  once  with  every  part.  But  though  we
know  God  directly  or  not  at  all,  we  yet  know  him  only
as  revealed  to  us  through  various  channels  of  illumina-
tion and  means  of  grace.  The  mystic  who  dwells  alone
with  God  is  only  a  mystic  through  social  influences  and
the  stimulus  of  his  surroundings,  and  in  his  union  with
the  divine  mind  he  is  united  no  less  with  all  the
community  of  living  spirits.

So  repentance  comes  not  only  from  God  but  through
paths  which  in  a  sense  we  distinguish  from  the  activity
of  God. Every  truth  is  reached  through  some  stimulus


1 92 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY „.m

or  instruction  which  comes  from  a  source  in  the  world
around  us  ;  and  in  the  same  way  repentance  reaches  us
]  through  human  channels,  and  we  repent  of  our  sins
because  we  see  others  repent  of  them.  This  is  human
vicarious  penitence ;  others  suffer  for  our  sins,  the
suffering  being  not  a  mere  "  natural  consequence  "  of
the  sin  but  specifically  sorrow,  penitence,  that  is,
punishment  for  it  ;  and  their  suffering  is  literally  the
means  of  grace  for  us,  the  influence  by  which  we  come
to  our  own  repentance.

But  this  universal  fact  of  human  life  is,  like  all  others,
summed  up  and  expressed  most  completely  in  the
divine  manhood  of  the  Christ.  He  alone  is  always  and
perfectly  penitent  ;  for  a  sinful  man  cannot,  while
sinful,  repent  for  his  own  sins  or  any  others ;  permanent
penitence  is  only  possible  for  a  permanently  sinless  mind.
And  this  repentance  of  Christ  is  not  only  subjectively
complete,  that  is,  unbroken  by  sins  of  his  own,  but
objectively  perfect  also  ;  it  is  incapable  of  supplement
or  addition,  sufficient  to  atone  for  the  sins  of  the  whole
world,  to  convert  all  sinners  by  the  spectacle  of  God's
suffering.  No  further  example  could  add  anything  to
its  force.  There  is  only  one  way  of  destroying  sin  ;
namely,  to  convert  the  sinner.  And  there  is  only  one
way  of  converting  the  sinner  ;  namely,  to  express  to
him,  in  such  a  way  that  he  cannot  but  realise  it,  the
attitude  towards  himself  of  a  good  will  ;  the  attitude
which  unites  condemnation  and  forgiveness  in  the
concrete  reality  of  vicarious  repentance.

Thus  the  supreme  example  of  sinless  suffering  is  the
salvation  of  the  world  ;  final  in  the  sense  that  nothing
can  be  added  to  it,  that  every  new  repentance  is  identical
with  it ;  not  final,  but  only  initial,  in  the  sense  that  by
itself  it  is  nothing  without  the  response  it  should  awake,
the  infinite  reproduction  of  itself  in  the  consciousness
of  all  mankind.  It  is  not  merely  an  example  set  up
|  for  our  imitation  ;  not  merely  a  guarantee  of  the
possibilities  of  human life. It  is  an  unfailing source


ch.  ii GOD'S  REDEMPTION  OF  MAN 193

and  fountain  of  spiritual  energy  ;  it  gives  to  those  who
would  imitate  it  the  strength  to  work  miracles,  to  cast
aside  their  old  selves  and  to  enter  upon  a  new  life
prepared  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  for  out  of
it  power  goes  forth  to  draw  all  men  to  itself.


CHAPTER  III

MIRACLE

There  are  three  questions  which  may  be  asked  about
any  supposed  miraculous  event.  Did  it  happen  ?  Why
did  it  happen  ?  and,  Was  it  a  miracle  ?

The  first  question  is  a  matter  for  history  to  decide.
No  event  can  be  proved  or  disproved  to  have  happened
except  on  historical  grounds.  The  second  question  is
also  historical  ;  for  it  lies  with  history  to  determine  not
only  the  actions  of  persons  in  the  past,  but  also  their
motives.  The  remaining  question,  whether  such  and
such  an  event  was  miraculous  or  not,  is  also  in  a
sense  historical,  but  (it  might  be  said)  less  purely
historical  than  the  others.  The  philosophical  assump-
tion which  underlies  it  is  more  evident  than  in  the
other  cases.  Every  historical  question  involves  such
assumptions.  The  question  "  Did  it  happen  ?  "  implies
the  assumption  that  past  facts  are  ascertainable  ;  a
technical  point  in  the  theory  of  knowledge.  The
question  "  Why  was  it  done  ?  '  involves  in  the  same
way  the  ethical  implication  that  people  have  motives
for  their  actions.  But  these  philosophical  implications
do  not  strike  us  when  the  historical  questions  are  asked,
because  they  are  generally  admitted  and  are  not  as  a
rule  called  in  question.

But  when  we  are  asked,  "  Was  it  miraculous  ?  *''  we
at  once  feel  the  necessity  for  a  philosophical  inquiry
before the question can be answered. Do miracles

194


ch.  in  MIRACLE


J95


happen  ?  we  ask  in  turn  ;  and  what  do  you  mean  by
a  miracle  ?  These  questions  form  the  starting-point  of
the  present  chapter.  We  shall  offer  no  opinion  on  the
historicity  of  any  particular  miracle,  or  on  the  motive
which  may  have  underlain  it  ;  we  shall  confine  our-
selves strictly  to  the  problem  of  defining  the  conception
of  miracle  as  such.  If  this  can  be  done,  it  will  perhaps
be  of  some  service  to  the  historical  theologian.  At
present  his  work  is  much  impeded  by  metaphysical
difficulties  ;  by  doubt  as  to  what  kind  of  evidence  and
how  much  of  it  is  necessary  to  establish  the  fact  of  a
miracle  ;  by  fear  that  if  he  pronounces  against  the
truth  of  a  miraculous  story  he  may  be  accused  of
joining  hands  with  the  party  which  denies  a  priori  the
existence  of  miracle,  and  that  if  he  accepts  such  stories
at  their  face  value,  as  he  accepts  other  historical  matter,
enlightened  persons  will  denounce  him  for  an  obscur-
antist believer  in  the  impossible.

i.  These  difficulties  are  due  to  the  prevalence  of  a
theory,  or  definition,  of  miracle  which  it  is  our  first
business  to  examine.  It  is  certainly  possible  to  define
miracle  in  such  a  way  that  the  whole  difficulty  is
evaded.  If  we  merely  say  "  a  miracle  is  something
striking,  wonderful,  awe-inspiring  " — then  no  problem
arises  ;  but  such  definitions  will  probably  be  suggested
only  by  persons  to  whom  controversy  has  imparted  the
wisdom  of  the  serpent.  And,  covering  as  they  do  such
things  as  a  Homeric  simile  or  dawn  on  the  Alps,  they
are  not  accurate  representations  of  the  common
theological  use  of  the  word.  They  are  rather  criti-
cisms of  that  usage,  or  confessions  that  it  cannot  be
maintained.

The  definition  which  gives  rise  to  our  problem  is  to
the  effect  that  a  miraculous  event  is  one  caused  by
God's  interference  with  the  course  of  nature.  This  is
the  definition  which  we  shall  first  examine  ;  and  we
shall  then  proceed  to  deal  with  the  two  bye-forms  of  it,
one,  that  a  miracle  is  an  event  due  to  the  intervention


196 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY PT.  m

of  a  higher  natural  law  negating  a  lower  one  ;  the
other,  that  it  represents  God's  departure  from  his
normal  modes  of  action.  We  shall  treat  these  two
later,  because  they  are  in  essence  modifications  of  the
first  definition,  and  only  arise  when  the  dualism
inherent  in  the  first  has  proved  fatal  to  its  defence.

This  dualism  may  be  expressed  as  follows.  If  we
ask  what  is  meant  by  "  nature  "  in  the  above  formula,
we  are  told  that  it  consists  of  a  series  of  events  such
that  any  given  event  is  the  effect  of  that  which  went
before  it  and  the  cause  of  that  which  follows.  In  the
"  order  of  nature  "  the  precise  character  and  occasion
of  every  event  is  rigidly  determined,  A  producing
B  ;  B,  C  ;  C,  D-E-F.  Now  when  a  miracle  happens,
this  series  is  broken.  Instead  of  C  leading  to  D,  the
divine  will  substitutes  for  D  a  new  state  of  things,  B,
which  becomes  the  cause  of  subsequent  events  ;  so  that
the  sequence  now  runs  ABC/Se£.  The  new  factor  B
might,  it  is  true,  appear  alongside  of  D,  not  instead  of
it  ;  but  we  generally  regard  a  miracle  as  the  cancelling
of  what  was  going  to  happen  and  the  positive  sub-
stitution of  something  else.  Now  B  is  an  event,  a
"  physical  "  event  just  as  C  is  ;  and  the  dualism  there-
fore consists  in  this,  that  a  given  physical  event  may  be
caused  either  naturally  or  miraculously.  There  are
two  different  principles  by  which  events  are  originated,
existing  side  by  side  in  complete  independence.

The  dislike  of  dualism  as  such  is  sometimes  repre-
sented as  nothing  more  than  a  curious  idiosyncrasy  of
the  philosophic  mind  ;  either  as  a  matter  of  taste,  or  as
a  weakness  due  to  a  desire  to  make  the  world  look
simpler  than  it  really  is.  "  Cheap  and  easy  "  are  almost
permanent  epithets  for  the  type  of  theory  called
monism,  which  explains  reality  as  issuing  from  a  single
principle.  And  doubtless  many  monistic  theories
deserve  such  names  ;  for  to  construct  a  view  of  the
universe  by  leaving  out  all  the  facts  except  one  is  both
easy  and  cheap. But  monism  properly  understood  is


ch.  in  MIRACLE  197

only  another  word  for  the  fundamental  axiom  of  all
thinking,  namely  that  whatever  exists  stands  in  some
definite  relation  to  the  other  things  that  exist.  And
the  essence  of  dualism  or  pluralism  is  that  it  catalogues
the  things  that  exist  without  sufficiently  determining
these  inter-relations.

Suppose,  for  instance,  we  discover  the  existence  of
two  principles  A  and  B,  and  then  go  on  to  ask  what  is
the  relation  between  them.  We  may  begin  by  saying
"  I  don't  know  "  ;  and  that  might  be  called  provisional
pluralism,  a  necessary  stage  in  the  development  of
any  theory.  But  we  must  add  "  I  mean  to  find  out  if
I  can  "  ;  and  that  is  to  profess  our  faith  in  a  monistic
solution.  For  the  principles  A  and  B,  connected  by
the  principle  C,  really  form  one  principle  ABC.  The
true  pluralist,  when  asked  for  the  relation  between  A
and  B,  would  reply  boldly  "  There  isn't  any  "  ;  and  that
is  as  meaningless  as  if  we  should  describe  two  points
in  space  between  which  there  was  no  distance.  This
could  only  mean  that  they  were  the  same  point  ;  and
similarly  to  say  that  there  was  no  relation  between  A
and  B  is  only  sense  if  it  means  that  there  is  no
difference  between  them,  that  they  are  the  same
principle.

Thus  our  objection  to  the  bare  dualism  of  God  and
nature  is  that  it  is  not  yet  a  theory  at  all  ;  it  simply
sets  the  two  principles  before  us  without  attempting
to  show  how  they  are  related.  We  want  to  know
the  difference  between  them,  and  the  nature  of  a  whole
in  which  they  can  exist  side  by  side.  This  simply
amounts  to  saying  that  the  dualism  is  a  provisional  one  ;
and  people  who  deal  in  such  dualisms  are  often  quite
ready  to  admit  that  the  dualism  is  "  not  absolute."  It
might  be  thought  hypercritical  to  reply  that  by  such
an  admission  they  confessed  that  they  were  trying  to
secure  the  advantage  of  maintaining  a  theory  while
knowing  it  to  be  unsound  ;  and  we  shall  rather  ask
whether, regarded simply  as  provisional,  the dualism


198 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.  m

does  what it claims to do, and  finds room for the
complete  reality  of  each  side.

(a)  On  examination,  it  appears  that  justice  is  done
to  neither  side  by  the  attempt  to  regard  them  dualisti-
cally  as  parallel  realities.  A  God  who  is  not  the  source
of  all  being  is  no  true  God  ;  and  this  defect  is  not
removed  by  saying  that  God  created  and  can  interfere
with  nature.  Even  if  this  were  so,  even  if  everv  event
in  the  present  were  the  outcome  of  an  original  creative
purpose,  nature  would  still  be  something  alien  to,
something  essentially  different  from,  the  activity  of
God  ;  for  the  events  by  which  God's  original  creation
became  the  world  as  we  now  see  it  would  be,  by
definition,  naturally  and  not  divinely  caused.  God,  on
this  theory,  created  the  world  in  the  beginning  ;  once
created,  it  continued  to  develop  by  its  own  impetus,
which  impetus  cannot  be  called  a  divine  law  because  it
is  precisely  nature,  the  principle  which  the  theory
distinguished  from  God's  activity.  And  therefore  the
world  only  expresses  God's  purpose  remotely  and
obscurely  ;  his  first  act  has  been  so  overlaid  by  natural
causation  that  the  present  world  is  in  fact  purely  natural,
not  in  itself  divine  at  all.

The  same  defect  appears  in  any  given  miracle  ;  for
any  such  event  is  only  a  reproduction  in  miniature  of
the  original  miracle  of  creation.  God's  activity  ceases
the  moment  it  is  put  forth  ;  at  once  it  is  seized  upon
and  petrified  by  natural  law  into  a  part  of  the  causal
system.  Nothing  is  God's  but  the  bare  abstract  point
of  departure,  his  own  subjective  volition.  He  may
interfere  with  nature  as  he  likes,  but  nature  remains
essentially  uninfluenced,  for  every  interference  is  no
sooner  accomplished  than  the  divinity  vanishes  from  it
and  it  becomes  mere  nature.  God  therefore  is  absolutely
unexpressed  in  the  world,  however  frequent  his  miracles
may  be  ;  for  by  the  time  they  reach  our  senses  they
have  lost  all  their  miraculous  character.  He  is  reduced
to  an  abstractly  transcendent  being,  aloof  from  reality


ch.  in  MIRACLE  i99

and  eternally  impotent  either  to  influence  it  or  to  use  it
as  the  expression  of  his  own  nature.  He  is  thus  shorn
of  all  true  Godhead,  and  becomes  little  more  than  the
spectator  of  an  automatic  world.

(/>)  But  if  God's  reality  is  sacrificed  by  the  dualistic
conception,  that  of  nature  is  preserved  no  better.
Granting  that  God  can  suspend  for  a  moment  the
operation  of  natural  law,  and  substitute  a  different
conclusion  to  a  causal  process,  what  are  we  to  think  of
such  laws  ?  A  miracle  is  described  as  an  exception  to
a  law  of  nature.  But  a  law  that  admits  exceptions  is
not  a  law  at  all.  It  explains  nothing  because  it  does
not  express  a  necessary  connexion.  A  connexion  that
is  at  the  mercy  of  any  one,  even  of  omnipotence,  is
simply  not  necessary,  not  a  connexion,  not  an  explana-
tion. We  are  told,  rightly  or  wrongly,  that  no  law  is
certain,  no  rule  free  from  exceptions  ;  but  if  we  could
accept  that  doctrine  the  only  inference  would  be  that
the  "  natural  order,"  the  system  of  universal  law,  was
non-existent.  But  this  theory  of  miracle  is  based  on
assuming  that  a  great  proportion  of  events  is  really
accounted  for  by  laws  of  this  kind.  It  assumes  that
there  are  events  of  which  we  can  say  :  "  It  must  be  so
because  there  is  a  universal  law  that  it  is  so."  If  the
supposed  law  is  subject  to  exceptions,  its  position  as
a  law  is  forfeited.  It  is  not  entitled  to  plead  "  an
omnipotent  will  overrode  my  arbitrament "  ;  that  would
be  merely  a  confession  that  it  was  not  a  law  at  all  as
the  scientist  understands  laws.

There  is  a  great  deal  of  loose  talking  and  vague
thinking  on  this  point.  People  speak  of  laws  exactly
as  if  they  were  individual  persons  ;  we  hear  of  the
reign  of  law,  the  compulsion  of  law,  the  decree  of  law,
or  even  sometimes  of  disobedience  and  defiance  of  the
laws  of  nature.  Such  wild  mythology  obscures  the
true  conception  of  law  so  hopelessly  in  the  popular  mind,
that  people  can  entertain  the  idea  of  two  laws  conflicting,
or  of  a  law  being  suspended  or  abrogated,  as  if  these


2oo METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT. Ill


laws  of  nature  were  rival  legislators  or  the  arbitrary  acts
of  a  sovereign.  We  must  try  to  remember  that  a  law
of  nature  is  a  statement  of  a  universal  fact,  not  a
command.  It  cannot  be  "  disobeyed,"  because  it  does
not  tell  any  one  to  do  anything ;  it  can  only  be  "  broken"
in  the  sense  that  we  can  find  instances  in  which  it  does
not  hold  good.  But  if  such  instances  do  arise,  the
universal  statement  is  no  longer  a  true  one,  it  no  longer
represents  a  fact ;  and  we  have  to  say,  not  "  In  this  case
such  and  such  a  law  is  broken,"  but  "  This  case  proves
that  such  and  such  a  statement  or  theory  is  not
universally  true,  and  that  the  supposed  law  does  not
exist,  or  requires  modification  so  as  to  exclude  cases  of
this  sort."  The  kind  of  thought  which  imagines
natural  law  as  subject  to  exceptions  is  precisely  that  of
the  most  unscientific  and  inadequate  type;  as  if  Newton
after  observing  the  fall  of  the  apple  had  written,
"Everything  has  a  natural  property  of  falling  to  the
earth  ;  this  is  why  the  apple  falls.  Exceptions  to  this
law  may  be  seen  in  smoke,  kites,  and  the  heavenly
bodies."

The  reader  may  remember  how  we  showed  in  a
former  chapter  that  matter  and  mind  cannot  exist  side
by  side,  since  if  any  matter  exists  everything  must  be
material  and  therefore  if  any  mind  exists  all  must  be
spiritual  (Part  II.  Ch.  II.  §  i).  We  have  now  discovered
a  parallel  or  rather  an  identical  truth  ;  natural  laws
admitting  exceptions  are  not  natural  laws  at  all,  and
divine  acts  subject  to  natural  conditions  are  not  divine.
The  fusion  of  God  and  nature  which  we  called  miracle
is  a  monstrosity,  because  the  two  principles  are  by  their
very  definition  mutually  exclusive,  and  neither  can  exist
if  compelled  to  share  the  universe  with  the  other.  We
must  follow  up  the  argument,  taking  each  in  turn  as
the  absolute  principle,  since  it  is  now  clear  that  we  can
no  longer  defend  our  original  dualism.

2.  We  must  therefore  posit  either  nature  or  God  as
the  sole  reality. We  are  seeking  only  for  a  basis  for


CH. Ill


MIRACLE  201


the  conception  of  miracle  ;  the  general  metaphysical
question  was  worked  out  at  length  in  Part  II.  Ch.  II.,
and  we  need  not  repeat  the  arguments  there  employed.

(a)  If  we  try  to  maintain  that  nature  is  the  sole
reality,  and  rebuild  our  conception  of  miracle  on  that
basis,  we  shall  have  to  define  the  miraculous  as  the  case
where  one  law  of  nature  is  overridden  by  another  ;  the
"  emergence  of  a  higher  law  "  or  some  such  phrase  is
used  to  cover  theories  of  this  kind.  It  is  not  difficult
to  see  where  the  fallacy  lies.  In  inductive  logic  we
are  told  that  a  higher  law  explains  a  lower,  the  lower
being  an  instance  of  the  operation  of  a  higher.  In  this
sense  of  lower  and  higher,  the  higher  is  the  more
universal;  the  laws  of  the  conic  section  explain  those  of
the  circle  because  they  are  higher  in  the  sense  that  the
circle  is  one  kind,  and  only  one  kind,  of  conic  section.
Now  if  in  this  sense  of  the  word  we  were  told  that  a
higher  law  overrode  a  lower,  we  should  reply  that  the
phrase  is  a  contradiction  in  terms  ;  the  lower  law  is
simply  one  instance  of  the  higher,  and  to  talk  of  a  law
overriding  one  of  its  own  instances  is  meaningless.
The  fact  that  two  men  and  two  women  are  four  people
is  an  instance  of  the  more  general  fact  that  twice  two  is
four;  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  higher  or  more  general
fact,  twice  two  is  four,  should  "  override  "  the  lower  or
less  general  so  as  to  make  two  men  and  two  women  into
three  people.

There  is  only  one  sense  in  which  one  law  can  conflict
with  or  override  another  ;  that  is,  when  the  "  laws "
involved  are  not  laws  of  nature  but  acts  of  will.  If  nurse
makes  a  law  that  baby  goes  to  bed  at  six,  that  law  may
be  overridden  by  superior  authority  ;  there  may  be  a
parental  law  that  baby  stays  up  later  on  birthdays.
"Higher"  in  this  case  has  quite  a  different  sense;  it
means  "promulgated  by  a  higher  authority."  And
"  law  "  in  this  case  means  not  a  law  of  nature,  the  state-
ment of  a  universal  fact,  but  a  command  given  by  one
will  to  another.


202 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT. Ill


The  overridden  law,  in  short,  cannot  be  a  natural
law,  because  such  laws,  being  simply  general  truths,
cannot  be  overridden  ;  nor  can  the  higher  law  be  a  law
of  nature  miraculously  overriding  the  decision  of  a  will,
because  a  real  law  of  nature  in  conflict  with  a  will  would
win  every  time,  not  in  miraculous  cases  only.  Therefore
if  we  define  miracle  as  the  outcome  of  a  conflict  between
two  laws,  neither  law  can  be  regarded  as  a  law  of  nature ;
each  is  an  act  of  will,  and  the  higher  law  is  the  act  of
the  more  potent  will.

The  result  of  defining  miracle  by  reference  to  the
conception  of  natural  law  is  that  it  compels  us  to
describe  nature  in  terms  only  applicable  to  spirit.  The
attempt  to  combine  the  two  conceptions,  miracle  and
nature,  leads  to  the  explicit  reversal  of  the  very
definition  of  nature.

(b)  We  have  now  to  examine  the  third  of  our  original
definitions,  namely  that  which  escapes  the  dualism  of
God  and  nature  by  resting  on  the  single  conception  of
God.  We  shall  then  regard  miracle  as  one  kind  of  divine
operation,  distinguished  from  another  kind,  the  non-
miraculous,  by  some  criterion  to  be  further  determined.
Two  such  criteria  may  be  suggested:  (i.)  that  of  normal
and  abnormal,  (ii.)  that  of  mediate  and  immediate.

(i.)  The  distinction  between  normal  and  abnormal
action  presupposes  the  idea  of  a  norm,  a  principle  or
rule  generally  followed,  but  not  invariably  adhered  to  ;
admitting  of  exceptions  but  only  in  exceptional  circum-
stances. Such  rules  are  conceived  as  made  by  mind  for
mind  ;  they  are  not  necessities  to  which  the  will  is
subject,  but  forms  of  its  own  activity.  They  are  familiar
enough  in  our  own  life ;  and  it  is  assumed  that  they
exist  no  less  in  that  of  God.  Now  when  man  makes
himself  rules,  he  breaks  them  in  one  of  two  ways.
Either  his  original  purpose  fails  him  through  weakness,
caprice,  or  sinfulness  ;  or  else  he  abandons  it  because
unforeseen  circumstances  have  arisen  which  make  it
impossible  or  wrong  to  pursue  his  intention. These  are


CH. Ill


MIRACLE  203


the  causes  of  human  abnormality  ;  defect  in  the  man  or
defect  in  the  rule.  Neither  cause  can  be  operative  in
the  case  of  God.  He  is  not  vacillating  and  infirm  of
purpose  ;  and  he  is  not  subject  to  the  occurrence  of
events  whose  possibility  he  had  overlooked.  No  reason,
in  fact,  can  ever  arise  why  God  should  ever  depart  from
his  own  rules  of  conduct.

The  conception  of  a  rule  or  norm  thus  leads  not  to
the  explanation  but  to  the  denial  of  miracle.  Abnor-
mality implies  that  either  the  rule  or  the  exception  was
wrong  ;  alternatives  equally  impossible  to  the  divine
wisdom.

And  this  argument  is  often  used  against  those  who
uphold  the  possibility  of  miracles.  But  we  are  not
concerned  to  prove  their  possibility  or  impossibility;  we
are  seeking  only  for  a  definition  of  what  the  word  means.
Consequently  we  cannot  end  our  inquiry  here  ;  if  it  is
said  that  the  abnormal  never  happens  in  God  we  must
ask  whether  the  conception  of  normality  is  sound  ;
whether  it  is  true  to  say  that  God  always  acts  in  perfect
conformity  to  perfect  principles.  The  doctrine  as  stated
appears  simple  and  unobjectionable,  but  it  is  in  fact
either  tautologous  or  misleading.  In  the  first  place,
principles  of  conduct  as  known  to  ourselves  are,  if
perfectly  universal,  always  perfectly  empty.  They  give
no  information  as  to  what  you  are  to  do  on  any  particular
occasion.  "Always  do  right";  "Always  treat  others
as  ends  in  themselves  "  ;  "  Render  to  every  man  his
due  "  ;  these  are  absolutely  universal  ;  they  apply  to
every  case  of  conduct  you  can  imagine.  But  they  are
also  alike  in  not  prescribing  any  definite  course  of  action
whatever.  No  doubt  in  a  certain  case  the  maxim
"Always  do  right"  acquires  a  content  from  the  fact  that
there  is  only  one  right  thing  to  do  ;  therefore,  the
principle  "  Always  do  right  "  appears  in  this  given  case
to  mean  "  Confess  your  fault  and  take  your  punishment,"
or  the  like.  But  this  content  is  not  supplied  by  the
general  principle  itself ;  it  is  supplied  by  the  answer  to


2o4 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT.  Ill


the  question  stimulated  by  that  principle  :  "  What  is
right  ? '  A  person  who  did  not  know  how  to  behave
on  a  given  occasion  would  not  be  helped  by  the  principle
unless  he  intended  to  act  capriciously  ;  in  that  case  it
might  remind  him  that  he  had  duties.  But  one  may
safely  say  that  a  conscientious  person  never  thinks  of  the
principle  as  a  principle  ;  and  if  his  attention  was  called
to  it,  he  would  say  that  it  told  him  nothing  he  wanted
to  know.  In  a  sense,  he  acts  on  it  :  but  it  does  not
explain  why  he  did  this  and  not  that.

The  truly  universal  rule,  then,  is  absolutely  empty.
It  is  doubtless  true  to  say  God  always  acts  on  it,  but  to
say  that  adds  nothing  to  our  knowledge  of  God.  It
does  not  let  us  into  the  secret  of  his  will.  It  merely
staves  off  our  inquiry  with  a  truism  ;  as  if  one  should
say  that  the  secret  of  good  painting  was  always  to  put
the  right  colour  in  the  right  place.  True,  no  doubt  ;
but  not  very  helpful.

There  is  another  type  of  rule  which  represents  an
attempt  to  overcome  this  difficulty  by  supplying  a
content.  It  definitely  tells  you  what  you  are  to  do
and  what  you  are  not  to  do  ;  whether  simply  because
agreement  on  such  points  is  convenient  for  social
purposes  (keep  to  the  right,  or,  last  boy  in  bed  put  out
the  gas)  or  because  every  case  of  the  rule  represents
a  definite  and  binding  moral  duty  (thou  shalt  do  no
murder  ;  audi  alteram  partem  ;  always  protect  a  lady).
Since  the  first  type,  the  absolutely  universal,  has  proved
useless,  this  must  be  the  kind  of  rule  which  the  theory
has  in  mind  ;  and  the  doctrine  must  be  that  there  is  (if
only  we  could  formulate  it)  a  complete  body  of  such
rules  which,  taken  altogether,  cover  the  whole  of  life
and  provide  for  every  case  ;  that  a  breach  of  one  is
either  a  crime  or  the  sign  of  the  law's  imperfection ;
and  that  therefore  the  rules  of  conduct  laid  down  for
himself  by  God  are  never  broken  at  all.  Such  a  body
of  rules  constitutes  what  is  generally  called  a  casuistry  ;
not  using  the  word  in  a  bad  sense,  but  in  the  strict  and


CH. Ill


MIRACLE


205


accurate  sense  in  which  it  signifies  the  normative  science
of  conduct,  the  complex  of  rules  defining  one's  duty  in
any  given  situation.  For  man,  according  to  the  doctrine
we  are  examining,  casuistry  is  always  imperfect  because
of  his  deficient  imagination  of  possible  emergencies,  and
on  account  of  the  differences  between  man  and  man
which  make  it  impossible  for  all  to  be  guided  by  quite
the  same  principles.  For  God  these  difficulties  disappear
and  the  science  would  be  perfect.

Now  there  are  two  points  about  the  essential  nature
of  this  science  which  must  be  observed,  (a)  First,
obeying  its  rules  is  not  the  same  thing  as  doing  a  moral
action.  If  I  am  asked  "Why  did  you  do  that?"  I  may
reply  either  "Because  the  rule  says  I  must,"  or  else
"  Because  I  felt  I  ought."  (I  do  not  assert  that  there
are  no  other  possible  answers.)  But  these  are  quite
different  answers  and  represent  two  different  points  of
view.  The  first  answer  does  no  doubt  suggest  the
question  "  But  why  obey  the  rules  ? '"  and  to  that  the
reply  may  be  "Well,  I  suppose  one  ought  to  obey  them";
but  as  a  matter  of  fact  this  ulterior  question  has,  in  most
cases,  not  been  raised  at  all,  and  obeying  the  rule  as
such  has  no  further  moral  implication,  or  at  most  a  vague
and  distant  one.  The  two  answers  may  coincide  ;  but
in  that  case  the  first  is  not  felt  to  be  of  any  importance.
"  I  ought "  stands  by  itself  and  gains  nothing  by  the
addition  "  I  am  told  to."  In  conduct  the  only  thing
that  confers  moral  value  is  motive  ;  and  if  one  is
conscious  of  no  motive  except  obedience  to  a  rule,  one
cannot  claim  the  action  as  a  moral  one.  Whereas  if
one  is  conscious  of  the  action  as  a  duty,  its  legality  no
longer  makes  any  difference.  To  obey  a  rule  may  be
socially  indispensable  ;  it  may  be  educative  ;  it  may  be
prudent ;  but  it  is  not  a  free,  morally  initiated  action.
Morality  knows  no  rules  ;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with
art,  and  all  spiritual  activity.

But,  it  may  be  asked,  are  we  to  abolish  all  rules  of
conduct  ? What  would  become  of  the  world  if  we  did  ?


206 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY PT.  m

That  is  exactly  the  point.  The  world,  taken  at  any
given  moment,  requires  education,  it  requires  discipline ;
it  is  not  by  any  means  perfect  or  moral  or  self-dependent.
We  were  not  proposing  to  abolish  laws  and  empirical
maxims  from  our  makeshift  society.  We  merely  assert
that  for  a  perfectly  moral  being,  one  who  really  appre-
hended duty  as  such,  these  maxims  and  laws  would
recede  into  the  background  and  disappear ;  such  a
being  simply  ignores  and  does  not  act  on  them  at  all,
but  acts  merely  on  his  intuition  of  duty.

(/3)  The  second  point  is  that  such  rules  contain  an
element  of  approximation  and  vagueness  which  can
never  be  eliminated  and  therefore  makes  them  unfit
to  serve  as  guides  for  a  perfect  intelligence.  They  are
based  on  the  supposition  that  cases  and  actions  can  be
classified  in  such  a  way  that  the  classification  will
provide  the  basis  for  a  distinction  between  right  and
wrong  :  and  this  supposition  is  fallacious.

These  rules  are  always  general,  by  their  very  nature ;
they  lay  down  that  an  action  of  the  type  A  is  always
right,  an  action  of  the  type  B  always  wrong.  On
inspection,  however,  it  proves  impossible  to  find  any
class  of  actions  of  which  we  can  say  that  it  is  always
right  or  always  wrong,  unless  we  have  defined  it  in  such
a  way  as  to  beg  the  question.  Thus,  "  never  tell  a  lie  "
is  a  good  rule  ;  but  telling  a  lie  is  by  no  means  always
wrong.  The  least  imaginative  person  could  think  of  a
situation  in  which  it  was  a  positive  duty.  On  the  other
hand,  "  commit  no  murder "  is  absolutely  valid  only
because  murder  means  wrongful  killing  ;  so  that  the
rule  is  a  tautology.

But  further  :  actions  cannot  strictly  be  classified  at
all.  What  is  a  lie  ?  Intentional  deceit  ?  Then  it  covers
such  cases  as  ambiguous  answers,  refusals  to  answer,
evasions  ;  or  even  the  mere  withholding  of  information
when  none  has  been  demanded  ;  and  we  cannot  easily
say  when  such  concealment  of  the  truth  is  intentional.
To  lay  a  trap  for  an  opponent  in  controversy  would


ch.  in  MIRACLE  207

probably  have  to  be  called  lying,  as  well  as  countless
other  cases  in  which  we  do  not  use  the  word.  A
classification  of  actions,  in  short,  can  only  exist  so  long
as  we  refrain  from  asking  the  precise  meaning  of  the
terms  employed.

Therefore  a  system  of  casuistry  is  not  only  useless
but  actually  impossible  for  a  really  moral  mind  ;  it  is
essentially  a  makeshift,  vanishing  with  the  advance  in
spiritual  life.  This  is  not  because  our  rules  are  bad
rules ;  it  follows  from  their  mere  nature  as  rules.
The  nearer  we  come  to  true  living,  the  more  we  leave
behind  not  bad  rules  merely,  but  all  rules.  Thus
Beethoven  said  that  the  rules  were  all  his  very  humble
servants  ;  and  it  is  true  that  the  rules  formulated  by
his  masters  met  with  little  respect  at  his  hands.  But
that  (it  may  be  argued)  was  because  they  were  bad,
imperfect,  inadequate  rules;  he  created  rules  of  his  own,
and  those  he  did  obey.  For  instance,  he  altered  sonata-
form  a  great  deal ;  but  he  did  write  sonatas.  Musical
scholars  tell  us  that  John  Sebastian  Bach  did  not  write
fugues  ;  and  that  is  true  if  by  fugues  you  mean  com-
positions of  an  arbitrarily  rigid  and  academic  type.
But  he  did  write  Bachesque  fugues,  or  whatever  you
please  to  call  them  ;  he  did  write  one  definite  type  of
composition,  and  Beethoven  wrote  another  type.  Thus
each  made  his  own  rules.  They  were  not  the  rules  his
masters  taught  him  ;  but  the  rules  he  made  he  kept.

No,  we  must  reply,  he  did  not.  The  form  of  the
Beethoven  sonata  varies  between  Op.  2  and  Op.  1 1 1  so
vastly  that  we  cannot  lay  down  any  one  set  of  regula-
tions and  say  "  These  are  Beethoven's  sonata-rules."
No  doubt  if  we  take  few  enough  rules  and  sufficiently
abstract  ones,  we  can  arrive  at  some  that  Beethoven
never  broke  ;  but  if  you  had  pointed  out  the  fact  to
him,  he  would  probably  have  taken  care  to  break  them
all  in  his  next  sonata.  The  fact  is  that  the  conception
of  rule  to  which  we  are  now  appealing  is  a  fluid  con-
ception ; a  Beethoven can abandon his old rules  at


2o8 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT.  Ill


pleasure  and  take  a  leap  into  a  new  world,  guided  only
by  the  spirit  of  music  itself.  What  then  are  Beethoven's
rules  of  composition  ?  Here  is  the  secret  :  they  are
recast  for  every  new  work.  The  "  rule "  is  nothing
but  another  name  for  the  ground-plan  of  the  new  work
itself.  He  simply  invents  new  rules  as  he  goes  along,
to  meet  his  requirements.  And  that  means  that  in  the
sense  of  the  word  with  which  we  started  he  has  no  rules
at  all.

Thus  in  a  sense  every  action  obeys  a  law.  But  the
law  is  newly  shaped  for  every  fresh  action  ;  in  fact,  it
simply  is  the  action.  Therefore  the  original  theory,
that  there  were  certain  rules  established  by  himself
eternally  which  God  in  virtue  of  his  own  consistency
was  bound  to  obey,  is  seen  to  be  a  delusion.  We  cannot
escape  the  analogy  by  saying  that  Beethoven's  develop-
ment was  a  continual  improvement  of  existing  laws,  and
that  such  an  improvement  is  inconceivable  in  God  ;  for
Haydn's  rules  were  quite  as  good  as  Beethoven's  for  the
work  they  had  to  do,  and  Beethoven's  early  rules  are  no
worse  in  themselves  than  his  later  ones.  Then  why
did  he  change  them  ?  Simply  because  one  rule  is  only
applicable  to  one  case  ;  and  to  apply  it  to  another  case
is  pedantry.

If  we  cannot  speak  of  a  rule  fixing  the  normal  treat-
ment of  every  case,  neither  can  we  speak  of  a  single
dominant  purpose  which  determines  how  every  action
shall  be  done.  This  would  be  only  another  form  of  the
same  fallacy.  I  may,  owing  to  my  obsession  by  a
dominant  purpose,  be  led  to  treat  people  in  the  lump,
abstractly,  and  not  as  real  individuals  ;  I  may  ignore
the  finer  shades  of  difference  and  lose  my  sense  of  pro-
portion. But  in  such  a  case  the  purpose  is  a  bad  one,
in  that  it  has  a  bad  effect  on  my  conduct ;  or  at  least  I
am  the  wrong  person  to  carry  it  out.  To  suppose  that
God  acts  on  immutable  rules  because  he  has  an  immutable
purpose  is  a  mere  confusion  of  terms.  His  immutable,
purpose  might  surely  be  to  do  justice  in  every  separate


ch.  in  MIRACLE  209

case and to avoid all the abstract mechanism of
immutable  rules.

We  cannot  base  miracle  on  the  distinction  between
normal  and  abnormal  cases  ;  because  the  distinction  is
not  to  be  found  in  God.  Where  everything  is  perfectlv
individual,  the  class  or  norm  no  longer  has  a  meaning  ;
the  individual  is  a  law  to  itself.  Relatively,  this  is
true  for  man  in  proportion  as  he  approximates  to
perfection  ;  it  is  absolutely  true  of  God.

(ii.)  The  second  attempt  to  reintroduce  the  notion
of  miracle  on  the  basis  of  God's  sole  reality  was  the
distinction  between  mediate  and  immediate  action  on  the
part  of  God.  This  again — I  hope  the  subdivision  is  not
becoming  wearisome — will  take  two  forms  according  as
God's  "  medium  "  is  man  (including  other  spirits)  or
nature.

(a)  That  God  acts  either  directly  or  through  natural
processes  is  precisely  the  dualistic  conception  which  we
found  wanting  at  the  outset  ;  so  we  can  pass  on  at  once.

(yS)  God's  action  is  now  considered  as  either  direct,
or  mediated  through  the  agency  of  man.  I  do  not  wish
to  spend  time  over  the  conception  of  mediacy  ;  we  have
already  examined  it  in  another  chapter,  and  the  only
question  here  is  whether  it  fits  the  notion  of  miracle.
Plainly  it  does  not.  If  God  delegates  power  to  a
creature,  and  that  creature  then  operates  of  itself,  the
action  is  mediate ;  whereas  God's  delegation  itself  or
his  subsequent  interference  is  immediate.  But  the
distinction  is  too  arbitrary  to  require  serious  refutation.
In  the  Gospels,  Jesus  works  miracles  ;  in  the  Acts,  the
Apostles.  No  doubt  the  power  comes  from  God,  often
in  answer  to  direct  prayer.  But  if  God's  power  is  not
mediate  when  it  is  seen  in  the  person  of  Peter  or  Paul,
what  does  the  word  mean  ?  It  must  surely  be  held  that
the  power  to  work  miracles  is  no  less  mediate  than  the
other  powers  which  God  bestows  upon  his  creatures.

3.  Of  all  these  forms  in  which  the  definition  of
miracle  appears  we  have  discovered  that  every  one  is

p


210 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY PT.  m

based  upon  some  error,  some  dualism  which  is  a  mere
metaphysical  fiction  and  has  no  existence  in  reality.
No  dualism  is  ultimate,  and  no  dualism  that  is  not
ultimate  is  a  suitable  basis  for  a  theological  system.  It
stands  self-confessed  a  foundation  of  sand.  We  must
declare  frankly  that  the  common  conception  of  miracle
is  untenable.  It  is  a  hybrid  conception,  compounded
of  two  conflicting  and  absolutely  irreconcilable  views  ;
one  atheistic,  the  other  theistic  ;  one  material,  the
other  spiritual  ;  one  false,  the  other  true.

(a)  But  we  must  maintain  that  we  have  not  forfeited
anything  of  value.  Instead  of  finding  the  operation  of
God  in  isolated  and  controvertible  facts,  we  are  now
free  to  find  it  universalised  in  everything  that  is  true
or  good  or  beautiful.  And  so  far  from  admitting,  as
some  persons  pretend,  that  between  elevating  all  these
things  to  the  rank  of  God  and  depressing  them  all  to
the  rank  of  matter  there  is  little  to  choose,  we  must
assert  that  the  former  view  alone  does  justice  to  the
facts  of  common  consciousness  as  well  as  to  the  truths
of  philosophy.

For  up  to  now  we  have  refrained  from  asking  for  a
working  limitation  of  the  use  of  the  term  miracle.  If
now  we  ask  what  is  and  what  is  not  called  miraculous,
the  difficulty  of  making  a  distinction  will  be  very  evident.
Thus,  excluding  merely  superstitious  interpretations  of
Transubstantiation,  would  a  normal  Christian  describe
the  Real  Presence  in  the  Eucharist  as  miraculous?  If
so,  then  is  not  the  equally  real  presence  in  prayer  a
miracle  ?  And  then  what  of  the  real  presence  which
surrounds  the  religious  man  in  every  moment  of  his
life  ?  To  a  religious  person  it  is  surely  true  to  say  that
nothing  exists  that  is  not  miraculous.  And  if  by
miracle  he  means  an  act  of  God  realised  as  such,  he  is
surely  justified  in  finding  miracles  everywhere.  If  the
Real  Presence  is  not  a  miracle,  then  what  is  ?  An  act
of  healing  ?  But  are  we  really  prepared  to  maintain
that  healing  done  by  non-medical  means  is  miraculous,


CH. Ill


MIRACLE  211


as  distinguished  from  medical  healing  which  is  not  ?  If
miraculous  means  mysterious  (as  in  common  speech  it
often  does)  we  can  draw  no  such  distinction.  We  are
not  in  a  position  to  say  that  while  a  headache  cured  by
prayer  is  a  mystery  and  therefore  presumably  miraculous,
a  headache  cured  by  drugs  is  scientifically  understood
and  therefore  not  mysterious  nor  miraculous.  For  our
criticism  of  causation  has  shown  us  that  we  do  not
"  understand  "  the  operation  of  the  drug  in  the  least,
and  are  therefore  not  entitled  to  call  it  either  miraculous
or  the  reverse,  whereas  we  must  for  ever  call  it
mysterious.  Every  cure  is  equally  a  miracle,  and  every
doctor  (like  every  other  active  and  creative  mind)  a
miracle-worker,  in  the  only  sense  which  can  reasonably
be  attached  to  the  word.

For  again,  if  the  miraculous  and  the  non-miraculous
must  be  distinguished,  into  which  category  does  human
life  and  activity  fall  ?  That  again  cannot  be  answered.
It  is  not  nature  in  the  sense  required  ;  it  must  be
miracle,  and  yet  we  do  not  call  it  so.  And  if  our
scheme  of  reality  is  such  that  we  can  find  no  place  in  it
for  man,  what  is  to  become  of  it  as  a  philosophy  ?

(b)  But,  even  after  reconciling  ourselves  to  the  fact
that  all  events  are  volitions  and  that  the  mechanically
controlled  "  order  of  nature  "  is  non-existent,  we  may
still  ask,  Does  not  this  view  overthrow  all  we  have
believed  about  the  uniformity  of  nature  ?  And  if  we
give  up  the  uniformity  of  nature,  where  is  our  boasted
volition  ?  for  without  a  reliable  and  steadygoing  nature
to  ride  upon,  Will  would  never  be  able  to  get  to  the
end  of  its  journey.

(i.)  Whether  it  overthrows  our  beliefs  depends,
perhaps,  on  how  far  they  are  true.  What  do  we  mean
by  uniformity?  That  A  always  produces  a.  But  A
and  a,  definite  events,  only  happen  once  each ;  uniformity
has  no  place  there.  Very  well  ;  we  mean  that  events
of  the  class  A  always  produce  (or  rather  precede)  events
of  the  class  a. The  class  A  consists  of  B,  C,  D,  all

p  2


2i2 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY


PT. Ill


alike  ;  the  class  a  of  fi,  7,  8,  all  similarly  alike.  Then
an  event  in  the  first  class  will  always  precede  one  in  the
second.  Produce,  we  cannot  say  ;  that  would  be  to
claim  a  knowledge  of  their  inner  connexion  which  we  do
not  possess.  Then  all  it  comes  to  is  this,  that  there  are
resemblances  between  events,  and  that  if  events  B,  C,  D,
are  like  one  another,  their  contexts  /3,  7,  S,  will  also
show  resemblances.  That  is  what  we  describe  as  the
uniformity  of  nature.  The  so-called  classes  are  only
our  way  of  recording  these  resemblances.  But  in
resemblance  there  is  nothing  alien  to  mind  as  such.
Beethoven's  sonatas  resemble  one  another ;  so  do
Napoleon's  battles  and  Shakspere's  sonnets.  Uniformity
is  a  perfectly  obvious  characteristic  of  the  products  of
mind.  To  argue  from  resemblance  to  determinism  is
not  uncommon ;  but  it  is  totally  fallacious.

If  recurrence  or  resemblance  proved  determinism,
the  same  conclusion  is  equally  proved  by  any  single
event.  There  is  nothing  in  recurrence  that  is  not  already
present  in  the  single  instance.  Indeed  some  determinists
have  argued  that  because  a  certain  man  once  did  a  certain
action,  therefore  he  was  bound  to  do  it.  This  seems  a
reductio  ad  absurdum  ;  and  yet  if  we  can  argue  from
frequency  to  necessity,  the  question  "  How  often  must  a
thing  happen  before  you  know  it  was  bound  to  happen?"
can  have  only  one  answer  : — "  Once  is  enough."  All
the  arguments,  therefore,  by  which  we  prove  that  matter
is  mechanical  in  its  behaviour  will  prove  the  same  of
mind  ;  and  the  uniformity  of  nature  differs  not  at  all
in  character  from  the  uniformity  of  spirit.

(ii.)  Granted — and  by  now  we  seem  bound  to  grant
— that  a  ball,  let  drop,  falls  in  virtue  not  of  an  inexorable
law  but  of  a  volition,  and  that  the  volition  might  will
otherwise,  we  may  still  say  that  the  possibility  of  a  ball's
thus  changing  its  habits  need  not  seriously  disturb  our
practical  calculations.  We  have  to  deal  not  only  with
things,  but  with  men  ;  and  if  the  engineer  feels  justified
in  calculating  the  strength  of  his  materials  on  a  basis  of


CH.  Ill


MIRACLE  213


absolute  uniformity,  the  organiser  of  labour  is  no  less
ready  to  calculate  the  average  output  of  a  workman  and
to  act  on  his  calculations.  If  we  try  to  carry  the
principle  of  uniformity  too  far,  it  will  fail  us  whether
our  assumption  is  that  any  man  will  write  an  equally
good  epic  or  that  any  steel  will  make  an  equally  good
razor.  In  practice,  we  learn  to  discriminate  ;  we  dis-
tinguish between  the  things  that  any  man  can  do  and
the  things  for  which  an  exceptional  man  is  needed  ;  and
in  exactly  the  same  way  we  learn  how  far  it  is  safe  to
reckon  on  the  uniformity  of  matter  and  at  what  point
we  must  begin  to  look  for  diversity.

Uniformity,  in  a  word,  is  relative  to  our  needs ;  and
to  suggest  that  a  game  of  cricket,  for  instance,  would
be  impossible  if  we  supposed  that  the  ball  might  suddenly
decide  to  fly  to  the  moon,  is  no  less  and  no  more
sensible  than  to  suggest  that  it  is  impossible  because  the
bowler  might  put  it  in  his  pocket  and  walk  off  the  field.
We  know  that  the  friend  we  trust  is  abstractly  capable,
if  he  wished,  of  betraying  us,  but  that  does  not  prevent
our  trusting  him.  It  may  be  that  our  faith  in  the
uniformity  of  matter  is  less  removed  from  such  a  trust
than  we  sometimes  imagine.  Whether  we  describe  it
as  faith  in  matter  or  faith  in  God  makes,  after  all  we
have  said,  little  difference.

But  if  we  mean  by  uniformity  the  mere  statement
that  things  behave  alike  and  that  we  can  rely  on  them  to
do  so,  it  is  only  one  side  of  the  truth  and,  perhaps,  not
the  most  important  side.  To  see  uniformities  is  the
mark  of  a  superficial  observer  ;  to  demand  uniformities
is  characteristic  of  all  the  less  vital  and  more  mechanical
activities.  What  we  call  uniformity  in  people,  in  society
and  history,  is  generally  a  name  for  our  own  lack  of
insight ;  everything  looks  alike  to  the  person  who
cannot  see  differences.  What  we  demand  of  a  friend  is
not  constancy  alone ;  it  is  resourcefulness,  adaptability,
variety  ;  a  continual  readjustment  to  the  new  demands
of  an  always  new  intercourse. To  the  eye  of  perfect


2i4 METAPHYSICS  TO  THEOLOGY pt.ih

insight,  nothing  is  merely  uniform ;  everything  is  unique.
For  such  a  consciousness  there  are  no  classes,  there  are
only  individuals  ;  not  in  chaos,  for  every  individual  is
related  to  every  other  : —

All  things,  by  immortal  power,

Near  or  far,

Hiddenly

To  each  other  linked  are,

That  thou  canst  not  stir  a  flower

Without  troubling  of  a  star.1

The  true  relation  between  individuals  is  not  the
resemblance  which  connects  members  of  a  class,  but
the  co-operation  which  unites  parts  of  a  whole.  Such
parts  are  not  bound  by  abstract  rules.  They  are  free,
but  their  freedom  is  not  caprice,  for  they  act  in  and
through  the  whole  and  each  other,  so  that  the  whole
perpetually  re-creates  itself  in  their  actions.

If  materialism  only  means  the  mood  in  which  we
have  tired  of  the  infinity  and  intimacy  of  the  real,  and
lapse  wearily  into  a  ghost-land  of  our  own,  peopled  by
abstractions  which  we  can  command  if  we  cannot  enjoy
them,  the  only  hope  is  in  some  sudden  inrush  of  life,
something  to  startle  us  into  consciousness  once  more  and
to  scatter  the  ghosts  by  the  blaze  of  its  own  light.
This  is  the  function  of  those  events  which  we  call,  par
excellence,  Miracles  ;  they  force  themselves  upon  our
eyes  as  a  standing  testimony  to  the  deadness  and  falsity
of  our  materialistic  dogmas,  and  compel  us  to  face
reality  as  it  is,  free,  infinite,  self-creative  in  unpredicted
ways.  But  the  very  meaning  and  purpose  of  miracle  is
lost  if  we  regard  it  as  unique  and  exclusive  ;  if  we  set
up  for  our  superstitious  worship,  side  by  side  with  the
true  God,  an  idol  of  man's  making,  adored  under  the
name  of  Nature.

1  F.  Thompson,  The  Mistress  of  Vision.


INDEX


Absolute,  18,  115,  120
Action,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  II.  pass.

presupposes  knowledge,  30

and  thought,  popular  distinction,  32  j
breakdown  of  the  distinction,  34

its  relation  to  materialism,  80

See  also  Conduct
"  Active life "  as  much intellectual as

active,  31
./Etiological  myth,  5-7
Agnosticism,  130
Altruism,  46
Anselm,  66
Anthropology,  4,  24
Anti-historical  scepticism,  44-46
Anti-moral  theories  of  religion,  22-29
Antinomianism,  25
Aristotelian  science,  17,  83
Aristotle,  66,  161
Art  and  religion,  xvi

rules  in,  207-8
Atavism,  136
Atheism,  18-19
Atheists,  8,  66
Atomic  theory,  ancient,  81
Atonement,  70, 147,  Pt.  III. Ch. II.
pass.

"objective"  view,  181  seqq.
"subjective  "  view,  182  seqq.
Authority  in  religion  and  elsewhere,  67
Autonomy,  moral  and  political,  26

Bach,  J.  S.,  207
Balfour,  Mr.  A.  J.,  82
Beethoven,  207,  212
Bio-chemistry,  75
Biology,  75
Bio-physics,  75
"Blind  will,"  31,  123
Bradley,  Mr.  F.  H.,  40  n.
Buddhism,  xiii,  18

Caesar,  Julius,  59

Carritt,  Mr.  E.  F.,  vi,  101  n.


with Christian
materialism and


Casuistry,  204
"  Categories,"  134
Causal  sequence,  196
Causation,  83  seqq.
Chalcedon,  28  n.,  148
Change,  117
Character,  107
Christ,  151  seqq.,  183,  192
two  wills  of,  28  n.
divinity  of,  1 51-158
omniscient  and  omnipotent,  155-156
humanity  of,  158-162
the  disciples  of,  their  relation  to  his

personality,  160
uniqueness  of,  162-166
repentance  of,  192
"Christ-myth,"  53
Christianity,  xiii,  147
falsely identified

morality,  8
its opposition to

atheism,  20
as  "law  of  Faith,"  26
its  view  of  God,  70
Christology,  28
Church,  authority  of,  12,  65
Circumstances,  definition  by,  188
Clerk  Maxwell,  64
Cockin,  Rev.  F.  A.,  vi
Coherence,  144
Coleridge,  37

Communication,  97  seqq.,  177
Comparative  religion,  37  seqq.

its  anthropological and psychological
character,  39
Compulsion or externality, falsely
ascribed to the moral and civil
law,  26
Comte,  18,  38

Condemnation the essence of punish-
ment, 176
Conduct,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  II.  pass.
in  relation  to  thought,  7-8
and  religion,  xv,  7


215


2l6


INDEX


Conduct,  rules  of,  203  seqq.

Consequences of actions, not punish-
ment, 177-178

"  Contemplative  life  "  as  much  practical
as  theoretical,  3  1

Contingent,  necessary  and,  50

Contradiction,  118

Conversion,  189

Co-operation,  102  seqq.,  186

Cosmological  proof  [a  contingentia  mundi),
66

Cosmology,  18,  21

Creed,  as  prior  to  ritual,  6-7
as  means  to  morality,  9
—  theology,  12

its necessity to all religion, Pt. I.
Ch.  I.  pass.

Crimes  of  religion,  22

Criminals,  treatment  of,  171  seqq.

Crusoe,  Robinson,  in

Definition,  3,  62,  1 1 1

of  evil  and  error,  127

by  circumstances,  188
Democritus,  64
Descartes,  66

Desert,  conception  of,  176
Design,  argument  from,  66
Determinism,  25,  104,  107  n.
Deterrent,  punishment  as,  172
Differentiation,  implies  comparison,  79
Disciples  of  Christ,  their  relation  to  his

personality,  160
Dragons,  62
Drama,  126

Dualism,  50,  73  seqq.,  196-197
Duet  in  music,  as  example  of  whole  and

part,  112
Duty,  no  degrees  in,  175

Efficient  cause,  83  seqq.

Electrons,  82

Elimination  of  error  and  evil,  138  seqq.

Elisha,  191

Emotion,  10,  190

Empiricism,  48

Energy,  82

Enoch,  Apocalypse  of,  37

Error,  127

not  apparently  definable,  129

elimination  of,  138  seqq.
Ethics,  15,  39,  118,  136,  171

and  evolution,  136
Eucharist,  210
Evil,  Pt.  II.  Ch.  IV.  pass.,  71,  121,  157

apparently  not  definable,  129

false  theories  of,  130  seqq.

and  negativity,  135

elimination  of,  138


Evil,  how  overcome  by  good,  141,  144

as  perverted  good,  143

as  exceptional,  143
Evil  eye,  5
Evolution,  24,  1  36

and  ethics,  136
Externality. See  Compulsion

"  Facts  "  necessary  to  religion,  37
Feeling,  view  that  it  is  the  chief  content
of  religion,  10-n
various  meanings  of,  n  •
Fictions  as  a  means  to  morality,  9
Final  causes,  83
Finitude,  alleged,  of  human  personality,

?7»  J52

Fluxions,  61
Forgiveness,  169

a  crime?  171

an  absolute  duty,  175

=  punishment,  179

=  self-expression  of  the  good  will,  179

empirically  distinct  from  punishment,
180

relation  to  repentance,  186

self-,  187
Freedom,  105,  127,  182-183

not  chaotic,  91
Friendship,  161
Fugue,  207
Future,  as  unknowable,  156

Gassendi,  64

Generalisations, not dependent for
validity on quantity of facts ac-
cumulated, 49
God,  love  of,  10

belief  about,  indispensable  to  religion,
12

in  what  sense  do  all  religions  require
one?  18

justice  of,  23

omnipotence  of,  25,  70,  120,  122,  155

union  with,  27

his  nature  historically  revealed,  50

proofs of the existence of, Pt. II.
Ch.  I.  pass.

as  spirit,  70

as  creator,  70

as  personal,  70

as  good  yet  omnipotent,  70

as purely immanent  (rejected by  re-
ligion), 114

meaning  of  "  personal,"  115

immanent  and  transcendent,  119

not  a  hypothesis,  1 19-120

a  limited  (not  a  God),  121

how  at  once omnipotent and good  ?
122


INDEX


217


God,  benevolence  of,  125

as  perfectly  good,  142

fatherhood  of,  149

how  omnipotent,  155

how  omniscient,  157

falsely  conceived  as  a  universal,  163-
165

as  forgiving  sins,  169,  180

as  punishing  sins,  169,  180

repentance  of,  187

his  relation  to  Nature,  195  seqq.
Gods  of  paganism,  20
Good  Samaritan,  52
Good,  self-consistency  of,  118

as  normal,  136,  144
Grace,  182,  184
Gravitation,  77  n.

Hamlet,  113
Haydn,  208
Healing,  21 1
Hegel,  48,  80,  116,  131
Herakles,  53
Heresies,  28  and  n.
Heteronomy,  26

Historical  fact,  falsely  described  as  irrele-
vant to  philosophical (theological)
truth,  45
'•  Historical  Jesus,"  43,  14S
Historical  theology,  38

its  philosophical  character,  52
Historicity  of  Jesus,  52,  54
History,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  III.  pass.

and  religion,  xv

presupposes  philosophy,  46

as  objectivity,  49

—  philosophy,  51

in  what sense  capable  of  distinction
from  philosophy,  51
Homer,  18,  52

"  Idea " falsely distinguished from

"  object,"  98
Idealism,  73,  94,  101  n.,  120
two  senses  of  the  word,  73
Ideals  of  life,  their  variety,  35
Identity,  concrete  and  abstract,  106  seqq.,

149  seqq.
Immanence,  1 14-120
Impact,  77  and  «.

Incarnation, 70, 107, Pt. III. Ch. I.
pass.
in  what  sense  a  mystery,  159
Individualism,  183
Individuals,  distinction  between,  100
Inductive  logic,  201
Intellect,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  I.  pass.

falsely distinguished from reason,
intuition,  etc.,  12  n.


Intellect  =  reason,  12  n.

—  intuition,  12  >/.
Intuition  =  intellect,  12  n.

James,  Professor  W.,  1 3  1  ;;.
Jesus,  37,  43,  149,  151,  165,  209

historicity  of,  52-54

one  aspect  of  his  death,  54

temptation  of,  1  54
Joachim,  Mr.  H.  H.,  101  n.
John,  S.,  32
Judaism,  26,  37,  43
Judgment,  logical,  40

moral,  179
Julius  Caesar,  59

Kant,  48,  134

"  Kingdom  of  ends,"  26

Knowability,  argument  from,  108

Knowledge,  theory  of,  15
presupposes  action,  31
not  peculiar  to  individuals,  98
alleged  ambiguity  of  the  term,  102

Law,  199  seqq.
of  works,  26
Layman  and  priest,  in  what  sense  dif-
ferent, 35
Legalism,  182,  184
Liberal  Protestants,  39
Logic,  13,  15,  39,  49,  118,  163,  201
Love,  synthesis  of  thought  and  action,

Lucretius,  20

Man,  nature  of,  14S.  158,  164,  166
Materialism,  19,  79  seqq.,  153

the  truths  for  which  it  stands,  91

higher,  95
Mathematical  proof,  character  of,  66
Matter,  59  seqq.,  Pt.  II.  Ch.  II.  pass.

ambiguity  of  the  term,  89
Meaning  of  words,  62
Mechanists,  75
Mediacy,  209
Mediation,  160-162
Mediaeval  science,  17
Metaphysics,  bad  sense  of  the  word,  61
Middle  Ages,  65

Mind,  falsely  compared to a  machine,
34,  100

and matter, popular distinction be-
tween, 72  seqq.

breakdown  of  the  distinction,  78-79

and object, distinction between, 99
seqq.
Miracle,  70,  Pt.  III.  Ch.  III.  pass.
Mohammed,  xv
Mohammedanism,  xiii


2l8


INDEX


Monism,  96,  196

Monothelitism,  28  and  n.

"  Moralisation " of religion, true and

false,  24
Moralistic  view  of  religion,  7-10
Morality,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  II.  pass.

autonomy  of,  26

relative  to  society,  133
Moses,  167

Motion,  its  causes,  77  and  n.
Music,  112,  126,  207
Mystery,  159

true  and  false,  64
Mystic,  191
Mysticism,  27,  41
Myth,  aetiological,  5-7
Mythology,  19

Napoleon,  212

Natural  law,  199  seqq.

Nature,  as  object  of  worship,  20,  214

and  miracle,  195  seqq.
Necessary  and  contingent,  50
New  Testament,  149
Newton,  61,  200
Non-contradiction  of  truth,  118

of  good,  118
Normality,  202  seqq.

Omnipotence,  120

what  it  is,  155

misconceived,  184
Omniscience,  117,  139

what  it  is,  156
Ontological  proof,  66
Opera,  113
Optimism,  121,  131

Pagan  gods,  20

Pantheism,  149,  162

"Paradox,"  the  religious,  42

Part. See  Whole

Paul,  S.,  26,  209

Penalty  =  judgment,  179

Penitence. See  Repentance

Persecution,  22

Personality, 19,  Pt.  II.  Ch.  III.  pass.,
183-184

Pessimism,  121,  131

Peter,  S.,  209

Philosophical problems,  in what  sense
insoluble,  124

Philosophy  and  religion,  xiii  seqq.
of  religion,  non-existence  of,  15-16
=  theology  =  religion,  16-19
its  distinction  from  science,  16-17
presupposes  history,  in  true  and  false

senses,  47
cannot  admit  hypothesis,  60


Philosophy  and  scientists,  17,  90
Physical  sufFering,  its  relation  to  punish-
ment, 178
Physics,  59  seqq.
Plato,  131
Pluralism,  96,  196
Polonius,  113
Positivism,  38  seqq.,  109
Practical  side  of  religion,  Pt.  I.  Ch.  II.

pass.
Prichard,  Mr.  H.  A.,  101  «.
Proofs  of  God's  existence,  their  abstract
nature,  65

their  supposed  dishonest  character,  65

not  typically  mediaeval,  66
Psychology,  its  nature,  39

method  of,  40

limitations  of,  41-42

its  relation to  the  problem  of  mind
and  matter,  76
Punishment,  169

a  crime  ?  172

as  deterrent,  172

an  absolute  duty,  175

its  essence,  176  seqq.

in  what  sense  a  duty,  177

does  not  consist  of  physical  pain,  178

=  forgiveness,  179

empirically  distinct  from  forgiveness,
180

self-,  187
Puritanism,  25

Qualities  =  relations,  112
Quietism,  27-29

Real  Presence,  210
Realism,  10 1  n.

"new,"  10 1  n.
Reason  =  intellect,  12  ».
Regress,  infinite,  86

Relations, their alleged "externality,"
ill

=  qualities,  112
Religion,  and  philosophy,  xiii

conduct  and,  xv

history  and,  xv

art  and,  xvi

universality  of,  xvii

usage  of  word,  xvii

of  savages,  4-7,  18,  24

moralistic  view  of,  7-10

non-existence  of  philosophy  of,  15-16

=  theology  =  philosophy,  16-19
Religious  wars,  22

life,  its  elements,  32

"  paradox,"  42
Renaissance,  66,  8}
Repentance,  141,  144,  178


INDEX


219


Repentance,  its  relation to forgiveness,
186

divine,  187

its  nature,  18S  seqq.

of  God,  189

of  Christ,  192
Responsibility,  190-191
Revenge,  i~z
Rigorism,  25

Ritual,  view  that  it  is  the  true  content
of  religion,  4-7

depends  on  creed,  7
Robinson  Crusoe,  ill
Rules,  of  conduct,  203  seqq.

in  art,  207-208

Samaritan,  Good,  52
Savages,  religion  of,  4-7,  18,  24
Scents,  difficulty  of  defining,  188
Scepticism,  8,  18,  99

true  and  false,  69
Science  and  religion,  19
Scientists  and  philosophy,  17,  90
Scott,  Mr.  S.  G.,  vi
Secular,  falsely  opposed  to  religious,  35
Self-condemnation,  178-189
Self-consciousness,  10 1
Self-dependence,  184
Self-expression  of  the  good  will  =  punish-
ment, 177,  =  forgiveness,  179
Self-identity,  97  seqq.,  152
Selfishness,  46
Self-limitation  of  God,  154
Self-preservation,  172
Self-surrender,  27-29
Series,  infinite,  87
Sextus  Empiricus,  66
Shakspere,  113,  212
Society,  172-173

morality  relative  to,  133
Socrates,  49,  66
Son  of  Man,  37
Sonata,  207
Spinoza,  104,  131
Spirit,  Holy,  183

God  as,  70
Subjective  idealism,  120
"Super-moral  Absolute,"  123

Teleology,  83
Temperament,  xiv
Temptation  of  Jesus,  154
Testament,  New,  149
Theism,  transcendent,  125,  149
Theology,  xiii

attempts  to  distinguish  it  from  creed-
element  in  religion,  12-15

=  creed,  12


Theology  =  phi  losophy  =  religion,  16-19
historical,  38,  42  seqq.
philosophical character of  historical

not  an  empirical  science,  59
Theory  of  knowledge,  15

and  fact,  false  antithesis,  17  n.

anti-moral,  of  religion,  22-29

atomic,  ancient,  8  1
Things  and  thought,  10 1
Thinking,  ambiguity  of  the  term,  93
Thompson,  Francis,  214
Thought,  conduct  in  relation  to,  7-8,  30

and  action,  popular  distinction,  33

breakdown  of  the  distinction,  34

and  things,  101
Timelessness as characteristic of all

truth,  50
Totality,  two  senses  of,  137

must  be  good,  139,  144
Transcendence,  119,  198
Treatment  of  criminals,  171  seqq.
Triangle,  163-164
Triumph,  188
Truth,  ultimate,  64

involving  differences  in  unity,  106

involving  non-contradiction,  118

Ultimate  truths  not  incapable  as  such  of

proof,  64
Uniformity,  92,  211-214
Union  with  God,  27
Uniqueness,  92,  102

of  Christ,  163-166
Unity,  of  minds,  101,  104-105

and  truth,  106

and  identity,  108
Universal  and  particular,  49,  163
Universality  of  religion,  xvii
Universe, in what sense a totality,

140
Unknowable,  the  future  as,  156

Vendetta,  172

Vitalists,  75

Wars,  religious,  22

Watson,  Prof.  J.,  101  n.

Whole  and  part,  20,  SS,  104,  10S  teqq.,

152
"Will,  blind,"  31,  123
Will  falsely  distinguished  from  faculties,

103
"Will  not  to  will,"  154
"Will  to  power,"  31
Words,  meaning  of,  62
Works,  law  of,  26
Worship.  Nature  as  an  object  of,  20,  214


Printed  by  R.  &  R.  Clark,  Limited,  Edinburgh.


n


BINDING  SECT. MOV  30  1979


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
CARDS  OR  SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET

UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO  LIBRARY


Collingwood,  Robin  George
Religion  and  philosophy


33
