Collectanea Hermetica, Vol. 4: Æsch Mezareph, or Purifying Fire (W. Wynn Westcott (ed.), 1894)
==============================================================================================
Westcott's Collectanea Hermetica, Vol. 4. Completes the 9-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

Collectanea Hermetica 

EDITED BY 

W. WYNN WESTCOTT, M.B., D.P.H. 

S. M. of the Soc. Rosie, in Anglia 
W. M. of the Quatuor Coronati Lodge 

VOLUME IV. 

AESCH MEZAREPH 

OR 

PURIFYING FIRE 

A CHYMICO-KABALISTIC TREATISE 
COLLECTED FROM THE KABALA DENUDATA 
OF KNORR VON ROSENROTH. 

Translated by a Lover of Philalethes, 1714 
PREFACE, NOTES AND EXPLANATIONS BY 

“ SAPERE AUDE” 

PREFACE. 

By Sapere Aude. 

The ZEsch Mezareph or Ash Metzareph, is only known to 
persons of Western Culture from the Latin Translation found 
in a fragmentary condition in the work entitled Kahalah 
Denudata by Knorr von Rosenroth, published at Sulzbach in 
1677-84. These volumes have as a sub-title “ The Transcen- 
dental, Metaphysical and Theological Doctrines of the 
Hebrews ”, and they enshrine a Latin translation, with part 
of the Hebrew text and commentaries, of the great Sohar or 
ZOHAR, “The Book of Splendour” which is the most 
famous of all the Hebrew mystical codices of the Kabalah. 

Three of the principal tracts of the Zohar are now familiar 
to English readers through the translation of my friend, 
MacGregor Mathers : his edition of The Book of Concealed 
Mystery , The Greater Holy Assembly , and The Lesser Holy 
Assembly , has obtained so great a circulation that I am 
emboldened to issue this volume, which exemplifies the 
Kabalistic scheme of Alchymy, as one of the series of Collec- 
tanea Hermetica. The ZEsch Metzareph is still extant as a 
separate treatise in what is called the Hebrew language, but 
which is more properly Aramaic Chaldee : it was a com- 
panion volume to the Chaldean Book of Numbers so often 
referred to by H. P. Blavatsky, and which is no longer to be 
procured, although I have reason to think that copies still 
exist in concealment. 

The first volume of Rosenroth’s work consists entirely of a 
Kabalistic Lexicon. Upon the title-page is inscribed : — 

Apparatus in Librum Sohar 
nempe 

Loci communes Kabalistici 
secundum ordinem Alphabeticum 
concinnati, qui Lexici instar esse possunt. 

IV 

PREFACE. 

Upon the main title page of the work he describes this 
portion as collected from five sources : — 

I. Clavis ad Kabalam antiquam : i.e., explicatio et ad 
debitas Classes Sephiristicas facta distributio omnium nomi- 
num et cognominum Divinorum e Libro Pardes. 

II. Liber Schaare Orah seu Portae Lucis. 

III. Kabala recentior. Rabbi Jizchak Loria. 

IV. Index plurimarum materiarum Cabalisticarum in 
ipso Libro Sohar propositarum. 

V. Compendium Libri Cabalistico-Chymici, /Esch Met- 
zareph dicti, de Lapide Philosophico. 

The ZEsch Metzareph can be re-constructed from its 
fragments scattered through this Lexicon, almost in its 
entirety. This work has been done by The Lover of Phila- 
lethes, who published the English version of 1714. 

The present volume is a Reprint of that English version, 
in its original form ; many corrections however, have been 
made, and a few changes in spelling and diction introduced 
in order to avoid archaic forms, leading young students into 
difficulties. For instance, Kabalah is written instead of 
Kabbala, because the Hebrew word has only one B, and ah 
represents the Hebrew letter He better than the English a , 
which suggests that the word is spelled with the Hebrew 
aleph. 

The Hebrew or Chaldee name of this treatise is spelled 
thus AShH MTzRP. The Lover of Philalethes of 1714 
spelled this in English by a diphthong IE SCH ; and in the 
second word he puts Z for T z, zain for tzaddi, this leads to 
confusion and error. The meaning of Ash or Ashah is “ fire ” 
or “ a fire offering ”, and metzareph is “ cleansing ” or “ puri- 
fying ”. The whole title refers to “ Cleansing Fires ”, as the 
mode by which pure gold was obtained in Alchymy, by 
burning off the dross and so separating the pure from the 
impure — on the material plane ! while the cleansing fire of 
trial is also a suitable simile for the purification and exalta- 
tion of the human soul on the plane of spiritual Alchymy. 
The words Ash Metzareph, or Tisch Mezareph as Rosen- 
roth spells it, are found in the book of Malachi, cap. 3, v. 2, 
where it is said that the messenger of the Lord is like a 
“ refiner’s fire ”. 

There are in the book many references to other old Hebrew 

PREFACE. 

V 

and Chaldee works, several of these are included in the great 
collection of tracts called the Talmud ; of this work there 
are two great forms, the Talmud of Babylon, and that of 
Jerusalem. The former is the more important, and is more 
learned and mystical. Among the tracts referred to, are : — 
Pirke Aboth, PRQI ABUT, Sayings of the Fathers ; Baba 
Kama, BBA QMA, The first Gate ; Baba Bathra, BBA 
BTRA, The Latter Gate; Baba Metsia, BBA MTzIOA, The 
Middle Gate. 

The work Schaare Orah mentioned by Rosenroth is the 
Hebrew ShOR AURH or Gate of Light written by Rabbi 
Joseph Gikatilla ben Abraham. 

The Liber Pardes of Rosenroth is the book Sepher Pardesh 
Rimmonim, or Garden of Pomegranates , its author was Rabbi 
Moses Cordovero, or Remak, who flourished about 1550. 

The value of this treatise is so largely dependent upon the 
Literal Kabalah and the method of Gematria, or the mutual 
conversion between letters and numbers that it is wise to 
introduce here a table of the English Letters attributed to 
the Hebrew Letters and Numbers. The system followed is 
that conventional one laid down in Wynn Westcott on 
“ Numbers ”, which has also been adopted in each of the 
previous volumes of the series of Collectanea Hermetica. The 
system is only an approximation to the true rendering of 
Hebrew into English ; as for example I is adopted for Yod, 
but some authors use I or Y or J ; and for Ayin, O is adopted 
which has sometimes the force of Ay and O, and at others of 
Gn, when used as a consonant. 

Aleph 

Beth 

Gimel 

A 

B 

G 

1 

2 

3 

Zain 

Cheth 

Teth 

Z 

Ch 

Th 

7 

8 

9 

Mem 

Nun 

Samech 

M 

N 

S 

40 

50 

60 

Qoph 

Resh 

Q 

R 

100 

200 

Daleth 

Heh 

Van 

D 

H 

V 

4 

5 

6 

Yod 

Kaph 

Lamed 

I 

K 

L 

10 

20 

30 

Ayin 

Peh 

Tzaddi 

O 

P 

T z 

70 

80 

90 

Shin 

Tau 

Sh 

T 

300 

400 

VI 

PREFACE. 

The special final Letters are not used as numerals in the 
Alsh Metzareph. 

The sEsh Metzareph is almost entirely Alchymical in its 
teachings, and is suggestive rather than explanatory in its 
words. The allegorical method of teaching runs through it, 
and the similes have to be kept carefully in mind, otherwise 
confusion will result. Several Alchymic processes are set 
out, but not in such a way that they could be carried out by 
a neophyte ; any attempt to do so would discover that some- 
thing vital was missing at one stage or other. 

But although the J£sh Metzareph is not a manual of 
practical Alchymy, yet an attentive study of its statements 
considered with accurate relation to the numerical allusions, 
may give some true conclusions as to the materia and agents 
to be employed in the several forms of Transmutation. 

The nominal Christian of narrow views will see in this 
tract a confirmation of his opinion, that Alchymy is an un- 
holy art and prompted by the Evil One ; and there is perhaps 
no book which contains more Scripture verses referred to as 
illustrating the means and aims of Alchymy ; so that perhaps 
such a one may point to this work as the brightest example 
of the assertion that “the Devil can quote even Holy Scrip- 
ture to his purpose.” 

CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. Elisha. Naaman. The two systems of 

ALLOTTING THE SEPHIROTH TO THE ALCHY- 

MIC PRINCIPLES AND METALS ... ... 9 

II. Gold, its ten varieties, and the Kamfa 

OF 6 ... ... ... ... 13 

III. Silver, referred to the Ten Sephiroth ; 

its Kamea of 9 ... ... ... 20- 

Iron, the animal forms; its Kamea of 5 23 

IV. Tin is related to Jupiter; its Kamea of 4 27 

V. Brass, its Decad ; its Kamea of 7 ... 29 

Related to -Venus ... ... ... 32 

VI. Lead, Chokmah ; its Decad; its Kamea of 3 33 

Ariah, the Lions, Naaman ... ... 35 

Antimony ... ... ... ... 37 

VII. Jarden ; the river Jordan, its symbolism 38 

Jesod, Quicksilver, the Edomite wife ; 

its Kamea of 8 ... ... ... 38 

VIII. Juneh, the Dove ... ... ... 43. 

Jarach, the Moon ... ... ... 43 

Gophrith, Sulphur ... ... ... 44 

AL SCH-M EZAREPH;' 

OR 

Purifying Fire. 

CHAPTER I . 2 

E LISHA” was a most notable Prophet, an Example 
of Natural Wisdom, a Despiser of Riches, (as 
the History of the Healing of Naaman sheweth, 
2 Kings, c. 5, v. 16) and therefore truly Rich. Ac- 
cording to what is said in Pirke Aboth/ viz., Who is 
Rich ? He that rejoiceth in his Portion, cap. 4. For 
so the true Physician of impure Metals hath not an 
outward Show of Riches, but is rather like the Tohu 5 of 
the first Nature, empty and void. Which Word is of 
equal Number with the Word Elisha, viz., 41 1. For it 
is a very true saying in Baba Kama 0 , fol. 71. col. 2. 
The thing which causeth Riches, (such as Natural 
Wisdom) is supplied instead 7 of Riches. 

Learn therefore to purify Naaman, coming from the 
North, out of Syria, and acknowledge the power of Jor- 
dan : Which is as it were Jar-din 8 that is the River of 
Judgment flowing out of the North. 

And remember that which is said in Baba Bathra, 
fol. 25, col. 2. He that will become Wise, let him live 
in the South ; and he that will grow Rich, let him turn 
himself toward the N orth, etc. Although in the same place 
Rabbi Joshua Ben Levi says, let him live always in the 
South, for whilst he becomes Wise, at the same time 

10 

he becomes Rich. “ Length of Days is in her right 
hand, and in her left, Riches and Honour.” Prov., 
c. 3, v. 1 6. So thou wilt not desire other Riches. 

But know, that the Mysteries of this Wisdom, differ 
not from the superior Mysteries of the Kabalah. For 
such as is the Consideration of the Predicaments in 
Holiness, the same is also in Impurity ; and the same 
Sephiroth which are in Atziluth, 9 the same are in 
Assiah, 10 yea, the same in that Kingdom, which is 
commonly called the Mineral Kingdom ; although their 
Excellency is always greater upon the spiritual plane. 
Therefore the Metallic Root here possesseth the place 
of Kether, 11 which hath an occult Nature, involved in 
great obscurit}', and from which all Metals have their 
Origin; even as the Nature of Kether is hidden, and 
the other Sephiroth flow from thence. 

Lead hath the place of Chokmah, because Chokmah 
immediately proceeds from Kether, as it immediately 
comes from the Metallic Root, and in ^Enigmatic 
similes, it is called the “ Father ” of the following 
Natures. 

Tin possesseth the place of Binah, shewing Age, by 
its Greyness, and shadowing forth Severity and Judicial 
Rigour, by its Crackling. 

Silver is placed under the Classis of Chesed, by all 
the Masters of the Kabalah, chiefly for its Colour and 
Use. 

Thus far the White Natures. Now follow the Red. 

Gold is placed under Geburah, according to the most 
common Opinion of the Kabalists ; Job in c. 37, v. 22, 
also tells us that gold cometh from the north, 12 not only 
for its Colour, but for the sake of its Heat and Sulphur. 

Iron is referred to Tiphereth, 13 for he is like a Man of 
War, according to Exod., c. 15, v. 2, and hath the Name 
of “ Seir Anpin,” from his swift Anger, according to 
Psalm 2, v. ult., “ kiss the son lest he be angry.” 

Netzach and Hod are the two Median places of the 

Body, and the Seminal Receptacles, and refer to the 
Hermaphroditic Brass. So also the two Pillars of the 
Temple of Solomon (referring to these two Sephiroth) 
were made of Brass, i Kings, c. 7, v. 15. 

Jesod is Argent vive. For to this, the name 
“ Living ” is Characteristically given ; and this Living— 
Water is in every case the Foundation of all Nature 
and of the Metallic Art. 

But the true Medicine of Metals is referred to Mal- 
kuth, for many Reasons ; because it represents the 
rest of the Natures under the Metamorphoses of Gold 
and Silver, right and left, Judgment and Mercy, 15 con- 
cerning which we will speak more largely elsewhere. 

Thus I have delivered to thee the Key to unlock 
many Secret Gates, and have opened the door to the 
inmost adyta of Nature. But if anyone hath placed 
those things in another order, I shall not contend with 
him, inasmuch as all systems tend to the one truth. 

For it may be said, the three^ Supernals are the 
Three Fountains of Metallic things. The thick water 
is Kether, Salt is Chokmah, and Sulphur is Binah ; 
for known reasons. And so the Seven Inferior will 
represent the Seven Metals, viz., Gedulah and Geburah, 
Silver and Gold ; Tiphereth, Iron; Netzach and Hod, 
Tin and Copper; Jesod, Lead; and Malkuth will be 
the Metallic Woman, and the Luna of the Wise Men ; 
and the_Field into which the Seeds of secret Minerals 
ought to be cast, that is the Water of Gold, as this 
Name (Mezahab 16 ) occurs, Genesis, c. 36, v. 39. 

But know, my Son, that such Mysteries are hid in 
these things as no Tongue may be permitted to utter. 
But I will not offend any more with my Tongue, but 
will keep my Mouth with a Bridle , Psalm 39, v. 2. 

17 Gehazi the Servant of Elisha, is the type of the 
vulgar Students of Nature, who contemplate the Valley 

12 

and Depths of Nature, but do not penetrate into her 
Secrets. 

Hence they Labour in vain, and remain Servants for 
ever. They give Counsel about procuring the Son of 
the Wise Men whose Generation exceeds the Power of 
Nature, but they can add nothing to assist in his 
Generation, 2 Kings, c. 4, v. 14 (for which purpose a 
Man like Elisha is required). For Nature doth not 
open her Secrets to them, v. 26, but contemns them, 
v. 30, and the Raising of the Dead is impossible to 
them, v. 31. They are Covetous, cap. 5, v. 20; Liars, 
v. 22 ; Deceivers, v. 25 ; Prattlers of other Men’s 
Deeds, 2 Kings, c. 8, v. 4-5, and instead of Riches, 
contract a Leprosy themselves, that is Disease, 
Contempt and Poverty, v. 27. For the word Gehazi, 18 
and the word Choi, Prophane or Common, have both 
the same Number. 19 

J 3 

CHAPTER II. 

x In Metallic things, Gebnrah is of the Class to which 
Gold is referred ; which has again its Decad ; (i.e., Ten 
Orders or Degrees). So that, 

1. Chethem, 2 that is, pure fine Gold, is referred to 
the Kether thereof; which, Canticles, c. 5, v. u, is re- 
ferred to the Head. 

2. Batzar, 3 Gold, is referred to Chokmah, as though 
laid up in strongholds, Job, c. 22, v. 24, 25, and c. 
36, v. 19. 

3. Charutz, 4 Prov., c. 8, v. 10, is referred to Binah, 
from the digging of it ; which Name belongs to the 
Feminine Gender. 

4. Zahab Shachut, 5 that is, fine and drawn Gold, 
2 Chron., c. 9, v. 15, because it hath the Analogy to the 
Thread of Chesed. 

5. Zahab, 6 alone, is referred to Geburah, because 
Gold cometh from the North, Job, c. 37, v. 22. 

6. Paz, 7 and Zahab Muphaz, 8 are referred to 
Tiphereth, 1 Kings, c. 10, v. 18; Psalm, c. 21, v. 4, 
and 19, v. 11 ; and Daniel, c. 10, v. 5. 9 For so 
Tiphereth and Malkuth are compounded in the 
Golden Throne, 1 Kings, c. 10, v. 18; also when it is 
called a Vessel of Gold, Job, c. 28, v. 17; a Crown of 
Gold, Psalm 21, v. 3 ; Bases of Gold, Cant., c. 5, v. 15. 

7. Zahab Sagur, 10 is referred to Netzach, that is 
Gold shut up, 1 Kings, c. 4, v. 20, 21, Job, c. 28, v. 15, 
to wit, to bring forth Seed. 

8. Zahab Parvajim, 11 is referred to Hod ; 2 Chron., 
c. 3, v. 6, 1 Kings, c. 6, v. 20, from its likeness to the 
Blood of Young Bullocks, for this kind is Red at the 
left Hand. 

H 

9. Zahab Tob, 12 is referred to Jesod, that is good 
Gold, Gen., c. 2, v. 12, for this kind is called good, after 
the manner of a good Man. 

10. But Zahab Ophir, 18 is referred to Malkuth, 
Job, c. 22, v. 24, for it is the Name of a Land (or Earth) 
as called so from Ashes. See also 1 Chronicles, c. 29, 
v. 4. 

And 14 now concerning the Name Zahab, I will lead 
thee into the Cave of the hidden Matter, and will shew 
thee the Treasuries of Solomon 15 mentioned in Nehemiah, 
c. 13, v. 13, viz., the Perfection of Stones, Exodus, c. 26, 
v. 6. 

Come See ! There are many places, to which Gold 
is referred, viz., Geburah and Binah, and other special 
Places, where the Species of Gold are disposed by one 
thus, by another other ways. But now I represent to 
thee the Nature of Gold in Tiphereth. 

Neither can you object out of the Zohar or Tikkunim. 
For know, chat in this place ought to be understood 
Tiphereth, of the Measure or Degree of Geburah. And 
it is a great Mystery, because Tiphereth commonly 
contains Iron under it, from whence we seek Gold. 

This is the Sol or Sun le of Nature and Art, whose 
lesser Number is ten, the Symbol of all Perfection ; 
Which Number by Gematria also shews you the 
lesser Number of Tiphereth ; likewise the word Atah 17 
belonging to the same in its lesser computation. 

Mingle therefore Iron and Clay, Daniel, c. 2, v. 33, 
and thou shalt have the Foundation of Gold. 

This is that Gold, to which is attributed the Notion 
of Tetragrammaton, 18 Exodus, c. 32, v. 5, in the History 
of the Calf, which was to be ground to powder, and 
thrown upon the Waters, v. 20, whence you shall see 
seven kinds of Gold immediately following one another 
in the Work. 

i5 

First, simple Gold, which is called Zahab barely ; for 
it is truly Gold, tho’ not digged out of the Earth ; nor 
destroyed by the Violence of the Fire, but living, risirig 
out of the Waters ; sometimes of a Black, sometimes of 
a Yellowish, and often like a Peacock’s Colour; going 
back of its own accord into the Waters, and this may 
be called Zahab Saba, 19 as tho’ you should say, Sabi, 
the Gold of Captivity, because ’tis newly captured, 
and shut up in its Prison ; where it keeps a Fast of 
Forty Days and Nights, that you know not what is 
become of it, Exodus, c. 32, v. 1 ; for there is then no 
External appearance, even as Moses was hidden and 
they knew not what had become of him. 

Secondly, it becomes Zahab Shacuth as though killed 
and slain, for it dies and its corpse putrefies and grows 
black : then it is under Judgment and the Shells rule it, 
and the powers of the name of 42 letters 20 fulfil their 
time upon it. 

Thirdly, but then follows Zahab Ophir, as tho’ you 
should say Aphar, 21 for it is of the Colour of Ashes ; 
which time the twenty-two Letters of the Alphabet will 
determine for you. 

Fourthly, it become Zahab Tob, because it is good to 
Colour, tho’ not of the Colour of Gold, but Silver. 
This may be called Chethem. For it may be so called, 
according to Lam., c. 4, v. i. 22 How shall Gold be 
coloured with Redness, and Hacchethem Hattob, 23 i. e., 
good Silver be changed ? And thence is referred that 
text in Job, c. 22, v. 24, and pjM it upon Opher, he 
would have said Opheret, 24 Lead, Batsar, Silver, that is 
this White Gold. For from hence you shall have Silver. 
And to Silver when it shall be in the state of a Stone, 
add Nachlim, 25 Rivers of Metallic Waters; from 
whence you shall have Ophir, that is Gold of Ophir, 
which was accounted the best. Now you shall have 
the Number of the great Name Ehejeh ; 26 for thou shalt 
possess, after twenty-one days, these things. If thou 

i6 

wilt now open thy Treasure, 27 open it ; but it shalt yet 
only give Silver as Stones, i Kings, c. io, v. 27. 

But if thou desire more, let thy Gold be, 

Fifthly, Zahab Sagur, i.e ., Shut-up Gold : Let it 
remain in the Prison, in the Place of its Maturation, in 
the Bowels of the Earth of the Wise Men all the time 
of the Decumbiture of Ezekiel, c. 4, v. 6. 2S And thy 
Gold shall become the 

Sixth, Jarak Rak, 29 i.e., Yellow Gold, like Zahab 
Parvajim. These are the thirty Men, Judges, c. 14, v. 
19, whom Sampson slew. For this being done, 

Seventhly, Your Gold will be Paz and Muphaz and 
Uphaz; being strengthened to Conquer and Colour all 
imperfect Metals. 

This is that Charutz, that sharp pointed (or pene- 
trating) thing ; which Job, c. 41, v. 30, says ought to be 
cast upon Clay, i.e., imperfect Metals, that hath 
Cohach, Power to produce Gold: for Tit .and Cohach 31 
are of equal Numbers. And make it to boil like a deep 
pot, a Sea of thick Metallic Waters ; and it shall 
become like a Vessel of Paint : But after that it shall 
make the Path to shine, v. 31-32. Blessed be the 
Name of the Glory of his Kingdom for ever and ever. 

I write these things, I the insignificant one, according 
to my slender knowledge, who have earnestly sought 
out secret things, to the healing of all Creatures. But 
that which moved me thereto is spoken in Sohar 
Heaesinu, fol. 145, cap. 580, concerning the Office of a 
Physician, that I should not desist from the good and 
right Way until I should find the best Medicine : And 
the Words are these ; 

It is written, Deut., c. 32, v. 10, “ He found him in 

Desert land and in the waste howling Wilderness ; he 
led him to find the causes, and made him understand 
and kept him as the apple of his eye. And rightly be- 
cause he hath compelled all the Cortices to serve him.” 
Thus far was it written in the Book of Kartanaeus the 

i7 

Physician. And then he drew from this Text various 
Observations necessary to a wise Physician about the 
Cure of the Patient, lying in the Chamber of sickness, 
Genesis, c. 39, v. 20, where the Captives of the King 
may worship the Lord of the World. For when a 
prudent Physician comes, he finds him in the Land of 
the Desert, and in the Wilderness of the Howling 
Solitude, which are as the Diseases afflicting him, and 
finds him in the Captivity of the King. 

Here it may be objected that it is not lawful to cure 
him, because the Holy One, Who is Blessed for ever, 
hath caused him to be ill and as if a captive. But this 
is not so ; for David says, Psalm 41, v. 2, “ Blessed is 
he who considereth (the curing of) the poor ; the Lord 
will preserve him and keep him alive.” For he is poor 
who lies in the House of Sickness ; and if the Physician 
be wise that Holy One, who is blessed for ever, loads 
him with Blessings, in reference to him, whom he 
cures. That Physician finds him in the Land of the 
Desert, that is ill, etc. And what is to be done for 
him ; Rabbi Eleasar hath told us : Hitherto we have 
heard nothing of that Physician, nor of his Book ; ex- 
cept that once a certain Merchant told me that he 
heard his Father say, that in his time there was a certain 
Physician, who having seen a Patient, presently said, 
“ this one will live and that one will die ” ; and that it 
was reported of him, that he was a just and true Man 
fearing Sin ; and that, if any Man could not procure 
those things he needed, he would buy them for him, and 
freely supply his necessities ; and that it was said, there 
was not so nice a Man in the whole World, and that he 
did more with his Prayers, than with his Hands. And 
when we supposed this Man to be the very same Phy- 
sician, the Merchant made reply, Certainly his Book 
is in my Hands, having been left to me as an Inheri- 
tance by my Father ; and all the Sayings of that Book 
are hidden in the Mystery of the Law : And in it we 

i8 

do find profound Secrets* and many Medicines ; which 
notwithstanding, is not lawful to apply to any, except 
to him that feareth Sin, etc. Rabbi Eleasar said, 
Lend it to me. He replied, I will, so as to shew to 
you the Power of the Sacred Light. And you have 
heard (said Rabbi Eleasar) that Book was in my Hands 
twelve months, and we found in it sublime and precious 
Lights, etc., and we have found in it various sorts of 
Medicines, ordered according to the Prescriptions of 
the Law, and the profound Secrets, etc. And we said, 
Blessed be the Holy and Merciful One, Who be'stoweth 
a share of Wisdom upon Men from the Supernal Wis- 
dom. Thus far here. 

These things moved me to seek the like good and 
secret Books ; and from the good Hand of my God I 
found that which I now teach to thee. And the Camea 31 
of this Metal is altogether wonderful, for it consists of 
six times six Partitions, everywhere wonderfully shew- 
ing the Virtue of the Letter Vau, 32 related to Tiphereth. 
And all the Columns and Lines, as well from the bottom 
to the top, as from the right to the left, and from one 
Angle to another, give the same Sum ; and thou mayest 
vary the same ad infinitum. And the various totals 
always observe this principle, that their lesser Number 
is always 3, 9, or 6 ; and again, 3, 9 or 6 ; and so on. 
Concerning which I could reveal many things to thee. 

Now I add this Example, which shows as the total 
of a line the number 216 of Arjeh 33 our wonderful Lion, 
14 times, which is the Name Zahab, Gold. Compute 
and be Rich. 

19 

II 

63 

5 

67 

69 

1 

13 

21 

53 

55 

E 

59 

37 

27 

3 1 

29 

47 

33 

39 

43 

4 1 

33 

25 

49 

57 

19 

17 

5 i 

23 

7 i 

9 

65 

7 

3 

61 

(S. A. adds in the Notes the true Magic Square of 
the Planet Sol.) 

20 

CHAPTER III. 

Cheseph , 1 Silver is referred to Gedulah on account of 
its whiteness which denotes Mercy and Pity. In Raja 
Meh. it is said that by 50 silver shekels, Deut., c. 22, 
v. 29, is understood Binah, Understanding, but when from 
50 portals it inclines to the side of Gedulah — see the book 
Pardes Rimmonim, tract 23, c. n. 

Cheseph, Silver, in Metallic things Rabbi Mordechai 
writes thus : 

Let the Red Minera 2 of Silver be taken, let it be ground 
very finely ; add an Ounce and a half 3 of the Calx of 
Luna to six Ounces of it. Let it be placed in a Sand 
bath in a Vial sealed. Let there be given a small Fire 
for the first Eight Days, lest its Radical Plumidity be 
burnt up. The second Week, one degree stronger ; and 
the third yet stronger ; and on the fourth, that the sand 
may not be red hot, but so that when Water is dropped 
upon it, it may hiss. Then on the top of the Glass, thou 
shalt have a White Matter, which is the Materia Prima 
or tinging Arsenic, 4 being the living Water of Metals, 
which all Philosophers call dry Water, or their Vinegar. 
Let this be purified thus : Take of the Crystalline 
Matter sublimed ; Let it be ground upon a Marble, with 
an equal part of Calx of Luna, and let it be put into a 
Vial sealed, and set in a Sand bath again, the first two 
Hours with a gentle Fire, the second with a stronger, 
and the third with one yet more violent, and increased 
till the Sand will hiss, and our Arsenic will be sublimed 
again, the starry Beams being sent forth. And since a 
quantity of this is required thou shalt augment it thus : 

21 

Take six Ounces of this, and an Ounce and a half of 
the most pure Filings of Luna, and make an Amalgama, 
and let them be digested in a Vial in hot Ashes, till all 
the Luna be dissolved, and converted into Arsenical 
Water. 

Take an Ounce and a half of this Spirit, and place it in 
a closed Vial : Let this be put into hot Ashes, and it will 
ascend and descend ; which heat continue, till it leaves 
off Sweating, and it lies at the bottom the Colour of 
Ashes. Thus the matter is dissolved and putrefied. 

Take one part of this Cinereous Matter, and half a part 
of the aforesaid Water, let them be mixed and sweat in 
a Glass, as before, which will happen in about Eight 
Days ; when the Cinereous Earth shall begin to wax 
white, take it out, and let it be imbibed with five Wash- 
ings of its Lunar Water, and digested as before. Let it 
be imbibed the third time, with five Ounces of the same 
Water, and coagulated as before, for Eight Days. The 
fourth Imbibition requires seven Ounces of the Lunar 
Water. And the Sweating being ended, this Prepar- 
ation is finished. 

Now for the White Work. Take 21 Drachms of 
this White Earth, 14 Drachms of the Lunar Water, 
10 Drachms of Calx of most pure Luna ; mix them 
upon a marble slab and commit them to Coagulation, 
till they grow hard ; imbibe it with three parts of its 
own Water, till it hath drank up this Portion ; and 
repeat that so often, till it flow on a Copper Plate, 
made red hot, without Smoke ; and then thou shalt 
have the Tincture for the White, which thou mayest 
increase by the means aforesaid. 

For the Red, you must use Calx of Sol, and a 
stronger Fire ; and ’tis a work of about four months. 
Thus this author. 

Let this be compared with the Writing of the Arab 
Philosopher (Geber), where he writes very fully of the 
Arsenical Matter. 

22 

Chesed, 5 in the Metallic Kingdom, is Luna, Nemine 
Contmdicente. And so the Lesser Number of Gedulah 
is as that of Sama, c or Sima. Silver is referred to in 
Prov., c. 16, v. 16, and c. 17, v. 3, and also Psalm 12, 
v. 7, and Job, c. 28, v. 1. Silver is also found allotted 
to each one of the Sephirotic Decad, thus see the 
c. 38 of Exodus, v. 17 and 19, where Silver forms 
the Chapiters of the Pillars representing Kether or the 
summit. While Silver is compared with Chokmah, in 
Proverbs, c. 2, v. 4, and to Binah, in Prov*, c. 16, v. 16. 

Gedulah is manifest out of the History of Abraham, 
where Silver is always preferred, Gen, c. 13, v. 2, and 
c. 23, v. 15, 16, and c. 24, v. 35, 53. 

Geburah is shewed, when Silver is put in the Fire, 
Prov., c. 17, v. 3, and Num., c. 31, v. 21. Psalm 66, 
v. 10. Prov., c. 27, v. 21. Isaiah, c. 48, v. 10. Ezek., 
c. 22, v. 22. Zech., c. 13, v. 9. Mai., c. 3, v. 3. 

Tiphereth is the Breast of the Statue, in Dan., c. 2, 
v * 3 2 - 

Netzach is a Vein of Silver, in Job, c. 28, v. 1. 

Hod are the Silver Trumpets, Num., c. 10, v. 2. 

Jesod is found in Prov., c. 10, v. 20, and Malkuth, 
in Psalm 12, v. 6. 

The Camea of this Metal represents nine times nine 
Squares, showing the same sum twenty times, viz., 369, 
and in its lesser Number 9, which all the Variations 
shew, though they should be a thousand times a 
thousand ; because this Chesed (which is Mercy) 
endureth for ever. Psalm 136, v. 1. 

23 

37 

78 

29 

70 

21 

62 

13 

54 

5 

6 

38 

79 

30 

71 

22 

63 

14 

46 

47 

7 

39 

80 

3 1 

72 

23 

55 

15 

16 

48 

8 

40 

81 

32 

64 

24 

56 

57 

17 

49 

9 

4 i 

73 

33 

65 

25 | 

| 

26 

58 

18 

5 ° j 1 42 

74 

' 

j 

34 ' 66 

j 

67 

27 

59 

10 

, 

51 2 

43 

75 

! 

1 

35 1 

1 

1 

36 

68 

19 

60 

11 

_ 

52 

3 

44 

76 

77 

28 

69 

20 

1 

1 

61 ; 12 

J 

53 

4 ; 45 

1 

Barzel , 7 Iron ; in the Natural Science, this Metal is 
the middle Line, reaching from one extreme to the 
other. This is that Male and Bridegroom, without 
whom the Virgin is not impregnated. This is that 
Sol, Sun or Gold of the Wise Men, without whom, the 

24 

Moon will be always in Darkness. He that knows his 
Rays, works in the Day; others grope in the Night. 

Parzala, 8 whose lesser number is 12, is of the same 
account as the Name of that Bloody Animal Dob, 9 a 
Bear, Whose Number is 12 also. 

And this is that Mystical thing, which is written, 
Dan., 7, 5, “ And behold another Beast, a second like 
unto a Bear, stood on its one side, and it had three 
Ribs standing out in his Mouth, between his Teeth ; 
and thus they said unto it, Arise, eat much Flesh.” 
The Meaning is, that in order to constitute the Metallic 
Kingdom, in the second place, Iron is to be taken ; in 
whose Mouth or Opening (which comes to pass in an 
Earthen Vessel) a threefold Scoria is thrust out, from 
within its whitish Nature. 

Let him eat Batsar, 10 i.e., Flesh, whose lesser Number 
is 7, that is Puk, 11 that is Stibium, whose lesser Num- 
ber in like manner is 7. 

And indeed much Flesh, because the proportion of 
this, is greater than of that ; and indeed such a propor- 
tion as Puk, that is 106, bears to Barzel 239 ; such shall 
be the proportion of Iron to Antimony. 

But understand the Flesh of the Lion , which is the 
first Animal ; whose Eagle's Wings, and so much as is 
very Volatile in him, shall be drawn out , and it shall be 
lifted up, and by purifying be separated from its Earth or 
Scoria : And it will stand on its Feet ; that is, shall get 
its Consistency, in a Cone ; like a Man erect and with a 
shining Countenance, like Moses. For Enos 12 and 
Moses 13 in full writing by Gematria each give 351. 
And the Heart of Iron, [for the heart, Leb 14 and iron, 
Barzel, in their least Number both give 5], (Mineral) 
i.e., the Tiphereth of Man Mineral shall be given to it. 

For even the name of the Star belonging to this, is 
Edom, 15 which hath the Connotation of a Red Man. 

These things being done, the third Beast ought to be 
taken, which is as it were a Leopavd , i.e., Water not wet- 

25 

ting; the Garden of the Wise Men; for Nimra 16 a 
Leopard, and Jardin in their lesser Number, make the 
same Sum, viz., 12. Such also is the Quickness of this 
Water, that is not unlike a Leopard upon that 
account. 

And he shall have four Wings of a Bird 11 upon his Back, 
the four Wings are two Birds, which exasperate 18 this 
Beast with their Feathers, to the intent he may enter 
and fight with the Bear and Lion ; altho’ of himself he 
be volatile and biting enough, and venomous like a 
Winged Serpent and Basilisk. 

And the Beast had four Heads ; in which Words are 
understood four Natures lurking in his Composition, 
i.e., white, red, green, and watery. 

And power was given him over the other Beasts, i.e., the 
Lion and the Bear, that he may extract their gluten or 
Blood. 

From all these are made one Fourth Beast in the 7th 
verse, which is frightful, terrible, and very strong : For it 
casts forth so great Fumes, that at some times there is 
Peril of Death, if he be handled at undue time and 
place. 

And he hath great Teeth of Iron, because this is one of 
the Parts and Materials compounding it ; Eating and 
Breaking himself, and others to pieces, and Treading the 
Residue under his Feet. That is, of a Nature so violent, 
that by many bruisings and tramplings, he is as it were 
tamed at length. 

And he had ten horns, because he hath the Nature of 
all the Metallic Numbers. 

A little Horn, etc., for out of this is extracted the 
young King, who hath the Nature of Tiphereth (that is 
of a Man) but of the Nature or Part of Geburah : For 
it is that Gold which predominates in the Work of the 
Wise Men. Thus far the Preparatories. 

And now the Beast is to be killed, and his Body to be 
destroyed and delivered up to the Fire to be burned, etc. For 

26 

now follows the Regimen of the Fire. Concerning 
which elsewhere. 

The Sword of the Illustrious Naaman is also related 
to the word Barzel. 

Lancea ; 19 in the Study of the Metallic Natures, the 
History of Phinehas, Numbers, c. 25, v. 7, belongs to 
this place. By the Fornicators are understood the 
(Masculine) Arsenical Sulphur, and the (feminine) dry 
Water unduly mixed, together in the Mineral. 

By the Spear of Phinehas is meant the Force of Iron 
acting upon the Matter to cleanse it of Dross : By 
which Iron, 20 not only is the Arsenical Sulphur killed, but 
also the Woman herself is at length mortified ; so that 
the Miracle of Phinehas may be fitly applied here. 
See also the Targum on this Place, i.e., Numbers, c. 25, 
v. 7. For the Nature of Iron is wonderful, as its 
Camea (whose lines add up to 65 each way) shews. 

It is here given : the Number 5, and its Square (i.e., 
25) denote the Feminine Nature, which is corrected by 
this Metal. 

1 1 

24 7 20 

3 

4 

12 

25 8 

1 

l6 

17 

5 

13 21 

9 

10 

j 

18 1 14 22 

i 

23 

6 

19 | 2 

1 

15 

27 

CHAPTER IV. 

Bedil , 1 Tin ; in Natural Science, this Metal is not 
greatly used ; for as it is derived by Separation, so its 
Matter remains separate from the Universal Medicine. 

Amongst the Planets, Zedek 2 is attributed to it ; a 
white wandering Planet, to which the Gentiles applied 
an Idolatrous Name, mention whereof is forbidden, see 
Exodus, c. 22, v. 12, and a greater Extirpation is 
promised, Hosea, c. 2, v. 17, and Zechariah, c. 13, v. 2. 

Amongst the Beasts, no Allegory is better applied to 
this metal than that, because of its Crackling, it should 
be called Chazir Mijaar, 3 a Boar out of the Wood, 
Psalm 80, v. 14, whose Number is 545 ; which is not 
only made five times from 109, but in its lesser Number 
shews a Quinary, as the Name Zedek 194; which 
Numbers being added, make 14 ; and they make 
the Number 5, which twice taken is 10, the lesser 
Number of the word Bedil, by the two figures of 46 
being added together. But five times ten shews the 
Fifty Gates of Binah, 4 and the first Letter of the 
Sephira Netzach, 5 which is the Sephirotic Class to 
which this Metal is referred. 

In particular Transmutations, its Sulphurous Nature 
alone doth not profit, but with other Sulphurs, 
especially those of the Red 6 Metals, it does reduce thick 
Waters, duly terrificated into Gold ; so also into Silver, 
if its nature be subtilized into a thin water by Quick- 
silver which (amalgam) amongst others is made well 
enough by Tin. 

But its viscous and watery Nature may be meliorated 
into Gold, if it be duly pulverized with the Calx of 

28 

Gold through all the Degrees of Fire, for ten Days, 
and by degrees thrown upon flowing Gold, in the form of 
little masses, which also I am taught is to be done with 
Silver. But no man is wise unless his Master is 
Experience. 

I add no more ; He that is wise may correct Natures 
and help by Experiments where they are imperfect. 

Kassitera , 7 Tin ; See Bedil’s Camea , 9 where the 
Number resulting from every side is Dal 8 ; representing 
the Tenuity and Vileness of this Metal, in all Metallic 
Operations. 

4 

14 

D 

1 

9 

7 

6 

12 

5 

11 

10 

8 

16 

2 

3 

13 

CHAPTER V. 

Hod , 1 in the Wisdom of Nature, is of the Classis of 
Brass; for the Colour expresses the Nature of Geburah, 
which this Sephira contains. And the Use of Brass 
was for instruments of Praise and Music, i Chronicles, 
c. 15, v. ig. “ And Brazen Bows were of Use in War.” 

2 Samuel, c. 22, v. 35, Job, c. 20, v. 24, and the like, 

1 Samuel, c. 17, v. 5, 6, 38. 

But as Hod is encompassed with a Serpent, so 
Nechuseth 2 — Brass is of the same Root with Nachash* 
a Serpent. 

The Seventy Talents of Brass of the Oblation, 
Exodus, c. 38, v. 29, represent Seventy Princes ; for 
about this place is the greatest Force of the Cortices or 
Shells. 4 Whence in Hod is a degree of Prophetical 
Representation, as from the Root Nachash comes 
Nechashim, Enchantments, Numbers, c. 23, v. 23, and 
c. 21, v. 1. But he that will be curious, may find, that 
Hod has a special Decad. So also in the History of 
Brass, from the Law, he may easily gather a Decad. 

For may not that Oblation in general from which 
afterwards Vessels were made for the Tabernacle, 
Exodus, c. 38, v. 29, be referred to Kether, since all the 
other degrees spring from this ?. 

Doth not the Laver of Brass, Exodus, c. 30, v. 18, 
shew the Nature of Chokmah, from which an Influx is 
let down to all the Inferiors ? ■ But the Basis thereof, 
which also was of Brass, is Binah ; for Chokmah resides 
therein. 

Afterwards the Brazen Altar, Exodus, c. 27, v. 2, with 
its Furniture represents the two Extremes, for the two 

30 

Bars in the same place were covered over with Brass ; 
and are as it were the two Arms, Gedulah and Geburah. 
The Body of the Altar itself, Tiphereth. The four Rings 
of Brass, to the right and left are Netzach and Hod. 

And the Brazen Net, which was instead of a Founda- 
tion, is Jesod. 

And if you say, that the Altar was to be referred to 
Malkuth, according to the most common Opinion, which 
Altar may represent the Notion of a Woman : I answer, 
’Tis true according to the general Distribution of the 
Tabernacle and Temple. But amongst the special 
Classis of Brass, where all things before incline to the 
Female, and so also Tiphereth, the Notion of the Male 
will not be so remote. 

For there are yet Adne, Brazen Bases, Exodus, c. 26, 
v. 37, and c. 27, v. 10, which being as it were the bottom 
of the Tabernacle, have congruously enough the Nature 
of Malkuth. 

He that would here trace these Mysteries more 
largely, might easily prolong his Discourse : But a wise 
Man will in short understand the Foundation. 

The wonderful Camea 5 belonging to the Classis of 
Brass, contains seven times seven Squares ; and the 
Sum of each Line, whether Horizontal, Vertical, or 
Diagonal, are equal to each other, and to Tzephah 6 . 

3 1 

22 

47 

16 

4 i 

10 

35 

4 

5 

23 

48 

J 7 

42 

11 

29 

30 

6 

24 

49 

18 

36 

12 

13 

3 i 

7 

25 

43 

19 

37 

38 

14 

32 

1 

26 

44 

20 

21 

39 

8 

33 

2 

27 

45 

46 

15 

40 

9 

34 

3 

28 

As for Example, Here all the Columns make the 
same Tzephah, 175, as is to be seen above ; for the 
first Column to the right, 4, 29, etc., makes 175, and so 
the rest to the last towards the left. After the same 
manner note the uppermost corner 22, (where is the 
Mystery of the 22 7 Letters) 47, etc., and ending with 
the number 4, where note the Mystery of the 
Tetragrammaton 8 and so all to the bottom. Lastly, 
crosswise from the Angle between the East and 
South, to the Angle between the West and North, 4, 
11, 18, etc., are 175, and from the Angle between the 
East and North, to the Angle between the West and 
South, viz., 22, 23, 24, etc., make all 175. 

32 

Therefore contemplate these things and thou shalt 
see an Abyss of Profundity. 

Unless thou hadst rather allude to those Coverings, 
in which Brass was used, Exodus, c. 27, v. 2, 6, etc. 

So if No. 1 be omitted, and you begin with line 2, there 
meets you the Sum Botzatz, 9 1 Samuel, c. 14, v. 4, 
writ defectively. If you begin with line 3, you will have 
the like Sum of 189. If you begin with line 4, then 
196. If you begin with line 5, then 203. And so they 
ascend, exceeding one another by 7 10 . 

But if by a skip you dispose the Numbers 1, and 3, 
and 5, and 7, and 9, etc., then begin with which you 
will, you will observe the same Proportion. Also 1, and 
4, and 7, and 10, and 13, etc. Also 1, and 5, and 9, and 
13. This Septenary Net will always, from every Face, 
represent the same Sum, whose farther Use I should be 
able to open elsewhere. 

Nechusheth, Brass, 11 see Sohar Pekude, 103,410, etc., 
and see Plod as above. Amongst the Planets Nogah, 12 
Venus corresponds to it. A necessary Instrument to 
promote the Metallic Splendour. 

Yet it hath more the part of a Male 13 than Female. 
For do not deceive thyself, to believe a white Splendour 
is promised to thee, as the word Nogah infers. But 
Hod ought to receive a Geburic Influence, and gives it 
also. O, how great is this Mystery. 

Learn therefore to lift the Serpent up on high, which 
is called Nechushtan, 2 Kings, c. 18, v. 4, if thou wouldst 
cure infirm Natures after the Example of Moses. 

33 

CHAPTER VI. 

Chokmah , 1 in the Metallic Doctrine, is the Sephira of 
Lead, or Primordial Salt, in which the Lead of the 
Wise Men lies hid. But how is so high a Place attri- 
buted to lead which is so Ignoble a Metal, and of which 
there is so seldom Mention made in the Scripture ? 

But here lies Wisdom ! Its several Degrees are kept 
very secret ; hence there is very little mention made of 
it. But yet here will not be wanting examples of the 
particular Sephiroth. 

For may not that which, in Zech., c. 5, v. 7, is called 
a Lifted up Talent of Lead, and brought from the deep, 2 
represent the grade of Kether ? And that which in the 
same Chapter, v. 8, is spoken concerning the Stone of 
Lead, 3 it sets before itself the Letter Jod, which is in 
Chokmah. 4 

Then Ezekiel, c. 27, v. 12, Lead is referred to the 
place of the congregation, of which type is Binah. 

And Amos, c. 7, v. 7, Anak, 5 a Leaden Plummet, 
denotes the Thread of Chesed. For Anak, with the 
whole Word, hath 72 the Number of Chesed. But in 
Numbers, c. 31, v. 22, Lead is reckoned amongst those 
things which can abide the Fire, will be referred to 
Geburah. 

But Job, c. 19, v. 24, graven with an Iron Pen and 
Lead 6 are joined together, from whence you have 
Tiphereth. 

But in Ezekiel, c. 22, v. 18, 20, there is the Furnace, 7 * 
of Trial, or of Grace, or Furnace of Judgment, in 
which also is put lead; hence, Netzach and Hod; for 
thence ought to flow a River of Silver. 

34 

And Jeremiah, c. 6, v. 29, the Furnace of Probation ; 
out of which, by the means of Lead, good Silver is 
looked for. 8 Is not the just Man, and he that justifies, 
Jesod (i.e., the Foundation) ? 

But if you seek the bottom of the Sea, look upon 
Exodus, c. 15, v. 10, where the Notion of Malkuth 
will occur. 

This is that Red Sea, out of which the Salt of Wis- 
dom is extracted, and through which the Ships of 
Solomon fetched Gold. 

Ophereth, 9 in the Doctrine of Natural things, is 
referred to Wisdom, 10 for a great Treasure of Wisdom 
lies hid here. And hither is referred the quotation 
Proverbs, c. 3, v. 19. The Lord in Wisdom hath 
founded the earth ; I say, the Earth, concerning which 
job speaks, c. 28, v. 6, which hath Dust of Gold. 
W T here, take notice of the W^ord Ophereth, i.e., Lead. 
This Lead, by a Mystical Name is called Choi, 11 
because therein lies the System of the whole Universe. 
For its Figure 12 has below a Circle, the Sign of 
Universal Perfection, and over the circle is a cross 
formed of four Daleths, whose Angles meet in one 
Point ; so you may know, that all Quaternity lies 
here, and the Quaternions of Quaternity : whether 
you refer to the Elements, or Cortices, or Letters or 
Worlds. 

And in this Lead of the Wise Men, four Elements 
lie hid, i.e , Fire, or the Sulphur of the Philosophers ; 
Air, the Separator of the Waters; the dry Water; 
and the Earth of the Wonderful Salt. 

There are also hid in it the four Cortices, described 
in Ezekiel, c. 1, v. 4, for in the Preparation of it there 
will occur to thee the Whirlwind, a great Cloud, and a 
Fire enfolding itself, and at length the desired Splen- 
dour 18 breaks forth. 

35 

Also the Natural Sephira of the Tetragrammaton, 
and the Metal thereof, occurs to thee here. And you 
will naturally travel through four Worlds in the very 
Labour; when after the Faction and Formation, labor- 
ious enough, there will appear the wonderful creation : 
after which thou shalt have the Emanation of the 
desired Natural Light. 

And note, that the word Choi, whose Number is 50, 
multiplied by 15, according to the Number of the 
Sacred Characteristic Name 14 in the Sephira of Wisdom, 
will produce the Number of Ophereth, i.e., 750. 

Also the Kamea of that Metal is also wonderful, in 
which the Number 15, viz., the Name Jah, i.e., a form 
of Jehovah, in a Magic Square of nine Squares (because 
we are in the ninth Sephira 15 ) throughout all its 
Columns, shows itself after this manner. 1 ' 5 

4 

9 

2 

3 

1 

7 

8 

5 

6 

The Planet Snabthai 17 denominated from “ Rest,” 
because in this Principle is offered the most desired 
Rest. 

And if you shall compute the words Lahab 18 Shab- 
thai, i.e., the point or edge of Saturn, there will arise 
the Number of the Name Ophereth, viz., Lead. 

Arjeh, 19 a Lion, in Natural Science is variously 
applied. 

3 6 

“ For there is Gur Arjeh, a Lion’s Whelp as Jacob 
speaks, Genesis, c. 49, v. 9. That word Gur, 20 a 
Whelp, Numbers 209, and if you add the whole Word 
in the place of a Unit, it will be 210, which is the 
Number of the word “ Naaman 21 the Syrian, the General 
of the Army of the King of Aram. 22 ” 2 Kings, c. 5, v. i, 
by whom is Allegorically to be understood the Matter 
of the Metallic Medicine, to be purified Seven times 23 in 
Iordan, which many men, studious in Metallic Affairs, 
call Gur. 24 

2. And that thou mayest the better understand this 
Matter, take the Lesser Number of this word Naaman, 
which is 21, this is equal to the Number of the Name 
of Kether, which is Ehejeh, 21. 25 

3. The Number of Naaman, with the whole Word, 
is 21 1 ; to which another Name of the Lion is equal, 
Ari, 21 1. 2(5 

4. And so also Arjeh, a Lion is equal in Number to 
the first word 27 of that wonderful History, 2 Kings, c. 5, 
v. 1. “And Naaman, etc.” For this constitutes 216. 

5. Moreover, the word Kephir, 28 a young Lion, and 
Jerik, 29 agree also in their Number; for each of them 
give 310. And now it is known in Metallic Mysteries, 
that at the very Entrance, we meet the /Enigma of the 
Lion of Green growth, which we call the Green Lion 30 ; 
which, I pray thee, do not think is so-called, from any 
other Cause but its Colour. For unless thy Matter 
shall be green, not only in that intermediate state before 
’tis reduced into W r ater, and also after the Water of 
Gold is made of it, remember that this Universal Dry 
Process must be amended. 

6. The other Names of Lions, are Lebi, 31 which is a 

Lioness, according to Job, c. 4, v. 11. The Whelps of 
the Lioness shall separate themselves ; Ezekiel, c. 19, 
v. 2. “ Thy Mother being a Lioness lay amongst the 

Lions ; ” Nahum, c. 2, v. 12. “A Lioness is there ” ; 
v. 13, “The Lion did strangle them for his Lioness.” 

37 

Also Lish, 32 which denotes a fierce Lion, with long 
straight hair : as found in Proverbs, c. 30, v. 30. 
These two Names, in their Lesser Numbers each 
contain a Septenary, for Lebi numbers 43, which gives 
7, and Lish 340, which gives 7 also. To these 
the Name Puk, 83 Stibium is equal, whose Sum is 
106, and its lesser Number is 7, than which 
nothing could be more plain. Especially if the Sirname 
of that Mineral be considered, when it is called the 
Hairy Servant, or he with long hair or Ruddy haired ; 
with many like Names given to it. 

7. There is yet another Name of a Lion according to 
the Masters of the Sanhedrim, in chapter n, fol. 95, 
col. 1, i.e.y Shachatz ; 34 which also the Targum uses; 
and Psalm 17, v. 12; its Number is 398, in its lesser 
Number it is 2. And the Chaldaic Word Tzadida 85 
shews the same lesser Number 2, being used in 
Targum, 2 Kings, c. 30, v. 30, Jeremiah, c. 4, v. 30, 
(instead of the Hebrew Word Puk, which is Antimony) 
for its sum is 109, which together with the whole Word, 
is no, and its lesser Number 2. 

8 . At length also there meets us the Name of the 
Black Lion, to wit, Shacal, 86 whose Number is 338, and 
its lesser Number 5. 

Now take the least Number of the word Naarnan 210, 
which is 3, and the least Number of the Chaldaic 
word Parzel, 37 Iron, which is 2, and you will have 
5, the Black Lion. 

9. Zahab, Gold, is called by the name Red Lion ; and 
so not only the least Numbers of the Names Lebi and 
Lish make 14, which Number Zahab hath ; but also the 
least Number of the word Zahab is 5, as I said but now 
to be equal to Shacal. 

But under this Notion is to be understood Gold, either 
already Mortified, or now at length drawn from the 
Mines of the Wise Men, — Black in Colour, but Red in 
Potency. 

38 

CHAPTER VII. 

J arden , 1 denotes a Mineral Water, useful in the 
cleansing of Metals, and Leprous 2 Minerals. But this 
Water flows from two sources, whereof one is called 
Jeor, 3 i.e., a fluid, having the Nature of the Right Hand, 
and very Bountiful. The other is called Dan, 4 Rigorous 
and of a sharp Nature. 

But it flows through the Salt Sea, which ought to be 
observed, and at length is thought to be mixed with the 
Red Sea ; which is a Sulphurous Matter, Masculine, 
and known to all true Artists. 

But know thou, that the Name Zachu/' i.e,, Purity, 
being multiplied by 8, the Number of Jesod, produces 
the Number Seder, 7 i.e., Order, which is 264. Which 
Number is also contained in the word Jarden ; thus you 
may Remember, that at least Eight Orders of Purification 
are required, before the true Purity follows. 

Jesod, 8 in natural things, contains under itself Quick- 
silver ; because this Metal is the Foundation of the 
whole Art of Transmutation. 

And as the Name of El 9 , doth insinuate the Nature 
of Silver, because both belong to the Classis of Chesed, 
(but here to that Chesed, which is inferior, viz., Jesod). 
So the name of El Chai, is the same as it were, Cheseph 
Chai, 10 i.e., Quicksilver. 

And so Kokab, 11 a Star, is the Name of the Planet, 
under whose Government this Matter is, with the 
whole Word is 49 ; which same is the Number of 
El-Chai. 

39 

But remember that all Quicksilver doth not conduce 
to this Work, because the sorts of it differ even as Flax 
from Hemp or Silk, and you would work on Hemp to 
no purpose, to make it receive the Tenuity and 
Splendour of fine Flax. 

And there are some that think it a sign of Legitimate 
Water, if being mixed with Gold, it presently ferments. 
But the common liquid Mercury, precipitated by Lead, 
performs this. And what will it do ? 

Verily I tell thee, there is no other Sign of a true 
Mercury but this, that in a due heat it invests itself 
with a Cuticula which is the purest refined Gold ; and 
that in a little space of time, yea, in one night. 

This is that which, not without a Mystery, is called 
Kokab, a Star ; because according to the natural 
Kabalah, Numbers, c. 24, v. 17, out of (the Metal) 
Jacob comes a Star ; or in Plain language the shapes 
of Rods, and Branches, arise ; and from this Star flows 
this Influence, of which we speak. 

This Argent Vive, in the Gemara Tract Gittin, ch. 7, 
fol. 69, is called Espherica, 12 i.e., Spherical Water, be- 
cause it flows from the Mundane Sphere. 

And in Genesis, c. 36, v. 39, it is called Mehetabel, 13 
as tho’ it were Me Hathbula, by changing the order of 
the Letters, i.e., the Waters of Immersion, because the 
King is immerged in them to be cleansed. 

Or as tho’ it were the El Hatob, by a like Change of 
Letters ; the Waters of the good El, or of Living Silver ; 
for Life and Good have equal power, as Death and 
Evil have the same. 

This is called the Daughter of Metred, 14 that is, (as 
the Targum teaches,) the Gold-maker, Labouring with 
daily Weariness. 

For this Water flows not out of the Earth, nor is 
digged out of the Mine ; but is produced and perfected 
with great Labour and much Diligence. 

This Wife (or female) is also called Me Zahab, 15 the 

4 o 

Waters of Gold, or such a Water as sends forth 
Gold. 

If the Artist be betrothed to her, he will beget a 
Daughter, who will be the Water of the Royal Bath. 
Although some would have this Bride to be the Waters 
that are made out of Gold ; which Bride (notwith- 
standing) poor Men leave to be espoused by great Men. 

The Husband of Mehetabel is that Edomite King, 
and King of Redness, who is called Hadar, Glorious ; 
viz., the Beauty of the Metallic Kingdom, which is 
Gold, Daniel, c. n, v. 20-29. But such Gold as may 
be referred to Tiphereth. For Hadar represents 209, 
which Number also the Tetragrammaton, multiplied by 
8, produces, (which is the Number of Circumcision and 
Jesod 17 ) if the whole Word be added as one. 

But that thou mayest know, that Tiphereth, of the 
degree of Geburah, is understood ; know thou, that that 
Number being added to the whole, is also contained in 
Issac, 18 which in like manner is of the Classis of Gold. 

The City of that King is called Pegno, 19 Brightness, 
from its Splendour, according to Deut., c. 33, v. 2. 
Which Name, and the Name Joseph, 20 (by which Jesod 
is meant, have the same Number 156. That you may 
know that Argent vive is required to the Work ; and 
that the Royal Beauty doth not reside out of this 
Splendid City. 

To this place belongs another Sirname, i.e., Elohim 
Chajim, 21 as tho’ it were called Living Gold ; because 
Elohim and Gold denote the same Measure. But 
so this Water is called, because it is the Mother and 
Principle of Living Gold : For all other kinds of Gold 
are thought to be dead ; this only excepted. 

Nor will you err, if you shall attribute to it another 
special name, for it may be called Mekor Majim 
Chajim 22 , that is, a Fountain of Living Water. For, 
from this Water the King is enlivened, that he may 
give Life to all Metals and Living Things. 

4 1 

The Kamea 23 of this Water is altogether wonderful, 
and exhibits in like manner the Number Chai (i.e. 
Living) 1 8 times, the same Sum in a Magic Square of 
64 Squares, which is the Sum of Mezahab, Waters of 
Gold; being variable, after this manner, to infinity. 

8 

58 

59 

5 

4 

62 

63 

1 

49 

15 

14 

52 

53 

11 

10 

56 

4 i 

23 

22 

44 

45 

19 

18 

48 

32 

34 

35 

29 

28 

38 

39 

25 

40 

26 

27 

37 

36 

30 

3 i 

33 

17 

47 

46 

20 

21 

43 

42 

24 

9 

55 

54 

12 

13 

51 

50 

16 

64 

2 

3 

61 

60 

6 

7 

57 

Here you have the Sum 260, from the bottom to the 
top, from the right hand to the left, and by the Diagonal ; 
the lesser Number of 260 is 8, the Number of Jesod ; as 
also the Root of the whole Square is 8. 

42 

The Symbol of the first Sum is 260, which makes the 
word Sary 4 i.e., “he went back,” because in going 
forward the Sum always goes backward through the 
units. 

For Example, if you begin with 2, reckoning the first 
Column for 8 the Sum will be 268, which is resolved in 

7 - 

If you begin with the 3 (reckoning 8 for the second 
Column) the Sum will be 276, which resolves into 6. 
And so of the rest. 23 And so also the number of Puri- 
fications increasing, the Weight of thy Water decreases. 

43 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Juneh. a Dove; 1 amongst the ./Enigmas of Natural 
things, the Name of a Dove is never applied to the 
Metals themselves, but to the Ministering and Preparing 
forms of Nature. 

He that understands here the Nature of the Burnt 
Offering 2 will not take Turtles, but two young male 
Pigeons, or Sons of the Dove, Leviticus, c. i, v. 14, and 
c. 12, v. 8, and c. 14, v. 22. 

But count the word Beni 62, 3 and 2 for a Pair of Doves, 
and thence is the number 64 of the word Nogah, which 
is the N ame of the 5th amongst the Planets, 4 and you shall 
go the true way. Else “ labour not to be Rich ; Cease 
from thy own Wisdom Wilt thou cause thine eyes 
presently to discern it ? That will not be: But the 
Scholar of the Wise Men maketh to himself Wings, and 
flieth as an Eagle, even as he doth the Minerals of the 
Stars 5 to heaven. Prov., c. 23, v. 4, 5. 

Jarach, fi the Moon or Luna 7 in the History of Natural 
Things is called the “ Medicine for the White,” because 
she hath received a Whitening Splendour from the Sun, 
which by a like shining, illuminates and converts to 
her own Nature all the Earth, that is the impure 
Metals. 

And the place of Isaiah, c. 30, v. 26, “ the moon shall 
be as the Sun,” may be mystically understood of this, 
because the Work being finished, she hath a solar 
Splendour ; but in this State, the place of Canticles, c~ 
6, v. 10, belongs to her, — “ fair as the Moon.” 

44 

By the same Name the Matter of the Work is called : 
and so indeed it is like to the crescent Moon, in the 
first State of Consistence ; and like to the Full Moon 
in the last State of Fluidity and Purity. For the words 
Jarach, the. Moon, and Razia, Secrets, also Rabui, a 
Multitude, have by Gematria the same Numbers, be- 
cause in this Matter are found the Secrets of Multipli- 
cation. 

Gophrith 10 is Sulphur ; in the Science of Minerals this 
Principle is referred to Binah, to the left because of its 
Colour ; and to left also, Gold is wont to be referred ; 
and Charutz, 11 a kind of Gold, is also referred to Binah, 
and being 7 in its lesser Number agrees with that of 
Gophritha. 12 

Therefore the Gold of Natural Wisdom ought to be 
Charutz ; that is digged out, or the like not excocted. 
And this is that Sulphur, which hath a fiery Colour, and 
is penetrating and changing to impure Earths ; to wit, 
Sulphur with Salt, Deut., c. 29, v. 23. Sulphur with 
Fire, rained down upon the Wicked,— that is the im- 
pure Metals, Psalm n, v. 6. 

You must dig up this Sulphur ; and it is to be digged 
out of the Water, that you mayest have Fire obtained 
from Water. 13 “ And if your Ways be right before the 
Lord, your Iron shall swim upon the Water,” 2 Kings, 
c. 6, v. 6. “ Go thy way then to the River Jordan with 

Elisha”; see v. 4. “But who shall declare the 
Geburah of the Lord ? ” Psalm 106, v. 2. 

Many seek other Sulphurs, and he that hath entered 
the “House of the Paths” shall understand them, 
Proverbs, c. 8, v. 2. For the Sulphurs of Gold and 
Iron, the Extraction whereof is taught by many, and is 
easy ; also of Gold, Iron and Brass ; also of Gold, 
Iron, Copper and Antimony, which are gathered 

45 

together after Fulmination by Vinegar, out of the 
lixivium, which are changed into a Red Oil, with a 
moist Hydrargyrum, — do tinge Silver. For from 
Proverbs, c. 21, v. 20, we know there is a Treasure to 
be desired and also an Oil to be found in the dwelling 
of a Man of Wisdom. 

Finis. 

NOTES BY SAPERE AUDE. 

CHAPTER I. 

1. /Esch Mezareph, or Cleansing Fire. In Hebrew 
letters ASh MTzRP, according to the s)?stem of trans- 
literation adopted in the volume called Numbers 
written by the Editor of the Collectanea Hermctica. ASh 
is fire and MTzRP is a word meaning “ refiner ” and 
“ goldsmith,” and is from the root TzRP meaning 
cleanse, purify and refine. The sch found here instead 
of sh in the word ASH, betrays the German source of 
the First Latin Edition. 

2. Compare Kdbalali Denudata, page 116. 

3. Elisha. The Hebrew mode of spelling proper 
names and words meaning the metals, planets and 
Sephiroth is very important, as words are also numbers 
and shew relation. Elisha is spelled ALIShO, that is 
41 1, whose lesser number is 6. 

4. Pirke Aboth. The Sayings of the Fathers. 

5. Tohu is THU, meaning “ void ; ” see Genesis, 
•c. 1, v. 2. 

6. Baba Kama, the “First Gate,” a tract of the 
Talmud. 

7. Instead of ; the Latin is “ est instar divitiarum.” 

8. Jar-din, the words are IAR DIN, the river 
Jordan. 

9. Atziluth, ATzILUT is the highest World of 
the Kabalah. 

10. Assiah, OSHIH is the lowest World of the 
Kabalah. 

47 

11. The Ten Sephiroth now follow in their order : — 

Kether, KTR the Crown, the First Sephira. 

Chokmah, ChKMH is Wisdom, the Second Sephira. 

Binah, BINH is Understanding, the Third Sephira. 

Chesed, ChSD is Mercy, the Fourth Sephira. 

Geburah, GBVRH is Severity, the Fifth. 

Tiphereth, TPART is Beauty, the Sixth. 

Netzach, NTzCh is Victory, the Seventh. 

Hod, HUD is Splendour, the Eighth. 

Jesod, ISUD is Foundation, the Ninth. 

Malkuth, MLKUT is the Kingdom. 

12. Job states that ZHB, gold comes from the 
North, but our Bible translates the word Zahab as 

fair weather.” 

13. It is the Microprosopus of metals. 

14. Living, the word is ChI. 

15. The two columns of the Sephiroth. 

16. Mezahab, given as the name of the grandmother 
of Mehetabel the wife of the Edomite King Hadar. 
Zahab means gold. These Edomite kings form another 
mystery. 

17. Compare Kab. Den., p. 235. 

18. Gehazi is spelled GIChZI ; 3, 10, 8 , 7, 10 or 38. 
The mediaeval Alchymic authors called him a sophister. 

19. Choi, ChL, 38, for Ch is 8 and L is 30 ; while 
G is 3, I is 10, Ch is 8, Z is 7 and I is 10 ; total 38. 

Frater Q.S.N. writes : — 

The meaning of this portion appears to be that 
Gehazi represents the Pretender to Alchymy who 
knowing that transmutation is possible, wastes his own 
time, and advises a similar waste on the part of others, 
in attempting processes against natural law and har- 
mony; one metal cannot be directly turned into another, 
but the path of evolution must be retraced to the hyle 
or prima materia and then the other line of evolution 
followed. 

4 8 

CHAPTER II. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 227. 

2. This word is really Ketem, KTM. Canticles, 
c. 5, v. 11, says “ his head is as the most fine gold.” 

3. Batzar is BTzR, gold in dust. 

4. Charutzis ChRUTz, from the root meaning the 
ore of gold which is “dug out”; native in masses or 
grains. 

5. This name is ZHB ShChUTh ; ChUTh 
means filum, funiculus, or a thread From its ductile, 
malleable nature, gold can be drawn out. The Kabalah 
speaks of the Thread of Chesed — the flux of its force to 
Malkuth ; the Thread of Red Colour, the flux from 
Geburah to Malkuth, related to the kiss on the lips ; 
the Yellow Thread of Tiphereth, related to gold ; and 
lastly, the Spinal Cord of Man, ChUTh H ShDRH, 
white as silver, passing from above down through 
Tiphereth. The Golden Thread is Yellow, being a 
compound of Red and White, Geburah and Gedulah. 

N. O. M. 

6. Zahab, ZHB ; 7, 5, 2 or 14, lesser number 5. 
Some English references write this word Zeb, it means 
“shining ” or “ yellow.” 

7. Paz ; PZ ; 80, 7, or 87. Gold as found pure, 
solid gold as formed into a crown. Psalm 21, v. 3. 

8. Zahab Muphaz, ZHB MUPZ ; Muphaz means 
pure. 

9. Daniel, c. 10, v. 5, “ Gold of Uphaz,”the words 
are KTM AUPZ. Kethem is “ concealed.” 

10. ZHB SGUR, treasured, also fine gold : or 
perhaps gold shut up, in the bowels of the earth, or in 
a chemical closed vessel. 

11. ZHB PRUIM, Parvahinl, appears to be the 
name of a place : but also LDM means for the blood 

49 

of, H the PRV bullock: left hand means “of the 
Sephirotic tree.” 

12. ZHB ThUB. Tob is the common adjective 
for good or pure. 

13. ZHB AUPIR, Gold of Ophir, probably Arabia. 
Gold was not coined until the time of Ezra ; before 
that, as a medium of exchange, it was weighed. For a 
reference to these sorts of Gold see Buxtorf, Lexicon 
Hebraicum, 1646, London, page 170, where the student 
is referred to the Talmudic Joma, 44, 2. 

14. Compare Kab. Den., page 301. 

15. Solomon. This is an error, for , Solomon is 
ShLMH or Shelomoh, and the name here is Shelemaiah, 
ShLMIH, who is called “the priest,” who was made 
“ treasurer.” 

16. Sol is ShMSh that is 300, 40, 300, total 640, 
whose lesser number is 6 and 4 that is 10. A simile of 
TPART, that is 400, 80, 1, 200 and 400, or 1081, whose 
lesser number is also 10. 

17. Atah is ATH, or 1, 400, 5 or 406, also 10. 

18. Because a feast was to be made in honour of 
the Calf, to the Lord, and the word in Exodus for Lord 
is here IHVH. 

19. Saba or ShBA and Sabi, ShBI, mean captivity. 

20. The name of 42 letters is the Hebrew of “ Pater 
Deus, Filius Deus, Spiritus Sanctus Deus, Tres in uno, 
Unus in tribus.” 

21. Aphar is APR, meaning ashes or a powder. 

22. The word is KTM. 

23. Hacchethem ha Tob, HKTM H TUB ; Tob 
means good. 

24. Opheret is OPRT, the common Hebrew name 
of Lead. Batzar, BTzR, is gold, containing silver. 
Job, c. 22, v. 24, does not in the E.B. say “ Put it upon 
Ophir,” but “Thou shalt lay up — the gold of Ophir.” 

25. Nachlim is NChLIM, plural of Nachal, a 
stream, river or torrent. 

50 

26. Ehejeh, this is also often written in English as 
Aheie, the letters are AHIEL 

27. This is an error, the word is Treasury, closed 
vessel. 

28. That is the 40 days which Ezekiel had to lie on 
his right side for the iniquity of Judah. 

29. That is IRQ RQ. 

30. This Cohach is KCh, power, whose number is 
28. Tit is ThITh meaning clay, whose number is 9, 10, 
9 or 28. 

31. The Magic Square given is not the true Square 
of Sol. This word QMIO, commonly written Kamea, 
is a Mystical Square, sub-divided into lesser squares 
by perpendicular and horizotital lines ; in each space 
is placed a number or equivalent letter or letters, so 
arranged as to give the same total by addition in each 
line, up and down, or across. 

32. Vau corresponds to the English letter V and to 
the number 6, the number of Sol, and Tiphereth, 
Beauty, is the sixth Sephira from above. 

33. Arjeh, the word is ARIH, that is 1, 200, 10, 5, 
or 216, meaning a “ lion,” and the square shows the 
total of 216 by addition, 

Six times horizontally, 

Six times vertically, 

Twice diagonally, 

in all 14 times, the number of ZHB or Gold. The 
root of ARIH is ARH, to snatch prey. The name 
ZHB, gold, is related to ZHR, light, shining, splendour, 
as the shining of a golden plate, and AUR is light; 
compare aurum , gold, and aura, a shining halo : all are 
related again to Sol. 

The true Magic Square or Kamea of Sol, is here 
given, it contains only all the numbers from 1 to 36. 

5 1 

6 I 32 

| 

1 

3 1 34 

j 

l 

35 

1 

1 

I 

| 

7 i 11 

27 

28 

8 

3 ° | 

1 ! 

i 

; 19 ! *4 

j I 

j 1 

16 

; 

i 

!5 23 

24 | 

j 18 20 

1 

i | 

22 | 21 | 17 

1 1 

; ; 

13 

1 

! 

! 

j i 

25 , 29 

I 1 

10 

9 

26 

12 

j i 

i * ! 

36 i 5 

i 

1 

33 ! 4 ! 2 

1 

1 

31 

CHAPTER III. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 483. Cheseph 
should be Keseph, the initial is not Ch, the word is 
KSP. Gedulah is GDULH, Magnificence. 

2. Red mineral of Silver, there is none ; the word 
should be Quicksilver, whose ores, Oxide and Sulphide, 
,are red, Cinnabar. 

3. Some translators say half an ounce only; the 
Latin words are “ Recipe calcis Lunse unciam semis.” 
El. Levi says calx of antimony. 

4. Arsenic, or Orpiment, or Auripigment ; or was 
it Corrosive Sublimate ? 

5. Compare Kab. Den., page 359. This word 
Chesed, ChSD, has the same reference as the word 
Gedulah at the commencement of the chapter. 

52 

6. SAMA numbering 102, lesser number 3. SIMA 
numbering hi, lesser number 3. 

7. Compare, Kab. Den., page 206. Barzel is 
BRZL, which is 239, least number 5 ; iron ores are 
plentiful in Palestine ; some authors write it in English 
as Berezel — it is from BR, bright, and NZL, to melt, 
hence cast iron. 

8. Parzala is PRZLA, numbering 318, is Chaldee 
for Iron. 

9. Dab is DUB, numbering 12. 

10. Batsar is BShR or 502. 

11. Puk, the Hebrew is PUK or 80, 6, 20, or 106, 
which is 7. There must be nearly two and a half 
times as much antimony as iron. 

12. Enos is ANSh ; 1, 50, 300, or 351. 

13. Moses is MUShH ; 40, 6, 300, 5 or 351. 

14. Leb is LB or 30, 2 is 32, or 5. Leb means the 
heart ; some English authors write Laib. 

15. Edom is ADUM : ADM is red and is the 
proper name of red man ; ADMH is red earth. 

16. NimraisNMRA; 50,40, 200, 1 or 291 is 12. 
Jardin is IR DN ; 10, 200—4, 5° or 264 is 12. Nimrah 
was a place in Gilead, Numbers, c. 32, v. 3 ; and as a 
common noun means Leopard. 

17. Bird is OUQ, and OITh, and TzPUR. 
“ Bird ” in Alchymy generally means Sublimations. 

18. Compare the Hermetic Arcanum , of this Series, 
section 119. 

19. Compare Kab. Den., 683. Lancea, a spear, is 
in Hebrew RUMCh ; called in Numbers, a javelin. 
Phineas is in Hebrew PINChS, a proper name not easily 
related to any root. 

20. The name Chalybs was also given to iron, it was 
derived from the nation of Chalybes living on the 
shores of the Black Sea ; they were famous for smelt- 
ing ores ; see Xenophon Anabasis, v- 5. 

53 

CHAPTER IV. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 185. Bedil or Badil 
is BDIL or 46 or 10. This metal is not found native 
in Palestine. 

2. Zedek, TzDQ or 194, and lesser number is 14 
and then 5 ; this is Jupiter. 

3. A boar from the wood, Aper de Sylva, is 
ChZIR MIOR, that is 225 and 320 or 545, whose 
lesser number is 14 and then 5. 

4. The Fifty Gates of Binah or Understanding (see 
also Chapter III, paragraph 1) may be referred to the 
Decad of Potencies acting through the Five human 
senses, but the phrase has a more arcane meaning : the 
Theosophical Glossary says that 50 is a blind, and that 
the number is 49. 

5. Nun is 50. 

6. Query Mars and Venus. 

7. Compare Kab. Den., page 676. Kassitera is 
QSThRA, is a Chaldee word meaning Tin. 

8. Dal, that is DL or 30 and 4, 34. 

g. This is the true Magic Square of Jupiter. 

CHAPTER V. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 271. Hod is the 
eighth Sephira. The letters are HUD or 5, 6, 4, that is 
15, lesser number 6. Hod is found in the same column 
as Geburah. For brass, query copper. 

2. Nechuseth is NCh ShT, it is also used for 
copper as well as Brass and Bronze, in the Bible. 

3. Nachash is NChSh : note that NChShIM 
means “ enchantments.” 

4. Cortices, shells or Klippoth. 

5. This is the true Kamea of Seven. 

54 

6. Tzephah, that is TzPH or 90, 80, 5, that is 175,. 
lesser numbers 13 and 4. 

7. There are 22 Hebrew letters divided into a triad,, 
heptad and dodecad. 

8. Four is the number of the letters of IHVH. 

9. Botzatz is BUTzTz, in the English Bible 
Bozez; it is here written BTzTz, these are 188 and 

182. 

10. That is by allowing seven for each column, and 
so adding 7 to the total of column two, 14 to column 
three, 21 to column 4. 

11. Compare Kab. Den., page 570. [Nechuseth, 
vEs, Brass, a return to the subject of the Hermaphro- 
ditic Brass, which in a sense is both Hod and Netzach. 

12. Nogah is NUGH, Splendour, numbering 64. 

13. More a Red male than White female. 

14. Nechushtan, the brazen serpent which Moses 
made, in the likeness of the fiery serpents which 
were a plague to the people. See Numbers, c. 21, v. 9. 

Netzach and Hod are here attributed to Brass, and 
no mention is made of Copper pure. Now Brass is not 
a pure metal but is made by fusing together Copper 
two parts and Zinc one part. Zinc pure as a metal 
was not apparently known to the Hebrews. Brass is 
an Hermaphrodite and this is taught in Rosicrucian 
Colleges in a special Sephirotic manner. 

Brass is very frequently mentioned in the O.T., but 
Copper only once in Ezra, c. 8, v. 27, but even there 
the word is Nechuseth with the adjective MTzHB, 
shining. Thomas Thompson says Nechuseth ought to 
have been translated Copper generally, and refers to 
Genesis, c. 4, v. 22, when Tubal Cain was a worker 
in Brass, and hence it was known before the Flood ; 
now the same word Nechuseth, Brass, is said to be 
dug out of the hills in Deut., c. 8, v. 9, and Brass 
is never found native. 

55 

CHAPTER VI. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 345. Chokmah, the 
second Sephira. Lead is commonly in Hebrew 
Ophereth, OPRT. 

2. There is in this place no reference to “ brought 
from the deep ; ” the Latin of Rosenroth says “ in alto 
deportatum.” 

3. The reference says “ and he cast the weight of 
the lead upon the mouth ” of the ephah. 

4. Yod, I is related per Tetragrammaton to 
Chokmah. 

5. Anak is ANK, or 1, 50, 20 is 71 and adding 1 
for the whole word is 73 ; and Chesed, ChSD, is 8, 60, 
4, or 72. 

6. With an iron pen and lead axe, OTh pen, 
BRZL iron, OPRT lead. 

7. Furnace is KUR. 

8. Cupellation of silver by lead. 

9. See Kab. Den., page 625. Ophereth is 70, 80, 
200, 400, or 750. 

10. That is to Chokmah. 

11. Kol is KL, 20 and 30 is 50 ; this word means 
the “ all.” 

12. That is this author used as a symbol of Lead a 
circle surmounted by a cross of four equal limbs ; other 
Alchyrnists use this symbol for Antimony, and for Lead 
use the symbol of Saturn. 

13. A brightness as the colour of amber. 

14. This name is Jah; or IH, 10 and 5. 

15. That is Jesod the foundation or base. 

16. This is the usual Kamea of Saturn. 

17. Shabtai, ShBTAI, this is Saturn, 713. 

iS. Lahab, LHB, 37 : means flame or point. 

19. Arieh or Arjeh is ARIH, or 1, 200, 16, 5, that is 
216. 

56 

20. Gur, GUR is 3, 6, 200 or 209, in Latin catulus. 

21. Naaman, is NOMN or 50, 70, 40, 50, or 210; 
lesser number 21 and then 3. 

22. The English Bible omits the name Aram, which 
is found in the Hebrew. 

23. Seven Purifications almost universal in trans- 
mutations, refer to the Regimen of the planets. 

24. Authorities differ as to whether Gur is referred 
to the Matter or to the River. 

25. AHIH or 1, 5, 10, 5, which is 21. 

26. ARI is 1, 200, 10. 

27. Naaman preceded by a Vau, V that is Six. 

28. Kephir, KPIR ; also said to mean a Lioness. 

29. Jerek, IRQ ; means green colour, herbaceous. 

30. One authority adds here “ which must yet 
become black and red.” 

31. Lebi, LBIA, or 43 : LB means the heart. 

32. LISh, 340. 

33. Puk, Stibium is native antimony; is PUK, 80, 
6, 20, or 106, becoming 7. 

34. Shachatz, ShChTz, or 300, 8, 90 ; a lion greedy 
of its prey. 

35. Tzadida, TzDIDA, 90, 4, 10, 4, 1, or 109, lesser 
10 and 1 : add one for the word itself and you get no 
or 2. 

36. ShChL, 300, 8, 30, giving 338, and then lesser 
number 14 then 5. 

37. PRZL ; 80, 200, 7, 30, or 317 or 11 or 2: this 
is Chaldaic for the Hebrew Barzel — iron. 

CHAPTER VII. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 455. Jarden, IRDN, 
10, 200,4, 50, or 264 or 12 or 3. All Latin and English 
versions here write Jarden, but the word is really the 
Bible word for the river Jordan. 

2. That is impure metallic ores. 

57 

3. Jeor, IAR. “ Jamin” is the right side. 

4. Dan or rather Din, DIN, judgment, severity ; 
or is Dan referred to DN, the name of the Tribe. 

5. Zachu, ZKU ; 7, 20, 6 or 33. 

6. Eight ; how is this ? Jesod is the Ninth Sephira, 
yet Jesod is ISUD ; 10, 60, 6, 4, or 80, lesser number 8. 

7. Seder, order, SDR, 264 ; which equals 33 ; 
Zachu multiplied by 8. 

8. Compare Kab. Den ., page 441. Jesod, ISUD, 
the Ninth Sephira. 

9. El or Al, AL meaning God, is 31 ; lesser 
number is 4 of the Tetragrammaton. 

10. Cheseph Chai, that is Silver of Life, Quicksilver 
or Mercury. KSP ChI, or 160 and 18, that is 178; but 
AL ChI is 1, 30, 8, 10, or 49. 

11. Kokab, KUKB, also referred to the planet 
Mercury. Kokab is 48 and add one for the name, we 
get 49. 

12. Espherica, ASPIRKA; there is a Chaldee ShPR, 
a root for globe, roundness. 

13. MHIThBAL as though it were MI HThBLA 
or MI AL HThB. Mehetabel was wife of Hadar, 
King of Edom. 

14. Metred or Matred, MTRD; the Gold Maker. 
Matred was mother of Mehetabel, the wife of the King 
of Edom. The Kings and Dukes of Edom, who reigned 
before there was any King over Israel, constitute a deep 
mystery. 

15. Mezahab or more properly Mi-zahab. MI for 
MIM, the Hebrew name of water. 

16. Hadar, HDR ; 5, 4, 200, that is 209. Tetra- 
grammaton is 16, which multiplied by 8 is 208. 

17. Jesod is 8 as above. Circumcision is Mulah, 
MVL ; 40, 6, 30 or 76, and does not relate to 8 by 
Gematria. 

18. Isaac, ITzChQ ; 10, 90, 8, 100, or 208 ; means 
laughter. 

58 

ig. Pegno or Pau, POU ; this O is ayin, which in 
some words has the sound of “ gn.” 

20. Joseph, IVSP, 156. 

21. Elohim Chiim, ALHIM ChIIM, the Deities 
of the Living Ones ; both words are of plural form. 
Elohim is the plural of El — God, and Chiim the plural 
of ChI — a living one. Elohim is 86 and Chiim 68, they 
have the same Lesser Number. 

22. Mekor maj'im chiim, MQUR MUM ChIIM,. 
Mekor, or rather Mequor, is a Fountain. 

23. This is the usual form of the Magic Square of 8 
related to Mercury. 

24. Sar is SR ; 60 and 200 or 260, “ declined.” 

25. As if instead of 8 for the second column and 16 
for the third, you add 24 for the fourth you obtain 284, 
whose lesser number is 14 and then 5 ; and again 292 
becomes 13 or 4. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

1. Compare Kab. Den., page 430. Or Iunah, or 
Joneh; a dove is IUNH. 

2. Ivnorr von Rosenroth gives Plolocaust. 

3. Beni is BNI, sons ; 2, 50, 10 or 62. 

4. Nogah, NUGH, 64, refers to Venus; it means 
“ external splendour.” 

5. That is, he volatilizes the metals their represen- 
tatives. 

6. Compare Kab. Den., page 456. Jarach or IRICh, 
which is 10, 200, 10, 8 or 228. 

7. Rosenroth adds here: “She is the Shekinah and 
whether in decrease or at the full, she is a mystery to 
the student. This increase and decrease are suggested 
by the name. Irach is referred to the w T aning moon, 
and the name Levanah, LBNH, to the Full Moon, 
when it resembles pure Incense, as in Exodus, c. 30^ 

59 

v. 34 - Levunah Zakah, LBUNH ZKR, and also the 
Full Moon hath a white colour, but it accepts white 
light from the Sun. And six Sephiroth are called the 
Moons.” Sohar, Jethro, 35, c. 139. 

This Levunah means Frankincense, and the root is 
LBN, meaning White, Zahah is “ consumed by fire.” 

Irach also means “ scent ” and “ smelling ” as well as 
moon and thence month. 

“ As Luna receives Light from Sol, so does Malkuth 
from Tiphereth ” says the Liber Pardesh. 

8. Razia, RZIA ; 200, 7, 10, 1 are 218, in Latin 
“ arcana.” 

9. Rabui, RBUI ; 200, 2, 6, 10 are 218, in Latin 
“ a multitude.” 

10. Compare Kab. Den., page 241. Gophrith ; 
GPRIT, 3, 80, 200, 10, 400 are 693. The substance 
is found native in Palestine. 

11. Charutz, ChRUTz ; 8, 200, 6, 90 or 304, whose 
lesser number is 7. 

12. Gophritha, GUPRITA; this is 700 ; the lesser 
number being 7 also. 

13. See Westcott, Everburning Lamps of the Ancients , 
in regard to II. Maccabees, c. 1, v. 19 to 22, where 
water is changed into fire. 

SUPPLEMENT. 

It may be useful to students to add the Chaldee and 
Hebrew names of some other substances used in 
Alchymic art. 

Clay. Tit, TIT ; and Chemar, ChMR. 

Earth. Aretz, ARTz ; and Adamah, ADMH ; and 
Aphar, APR. 

Nitre. Nether, NTR. 

Salt. Melach, MLCh. 

6o 

Sand. Choi, ChUL. 

Amber. Chashmal, ChShML. 

Dew, Thel, ThL ; Latin Ros. 

Vapour, Steam, Aid, AID. 

Ashes, Cinis, APR. 

Furnace, TNUR and KBRH and KBShN. 

Vinegar, Acetum, ChMO, also means Ferment. 

Bath, Balneum, MRChTzT. 

Glass, Vitrum, ZKUKIT. 

Calx, GIR, also means Chalk, Lime and Mortar. 
Quintessence, ChMSh TUShIH. 

Dissolve, MSH, and also to Melt. 

Putrefaction, RQB, and BASh. 

Coagula, QBA. Solve, MUG. 

Path, NTIB, in the sense of the 32 Paths of Wisdom. 
Divination, QSM. 

Magician, ChRThM. 

Purification, BRR. 

Oil, Oleum, IZHR, from its brightness Zohar. 

Black, ChM, AIShUN, ShChR. 

White, LBN, TzChR, ChUR and QDR. 

Red, ADM, and ShRQ. 

Blue, TKLT, also means Perfection. 

Green, I'RUQ, LCh, RONN and DSh. 

Life, CHUM. 

Death, MUT. 

Immortality ; neither Hebrew nor Chaldee has any 
such root word.