The Idyll of the White Lotus
========================================
Mabel Collins (1884) — Collins's theosophical romance of initiation — a canonical text of the movement's literary canon. Source: https://archive.org/details/idyllofwhitelotu00coll. Public domain.

THE  IDYLL  OF  THE  WHITE  LOTUS

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE
WHITE    LOTUS

BY

MABEL    COLLINS

HI

Fourth  Edition

THEOSOPHICAL    PUBLISHING    HOUSE

Adyar,  Madras
London  ;  Benares  ;  Krotona,  Los  Angeles,  U.S.A.

1919

All  Rights  Reserved

For  permission  to  translate  apply  to

THEOSOPHICAL  PUBLISHING  HOUSE
Adyar,  Madras,  India

TO

THE  TRUE  AUTHOR,

THE    INSPIRER   OF   THIS    WORK,    IT    IS    DEDICATED

PREFACE

The  ensuing  pages  contain  a  story  which  has
been  told  in  all  ages  and  among  every  people.
It  is  the  tragedy  of  the  Soul.  Attracted  by
Desire,  the  ruling  element  in  the  lower  nature
of  Man,  it  stoops  to  sin ;  brought  to  itself  by
suffering,  it  turns  for  help  to  the  redeeming
Spirit  within  ;  and  in  the  final  sacrifice  achieves
its  apotheosis  and  sheds  a  blessing  on  mankind.

PROLOGUE

Behold  I  stood  alone,  one  among  many,  an
isolated  individual  in  the  midst  of  a  united
crowd.  And  I  was  alone,  because,  among  all
the  men,  my  brethren,  who  knew,  I  alone  was
the  man  who  both  knew  and  taught.  I  taught
the  believers  at  the  gate,  and  was  driven  to  do
this  by  the  power  that  dwelled  in  the  sanctuary.
J  had  no  escape,  for  in  that  deep  darkness  of
the  most  sacred  shrine,  I  beheld  the  light  of
the  inner  life,  and  was  driven  to  reveal  it,  and
by  it  was  I  upheld  and  made  strong.  For
indeed,  although  I  died,  it  took  ten  priests  of
the  temple  to  accomplish  my  death,  and  even
then  they  but  ignorantly  thought  themselves
powerful.

THE  IDYLL  OF  THE
WHITE  LOTUS

BOOK     I

CHAPTER  I

Before  my  beard  had  become  a  soft  down  upon
my  chin,  I  entered  the  gates  of  the  temple  to
begin  my  noviciate  in  the  order  of  the  priest-
hood.

My  parents  were  shepherds  outside  the  city.
I  had  never  but  once  entered  within  the  city
walls  until  the  day  my  mother  took  me  to  the
gate  of  the  temple.  It  was  a  feast  day  in  the
city,  and  my  mother,  a  frugal  and  industrious
woman,  thus  fulfilled  two  purposes  by  her
journey.     She  took  me  to  my  destination,  and

2  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

then  she  departed  to  enjoy  a  brief  holiday
amid  the  sights  and  scenes  of  the  city.

I  was  enthralled  by  the  crowds  and  noises  of
the  streets.  I  think  my  nature  was  always  one
that  strove  to  yield  itself  to  the  great  whole  of
which  it  was  such  a  small  part — and  by  yield-
ing itself,  to  draw  back  into  it  the  sustenance
of  life.

But  out  of  the  bustling  throng  we  soon  turn-
ed. We  entered  upon  a  broad,  green  plain,
upon  the  further  side  of  which  ran  our  sacred,
beloved  river.  How  plainly  I  behold  that  scene
still !  On  the  banks  of  the  water  I  saw  the
sculptured  roofs  and  glittering  ornaments  of
the  temple  and  its  surrounding  buildings,  shin-
ing in  the  clear  morning  air.  I  had  no  fear,
for  I  had  no  definite  expectations.  But  I
wondered  much  whether  life  within  those  gates
was  as  beautiful  a  thing  as  it  seemed  to  me  it
must  be.

At  the  gate  stood  a  black-robed  novice  speak-
ing to  a  woman  from  the  city,  who  carried
flasks  of  water  which  she  urgently  prayed  one
of  the  priests  to  bless.  She  would  then  have
for  sale  a  precious  burden — a  thing  paid  dearly
for  by  the  superstitious  populace.

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  O

I  peeped  through  the  gate  as  we  stood  wait-
ing for  our  turn  of  speech,  and  beheld  a  sight
that  struck  me  with  awe.  That  awe  lasted  a
long  time,  even  when  I  had  entered  into  almost
hourly  familiarity  with  the  figure  which  so
impressed  me.

It  was  one  of  the  white-robed  priests,  pacing
slowly  down  the  broad  avenue  towards  the
gate.  I  had  never  seen  one  of  those  white-
robed  priests  before,  save  on  the  single  occasion
when  I  had  before  visited  the  city.  I  had  then
seen  several  upon  the  sacred  boat  in  the  midst
of  a  river  procession.

But  now  this  figure  was  near  me,  approach-
ing me — I  held  my  breath.

The  air  was  indeed  very  still,  but  those  stately
white  garments  looked,  as  the  priest  moved
beneath  the  shadow  of  the  avenue,  as  if  no
earthly  breeze  could  stir  them.  His  step  had
the  same  equable  character.  He  moved,  but  it
seemed  scarcely  as  though  he  walked  in  the
fashion  that  other  and  impetuous  mortals  walk.
His  eyes  were  bent  on  the  ground,  so  that  I
could  not  see  them  ;  and,  indeed,  I  dreaded  the
raising  of  those  drooping  lids.  His  complexion
was  fair,  and  his  hair  of  a  dull  gold  colour.  His

4  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

beard  was  long  and  full,  but  it  had  the  same
strangely  immovable,  almost  carven  look,  to  my
fancy.  I  could  not  imagine  it  blown  aside.  It
seemed  as  though  cut  in  gold,  and  made  firm
for  eternity.  The  whole  man  impressed  me
thus — as  a  being  altogether  removed  from  the
ordinary  life  of  man.

The  novice  looked  around,  his  notice  attracted
probably  by  my  intense  gaze,  for  no  sound
reached  my  ears  from  the  priest's  footfall.

"  Ah  ! "  he  said,  "  here  is  the  holy  priest
Agmahd,  I  will  ask  him."

Closing  the  gate  behind  him,  he  drew  back,
and  we  saw  him  speak  to  the  priest,  who  bowed
his  head  slightly.  The  man  returned,  and
taking  the  water  flasks  from  the  woman,  carried
them  to  the  priest,  who  laid  his  hand  for  a
second  upon  them.

She  took  them  again  with  profuse  thanks,
and  then  we  were  asked  our  business.

I  was  soon  left  alone  with  the  black-robed
novice.  I  was  not  sorry,  though  consider-
ably awed.  I  had  never  cared  much  for  my
old  task  of  tending  my  father's  sheep,  and  of
course  I  was  already  filled  with  the  idea  that
I    was   about   to    become    something   different

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  0

from  the  common  herd  of  men.  This  idea  will
carry  poor  human  nature  through  severer
trials  even  than  that  of  leaving  one's  home  for
ever  and  entering  finally  upon  a  new  and
untried  course  of  life.

The  gate  swung  to  behind  me,  and  the
black-robed  man  locked  it  with  a  great  key
that  hung  from  his  waist.  But  the  action  gave
me  no  sense  of  imprisonment — only  a  con-
sciousness of  seclusion  and  separateness.
Who  could  associate  imprisonment  with  a  scene
such  as  that  which  lay  before  me  ?

The  temple  doors  were  facing  the  gate,  al
the  other  end  of  a  broad  and  beautiful  avenue.
It  was  not  a  natural  avenue  formed  by  trees
planted  in  the  ground,  and  luxuriating  in  a
growth  of  their  own  choosing.  It  was  formed
by  great  tubs  of  stone,  in  which  were  planted
shrubs  of  enormous  size,  but  evidently  trimmed
and  guided  most  carefully  into  the  strange
shapes  they  formed.  Between  each  shrub  was
a  square  block  of  stone,  upon  which  was  a
carven  figure.  Those  figures  nearest  the  gate
I  saw  to  be  sphinxes  and  great  animals  with
human  heads  ;  but  afterwards  I  did  not  dare
raise  my    eyes   to   gaze   curiously  upon  them ;

6  THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

for  I  saw  again  approaching  us,  in  the  course
of  his  regular  walk  to  and  fro,  the  golden-
bearded  priest  Agmahd.

Walking  on  by  the  side  of  my  guide,  I
kept  my  eyes  upon  the  ground.  When  he
paused  I  paused,  and  found  that  my  eyes  fell
upon  the  hem  of  the  priest's  white  robe.  That
hem  was  delicately  embroidered  with  golden
characters  ;  it  was  enough  to  absorb  my  atten-
tion and  fill  me  with  wonder  for  a  while.

"  A  new  novice  !  "  I  heard  a  very  quite  and
sweet  voice  say.  "Well,  take  him  into  the
school ;  he  is  but  a  youth  yet.  Look  up,  boy  ;
do  not  fear."

I  looked  up,  thus  encouraged,  and,  en-
countered the  gaze  of  the  priest.  His  eyes,
I  saw,  even  then  in  my  embarrassment,  were
of  changing  colour — blue  and  gray.  But,  soft-
hued  though  they  were,  they  did  not  give  me
the  encouragement  which  I  had  heard  in  his
voice.  They  were  calm  indeed  :  full  of  know-
ledge :  but  they  made  me  tremble.

He  dismissed  us  with  a  movement  of  his
hand,  and  pursued  his  even  walk  down  the
grand  avenue ;  while  I,  more  disposed  to
tremble    than    I    had     been   before,   followed

THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  7

silently  my  silent  guide.  We  entered  the
great  central  doorway  of  the  temple,  the  sides
of  which  were  formed  of  immense  blocks  of
uncut  stone.  I  suppose  a  fit  of  something  like
fear  must  have  come  upon  me,  after  the  inquisi-
tion of  the  holy  priest's  eyes ;  for  I  regarded
these  blocks  of  stone  with  a  yague  sense  of
terror.

Within  I  saw  that,  from  the  central  door-
way, a  passage  proceeded  in  a  long,  direct  line
with  the  avenue  through  the  building.  But
that  was  not  our  way.  We  turned  aside  and
entered  upon  a  network  of  smaller  corridors,
and  passed  through  some  small,  bare  rooms.

We  entered  at  last  a  large  and  beautiful
room.  I  say  beautiful,  though  it  was  entirely
bare  and  unfurnished,  save  for  a  table  at  one
corner.  But  its  proportions  were  so  grand,
and  its  structure  so  elegant,  that  even  my  eye,
unaccustomed  to  discern  architectural  beauties,
was  strangely  impressed  with  a  sense  of  satis-
faction.

At  the  table  in  the  corner  sat  two  other
youths,  copying  or  drawing,  I  could  not
quite  see  what.  At  all  events  I  saw  they
were  very   busy,    and   I    wondered   that   they

8  THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

scarcely  raised  their  heads  to  observe  our
entrance.  But,  advancing,  I  perceived  that,
behind  one  of  the  great  stone  projections
of  the  wall,  there  sat  an  aged  white-robed  priest,
looking  at  a  book  which  lay  upon  his  knee.

He  did  not  notice  us  until  my  guide  stood
deferentially  bowing  right  in  front  of  him.

"  A  new  pupil  ?  "  he  said,  and  looked  keenly
at  me  out  of  his  dim,  bleared -looking  eyes.
"  What  can  he  do  ?  "

"  Not  much,  I  fancy,"  said  my  guide,  speak-
ing of  me  in  an  easy  tone  of  contempt.  "  He
has  been  but  a  shepherd  lad."

"  A  shepherd  lad,"  echoed  the  old  priest ;  "  he
will  be  no  use  here,  then.  He  had  best  work  in
the  garden.  Have  you  ever  learned  to  draw
or  copy  writing  ?  "  he  asked,  turning  upon  me.

I  had  been  taught  these  things  as  far  as  might
be,  but  such  accomplishments  were  rare,  except
in  the  priestly  schools  and  among  the  small
cultivated  classes  outside  the  priesthood.

The  old  priest  looked  at  my  hands,  and  turned
back  to  his  book.

"  He  must  learn  some  time,"  he  said  ;  "  but  I
am  too  full  of  work  now  to  teach  him.  I  want
more  to  help   me  in  my  work  ;  but  with  these

THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE     LOTUS  V

sacred  writings  that  have  to  be  closed  now,  I
cannot  stay  to  instruct  the  ignorant.  Take  him
to  the  garden,  for  a  while  at  least,  and  I  will  see
about  him  by-and-by."

My  guide  turned  away  and  walked  out  of  the
room.  With  a  last  look  around  at  its  beautiful
appearance,  I  followed  him.

I  followed  him  down  a  long,  long  passage,
which  was  cool  and  refreshing  in  its  darkness.
At  the  end  was  a  gate  instead  of  a  door,  and  here
my  guide  rang  a  loud  bell.

"We  waited  in  silence  after  the  bell  had  rung.
No  one  came,  and  presently  my  guide  rang  the
bell  again.  But  I  was  in  no  hurry.  With  my
face  pressed  against  the  bars  of  the  gate,  I  looked
forth  into  a  world  so  magical,  that  I  thought  to
myself :  "  It  will  be  no  ill  to  me  if  the  blear-eyed
priest  does  not  want  to  take  me  from  the  garden
yet  awhile."

It  had  been  a  dusty,  hot  walk  from  our  home
to  the  city,  and  there  the  paved  streets  had
seemed  to  my  country-bred  feet  infinitely  weari-
some. Within  the  gates  of  the  temple  I  had
as  yet  only  passed  down  the  grand  avenue,  where
everything  filled  me  so  deeply  with  awe,  that  I
scarce    dared   look   upon  it.     But  here  was  a

10  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE   LOTUS

world  of  delicate  and  refreshing  glory.  Never
had  I  seen  a  garden  like  this.  There  was
greenness,  deep  greenness  ;  there  was  a  sound  of
water,  the  murmuring  of  gentle  water  under
control,  ready  to  do  service  for  man,  and  refresh
in  the  midst  of  the  burning  heat  which  called
the  magnificence  of  colour  and  grand  develop-
ment of  form  into  the  garden.

A  third  time  the  bell  rang — and  then  I  saw,
coming  from  among  the  great  green  leaves,  a
black-robed  figure.  How  strangely  out  of  place
did  the  black  dress  look  here !  and  I  thought  with
consternation  that  I  should  also  be  clothed  in
those  garments  before  long,  and  should  wander
among  the  voluptuous  beauties  of  this  magical
place  like  a  strayed  creature  from  a  sphere  of
darkness.

The  figure  approached,  brushing,  with  its
coarse  robe,  the  delicate  foliage.  I  gazed  with
a  sudden  awakening  of  interest  upon  the  face  of
the  man  who  drew  near,  and  into  whose  charge
I  supposed  I  was  to  be  committed.  And  well
I  might ;  for  it  was  a  face  to  awake  interest  in
any  human  breast.

CHAPTER  n

"  What  is  it  ?  "  asked  the  man  querulously,  as
he  looked  at  us  through  the  gate.  "  I  sent  fruit
and  to  spare  into  the  kitchen  this  morning.
And  I  can  give  you  no  more  flowers  to-day ;  all
I  have  to  pluck  will  be  wanted  for  the  proces-
sion to-morrow."

"  I  am  not  wanting  your  fruit  or  flowers,"
said  my  guide,  who  seemed  fond  of  adopting  a
lofty  tone.  "  I  have  brought  you  a  new  pupil,
that's  all."

He  unlocked  the  gate,  motioned  me  to  pass
through,  and  shutting  it  behind  me,  walked
away  down  the  long  corridor  (which  now,  look-
ing back  from  the  garden,  seemed  so  dark)
without  another  word.

"  A  new  pupil  for  me  !  And  what  am  I  to
teach  you,  child  of  the  country  ?  "

I  gazed  upon  the  strange  man  in  silence.
How  could  I  tell  what  he  was  to  teach  me  ?

"  Is  it  the  mysteries  of  the  growth  of  the  plants
you   are   to   learn  ? — or   the    mysteries  of  the

12  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

growth  of  sin  and  deceit  ?  Nay,  child,  look  not
so  upon  me,  but  ponder  my  words  and  you  will
by-and-by  understand  them.  Now,  come  with
me,  and  fear  not."

He  took  my  hand  and  led  me  under  the  tall-
leaved  plants  towards  the  sound  of  water.  How
exquisite  it  seemed  to  my  ears,  that  soft,  bright,
musical  rhythm  !

"  Here  is  the  home  of  our  Lady  the  Lotus,"
said  the  man.  "  Sit  down  here  and  look  upon
her  beauty  while  I  work ;  for  I  have  much  to
do  that  you  cannot  help  me  in."

Nothing  loth,  indeed,  was  I  to  sink  upon  the
green  grass  and  only  look — look  in  amazement — ■
in  wonder — in  awe  !

That  water — that  delicate-voiced  water —
lived  only  to  feed  the  queen  of  flowers.  I  said
to  myself,  thou  art  indeed  the  Queen  of  all
flowers  imaginable,

The  White  Lotus.

And  as  I  gazed  dreamingly  in  my  youthful
enthusiasm  upon  this  white  bloom,  which  seem-
ed to  me,  with  its  soft,  gold-dusted  heart,  the
very    emblem    of   pure,    romantic    love — as    I

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  13

gazed,  the  flower  seemed  to  change  in  shape —
to  expand — to  rise  towards  me.  And  lo,  drink-
ing at  the  stream  of  sweet,  sounding  water,
stooping  to  take  its  refreshing  drops  upon  her
lips,  I  beheld  a  woman  of  fair  skin  with  hair
like  the  dust  of  gold.  Amazed,  I  looked  and
strove  to  move  towards  her,  but  ere  I  could
make  any  effort  my  whole  consciousness  left
me,  and,  I  suppose,  I  must  have  swooned  away.
For,  indeed,  the  next  that  I  can  recall  I  lay
upon  the  grass,  with  the  sense  of  cool  water
upon  my  face,  and  opening  my  eyes,  I  beheld
the  black-robed,  strange-faced  gardener  leaning
over  me.

"  Was  the  heat  too  much  for  thee  ?  "  he  asked,
his  brow  knit  in  perplexity.  "  Thou  lookest  a
strong  lad  to  faint  for  the  heat,  and  that,  more-
over, in  a  cool  place  like  this."

"  Where  is  she  ?  "  was  my  only  reply,  as  I
attempted  to  rise  upon  my  elbow  and  look
towards  the  lily  bed.

"What !"  cried  the  man,  his  whole  counte-
nance changing,  and  assuming  a  look  of  sweet-
ness that  I  should  never  have  supposed  could
appear  upon  a  face  so  naturally  unbeautiful.
"  Hast  thou  seen  her  ?    But  no — I  am  hasty  in

14  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE   WHITE    LOTUS

supposing  it.      What  have  you  seen,  boy  ? — do
not  hesitate  to  tell  me."

The  gentleness  of  his  expression  helped
my  scattered  and  startled  senses  to  collect
themselves.  I  told  him  what  I  had  seen,  and,  as  I
spoke,  I  looked  towards  the  lily  bed,  hoping,
indeed,  that  the  fair  woman  might  again  stoop
to  slake  her  thirst  at  the  stream.

The  manner  of  my  strange  teacher  gradually
changed  as  I  spoke  to  him.  When  I  ceased
describing  the  beautiful  woman,  with  the
enthusiasm  of  a  boy  who  has  never  seen  any
but  his  own  dusky-skinned  race,  he  fell  upon
his  knees  beside  me.

"  Thou  hast  seen  her  !  "  he  said  in  a  voice
of  deep  excitement.  "  All  hail !  for  thou  art
destined  to  be  a  teacher  among  us — a  help  to
the  people — thou  art  a  seer  !  "

Bewildered  by  his  words,  I  only  looked
upon  him  in  silence.  After  a  moment  I  grew
terrified,  for  I  began  to  think  he  must  be
mad.  I  looked  around,  wondering  whether  I
could  return  to  the  temple  and  escape  from
him.  But  even  as  I  debated  within  myself
whether  to  venture  upon  this,  he  rose  and
turned  upon  me  with  the  singular,  sweet  smile,

THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  15

which  appeared  to  cover  and  hide  the  ugliness
of  his  strongly  marked  features.

"  Come  with  me,"  he  said  ;  and  I  arose  and
followed  him.  We  passed  through  the  garden,
which  was  so  full  of  attractions  for  my  wan-
dering eyes  that  I  loitered  on  my  path  behind
him.  Ah,  such  sweet  flowers ;  such  rich
purples  and  deep-hearted  crimson.  Difficult  I
found  it  not  to  pause  and  inhale  the  sweetness
of  each  fair-faced  blossom,  though  still  they
seemed  to  me,  in  my  so  recent  adoration  of  its
beauty,  to  but  reflect  the  supreme  exquisiteness
of  the  white  lotus  flower.

We  went  towards  a  gate  in  the  temple :  a
different  one  from  that  by  which  I  had  entered
the  garden.  As  we  approached  it,  there  issued
forth  two  priests  clad  in  the  same  white  linen
robes  as  I  had  seen  worn  by  the  golden-bearded
priest  Aginahd.  These  men  were  dark ;  and
though  they  moved  with  a  similar  stateliness
and  equilibrium,  as  though  indeed  they  were
the  most  firmly  rooted  growth  of  the  earth,
yet  to  my  eyes  they  lacked  a  something  which
the  priest  Agmahd  possessed — a  certain  perfec-
tion of  calm  and  assuredness.  They  were
younger   than  he,  I  soon  saw  ;  perhaps  therein

16  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

lay  the  difference.  My  dark-visaged  teacher
drew  thein  aside,  leaving  me  to  stand  in  the
pleasant  shadow  of  the  deep-arched  doorway.
He  spoke  to  them  excitedly,  though  evidently
with  reverence ;  while  they,  listening  with  quick
interest,  glanced  ever  and  anon  towards  me.

Presently  they  came  to  me,  and  the  black
robed  man  turned  and  moved  over  the  grass,
as  though  returning  on  the  way  we  had  come
together.  The  white-clad  priests,  advancing
under  the  doorway,  spoke  together  in  low
whispers.  When  they  reached  me  they  motion-
ed me  to  follow  them,  and  I  did  so :  passing
through  cool,  high-roofed  corridors  and  gazing
idly,  as  was  always  a  foolish  habit  of  mine,
upon  everything  I  passed ;  while  they,  still
whispering  together  as  they  preceded  me,
would  now  and  then  cast  looks  upon  me,  the
meaning  of  which  I  could  not  understand.

Presently  they  turned  out  of  the  corridors,
and  entered  into  a  large  room  similar  to  the
one  I  had  already  seen,  where  the  old  priest
was  instructing  his  copyists.  This  was
divided  by  an  embroidered  curtain  which
fell  in  majestic  folds  from  the  lofty  roof  to
the  ground.     I   always    loved  beautiful  things,

THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  17

and  I  noticed  how,  as  it  touched  the  ground,
it  stood  firm  with  the  stiffness  of  the  rich
gold  work  upon  it.

One  of  the  priests  advanced,  and  drawing  back
one  side  of  the  curtain  a  little,  I  heard  him  say —

"  My  lord,  may  I  enter  ?  "

And  now  I  began  to  tremble  a  little  again.
They  had  not  looked  unkindly  upon  me,
yet  how  could  I  tell  what  ordeal  awaited  me  ?
I  looked  in  fear  upon  the  beautiful  curtain,
and  wondered,  in  some  natural  fear,  who  sat
behind  it.

I  had  not  over  long  in  which  to  tremble  and
be  afraid  of  I  knew  not  what.  Ere  long  the
priest  who  had  entered  returned,  and  accom-
panying him,  I  saw,  was  the  golden-bearded
priest  Agmahd.

He  did  not  speak  to  me,  but  said  to  the
others —

w  Wait  thou  here  with  him,  while  I  go  to
my  brother  Kamen  Baka."

And  saying  this,  he  left  us  alone  again  in
the  great  stone  room.

My  fears  returned  trebly  upon  me.  Had
but  the  stately  priest  given  me  a  glance  which
held   kindness   in    it,   I  had  not  so  yielded  to

18  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

them,  but  now  I  was  again  plunged  in  vague
terrors  of  what  next  should  come  upon  me ;
and  I  was  weakened  also  by  the  swoon  which
had  but  so  recently  prostrated  me.  Trembling,
I  sank  upon  a  stone  bench,  which  ran  around
the  wall ;  while  the  two  dark-haired  priests
talked  together.

I  think  the  suspense  would  soon  have  brought
another  lapse  into  unconsciousness  upon  me,
but  suddenly  I  was  again  awakened  to  the
doubts  and  possibilities  of  my  position  by  the
entrance  of  Agmahd,  accompanied  by  another
priest  of  most  noble  appearance.  He  was  fair-
skinned  and  fair -haired,  though  not  so  fair  in
either  as  Agmahd ;  he  shared  with  him  the
stately  immobility  of  appearance  which  made
Agmahd  an  object  of  the  deepest  awe  to  me  ;
and  in  his  dark  eyes  there  was  a  benevolence
which  I  had  not  yet  seen  in  any  of  the  priests'
countenances.  I  felt  less  fearful  as  I  looked
upon  him.

"  This  is  he,"  said  Agmahd,  in  his  musically
cold  voice.

Why,  I  wondered,  was  I  thus  spoken  of  ?  I
was  but  a  new  novice,  and  had  already  been
handed  over  to  my  teacher.

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  19

"  Brethren,"  cried  Kamen  Baka,  "  is  it  not
best  that  he  should  be  clothed  in  the  white
garment  of  the  seer  ?  Take  him  to  the  baths  ;
let  him  bathe  and  be  anointed.  Then  will  I
and  Agmahd  my  brother,  put  upon  him  the
white  robe.  We  will  then  leave  him  to  repose,
while  we  report  to  the  company  of  the  high
priests.  Bring  him  back  here  when  he  has
bathed."

The  two  younger  priests  led  me  from  the
room.  I  began  to  see  that  they  belonged  to  an
inferior  order  in  the  priesthood,  and,  looking  on
them  now,  I  saw  that  their  white  robes  had  not
the  beautiful  golden  embroidery  upon  them,
but  were  marked  with  black  lines  and  stitch-
ings  around  the  edges.

How  delicious,  after  all  my  weariness,  was
the  scented  bath  which  they  led  me  to !  It
soothed  and  eased  my  very  spirit.  When  I  left
it  I  was  rubbed  with  a  soft  and  sweet  oil,  and
then  they  wrapped  me  in  a  linen  sheet,  and
brought  me  refreshment — fruits,  oiled  cakes,
and  a  fragrant  draught  that  seemed  both  to
strengthen  and  stimulate  me.  Then  I  was  led
forth  again  to  the  chamber  in  which  the  two
priests  awaited  me.

20  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

They  were  there,  with  another  priest  of  the
inferior  order,  who  held  in  his  hands  a  fine
linen  garment  of  pure  white.  The  two  priests
took  this,  and  as  the  others  drew  away  the
sheet  from  my  form,  they  together  put  it  upon
me.  And  when  they  had  done  so,  they  joined
their  hands  upon  my  head,  while  the  other
priests  knelt  down  where  they  stood.

I  knew  not  what  all  this  meant — I  was  again
becoming  alarmed.  But  the  bodily  refreshment
had  done  much  to  soothe  my  soul,  and  when,
without  further  ceremony,  they  sent  me  away
again  with  the  two  inferior  priests,  with  whom
I  felt  a  little  familiarised,  my  spirits  arose,  and
my  step  became  light.

They  took  me  to  a  small  room,  in  which  was
a  long,  low  divan,  covered  with  a  linen  sheet.
There  was  nothing  else  in  the  room,  and  indeed
I  felt  as  if  my  eyes  and  brain  might  well  remain
without  interest  for  a  while  ;  for  how  much  had
I  not  seen  since  I  entered  the  temple  in  the
morning  !  How  long  it  seemed  since  I  had  let
go  my  mother's  hand  at  the  gate  !

"  Rest  in  peace,"  said  one  of  the  priests.
"  Take  your  fill  of  sleep,  for  you  will  be
awakened  in  the  first  cool  hours  of  the  night !  "

And  so  they  left  me.

CHAPTER   III

I  lay  upon  my  couch,  which  was  soft  enough
to  make  it  very  welcome  to  my  weary  limbs,
and  before  long,  I  was  buried  in  profound  sleep,
notwithstanding  the  strangeness  of  my  surround-
ings. The  health  and  faith  of  youth  enabled
me  to  forget  all  the  newness  of  my  position  in
the  temporary  luxury  of  complete  rest.  Not
long  afterwards  I  have  entered  that  cell  to  gaze
upon  that  couch,  and  marvel  where  the  peace
of  mind  had  flown  that  had  been  mine  in  my
ignorant  boyhood.

When  I  awoke  it  was  quite  dark,  and  I
started  suddenly  to  a  sitting  posture,  vividly
conscious  of  a  human  presence  in  the  room.  My
wits  were  scattered  by  my  sudden  awakening.
I  thought  myself  to  be  at  home,  and  that  it
was  my  mother  who  was  silently  watching
beside  me.

"  Mother,"  I  cried  out,  "  what  is  the  matter?
Why  are  you  here  ?  Are  you  ill  ?  Are  the
sheep  astray  ?  "

22  THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

For  a  moment  there  was  no  answer,  and  my
heart  began  to  beat  rapidly  as  I  realised  in  the
midst  of  the  blank  darkness  that  I  was  not  at
home — that  I  was  indeed  in  a  new  place — that
I  knew  not  who  it  might  be  that  thus  silently
watched  in  my  room.  For  the  first  time  I
longed  for  my  little  homely  chamber — for  the
sound  of  my  mother's  voice.  And,  though  I
think  I  was  a  brave  lad,  and  one  not  given  to
womanish  weakness,  I  lay  down  again  and  wept
aloud.

"  Bring  lights,"  said  a  quiet  voice  ;  "  he  is
awake."

I  heard  sounds,  and  then  a  strong  fragrance
crept  to  my  nostrils.  Immediately  afterwards
two  young  novices  entered  at  the  door,  bearing
silver  lamps,  which  threw  a  sudden  and  vivid
light  into  the  room.  Then  I  saw — and  the  sight
so  startled  me  that  I  ceased  to  weep  and  forgot
my  home-sickness — I  saw  that  my  room  was
quite  full  of  white-robed  priests,  all  standing
motionless.  No  wonder,  indeed,  that  I  had
been  overpowered  by  the  sense  of  a  human
presence  in  my  room.  I  was  surrounded  by  a
silent  and  statuesque  crowd  of  men,  whose  eyes
were  bent  upon  the  ground,  whose  hands  were

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  23

crossed  upon  their  breasts.  I  sank  back  again
upon  my  couch  and  covered  my  face  ;  the  lights,
the  crowd  of  faces,  overpowered  me ;  and  I  felt
strongly  disposed,  when  I  had  recovered  from
my  astonishment,  to  begin  weeping  again  from
sheer  bewilderment  of  ideas.  The  fragrance
grew  stronger  and  more  intense,  the  room
seemed  filled  with  burning  incense ;  and,  opening
my  eyes,  I  saw  that  a  young  priest  on  each  side
of  me  held  the  vases  which  contained  it.  The
room,  as  I  have  said,  was  full  of  priests ;  but
there  was  an  inner  circle  close  about  my  couch.
Upon  the  faces  of  these  men  I  gazed  with  awe.
Among  them  were  Agmahd  and  Kamen,  and
the  others  shared  with  them  the  strange
immobility  of  expression  which  had  affected  me
so  deeply.  I  glanced  from  face  to  face  and
covered  my  eyes  again,  trembling.  I  felt  as
though  walled  in  by  an  impenetrable  barrier  ;
I  was  imprisoned,  with  these  men  around  me,
by  something  infinitely  more  impassable  than
stone  walls.  The  silence  was  broken  at  last.
Agmahd  spoke.

"  Arise,  child,"  he  said,  "  and  come  with  us."
I  arose  obediently,  though  truly  I  would  rather
have  remained  alone  in  my  dark  chamber  than

24  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

have  accompanied  this  strange  and  silent  crowd.
But  I  had  no  choice  save  silent  compliance  when
I  encountered  the  cold,  impenetrable  blue  eyes
which  Agmahd  turned  upon  me.  I  arose,  and
found  that  when  I  moved  I  was  enclosed  by  the
same  inner  circle.  Before,  behind,  and  at  the
side  of  me  they  walked,  the  others  moving  in
orderly  fashion  outside  the  centre.  We  passed
down  a  long  corridor  until  we  reached  the  great
entrance  door  of  the  temple.  It  stood  open,  and
I  felt  refreshed,  as  by  the  face  of  an  old  friend,  by
the  glimpse  I  got  of  the  starlit  dome  without.
But  the  glimpse  was  brief.  We  halted  just
inside  the  great  doors,  and  some  of  the  priests
closed  and  barred  them  ;  we  then  turned  towards
the  great  central  corridor  which  I  had  observed
on  my  first  entrance.  I  noticed  now  that,  though
so  spacious  and  beautiful,  no  doors  opened  into
it,  save  one  deep-arched  one,  right  at  the  end,
facing  the  great  temple  avenue.  I  wondered
idly  where  this  solitary  door  would  lead.

They  brought  a  little  chair,  and  placed  it  in
the  midst  of  the  corridor.  On  this  I  was  told
to  sit,  facing  the  door  at  the  far  end.  I  did  so,
silent  and  alarmed  ; — what  meant  this  strange
thing  ?    Why  was  I  to   sit  thus,  with  the  high

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  25

priests  standing  around  me  ?  What  ordeal  was
before  me  ?  But  I  resolved  to  be  brave,  to  have
no  fear.  Was  not  I  already  clothed  in  a  pure
white  linen  garment  ?  Truly  it  was  not
embroidered  in  gold  ;  but  yet  it  was  not  stitched
with  black,  like  that  of  the  younger  priests.  It
was  pure  white  ;  and  priding  myself  that  this
must  mean  some  sort  of  distinction,  I  tried  to
sustain  my  failing  courage  by  this  idea.

The  incense  grew  so  strong  that  it  made  my
head  confused.  I  was  unaccustomed  to  the
scents  which  the  priests  so  lavishly  scattered.

Suddenly — without  word  or  any  sign  of  pre-
paration— the  lights  were  extinguished,  and  I
found  myself  once  more  in  the  dark,  surrounded
by  a  strange  and  silent  crowd.

I  tried  to  collect  myself  and  realise  where  I
was.  I  remembered  that  the  mass  of  the  crowd
was  behind  me,  that  in  front  of  me  the  priests
had  parted,  so  that,  though  the  inner  circle  still
separated  me  from  the  others,  I  was  looking,
when  the  lights  were  put  out,  straight  down  the
corridor  towards  the  deep-arched  doorway.

I  was  alarmed  and  miserable.  I  curled  myself
together  on  my  seat,  intending  to  be  brave,
if  need   be,  but  in  the  meantime  to  remain  as

I

26  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE   WHITE   LOTUS

silent  and  unobtrusive  as  possible.  Much  did  I
dread  the  calm  faces  of  those  high  priests
whom  I  knew  to  be  standing  immovably
beside  me.

The  absolute  silence  of  the  crowd  behind
filled  me  with  terror  and  awe.  I  was  at  some
moments  so  full  of  alarm  that  I  wondered
whether,  if  I  arose  and  moved  straight  down
the  corridor,  I  could  escape  from  between  the
priests  unnoticed.  But  I  dared  not  try  it ;  and
indeed  the  incense,  combined  with  the  effects  of
the  subtle  drink  and  the  quiet,  was  producing
an  unaccustomed  drowsiness.

My  eyes  were  half  closed,  and  I  think  I  might
soon  have  fallen  asleep,  but  my  curiosity  was
suddenly  aroused  by  perceiving  that  a  line  of
light  showed  around  the  edges  of  the  doorway
at  the  far  end  of  the  corridor.  I  opened  my
eyes  wide  to  look,  and  soon  saw  that  slowly,
very  slowly,  the  door  was  being  opened.  At
last  it  stood  half-way  open,  and  a  dim  suffused
kind  of  light  came  forth  from  it.  But  at  our
end  of  the  corridor  the  darkness  remained  total
and  unrelieved,  and  I  heard  no  sound  or  sign  of
life,  save  a  low,  subdued  breathing  from  the
men  who  surrounded  me.

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  27

I  closed  my  eyes  after  a  few  moments ;  for  I
was  gazing  so  intently  out  of  the  darkness  that
my  eyes  grew  wearied.  When  I  opened  them
again  I  saw  that  there  stood  a  figure  just  out-
side the  doorway.  Its  outline  was  distinct,
but  the  form  and  face  were  dim,  by  reason  of
the  light  being  behind;  yet,  unreasonable  as
it  was,  I  was  filled  with  a  sudden  horror —
my  flesh  creeped,  and  I  had  to  use  a  kind  of
physical  repressive  force  in  order  to  prevent
myself  from  screaming  aloud.  This  intolerable
sense  of  fear  momently  increased;  for  the
figure  advanced  towards  me,  slowly,  and  with  a
kind  of  gliding  motion  that  was  unearthly.  I
saw  now,  as  it  neared,  that  it  was  robed  in  some
kind  of  dark  garment,  which  almost  entirely
veiled  form  and  face.  But  I  could  not  see
very  clearly,  for  the  light  from  the  doorway
only  faintly  reached  out  from  it.  But
my  agony  of  fear  was  suddenly  augmented
by  observing  that,  when  the  gliding  figure
nearly  approached  me,  it  kindled  some  kind  of
light  which  it  held,  and  which  illumined  its
dim  drapery.  But  this  light  made  nothing
else  visible.  By  a  gigantic  effort  I  removed
my  fascinated  gaze  from  the  mysterious  figure,

28  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

and  turned  my  head,  hoping  to  see  the  forms
of  the  priests  beside  me.  But  their  forms  were
not  to  be  seen — all  was  a  total  blank  of  dark-
ness. This  released  the  spell  of  horror  that  was
on  me,  and  I  cried  out — a  cry  of  agony  and  fear
— and  bowed  my  head  in  my  hands.

The  voice  of  Agmahd  fell  upon  my  ear.

"  Fear  not,  my  child,"  he  said  in  his  melodi-
ous, undisturbed  accents.

I  made  an  effort  to  control  myself,  helped  by
this  sound  which  savoured  at  least  of  something
less  unfamiliar  and  terrible  than  the  veiled
figure  which  stood  before  me.  It  was  there —
not  close,  but  close  enough  to  fill  my  soul
with  a  kind  of  unearthly  terror.

"  Speak,  child,"  said  again  the  voice  of
Agmahd,  "  and  tell  us  what  alarms  thee."

I  dared  not  disobey,  though  my  tongue  clove
to  the  roof  of  my  mouth  ;  and,  indeed,  a  new
surprise  enabled  me  to  speak  more  easily  than
otherwise  I  could  have  done.

"  What !  "  I  exclaimed,  "  do  you  not  see  the
light  from  the  doorway,  and  the  veiled  figure?
Oh  !  send  it  away  ;  it  frightens  me  !  "

A  low,  subdued  murmur  seemed  to  come
from    all   the   crowd   at  once.     Evidently   my

THE    IDYLL   OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  2d

words  excited  them.     Then  the  calm  voice  of
Agmahd  again  spoke —

"  Our  queen  is  welcome,  and  we  do  her  all
reverence ."

The  veiled  figure  bowed  its  head,  and  then
advanced  nearer.  Agmahd  spoke  once  more,
after  a  pause  of  total  silence —

"  Cannot  our  lady  make  her  subjects  more
open-eyed,  and  give  them  commands  as
before  ? "

The  figure  stooped  and  seemed  to  trace
something  on  the  ground.  I  looked  and  saw
the  words  in  letters  of  fire,  which  vanished  as
they  came —

"  Yes  ;  but  the  child  must  enter  my  sanctuary
alone  with  me."

I  saw  the  words,  I  say,  and  my  very  flesh
trembled  with  horror.  The  unintelligible  dread
of  this  veiled  form  was  so  powerful  that  I
would  rather  have  died  than  fulfil  such  a
command.  The  priests  were  silent,  and  I
guessed  that,  as  the  figure,  so  the  fiery  letters
were  invisible  to  them.  Immediately  I  reflect-
ed that  if,  strange  and  incredible  as  it  seemed,
it  were  so,  they  would  not  know  of  the  com-
mand.    Terrified   as  I  was,  how  could  I  bring

30  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE   WHITE    LOTUS

myself  to  frame  the  words  which  should  bring
upon  me  an  ordeal  so  utterly  dreadful  ?

I  remained  silent.  The  figure  turned  sud-
denly towards  me  and  seemed  to  look  on  me.
Then  again  it  traced,  in  the  swiftly  vanishing,
fiery  letters — "  Pass  on  my  message."

But  I  could  not;  indeed,  horror  had  now
made  it  physically  impossible.  My  tongue  was
swollen,  and  seemed  to  fill  my  mouth.

The  figure  turned  to  me  with  a  gesture  of
fierce  anger.  With  a  quick,  gliding  move-
ment, it  darted  towards  me,  and  drew  the  veil
from  its  face.

My  eyes  seemed  to  start  from  their  sockets,
as  that  face  was  upturned  close  to  mine.  It
was  not  hideous,  though  the  eyes  were  full  of
an  icy  anger — an  anger  that  flashed  not,  but
froze.  It  was  not  hideous,  yet  it  filled  me
with  such  loathing  and  fear  as  I  had  never
imagined  possible,  and  the  horror  of  it  lay  in
the  fearful  unnaturalness  of  the  countenance.
It  seemed  to  be  formed  of  the  elements  of  flesh
and  blood,  yet  it  impressed  me  as  being  only  a
mask  of  humanity — a  fearful,  corporeal  unreal-
ity— a  thing  made  up  of  flesh  and  blood,
without   the    life   of   flesh   and  blood.     Into  a

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  31

second  were  crowded  these  horrors.  Then
with  a  piercing  shriek,  I  swooned  for  the  second
time  in  that  day — my  first  day  in  the  temple.

CHAPTER  IV

When  I  awoke  I  felt  my  body  to  be  covered
with  a  cold  dew,  and  my  limbs  seemed  life-
less. I  lay  helplessly,  wondering  where  I
was.

It  was  still  and  dark,  and  at  first  the  sense
of  solitary  quiet  was  delightful.  But  soon  my
mind  began  to  review  the  events  which  had
made  the  past  day  seem  like  a  year  to  me.  The
vision  of  the  white  Lotus-flower  grew  strong  in
my  eyes,  but  waned  as  my  terrified  soul  flew
on  to  the  recollection  of  that  later  and  most
horrible  sight — that  which,  indeed,  had  been
the  last  before  them,  until  now.  when  I  awoke
in  the  darkness.

Again  I  saw  it :  again,  in  my  imagination,  I
saw  that  uplifted  face — its  ghastly  unreality,
the  cold  glare  of  its  cruel  eyes.  I  was  unstrung,
unnerved,  exhausted — and  again,  though  now
the  vision  seemed  but  my  own  imagination,  I
cried  aloud  in  terror.

THB    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  33

Immediately  I  saw  a  light  approach  the
doorway  of  my  room,  and  a  priest  entered,
carrying  a  silver  lamp.

I  saw  by  its  rays  that  I  was  in  a  chamber
which  I  had  not  before  entered.  It  seemed
full  of  comfort.  I  saw  that  soft  falling  curtains
made  it  secluded,  and  I  felt  that  the  air  was  full
of  a  pleasant  fragrance.

The  priest  approached,  and  as  he  neared  me
he  bowed  his  head.

"  What  needs  my  lord  ?  "  he  said.  "  Shall  I
bring  fresh  water  if  thou  art  thirsty  ?  "

"  I  am  not  thirsty,"  I  answered  ;  "  I  am
afraid — afraid  of  the  horrible  thing  which  I
have  seen."

"  Nay,"  he  answered,  "  it  is  but  thy  youth
that  makes  thee  afraid.  The  gaze  of  our  all-
powerful  lady  is  at  all  times  enough  to  make  a
man  swoon.  Fear  not,  for  thou  art  honoured
in  that  thine  eyes  have  vision.  What  shall  I
bring  to  give  thee  ease  ?  "

"  Is  it  night  ?  "  I  said,  restlessly  turning  upon
my  soft  couch.

"It  is  near  morning  now,"  answered  the
priest.

"  Oh,     that     the     day     would     come ! "     I

exclaimed  ;   "  that   the  blessed  sun  should  blot
s

34  THE    IDYLL    OF   THE   WHITE    LOTUS

from  my  eyes  the  thing  that  makes  me  shudder !
I  am  afraid  of  the  darkness,  for  in  the  darkness
is  the  evil  face  !  "

"  I  will  stay  beside  your  bed,"  said  the
priest  quietly.  He  placed  the  silver  lamp  upon
a  stand  and  sat  down  near  me.  His  face
relapsed  into  instant  composure,  and  ere  he
had  been  there  a  moment  he  seemed  to  me
naught  but  a  carven  statue.  His  eyes  were  cold ;
his  speech,  though  full  of  kind  words,  had  no
warmth  in  it.  I  shrank  away  from  him ;  for
as  I  looked  on  him  the  vision  of  the  corridor
seemed  to  rise  between  us.  I  bore  this  a  while,
trying  to  find  comfort  in  his  presence  ;  but  at
length  I  burst  forth  in  words,  forgetting  my
fear  of  giving  offence,  which  had  kept  me,  until
now,  so  obediently  quiet.

"  Oh,  I  cannot  bear  it !  "  I  cried.  "  Let  me
go  away ;  let  me  go  out — into  the  garden —
anywhere !  The  whole  place  is  full  of  the
vision.  I  see  it  everywhere.  I  cannot  shut  my
eyes  against  it !   Oh,  let  me — let  me  go  away  ! ':

"  Rebel  not  against  the  vision,"  answered  the
priest.  "  It  came  to  thee  from  the  sanctuary —
from  the  most  sacred  shrine.  It  has  marked
thee  as  one  different  from  others,  one  who  will

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  35

be  honoured  and  cared  for  among  us.  But  thou
must  subdue  the  rebellion  of  thy  heart."

I  was  silent.  The  words  sank  like  cold  icicles
upon  my  soul.  I  did  not  grasp  their  meaning —
indeed,  it  was  impossible  that  I  should;  but
was  sensitively  alive  to  the  chill  of  the  speech.
After  a  long  pause,  in  which  I  tried  hard  to  put
thought  out  of  my  mind,  and  so  to  obtain
release  from  my  fears,  a  sudden  recollection
seized  me  with  an  agreeable  sense  of  relief.

"  Where,"  I  said,  "  is  the  black  man  whom  I
saw  in  the  garden  yesterday  ?  "

"  What  ? — the  gardener,  Seboua  ?  He  will
be  sleeping  in  his  chamber.  But  when  the
dawn  breaks  he  will  rise  and  go  out  into  the
garden."

"  May  I  go  with  him  ?  "  I  asked,  with  feverish
anxiety,  even  clasping  my  hands  as  in  prayer,
so  distressed  was  I  lest  I  should  be  refused.

"  Into  the  garden  ?  If  you  are  restless,  it
will  soothe  the  fever  that  is  upon  your  frame
to  go  among  the  morning  dews  and  the  fresh
flowers.  I  will  call  Seboua  to  fetch  you,  when
I  see  the  dawn  breaking."

I  heaved  a  deep  sigh  of  relief  at  this  easy
assent  to  my  prayer ;  and,  turning  away  from

36  THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

the  priest,  lay  still  with  closed  eyes,  trying  to
keep  all  horrid  sights  or  imaginings  from  me
by  the  thought  of  the  sense  of  delight  which
would  soon  be  mine  when  I  should  leave  the
close,  artificially  perfumed  chamber  for  the
sweetness  and  free  inbreathing  of  the  outer  air.

I  said  no  word,  waiting  patiently ;  and  the
priest  sat  motionless  beside  me.  At  last,  after
what  seemed  to  me  hours  of  weary  waiting,  he
rose  and  extinguished  the  silver  lamp.  I  saw
then  that  a  dim  gray  light  entered  the  room
from  the  lofty  windows."

"  I  will  call  Seboua,"  he  said,  turning  to  me,
"  and  send  him  to  you.  Remember  that  this
is  your  chamber,  which  is  henceforth  to  belong
to  you.  Return  here  before  the  morning
ceremonies  ;  there  will  be  novices  waiting  with
the  bath  and  oil  for  your  anointment."

"  And  how,"  said  I,  much  terrified  at  the
idea  of  being,  by  some  strange  destiny,  so  impor-
tant a  person — "  how  shall  I  know  when  to
return  here  ?  "

"  You  need  not  come  till  after  the  morning
meal,  A  bell  rings  for  that;  and,  moreover,
SeboutL  will  tell  you."  With  these  words  he
departed.

THB    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  37

I  was  full  of  pleasure  at  the  thought  of  the
fresh  air,  which  would  revive  my  unnaturally
wearied  body ;  and  I  longed  to  see  Seboua's
strange  face  and  the  sweet  smile  which  would
now  and  again  obliterate  his  ugliness.  It
seemed  as  though  his  had  been  the  only  human
face  I  had  seen  since  I  parted  with  my  mother.

I  looked  to  see  if  I  still  wore  my  linen  gar-
ment so  that  I  was  ready  to  go  with  him.  Yes,
it  was  on  me,  my  pure  white  dress.  I  looked
on  it  with  a  sense  of  pride,  for  I  had  never
worn  anything  so  finely  woven  before.  I  was
so  far  restored  to  quietude  by  the  idea  of  being
again  with  Seboua  that  I  lay  looking  idly  at
my  dress,  and  wondering  what  my  mother
would  have  thought,  seeing  me  clad  in  this  fine
and  delicate  linen.

It  was  not  long  before  I  heard  a  step  which
roused  me  from  my  dreaming ;  Seboua's
strange  visage  appeared  in  the  doorway ;
Seboua's  black  form  advanced  towards  me.  He
was  ugly — yes  ;  uncouth — yes ;  black  and  with-
out any  fairness  of  appearance.  Yet,  as  he
entered  and  looked  on  me,  the  smile  which  I
remembered  again  irradiated  his  face.  He  was
human  ! — loving  !

38  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

I  stretched  out  my  hands  to  him  as  I  rose
from  my  couch.

"  0  Seboua  !  "  I  said,  the  tears  rising  in  my
foolish  boy's  eyes  as  I  saw  this  gentleness  upon
his  face — "  Seboua,  why  am  I  here  ?  What  is  it
that  makes  them  say  I  am  different  from  others  ?
Seboua,  tell  me,  am  I  again  to  see  that  awful
form  ?  "

Seboua  came  and  knelt  beside  me.  It  seemed
natural  in  this  black  man  to  kneel  down
when  a  sense  of  awe  overcame  him.

"  My  son,"  he  said,  "  thou  art  gifted  from
heaven  with  unclosed  eyes.  Be  brave  in
the  possession  of  the  gift  and  thou  shalt  be
a  light  in  the  midst  of  the  darkness  that  is
descending  upon  our  unhappy  land."

"  I  don't  want  to  be,"  I  said  fretfully.  I
was  not  afraid  of  him,  and  my  rebellion  must
out.  "  I  don't  want  to  do  anything  which
makes  one  feel  so  strange.  Why  have  I
beheld  this  ghastly  face  which  even  now  comes
before  my  eyes  and  blots  out  from  them  the
light  of  day  ?  "

"'Come  with  me,"  said  Seboua,  rising  instead
of  answering  my  question,  and  holding  out  his
hand  to   me.     "  Come,   and  we  will  go  among

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  39

the  flowers,   and  talk  of  these  things  when  the
fresh  airs  have  cooled  thy  brow."

I  rose,  nothing  loth,  and  hand  in  hand  we
passed  through  the  corridors  until  we  reached
a  door  that  admitted  us  to  the  garden.

How  can  I  describe  the  sense  of  exhilaration
with  which  I  drank  in  the  morning  air  ?  It  was
incomparably  a  greater  and  keener  delight  than
anything  in  the  world  of  nature  had  ever  before
imparted  to  me.  Not  only  did  I  pass  out  of  a
secluded  and  scented  atmosphere,  different  from
any  to  which  I  had  been  accustomed,  but  also
the  terrified,  over-excited  mental  state  which  I
was  in  was  infinitely  cooled  and  reassured  by
the  renewed  sense  that  the  world  was  still
beautiful  and  natural  outside  the  temple  doors,

Seboua,  looking  in  my  face,  seemed  by  some
subtle  sympathy  to  detect  my  vague  thoughts
and  interpret  them  to  me.

"  The  sun  still  rises  in  all  his  magnificence,'*
he  said.  "  The  flowers  still  open  their  hearts
to  his  greeting.  Open  thou  thine,  and  be
content."

I  did  not  answer  him.  I  was  young  and
untaught.  I  could  not  readily  answer  him  in
words,  but  I  looked  up  in  his  face  as  we  moved

40  THE    IDYLL   OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

across  the  garden,  and  I  suppose  my  eyes  must
have  spoken  for  me.

"  My  son,"  he  said,  "  because  in  the  night  you
have  been  into  the  darkness,  there  is  no  reason
to  doubt  that  the  light  still  is  behind  the  dark-
ness. You  do  not  fear  when  lying  down  to
sleep  at  night  that  you  will  see  the  sun  in  the
morning.  You  have  been  into  deeper  darkness
than  that  of  the  night,  and  you  will  see  a
brighter  sun  than  this."

I  did  not  understand  him,  though  I  revolved
his  words  in  my  mind.  I  said  nothing,  for  the
sweet  air,  and  the  sense  of  human  sympathy,
were  enough  for  me.  I  seemed  careless  of
hearing  words,  or  understanding  my  experiences,
now  that  I  was  out  in  the  fresh  air.  I  was  but
a  boy,  and  the  sheer  delight  of  my  reviving
strength  made  me  forget  all  else.

This  was  natural,  and  all  that  was  natural
seemed  to  me,  to-day,  to  be  abundantly  full  of
charm.  Yet  no  sooner  had  I  entered  the  natural
once  more  and  begun  to  revel  in  my  return  to
it,  than  suddenly  and  unawares  I  was  taken
out  of  it.

Whither  ?  Alas  !  how  can  I  tell  ?  There  are
no  adequate  words  in  the  languages  of  the  world

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  41

to  describe  any  real  thing  which  lies  outside
the  circle  that  is  called  natural.

Surely  I  stood  with  my  own  feet  upon  the
green  grass — surely  I  had  not  departed  from
the  spot  whereon  I  stood  ?  Surely  Seboua  stood
by  me?  I  pressed  his  hand.  Yes,  it  was  there.
Yet  I  knew  by  my  sensations  that  the  natural
had  yielded  me  up,  and  that  again  I  was  within
the  world  of  feeling — sight — sound  which  I
dreaded.

I  saw  nothing — I  heard  nothing — yet  I  stood
in  horror,  trembling  as  the  leaves  tremble
before  a  storm.  What  was  I  about  to  see  ?
What  was  near  me  ?  What  was  it  that  drew  a
cloud  across  my  eyes  ?

I  closed  them.  I  dared  not  look.  I  dared
not  face  the  dimness  of  the  realities  around  me.

"  Open  thine  eyes,  my  son,"  said  Seboua,
"  and  tell  me,  is  our  lady  there  ?  "

I  opened  them,  dreading  to  behold  the  awful
face  which  had  filled  me  with  fear  in  the  dark-
ness of  the  night.  But  no — for  a  moment  I
saw  nothing — and  I  sighed  with  relief,  for  I
always  expected  to  see  that  face  uplifted  close
to  mine,  with  a  grin  of  anger  upon  it.  But  in
another   second  my  frame  thrilled  with  delight.

42  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

Seboua  had  brought  me,  without  my  perceiving
it,  close  beside  the  lotus  tank ;  and  I  saw,  stoop-
ing as  before,  to  drink  the  clear  flowing  water,
the  fair  woman  whose  long  golden  hair  half  hid
her  face  from  me.

"  Speak  to  her !  "  cried  Seboua.  "  I  see  by
thy  face  that  she  is  before  thee.  Oh,  speak
to  her  !  Not  in  this  generation  has  she  spoken
with  her  priests — speak  to  her,  for  indeed  we
need  her  help  ! "

Seboua  had  fallen  on  his  knees  by  my  side,
as  yesterday  he  had  done.  His  face  was  full  of
earnestness  and  glow — his  eyes  full  of  a  prayer.
Looking  into  them  I  sank  back  overcome,  I
could  not  tell  by  what,  but  it  seemed  as  though
the  golden-haired  woman  called  me  to  her,  and
as  though  Seboua  pushed  me  towards  her,  yet
in  my  body  I  was  no  nearer  to  her ;  but  in  my
consciousness  I  appeared  to  rise  and  move
towards  the  lily  tank,  until,  leaning  upon  its
ledge,  I  touched  her  garment  where  it  fell  upon
the  surface  of  the  water.  I  looked  up  into  her
face,  but  I  could  not  see  it.  Light  radiated
from  it,  and  I  could  only  look  at  it  as  I  might
look  upon  the  sun.  Yet  I  felt  the  touch  of  her
hand  upon   my  head,  and  words  crept  into  my

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE   WHITE    LOTUS  43

mind  which  emanated  from  her,  though  I  was
scarcely  conscious  that  I  heard  them.

"  Child  with  the  open  eyes,"  she  said,  "  thy
soul  is  pure,  and  upon  it  is  laid  a  heavy  task.
But  keep  thou  near  to  me  who  am  full  of  light,
and  I  will  show  thee  the  way  to  plant  thy  feet."

"  Mother,"  said  I,  "  what  of  the  darkness  ?"

I  scarce  dared  frame  my  question  more
plainly.  It  seemed  that  if  I  spoke  of  that
terrible  face  it  would  appear  in  anger  before
me.  I  felt  a  thrill  pass  through  me  from  her
hands  as  I  uttered  the  words.  I  fancied  that
it  must  be  anger  which  was  about  to  descend
on  me,  but  her  voice  passed  into  my  conscious-
ness as  sweetly  and  softly  as  raindrops,  and
imparted  to  me  the  same  sense  of  divine  send-
ing that  we  dwellers  in  a  thirsty  land  associate
with  the  advent  of  the  sweet  moisture.

"  The  darkness  is  not  to  be  feared  ;  it  is  to  be
conquered  and  driven  back,  as  the  soul  grows
stronger  in  the  light.  My  son,  there  is  dark-
ness in  that  innermost  sanctuary  of  the  temple,
because  the  worshippers  therein  cannot  bear
the  light.  The  light  of  your  world  is  excluded
from  it,  that  it  may  be  illumined  with  the  light
of  the  spirit.  But  the  blind  priests,  hid  in  their

44  THB    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

own  conceit,  comfort  themselves  with  the  brood
of  darkness.  They  mock  my  name  by  using
it ;  tell  them,  my  son,  that  their  queen  holds
no  sway  in  the  realms  of  darkness.  They  have
no  queen  ;  they  have  no  guide  but  their  blind
desires.  This  is  the  first  message  you  are
charged  with — did  they  not  ask  for  one  ?  "

At  this  moment  I  seemed  drawn  back  from
her.  I  clung  to  her  garment's  hem,  but  my
hands  were  powerless  ;  as  I  lost  my  hold  upon
her  I  seemed  also  to  lose  the  sense  of  her
presence.  I  was  conscious  only  of  an  intoler-
able feeling  of  physical  irritation.  My  eyes  had
closed,  helplessly,  as  I  drew  from  her ;  I  opened
them  with  an  effort.  I  saw  before  me  only
the  lotus  tank,  filled  with  blossoms  of  the  queen
of  flowers — filled  with  blossoms  which  floated
royally  upon  the  surface  of  the  water.  The
sunshine  lay  upon  their  golden  hearts,  and  I
saw  in  them  the  colour  of  golden  hair.  But  a
voice,  full  of  wrath,  though  speaking  slowly
and  with  deliberate  intonation,  aroused  me
from  dwelling  upon  the  fringe  of  my  dream.

I  turned  my  head  and  beheld,  to  my  amaze-
ment, Seboua  standing  between  two  novices  ;
his    head   bowed,  his  hands  crossed.     Near  to

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  45

me  stood  the  high  priests  Agmahd  and  Kamen  ;
Agmahd  was  speaking  to  Seboua.  I  soon
gathered  that  he  was  in  disgrace  on  account  of
me,  but  I  could  not  discover  what  he  had  done.
Agmahd  and  Kamen  placed  themselves  on
either  side  of  me.  And  I  understood  that  I
was  to  walk  between  them.  We  advanced  in
silence  towards  the  temple,  and  entered  again
its  gloomy  gates.

CHAPTER  V

I   was   led  into  the  hall,  where  the  priests  had

been   taking  their  morning  meal.     The   room

was    almost   deserted  now ;  but  Agmahd   and

Kamen  remained  talking,  in  their  low  subdued

tones,  by  one  of  the  windows,  while  two  novices

led  me  to  a  place  by  the  table  and  brought  me

oiled  cakes,  fruit  and  milk.     It  was  strange  to

me  to  be  waited  on  by  these  youths,  who  did

not  speak  to  me,  and  whom  I  regarded  with

awe    as  being  more  experienced  than  myself  in

the  terrible  mysteries  of  the  temple.  I  wondered,

as  I  ate  my  cakes,  why  they  had  not  spoken  to

me,    any   of  the  novices  whom  I  had  seen  ;  but

looking  back   over  the  brief  time  which  I  had

spent   in  the   temple,   I   recollected  that  I  had

never   been  left  alone  with  one  of  them.     Even

now,    Agmahd    and    Kamen    remained   in   the

room,   so  that,   as   I  saw,  a  silence  of  fear  was

upon  the  faces  of  the  youths  who  served  me.

And   I   fancied  it  to  be  a  fear,  not  as  of  a

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  47

schoolmaster  who  uses  his  eyes  like  ordinary
mortals,  but  as  of  some  many-sighted  and
magical  observer  who  is  not  to  be  deceived.  I
saw  no  gleam  of  expression  on  the  countenance
of  either  of  the  youths.  They  acted  like  automata.

The  exhaustion  which  had  again  taken
possession  of  my  frame  was  lessened  by  the  food,
and  when  I  had  eaten  I  rose  eagerly  to  look
from  the  high  window,  to  see  if  Seboua  were  in
the  garden.  But  Agmahd  advanced,  stepped
between  me  and  the  window,  and  gazed  upon
me  with  the  immovable  look  which  made  me
dread  him  so  deeply.

"  Come,"  he  said.  He  turned  and  moved
away ;  I  followed  him  with  drooping  head,  and
all  my  new  energy  and  hope  departed  ;  why,  I
knew  not ;  I  could  not  tell  why  I  gazed  upon
the  embroidered  hem  of  the  white  garment —
which  seemed  to  glide  so  smoothly  over  the
ground  in  front  of  me — with  a  sense  that  I  was
following  my  doom.

My  doom  !  Agmahd  the  typical  priest  of  the
temple,  the  real  leader  among  the  high  priests.
My  doom.

We  passed  down  the  corridors  till  we  entered
upon  the  wide  one  which  led  from  the  gate  of

48  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

the  temple  to  the  holy  of  holies.  A  horror
filled  me  at  the  sight  of  it,  even  with  the  sun-
light streaming  through  the  gateway,  and
making  mock  of  its  unutterable  shadows.  Yet
so  deep  was  my  dread  of  Agmahd,  that,  left
thus  alone  with  him,  I  followed  him  in  perfect
obedience  and  silence.  We  passed  down  the
corridor — with  each  reluctant  step  of  mine  I
drew  nearer  to  that  terrible  door  whence,  in  the
darkness  of  the  night,  I  had  seen  the  hideous
form  emerge.  I  was  scanning  the  wall  with
the  kind  of  terror  with  which  a  tormented  soul
might  gaze  upon  the  awful  instruments  of
spiritual  inquisition.  It  is  impossible,  once
looking  upon  some  impending  doom  with  open
eyes,  not  to  remain  gazing  thereon  with  abject
yet  riveted  attention.  Such  did  I  in  my  blind
fear  bestow  upon  the  walls  of  the  long  corridor,
which,  to  my  fancy,  as  we  moved  down  it,
seemed  to  close  upon  us  and  to  shut  us  from
all  the  bright,  beautiful  world  which  I  had
lived  in  until  now.

Scanning  thus  intently  these  smooth  and
terrible  walls,  I  perceived,  as  we  approached  it,
a  little  door  which  stood  at  right  angles  with
the    door   of   the   sanctuary.     It   would   have

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  49

escaped  any  observation  but  one  unnaturally
tense ;  for  the  darkness  at  this  far  end  of  the
corridor  was  deep  indeed,  by  contrast  with  the
glowing  sunlight  we  had  left  at  the  other.

We  approached  this  door.  As  I  have  said,
it  stood  at  right  angles  with  the  wall  of  the
sanctuary.  It  was  close  to  the  door  of  it,  but
it  was  in  the  wall  of  the  corridor.

My  steps  seemed  to  be  taken  without  my
own  volition  now;  certainly  my  will  would
have  carried  me  back  to  the  sunshine  which
made  the  world  beautiful  with  flowers — which
made  life  seem  a  glorious  reality,  and  not  a
hideous  and  unimaginable  dream !

Yet  there  it  was — the  door — and  Agmahd
stood,  his  hand  upon  it.  He  turned  and  looked
at  me.

"  Have  no  fear,"  he  said,  in  his  calm,  equable
tones.  "  Our  sanctuary  is  the  centre  of  our
home,  and  its  near  neighbourhood  is  enough  to
fill  us  with  strength."

I  passed  through  the  same  experience  as
when  first  Agmahd  encouraged  me  by  his  voice
in  the  garden.  I  raised  my  eyes,  with  an
effort,  to  his,  that  I  might  discover  whether
there    was    the    same    encouragement   in    his

50  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

beautiful  countenance.  But  all  that  I  saw  was
the  intolerable  calm  of  those  blue  eyes ;  they
were  pitiless,  immovable :  my  soul,  aghast,
beheld  in  them  at  that  moment  fully  the  cruelty
of  the  beast  of  prey.

He  turned  from  me  and  opened  the  door;
and,  passing  through  it,  held  it  open  that  I
might  follow  him.  I  followed  him — yes,
though  my  steps  seemed  to  recoil  upon  myself
and  lead  me  to  the  deeps.

We  entered  a  low-roofed  room,  lighted  by
one  broad  window,  high  in  the  wall.  It  was
curtained  and  draped  with  rich  material;  a
low  couch  stood  at  one  side  of  the  room.  When
my  glance  fell  on  the  couch  I  started,  why,  I
know  not ;  but  I  at  once  thought  it  to  be  the
couch  which  I  had  slept  on  in  the  last  night.
I  could  look  at  nothing  else,  though  there  were
many  beautiful  things  to  look  at,  for  the  room
was  adorned  luxuriously.  I  only  wondered,
with  a  shrinking  heart,  why  that  couch  had
been  removed  from  the  room  in  which  I  had
slept.

While  I  looked  on  it,  lost  in  conjecture,  I
suddenly  became  conscious  of  silence — complete
silence — and  of  loneliness.

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  51

I  turned  with  a  sudden  alarm.

Yes !  I  was  alone.  He  was  gone — the  dread
priest  Agmahd — he  had  gone  without  another
word,  and  left  me  in  this  room.

What  could  it  mean  ?

I  crossed  to  the  door  and  tried  it.  It  was
fast  closed  and  barred.

I  was  a  prisoner.  But  what  could  it
mean  ?  I  looked  around  the  massive  stone
walls — I  glanced  up  at  the  high  window — I
thought  of  the  near  neighbourhood  of  the
sanctuary — and  I  flung  myself  upon  the  couch
and  hid  my  face.

I  imagine  that  I  must  have  lain  there  for
hours.  I  did  not  dare  to  arise  and  make  any
disturbance.  I  had  nothing  to  appeal  to  but
the  blue,  pitiless  eyes  of  the  priest  Agmahd.
I  lay  upon  my  couch  with  fast-closed  eyes,  not
daring  to  face  the  aspect  of  my  prison,  and
praying  that  the  night  might  never  come.

It  was  yet  the  early  part  of  the  day — that  I
felt  sure  of,  although  I  knew  not  how  long  a
time  I  had  passed  in  the  garden  with  Seboua.
The  sun  was  high,  and  streamed  in  at  my  win-
dow. I  saw  this  as,  after  a  long  time  had
passed,  I  turned   and  looked   around  my  room

52  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

with  a  sudden  and  alarmed  glance.  I  had  the
idea  that  someone  was  in  it — but,  unless  hidden
behind  the  curtains,  no  visible  form  was  in  the
room.

No,  I  was  alone.  And  as  I  gathered  courage
to  look  up  to  the  sunlight  that  made  my  window
a  thing  glorious  for  the  eyes,  I  began  to  realise
that  it  still  veritably  was  in  existence;  and
that,  notwithstanding  my  recent  hideous
experiences,  I  was  nothing  but  a  boy  who  loved
sunshine.

The    attraction  grew  very  strong,  and  at  last

fanned  itself  into  the    wish  to  climb  up  to  the

high    window   and    look.     The   passion    which

caused   me   to    desire   so   ardently   to  do  this,

having     once     thought    of    it,  I    can    no    more

account    for    than    I   could    for   most   of   the

inquisitive  and  headstrong  purposes  of  a  boy's

brain.     At   all   events  I  rose  from  my  couch —

casting  all  terror  of  my   surroundings  to  the

winds,    now  that   I  had  a   purpose  sufficiently

childish  to  absorb  me.     The  wall  was  perfectly

smooth  ;    but   I   fancied   that,  by  standing  on  a

table    that   was   beneath  the  window,   I  could

reach    the    sill    with    my    hands,   and  so  raise

myself  up  to  see  out.    I  soon  climbed  the  table,

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE   WHITE    LOTUS  53

but  I  could  barely  reach  the  sill  with  upstretch-
ed  arms.  I  jumped  a  little,  and  just  catching
hold  of  the  sill  managed  to  draw  myself
upwards.  I  suppose  that  part  of  the  enterprise
must  have  been  the  delight  to  me;  for  I
certainly  did  not  anticipate  seeing  anything
but  the  temple  gardens.

What  I  saw,  though  there  was  nothing
perhaps   very  startling,  sobered  my  enjoyment.

The  gardens  were  not  there.  My  window
looked  out  upon  a  small  square  piece  of  ground,
which  was  surrounded  by  high  blank  walls.  I
soon  saw  that  these  were  evidently  walls  of  the
temple,  not  outer  walls.  The  piece  of  ground
was  enclosed  in  the  very  heart  of  the  great
building,  for  I  could  see  its  columns  and  roofs
rising  beyond  each  side,  and  the  walls  were
blank.  Mine  was  the  only  window  I  could
perceive  any  trace  of.

At  that  moment  I  heard  a  faint  sound  in  the
room,  and,  quickly  letting  myself  drop,  I  stood
upon  the  table,  looking  round  in  consternation.
The  sound  seemed  to  proceed  from  behind  a
heavy  curtain  that  half  covered  one  wall.  I
stood  breathless,  and,  even  in  this  broad  day-
light   and    gleaming    sunshine,    somewhat   in

54  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

terror  of  what  I  might  see.  For  I  had  no  idea
that  there  was  any  mode  of  entrance  but  that
door  by  which  I  had  come,  so  that  I  scarce
dared  to  hope  for  a  wholesome  human  pre-
sence !

These  fears  soon  vanished,  however,  for  the
curtain  was  drawn  a  little  back,  and  a  black-
robed  novice — whom  I  had  not  seen  before —
crept  from  out  its  shelter.  I  wondered  at  his
stealthy  manner ;  but  I  had  no  fears,  for  he
held  in  his  hand  a  glorious  blossom  of  the  roval
white  lotus  flower.  I  sprang  from  the  table
and  advanced  towards  him,  my  eyes  upon  the
flower.  When  quite  close  he  spoke,  very  low
and  quickly.

"  This,"  he  said,  "  is  from  Seboua.  Cherish
it,  but  let  none  of  the  priests  see  it.  Cherish  it,
and  it  will  help  you  in  hours  when  you  will  need
help ;  and  Seboua  urges  that  you  remember  all
the  words  he  has  said  to  you,  and  that  you  trust,
above  all,  to  your  love  for  the  truly  beautiful  and
to  your  natural  likes  and  dislikes.  That  is  the
message,"  he  said,  stepping  back  towards  the
curtain.  "  I  am  risking  my  life  here  to  please
Seboua.  Be  careful  that  you  never  come  near
this    door,    or  show  that  you  know  it  exists  ;  it

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  55

opens  into  the  private  room  of  the  high  priest
Agmahd,  into  which  none  dare  enter  save  on
peril  of  intolerable  punishment.

"  And  how  have  you  come  through  ?  "  I  asked
in  great  curiosity.

"  They  are  engaged  in  the  morning  cere-
monies— all  the  priests — and  J.  succeeded  in
escaping  unseen  to  come  to  you."

"  Tell  me,"  I  cried,  holding  him  even  as  he
endeavoured  to  hurry  through  the  door,  "  why
did  not  Seboua  come  ?  "

"  He  cannot — he  is  closely  watched  that  he
may  make  no  effort  to  get  near  you."

"  But  why  is  this  ?  "  I  exclaimed  in  dismay
and  wonder.

"I  cannot  tell,"  said  the  novice,  extracting  his
garment  from  my  grasp.  "  Remember  the
words  I  have  said."

He  hastily  passed  through  the  door  and
closed  it  behind  him.  I  found  myself  half
smothered  by  the  heavy  curtain,  and,  as  soon
as  I  could  recover  from  my  amazement  at  this
sudden  appearance  and  disappearance,  I  moved
it  aside  and  stepped  out,  the  lily  in  my  hand.

My  first  thought — even  before  I  would  let
myself  think  over  the  words  which  I  was  to

56  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

remember — was  to  place  my  precious  flower  in
some  safe  place.  I  held  it  tenderly,  as  though
it  were  the  breathing  form  of  one  I  loved.  I
looked  around  anxiously,  wondering  where  it
would  be  both  unseen  and  yet  preserved.

I  saw,  after  a  few  moments  spent  in  hasty
inspection,  that  just  behind  the  head  of  my
couch  there  was  a  corner  which  the  curtain  fell
a  little  away  from.  Here,  at  least,  I  might
place  it  for  a  while ;  it  would  have  room  to
breathe,  and  would  not  be  seen  unless  the
curtain  were  moved  away — and  behind  my
couch  seemed  a  less  likely  place  for  it  to  be
discovered  in  than  any  other.  I  hastily
placed  it  here,  afraid  to  keep  it  in  my  hand  lest
the  ceremonies  should  be  over  and  Agmahd
enter  my  room.  So  I  hid  it,  and  then  looked
around  for  some  vessel  of  water  in  which  I
might  place  it,  for  it  occurred  to  me  that,  if  I
did  not  supply  it  with  some  of  that  element
which  it  so  dearly  loved,  it  would  not  live  long
to  be  my  friend.

I  found  a  little  earthen  jar  of  water  and
placed  it  in  it,  wondering  the  while  what  I
should  do  if  the  priests,  discovering  its  absence,
should  ask  me  for  it.     I  could  not  tell  what  to

THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  57

do  in  such  an  emergency ;  but,  if  the  flower
were  discovered,  I  could  only  hope  that  some
inspiration  would  be  given  me  by  which  I  might
avoid  throwing  further  blame  upon  Seboua ;
for,  though  I  could  not  understand  why  or  how,
it  was  very  evident  that  he  had  been  blamed
for  something  in  connection  with  me.

I  went  and  sat  on  the  couch,  to  be  near  my
beloved  flower.  How  I  desired  that  I  mi^ht
place  it  in  the  sunshine  and  revel  in  its  beauties !

In  this  way  the  day  passed.  No  one  came
near  me.  I  watched  the  sun  pass  away  from
my  window.  I  watched  the  shadows  of  even-
ing descend  upon  it.  I  was  still  alone.  I  do
not  think  I  grew  more  terrified.  I  do  not
remember  that  the  coming  night  brought  with
it  any  agony  of  fear.  I  was  filled  with  a  deep
calmness,  which  either  the  long  undisturbed
hours  of  the  day  had  produced,  or  else  it  was
wrought  by  the  beautiful  though  unseen  flower ;
for  that  was  ever  before  my  eyes  in  all  its
radiant  and  delicate  beauty.  I  had  none  of  the
intolerable  visions  which  I  had  been  unable  to
drive  from  me  in  the  former  night.

It  was  quite  dark  when  the  door  which  com-
municated    with     the    corridor     opened,    and

58  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

Agniahd  entered,  followed  by  a  young  priest,
who  brought  me  food  and  a  cup  of  some  strange
sweet-smelling  syrup.  I  should  not  have  stirred
from  my  couch  had  it  not  been  that  I  longed
for  food.  I  had  not  thought  of  it  before,  but
I  was  indeed  faint  and  fasting.  I  rose  eagerly,
therefore,  and,  when  the  young  priest  brought
the  food  to  my  side,  I  drank  first  of  the  syrup
— which  indeed  he  offered  me  first — for  my
exhaustion  suddenly  became  plain  to  me.

Agmahd  looked  on  me  as  I  drank.  When
I  had  put  down  the  cup,  I  raised  my  eyes  to
his  with  a  new  defiance.

"  I  shall  go  mad,"  I  said  boldly,  "  if  you
leave  me  in  this  room  alone.  I  have  never
been  left  alone  so  long  in  all  my  life."

I  spoke  under  a  sudden  impulse.  When  I
had  been  passing  the  long  hours  in  solitude
they  had  not  seemed  so  terrible  ;  but  now,  with
a  quick  apprehension  of  the  evil  of  this  solitari-
ness, I  spoke  out  my  feeling.

Agmahd  said  to  the  young  priest —

"  Set  the  food  down,  and  fetch  hither  the
book  that  lies  upon  the  couch  in  my  outer  room."

He  departed  on  his  errand.  Agmahd  said
nothing  to  me  ;  and  I — having  said  my  say,  and

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  59

Dot  having,  as  I  rather  expected,  been  annihilat-
ed for  it — took  up  an  oiled  cake  from  the
platter,  and  cheerfully  went  on  with  my  meal.

Five  years  after,  I  could  not  have  faced
Agmahd  in  this  way.  I  could  not  have  eaten
my  fill  having  just  defied  him.  But  now  I
was  elated  by  the  supreme  ignorance  and  in-
difference of  youth.  I  had  no  measuring  line
for  the  depths  of  the  priest's  intellect — the
wide  embracingness  of  his  stern  cruelty.  How
should  I  have  ?  I  was  ignorant.  And,  more-
over, I  had  no  clue  to  the  mode  of  his  cruelty —
the  purpose,  the  intention  of  it.  I  was  in  the
dark  altogether.  But  I  was  well  aware  that  my
life  in  the  temple  was  not  what  I  had  looked
for,  if  it  was  to  be  like  this,  and  I  already
cherished  boyish  notions  of  escaping  from  it
(even  down  the  terrible  corridor)  if  I  were  to
exist  after  such  an  unhappy  fashion.  I  little
knew  when  I  thought  of  this  how  well  I  was
guarded.

Agmahd  said  no  word  while  I  ate  and  drank,
and  presently  the  young  priest  opened  the
door  and  entered,  bearing  in  his  hands  a  large
black  book.  He  placed  it  on  a  table  which
Agmahd  told   him  to   draw  near  to  my  couch.

60  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

A  lamp  was  then  brought  by  him  from  a  corner
of  the  room  and  placed  on  the  table.  He
lighted  it,  and  this  done,  Agmahd  spoke :

"  You  need  not  be  lonely  if  you  look  within
those  pages."

So  saying,  he  turned  and  left  the  room,  follow-
ed by  the  young  priest.

I  opened  it  at  once.  It  seems,  looking  back
on  that  time,  that  I  was  to  the  full  as  inquisitive
as  most  boys ;  at  all  events,  any  new  object
riveted  my  attention  for  the  time  being.  I  open-
ed the  black  covers  of  the  volume  and  gazed  on
the  first  page.  It  was  beautifully  coloured,
and  I  looked  in  pleasure  at  the  colours  a  little
while  before  I  began  to  spell  out  the  letters.
They  stood  out  from  a  gray  background  in  letters
of  so  brilliant  a  hue,  that  they  seemed  like
fire.  The  title  was — "  The  Arts  and  Powers  of
Magic  ".

It  was  nonsense  to  me.  I  was  a  compara-
tively uneducated  boy,  and  I  wondered  what
companionship  Agmahd  supposed  such  a  book
could  afford  me.

I  turned  idly  over  its  pages.  They  were  all
unintelligible  to  me,  by  very  reason  even  of  the
words  used,  apart  from  the  matter.     The  thing

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  61

was  ridiculous,  to  have  sent  me  this  book  to
read.  I  yawned  widely  over  it,  and  closing
the  book,  was  about  to  lie  down  again  upon  my
couch,  when  I  was  startled  to  oberve  that  I  was
not  alone.  On  the  other  side  of  the  little  table
whereon  my  book  and  lamp  were,  stood  a  man
in  a  black  dress.  He  was  looking  earnestly
upon  me,  but  when  I  returned  his  gaze  he  seem-
ed to  retreat  from  me  a  little.  I  wondered  how
he  could  have  entered  so  noiselessly  and
approached  so  near  me  without  sound.

CHAPTER  VI

"  Have  you  any  wish  ?  "  said  the  man  in  a  clear,
but  very  low  voice.

I  looked  at  him  in  surprise.  He  was  a  novice,
it  seemed,  by  his  dress  ;  yet  he  spoke  as  though
he  could  gratify  my  wish — and  that,  too,  with-
out the  tone  of  a  mere  servant.

"  I  have  just  taken  food,"  I  answered.  "  I
have  no  wish — but  for  freedom  from  this  room."

"  That,"  he  answered  quietly,  "  is  soon
gratified.     Follow  me."

I  stared  in  astonishment.  This  novice  must
know  my  position — must  know  of  Agmahd's
will  with  regard  to  me.  Dare  he  thus  defy
him  ?

"  No,"  I  answered  ;  "  the  high  priests  have
imprisoned  me  here ;  if  I  am  found  escaping
I  shall  be  punished  !  "

"  Come  !  "  was  all  his  answer.  And  as  he
spoke  he  raised  one  hand  commandingly.  As
in  physical  pain,  1  cried  aloud  ;  why,  I  could
not  realise.  Yet  my  sense  seemed  to  be  that
I  was  held  as  by  a  vice — that  some  intolerable

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE     LOTUS  63

power  grasped  my  frame  and  shook  it.  A
second  after,  I  stood  beside  my  mysterious
visitor,  my  band  tight  clasped  in  bis.  "  Look  not
back !  "  be  cried.    "  Come  with  me."

And  I  followed  him.  Yet,  at  the  door  I
desired  to  turn  my  head  to  look  ;  and  by  what
seemed  a  great  effort,  I  did  so.

Little  marvel  that  he  bade  me  not  look  back  !
Little  marvel  that  he  strove  to  hurry  me  from
the  room,  for  when  my  eyes  had  once  turned
I  remained  spellbound,  gazing — resisting  his
iron  grasp.

I  saw  myself — or  rather  my  unconscious
form — and  then,  for  the  first  time,  I  under-
stood that  my  companion  was  no  denizen  of
earth — that  I  had  again  entered  the  land  of
shadows.

But  this  wonder  was  wholly  swallowed  up  in
a  larger  one — one  sufficient  to  make  me  strong
against  the  effort  of  my  companion  to  draw
me  from  the  room.

Leaning  over  the  couch — standing  behind  it
and  bending  forward,  in  that  delicious  drooping
attitude  in  which  I  had  first  seen  her  when
she  stooped  to  drink  the  water — I  saw  the
Lily  Queen.

64  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

And  I  heard  her  speak.  Her  voice  came  to
me  like  the  dropping  of  water — like  the  spray
of  a  fountain.

"  Wake,  sleeper — dream  no  more,  nor  remain
within  this  accursed  spell."

"  Lady,  I  obey,"  I  murmured,  within  myself,
and  instantly  a  mist  seemed  to  enwrap  me.  I
was  but  dimly  conscious — yet  I  knew  that,  in
obedience  to  the  wish  of  the  beautiful  queen,  I
was  endeavouring  to  return  to  my  natural  state.
I  succeeded  by  degrees,  and  opened  my  eyes
wearily  and  heavily,  to  behold  a  desolate  empty
room.  The  novice  had  left  me — of  that  I  was
glad — but,  alas  !  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus  had  left
me  also.  The  room  seemed  empty  indeed,  and
my  heart  was  heavy  as  I  looked  around  me.  I
felt  the  sweet  Lady  of  the  Flower  more  as  a
beautiful  mother  in  my  childish  heart,  than  as
a  queen.  I  yearned  for  her  soft  presence.  But
it  was  not  there.  I  knew  only  too  well  that  she
was  not  in  the  room  hidden  from  me.  I  felt
her  absence  with  my  soul  as  well  as  perceived
it  with  my  eyes.

I  raised  myself  languidly  enough,  for,  indeed,
this  last  struggle  had  out-wearied  me,  and  went
to  the   corner  behind  my  couch  where  my  dear

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  65

flower  was  hid.  I  drew  back  the  curtain  a  little
way,  to  look  at  my  treasure.  Alas ;  it  was
already  drooping  its  lovely  head  !  I  sprang  for-
ward to  assure  myself  that  I  had  indeed  given
it  water.  Yes,  its  stem  was  deeply  plunged  in
its  lovely  element.  Yet  the  flower  drooped
like  a  dead  thing,  and  the  stem  bent  inertly
over  the  edge  of  the  vessel.

"  My  flower,"  I  cried,  kneeling  down  beside
it,  "  art  thou  too  gone  ? — am  I  quite  alone  ?  "

I  took  the  languid  flower-form  from  the  vessel
and  placed  it  upon  my  breast,  within  my  robe.
And  then,  wholly  disconsolate  for  the  moment,
I  flung  myself  again  upon  my  couch  and  closed
my  eyes,  endeavouring  to  make  them  dark  and
visionless.

How  ? — who  knows  the  way  to  hide  visions
from  the  inner  eye,  that  eye  which  has  the
terrible  gift  of  sight  which  no  darkness  can
blind  ?  I  did  not  then,  at  all  events.

The  night  had  descended  on  the  earth,  when
I  aroused  myself  from  my  long  and  silent  rest.
It  was  moonlight  without,  and  a  silvery  streak
of  light  entered  at  the  high  window  and  stream-
ed into  my  room.  Just  within  that  streak  of
light   came  the  hem  of  a  white  garment ;  a  hem

66  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

gold-embroidered.  I  knew  the  embroidery — I
raised  my  eyes  slowly,  for  I  expected  to
recognise  Agmahd,  as  indeed  I  did.  He  stood
just  within  the  dim  shadow ;  but  his  bearing
was  not  easily  confused  with  that  of  another
man,  even  if  his  face  were  unseen.

I  lay  perfectly  still ;  yet  he  seemed  im-
mediately to  know  that  I  was  awake.

"  Rise,"  he  said.  I  rose,  and  stood  beside
my  couch,  with  wide  eyes  of  fear  fixed  upon
him.

"  Drink  that  which  is  beside  you,"  he  said.  I
looked  and  saw  a  cup  full  of  red  liquid.  I  drank
it,  blindly  hoping  it  might  give  me  strength  to
bear  whatever  ordeal  the  silent  hours  of  this
night  might  be  destined  to  bring  upon  me.
"  Come,"  he  said ;  and  I  followed  him  to  the
door.  I  half  unconsciously  cast  a  glance  up  to
the  window,  in  the  thought  that  perchance
fresh  air  and  freedom  lay  before  me.  Suddenly
I  felt  myself  blinded — quickly  I  put  my  hand
to  my  eyes ;  a  soft  substance  was  bound  over
them.  I  was  silent  with  the  silence  of  won-
der and  of  fear ;  I  felt  myself  supported  and
led  onward  carefully.  I  shuddered  as  I
thought   that  it  must  be  the  arm   of  Agmahd

\

THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  67

which  upheld  me,  but  I  submitted  to  the
contact,  knowing  that  I  was  powerless  to  resist  it.

We  moved  onwards  slowly  ;  I  was  conscious
of  leaving  my  own  room  and  of  traversing  some
distance  beyond  it,  but  how  far  or  in  what
direction  I  was  unable  to  guess,  bewildered  as
I  was  by  my  blindfold  state.

"We  paused  in  utter  silence  ;  the  arm  around
me  was  removed,  and  I  felt  the  bandage  taken
from  my  eyes.  They  opened  upon  a  darkness
so  complete  that  I  raised  my  hand  to  assure
myself  that  the  kerchief  was  not  still  upon  them.
No — they  were  free — they  were  open — yet  they
gazed  upon  nothing  but  a  blank  wall  of  deep
and  total  darkness.  My  head  was  full  of  pain
and  dizziness — the  fumes  of  the  strong  syrup
that  I  had  drunk  seemed  to  have  filled  it  with
confusion.  I  remained  motionless,  hoping  to
recover  myself  and  realise  my  position.

While  I  waited,  I  suddenly  became  conscious
of  a  new  presence  close  beside  me.  I  did  not
shrink  from  it.  I  seemed  to  know  it  to  be
beautiful,  to  be  friendly  and  glorious.  I  was
thrilled  with  a  yearning,  an  indescribable  sense
of  leaning  in  spirit  towards  the  unknown
presence.

68  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

Amid  the  silence  suddenly  came  low,  sweet
speech  close  to  mine  ear.

"  Tell  Agmahd  that  he  disobeys  the  law.  One
priest  alone  may  enter  the  holy  of  holies,  and

no  more."

I  recognised  the  liquid  water-like  voice  of
the  Lily  Queen.  Although  I  was  unaware  of
the  priest's  presence  I  unhesitatingly  obeyed
my  queen.

"  One  priest  alone  may  enter  the  holy  of
holies,"  I  said,  "  and  no  more.  Agmahd  being
here,  the  law  is  disobeyed."

"  I  demand  to  hear  the  utterance  of  the
queen,"  came  the  reply  in  the  solemn  tones  of
Agmahd.

"  Tell  him,"  said  the  other  voice  which
thrilled  my  soul  and  made  my  frame  vibrate,
"  that  had  I  been  able  to  reveal  myself  in  his
presence  I  had  not  waited  for  you."

I  repeated  her  words.  There  was  no  answer,
but  I  heard  a  movement — footsteps — and  a  door
closed  softly.

Immediately  a  soft  hand  touched  me.  I  was
simultaneously  conscious  of  the  touch,  and  of  a
faint  light  upon  my  chest.  I  felt  in  a  second
that  the  hand  was  put  within  my  dress  to  draw

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  69

forth  the  withered  lily  which  I  had  hid  there.
But  I  did  not  attempt  to  hinder  this,  for,
looking  up  as  a  light  attracted  my  eyes,  I
beheld  standing  before  me  the  Lily  Queen.  My
queen,  as  in  my  boyish  heart  I  had  begun  to
call  her,  I  saw  dimly  and  as  enveloped  in  a
shadowy  mist,  but  yet  plainly  enough  to  make
me  rejoice  in  her  near  presence.  And  as  I
looked  I  saw  that  she  held  close  to  her  bosom
the  withered  flower  which  she  had  taken  from
mine.  And  I  saw,  wonderingly,  that  it  faded
yet  more,  grew  dimmer,  and  wholly  vanished.
Yet  I  did  not  regret  it,  for,  as  it  died  away,  she
grew  more  bright  and  distinct  to  my  sight.
When  the  flower  had  wholly  disappeared  she
stood  beside  me,  clear  and  distinct,  illuminated
by  her  own  radiance.

"  Fear  no  longer,"  she  said  ;  "  they  cannot
harm  thee,  for  thou  hast  entered  within  my
atmosphere.  And  though  they  have  placed
thee  in  the  very  dungeon  of  vice  and  false-
hood, have  no  fear,  but  observe  all  things,  and
remember  what  thine  eyes  perceive."

The  darkness  appeared  to  become  illumined
by  her  confident  and  gracious  words.  I  grew
bold  and  full  of  strength.

70  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

She  held  out  her  hand  and  touched  me  gently.
The  touch  filled  me  with  a  fire  that  excelled
any  warmth  I  had  ever  experienced.

"  The  royal  flower  of  Egypt  dwells  upon  the
sacred  waters,  which  in  their  purity  and  peace
fitly  form  its  eternal  resting-place.  I  am  the
spirit  of  the  flower ;  I  am  sustained  upon  the
waters  of  truth,  and  my  life  is  formed  of  the
breath  of  the  heavens,  which  is  love.  But  the
degradation  of  my  earthly  resting-place,  over
which  my  wings  of  love  yet  brood,  is  driving
from  it  the  light  of  heaven,  which  is  wisdom.
Not  long  can  the  spirit  of  the  royal  lotus  live
in  darkness  ;  the  flower  droops  and  dies  if  the
sun  be  withdrawn  from  it.  Remember  these
words,  child,  grave  them  upon  your  heart,  for
as  your  mind  becomes  capable  of  grasping  them,
they  will  enlighten  you  in  many  things."

"  Tell  me,"  I  said,  "  when  may  I  again  visit
the  lilies  ?  Will  you  not  take  me  there  in
to-morrow's  sunshine  ?  Now  it  is  night,  and  I
am  tired ;  may  I  not  sleep  at  your  feet,  and
to-morrow  be  with  you  in  the  garden  ?  '

"  Poor  child,"  she  said,  stooping  towards  me
so  that  her  breath  fanned  me,  and  it  was  sweet
like   the    scent    of   wild    flowers,  "  how  hardly

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  71

have  they  taxed  thee  !  Rest  here  in  my  arms,
for  thou  art  to  be  my  seer,  and  the  enlightener
of  my  loved  land.  Strength  and  health  must
dwell  upon  thy  brow  like  jewels.  I  will  guard
thee  ;  sleep,  child."

I  lay  down  at  her  bidding,  and  though  I
knew  that  I  was  upon  a  cold,  hard  floor,  I  felt
that  my  head  rested  upon  an  arm  soft  and
full  of  magnetic  soothing;  and  I  fell  into  deep,
dreamless,  undisturbed  slumber.

There  was  writ  in  Agmahd's  secret  volume
of  records  but  one  word  that  night — "  Vain  ".

CHAPTER  VII

A  white  flower  was  in  m}'-  hand  when  I  awoke.
Its  beauty  filled  my  heart  with  gladness ;  I
looked  on  it  and  was  refreshed  and  content,  as
though  I  had  slept  in  my  mother's  arms,  and
this  was  her  kiss  on  my  lips,  for  I  held  the
flower,  a  half-blown  lotus-blossom,  close  to  my
mouth.  I  did  not  wonder  at  first  how  I  had
obtained  it,  I  only  looked  upon  its  beauty  and
was  happy,  for  it  made  me  know  that  my
queen,  my  one  friend,  did  indeed  guard  me.

Suddenly  I  saw  some  one  enter  the  room,  yet
she  did  not  so  much  enter  it,  as  seem  to  come
out  of  the  shadow.  I  lay,  as  now  I  saw,  on  the
couch  in  the  room  to  which  Agmahd  had
brought  me.  I  was  scarcely  aware  of  how,  or
in  what  place,  I  had  spent  the  dark  hours  of
the  night,  but  I  felt  that  it  was  in  his  arms  I
had  been  carried  back  to  my  couch.  I  was  glad
to  be  there  again,  and  I  was  glad  to  see  this
child  that  approached  me.  She  was  younger
than  myself,  and  bright  as  the  sunshine.     She

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  73

came  near  to  me,  and  then  paused ;  I  put  out
my  hand  to  her.

"  Give  me  the  flower,"  she  said.

I  hesitated,  for  the  possession  of  the  flower
made  me  happy,  but  I  could  not  refuse  her,
for  she  smiled,  and  none  within  the  temple
had  smiled  on  me  till  now.  I  gave  her  my
blossom.

"  Ah !  "  she  cried,  "  there  is  water  on  its
leaves ! "  and  she  flung  it  away  from  her  as
if  in  disgust.  I  started  from  my  couch  in
angry  haste  to  rescue  my  treasure.  Instantly
the  child  snatched  it  up  again,  and  fled  from
me  with  a  cry  of  laughter.  I  followed  her  at
my  utmost  speed.  I  was  only  a  boy,  and  like
a  boy  I  chased  her ;  for  I  was  angry  and  deter-
mined she  should  not  win.  We  sped  through
great  rooms  wherein  we  saw  no  one,  the
child  darting  through  the  great  curtains,  and
I  following  with  the  swiftness  of  a  lad  of
the  country.  But  suddenly  I  came  against
what  seemed  to  me  a  wall  of  solid  stone.  How
was  it  she  could  have  eluded  me,  for  I  was  close
on  her  footsteps  ?  I  turned  back  in  a  passion  of
rage  that  made  me  blind,  but  I  was  silenced
and  stricken  into  quiet,  for  the  priest  Agmahd

74  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

stood  before  me.     Had  I  done  wrong  ?  It  could
not  be,  for  he  was  smiling.

"  Come  with  me,"  he  said,  and  spoke  so  gent-
ly that  I  did  not  fear  to  follow  him.  He  opened
a  door,  and  I  saw  before  my  eyes  a  garden  full
of  flowers,  a  square  garden  enclosed  in  hedges,
thickly  covered,  too,  with  flowers,  and  this
garden  was  full  of  children,  all  running  hither
and  thither  as  swiftly  as  possible,  in  the  intri-
cacies of  some  game  I  did  not  understand.  There
were  so  many,  and  they  moved  so  swiftly,  that  at
first  I  was  bewildered,  but  suddenly  I  saw  the
child  among  them  who  had  taken  my  flower.  She
wore  it  on  her  dress,  and  she  smiled  in  mockery
as  she  saw  me.  I  plunged  into  the  crowd  im-
mediately, and  seemed,  though  I  knew  not  how,
at  once  to  obey  the  laws  of  the  game  or  dance.
I  scarce  knew  which  it  was,  for  though  I  moved
rightly  among  them  I  could  not  tell  what  object
they  had  in  pursuit.  I  followed,  and  chased
the  figure  of  the  girl.  Although  I  did  not
succeed  in  approaching  her,  so  swift  was  she,
yet  I  grew  quickly  to  enjoy  the  motion,  the
excitement,  the  merry  faces  and  laughing  voices.
The  scent  of  the  innumerable  flowers  filled  me
with  delight,  and  I  became  passionately  desirous

THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  75

to  possess  myself  of  some  of  them.  I  forgot
the  lotus  blossom  in  thinking  of  these  others,
and  yet  I  hurried  on  in  the  maze  of  the  dance,
promising  myself  a  great  cluster  of  the  flowers
when  the  dance  ceased  ;  at  that  moment  I  did
not  fear  Agmahd  or  his  displeasure,  even  if  this
garden  were  his.  Then  suddenly  I  heard  a
shout  of  a  hundred  gay  children's  voices.

"  He  has  won  it !  He  has  won  it  !  "

It  was  a  ball,  a  golden  ball,  and  light,  so
light,  that  I  could  throw  it  far,  far  up  in  the
sky ;  yet  it  always  returned  to  my  uplifted
hands.  I  had  found  it  at  my  feet  when  I  heard
the  others  shout,  and  immediately  I  knew  the
ball  was  mine.  Now,  I  saw  there  was  no  one
near  me  but  the  child  who  had  taken  my  lotus
flower.  It  was  not  on  her  dress  now,  and  I  had
forgotten  it.  But  she  was  smiling,  and  I  laugh-
ed to  see  her.  I  threw  her  the  ball,  and  she
threw  it  back  to  me,  from  one  end  of  the  garden
to  the  other.

Suddenly  a  bell  rang  out  clear  and  loud  in
the  air.  "  Come,"  she  said,  "  it  is  school  time,
come."  She  caught  my  hand  and  threw  the
ball  away.     I  looked  longingly  after  it.

"  That  was  mine,"  I  said.

76  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  It  is  no  use  now,"  she  answered.  "  You
must  gain  another  prize."

We  ran  away,  hand  in  hand,  through  another
garden  into  a  great  room  which  I  had  not  seen
before.  The  children  with  whom  I  had  played
were  here  and  a  great  many  more.  The  air  was
heavy  and  sweet  in  this  room.  I  was  not  tired,
for  I  had  but  just  risen  from  my  long  sleep  and
the  morning  was  yet  fresh,  but  now  that  I
entered  this  room  I  felt  weary  and  my  head
burned.

Very  soon  I  fell  asleep,  hearing  the  children's
voices  round  me.  When  I  awoke  it  was  to  hear
a  shout  like  that  in  the  garden.  "  He  has  won
it !  He  has  won  it !  "

I  stood  upon  a  kind  of  throne — a  lofty  seat
of  marble.  And  I  could  hear  my  own  voice  in
the  air.  I  had  been  speaking.  The  children
were  round  me,  but  they  were  clustered  upon
and  about  the  marble  seat.  I  remembered  that
the  child  who  brought  me  here  had  said  the
teacher  stood  upon  this  throne.  Why  then
were  we,  the  children,  here  ?  I  looked,  and  lo,
I  saw  that  the  room  was  full  of  priests !  They
stood  in  the  place  of  the  taught.  They  stood
silent,  immovable.     Again  I  heard  the  children

THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  77

cry:  "He  has  won  it!  He  has  won  it!"  I
sprang  from  the  throne  in  a  sudden  frenzy,
I  knew  not  why.  As  I  stood  upon  the  ground
I  looked  and  saw  that  the  children  were  gone.
I  could  not  see  any  one  of  them  but  the  child
who  had  brought  me  here.  She  was  standing
on  the  throne,  and  she  laughed  and  clapped
her  hands  with  glee.  I  wondered  what  it  was
that  pleased  her,  and  looking  down  I  saw  that
I  stood  in  a  circle  of  white-robed  priests,  who
had  prostrated  themselves  until  their  foreheads
touched  the  ground.  What  did  this  mean  ?  I
could  not  guess,  and  stood  still  in  terror,  when
suddenly  the  child  cried  out  as  if  in  answer  to
my  thought :  "  They  worship  you  !  "

My  wonder  at  her  words  was  not  greater
than  another  wonder  which  fell  on  me.  For  I
understood  that  I  alone  heard  h^r  voice.

CHAPTER  VIII

I  was  taken  back  to  my  own  room,  and  there
the  young  priests  brought  me  food.  I  was
hungry,  for  I  had  not  broken  my  fast,  and  I
found  the  food  exquisite.  The  young  priests
who  brought  it  to  me  fell  on  one  knee  when
they  offered  it !  I  looked  wonderingly  at  them,
for  1  could  not  guess  why  they  should  do  so.
Many  of  them  came  with  fruits  and  rich  syrup
and  delicate  sweetmeats,  such  as  I  had  never
seen,  and  with  flowers.  Great  clusters  of
'flowers  were  brought  and  placed  near  me,  and
bushes  covered  with  blossoms  were  put  against
the  wall.  I  cried  out  with  pleasure  to  see  them,
and  as  I  cried  out,  I  saw  Agmahd  standing
within  the  shadow  of  the  curtain.  His  eyes
were  on  me,  cold  and  smileless.  Yet  I  did  not
fear  him  now ;  I  was  full  of  a  new  spirit  of
pleasure,  which  made  me  bold.  I  went  from
flower  to  flower,  kissing  the  blossoms.  Their
scent  filled  all  the  room  with  its  richness.  I
was  glad  and  proud,  for  I  felt  as  if  I  need  no
longer   be  afraid  of  this  cold  priest,  who  stood

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  79

motionless,  as  though  cut  in  marble.  This
sensation  of  fearlessness  lifted  a  weight  of
agony  from  my  childish  soul.

He  turned  and  vanished,  and  as  he  passed
under  the  curtain  I  saw  the  child  at  my  side.

"  See,"  she  said,  "  I  brought  you  these
flowers."

"  You  !  "  I  exclaimed.

"  Yes,  I  told  them  you  loved  flowers.  And
these  are  strong  and  sweet;  they  grow  in  the
earth.  Are  you  tired,  or  shall  we  go  out  and
play?  Do  you  know  that  garden  is  our  own,
and  the  ball  is  there  ?  Some  one  took  it  back
for  you."

"  Tell  me,"  I  said,  "  why  the  priests  kneel  to
me  to-day?  "

"  Do  you  not  know  ?  "  she  said,  looking  at
me  curiously.  "  It  is  because  you  taught  from
the  throne  to-day,  and  spoke  wise  words  they
understood,  but  we  could  not.  But  we  saw
you  had  won  a  great  prize.  You  will  win  all
the  prizes."

I  sat  down  upon  my  couch,  and  held  my  head
with   my  hands  and  looked  at  her  in  wonder.

"  But  how  could  I  do  that  and  not  know  it  ?  "
I  demanded.

80  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE   LOTUS

"  You  will  be  great  when  you  do  not  struggle;
when  you  do  not  know  it  you  will  win  all  the
prizes.  If  you  are  quiet  and  happy  you  will
be  worshipped  by  all  these  priests,  even  the
most  splendid."

I  was  dumb  with  wonder  for  a  moment,  then
I  said —

"  You   are  very  little.     How  can  you  know

all  this  ?  "

"  The  flowers  told  me,"  she  said  with  a  laugh.
"  They  are  your  friends.  But  it  is  all  true.
Now  come  and  play  with  me."

"  Not  yet,"  I  said.  And  indeed  I  felt  my
head  was  hot  and  heavy,  and  my  heart  filled
with    wonder.      I   could    not    understand   her

words.

"  It  is  impossible  I  can  have  taught  from  the
throne,"  I  exclaimed.

"  You  did !  and  the  high  priests  bowed  their
awful  faces  before  you.  For  you  told  them
how  to  perform  some  strange  ceremony  where
you  would  be  in  the  midst."

"  I ! "

"  Yes,  for  you  told  them  of  what  should  be
your  dress,  and  how  to  prepare  it,  and  what
words  to  utter,  as  they  placed  it  on  you."

THE    IDYLL   OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  81

I  watched  her  with  passionate  interest.
"  Can  you  tell  me  more  ?  "  I  cried,  when  she
ceased.

"  You  are  to  live  among  earth-fed  flowers,
and  to  dance  with  the  children  often.  Oh,
there  were  many  things.  But  of  the  ceremony
I  cannot  remember.  But  you  will  soon  see,  for
it  is  to  be  to-night."

I  started  from  my  couch  in  a  sudden  frenzy
of  fear.

"  Do  not  be  afraid,"  she  said  with  a  laugh.
"  For  I  am  to  be  with  you.  That  makes  me
glad,  for  I  belong  to  the  temple,  yet  have  I
never  been  admitted  to  one  of  the  sacred
ceremonies."

"  You  belong  to  the  temple  !  But  they  can-
not hear  your  voice  !  "

"  Sometimes  they  cannot  see  me  !  "  she  said,
laughing,  "  only  Agmahd  can  always  see  me,
for  I  am  his.  But  I  cannot  talk  to  him.  I  like
you  because  I  can  talk  to  you.  Come,  let  us
go  out  and  play.  The  flowers  in  the  garden
are  as  sweet  as  these,  and  the  ball  is  there.
Come."

She  took  my  hand  and  went  quickly  away.
I  let  her  lead  me,  for  I  was  lost  in  thought.

82  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

But  outside  the  air  was  so  rich  and  sweet,  the
flowers  so  bright,  the  sun  so  warm,  that  soon
I  forgot  my  thoughts  in  happiness.

CHAPTER  IX

It  was  night.  I  was  sleepy  and  content,  for
I  had  been  happy  and  amused,  running  hither
and  thither  in  the  sweet-scented  air.  All  the
evening  I  had  slept  on  my  couch  among  the
flowers  that  made  my  room  fragrant,  and  I
dreamed  strange  dreams  in  which  each  flower
became  a  laughing  face,  and  my  ears  were  full
of  the  sound  of  magic  voices.  I  awoke  suddenly
and  fancied  I  must  be  still  dreaming,  for  the
moonlight  came  into  my  room  and  fell  upon
the  beautiful  blossoms.  And  I  thought  with
wonder  of  the  simple  home  I  had  been  reared
in.  How  had  I  ever  endured  it?  For  now  it
seemed  to  me  that  beauty  was  life.

I  was  very  happy.

As  I  lay  dreamily  looking  at  the  moonlight,
the  door  in  the  corridor  was  suddenly  opened
from  without.  The  corridor  was  full  of  light,
such  brilliant  light  that  the  moonlight  seemed
like   darkness,    and    I  was    blinded.     Then    a

84  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE   WHITE    LOTOS

number  of  neophytes  entered  my  room,  bring-
ing with  them  some  things  that  I  could  not  see,
because  of  the  strong  light.  Then  they  went
away  and  closed  the  door,  leaving  me  alone
in  the  moonlight,  with  two  tall,  white-robed,
motionless  forms.  I  knew  who  was  with  me
though  I  dared  not  look — it  was  Agmahd  and
Kamen  Baka.

At  first  I  trembled,  but  suddenly  I  saw  the
child  glide  forth  from  the  shadow,  her  finger  on
her  lips  and  a  smile  on  her  face.

"  Do  not  be  afraid,"  she  said.  "  They  are
going  to  put  on  you  the  beautiful  robe  you  told
them  to  prepare."

I  rose  from  my  couch  and  looked  at  the
priests.  I  was  no  longer  afraid.  Agmahd
stood  motionless,  his  eyes  fixed  on  me.  The
other  approached  me,  holding  in  his  hands
a  white  robe.  It  was  of  fine  linen  and  covered
with  rich  gold,  embroidery,  which  I  saw  formed
characters  I  could  not  understand.  It  was
more  beautiful  than  A^mahd's  robe — and  I  had
never  seen  anything  so  beautiful  as  that  when
I  entered  the  temple.

I  was  pleased,  and  held  out  my  hand  for  the
robe.     Kamen    came   close  to  me,  and  when  I

THH    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  85

flung  aside    the  one   I  wore,  put  this  upon  me
with  his  own  hands.

It  was  steeped  with  a  subtle  perfume,  which
I  inhaled  with  delight.  This  seemed  to  me  a
royal  robe !

Kamen  advanced  to  the  door  and  opened  it.
The  brilliant  light  streamed  in  full  upon  me.
Agmahd  remained  standing  motionless,  his
eyes  fixed  on  me.

The  child  looked  upon  me  with  admiration,
and  clapped  her  hands  in  delight.  Then  she
held  out  one  hand  and  took  mine.  "  Come,"
she  said.  I  yielded,  and  together  we  went  into
the  corridor,  Agmahd  close  behind  us.  The
scene  we  entered  startled  me,  and  I  paused.
The  great  corridor  was  full  of  priests,  save
just  where  I  stood,  close  to  the  door  of  the
holy  of  holies.  Here  a  large  space  was  left,
and  in  this  space  stood  a  couch  covered
with  silken  drapery,  embroidered  with  gold,
in  characters  resembling  those  upon  my
dress.  About  the  couch  was  a  bank  or
hedge  of  sweet-smelling  flowers,  and  all
around  the  ground  was  strewn  with  plucked
blossoms.  I  shrank  from  the  great  crowd
of    motionless   white-robed  prists,    whose  eyes

86  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

were    fixed   on    me,    but   the  beautiful  colours
pleased  me.

"  This  couch  is  for  us,"  said  the  child,  and
led  me  to  it.  No  one  else  spoke  or  moved,  and
I  obeyed  her.  "We  advanced,  and  upon  the
couch  found  our  golden  ball  with  which  we
had  played  in  the  garden.  I  looked  in  a
sudden  wonder  to  see  if  Agmahd  watched  us.
He  stood  by  the  door  of  the  holy  of  holies ;  his
eyes  were  on  me.  Kamen  stood  nearer  to  us,
and  he  was  gazing  at  the  closed  door  of  the
sanctuary,  and  his  lips  were  moving  as  if
he  were  repeating  words.  No  one  seemed
angry  with  us,  so  I  looked  back  at  the
child.  She  snatched  up  the  ball  and  sprang
to  one  end  of  the  great  couch ;  I  could
not  resist  her  gaiety ;  I  sprang  to  the  other  end
of  the  couch,  and  laughed  too.  She  flung  me
the  ball ;  I  caught  it  in  my  hands,  but  before  I
could  throw  it  back  to  her,  the  corridor  was
plunged  into  complete  profound  darkness.  For
a  moment  my  breath  died  away  in  the  sudden
agony  of  fear,  but  suddenly  I  found  that  I
could  see  the  child,  and  that  she  was  laughing.
I  flung  her  the  ball,  and  she  caught  it,  and
laughed  again.     I  looked  around,  and  saw  that

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  87

all  else  was  black  darkness.  I  thought  of  the
awful  figure  I  had  seen  before  in  the  darkness,
and  I  must  have  cried  aloud  with  fear  but  for
the  child.  She  came  to  me  and  put  her  hand
in  mine.

"Are  you  afraid?"  she  said;  "I  am  not
And  you  need  not  fear.  They  would  not  harm
you,  for  they  worship  you  !  "

While  she  spoke,  I  heard  music — gay,  wonder-
ful music — that  made  my  heart  beat  fast  and
my  feet  long  to  dance.

A  moment  later  and  I  saw  the  light  come
round  the  sanctuary  door,  and  the  door  open.
Was  that  awful  figure  coming  forth  ?  My  limbs
shook  at  the  thought,  but  yet  I  did  not  lose  all
courage  as  before.  The  child's  presence  and
the  gay  music  kept  from  me  the  horror  of  soli-
tude. The  child  rose,  holding  my  hand  in  hers.
We  approached  the  sanctuary  door.  I  was
unwilling,  yet  I  could  not  resist  the  guidance
which  led  me  on.  We  entered  the  door,  and
as  we  did  so  the  music  ceased.  All  was  still
again.  But  there  was  a  faint  light  within  the
sanctuary  which  seemed  to  come  from  the  far
end  of  the  chamber.  The  child  led  me  towards
this   light.     She   was  with  me,   and  I  was  not

88  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

afraid.  At  the  end  of  the  chamber  was  a  small
inner  room,  or  recess,  cut,  as  I  could  see,  in  the
rock.  I  could  see  this,  for  there  was  enough
light  here.  A  woman  sat  on  a  low  seat,  her
head  bent  over  a  great  book,  which  she  held
open  on  her  knee.  My  eyes  were  riveted  upon
her  instantly,  and  I  could  not  remove  them.  I
knew  her,  and  the  heart  within  me  shuddered
at  the  thought  that  she  would  raise  her  head,
and  I  should  see  her  face.

Suddenly  I  knew  my  companion,  the  child,
was  gone.  I  did  not  look  to  see,  for  my  eyes
were  held  by  a  supreme  fascination,  but  I  felt
my  hand  had  no  answering  clasp.  I  knew  her
presence  was  gone.

I  waited,  standing  still  as  one  of  those  carved
figures  in  the  avenue  of  the  temple.

At  last  she  lifted  her  head  and  looked  at
me.  My  blood  shivered  and  grew  cold.  It
seemed  to  myself  that  I  froze,  for  those  eyes
cut  like  steel,  yet  I  could  not  resist  or  turn
away,  or  even  hide  my  eyes  from  that  awful
sight.

"  You  have  come  to  me  to  learn.  Well,  I
will  teach  you,"  she  said,  and  her  voice  sounded
low   and  sweet  like  the  soft  tones  of  a  musical

THE    IDYLL   OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  89

instrument.  "  You  love  beautiful  things  and
flowers.  You  will  be  a  great  artist  if  you  live
for  beauty  alone,  but  you  must  be  more  than
that."  She  held  out  her  hand  to  me,  and,
against  my  will,  I  lifted  mine,  and  gave  it  her,
but  she  barely  touched  it ;  at  the  touch  my
hand  was  suddenly  full  of  roses,  and  all  the
place  was  filled  with  their  scent.  She  laughed,
and  the  sound  was  musical ;  I  suppose  my  face
pleased  her.

"  Come  now,"  she  said,  "  and  stand  nearer
me,  for  you  no  longer  fear  me."  With  my  eyes
upon  the  roses,  I  approached  her ;  they  held
my  sight,  and  I  did  not  fear  her  when  I  did  not
see  her  face.

She  put  her  arm  round  me  and  drew  me  close
to  her  side.  Suddenly  I  saw  that  the  dark  robe
she  wore  was  no  garment  of  linen  or  cloth — it
was  alive — it  was  a  drapery  of  coiling  snakes,
which  clung  about  her  and  made  folds  that  had
seemed  to  me  like  soft  hanging  draperies  when
I  stood  a  little  away  from  her.  Now  terror
overcame  me ;  I  tried  to  scream  but  could  not,
I  tried  to  fly  from  her  but  could  not.  She
laughed  again,  but  this  time  her  laugh  was
harsh.     But  while  I   looked,    all  was  changed,

90  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

and  her  robe  was  dark — dark  still  but  not  alive.
I  stood  breathless,  wondering  and  cold  with
fear — her  arm  was  still  about  me  !  She  raised  her
other  hand  and  placed  it  on  my  forehead.  Then
fear  left  me  altogether ;  I  seemed  happy  and
quiet.  My  eyes  were  shut,  although  I  saw  ;  I
was  conscious,  yet  I  did  not  desire  to  move.  She
rose,  and  lifting  me  in  her  arms,  placed  me  on
the  low  stone  seat  where  she  had  herself  been
sitting.  My  head  fell  back  against  the  wall  of
rock  behind  me.  I  was  dumb  and  still,  but  I
could  see.

She  rose  up  to  her  full  height  and  stretched
her  arms  aloft  above  her  head,  and  again  I  saw
the  serpents.  They  were  vigorous  and  full  of
life.  They  were  not  only  her  dress  but  they
were  about  her  head.  I  could  not  tell  if  they
were  her  hair  or  if  they  were  in  it.  She  clasp-
ed her  hands  high  above  her  head,  and  the
terrible  creatures  hung  wreathing  from  her
arms.  But  I  was  not  afraid.  Fear  seemed  to
have  left  me  for  ever.

Suddenly  I  became  aware  that  there  was
another  presence  in  the  sanctuary.  Agmahd
was  there,  standing  at  the  door  of  the  inner
cavern.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  91

I  looked  in  wonder  at  his  face,  it  was  so  still ;
the  eyes  were  unseeing.  Then  I  knew  suddenly
that  they  were  in  very  fact  unseeing ;  that  this
figure,  this  light,  I  myself,  were  all  invisible  to
him.

She  turned  to  me,  or  leaned  towards  me,  so
that  I  saw  her  face,  and  her  eyes  were  on  mine ;
otherwise  she  did  not  move.  Those  eyes  that
cut  like  steel  no  longer  filled  me  with  terror,
but  they  held  me  with  a  grasp  as  of  some  iron
instrument.  While  I  watched  her,  suddenly  I
saw  the  serpents  change  and  vanish ;  they
became  long  sinuous  folds  of  some  soft  gray
gleaming  garment,  and  their  heads  and  terrible
eyes  changed  into  starry  groups  of  roses.  And
a  rich  strong  scent  of  roses  filled  the  sanctuary.
Then  I  saw  Agmahd  smile.

"  My  Queen  is  here,"  he  said.

"  Your  Queen  is  here,"  I  said,  and  did
not  know  I  had  spoken  till  I  heard  my
own  voice.     "  She  waits  to  know  your  desire."

"  Tell  me,"  he  said,  "  what  is  her  robe  ?  "

I  answered  :  "  It  shines  and  gleams,  and  on
her  shoulders  are  roses."

"  I  do  not  desire  pleasure,"  he  said ;  "  my
soul  is  sick  of  it.     But  I  demand  power."

92  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

Until  now  her  eyes  fixed  on  mine  had  told
me  what  to  speak ;  but  now  I  heard  her  voice
again.

"  In  the  temple  ?  "

And  I  repeated  her  words,  unconscious  that
I  did  so  till  I  caught  the  echo  of  my  voice.

"  No,"  answered  Agmahd  contemptuously.
"  I  must  go  outside  these  walls,  and  mix  with
men,  and  work  my  will  among  them.  I  demand
the  power  to  do  this.  It  was  promised  to  me ;
that  promise  has  not  been  fulfilled."

"Because  you  lacked  the  courage  and  the
strength  to  compel  its  fulfilment."

"  I  lack  those  no  longer,"  answered  Agmahd,
and  for  the  first  time  I  saw  his  face  flame  with
passion.

"  Then  utter  the  fatal  words,"  she  said.

Agmahd's  face  changed.  He  stood  still  for
some  moments,  and  his  face  grew  colder  and
more  stony  than  any  carven  form.

"  I  renounce  my  humanity,"  he  said  at  last,
uttering  the  words  slowly,  so  that  they  appear-
ed to  pause  and  rest  upon  the  air.

"  It  is  well,"  she  said.  "  But  you  cannot
stand  alone.  You  must  bring  me  others  ready
like  yourself  to  brave  all  and  know  all.     I  must

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  93

have  twelve  sworn  servants.     Get  me  these,  and
you  shall  have  your  desire."

"  Are  they  to  be  my  equals  ? "  demanded
Agmahd.

"  In  desire  and  in  courage,  yes  ;  in  power,
no  ;  because  each  will  have  a  different  desire  ;
thus  will  their  service  be  acceptable  to  me."

Agmahd  paused  a  moment.  Then  he  said  :
"  I  obey  my  Queen.  But  I  must  be  aided  in  so
difficult  a  task.     How  shall  I  tempt  them  ?  "

At  these  words  she  flung  out  her  arms,  open-
ing and  shutting  her  hands  with  a  strange  ges-
ture, which  I  could  not  understand.  Her  eyes
gleamed  like  hot  coals,  and  then  grew  cold  and
dull.

"  I  will  direct  you,"  she  answered.  "  Be
faithful  to  my  orders  and  you  need  not  fear.
Only  obey  me  and  you  shall  succeed.  You
have  every  element  within  this  temple.  There
are  ten  priests  ready  to  our  hand.  They  are
full  of  hunger.  I  will  satisfy  them.  You  I  will
satisfy  when  your  courage  and  steadfastness
are  proved — not  until  then,  for  you  demand
much  more  than  these  others."

"  And  who  shall  be  the  one  to  complete  the
number?"  asked  Agmahd.

94  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

She  turned  her  eyes  again  upon  me.

"  This  child,"  she  answered.  "  He  is  mine
— my  chosen  and  favourite  servant.  I  will
teach  him  :  and  through  him  I  will  teach  you."

CHAPTER  X

"  Tell  Kamen  Baka  that  I  know  his  heart's
desire,  and  that  he  shall  have  it,  but  that  he
must  first  pronounce  the  fatal  words."

Agmahd  bowed  his  head  and  turned  away.
He  silently  left  the  sanctuary.

I  was  again  alone  with  her.  She  approached
me  and  fastened  her  terrible  eyes  on  mine.

While  I  gazed  at  her  she  vanished  from
before  me,  and  in  her  place  was  a  golden  light
which  gradually  shaped  itself  into  a  form  more
beautiful  than  any  I  had  ever  seen.

It  was  a  tree  full  of  foliage  that  hung  soft
like  hair  rather  than  leaves,  and  on  each
branch  was  a  multitude  of  flowers  growing
in  thick  clusters,  and  among  the  flowers
were  a  number  of  birds,  all  golden  and  gay  with
brilliant  colours,  and  they  darted  hither  and
thither  among  the  glowing  blossoms,  till  my
eyes  grew  dazzled,  and  I  cried  aloud:  "  Oh  give
me  one  of  these  little  birds  for  my  own,  that  it

96  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

may  come  to  me  and  nestle  as  it  does  in  those
flowers."

"  You  shall  have  a  hundred  of  them,  and
they  will  so  love  you  they  will  kiss  your  mouth
and  take  food  from  your  lips.  By-and-by  you
shall  have  a  garden  in  which  a  tree  like  this
shall  grow,  and  all  the  birds  of  the  air  will  love
you.  But  first  you  must  do  my  bidding.
Speak  to  Kamen  and  bid  him  enter  the
sanctuary."

"  Enter,"  I  said,  "  the  priest  Kamen  Baka
shall  enter."

He  came  and  stood  within  the  doorway  of
the  inner  cavern.  The  tree  had  vanished,  and
I  saw  before  me  the  dark  figure  with  its  shining
flowing  robes  and  cruel  eyes ;  they  were  fixed
on  the  priest.

"  Tell  him,"  she  said  slowly,  "  that  his
heart's  hunger  shall  be  satisfied.  He  desires
love  ! — he  shall  have  it.  The  priests  of  the
temple  have  turned  cold  faces  towards  him,
and  he  feels  that  their  hearts  are  as  stone.  He
wants  to  see  them  on  their  knees  around  him,
adoring  him,  willing  slaves.  He  shall  have  it ;
for  he  shall  take  upon  him  this  office,  which
until  now   has  been    mine.     He   shall   gratify

THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  97

their  hearts'  lust,  and  in  return  they  will  put
him  alone  upon  a  pedestal  above  all  but  myself.
Is  the  bribe  great  enough  ?  "

She  said  these  words  in  a  tone  of  intense
contempt,  and  I  could  read  in  her  terrible  face
that  she  despised  him  for  the  narrow  limit  of
his  ambition.  But  the  sting  left  the  words  as
I  repeated  them.

Kamen  bowed  his  head,  and  a  strange  glow
of  exultation  came  upon  his  face.

"  It  is,"  he  said.

"  Then  pronounce  the  fatal  words !  "

Kamen  Baka  fell  upon  his  knees  and  flung
his  hands  high  above  his  head.  The  look  in
his  face  changed  to  one  of  agony.

"  From  henceforward,  though  all  men  love
me,  I  love  no  man  !  "

The  dark  figure  swept  towards  him  and
touched  his  head  with  her  hand.  "  You  are
mine,'*  she  said,  aud  turned  away,  a  smile  that
was  dark  and  cold  like  a  northern  frost  upon
her  face.  She  gave  me  the  idea  of  a  teacher
and  a  guide  with  Kamen ;  to  Agmahd  she  had
rather  spoken  as  a  queen  might  to  her  chief
favourite,  one  whom  she  values  and  fears  at
once  ;  one  who  has  strength.

7

98  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  Now,  child,  there  is  work  to  do,"  she  said,
approaching  me.  "  This  book  has  written  in
it  the  hearts  of  the  priests  who  shall  be  my
servants.  Thou  art  weary  and  must  rest,  for
I  will  not  that  they  injure  thee.  Thou  must
grow  to  be  a  strong  man  worthy  of  my  favour.
But  carry  the  book  with  thee  in  thy  arms ;  and
as  soon  as  thou  shalt  wake  in  the  early  morn
Kamen  shall  come  to  thee,  and  thou  shalt  read
to  him  the  first  page  of  this  volume.  When  he
has  succeeded  in  accomplishing  the  first  task,
then  he  shall  again  come  to  thee  at  early
morn,  and  thou  shalt  read  to  him  the  second;
and  in  this  way  the  book  will  be  finished.  Tell
him  this  ;  and  bid  him  not  despair  at  any  time,
because  of  difficulties.  With  each  difficulty
surmounted  his  power  will  increase,  and  when
all  is  done  he  will  stand  supreme."

I  repeated  these  words  to  Kamen.  He
was  standing  now  at  the  doorway,  his  hands
clasped  in  front  of  him,  and  his  head  droop-
ed low,  so  that  I  could  not  see  his  face.  But
as  I  ceased,  he  raised  his  head,  and  said :  "  I
obey."

His  face  wore  still  the  strange  gleam  which
I  had  seen  on  it  before.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  99

"  Bid  him  go,"  she  said,  "  and  he  is  to  send
Agmahd  hither."

When  I  repeated  this,  he  quietly  withdrew  ;
and  I  could  see  by  his  movements  that  the
place  to  his  eyes  was  all  darkness.

A  moment  later,  and  Agmahd  stood  in  the
doorway.

She  approached  him  and  laid  her  hand  upon
his  forehead.  Immediately  I  saw  a  crown
there  ;  and  Agmahd  smiled.

"  It  shall  be  yours,"  she  said.  "  Say  this
to  Agmahd  ;  it  is  the  greatest  crown  but  one
upon  the  earth  ;  and  that  greater  one  he  would
not  wear.  Now  bid  him  carry  thee  in  his  arms
and  lay  thee  on  thy  couch.  But  thou  clasp
tight  the  book."

While  I  was  repeating  her  words,  she  came  to
me  and  touched  my  forehead.  A  deep  delicious
languor  came  upon  me,  and  I  thought  the  words
faded  on  my  lips.  But  I  could  not  say  them
again  ;    all  had  vanished.     I  was  asleep.

CHAPTER  XI

When  I  awoke  it  was  broad  daylight ;  and  I
felt  that  I  had  slept  a  long,  deep  sleep.  My
room  was  like  a  garden,  it  was  so  full  of  flowers.
My  eyes  wandered  around  them  in  pleasure,  but
presently  lighted  on  an  object  which  kept  them
fixed.  It  was  a  kneeling  figure  in  the  midst  of
the  room  ;  a  priest  whose  head  was  bowed  low ;
but  I  knew  it  was  Kamen  Baka.  I  moved,  and
at  the  slight  sound  I  made,  he  raised  his  head
and  looked  towards  me.  In  moving  I  found
that  the  book  lay  beside  me,  open.  My  eyes
became  fastened  to  the  page.  I  saw  words  that
shone,  and  unconsciously  I  read  them  aloud.  I
ceased  at  last,  because  no  more  was  writ  in
plain  language,  but  all  was  hieroglyphics.

Kamen  Baka  started  to  his  feet.  I  looked  at
him,  and  saw  his  face  -was  all  alight  with  what
seemed  like  wild  exultation.

"  He  shall  kiss  my  feet  to-day,"  he  cried  out.
Then  observing  my  wondering  gaze,  he  said  :
"  Have  you  read  all  ?  "

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  101

tt

All  that    I  can  understand,"  I  answered.

The  rest  is  in  strange  characters  that  I  do
not  know."

He  turned  instantly  and  left  my  chamber.
I  looked  back  at  the  page  of  the  book  which
I  had  read,  to  see  what  were  the  words  which
had  so  strangely  excited  him.  They  were  now
no  longer  intelligible  to  me — they  too  were
writ  in  hieroglyphics — and  I  gazed  at  them  in
despair,  for  now  I  found  I  could  remember  no
word  of  what  I  had  read.  I  grew  weary  with
puzzling  over  this  strange  thing,  and  at  last
I  fell  asleep  again,  my  head  upon  the  open
pages  of  the  mystic  book.  I  did  not  rouse
from  the  deep  dreamless  sleep  in  which  I  was,
until  a  sound  startled  me.  Two  young  priests
were  in  ray  room  ;  they  carried  cakes  and  milk,
and  fell  upon  their  knees  to  offer  me  the  food.
I  was  afraid,  or  I  should  have  laughed  to  see
them  thus  kneeling  to  me,  a  boy  of  the  country.
When  I  had  eaten,  they  left  me,  but  I  was  not
long  alone.  The  curtain  lifted,  and  at  the
sight  of  one  who  entered,  I  sprang  to  my  feet
and  laughed  with  pleasure.  It  was  Seboua,  the
gardener.

"  How  is  it  you  have  come  to  me?"  I  asked.
"  I  thought  indeed  I  was  never  to  see  you  again."

102  THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  Agmahd  sent  me  here,"  he  said.

"  Agmahd  I "  I  cried  in  amazement.  I
approached  him  and  pressed  his  arm  between
my  hands.

"  Oh  yes,  I  am  real,"  he  answered.  "  They
cannot  make  a  phantom  of  me.  Do  not  doubt
when  you  see  me  it  is  I  myself."

He  spoke  angrily  and  roughly,  and  for  a
moment  I  was  afraid,  but  not  for  long.  The
strange  smile  came  on  his  ugly  face.

"You  are  to  come  with  me  into  the
garden,"  he  said,  and  held  out  his  dark
large  hand.  I  put  mine  in  it,  and  together
we  left  my  room  and  went  quickly  away  through
the  large  empty  chambers  and  long  passages  of
the  temple  till  we  reached  that  narrow  iron  gate-
way through  which  I  had  first  seen  Seboua's
face.  As  then,  so  now,  the  garden  shone  be-
yond, a  vision  of  greenness  and  light  and  colour.

"  Oh  !  I  am  glad  to  come  back  here,"  I  said.

"  You  came  first  to  work ;  you  were  to  be
the  drudge  for  me,"  said  Seboua,  gruffly.  "  Now
all's  changed.  You  are  to  play,  not  work,  and
I  am  to  treat  you  like  a  little  prince.  Well !
have  they  spoiled  thee  yet,  I  wonder,  child?
Would'st  like  to  bathe? "

THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  103

"  But  where,"  I  said,  "  in  what  waters  ?  I
would  love  to  plunge  in  and  swim  in  some
water  that  was  cool  and  deep."

"  Thou  canst  swim  ?  and  thou  lovest  the
water  ?  Well,  come  with  me  and  I  will  show
thee  deep  water  that  will  be  cool  indeed.  Come
thou  with  me  !  "

He  walked  on,  and  I  had  to  hurry  to  keep
pace  with  him.  He  muttered  to  himself  as  he
went,  but  I  could  not  understand  his  words.
Indeed,  I  did  not  listen,  for  I  was  thinking  of
how  glorious  the  plunge  into  cool  water  would
be  on  this  warm  languid  morning.

We  came  to  a  place  where  there  was  a  wide,
deep  pool,  into  which  water  came  dropping,
dropping,  in  a  quick  swift  shower  from  some
place  above.

"  There  is  water  for  thee,"  said  Seboua,  "  and
no  flowers  are  there  for  thee  to  hurt."

I  stood  on  the  brink  in  the  warm  sunlight
and  flung  my  white  robe  from  me.  Then,  with
one  instant  of  pause  to  look  around  and  think
how  sweet  the  sun  was,  I  plunged  into  the
water.  Ah  !  indeed,  it  was  cold  !  My  breath
was  almost  gone  with  the  sudden  chill,  but  I
struck  out  and  began  to  swim,  and  soon  began

104  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

to  glory  in  the  sense  of  keen  refreshment.  I
felt  strong  and  eager,  here  in  the  sweet  fresh
waters.  No  longer  languid  as  amid  the  frag-
rant odours  of  the  temple,  or  the  rich  scents  of
the  flowers  in  my  chamber.  I  was  so  happy,
I  wanted  to  stay  a  long  while  here  in  the  water
and  the  sun  ;  so  presently  I  ceased  swimming
and  let  myself  float  idly,  and  closed  my  eyes
that  the  sunlight  should  not  blind  me.

Suddenly  I  felt  something  so  strange,  I  grew
breathless,  yet  it  was  so  gentle  it  did  not  terrify
me.  It  was  a  kiss  upon  my  mouth.  I  opened
my  eyes.  There,  beside  me,  lying  upon  the
surface  of  the  water,  was  my  own  Queen,  the
Lily  Queen,  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus.  I  uttered
a  cry  of  joy.  Immediately  all  pleasure  which
I  had  had  since  last  I  saw  her,  vanished  from
my  mind.  She  was  my  Queen,  my  beautiful
friend ;  when  she  was  there  I  had  none  other
in  all  the  world.

"  Child,  thou  art  come  to  me  again,"  she  said,
"  but  soon  thou  wilt  leave  me  ;  and  how  can  I
aid  thee  if  thou  forgettest  me  utterly  ?  '

I  made  no  answer,  for  I  was  ashamed.  I
could  harldly  believe  that  I  had  indeed  forgot-
ten, and  yet  I  knew  that  it  was  true.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  105

"  The  waters  thou  liest  in  now,"  she  said,
"  come  from  that  place  where  my  flowers,  the
lotus  blossoms,  dwell  in  their  glory.  Thou
wouldst  die  wert  thou  to  lie  thus  in  the  water
where  they  dwell.  But  this  that  drops  from
them  has  but  little  of  their  life  in  it,  and  has
given  up  its  own  to  them.  When  thou  canst
plunge  into  the  water  of  the  lotus  tank,  then
thou  wilt  be  strong  as  the  eagle  and  eager  as
the  young  life  of  the  newborn.  My  child,  be
thou  strong ;  listen  not  to  the  flattery  which
confuses  thee ;  listen  only  to  the  truth !  Keep
in  the  sunlight,  dear  child,  and  let  not  the
phantoms  delude  thee  ;  for  there  is  the  life  of
lives  awaiting  thee,  the  pure  flower  of  know-
ledge and  love  is  ready  for  thee  to  pluck.
Wouldst  thou  be  a  tool,  a  mere  instrument  in
the  hands  of  those  who  desire  only  for  them-
selves ?  No !  acquire  knowledge  and  grow
strong  !  Then  shalt  thou  be  a  giver  of  sunshine
to  the  world.  Come,  my  child,  give  me  thine
hand ;  rise  in  confidence,  for  this  water  will
support  thee  ;  rise  and  kneel  upon  it  and  drink
of  the  sunshine ;  rise  and  kneel  upon  it,  and
address  thyself  to  the  light  of  all  life,  that  it
may  illumine  thee."

106  THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

I  rose,  holding  her  hand.  I  knelt  beside  her.
I  rose  again,  and  with  her  stood  upon  the  water
— and  then  I  knew  no  more.

"  Wouldst  thou  be  a  tool,  a  mere  instrument
in  the  hands  of  those  who  desire  only  for  them-
selves ?  No !  acquire  knowledge  and  grow
strong ;  then  shalt  thou  be  a  giver  of  sunshine
to  the  world."

These    words   seemed  whispered  in   my   ear

as   I  awoke ;  I   repeated  them  over  and  over,

and    remembered  every  separate  word  rightly.

But  they  were  vague  and  unmeaning  to  me  ;    I

had    fancied    I   understood    them    when  first  I

heard  them,  but  now  thev  sounded  to  me  as

the  good  words   of  the  preacher  sound  to  the

dancers  at  the  festivals.

*****

I  was  a  child  when  these  words  were  breathed
into  my  ear — a  lad,  helpless  because  ignorant
and  full  of  youth.  Through  the  years  of  my
growth,  the  cry  to  my  soul  from  the  Lily  Queen
rang  dimly  and  without  meaning  in  the  obscure
regions  of  my  brain.  They  were  to  me  as  the
song  of  the  priest  to  the  babe  that  hears  but
its  music.  Yet  I  never  forgot  them.  My  life  was
given   up  to  the  men  who  held  me  in  bondage,

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  107

in    spirit  and  in    body  ;    fetters  lay  heavy  on
my    unawakened  soul.     While  my  body  yielded
dully  to  the  guidance  of  its   masters,  I  was  a
slave,  yet  knew   that  freedom  existed  beneath
the  free  sky !  But,  though  I  obeyed  blindly,  and
gave   all    my  strength  and  powers  to  the  base
uses  of  the  desecrated  temple,  in  my  heart  I
held    fast  the  memory  of  the  beautiful  queen,
and   in    my    mind  her  words  were   written  in
fire   that   would    not   die.     Yet  as  I  grew  to
man's   stature,    my   soul   sickened   within   me.
These  words,  which  lived  like  a  star  in  my  soul,
cast  a  strange  light  upon  my  wretched  life.  And
as  my  mind  developed  I  recognised  this,  and  a
heavy  weariness,    as  of   death  or  despair,  shut
away   from    me   all   the    beauty  of  the  world.
From    a    gay    child,   a   happy  creature  of  sun-
shine, I  grew   into  a   sad   youth,    whose  eyes
were  large  and  heavy  with  tears,  and  whose  sick
heart  held  hidden    within  it  many  secrets,  but
half   understood,    of  shame  and  sin  and  sorrow.
Sometimes,  when  I  wandered  through  the  garden
I  gazed  into  the  still  water  of  the  lily  tank  and
prayed  to   see  again  the  vision.     But^ianreo
not.     I   had  lost  the  innocence  of   childhood,
and   had    not  yet  won  the  strength  of  the  man.

BOOK    II

CHAPTER  I

I  was  in  the  garden  of  the  temple,  lying  beneath
a  wide  tree  that  cast  deep  shade  upon  the  grass.
I  had  been  very  weary,  for  all  the  night  before
I  had  been  in  the  sanctuary,  speaking  the
messages  of  the  dark  spirit  to  her  priests.  I
slept  a  little  in  the  warm  air  and  awoke  strange-
ly full  of  sadness.  I  felt  that  my  youth  had
gone,  yet  I  had  never  enjoyed  its  fire.

On  each  side  of  me  was  a  young  priest.  One
was  fanning  me  with  a  broad  leaf  that  he  must
have  plucked  from  the  tree  above.  The  other,
leaning  on  one  hand  upon  the  grass,  regarded
me  earnestly.  His  eyes  were  large  and  dark
and  pleasant,  like  the  eyes  of  a  kindly  animal.
I  had  often  admired  his  beauty,  and  I  was  glad
to  see  him  at  my  side.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  109

"You  have  been  too  much  within  doors.  See
now,"  he  said,  when  he  saw  my  eyes  open  weari-
ly, and  gaze  into  his  face.  "  They  shall  not  kill
thee  with  the  ceremonies  of  the  temple,  even  if
thou  art  the  only  one  that  can  give  them  life.
Wilt  come  into  the  town  with  us,  and  taste
something  different  from  the  air  of  the  temple  ?  "

"  But  we  cannot !  "  I  said.

"  Cannot,"  said  Malen  contemptuously.  "Do
you  suppose  we  are  prisoners  here  ?  "

"But  even  if  we  can  find  a  way  out,  the  people
will  know  us.  The  priests  do  not  go  among  the
people."

"  The  people  will  not  know  us,"  said  Malen
with  a  merry  laugh.  "AgmaM  has  given  us
liberty.  Agmahd  has  given  us  power.  Come,
if  thou  wilt — we  are  going."

The  two  rose  and  held  out  their  hands  to  help
me  to  rise  ;  but  I  was  no  longer  weak.  I  sprang
to  my  feet,  and  arranged  my  white  garment.
"  Are  we  to  wear  these  robes  ?  "  I  asked.

"  Yes,  yes,  but  none  will  know  us.  We  shall
appear  as  beggars,  or  as  princes  ;  what  we  will ;
Agmahd  has  given  us  power.     Come  ! '

I  was  as  delighted  as  they  at  this  prospect  of
adventure.      We  ran  across  the  garden  till  we

110  THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

came  to  a  narrow  gate  in  the  wall.  Malen
touched  it,  and  easily  pushed  it  open.  "We  were
outside  the  temple.

My  companions,  laughing  and  talking  as  we
went,  ran  across  the  plain  to  the  city.  I  ran
too,  and  listened  ;  but  I  understood  little  of  what
they  said.  Evidently  they  knew  the  city,  which
to  me  was  only  a  name.  True,  I  had  walked
through  it  with  my  mother,  a  barefoot  country
lad.  But  now,  it  seemed,  I  was  to  enter  houses,
and  mix  with  great  and  rich  people.  I  felt
afraid  at  the  thought.

We  hurried  on  until  we  entered  one  of  the
busiest  streets.  It  was  crowded  with  gay  people
in  beautiful  dresses,  and  all  the  shops  seemed
to  sell  only  jewelry.  Then  we  turned  through
a  great  gateway,  into  a  courtyard,  and  from  that
passed  into  a  marble  hall  where  a  great  fountain
played,  and  large  flowering  shrubs  threw  out  a
strong  scent.

A  wide  marble  stairway  went  out  of  this  hall,
and  we  immediately  commenced  to  climb  it.
And  when  we  reached  the  top,  Malen  opened  a
door,  and  we  entered  a  room  all  hung  with
golden  tapestry,  and  where  were  a  number  of
people    whose   dresses  and  jewels   dazzled  me.

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  111

They  were  seated  round  a  table,  drinking  wine
and  eating  sweetmeats.  The  air  was  full  of  talk
and  laughter,  and  heavy  with  perfume.  Three
very  lovely  women  rose  and  welcomed  us,  each
taking  one  of  us  by  the  hand,  and  giving  us  a
place  beside  her.  In  a  moment  we  seemed  to
be  of  the  party,  and  to  mingle  our  laughter  with
theirs,  as  though  we  had  sat  out  all  the  feast.  I
know  not  whether  it  was  the  scented  wine  I
drank  or  the  magic  touch  of  the  beautiful  hand
that  often  touched  mine,  as  it  lay  upon  the
embroidered  table-cover — but  my  head  grew
light  and  strange,  and  I  talked  of  things  I  did
not  know  anything  about  till  now,  and  laughed  at
sayings  that  an  hour  before  would  have  seemed
dull  to  me,  because  of  my  want  of  under-
standing.

She  who  sat  next  me  pressed  her  hand  in
mine.  I  turned  to  look  at  her  ;  she  was  leaning
towards  me  ;  her  face  was  brilliant  with  youth
and  beauty.  Her  rich  dress  had  made  me  feel
a  child  beside  her,  but  nowr  I  saw  that  she  was
young,  younger  than  myself,  yet  she  was  of  such
rich  form  and  radiant  loveliness  that  though  a
child  in  years  she  was  a  woman  in  charm.  As
I  gazed  into  her  tender  eyes,  it  seemed  to  me

112  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

that  I  knew  her  well,  that  her  charm  was  familiar,
and  the  stronger  for  its  familiarity.  She  spoke
many  words  that  at  first  I  hardly  understood,
indeed  scarcely  heard.  But  gradually,  as  I
listened,  I  grew  to  understand.  She  told  me  of
her  longing  for  me  in  my  absence,  of  her  love
for  me,  and  of  her  weariness  of  all  others  on  the
earth.  "  The  room  seemed  dark  and  silent  till
you  came,"  she  said.  "  The  banquet  had  no
mirth  in  it.  The  others  laughed,  but  their
laughter  sounded  as  sobs  in  my  ears — the  sobs
of  those  in  torment.  Is  it  for  me,  who  am  so
young  and  strong  and  full  of  love,  to  be  so  sad  ?
No — no,  it  is  not  for  me.  Ah,  lover,  husband,
leave  me  not  again  alone.  Stay  by  my  side,  and
my  passion  will  make  thee  strong  to  fulfil  thy
destiny."

I  rose  from  my  seat  suddenly,  holding  her
hand  clasped  tight  in  mine.

"  It  is  true,"  I  cried  in  a  loud  voice.  "  I  have
done  ill  to  neglect  that  which  is  the  glory  of
life.  I  confess  it,  that  thy  beauty,  which  indeed
is  mine,  had  been  blotted  from  my  mind.  But
now  I  see  thee  with  mine  eyes,  I  wonder  I  could
ever  have  seen  beauty  in  aught  else  in  heaven
or  earth."

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  113

Suddenly,  while  I  spoke,  there  was  a  move-
ment among  the  startled  guests.  With  wonderful
rapidity,  they  left  the  table  and  were  at  once  gone
from  the  room.  Only  the  two  young  priests
remained.  Their  eyes  were  fixed  on  me.  They
seemed  grave,  serious,  disturbed.  They  rose
slowly.  "  You  will  not  return  to  the  temple  ?  "
said  Malen.  My  answer  was  a  gesture  of
impatience.

"  Do  you  forget,"  he  demanded,  "  that  we
were  but  to  look  at  the  follies  of  the  city,  that
we  might  know  of  what  clay  men  are  made  ?
You  know  that  the  initiated  priests  must  retain
their  purity.  What  of  you,  the  seer  of  the
temple  ?  Even  I,  who  am  but  a  novice,  dare
not  yield  to  the  fierce  longing  for  liberty  that
fills  my  soul.  Ah,  to  be  free  !  to  be  a  child  of
the  city,  to  know  the  meaning  of  life  !  But  I
dare  not.  Else  am  I  less  than  nothing,  I  should
have  no  place  in  the  temple,  no  place  in  the
world.  How  then  will  it  be  with  thee,  the  seer?
How   are  we  to  answer  to  Agmahd  for  thee  ?  "

I  made  uo  answer.  But  she  who  sat  beside
me  rose  and  advanced  towards  him.  She  took
a  jewel  from  her  neck,  and  put  it  in  his  hand.

"  Give  him  this,"  she  said,  "  and  he  will  ask

no  more."

4

CHAPTER  II

From  this  hour  there  is  a  time  of  which  I  cannot
give  so  careful  an  account  as  of  the  other  days
of  my   life.     It  is   blurred  and  veiled   by  the
similarity    of  the    emotions   through    which    I
passed.      Indeed,    they   merged   together    and
became   one  and  the  same.     I  drank  deep  of
pleasure   each   day  ;  each  hour  it  seemed  to  me
that  my  beautiful  companion  grew  more  beauti-
ful,  so  that   I    gazed  upon  her  face  in  wonder.
She    led  me  through  the  rooms  of  our  palace,
and   I  could   not  stay   to  see  their  splendour,
because  always  beyond  were  chambers  yet  more
splendid.     With  her   I  wandered   through  the
gardens,  where  the  fragrant  flowers  grew  in  a
profusion  such  as  I  had  never  seen  in  any  other
place.     Beyond   the  gardens  were  meadows  ;  in
the  short,  sweet  grass  grew  many  wild  flowers,
and    lilies    blossomed]  in  the  stream  that    ran
through   the    fields.      Here   the   city    maidens
came    at  evening,  some  to  fetch  water,  some  to
bathe  in  the  stream  and  sit  afterwards  upon  its

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE     WHITE    LOTUS  115

bank,  and  talk  and  laugh  and  sing  until  the
night  was  half-spent.  Their  gleaming  forms
and  sweet  voices  made  the  evenings  doubly
beautiful,  and  I  would  linger  among  them  under
the  stars,  and  would  often  have  stayed  until  the
dawn,  the  playmate  of  them  all,  but  only  whis-
pering words  of  love  to  those  who  were  most
beautiful.  And  then,  as  they,  singing  in  low
voices,  left  me,  she,  my  own  most  beautiful,
went  with  me  back  to  the  palace,  wherein  we
lived  amid  the  city,  yet  apart  from  it.  For
we  were  happy  as  were  none  else  within  that
city.

I  cannot  tell  how  long  passed  thus.  Only  I
know  that  one  day  I  lay  within  my  own  cham-
ber, and  she,  the  most  beautiful,  sang  sweet  low
songs  while  her  head  lay  upon  my  arm,  when
in  a  moment  the  song  was  hushed  upon  her
lips  and  she  lay  pale  and  still.  I  heard,  in  the
silence,  a  slow,  soft  footfall  on  the  stairs.  The
door  was  opened,  and  Agmahd  the  high  priest
stood  motionless  within  it.

He  gazed  at  me  one  moment  with  his  terrible
eyes,  that  were  cold  as  though  they  were  jewels ;
there  was  a  smile  upon  his  face,  but  that  smile
struck  me  with  fear,  and  I  trembled.

116  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  Come,"  he  said.

I  arose  unhesitatingly.  I  knew  that  I  must
obey.  I  looked  not  back  until  I  heard  a  swift
movement  and  a  sob  ;  then  I  turned.  But  she,
the  most  beautiful,  was  gone.  Had  she  fled
from  before  this  unexpected  appearance  in  our
chamber  ?  I  could  not  stay  to  see,  or  go  to
comfort  her.  I  knew  that  1  must  follow
Agmahd ;  I  felt,  as  I  had  never  felt  before,
that  he  was  my  master.  As  I  came  to  the
doorway,  I  saw  across  the  threshold  a  snake
that  reared  its  head  at  my  approach.  I  sprang
back  with  a  cry  of  horror.

Agmahd  smiled.  "  Do  not  fear,"  he  said.
"  This  is  a  favourite  of  thy  Queen,  and  will
do  her  chosen  servant  no  harm.     Come  !  "

At  his  command  I  felt  compelled  to  follow ;
I  dared  not  disobey.  I  passed  the  snake  with
averted  eyes,  and  as  I  reached  the  stairway  I
heard  its  hiss  of  anger.

Agmahd  went  through  the  gardens  to
the  meadows  beyond.  It  was  evening,  and
already  the  stars  were  gleaming  in  the  sky  and
the  eyes  of  the  maidens  shone  as  they  sat  in
groups  by  the  side  of  the  stream.  But  they
did  not  sing  as  was  their  habit.     In  the  midst

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  117

of  the  stream  was  a  boat,  and  in  it  two  oarsmen.
I  recognised  the  young  priests  who  had  come
with  me  to  the  city.  Their  eyes  were  down-
cast, and  they  did  not  raise  them  even  at  my
approach.  I  understood  as  I  passed  by  the
girls  that  they  had  recognised  old  acquaintances
and  merry  companions  in  those  two  young
priests,  and  were  amazed  and  full  of  wonder  to
see  them  in  this  dress,  and  of  such  changed
demeanour.

Agmahd  entered  the  boat ;  I  followed  him ;
and  then  we  rowed  silently  towards  the  temple.

I  had  never  seen  the  entrance  to  the
temple  from  the  water.  I  had  heard,  when  I
was  in  the  city  with  my  mother,  that  this
entrance  used  to  be  often  used,  but  now  it  was
reserved  only  for  festivals,  so  that  I  was  much
amazed  to  enter  by  this  way.  1  was  more
amazed  to  find  all  the  sacred  precinct  full  of
boats  decorated  with  flowers  and  occupied  by
white-robed  priests  who  sat  with  their  eyes
downcast.  But  I  soon  saw  that  to-day  was  a
festival.

This  temple  !  It  seemed  a  hundred  years  since
I  had  dwelled  within  it.  Agmahd  himself  looked
strange    and   unfamiliar  to  me.     Was  I  indeed

118  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

grown  much  older  ?  I  could  not  tell,  for  I  found
no  mirror  in  which  to  see  my  face,  and  I  found
no  friend  to  ask.  Only  this  I  knew,  that  com-
pared with  the  youth  who  ran  from  the  garden
of  the  temple,  eager  for  adventure,  I  was  now
a  man.  And  I  knew  my  manhood  had  come
to  me  not  in  glory,  but  in  shame.  I  was  a
slave.  A  deep  gloom  settled  on  my  soul  as
we  entered  the  temple.  The  boat  was  drawn
up  to  some  wide  white  marble  steps,  which
were  within  the  walls  of  the  temple  and  beneath
its  roof.  I  had  never  known  the  great  river
was  so  near.  When  we  reached  the  top  of  the
steps,  Agmahd  opened  a  door,  and  lo  !  we  were
immediately  at  the  entrance  of  the  holy  of
holies.  Only  a  few  faint  torches,  held  by  silent
priests,  lit  the  great  corridor.  It  was  but  dusk
outside,  on  the  river  ;  here  it  was  like  deep
night.  At  a  sign  from  Agmahd  the  torches
were  extinguished.  But  all  light  was  not  gone  !
for  round  the  door  of  the  sanctuary  gleamed
that  strange  light  which  once  had  so  terrified
me.  It  did  not  terrify  me  now.  I  knew  what
I  had  to  do ;  and,  unhesitatingly  and  without
fear,  I  did  it.  I  advanced,  opened  the  door,
and  entered.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  119

Within  stood  the  dark  figure,  whose  robes
gleamed  and  whose  eyes  were  cold  and  terrible.
She  smiled  and  put  out  her  hand  and  laid  it
upon  mine.  I  shuddered  at  the  touch,  it  was
so  cold.

"Tell  Agmahd,"  she  said,  "that  I  am
coming.  That  I  will  be  beside  you  in  the
boat.  That  he  is  to  stand  in  the  midst  with
us,  and  my  other  servants  to  surround  us.  And
that  then,  if  all  is  done  as  I  order,  I  will  work
a  wonder  before  all  the  priests  and  before  the
people.  And  this  I  will  do  because  I  am  well
pleased  with  my  servants,  and  because  I  desire
them  to  have  power  and  wealth."

I  said  her  words  again ;  and  when  I  had
ceased  Agmahd's  voice  came  out  of  the
darkness.

"  The  Queen  is  welcomed  !  The  Queen  shall
be  obeyed."

A  moment  later  and  the  torches  were  again
lit.  I  saw  that  they  were  ten  in  number,
carried  by  ten  priests,  who  all  wore  white
robes  deeply  embroidered  in  gold,  as  was  that
of  Agmahd.  Among  them  was  Kamen  Baka.
His  face  looked  strange  to  me.  It  was  as  the
face  of  an  ecstatic.

120  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

Agmahd  opened  the  door  which  admitted
us  to  the  river  steps.  A  different  boat  was
moored  here  now.  It  was  large,  with  a  wide
deck  surrounded  by  vases,  in  which  burned
something  strongly  fragrant.  Within  these
vases  a  circle  was  drawn  in  crimson,  and
mingled  with  that,  a  figure  which  I  could  not
understand.  At  the  sides  of  the  boat,  below
this  raised  deck,  sat  the  rowers — white-robed
priests.  All  were  still  and  mute,  waiting  with
downcast  eyes.  The  boat  was  hung  with  thick
garlands  of  flowers,  massed  together  till  they
seemed  like  great  ropes.  A  lamp  was  burning
at  each  end.

We  entered  the  boat.  Agmahd  went  first
and  stood  in  the  midst  of  the  circle.  I  took
my  place  at  his  side.  Between  us,  clearly
visible  to  my  eyes,  was  the  figure.  She' shed
a  light  like  that  which  illumined  the  sanctuary,
only  less  brilliant.  But  I  saw  that  none  per-
ceived her  presence  but  myself.

The  ten  priests  entered  the  boat  also,  and
placed  themselves  within  the  crimson  circle,
thus  completely  enclosing  us.  Then  the  boat
slowly  swung  from  the  steps,  I  saw  that  a
number  of  boats  were  before  and  behind  us,  all

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  121

hung  with  flowers  and  lamps,  all  filled  with
white-robed  priests.  Silently  the  procession
shot  out  upon  the  bosom  of  the  sacred  river
and  advanced  towards  the  city.

When  we  were  at  last  outside  the  temple,  I
heard  a  deep  murmur  rise  and  fill  the  air.  It
was  so  long  and  deep,  it  made  me  tremble
with  wonder,  but  it  disturbed  none  else,  and
soon  I  saw  its  meaning.  As  my  eyes  grew
accustomed  to  the  starlight,  I  saw  that  all  the
fields  on  each  side  of  the  river  were  full  of  a
surging,  swaying  mass  of  forms.  A  vast  multi-
tude of  people  crowded  at  the  water's  edge,
and  filled  the  fields  as  far  as  I  could  see.  This
was  a  great  festival,  and  I  had  not  known  it.
I  wondered  a  while  ;  but  soon  I  remembered
that  I  had,  indeed,  heard  it  spoken  of,  but  I
had  been  so  saturated  with  the  immediate
pleasures  about  me  that  I  had  not  heeded.
Perhaps,  had  I  remained  in  the  city  till  now,  I
should  have  mingled  in  the  crowd  ;  but  now
I  was  isolated  from  the  crowd,  and,  as  it
seemed  to  me,  from  all  that  was  human.  I
stood  silent  and  immovable  as  Agmahd  himself.
Yet,  my  soul  was  torn  with  a  despair  I  could
not  understand,  and  crushed  by  a  horror  of  the
unknown  which  was  yet  to  come.

CHAPTER  III

As  the  boats  glided  down  the  river,  suddenly
the  deep  silence  was  broken  by  a  burst  of  song.
It  came  from  the  priests  who  rowed.  From
every  boat  the  hymn  rushed  forth  in  a  volume
of  sound,  and  I  could  see  by  the  great  move-
ment, visible  even  in  the  dimness,  that  the  people
fell  upon  their  knees.  But  they  were  silent ;
they  adored  and  listened  while  the  priests'  voices
rang  out  upon  the  air.

When  the  song  ceased,  there  was  a  silence
that  was  not  broken  for  some  minutes.  The
people  remained  motionless,  kneeling,  silent.
But  on  a  sudden  they  flung  themselves
prostrate  upon  the  ground,  and  I  could  hear
the  sigh,  the  long  breath  of  awe  that  came
from  the  multitude :  for  the  priests  had
burst  out  anew,  with  a  cry  of  melodious  triumph,
and  the  words  they  uttered  in  so  loud  and
strong  a  voice  were  these —

"  The  goddess  is  with  us  !  She  is  in  our
midst !  Fall  down,  O  people,  and  worship  !  "

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  123

At  this  moment  the  figure  which  stood
between  me  and  the  priest  Agmahd  turned
and  smiled  into  my  face.

"  Now  my  chosen  servant,"  she  said,  "  I
must  ask  your  service.  I  have  paid  thee  before-
hand that  thou  might'st  not  hesitate.  But  do
not  fear.  Thou  shalt  be  paid  again  and  that
doubly.  Give  me  thy  hands.  Place  thy  lips
upon  my  forehead,  and  fear  not,  move  not,  utter
no  cry,  whatsoever  faintness,  whatsoever  tremor
come  upon  thee.  Thy  life  will  become  mine.
I  shall  draw  it  from  thee  ;  but  I  shall  return
it.     Is  it  not  precious  ?  Do  not  fear."

I  obeyed  her  without  hesitation,  yet  with
dread  unimaginable.  But  I  could  not  resist
her  will.  I  knew  myself  her  slave.  Her  cold
hands  clasped  mine,  and  instantly  it  seemed
that  they  were  no  longer  soft,  but  had  become
rivets  of  steel,  which  held  me  fast  and  were
inexorable.  Impelled  by  my  sense  of  helpless-
ness, I  dared  the  glitter  of  those  terrible  eyes,
and  drew  close  to  her.  I  longed  for  death  to
release  me,  but  I  could  hope  for  no  other  help.
I  placed  my  lips  upon  her  forehead.  The
vapour  from  the  lamps  and  vessels  had  filled  my
brain  with  a  strange  sleepiness,  and  I  was  dull

124  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

and  heavy.  But  now,  as  my  lips  touched
her  forehead,  which  scorched  them,  I  knew  not
whether  with  cold  or  heat,  a  frenzied  sense  of
joy,  of  lightness,  of  almost  insane  delight  filled
me.  I  knew  myself  no  longer ;  I  was  swayed
and  dominated  by  a  surging  sea  of  emotions
which  were  not  my  own.  They  swept  through
me,  and  their  rush  appeared  to  wash  away  my
individuality  utterly,  and,  as  it  then  seemed,
for  ever.  Yet  I  was  not  unconscious  ;  my
consciousness  grew  momently  more  intense  and
awake.  Then,  in  one  strange  second,  I  forgot
the  lost  individuality — I  knew  that  I  was  living
in  the  brain,  in  the  heart,  in  the  essence  of
that  being:  who  had  so  utterly  dominated  me.
A  wild  cry,  instantly  hushed,  rang  out  from  the
people.  They  saw  their  goddess.  And  I,
looking  down,  saw  at  my  feet  the  seemingly
dead  form  of  a  young  priest,  robed  in  white
garments,  gold-embroidered.  I  paused  for  one
instant  in  my  joy  of  power  to  wonder — Was  he
dead  ?

CHAPTER  IV

I  could  see  the  great  multitude  which  was  on
each  side  clearly ;  a  light  fell  upon  them  which
they  did  not  perceive.  It  was  not  the  starlight
by  which  they  saw,  but  a  brilliance  that  came
not  from  the  heavens  but  from  my  eyes.  I  saw
their  hearts — I  saw  not  their  bodies  but  them-
selves. I  recognised  my  servants,  and  my  soul
lifted  itself  as  I  perceived  that  nearly  all  of  this
multitude  were  ready  to  serve  me.  Mine  was  a
worthy  army ;  they  would  obey,  not  from  duty
but  desire.

I  saw  in  each  heart  what  was  its  hunger,  and
I  knew  that  I  could  feed  it.  One  long  moment
I  remained  visible ;  then  I  left  my  chosen
servants.  I  bade  them  draw  near  to  the  shore ;
for  now  that  I  was  no  longer  intent  upon
making  myself  seen  by  these  dull  eyes  of  men,
I  could  speak  to  and  touch  those  whom  I  chose.
The  strong  life  of  the  young  priest  was  enough
to  feed  the  lamp  of  physical  power  for  some
time  if  I  did  not  use  it  too  swiftly.

126  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

I  stepped  upon  the  shore,  and  moved  among
the  people,  speaking  into  the  ear  of  each  the
secret  of  his  heart — more,  I  told  him  how  to
obtain  that  which  he  only  thought  of  silently.
No  man  or  woman  was  without  some  longing
which  shame  would  have  held  them  forever
from  uttering  even  to  a  confessor.  But  I  saw
it,  and  made  it  no  longer  a  thing  of  shame,  and
showed  how  small  an  effort  of  will,  how  slight
a  knowledge  was  needed  for  the  first  step  in
self-gratification.  All  through  the  throng  I
went,  hither  and  thither,  and  as  I  passed  I  left
a  maddened  and  impassioned  crowd  behind  me.
At  length  the  intoxication  which  my  presence
produced  could  no  longer  be  held  in  check.
With  one  voice  the  people  burst  out  into  a  wild
song  that  thrilled  my  blood,  and  made  it  burn
within  me.  Have  I  not  heard  this  song  under
other  skies,  sung  in  the  voices  and  languages
of  all  peoples  ?  Have  I  not  heard  it  from  peoples
who  are  long  since  extinct  and  forgotten  ?
Shall  I  not  hear  it  from  peoples  whose  dwelling-
places  are  not  yet  created  ?  It  is  my  song  !  It
gives  me  life  !  Uttered  silently  in  one  heart,
it  is  the  cry  of  the  unspoken  passion,  the  hidden
madness   of   self.      When    it   comes   from  the

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  127

throat  of  the  multitude,  shame  is  gone  and  con-
cealment at  an  end.  Then  it  is  the  frenzied
utterance  of  the  orgie,  the  outcry  of  the
devotees  of  pleasure.

My  work  was  done.  I  had  lit  a  great  fire
which  raged  on  like  the  fire  in  the  forest.  I
turned  back  to  the  sacred  boat  where  it  awaited
me.  Motionless  they  stood  there,  waiting  my
return,  those  my  chosen  servants,  the  high
^priests  of  the  temple.  Ah,  my  mighty  ones  in
passion  !   Kings  in  lust !  Monarchs  in  desire  !

.And  the  young  priest — was  he  still  there ?
Still  looking  like  one  dead  ?  Yes,  he  lay
motionless,  pallid,  in  the  midst  of  the  circle
formed  by  the  high  priests,  lying  at  the  feet  of
Agmahd,  who  stood  here  alone.

As  this  thought  came  to  me,  I  seemed  sud-
denly to  withdraw  myself  in  some  mysterious
way  from  the  sea  of  passion  in  which  I  had
been  submerged.  I  knew  myself  again — that
I  was  not  the  goddess,  but  had  been  only
absorbed  by  her,  sucked  up  into  her  embracing
personality.  Now  I  was  again  separated  from
her.  But  I  did  not  return  to  that  pale  shape
which  so  lifelessly  lay  upon  the  deck  of  the
sacred  boat.     I  was  in   the  temple ;  I  was  in

128  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

darkness ;  yet  I  knew  that  I  was  in  the  holy  of
holies.

A  light  came  in  the  darkness.  I  looked,  and
lo  !  the  inner  cave  was  full  of  light ;  and  within
it  stood  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus.

I  was  at  the  door  of  the  inner  cave,  close  to
her,  within  the  glance  of  her  eyes.  I  tried  to
escape — I  tried  to  turn — I  could  not.  I  trembled
as  I  had  never  trembled  before,  even  with
horror  or  dread.

For  she  stood  silently,  her  eyes  upon  me.
And  I  saw  that  they  were  full  of  a  great  anger.
And  she  who  had  been  to  me  a  tender  friend,
gentle  as  a  kind  mother,  now  stood  in  her
majesty  before  me,  and  I  knew  that  I  had
angered  a  god  the  most  to  be  dreaded  of  all  that
are  known  to  men.

"  Was  it  for  this,  0  Sensa  !  beloved  of  the
gods !  that  thou  wert  born  ?  Was  it  for  this
that  thine  eyes  were  opened  and  thy  senses
made  clear  to  perceive  ?  Thou  knowest  it  was
not ;  yet  those  seeing  eyes  and  those  swift
senses  have  at  last  served  their  master,  and
shown  thee  who  and  what  it  is  thou  hast  been
serving.  Wilt  thou  serve  her  always  ?  Now
that  thou  art  a  man,  choose !  Art  thou  fallen  so

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  129

low  that  thou  wilt  be  a  slave  forever?  Go5
then  !  I  have  come  to  cleanse  my  sanctuary.  I
will  endure  no  longer.  It  shall  be  silent,  and
the  people  shall  not  know  that  any  gods
exist,  rather  than  that  they  shall  be  lied  to
by  false  lips,  and  tempted  by  the  darkness.
Go !  None  shall  enter  here  again.  I  close
the  door !  The  sanctuary  is  dumb,  and  knows
no  voice.  I  sit  here  alone  and  silent :  vea,
through  the  ages  I  will  dwell  here  without
speech,  and  the  people  shall  say  I  am  dead.
Be  it  so  !  In  the  ages  to  come  my  children  will
rise  again,  and  the  darkness  shall  break.  Go  !
Thou  hast  chosen.  Fall !  Thy  estate  is  lost.
Leave  me  to  my  silence  !  "

She  raised  her  hand  with  a  gesture  that  bade
me  leave  her.  It  was  so  imperative,  so  royal,
that  I  could  not  disobey.  I  turned,  I  drooped
my  head,  I  went  with  sad  steps  to  the  outer
door  of  the  sanctuary.  Yet  I  could  not  open  it ;
I  could  not  pass  out ;  I  could  advance  no  fur-
ther. My  heart  turned  sick  within  me  and  held
me  back.  I  fell  on  my  knees  and  cried  out  in  a
voice  of  agony  :  "  Mother !  Queen  and  Mother ! "

A  moment  passed  in  an  awful  silence ;  I
waited,  I  knew  not  for  what.     My  soul  was

9

130  THE   IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

hungry  and  desperate.  An  awful  memory
came  to  me  in  the  darkness  and  silence.  I  saw
in  the  past  not  only  pleasure,  but  deeds.  I  saw
that  I  had  done  these  blindly,  accepting  the
stupefaction  of  my  soul  as  men  accept  the  dull-
ness of  wine.  And  I  had  done  the  work  given
me  to  do  in  a  stupor,  thinking  not  of  it,  but  of
the  rewards,  of  each  pleasure  that  was  to  come.
I  had  been  the  mouthpiece,  the  oracle  of  her,
that  black  soul,  whom  now  I  had  seen,  and
whom  now  I  knew.  The  past  grew  so  terrible,
So  present,  so  fierce  in  its  denunciation,  that
again  I  cried  out  in  the  darkness :  "  Mother !

Save  me  !  "

A  touch  came  on  my  hand  and  on  my  face.
I  heard  a  voice  in  my  ear  and  in  my  heart :
"  Thou  art  saved.  Be  strong."  And  the  light
came  upon  my  eyes,  but  I  could  not  see,  for  a
rain  of  tears  washed  from  them  the  frightful
visions  they  had  seen.

CHAPTER  V

I  was  no  longer  in  the  sanctuary.  I  felt  the  air
on  my  face.  I  opened  my  eyes  and  saw  the
sky  above  me,  and  the  shining  stars  in  its  depth.
I  was  lying  prostrate,  and  I  felt  strangely
weary.  Yet  I  was  roused  by  the  sound  of  a
thousand  voices,  whose  cries  and  songs  struck
on  my  ears.     What  could  this  be?

I  raised  myself.  I  was  in  the  midst  of  the
circle  of  priests,  of  the  ten  high  priests.
Agmahd  stood  beside  me ;  he  was  watching
me.  My  eyes  fixed  on  his  face  and  I  could  not
look  away.  Pitiless,  heartless,  soulless !  Had  I
feared  him?  This  image,  this  unhuman  being?
I  feared  him  no  longer.  I  looked  round  at  the
priests  who  surrounded  me.  I  read  their  faces ;
they  were  absorbed,  self-conscious.  Each  and
all  were  bitten  and  eaten  by  one  deep  desire,
one  hunger  for  gratification,  which  he  cherished
like  a  serpent,  next  his  heart.  I  could  no  longer
fear  these  men.     I  had  seen  the  light.     I  was

*6J

strong.

I   rose  to  my  feet.     I  looked   round  at  the
multitudes  who  crowded  the  banks  of  the  river,

132  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

beneath  the  clear  sky.  I  understood  then  the
strange  voices  I  had  heard.  The  people  were
mad  ;  some  with  wine,  some  with  love,  some
with  absolute  frenzy.  Numbers  of  small  boats
had  crowded  the  water ;  the  people  had  come
in  these  to  make  offerings  to  the  goddess  whom
they  adored,  and  whom  to-night  they  had  seen,
and  heard,  and  felt.  The  sacred  boat  on  which
I  stood  was  weighted  and  heaped  with  the
offerings  the  people  had  flung  into  it,  standing
up  in  their  low  vessels,  their  rafts,  by  the  side
of  ours.  Gold  and  silver,  jewels,  and  vessels  of
gold  set  with  shining  stones.  Agmahd  looked
at  these  things,  and  I  saw  the  smile  on  his  lips.
These  riches  might  feed  the  temple,  but  for
himself  it  was  very  different  jewels  he  desired
and  worked  for.  My  soul  spoke  suddenly
unawares.  I  could  look  on  and  be  silent  no
longer.  I  spoke  in  a  loud  voice,  and  command-
ed the  people  to  hear  me,  and  immediately
there  was  a  stillness  which  grew  till  it  spread
over  the  multitude.

"  Listen  to  me,  you  that  are  worshippers
here  of  the  goddess.  What  goddess  is  it  you
worship  ?  Can  you  not  tell  by  the  words  she
whispers  into  your  hearts  ?  Look  within,  and  if

THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  133

she  has  seared  you  with  the  fierce  heat  of
passion,  know  she  is  no  true  god  !  For  there  is
no  truth  save  in  wisdom.  Listen,  and  I  will
speak  to  you  words  that  have  been  uttered  in
the  sanctuary,  and  breathed  by  the  spirit  of
light,  our  Queen  Mother.  Know  that  in
virtue,  in  true  thoughts,  in  true  deeds,  only  can
you  find  peace.  Is  this  dark  orgie  a  fit
surrounding  for  the  goddess  of  truth  ?  Are  you
her  worshippers,  who  are  drunk  with  wine  and
passion  here  beneath  the  open  sky  ?  You  with
wild  words  of  impiety  and  frenzied  songs  on
your  lips,  and  thoughts  of  shame  at  your
hearts,  ready  to  spring  boldly  into  deeds  ?  No  !
down  on  your  knees,  and  lift  your  hands  to
heaven,  and  ask  that  beneficent  spirit,  our
Queen  of  wisdom,  who  broods  over  you  with
wide  wings  of  love,  to  forgive  your  shameless-
ness,  to  help  you  in  a  new  effort.  Hear  me.  I
will  pray  to  her,  for  I  see  her  in  her  splendour.
Speak  to  her  the  words  I  utter,  and  she  shall
surely    listen,    for    she    loves   you  even  though

you  offend "

A  burst  of  melody,  a  number  of  strong  voices
singing,  drowned  my  voice.  The  priests  had
burst  out  into  song   with  the   rich  music  of  a

134  THE    IDYLL   OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

hymn.  The  people,  swayed  by  my  voice  and
words,  had  in  masses  fallen  upon  their  knees.
Now,  intoxicated  by  the  music,  they  sang  the
hymn  with  fervour,  and  the  volume  of  sound
rose  majestically  into  the  sky.  A  strong  sweet
scent  entered  my  nostrils.  I  turned  from  it  with
dislike,  but  already  it  had  done  its  work.  I
felt  my  brain  swoon.

"  He  is  in  an  ecstasy,"  said  Kamen  Baka.

"  He  is  mad,"  I  heard  uttered  in  another
voice — a  voice  so  cold,  so  enraged,  I  hardly
recognised  it.  Yet  I  knew  it  was  Agmahd  who
spoke.

I  strove  to  answer  him,  for  I  was  inspired
in  all  I  did  by  a  new  and  strange  courage,  and
I  knew  nothing  of  fear.  But  already  the
stupefying  vapour  had  done  its  work.  I  was
dumb,  as  in  sleep  ;  my  head  grew  heavy.  In  a
few  seconds  I  was  asleep.

CHAPTER  VI

When  I  awoke  I  was  in  my  old  chamber  in  the
temple ;  the  one  in  which  my  first  boyish
terrors  came  to  me.

I  was  very  tired ;  so  tired  that  the  first
sensation  I  experienced  was  that  of  intolerable
weariness,  which  numbed  all  my  body.  I  lay
still  a  little  while,  thinking  only  of  my  dis-
comfort.

Then  suddenly  the  events  of  yesterday  came
into  my  memory.  It  was  like  the  rising  of  the
sun.  I  had  found  her  again,  my  Queen  Mother,
and   she  had  taken   me  back  to  her  protection,

I  rose,  forgetting  my  pain  and  weariness.  It
was  just  dawn,  and  through  the  high  window
the  faint  gray  light  came  softly  into  my  room.
It  was  brilliant  with  rich  material  and  rich
embroidery  ;  full  of  strange  and  beautiful  things
which  made  it  seem  like  a  chamber  for  a
prince.  But  for  its  peculiar  shape  and  the  high
window,  it  could  hardly  have  been  recognised
as  the  room  which  in  my  childhood  had  been
made  a  garden  of  flowers  for  my  pleasure.

136  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

The  air  within  seemed  to  me  heavy  and  dull ;
I  longed  to  be  outside,  in  the  air,  sweet  with
the  newness  of  morning ;  for  I  felt  that  I  too
needed  to  be  new-made  and  strong  with  the
strength  of  youth.  And  here  the  perfumed
atmosphere,  the  heavy  draperies  and  weight  of
luxury,  oppressed  me.

I  lifted  the  curtain  and  crossed  the  great
room  which  was  next  mine.  It  was  empty  and
silent ;  so  was  the  wide  corridor.  I  went  softly
on  through  the  long  corridors,  till  I  reached
that  in  which  the  gate  opened  to  the  garden.
Through  the  iron  grating  I  could  see  the  gleam
of  the  grass  as  I  approached  it.  Ah,  that
beautiful  garden  !  Oh,  to  bathe  in  that  sweet
water  of  the  lily  tank !

But  the  iron  door  was  fast  locked ;  I  could
but  look  through  at  the  grass  and  sky  and
flowers,  and  drink  the  sweet  air  in  through  the
narrow  openings.  Suddenly  I  saw  Seboua
approaching  down  one  of  the  garden  walks.
He  came  straight  to  the  iron  door  within  which
I  stood.

"Seboua!"  I  cried.

"  Ah,  thou  art  here,"  he  said,  speaking  in  his
rough    tones.     "  The    man    and   the   child  are

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  137

alike.  But  no  longer  may  Seboua  be  thy  friend.
I  have  failed,  and  I  may  not  try  again.  I
angered  both  my  masters  when  thou  wast  a
child ;  I  could  not  hold  thee  fast  for  either.  Be
it  so;  thou  must  now  stand  alone."

"Can  you  not  open  the  gate  ?"  was  all  my
answer.

"  No,"  he  said ;  "  and  I  doubt  if  it  will  ever
be  opened  for  thee  again.  What  matters  it  ?
Art  thou  not  the  favourite  priest  of  the  temple,
the  darling,  the  cherished  one  ?  "

"  No,"  I  answered,  "  I  am  that  no  longer.
They  already  say  I  am  mad.  They  will  say
it  again  to-day."

Seboua  looked  at  me  earnestly.  "  They  will
kill  thee !  "  he  said  in  a  low  voice  full  of  tend-
erness and  pity.

"  They  cannot,"  I  answered,  smiling.  "  My
Queen  will  protect  me.  I  must  live  till  I  have
spoken  all  she  wishes.     Then,  I  care  not."

Seboua  raised  his  hand  from  where  it  had
remained  hidden  in  the  folds  of  his  black  dress.
He  held  in  it  a  bud  of  the  lotus  flower  that  lay
in  a  green  leaf  which  seemed  its  bed.

"  Take  it,"  he  said.  "  It  is  for  thee ;  it  speaks
a  language  that  thou  wilt  understand.     Take

138  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

it,  and  may  good  go  with  thee.  I  that  am
dumb,  save  in  common  speech,  yet  am  worth}7
to  be  a  messenger.  That  makes  me  glad.  But
thou  mayst  rejoice,  for  thou  canst  hear  and
speak,  learn  and  teach."

Immediately  he  was  gone ;  while  he  had  been
speaking  he  had  pushed  the  flower  to  me
through  one  of  the  narrow  openings  of  the
grating.  I  drew  it  towards  me  carefully.  I
held  it  now  in  my  hands ;  I  was  content.  I
needed  nothing  else.

I  went  back  to  my  room  and  sat  down,  hold-
ing the  flower  in  my  hand.  It  was  the  same
over  again  as  when  I  had,  long  ago,  a  mere
child,  sat  in  this  same  chamber,  holding  a  lily
and  gazing  into  its  centre.  I  had  a  friend,  a
guide  ;  a  union  with  that  unseen  Mother  of  grace.
But  now  I  knew  the  value  of  what  I  held ;
then  I  did  not.  Was  it  possible  that  it  would
be  again  taken  from  me  so  easily  ?    Surely  no.

For  I  could  understand  its  language  now.
Then  it  spoke  to  me  of  nothing  save  its  own
beauty  ;  now  it  opened  my  eyes,  and  I  saw  ;  it
unsealed  my  ears,  and  I  heard.

A  circle  was  round  me ;  such  as  had  sur-
rounded me   when  I  had  taught,  unknowingly,

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  139

in  the  temple.  These  were  priests,  white-
robed,  as  those  had  been  who  knelt  and
worshipped  me.  But  these  did  not  kneel ;  they
stood  and  gazed  down  upon  me  with  profound
eyes  of  pity  and  love.  Some  were  old  men,
stately  and  strong;  some  were  young  and
slender,  with  faces  of  fresh  light.  I  looked
round   in   awe,  and   trembled    with    hope    and

I  knew,  without  any  words  to  tell  me,  what
brotherhood  this  was.  These  were  my  pre-
decessors, the  priests  of  the  sanctuary,  the
seers,  the  chosen  servants  of  the  Lily  Queen.
I  saw  that  they  had  succeeded  each  to  each,
keeping  sacredly  the  guardianship  of  the  holy
of  holies  since  first  it  was  shaped  out  of  the
great  rock,  against  which  the  temple  rested.

"  Art  ready  to  learn  ?  "  said  one  to  me — one
whose  breath  seemed  to  me  to  be  drawn  from
long-forgotten  ages.

"  I  am  ready,"  I  said ;  and  knelt  upon  the
ground  in  the  centre  of  that  strange,  holy
circle.  My  body  fell,  yet  my  spirit  seemed  to
soar.  Though  I  knelt,  I  knew  I  was  held  up
in  soul  by  those  who  surrounded  me.  Hence-
forth they  were  my  brethren.

140  THB    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  Sit  thou  there,"  he  said,  pointing  to  my
couch,  "  and  I  will  talk  with  thee."

I  rose,  and  turning  to  go  to  the  couch,  saw
that  I  was  alone  with  this  one  who  spoke  to
me.  The  others  had  left  us.  He  came  and
sat  beside  me,  and  began  to  speak.  He  poured
into  my  heart  the  wisdom  of  the  dead  ages ;
wisdom  which  lives  for  ever,  and  is  young
when  the  race  of  its  early  disciples  is  no  longer
even  a  memory.  My  heart  grew  green  with
the  freshness  of  this  ancient  knowledge  and
truth.

Throughout  that  day  he  sat  beside  me  and
taught.  At  night  he  touched  my  forehead
with  his  hands  and  left  me.  As  I  lay  down  to
sleep,  I  recollected  that  I  had  seen  none  but
my  teacher  since  yesterday,  nor  had  I  tasted
food.  Yet  I  was  not  weary  with  learning,  nor
was  I  faint.  I  laid  my  flower  beside  me,  and
slept  quietly.

When  I  awoke  I  started  up,  fancying  some
one  touched  my  flower.  But  I  was  alone,  and
my  flower  was  safe.  A  table  stood  near  the
heavy  curtain  which  separated  my  room  from
the  next ;  on  this  table  stood  food  ;  milk  and
cakes.     All  yesterday  I  had  not  eaten  :    I  was

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTD8  141

glad  now  of  the  food.  I  put  my  flower  within
my  dress,  and  went  to  the  table.  I  drank  the
milk  and  ate  the  cakes ;  and  then,  with  new
strength  in  me,  I  turned  to  go  to  my  couch,
and  there  meditate  earnestly  on  what  I  had
learned  yesterday,  for  I  knew  that  these  were
golden  seeds  which  must  bear  fruits  of  glory.

But  I  stood  still  and  my  heart  sank  within
me ;  for  again  I  was  surrounded  by  the  beauti-
ful circle.  He  who  had  taught  me  yesterday,
looked  at  me  and  smiled,  but  he  did  not  speak.
Another  approached  me,  took  my  hand  and  led
me  to  the  couch,  and  I  was  alone  with  him.

Alone,  yet  not  alone,  and  never  to  be  any
longer  alone,  for  he  took  my  heart  and  soul,
and  showed  them  to  me  in  their  nakedness,
unsoftened  by  any  fancied  sanctity.  He  took
my  past,  and  showed  it  to  me  in  its  simple,
dark,  unbeautiful  poverty ;  that  past  which
might  have  been  so  rich.  Until  now,  it  seemed
to  me  that  I  had  been  living  in  unconsciousness.
Now,  I  was  guided  through  my  own  life  again,
and  bidden  regard  it  with  clear  vision.  The
chambers  I  passed  through  were  dark  and
dreary;  some  of  them  were  full  of  horrors.
For   now    I  saw  that  I  had  been  won  by  the

142  THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

magic  which  I  myself  had  interpreted  to  Kamen
Baka.  Like  the  others,  I  had  existed  for
desire  and  its  satisfaction.  And  steeped  in
the  joys  of  pleasure,  of  beauty,  I  had  been  as
one  intoxicated,  and  knew  not  all  that  I  did.
Remembering  my  past,  I  saw  the  meaning  of
Seboua's  words,  which  at  the  time  I  hardly
understood.  I  had  indeed  been  the  darling  of
the  temple,  for  when  my  body  was  steeped  in
pleasure,  and  silenced  in  the  dim  sleep  of
satiety,  my  lips  and  voice  had  become  docile  to
the  will  of  that  dark  mistress.  Through  my
physical  powers  she  made  known  her  wishes,
and  obtained  the  service  of  those  slaves  who
had  bartered  their  all  for  the  sake  of  gratifica-
tion. By  her  fierce  and  terrible  insight  into  the
dark  caverns  of  men's  souls,  she  saw  their
needs,  and  with  my  speech  she  showed
them  how  to  obtain  that  which  they  longed  for.
As  I  sat  there,  dumb  and  amazed  at  the
visions  which  passed  through  my  awakened
memory,  I  saw  myself  first,  a  mere  child,  lulled
from  terror  and  alarm  by  pleasure.  I  saw
myself  within  the  temple,  in  its  inner  sanctuary,
a  creature  helpless,  a  tool,  a  mere  instrument
played  upon  mercilessly.     I  saw  myself  later,  a

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  143

youth,  fresh  and  beautiful,  lying  unconscious  on
the  deck  of  the  sacred  boat,  rising  in  the  frenzy
of  unconsciousness,  and  uttering  strange  words.
I  saw  myself  later,  grown  pale  and  faint,  yet
always  the  willing  instrument,  although  the  soul
was  beginning  to  stir  and  weary  the  body  with
its  struggle  ;  and  now  I  saw  that  the  soul  had
awakened,  had  touched  its  mother,  the  Queen  of
light,  and  could  never  again  be  silenced.

The  night  came,  and  my  teacher  left  me.  None
else  had  come  to  my  chamber  ;  no  food  had  been
brought  to  me  since  the  early  morning.  I  was
faint  with  the  terrible  sights  which  I  had  seen
in  this  short  day.  I  determined  to  go  in  search
of  the  food  I  needed.  I  lifted  the  heavy  curtain
that  covered  the  archway,  which  led  into  the
great  room  beyond.  A  door  was  there — a
massive  door — such  as  might  close  the  portal  of
a  dungeon.  Then  I  understood  I  was  a  prisoner,
and  now  that  I  had  recovered  from  my  weakness
and  excitement,  I  was  to  have  no  food.  Agmahd
had  seen  that  my  spirit  had  awakened  ;  he  had
determined  to  kill  it  within  me,  and  preserve
the  mere  broken  body  for  his  purpose.

I  lay  down  upon  my  couch,  and  fell  asleep
with  the  drooping  lily-bud  upon  my  lips.

144  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

When  I  awoke,  one  stood  beside  me  whom  I
knew  to  be  my  new  teacher.  I  had  met  his  smile
when  I  had  seen  the  beautiful  circle  around
me.  I  sprang  up  gladly  ;  from  him  I  looked  for
encouragement.  He  came  and  sat  beside  me,
and  took  my  hand  in  his.

And  then  I  knew  that  his  smile  was  the
light  of  a  great  peace.  He  had  died  in  this
chamber — died  for  the  truth.  He  called  me
brother,  and  suddenly  I  became  aware  that  the
roses  of  my  life  had  blown  and  fallen,  and  passed
away  for  ever.  I  had  to  live  for  the  truth  in  the
light  of  the  pure  spirit,  and  no  suffering  must
make  me  afraid,  and  from  the  moment  that  his
hand  touched  mine,  I  knew  that  no  suffering
could  make  me  afraid.  Until  now,  pain  had
always  blinded  me  with  terror,  but  now  I  knew
that  I  could  meet  and  grasp  it  with  strong  hands
unterrified.  I  sank  to  sleep  that  night  in  an
ecstasy  ;  I  knew  not  whether  I  waked  or  dream-
ed ;  but  I  knew  that  this  my  brother,  whose
physical  life  had  been  torn  from  him  in  the  long
ages  past,  had  poured  the  strength  of  his  fiery
soul  into  mine,  and  that  I  could  never  lose
it  again.

CHAPTER  VII

On  the  morrow,  when  my  eyes  opened,  my  bed
was  surrounded  by  the  beautiful  circle.  They
regarded  me  with  grave  looks ;  I  saw  no  smile
on  any  face;  but  the  infinite  tenderness  which
I  felt  from  them  gave  me  strength.  I  rose  and
knelt  beside  my  couch,  for  I  saw  that  some
great  moment  was  approaching.

The  youngest  and  the  brightest  of  them  all
left  the  circle  and  approached  me.  He  knelt
beside  me  and  clasped  my  hands,  holding  with-
in them  the  faded  lotus-blossom  which  lay  upon
my  pillow.

I  looked  up — the  others  were  gone.  I  re-
garded my  companion.  He  was  silent ;  his  eyes
were  fixed  on  me.  How  young  he  was  and
beautiful !  Earth  had  left  no  soil  on  his  spirit.
I  knew  that  its  stain  must  be  on  mine  until  in
the  course  of  ages  I  had  washed  it  clean  again.
I  felt  a  fear  of  this  my  companion,  he  was  so

white  and  spotless.
10

146  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

As  we  remained  thus  in  silence  a  soft  voice
fell  on  my  ear.

"  Look    not  up  yet,"  whispered  he  who  knelt
at  my  side.

"  Twin  stars  of  the  evening,  thou  the  last  of
the  long  line  of  seers  who  have  made  the  wis-
dom of  the  temple  and  crowned  the  greatness
of  Egypt  with  glory  !  The  night  is  at  hand,  and
the  darkness  must  fall  and  hide  the  earth  from
the  beauty  of  the  heavens  above  it.  Yet  the
truth  shall  be  left  with  my  people,  the  ignorant
children  of  earth.  And  it  is  for  you  to  leave
behind  you  a  burning  light,  a  record  for  all
time  which  men  shall  look  at  and  wonder  at  in
ages  hence.  The  record  of  your  lives,  and  of
the  truth  which  inspired  you,  shall  go  to  other
races,  in  other  parts  of  the  dim  earth,  to  a
people  who  have  only  heard  of  the  light,  who
have  never  seen  it.  Be  strong,  for  your  work
is  great.  Thou,  my  child  of  the  snowy  soul,
thou  hadst  not  strength  to  battle  alone  with  the
growing  darkness  ;  but  now,  give  of  thy  faith
and  purity  to  this  one,  whose  wings  are  smirch-
ed with  stains  of  the  earth,  but  who  has  gather-
ed from  that  dark  contact  strength  for  the
coming  battle.     Fight   thou  to  the  last  for  thy

THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  147

Queen  Mother.     Speak  to  my  people,  and  tell
them    of   the    great  truths  ;  tell  them  that  the
soul  lives    and   is  blessed,  unless  they  drown  it
in  degradation  ;  tell  them  there  is  freedom  and
peace   for   all  who  will    free   themselves  from
desires ;  tell  them  to  look  to  me  and  find  rest  in
my  love  ;  tell  them  there  is  the  lotus-bloom  in
every  human   soul,   and  that  it  will  open  wide
to   the    light   unless  they   poison  its  roots ;  tell
them  to  live  in  innocence  and  seek  after  truth,
and  I  will  come  and  walk  in  their  midst,  and
show   them   the   way   into   that  place  of  peace
where  all  is  beauty  and  all  are  content.     Tell
them  I   love  my  children,  and  would  come  and
dwell    in   their  homes  and  bring  that  content
which    is    more  than  any  prosperity,  even  unto
these   their   hearths    of    the  earth.     Tell  them
this  in  a  voice  like  a  trumpet-call,  which  cannot
be   misunderstood.     Save   those  who  will  hear,
and    make  my  temple  once  more  a  dwelling  for
the  Spirit  of  Truth.     The  temple  must  fall,  but
it  shall  not  fall  in  iniquity.     Egypt  must  decay ;
but  it   shall   not  decay  in  ignorance.     It  shall
hear  a  voice  it  cannot  forget ;  and  the  words
which  that  voice  utters  shall  be  the  hidden  heir-
loom of   ages,  and  shall  again  be  spoken  under

148  THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

another  sky,  and  herald  the  dawn  which  must
break  through  the  long  blackness.  Thou,  my
youngest,  thou  who  art  both  strong  and  weak,
prepare !  The  struggle  is  at  hand ;  do  not
flinch.  One  duty  is  thine;  to  teach  the  people.
Do  not  fear  that  wisdom  shall  fail  thy  tongue.
I,  who  am  Wisdom,  will  speak  in  thy  voice.  I,
who  am  Wisdom,  will  be  at  thy  side.  Look
up,  my  child,  and  gather  strength."

I  raised  my  eyes,  and  as  I  did  so  felt  the
tightened  grasp  of  the  hand  of  my  companion,
who  knelt  at  my  side.  I  understood  that  he
desired  to  give  me  courage  to  face  the  blind-
ing glory  which  was  before  my  eyes.

She  stood  before  us,  and  I  saw  her  as  the
flower  sees  the  sun  which  feeds  it.  I  saw  her
without  disguise  or  veil.  The  fair  woman  who
had  soothed  my  boyish  tears  was  lost  in  the
god,  the  glory  of  whose  presence  filled  my  soul
with  a  burning  that  seemed  to  me  like  death.
Yet  I  lived;  I  saw  ;  I  understood.

CHAPTER  VIII

The  beautiful  young  priest  rose  and  stood  beside
me,  while  I  still  gazed  upon  the  glory.

"  Hear  me,  my  brother,"  he  said.  "  There
are  three  truths  which  are  absolute,  and  which
cannot  be  lost,  but  yet  may  remain  silent  for
lack  of  speech.

"  The  soul  of  man  is  immortal,  and  its  future
is  the  future  of  a  thing  whose  growth  and
splendour  has  no  limit.

"  The  principle  which  gives  life  dwells  in  us,
and  without  us,  is  undying  and  eternally  benefi-
cent, is  not  heard  or  seen,  or  smelt,  but  is  per-
ceived by  the  man  who  desires  perception.

"  Each  man  is  his  own  absolute  lawgiver,
the  dispenser  of  glory  or  gloom  to  himself  ;  the
decreer   of  his  life,  his  reward,  his  punishment.

"  These  truths,  which  are  as  great  as  is  life
itself,  are  as  simple  as  the  simplest  mind  of
man.  Feed  the  hungry  with  them.  Farewell.
It  is  sundown.  They  will  come  for  thee ;  be
thou  ready."

150  THE    IDYLL   OF   THE   WHITE   LOTUS

He  was  gone.  But  the  glory  did  not  fade
from  before  my  eyes.  I  saw  the  truth.  I  saw
the  light.  I  remained,  holding  the  vision  with
my  passionate  regard.

Some  one  touched  me.  I  was  awakened  and
stirred  immediately  by  a  sudden  startling  sense
that  the  hour  of  battle  had  come.  I  rose  and
looked  round.  Agmahd  stood  beside  me.  He
looked  very  serious ;  his  face  was  less  cold  than
was  usual ;  there  was  a  fire  in  his  eyes  such  as  I
had  never  seen  there  before.

"  Sensa,"  he  said  in  a  low  voice,  very  clear,
that  seemed  like  a  knife,  "  are  you  prepared  ?
To-night  is  the  last  night  of  the  Great  Festival.
I  need  your  service.  When  last  you  were  with
us  you  were  mad  ;  your  brain  was  frenzied
with  the  follies  of  your  own  conceit.  I  demand
your  obedience  now,  as  you  have  hitherto  given
it,  and  to-night  you  are  needed,  for  a  great
miracle  has  to  be  worked.  You  must  be  passive,
else  you  will  suffer.  The  Ten  have  determined
that,  unless  you  are  obedient  as  hitherto,  you
must  die.  You  are  too  well  versed  in  all  we
know  to  live,  unless  you  are  one  of  us.  Your
choice  lies  plain  before  you.     Make  it  quickly."

"  It  is  made,"  I  answered.

THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  151

He  looked  at  me  very  earnestly.  I  read  his
thought,  and  saw  that  he  had  expected  to  find
me  sad  with  solitude,  sick  with  the  long  fast,
and  broken  in  spirit.  Instead,  I  stood  erect,
unexhausted,  filled  with  fearlessness ;  I  felt  that
the  light  was  in  my  soul,  that  the  great  army
of  the  glorious  ones  stood  behind  me.

"  I  have  no  fear  of  death,"  I  answered,  "  and
1  will  no  longer  be  the  tool  of  men  who  are
killing  the  royal  religion  of  Egypt,  the  great
and  only  religion  of  truth,  for  the  benefit  of
their  own  ambitions  and  desires.  I  have  seen
and  understood  your  miracles  and  the  teachings
which  you  give  to  the  people  ;  I  will  aid  you
no  longer.     I  have  said."

Agmahd  stood  silent,  regarding  me.  His
face  grew  whiter  and  more  rigid,  as  though
cut  in  marble.  I  remembered  his  words  that
night  in  the  inner  sanctuary,  when  he  said  :
"  I  renounce  my  humanity."  I  saw  it  was  so,
that  the  renunciation  was  complete.  I  could
look  for  no  mercy ;  I  had  to  deal  not  with  man,
but  with  a  shape  animated  by  a  dominant  and
absolutely  selfish  will.

After  a  moment's  pause  he  spoke,  very
calmly  :

152  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

"  Be  it  so.  The  Ten  shall  hear  your  words
and  answer  them ;  you  have  a  right  to  be
present  at  their  deliberations ;  you  are  your-
self as  high  in  the  temple  as  I  myself.  It  will
be  a  trial  of  strength  against  strength,  of  will
against  will.  I  warn  you  that  you  will  suffer."
He  turned  away  and  left  me,  moving  with
that  slow  and  stately  step  which  had  so  fascin-
ated me  when  a  child.    •

I  sat  down  upon  my  couch  and  waited.  I  was
not  afraid ;  but  I  could  not  think  or  reflect.
I  was  conscious  that  a  moment  was  at  hand
which  would  need  all  my  strength ;  and  I
remained  without  motion  and  without  thought,
reserving  all  the  force  I  possessed.

A  star  rose  in  front  of  me,  a  gleaming  star,
which  seemed  to  me  shaped  like  the  full-blown
lotus  flower.  Excited  and  dazzled,  I  rose  and
sprang  towards  it.  It  moved  from  me — I
would  not  lose  it,  but  followed  eagerly.  It
passed  through  the  doorway  of  my  room  into
the  corridor  ;  I  found  that  the  door  opened
at  my  touch.  I  did  not  stay  to  wonder
why  it  was  unlocked,  but  followed  the  star
and  its  light,  which  momently  grew  clearer,
and   its  shape   grew  more  defined ;  I  saw  the

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  153

petals  of  the  royal  white  flower,  and  from
its  yellow  centre  streamed  the  light  that
led  me.

Swiftly  and  eagerly  I  went  down  the  wide
dim  corridor.  The  great  door  of  the  temple
was  open,  and  the  star  passed  through  it  into
the  outer  air.  I,  too,  went  out  of  the  temple
door,  and  found  myself  in  the  avenue  of  strange
statues.  Suddenly  I  became  aware  that  there
was  a  presence  at  the  outer  gate  which  called
me.  I  fled  down  the  long  avenue  with  feet
that  knew  not  whither  they  led  me  ;  yet  I
knew  that  I  must  go.  The  great  gates  were
locked  ;  but,  so  close  to  them  that  I  felt  as
though  I  were  in  the  midst  of  it,  was  a  great
crowd,  a  mass  of  people.  They  were  awaiting
the  great  ceremony,  the  final  glory  of  the
festival,  which  to-night  was  to  take  place  at  the
porta]?  of  the  temple  itself.  I  looked  up  and
saw  the  Queen  Mother  standing  beside  me.  She
had  in  her  hand  a  flaming  torch,  and  I  knew
that  its  light  had  formed  the  star  which  guided
me  hither.  She  it  was  then,  the  Light  of  Life,
who  had  led  me.  She  smiled  and  was,  in  an
instant,  gone ;  I  was  alone  with  my  knowledge ;
and   the  people,  crowded  together  and  plunged

154  THE    IDYLL   OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS

in  ignorance,    waited  at  the  gates  to  be  taught
of  the  priests.

I  remembered  the  words  of  my  predecessor,
my  brother,  who  had  given  me  the  three  truths
for  the  people.

I  lifted  up  my  voice  and  spoke  ;  my  words
carried  me  on  as  though  they  were  waves,  and
my  emotion  grew  into  a  great  sea  upon  which
I  was  lifted  ;  and  as  I  looked  into  the  eager
eyes  and  rapt  wondering  faces  before  me,  I
knew  that  the  people  also  were  being  swept
along  on  that  swift  tide.  My  heart  swelled
with  the  delight  of  speech,  of  giving  utter-
ance to  the  great  truths  which  had  become
my  own.

At  last  I  began  to  tell  them  how  I  had  caught
fire  from  the  torch  of  holiness,  and  was  resolved
to  enter  upon  a  true  life  of  devotion  to  wisdom,
and  to  discard  all  the  luxury  which  surrounded
the  priestly  life,  and  to  put  aside  forever  all
desires  but  those  which  belong  to  the  soul.  I
cried  aloud,  praying  all  those  who  felt  the  light
kindle  within  them  to  enter  upon  a  similar
path,  even  in  the  midst  of  their  life  in  the  city
or  on  the  mountains.  I  told  them  that  it  was
unnecessary,  because  men   bought  and  sold  in

THE    IDYLL    OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  155

the  streets,  that  they  should  utterly  forget  and
drown  the  divine  essence  within  them.  I  bade
them  burn  out  by  the  light  of  the  spirit  the
grosser  desires  of  the  flesh  which  held  them
back  from  the  true  doctrine,  and  sent  them  in
throngs  as  devotees  to  the  shrine  of  the  Queen
of  Desire.

I  paused  suddenly  with  a  heavy  sense  of
weariness  and  exhaustion.  I  became  aware  that
some  one  stood  on  each  side  of  me ;  an  instant
later,  I  saw  that  I  was  surrounded.  The  ten
high  priests  had  formed  a  circle  around  me.
Kamen  Baka  stood  facing  me,  and  fixed  his
eyes  on  mine.

I  cried  out  aloud,  standing  there  in  the  midst
of  this  circle —

"  0  people  of  Egypt,  remember  my  words !
Never  again  may  you  hear  the  messenger  of
the  mother  of  oar  life,  the  mother  of  the  God
of  Truth.  She  has  spoken.  Go  to  your  homes
and  write  her  words  on  tablets,  and  grave
them  on  stones,  that  people  yet  unborn  may
read  them  and  repeat  them  to  your  children,
that  they  shall  know  of  the  wisdom.  Go,  and
stay  not  to  witness  the  sacrilege  of  the  temple,
which  is  to-night  to  be  committed.     The  priests

156  THB    IDYLL    OF   THE   WHITE    LOTUS

of  the  goddess  desecrate  her  temple  with
madness  and  lust  and  rich  filling  of  all  desires.
Listen  not  to  their  words,  but  go  to  your  homes
and  ask  of  your  own  hearts  their  lesson."

My  strength  was  gone.  I  could  utter  no
words  more.  With  drooped  head  and  weary
limbs,  I  obeyed  the  menacing  circle  which
surrounded  me,  and  turned  my  steps  towards
the  temple.

In  silence  we  moved  up  the  avenue,  and
entered  the  doorway.  Within  it  we  paused.
Kamen  Baka  turned  and  looked  back  down
the  avenue.

"The  people  murmur,"  he  said.

Again  we  moved  on  down  the  great  corridor.
Agmahd  came  out  of  a  doorway,  and  stood
before  us.

"  Is  it  so  ?  "  he  said  in  a  strange  voice.  He
knew  what  had  happened  by  the  group  he
regarded.

"  What  shall  be  done  ?  "  said  Kamen  Baka.
"He  betrays  the  secrets  of  the  temple,  and
excites  the  people  against  us."

"  He  will  be  a  great  loss,"  said  Agmahd,
"  but  he  has  become  too  dangerous.  He  must
die.     Speak  I  well,  brethren  ?  "

THE    IDYLL    OP    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  157

A  faint  murmur  passed  round  me  from  lip
to  lip.     Every  voice  was  with  Agmahd.

"  The  people  murmur  at  the  gate,"  repeated
Kamen  Baka.

"  Go  to  them,"  said  Agmahd ;  "  tell  them  this
is  a  night  of  sacrifice,  and  the  goddess  will
herself  speak  with  her  own  voice."

Kamen  Baka  left  the  circle,  and  Agmahd
immediately  took  his  place.

I  stood  motionless,  silent.  I  dimly  under-
stood that  my  fate  was  sealed,  but  I  neither
knew  nor  desired  to  ask  in  what  way  I  was
to  die.  I  knew  myself  to  be  utterly  helpless
in  the  hands  of  the  high  priests.  There  was
no  appeal  from  their  authority,  and  the  crowd
of  inferior  priests  obeyed  them  as  slaves.  I,
one  alone,  was  helpless  amid  this  crowd,  and
under  this  absolute  authority.  I  did  not  fear
death,  and  I  thought  it  due  to  the  Queen
Mother  that  her  servant  should  go  to  her  with
all  gladness.  It  was  my  last  testimony  on
earth  to  her  love.

CHAPTER  IX

I  was  taken  into  my  own  chamber,  and  there
left  alone.  I  lay  down  upon  my  couch  and  fell
asleep,  for  I  was  very  weary,  and  I  was  not
afraid ;  it  seemed  to  me  that  under  my  head
was  the  tender  arm  of  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus.

But  my  sleep  was  short.  I  was  plunged  in
a  deep  unconsciousness,  that  was  too  sweet  for
any  dream  to  enter,  when  suddenly  I  was
roused  by  a  vivid  sense  of  being  no  longer
alone.  I  awoke  to  find  myself  in  darkness  and
silence,  but  I  recognised  the  sensation.  I  knew
I  was  surrounded  by  a  great  crowd.  I  waited
motionless  with  watchful  eyes  for  the  light,
wondering  what  presences  it  would  reveal  to  me.

Then  I  became  aware  of  something  I  had
never  felt  before.  I  was  not  unconscious,  yet
I  was  helpless  as  though  without  sense  or
knowledge.  I  was  not  motionless  from  indif-
ference or  peacefulness.  I  desired  to  rise  and
demand  that  light  should  be  brought,  but  I
could  neither  move  nor  utter  any  sound.     Some

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  159

fierce  will  was  battling  with  mine,  so  strong
that  I  was  all  but  utterly  mastered,  yet  I
struggled  and  would  not  yield.  I  was  deter-
mined not  to  be  a  blind  slave,  overpowered  in
the  darkness  by  an  unseen  adversary.

It  became  terrible,  this  fight  for  supremacy.
It  became  so  fierce  that  at  last  I  knew  it  was  a
fight  for  my  life.  The  power  that  weighed  me
down  desired  to  kill.  What  was  it,  who  was
it,  that  endeavoured  to  draw  my  breath  from
out  my  body  ?

At  last — I  cannot  tell  how  long  this  intense
silent  warfare  was  waged — at  last  the  light
came  flashing  round  me  on  every  side,  as  torch
was  lighted  from  torch.  I  saw  dimly,  for  my
sight  was  faint.  I  saw  that  I  was  in  the  great
corridor  before  the  door  of  the  sanctuary,  lying
upon  the  couch  where  I  had  played  with  the
strange  phantom-child  who  first  taught  me
pleasure.  I  lay  upon  it  outstretched  as  I  had
lain  on  my  own  couch  in  sleep.  As  when  it
had  been  used  in  the  ceremonial  before,  so  now
it  was  covered  with  roses — large,  rich,  voluptu-
ous, crimson  and  blood-red  roses ;  thousands
lay  upon  and  about  the  couch,  and  their  strong
perfume  overpowered    my  faint  senses.     I  was

160  THE    IDYLL    OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

clothed  strangely  in  a  thin  white  linen  robe,
whereon  were  embroideries,  such  as  until  now
I  had  never  seen,  hieroglyphs  worked  in  thick,
dark,  red  silk.  At  my  side  was  a  stream  of
red  blood,  which  flowed  from  the  couch  into  a
beautiful  vessel  that  stood  upon  the  ground
amid  a  heap  of  roses.  I  looked  at  this  a  while
in  idle  curiosity,  until  on  a  sudden  the  know-
ledge came  to  me  that  this  was  my  life's  blood
flowing  away.

I  raised  my  eyes,  and  saw  that  I  was  sur-
rounded by  the  Ten.  Their  gaze  was  all
fixed  on  me,  their  countenances  were  im-
placable. I  knew  then  what  that  terrible  will
was  with  which  I  had  done  battle.  It  was
their  united  resolution.  Was  it  possible  that
I  alone  could  struggle  against  this  band?  I
knew  not,  yet  I  was  not  cast  down.  By  one
great  effort  I  raised  myself  on  the  couch.  I
was  already  weak  from  want  of  blood,  but  they
could  no  longer  keep  me  silent.  I  rose  to  my
feet,  and  stood  upon  the  couch,  and  looked  past
them  to  the  crowd  of  priests  beyond,  and
further  still  to  the  throng  of  people,  who
waited  close-packed  at  the  entrance  of  the
great  corridor,  to  see  the  promised  miracle.

THE    IDYLL   OP   THE   WHITE    LOTUS  161

I  stood  one  instant,  and  thought  I  had  power
to  speak,  but  I  fell  back  helpless  in  my  weak-
ness. Yet  a  deep,  profound,  vivid  happiness
filled  my  soul,  and  suddenly  I  heard  a  murmur
which  rose  and  grew  stronger.

"  It  is  the  young  priest  that  taught  at  the
gate  !  He  is  good,  he  shall  not  die  !  Let  us  save
him  !  "

The  people  had  seen  my  face  and  knew  me.
A  great  rush  was  made  in  the  sudden  enthu-
siasm, and  the  crowd  of  priests  was  pressed
towards  the  couch,  so  that  the  Ten  were  unable
to  remain  around  it.  And  as  the  wave  of
struggle  came  up  towards  the  holy  of  holies,
many  of  the  priests  rushed  into  the  vacant
space  between  the  couch  and  the  door.  And  as
they  passed  by  in  the  confusion  and  surprise,  I
saw  that  the  vessel  which  held  my  life  was
overturned  and  the  red  blood  was  spilled  at
the  door  of  the  sanctuary.  The  door  opened  ;
Agmahd  stood  within  it ;  he  looked  majestic  in
his  impenetrable  calm.  He  gazed  upon  the
surging  crowd  before  him.  At  his  cold  gaze
the  priests  grew  calmer  and  gathered  strength
to  withstand  a  little  longer   the  onrush  of  the

crowd.    The  Ten  drew  together  again  and  with
11

162  THE   IDYLL   OP   THE   WHITE   LOTUS

difficulty  reached  my  couch  and  again  formed  a
barrier  about  it.

But  they  were  too  late.  Already  some  of  the
people  had  reached  my  side.  I  smiled  dimly
into  their  kindly  rough  faces.  Tears  fell  upon
my  face  and  penetrated  my  heart ;  and  then
suddenly  one  caught  my  hand  and  clasped  and
kissed  it,  and  wetted  it  with  hot  tears.  Surely
that  touch  thrilled  my  blood  as  did  none  other !
Then  I  heard  a  voice  cry  :  "  It  is  my  son — it  is
my  son  that  is  dead.  He  is  killed.  Who  will
give  me  back  my  son  ?  "

It  was  my  mother  who  knelt  at  my  side.  1
strained  my  fading  sight  and  saw  her.  She
was  worn  and  weary,  yet  her  face  was  good.
And  as  I  looked  I  saw  behind  her,  overshadow-
ing her,  the  Lady  of  the  Lotus,  standing  there
in  the  midst  of  the  people  !  And  a  gentle  smile
was  on  her  mouth.

My  mother  rose,  and  I  saw  a  strange  dignity
in  her  face.

"  They  have  killed  his  body,"  she  said,  "  but
they  have  not  killed  his  soul.  That  is  strong,
for  I  saw  it  in  his  eyes  as  this  moment  they
closed  in  death.'5

CHAPTER  X

And  on  my  dim  ears  fell  the  sound  of  a  great
sigh  that  came  from  the  heart  of  the  people.
And  then  I  knew  that  my  body  did  not  die
in  vain.

But  my  soul  lived.  It  was  not  only  strong,
it  was  indestructible.  It  had  worked  out  its
time  of  misery  in  that  pale  form  ;  it  had  escap-
ed from  the  imprisonment  which  so  long  had  held
it  fast.  But  only  to  reawakenin  another,  a  strong,
a  beautiful  and  pure  temple.

As  the  great  surging  crowd,  driven  to  fury
by  the  resistance  of  the  priests,  pressed  on
menacingly,  some  victims  to  its  rage  fell  around
me.  Close  to  my  lifeless  form  lay  Agmahd,
trampled  to  death  by  the  enraged  people,
and  at  my  very  side  against  the  couch  on
which  I  lay,  Malen  died,  his  breath  pressed
out  from  his  beautiful  form.  As  I  hovered
there  in  the  strange  consciousness  of  soul,  I
perceived  these  tainted  spirits,  dark  with  the
lust  and  ambition   which  the  Queen  of  Desire

164  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE    LOTUS

had  kindled  within  them,  forced  into  that  circle
of  necessity  from  which  there  is  no  escape.
Agmahd's  soul  fled  with  a  fierce  rush,  like  the
dark  passage  of  a  bird  of  the  night,  and  Malen,
that  young  priest,  who  had  led  me  to  the  city,
followed  him  swiftly.  He,  who  obedient  to  the
rules  of  his  order  had  preserved  the  purity  of
the  body,  was  black  within  with  ungratified  and
ceaseless  desire,  but  his  body  lay  a  broken
flower,  fair  as  a  lily  when  first  it  opens  its
bloom  on  the  surface  of  the  clear  water.

I  felt  that  my  Queen  Mother  held  me  fast  in
her  tender  grasp,  that  I  might  not  escape  from
the  scene  of  horror.

"  Return  to  thy  work,"  she  said  ;  "  it  is  yet
unfinished.  This  is  the  new  robe  that  thou
wilt  wear,  which  will  be  thy  covering  while
thou  teachest  my  people.  This  body  is  sinless,
unstained  and  beautiful,  although  the  soul  that
inhabited  it  is  lost.  But  thou  art  my  own.
To  come  to  me  is  to  live  through  eternity
in  truth  and  knowledge.  This  is  thy  new
garment."

I  found  that  I  was  yet  strong,  not  only  in
the  spirit,  but  in  physical  life.  New  vigour
came  to  me,  my  weariness  was  forgotten.     I

THE    IDYLL   OF   THE    WHITE    LOTUS  165

rose  from  the  place,  where  but  a  minute
since  I  had  lain  prostrate  and  lifeless.  I
rose,  and  standing  hidden  under  the  asgis
of  my  Queen,  looked  in  horror  at  the  scene
around  me.

"  Go,  Malen,  go  in  safety,"  she  said.  "  Thou
art  to  live  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  thou  wilt
be  to  them  an  image  and  symbol  of  the  glory.
Thou  wilt  be  again  a  martyr  to  my  cause,  one
who  will  forever  be  remembered  with  love  by
the  dusky  children  of  Chemi.  Yet,  though
thou  diest  in  my  service,  thou  shalt  teach
for  ages  to  come  among  the  ruins  of  this
temple ;  and  though  thou  diest  for  me  a  hun-
dred deaths,  yet  shalt  thou  live  to  teach  my
truths  from  the  adytum  of  the  new  fane  that
shall  arise  in  the  distance  of  time."

I  hurried  away,  and  passed  unnoticed  through
the  surging,  furious  crowd.  The  statues  in  the
avenue  were  thrown  down ;  the  temple  gates
were  broken  and  destroyed.

My  soul  was  sad  and  yearned  for  peace.  I
looked  with  longing  eyes  to  the  quiet  country
where  my  peasant  mother  dwelled  ;  but  she
believed  her  son  was  dead.  She  would  not
know  me  in  this  new  shape.     I  turned  towards

166  THE    IDYLL   OP   THE    WHITE   LOTUS

the    city,    now    deserted    by    the    maddened
people.

A  wild  shout  from  a  thousand  throats  tore
the  air.  I  paused,  and  looking  back,  saw  that
the  unchecked  vengeance  of  a  generation
betrayed  by  its  teachers,  had  indeed  fallen
upon  the  glorious  old  temple.  Already  it
was  desecrated,  and  its  sinful  inmates  sacri-
ficed.    Soon  it  would  be  a  ruin.

I  wandered  through  the  empty  streets  of  the
city,  and  knew  that  here,  where  I  had  drunk  of
pleasure,  I  must  taste  the  joy  of  the  worker.
Here  my  voice  must  be  heard  unceasingly.  The
truth,  long  driven  from  the  degraded  temple,
must  find  its  home  in  the  heart  of  the  people,
in  the  streets  of  the  city.  Long  time  must
pass  before  my  sin  should  fall  from  me,  and
leave  me  stainless,  pure,  prepared  for  the  per-
fect life  towards  which  I  labour.

*****

Since  then,  I  live,  change  form,  and  live
again  ;  yet  know  myself  through  the  long  ages
as  they  pass.

Egypt  is  dead,  but  her  spirit  lives,  and  the
knowledge  that  was  hers  is  still  cherished  in
those  souls  who  have  remained  true  to  the  grand

THE   IDYLL   OF   THE   WHITE   LOTUS  167

and  mysterious  past.  They  know  that  out  of
the  profound  blindness  and  inarticulateness  of
an  age  of  unbelief  shall  arise  the  first  signs  of
the  splendour  of  the  future.  That  which  is  to
come  is  grander,  more  majestically  mysterious
than  the  past.  For  as  the  whole  life  of  human-
ity rises  upward,  by  slow  and  imperceptible
progress,  its  teachers  drink  their  life  from  purer
founts,  and  take  their  message  from  the  soul  of
existence.  The  cry  has  sounded  through  the
world.  The  truths  are  uttered  in  words.
Waken  !  dark  souls  of  the  earth,  who  live  with
eyes  upon  the  ground,  raise  those  dim  eyes  and
let  perception  enter.  Life  has  in  it  more  than
the  imagination  of  man  can  conceive.  Seize
boldly  upon  its  mystery,  and  demand,  in  the
obscure  places  of  your  own  soul,  light  with
which  to  illumine  those  dim  recesses  of
individuality  to  which  you  have  been  blinded
through  a  thousand  existences.

Though  a  land  of  dusky  forms,  Egypt  stands
as  a  white  flower  anions  other  races  of  the
earth,  and  the  hieroglyph  readers  of  the  old
hieratic  writings,  the  professors  and  the
thinkers  of  the  day,  will  be  unable  to  stain  the
petals  of  that  grand  lily  blossom  of  our  planet.

168  THE   IDYLL   OP   THE   WHITE   LOTUS

They  do  not  see  the  stem  of  the  lily,  and  the
sunlight  shining  down  through  the  petals.  They
can  see  nothing  of  the  real  blossom,  neither
can  they  disfigure  it  by  modern  gardening,
because  it  is  out  of  their  reach.  It  grows  above
the  stature  of  man,  and  its  bulb  drinks  deep
from  the  river  of  life.

It  flowers  in  a  world  of  growth  to  which  man
can  only  attain  in  his  absolute  moments  of
inspiration  when  he  is  indeed  more  than  man.
Therefore,  though  its  lofty  stem  lifts  itself  from
our  world,  it  is  not  to  be  beheld  or  adequately
described,  save  by  one  who  is  in  truth  so  much
above  the  stature  of  man  that  he  can  look  down
into  the  face  of  the  flower,  wherever  it  blossoms,
whether  in  the  Bast  or  the  dark  West.  He  will
there  read  the  secrets  of  the  controlling  forces
of  the  physical  plane,  and  will  see,  written  within
it,  the  science  of  mystic  strength.  He  will
learn  how  to  expound  spiritual  truths,  and
to  enter  into  the  life  of  his  highest  self,  and
he  can  learn  also  how  to  hold  within  him  the
glory  of  that  higher  self,  and  yet  to  retain  life
upon  this  planet  so  long  as  it  shall  last,  if
need  be ;  to  retain  life  in  the  vigour  of  man-
hood,  till   his   entire   work   is  completed,  and

THE    IDYLL    OF    THE    WHITE    LOTUS  169

he  has  taught  the  three  truths  to  all  who  look
for  light.

"  The  soul  of  man  is  immortal."

"  The   principle   which    gives   life   dwells  in  us,  and
without  us,  is  undying  and  eternally  beneficent."

"  Each  man  is  his  own  absolute  lawgiver."

Printed  by  J.  R.  Aria,  at  the  Vasanta  Press,  Adyar,  Madras.

University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

305  De  Neve  Drive  -  Parking  Lot  17  •  Box  951388

LOS  ANGELES,  CALIFORNIA  90095-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library  from  which  it  was  borrowed.

lUpnnHiiuTliiSti  REGI°NAL  LIBRARY  FACIL

ITV

AA    000  600  839
