Google


This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project

to make the world's books discoverable online.

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover.

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the

publisher to a library and finally to you.

Usage guidelines

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying.
We also ask that you:

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for
personal, non-commercial purposes.

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help.

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it.

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe.

About Google Book Search

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web

at |http: //books .google .com/I


1


1el#d5tanfordJ»

_Jk uiniversitV


fSESESTEl !V THOIHS WEITM STAHfORI)


ISIS REVELATA, &c.


PRINTED BV NEILL & CO. OLD FISHMARKKT.


THE ORieiN. PROGRESS. AND PRESKST STATE

OF

^ittmal^gitftisiit;

BY

J, r. roLp'iJHorjx. E,sp„ aidvdcatk,


f.d:mbi:rch, macl-


ISIS REVELATA:


AN INQUIRY


INTO


THE ORIGIN, PROGRESS, AND PRESENT STATE


OF


ANIMAL MAGNETISM.


BY


J, C, COLQUHOUN, Esq.

ADVOCATE, F.R.S.B.


Ingenii commenta delet dies ; naturae judicia confirmat; — Cickro.

Non fingenduin, non exc(^taxidum, sed inveniendum et observandum
quid Natura faciat aut ferat. — Bacon.


VOL. II.


EDINBURGH .

MACLACHLAN & STEWART ;
AND BALDWIN & CRADOCK, LONDON.


MDCCCXXXYI.


IUy.ka»i ^ i^ i^iyns i^vvtif fikytt yiynrat uky0f

Toy }li »»tt»Tf vovffot9t xvxtifitvof u^yetkiuig rt
*Ay^A/Mvof x*'V^^ Suypx rifitur* vytti*

Solon, apud Stobaum,

S«pe dolor tenuis morbos produxit acerbos,

Tollero quos nullis sit medicaminibiis :
Sape diu snvo jactatum corporis aestu

Contaetu sanum reddidit una manus.


^ < J ' w s«^ O ^3


Grotius.


• • •

{ r • . a M
» • • ■ •


• *• ••


CONTENTS


OF


VOLUME 11.


I . Pag«

Chaptbr XXI.-^eneral concdusions from the forego-
ing instances of the natuial Somnambulism. Phe-
nomena inexplicable upon the received principles
of HLysiology. Spallanzani- s experiments on bats.
Sixth sense. Sir Charles Bell's explanation. Other
explanations. Theories — ^Mesmer. Tardy deMon-
travel. Deleuze. Attention to the facts recom-
mended. « . . , .1

Chapter XXII«*t-Analogy between the natural and the
magnetic Somnambulism. Remarkable phenome-
na of the latter. Evidence of the French Acade-
miciansw: Facts and authorities independently of
Magnetism. Plata Hippocrates. Aretceus. Ga-
len, &C. Prophetic faculty, Ammianus Maroelli-
nus. Adienagoras. St Justin. Cicero. Monta-
nus. Jamblichus« Johnston. Unknown tongues.
Pomponatins. Lemnius. Qainerius. . Ftcinus. Fo-
restasai' MoihoL La Motte le Vayer. Charron.
Valesins. ' Maupertuis. Sir Henry Halford. M.
G, Le^> &c. . .14


▼1 CONTENTS.

Chaptbb XXIII. — Dr Frederic Hoffmann. Subtile
ethereal fluid. Greater power and parity of intel-
lect upon the approach of death, and during sleep.
Explanation of the phenomenon. Prophecy and
use of unknown languages in cataleptic and ecsta-
tic affections. Cases of Chevalier Folard and of
Isabella Vincent. — Dr Sprengel. Instinct of re-
medies. Prediction in diseases. Case in 1760^ re-
ported by Dr Descottes. Jung-Stilling. Wien-
holt. Romish ritual. Coleridge. Dr Brandis. Dr
Georget. Opponents of Animal Magnetism. 84

Chapter XXIV. — ^Admissions of the first French Com-
missioners. Of Dr Stieglitz of Hanover. Article :
Magnetisms Animal^ in the IHctumnaire des Sciences
MedicaleSf by M, Virey. Answer by M. Deleuze.
Opinions of M. Virey. He admits all the most es-
sential doctrines of Animal Magnetism. Sympa-
thetic influence at a distance. Case recorded by
Marguerite de FaknSy Queen of Navarre. Transfu-
sion of the sensitive principle between living bodies.
M. Virey's opinion of the philosophy of the pre-
sent age. Living forces. Extraordinary develop-
ment of instinct in certain circumstances. Intui-
tion. Instinct of remedies. M. Virey explains the
phenomena of the Instinct upon the same principle
to which Kluge and others attribute those of Som-
nambulism generally. Cerebral and ganglionic
systems. M. Virey admits in man^ let, an inteUec-
tual, 2d, a sensitive principle^ and Sd, material ele-
ments; and that the soul acts upon the body
through the medium of a transmissible nervous
fluid. The soul sometimes acquires a supernatural
development. Distinction between the intellectual
and the sensitive elements. The latter secreted in
the brain, descends into the nerves, and is subject
to exhaustion and renewal The presence^ touch.


CONTENTS. vn

or words of a magnetic man capable of curing
bodily diseases. State of ordinary life— K>f dream-
ing or delirium— of ecstatic meditation. Habit of
directing the nervous energies. Power of volition.
Spontaneous motions of the soul. It constitutes
the Natura MediccMx of physicians^ and mecha-
nically aspires to restore health. Presentiment.
Prophecy. M. Virey probably an Animal Magne-
tizer. . . . - . . .48

Chapter XXV« — Phenomena of the magnetic Somnam-
bulism. M. de Puysegur. M. Tardy de Montra-
vel. Case reported by Dr Wienholt, and witness-
ed by Dr Olbers^ the astronomer. Case of Madame
G. by M. de Falieres. Case of M. Baron^ reported
by M. Xiamy Senart. Magnetic consultations.
Two young magnetizers— Anthony Tronchon, and
a girl^ Virginia. Analogous method supposed to
have been employed in the ancient Greek temples.
Loss and recovery of human knowledge. Case of
a fatuous lady at Landau. Case reported by a lady
to M. Deleuze. A lady magnetises her physician^
who prescribes for her while in a state of Somham-
bulism^ and manifests the faculty of prediction.
Reports of the magnetic 4:reatment of four females^
by M. Germon, Curate of Saint-Aubin-le-Cloux.
Case of Agnes Burguet, reported by M. de Puyse-
gur. Case reported by the Countess de C. Pre-
diction. Cases reported by Dr Thiriat. Madame
Hugaut's child. Incredulity removed. Madame
Chevalier. Mademoiselle S. Remarkable instance
of lucidity. Petronilla Leclerc. . . 6-1

Chapter XXVI. — Subject continued. Cases reported
by M. ChardeL Intimate rapport between two sis-
ters. Case of a Femme de chanibre. Case of the
.wife of a Colonel of a cavalry regiment. ' Addi-


viii CONTENTS.

tional particulars of the. case. of Madame P.^ report-
ed by the late French Coounissioners. Madame
Lagandr^ points out the seat of her mother's dis-
ease. Her indications verified upon. a post-mortem
examination of the body^ hy M. Cloquet^ Dr Cha-
pelain> M. Moreau> Dr Dronsart, &c... Case report-
ed by Professor. Schelling. Case reported by Dr
Amdt. Case of Mademoiselle W.^ one of the most
extraordinary somnambulists and clairvoyantes up-
on record, reported by Dr Klein. Prediction of
the death of the late King of Wirtembeig by two
Sonmambulists. Evidence in favour of the extra-
ordinary phenomena of Somnambulism by the Doc-
tors Geoiget, Rostan, and Dupotet, &c. 84

CHAnvaXXVII.— Symptoms of daiaiwtyance in Joan
of Aj!C> Swedenberg, and Jacob Behmen. The fa-
ther of the German poet^ Goethe. . Extraordinary
and apparently unaccountable natiue of the facts
no sufficient reason for rejecting, them in the &ce
of the evidence. . Somnambulism long observed,
but the study of its phenomena neglected — ^A state
totally different from that of ordinary life — Unin-
tentionally described by the poet Wordsworth.
Caimotbe explained by the laws and conditions of
ordinary life. The study of the phenomena high-
ly interesting to the philosophy of man. Not yet
known or appreciated in Great Britain. Almost
universally admitted upon the Continent. Facts
admitted even by the opponents of the practice.
Perversion of the name of Science, and neglect of
Mental Philosophy in this country. Study of Ani-
mal Magnetism recommended. . . 101

Chapter XXVIII. — Utility of induction and generaliza-
tion. Equally i^plieable to moral as to physical
science. . May be sa&ly applied to the phenomena


CONTENTS. IX

of Animal Magnetism. Best method of conducting
the investigation. Transference of vital power in-
capable of explaining the higher magnetic pheno- .
mena. No satis&ctory reason can be assigned why
Sleep and Somnambulism should be produced by
the processes. It only remains for ua, therefore^
to classify the phenomena^ and to ascertain the ana-
logy between them and other constitutional affec-
tions. Philosophy of Sleep and Dreams. Mani-
festations of spiritual activity without the co-opera-
tion of the corporeal organs. Sleeps— sound and
imsound. Sleep and Somnambulism.' Coincident
observations of Bishop Hall. Reason of the fre-
quently flEUitastic and incoherent nature of our
dreams. Difference between the natural and the
magnetic sleep. Prosecution of the investigation
recommended. . . . .115

Chapter XXIX. — ^M. Andral's Lectures on Animal Mag-
netism. M. Andral admits the reality of the spon-
taneous and of the magnetic Somnambulism. Re-
conmiends the separation of facts from the ejcplana-
ti&n of facts. Quotes the first Bologna case^ and
the case reported by M. Fillassier^ of which he ac-
knowledges the authenticity. Rejects Ihe theory
of touching, imitation, and imagination. Seems dis-
posed to admit the agency of Animal Magnetism.
Enforces serious attention to the subject^ and refers
to the establishment of a magnetie t^Me at BerUnJ M.
Andral very ignorant of the evideiioe. Ketl|v il*
hides to M. Deleuze, or to any oAer tiiShk 'h
thorities. Sonie of his general observilkMiifj
apposite. Admits/in the magnetic toinM
the abolition of all the brdmary senatblBiyyi
obliteration of all circumstance oomii|ii|f'
the ecstasy; but considers the assert^ oQli
between the magnetizer and Uie mpgnetM


X CONTENTS.

proved. Admit6 thejieatity of certain magical cures^
which appear to have^ been analogous to the mag-
netic methods. Admits, itiat Uie magnetised per-
son is capahle of maintaining » Certain connexion
with the external worlds whUe otherwise complete-
ly insensible* Denies the inAUnat of remedies, but
without adyerting to^ the eyidence« BSxpresses his
doubts with liQgacd tothf ,i!eality.flf:oth«r ph^no-
m^na of thejmagnetic SomnambuHsnWi J^isrepre-
s^ts the experiments^of Petetin»:. Alludes, Fith
si^ticism, to J^e experiments of Rostan :and Fil-
lassijsr. Hore profound and more impartial inquiry
recommended to M*. AndraL Magneliic or. vital
fliud. Pro<^^ ot. Facts incojntroyertible. DiS^-
oidt J of overcoming the prejudices of Dnedical men*
Physicians dare not avow their conviction. Facts
mentioned by M.. Deleuze. • . 127

Chaptbr^XXX^ — ^Beoapitulation% Thepties^ Reil^Au-
tenrieth and Hjumboldt.^ . JilagnetiQ treatment ope-
rates principally up<»i the gaagjipiac system. Flex-
us Solaris, ot eerebrum abdmUwUe* In catalepsy
^and somn^nl^iialisin, the seat of general sensibility
ftequently transferred to, the epigasti^P region. This
ganglion probably designated as the 4''^(^e^9 by
Paracebus and Van Hehnont. .j^il. assumed two
poles. of sensibijyity m, tl|e human piganism-^the
pneumatic aR<i the „«oii^^ic. . J^emairk of Dr Spurz-
zheim. Possibility iof withdrawing, the nervous
energy from the brain> and concentrating it in th^
fkdous solaHs^ Physical analogies. Simplioity.and
uniformity of nat?Aralcaiuses^ Qther. theories. Ani-
mal Magnetism opposed to physiological material-
ism* Insufficiency and absurdity of the material
hypothesis. Animal Magnetism distinguishes be-
tween matt^ and spirit Isiounded upcm an in-
ductive investigation of the phenomena of living


CONTENTS. XI

nature. The doctrine calculated to elevate hu-
mainty^ and to dignify science. Proves [the inde-
pendent existence of liie sotd. Theoiy of an ethe-
real fluid probable. Roullier. Puysegur. Opinions
of Hoffinann^ Hunter^ Abemethj^ Coleridge^ Bake-
wdL '.'Tlie 'assumption of an e^ereal fluid does not
infringe u]^on'Ae' doctrine of the immaterialityand
IndiBBtiractibility of the souL It may "be eonsidJered
as an intermediate ccmneoting link between mind
and matter. May elucidate many obscure points in
physiology. May be considered as a peculiar fltud
sui generis, or as a modification of an universal fluid.
Views of metaphysicians and poets realized by the
discoveries of Animal Magnetism. Religion and
Philosophy reconciled. Misapprehension of the real
tendency of the doctrine. Feelings produced) by
the contemplation of the material and of the moral
world contrasted. Views of the author. Bygone
fortunes of Animal Magnetism. Controversy be-
tween the Animal Magnetists and their opponents.
Trials ai^d ultimate triumph of Animal Magnetism.
Enlightened physicians ought to take it into their
own management. Suggestions to the Physician^
the Philosopher^ and the Divine. Views of the
Roman Catholics. Words of warning. Conclu-
sion. ..... 148


APPENDIX.

No. I. — Report on the Magnetic Experiments made by
a Committee of the Royal Academy of Medi-
cine at Paris. .... ]d3

II. — On the singular phenomenon of the Tiansfer-
ence of the Faculties from their usual and ap-
propriate organs to the Epigastrium^ and other


Xll CONTENTS.

parts of the nervous STStem^ which has been
occasionalljr observed to occur in cases of Ca-
talepsy and Somnambulism. . 295

III. — On the common cause of the phenomena of
Lights Heat, Motion^ Life^ Elasticity^ Sono-
rousness^ Magnetism^ Electricity^ Galvanism^
Eleotro^Magnetismj &c. being the foundation
of a new theory of Physics. . 349

IV.— Literature. .... 409


••/•.


"* •» - •


ANIMAL MAGNETISM.


CHAPTER XXL

From all the cases of the natural somnambuHsni
referred to in the preceding chapters, looking to
the phenomena which are found to occur in all, or,
at least, in the greater number of instances, I think
we are fully entitled to deduce the following con-
clusions : —

In genera], the Somnambulist, apparently with-
out the use of any of the organs of external sensi-
bility, sees and distinguishes objects as distinctly
as when awake and in his ordinary state ; he moves
about, by day or night, with equal, if not with su-
perior confidence and security, carefully avoiding
all obstacles that may happen to stand in his way;
he perfinrms acts, while under the influence of this
affection, of which he is totally incapable when

VOL. II. A


•••. •


.•. •-- •


.••/-••

A ^ m


• '• % * ANIMAL MA6N£TISM.


• « • •


a\l^key*«afid fearlessly exposes himself to dangers
/*^ Wh|eh he would otherwise shrink from with terror.
*«.V*Se reads, writes, sings, plays, thinks, reflects, rea-
sons, and performs a variety of the most delicate
operations, whether intellectual or mechanical, not
only as if he had the complete use of all his senses,
but as if the power, acuteness, and delicacy of his
faculties were actually increased, in consequence of
being emancipated from their organic thraldom.
In almost all of these cases, we are assured that
the eyes of the.somnambidists were either exactly
closed, or open and staring, and destitute of sensi-
bility ;* and from the decisive experiments that
were made in several instances, it appears to be
clearly made out, that the faculty of sight neither
was, nor could possibly have been, exercised through
the medium of the usual organ of vision. All the
other senses, too, are frequently found in a dormant

* <^ Somnambulists generally walk witfi their eyes open, but *
these organs are, nevertheless, frequently asleep, and do not
exercise their functions. This fact was well known to Shak-
speare, as is apparent in the fearful instance of Lady Macbeth :

Doctor,'— You see her eyes are open.
Gentleman, — Ay, but their sense is shut."

Macnish, Philot. of Sleep, 2d. ed. p. 164.

The same author had preTiously observed, that *^ some ani-
mals, flud^asithe bare, sleep with their eyes open ; aad I, have
known simUar instances in the human subject. But the organ
is dead to the ordinary stimulus of light, and sees no more than
if completely shut-^-^/Mef. p. 25.


AKIMAL MAGNETISK. 6


or Buspended state, MappeariinaTaratyof
and this fact would probably have -beem- rendered
still more prominent in these and other instanoes,
had the proper experiments been made with a view
to ascertain its existence. Somnambulists, it also
appears, are capable of answering distinctly any
<]uestions that maybe put to them, and, occasionally,
of carr3ring on a rational conversation; indeed, their
intellectual faculties, while in that state, seem to
possess much more than their usual clearness and
energy. It has been likewise observed, that indi-
viduals, while under this affection, occasionally
manifest a superior knowledge of subjects and of
languages, which they had not previously studied
so as to remember, or with which they had been
but imperfectly acquainted. One of the most re-
markably .characteristic circumstances attending
this singular state of existence, and which is inva-
riably found to accompany the perfect crisis, is,
that, on awaking, the individual who had thus, as
it were insensibly, performed all these operations,
retains no recollection of any thing that occurred
while he was under the influence of the paroxysm.
The same individual, when awake and when som-
oambulisty appears like two entirely diflPerent per-
sons.*

> * In » Note at-the I76th page of his Histoire Criiique du Mag-
meHtme Ammal, M. Deleuze justlj observer, that this is the most


4 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

It is worthy of notice, too, that the acts of the
somnambulist are almost always performed with a
degree of freedom, boldness, and precision, supe-
rior to what he manifests when awake ; and that
he generally succeeds in every thing he attempts.
There is no instance, so far as I am aware, of a

distinguishing charaeteristic feature of somnambulism. There
are, he says, somnambulists who have their eyes open, who hear
very well with their ears, who are even en rapport with every
body ; there are some in whom a single fitculty is augmented ^
and who, in other respects, have only confused sensations ; there
are some who speak with considerable difficulty, &c. But
hitherto not a jingle instance has been observed in which the in-
dividual, when awake, recollected any thing that occurred in the
state of somnambulism.

After noticing the very marked distinction between this state
and that of ordinary sleep and dreaming, M. Deleuze proceeds
to point out a very extraordinary psychological phenomenon,
viz. that some somnambulists have spoken of themselves as of
two different individuals in that and in the waking state. Of
this phenomenon he adduces two examples.

Mademoiselle Adelaide de F. became somnambulist without
having been magnetized. She had no idea of the personal iden.
tity xyf Adelaide and PeiUe-^the latter being the name she re-
ceived and gave herself during the paroxysm.

Madame N. who had r^eived a distinguished education, ha-
ving lost her fortune by a law-suit, determined, with the consent
of her husband, to go upon the stage. Whilst occupied with
this project, she fell ill and became somnambulist. As in her
somnambulism she gave reasons against the step she was about
to take, her magnetizer asked her to explain herself and he re-
ceived answers which surprised him. ^* Why, then, will you go
upon the stage ?*' ** // is not /, but she** '^ But why, then do
ypu not dissuade her V* '^ What should I say to her^^^the is a


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 5

somnambulist awaking spontaneously in the midst
of any operation he has once undertaken ; nor of
bis perishing amidst the dangers which he fre^
quently ^neount^ns. There are, it is true, several
instances of somnambulists who have perished in
consequence of having been suddenly awakened by
the imprudent alarm and fatal precautions of the
witnesses of those perils to which they were appa-
rently exposed ; but the general experience of all
times seems to lead directly to the conclusion, that
the somnambulist is guided by other senses or in-
stincts ; iq short, that he is protected from injury
by other and surer means and guarantees of secu-
rity, than those by which his conduct is regulated
in his ordinary waking state. So long as he is left
undisturbed in his proceedings, he acts fearlessly
and is safe; a sudden awakening alone, by restoring
him to his natural state, causes him to perish.

The circumstances above enumerated, as consti-
tuting the distinguishing characteristics of the state

The phenomenon of seeing or feeling one's self double is not
unfrequently observed in dying persons, who, with full con.
aciousnesfi, die of chronic complaints or gangrene, e.g. consump-
tive or dropsical persons. They separate the suffering creature,
as something external, and speak of him as of a third person.
Brandis tells us that a well known physician, in the last stage
of a dropsy, always talked to him as if he were the patient, and
the latter the physician. This is a curious fact, but our medi-
cal men, it would appear, deprecate all investigation into such
matters.


b ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

of sotnnanibulisni, ought, I think, to have been saf-
ficient, if duly attended to, to make the physiolo-
gists aware, that the phenomena are quite incapable
of being satisfactorily explained upon the received
principles of their science. Here, there can be no
question about the peculiar mechanism of the eye,
of the ear, &c. or about the mode in which impres-
sionfl are received and conveyed to the mind in the
ordinai*y state of the organism. In order to eluci-
date this interesting subject, we must investigate
more profoundly the phenomena of the spiritual
nature of man, and endeavour to discover how his
faculties can be exercised without the ordinary use
of their appropriate organs.* In proceeding to this
investigation! we ought to reflect seriously upon
thid following aphorism of Lord Bacon, which is so
peculiarly applicable to the present state of Phy-

*^ In the words of an anonymous author, who is evidently no
mystic, ^ it is certain that, in this state, the whole series of or-
gans, which is formed for the use of the peculiar internal life of
the spirit, appears to undergo a change, and thus also the soul does
not communicate in the usual manner with the external world.
The individuals hear, see, taste, feel, smell — ^the sensitive power
is still present, as usual ; but the eye-ball is motionless — they
do not see with the ey6s, nor do they hear with the ears ; it is
indifferent whether these are open or shut, the whole head, the
whole brain, seems deprived of its vital energy,' and all life ap-
pears to be concentrated in the epigastrium; another proof
that the organ does not generate the power, but that the power
forms the organ.*' — See Das vendikierte BUd zu SaUy oder die
Wunder des Magnetismus. Leips. 1830. P. 69, 70.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 7

siology :— «Fra9lra magnum expectatur augmentum
in scientiis ex superinductione et insitione novorum
super Vetera ; sed instauratio facienda est ab imis
fundamentis) nisi libeat perpetuo circumvolvi in
orbem, cum exili et quasi contemnendo progressu.
Phenomena in some respeets similar to those we
have been considering, may be occasionally met
with in some of the lower animals. I shall notice
only one remarkable instance. Spallanzani ob-
served that bats can fly wi^h great certainty and
confidence in rooms, however dark, without strtk*^
ing against the walls. He found, that, when their
eyes were covered, they could fly with. as. much,
precision as before; and even when their eyes were
put out, no alteration in this respect was observed.
From his experiments, Spallanzani was disposed to
conclude, that the bat must possess a sixOi sense.
The appropriate organs of vision had been destroy-
ed, and therefore it could not be by means of sight
that they were enabled to avoid all obstacles. In
many individuals,' the ears were stopped, so that
it could not be by hearing. In others, the nostrils
were stopped, so that it could not be by smelling ;
and taste is out of the question. In these circum-
stances, shall we adopt Spallanzani's idea of a sixth
sense^ cr shall we presume that the intemai sense or
instinct of the animal was informed through other


8 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

media than tiie usual organs of external communica'
tian, ? *

As matter of history, and with a view to assist
us iQ pur investigations into this very curious sub-
ject, I may here be permitted to advert to some of
those theories which have been propoundedf by cer-
tain ingenious men, in order to account for the ex-
traordinary phenomena of somnambulism. f

* Sir Charles Bell accounts for this phenomenon in a some-
what similar manner. Speaking of the wing of the bat, he ob-
serves, that '< it is not a wing intended merely for flight, but
one which, while it raises the animal, is capable of receiving a new
sensation or sensations, in that ejpquisite degree so as almost to con-
stUute a new sense. On the fine web of the bat's wing nerves are
distributed, which enable it to avoid objects in its flight, during
the obscurity of night, when both eyes and ears &il." — Bridge-
7rater Treatise, p. 70.

Of the sufficiency of this explanation I shall say nothing ;
but it appears to me to stand rather in contradiction to certain
other propositions laid down by Sir Charles, and formerly no-
ticed in this work, viz. that the nerves are capable of exciting
in the mind no other idea than that to which they are appro-
priate ; that the organs of the senses are appropriated to parti-
cular classes of sensations, while the nerves intermediate be-
tween the brain and the organs are respectively capable of re-
ceiving no other sensations but such as are adapted to their
particular organs ; and that, when an individual is deprived of
the organs of sight, no power of attention, or continued effort
of the will, or exercise of the other senses^ can make him.ei\joy the
class of sensations which is lost.

•f- The very intelligent author of a Memoir on the Vital Fluid
in the Bibliotheque du Magnetisme Animal (torn. ii. p. 26.}, give^


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 9

I observed id a former chapter, that it is through
the medium of the nerves that the vital principle

the following ingenious explanation of the means by which per.
sons are enabled to see and hear during sleep.

^ It has been observed,*' says he, " that, during sleep, the
senses of ^ght and hearing, so alert in the waking state, are the
most profoundly dormant ; while, on the contrary, the organ of
the skin (the cuticuiar organ), which, as we know, is the prin-
cipal seat of the physical sensibility, is considerably more open
to external impressions and influences, when asleep, than when
awake But what has not been suspected is, that this or-
gan is the door by which we may communicate directly with
the internal sense of man in the state of sleep, excite his intel-
lectual Acuities, and even direct his moral sense to the object
we propose. Undoubtedly, this phenomenon appears a prodigy,
but only to those who have not observed it, or who have rea-
soned ill on the subject. I can prove it. Is it not very com-
mon to make sleeping persons speak — to make them sometimes
keep up pretty long conversations, and even tell their sedets ?
Certainly you then speak to them, and they answer ; but in
order that they may be able to answer you, it is necessary, I
think, that they should hear you. Do they hear you by the ear>
while, at that momentj the ear is asleep ? If they heard by
the ear, is it not clear that they could not be asleep ? They
cannot, then, hear you by the ear ; and it is evident that they
hear you by the only sense which is awake, that is, by the organ
of the skin. In a state of sleep, man is not only capable of per-
ceiving sounds by the organ of the skin : he is also capable of
perceiving, in the same way, the rays of light ; that is to say,
he can see and distinguish objects through the medium of this
same organ.'*

For proofs of the accuracy of this theory, the author refers
us to the history of a somnambulist in the AniuUea de MorUpel^
lievy and to the works of M. de Puysegur.

The preceding theory seems to be corroborated by the follow-
ing observations of Professor Kluge. He remarks, that the
phenomena of the corporeal atmosphere in man are most con.


10 iKNIMAL MAGNETISM.

appears to be acted upon — that they are the sources
of the animal affectability — that many eminent
physicians and physiologists had found themselves
compelled to asstime the existence of a nervous
fluid, as the vehicle of the influence in question —
and that the existence of this fluid, if not actually
demonstrated, had, at least, been rendered exceed-
ingly probable by the researchiBs of several cele-
brated experimental philosophers.

Now, the existence of this nervous or vit^zl fluid
lies at the bottom of almost all the theories of Ani-
mal Magnetism. Of Mesmer I have already spoken.
The following are the fundamental opinions upon
this subject of M. Tardy de Montravel, an early,
practical, and most intelligent disciple of Magne-
tism.

There exists a fluid diffused throughout all na-
ture, which is the principle of life and motion.

splcQously manifested during sleep, whai the activity of the
cerebral system is diminished, and that of the ganglionic sys-
tem, on the contrary, is increased. ^' In confirmation of this
iact,** says he, ^ I need not refer to the cases of sleep-walkers
and magnetic somnambulists, but merely mention an experiment
noticed by Wienholt, and several times repeated, and always
with the same success, by myself. This experiment consists in
approaching a sleeping person, and slowly moving the finger, a
metal rod, or any other substance, repeatedly above the bare
sur&ce of the skin, at the distance of half an inch or an inch,
without producing a current of air, when the sleeper will be-
come restless, generally rub the affected part, and, if the expe-
riment be longer continued, probably awake.'*— .Kluge, p. 257r


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. ll

This fluid, in traversing bodies, modifies diem, and
^ is modified by them in its turn. When it circu-
lates from one body to another with the same mo-
tion, these two bodies are in harmony with each
other. It is by means of this fluid that our nerves
receive sensations. Besides the external organs of
the senses, man possesses an internal sense, of
which the entire nervous system is the organ, and
the principal seat is in the plexus aoiaris. This
sixth sense is the principle of what we call instinct
in animals. If, by any cause whatever, the exter-
nal senses are deadened, and the internal organ of
sensibility acquires more irritability, the latter
alone performs the functions of all the others : it
carries to the soul the most delicate impressions, and
these impressions affect us in a lively manner, be-
cause our attention is no longer distracted by other
objects. This is what takes place in somnambu-
lism. With regard to previsions,^ they are en-
tirely the result of the combinations of the intel-
lect, which reasons according to the impressions it
experiences, as a watchmaker foresees the instant
when a pendulum will stop — as an astronomer
foresees the various motions which will take place
in the heavens. In animals, instinct is purely me-
chanical : in man it is augmented by all the moral

* See the following Chapters.


12 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

faculties ; and it is for this reason that it sometimes
becomes the expression of conscience.

The knowledge which the somnambulist pos-
sesses of distant objects, is owing to this fluid,
which conveys to him the impression of them, tra-
versing all bodies, as light traverses glass. *

A theory similar to the preceding is adopted by
M. Deleuze in his Histoire critiqtie du Mtignetisme
Animal. Indeed, it appears, in one form or an-
other, in the works of almost all writers upon the
subject. The fluid in question is supposed to be
analogous to electricity and galvanism. Both are
thought to depend upon the same principle, and
to have one common origin ; and a very ingenious
recent author has ascribed all the important phe-
nomena of nature to the various combinations of
this universal fluid with matter. -|-

I am perfectly aware, that, in the present state
of gross ignorance upon the subject, it would be
equally foolish and futile to enlarge upon any such
theory as that now briefly touched upon, in this
country. The facts themselves which have given
birth to this theory, must first be more generally

* See Essai tur la Thettrie du Somnambulisme MagneHque^ and
the other writings of M. Tardy de Montravel.

t See Easai de Paychologie Ph^aioiogiqve, par M. Chardel. Pa-
ris, 1831. Also Appendix, No. III.


4


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 13

studied, appreciated, and admitted, as upon the
Continent, before we can expect that any great at-
tention will be paid to the principles upon which
they are capable of being explained.


( u )


CHAPTER XXII.

The phenomena manifested in the magnetic
somnambulism are, in almost all respects, analo-
gous to those which occur in the natural or spon-
taneous. In the former, however, when the patient
is very susceptible, or the operator possesses great
magnetic power, the crisis can generally be ren-
dered more perfect by the artificial means employ-
ed ; and much better opportunities are thus afford-
ed for making experiments, and observing the re-
sults.

Indeed, it is one of the many benefits conferred
upon physiological science by the magnetic treat-
ment, that it has not only completely demonstrated
the possibility of producing this remarkable state
of the human organism artificially, but likewise
afforded us the means of more carefully and more
minutely investigating its various and most inte-
resting phenomena. Many of the professors of
Animal Magnetism, it is true, seem to be of opi-
nion, that the magnetic treatment is not altogether
the primary and efficient, but only the secondary


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 15

and oceasional, cause of somnambulism ; that is to
say, that it merely tends to develope that affection
in such constitutions as are otherwise predisposed
to it. It is certain, however, that it has been so
^educed in a great variety of instances, and thus
given rise to many interesting speculations, both
with regard to the agency of the magnetic prin>*
ciple upon the human constitution in general, and
to the nature and extraordinary phenomena of that
peculiar state of the organism ; speculations which,
if divested of all mysticism, and conducted in the
sober spirit of philosophical investigation, cannot
ultimately fail to improve and extend our physio-
logical and psychological knowledge.

The cases of the magnetic somnambulism have
become exceedingly numerous, since the m(»'e ge-
neral introduction of that mode of treatment upon
the Continent ; so numerous, indeed, that it is quite
ttoneceatary, and. would be intolerably tedious, to
gBFe^anyJ^ull and. particular detail of them. The
cbaracter^of. the phenomena, too, is so similar in
all of them, that, after enumerating a few of the
mast remarkable, little additional instruction could
be derived^ so far, at least, as the nature of the< af-
fection is concerned, from the very few specialties
•wbicb.inay be* found to occur in individual in-
stances. I shall therefore merely advert to some
of the.inQre>remarki^ble, features^of this very extra-


16 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

ordinary organic state, referring those who may
feel desirous of obtaining more ample information
upon the subject to the various publications enu-
merated in this work.

The phenomena I am now about to bring under
the particular notice of the reader, may be arranged
into four classes :

1. The faculty possessed by almost all Som-
nambulists of seeing through intervening opaque
bodies;

2. The faculty manifested by some somnambu-
listic patients of seeing the interior of their own
bodies and that of other persons, of pointing out
the nature and seat of diseased structure, and of
prescribing appropriate remedies. This has been
called the faculty of Intuition,

3. The faculty of seeing objects at a distance ;
and,

4. The faculty of foreseeing future events; which
last has been denominated the faculty of iVeriMon.

All of these phenomena, it will be observed, are
comprehended under the fifth and sixth degrees
into which, as Professor Kluge remarks, patients
have been found to pass during the magnetic treat-
ment*

With regard to these phenomena, the Committee

* See page 281, &c. The evidence adduced in the Appendix to
tbe former edition of this publication, relative to the transfer-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 17

of the Royal Academy of Medicine at Paris ob-
serve, in their late Report : " We have seen two
somnambulists who distinguished, with their eyes
closed, the objects which were placed before them ;
they mentioned the colour and the value of cards,
without touching them ; they read words traced
with the hand, as also some lines of books opened
at random. This phenomenon took place even
when the eye-lids were kept exactly closed with
the fingers.

^^ In two somnambulists we recognized the fa-
culty of foreseeing the acts of the organism more
or less remote, more or less complicated. One of
them announced repeatedly, several months pre-
viously, the day, the hour, and the minute of the
access and of the return of epileptic fits. The other
announced the period of his cure. Their previsions
were realized with remarkable exactness. They
appeared to us to apply only to acts or injuries of
their organism.

•

ence of sensation in certain cases of Catalepsy and Somnambu-
lism, belongs to this branch of the subject ; and I have there-
fore caused the paper to be reprinted at the end of this work.
(See Appendix, No. IL) To that evidence I have never heard
any reasonable objection stated ; on the contrary, several per-
sons, previously sceptics, have since expressed to me their con-
viction of the truth of the fiict— a fact which is, moreover, con-
firmed by almost every case of the natural as well as of the
magnetic somnambulism.

VOL. II. B


18 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

** We found only a single somnambulist who
pointed out the symptoms of the diseases of three
persons with whom she was placed in magnetic
connexion. We had, however, made experiments
upon a considerable number."*

At one time, I proposed to bring these different
phenomena separately under the notice of my
readers ; but I soon found that this method would
necessarily be attended with a great deal of labour
and inconvenience, and with no little confusion.
There is scarcely a single patient, in the higher
magnetic state, who does not manifest several, if
not all, of these phenomena, at different stf^es of
the treatment. By taking them up singly, there-
fore, I should have exposed myself to much trouble
in repeatedly going back to each individual case ;
besides diminishing the interest which might other^
wise be felt by the reader in attending to an entire
and unbroken narrative. For these reasons, I shall
bring each case which I propose to adduce, with
all its remarkable phenomena, fully under the no-
tice of the reader, ^eria^'m ; beginning with the

* With praiseworthy candour and caution, these French
Academicians notice only such phenomena as fell tinder their
own observation, while engaged in the investigation entrusted
to them. I trust, however, that I shaU be able to demonstrate
the reality of the other fiicts alluded to, by the testimony of
equally con^tent and credible witnesses.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 19

more simple, and advaneiDg to the more compli-
cated.

But before I proceed to the details of these very
remarkable cases, I am anxious, in consequence of
the little attention which has been recently paid to
the subject, to shew that I am supported by com-
mon opinion, as well as by many competent gene-
ral authorities and authenticated facts, indepen-
dently of magnetism, in my views of the question
under discussion. For this purpose, I might refer
at some length to the writings of Plato, Hippo*
crates, Aretaeus, Galen, &c, who held as true, or,
at least, as probable, many of those phenomena
which have been experimentally demonstrated by
the modern magnetizers — ^thus verifying the adage,
that '^ there is nothing new but what has been for-
gotten/' But my authorities are abundant and
unambiguous; and I would avoid being thought
pedantic and tedious.

Ammianus Marcellinus, in defending the sybils
and others, thus answers the objections made to
their predictions : ^^ What signifies these murmurs
of ignorant people ? If there were any such thing,
say they, as a knowledge of the future, why was
this person ignorant that he should be overcome in
war? Why did not that other person foresee that
such and such an accident would happen to him ?
Excellent reasoning ! As if, because a certain


20 ANIMAL MAGNETISxM.

grammarian had committed a solecism in language
— a certain musician had produced a discord — a
certain physician had been ignorant of a particular
remedy ; as if from these circumstances we were
entitled to conclude that there are no such things
as grammar, music, or medicine."*

Athenagoras — who was first a Platonic philoso*
pher, and afterwards embraced Christianity — in his
apology for the Christians, considers the soul as
capable of itself, and by its own powers, of predict-
ing future events^ and of curing diseases^ and that
these powers were improperly ascribed to demons.
His words are :f Et cum suapte vi ac rations^ anima,
utpote immortcUiSy pkrumque moveatur et agat in ho-

m

miney ita utfuturaprcBdicaty et rerum prcesentium sta-
turn dirigaty aut<imendet (the Greek word is ^eiTtvrct.

* Ammian. Marcell. p. 1 30, No. 5. (Lib. xxi.>

■f Athenagoras, Gesnero Interprete,

Kluge observes, that this phenomenon manifested by som-
nambulists gave great ofience to many physicians, who thought
it an impertinent interference with their learning and dignity,
that the patient should pretend to know more than the Doctor.
The Professor, however, reminds these gentlemen, that the ob-
jection is founded upon a total mistake of their peculiar duties.
irhe business of the physician never was any thing more than
curaHve (curare J ; the healing power (ntederi) resided in Nature
herself, whose servants and subordinates they ought always to
be. In short, it is the sole duty of the physician to endeavour
to place the diseased organism in such a state as to allow Na.
ture to restore it to health.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 21

— cures), hufus sapienticB laudem dcemones sibi In-
crcofitur,

St Justin, who lived nearly about the same time
with Athenagoras, remarks, that the Sybils, in ut-
tering their predictions, however true, did not
themselves understand what tliey said, and that,
as soon as the instinct which animated them was
extinguished, they lost all recollection of what they
had predicted .-^^Sed in ipso afflatus tempore sortes
iUa suas explebat^ et evanescente instinctu ipso^ simul
quogtie dictorum memoria evanuit.* This is pre-
cisely what takes place in somnambulism.

The Druid priests were also physicians. Cicero
says of them : — There are Druids in Gaul, among
whom I knew Divitiacus of Autun, who pretended
to have a knowledge of natural things, which the
Greeks call Physiology^ and who said that, partly
by the science of augury, and partly by conjecture,
they foresaw future events. •[" Pliny describes the
Druids as ^' that kind of prophets and physicians'*
— hoc genus vatum medicorumque.%

Montanus the heretic prophesied. He appears
to have been in a state of habitual crisis. He had
two women along with him, Prisca and Maximilla,
who feU into ecstasies^ and predicted future events ;

* Justin, Admonitotium ad Greecos,
t Oe DhmaiUme, L. 1. § 41, No. 89.
t HiH. Nat. L. 30, c. 1.


22 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

but, like all samnambulistSi recollected nothing qfwhat
they had said when in their ordinary state. * Ter-
tullian speaks of one of these prophetesses^ who,
in her crises, amongst other things, prophesied^ and
prescribed remedies for diseases.

Jambliehus, in his work De Mysteriis, speaks of
the phenomena of the ecstatic crisis, which he ap-
pears to have perfectly well known. Those who
are thus affected, he observes, neither make use of
their senses, nor are so awake as those who have
waking senses. The soul, he says, has a twofold
life, the one along with the body, the other sepa-
rable from every thing corporeal. When awake,
we chiefly make use of the life which is common
to the body ; but in sleeping, the soul may be en-
tirely released from its chains, and make use of
the incorporeal life. In this state, he recognizes,
amongst others, the phenomenon of prevision, or
foreknowledge, f

Johnston, in his Thaumatographia naturedisj when
treating of hysterical diseases, observes, that those
who are aflected with them experience convulsions,
palpitations, epileptic fits ; they become deprived
of sight, their voice utters an extraordinary sound ;

• St Hieron. Proem, ad Ismam,

f See Jambliehus, De Mysteriis^ in cap. De Somniis..>-See al-
so Rob. Fludd, Hist, Microcosm, Tract, i. sect. 2, part. i. 1. 3.
c. 1.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM* 23

sometimes they avoid the light, and seek the ob-
scarity of the tombs ; at other times, they spectk
unknown languages^ and predict future events.*

Many authors have noticed this last mentioned
phenomenon of speaking a language unknown to
the individual in his ordinary state ; and it will very
frequently be found coupled with the prophetic facul-
ty, as arising out of the same or similar conditions.
Among these authors^ passing over the ancients, I
may mention Pomponatius, Lemnius, Gainerius,
Fioinus, Forestus, &c. Pomponatius, (Lib. de In-
cant, c. 4.) refers to the story of the wife of Fran-
cis Magresi, who, in an access of melancholy, spoke
in various languages, and, when cured by medical
treatment, lost all knowledge of these tongueSir
The author of the ChiHads {in Declam. pro Laudi-
bus Medic.) mentions the case of an Italian, who,
in a fit of mental aberration, (novo ex vermibusfU'

* ^^ Solet interdum in virginibus retentum semen putrescere
in utero, deleteriam acquirere vim, et mirifica excitare sjmptO'.
mata. Vapor enim malignus suscitatus, intestina, ventriculum,
hepar ad diaphragma comprimit, cordis palpitatio, cardialgia,
vertigo et pallor oboritur. Alias subito mulier prostemitur,
respiratione, loquela, visu privatur. Epilepsia, convulsione et
deUriis interdum infestatur. Exaudiuntur interdum ex imis
visceribus mirse voces. His positis, diversa et mirabilia in di-
vends etiam Unguis proferri: Nocturnos discursus, et circa
mortuorum sepulchra, latebras quseri."— J^. Johitstok, Thau-
mat, nat Amst. 1633.

** Aliquando solent tales homines Unguis peregrinis loqui, et
futura prsedicere."


24 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

roris genere correptits)^ spoke good Germarii a lan-
guage previously unknown to him when in health,
and which he again forgot when cured of his dis-
ease. Gainerius relates several instances of per-
sons, male and female, who spoke languages which
they had not previously known.*

Lemnius (Lib. ii. De Occult, NaXurcB Mirac. c. 2.)
observes, that, in acute fevers, persons have been
known to discourse, copiously and fluently, in an
elegant and elaborate dialect, which they were in-
capable of using when in health ; and he ascribes
this phenomenon, not, as was usual in his time, to
demoniacal possession, but to the influence of the
disease. The same thing is frequently found to
occur in the ecstatic somnambulism.

Morhof (in his Polyhist Litter, lib. iv. c. 4. § 2.),
quotes from Fulgosus the case of an Italian labour-
ing under the plague, and thought to be at the
point of death, who, suddenly rallying, sent for
his master, and told him that he had really been
in heaven, and had learned who and how many
persons belonging to the house would die of the
plague ; and having named them, he affirmed that
his master would survive. And in order that his
words might obtain credit, he shewed that he un-
derstood all languages, spoke Greek with his mas-
ter, and attempted other dialects with those who

* E» Gentile tn Qwest, de Incanlatume.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 25

knew theniy although he had previously only learned
Italian ; and having lived two days in this state, he
died, and was followed by those he had named, his
master surviving.

The same author also quotes from La Motte le
Vayer the ease of a Frenchman, Le Fevre, who, in
his sleep, when interrogated in any language, could
answer in the same, although, besides French, he
had only an imperfect knowledge of Italian and
Spanish. He predicted that a certain person should
die a violent death, and the individual subsequent-
ly perished in a duel. When awake^ he seemed to
be asleep, for he had always something obtuse and
stupid about him ; while, when asleep, he exhibited
much more alacrity and vigilance. In his waking
state, he recollected nothing of what had occurred
during his sleep, except that, from intense headach,
he judged that he had been much harassed with
questions and answers. This case, which seems
to have extremely puzzled the observers, was evi-
dently one of the natural or spontaneous somnam-
bulism; and the symptoms appear to have been
precisely analogous to those which have been found
to occur in other instances of the same affection.

Many other curious instances of these phenomena,
accompanied with learned and ingenious attempts
to explain them, may be found in Yalesius, Huarte,

VOL, II. c


26 A^IMAX MAGNlSTlSM.

£tefiii0rtui»9 &c. The fttcfte thettMetvies pr^te pretty
notorious, but the thebrcftieal explanations, from
the want of any adequate hiductiye investigation,
were almost always unsatisfactory.

Charroii, in his TiraUedela Sagesse (L. i. eh. 15,
No. 11), rettiarks, that melancholy, maniacal, fire-
Mtic persofDS, lind those aflfeirted with certain dis-
eases, wbieh H'Ippocrates caHssacred (morbmstxcer),
speak Latin w9l9t6nt having learnt it, eompose
verses, converse sensibly and wisely, discover hid-
ddt things^ and predict fiitt&e events (whicb foolish
and igndrant persons ascribe to the devil, dr to a
foliiiliaT spirit), ^Itho\igh th^ were previously
idiots and rustics, and agidn becoAie bo ^fter their
eure.

Valesius {DeSacrd PAfA>^c{pA. cap. SO), observes,
that whatever renders the mind free from external
cares, natntally disposes it for divine cotitempla-
tion, and fdr prophecy ; and that this disposition
probably becomes more efficacious in certain dis-
Bftg^ dr ht (!fdnsequencfe of it gt^t prostration of
bodily i^retxgth, as in ^ying perilous. For it is
c€hr«ain;^ys he, thalt, in pfopoftion as lihei^rength
of the body and lire t«^eJght rff «ie "fiesh are dimi-
tdi/hed, H^e powers of the ttitnd beoolne more ener-
getic 'laid "ttiore perfect.

'IMbuperttfis not only believed in the pOS^bility
of a faculty of prevision, but he has even exempted


to ex|>laia it ^SiScnaftetliiog quite jnatiual. In a pas-
su^ «f cMbe of bis wocks,. &ero oocnr tfae feUowing
obseryaAidDs :-r^ It «Fbi»ld appear thatfc the yeroep-
ttoniB tS the past, 4he prjoseiit, Aiid ihei firtune, only
differ in the degaree of the mnai'M «actiyity. Op-
pcesaed l^ the eMUBeqiMnee' tf its peneeptions, k
petod^s the pa^ y its ^drdkuwy .atete 4ihe«v« it the
pi^esent^ a etafe ine^ exidfted i^iDuilc^ perhaps, ren-
deritiiBi^bk^^diBcoveidiig the fo^iiCBe; «nd tbi%
perhapi^ ^ii^cidlditet fae(&o<wioaadeFfai, as to find it
ire^teBBntingtoitadf change vthat^giiottejdat^ seiner
msitodi and ne\wr will .ittxiBt. Weliaire^iieediif all
imr leorperieDoe ito prei^t ua irem )^mng (CJtfedit to
ear iliieainB. If we emniiae pfailosqihioaHy the
a^temis to wbieh we mi^t have Ffeoeni'iei 'in order
to cb^Ibmi ihow we|ieroeiv;e o]a$ect%ipiedba{Mkall that
we have just «aid will no; longer ^appear ^so strange,
as it may have done at ifirst* Jf there be no real
relation between the objects and thai spiritual es-
itooe iddoh perciEiives them ; if our perceptions have
their proper cause in the soul, imdliave no relation
to the objects but by concomUadoe, or by .a pre-
estdblished harmony ; or if ihe objects are only the
occasional causes of that manifestation which fiod
wished the soiil to faave^df^a didwtanceiwheTe all
ihe archetypes of it are to be Ibond : dhe peceeption
of the past, and Aat of the iuture, will be no more
difficult to comprehend than thsctiof the present."


28 ANIMAL MA6N£TISftr«

Sir Henry Halford, in an interesting essay on the
Kttver»f — brain fever--^f Aretaeus, has the following
remarkable passage in relation to this subject :

^^ The author, Aretaeus, states that the first ef-
fect of the subsidence of the violent excitement is,
that the paiienfs mind becomes clear, that aUkU sen^
satums are now exquisitely keen ; that he is the first
person to discover that he is about to die, and an^
nounces this to his attendants; that he seems to hold
converse with the spirits of those who have departed
before him, as if they stood in his presence ; and that
his soul acquires a prophetic power. The author,
with all the appearance of being himself convinced
that this power has really been acquired by the pa-
tient in the last hours of his life, remarks that the
bye-standers fancy him to be rambling and talking
nonsense, but that they are afterwards astounded
at the coming to pass of the events which bad been
predicted. Indeed, he attempts to account for it
by supposing that the soul, whilst ^shuffling off
this mortal coil,^ whilst disengaging itself from the
incumbrances of the body, becomes pufer, more
essential, entirely spiritual, as if it had already
commenced its new existence.

^* To me, I own," continues Sir Henry^ ^^ i4 dees
not seem necessary to ascribe to persons under such
circumstances a supernatural power. We have all
observed the mind clear up in an extraordinary


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 29

manner in the last hours of life, when terminated
even in the ordinary course of nature, but certainly
still more remarkably when it has been cut short
by disease, which had affected, for a time, the in-
tellectual faculties. We have seen it become ca-
pable of exercising a subtle judgment, when the
passions which had been accustomed to bias and
embarrass its decisions whilst they existed, were
extinguished at the approach of death ; when the
inferences which wisdom had drawn from the for*
mer behaviour of men were now made available to
a correct estimate of their future conduct, in the
sense of Milton's lines :

' When old experience does attain
^ To something like prophetic strain.*

^^ An illustration of this argument may be read
in the beautiful valedictory address of the elder
Cyrus to his two sons and his friends assembled
round his death-bed to receive his last instructions.
The speech, full of good sense, of truth, and of
practical wisdom, is not less worthy of the favour-
ite disciple of Socrates, who records it, than of the
great king, who having been predicted by name,
some centuries before he existed, as the instrument
hereafter to accomplish the will of Providence, im-
parted these results of his experience at the close
of his illustrious life.

'^ Nevertheless, that a prophetic power did at-


30 ANIMAL MAGNETIBSM.

tend QMUi^s last. hour geoeniUy was a notioit oi-
terta)ii«4 of o)^ a&d haa been trancaiiitted down to
us froiipb tbe curliest records of mankind. We read
in tbe^ Pentatecidi) .tbat, *^ \dbwn Jacob bad made
an end of eommaiiding bis sons'*, (or^ in other
wy>rd% not ksa fiiitbffil to the original^ nor to dw
version of the Ssfitiiaghi V ' when Jacob bad finish-
ed imparting bis solemn ii^anetiotis to biff soii^),
he drew up bis feet into the bed, and yielded np
the ghofi^" Now» with these solemn injunctions
were mixed op much jurophetic matter, many pre-
dictions of their future fate and fortunes: as, for
instance, — ^ the sceptre shall not depart from Jo-
dab, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shiloh come, and to him shall the gathering of the
pe(^le be»^

/* And although the aceoont here given by Mo-
ses is^ as I believe it to be, in the language of in*
spiration^ and must not therefore be humiliated by
beii^ compared even with this sublime account of
an imp<M:tant disease, given by a physician for tbe
infornuUion of his profession, and the good of
iqankind ; yet we must allow it to be remfla*kable,
that the Almighty should be pleased to choose the
dying hour of the Patriarch in which to insphre him
with a foreknowledge of his. gracious purpose to
send the Messiah into the world for the redemption
of mankind ; nor will it seem extravagant to sup*


ANIMAL MA6NETI9M> SI

pQ«e th^t this most interesting prediction, at t^e
cloiBiB of'Ja^abiVlife, might be the very foundation
on. wUck the popular notion (that dying peraomii
were gifted with the power of prophecy — a notion
whieh prey^led through so many successive ages
afterwarda) was huilt. The. pride of human na-
ture'easily disposes it to appropriate to itself extra-
ordinary power; and that which was peculiarly
vouchsafed to the sanctity of the Patriarch and
Prophets of God may have l^een asmimed to be the
privilege of mankind universally in. the ]i^ar of
deHthi

*^That the. fame of the Patriareh^s prophecy,
and those of Isaiah at a much later period, was
not confined to the limits of the country in whi^
they were first promulgated, we are very sure; that
they were extended, in process of time, by the ve-
nerated authority of the Sibylline leaves (which
we have good reason to believe were a collection
of prophecies), over the whole extent of the Roma&
empire, is probable, and that their fulfilment was
expeeted the more intensely as the time of their
accomplishment drew near, we may assume, as a
fair inference, from the Pollio of Virgil, who makes
use of the very same beautiful imagery in depict-
ing the advantages to follow the expected birth of
his august personage, as Isaiah had employed to
describe the happy consequences of the advent of


32 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

»

the Messenger of mercy to mankind. What won-
der, then, if the philosophers, both Grecian and Ro-
man, if the poets (who may be considered as his-
torians of popular notions) concurred in transmit-
ting down this accredited opinion ? Cicero, a most
accomplished philosopher as well as orator, him-
self an augur too, and therefore probably well ac-
quainted with the contents of the Sibylline leaves,
(for they were committed to the safe custody of
the College of Augurs), in his first book on Divi-
nation, gives a story of the prediction of the death
of Alexander the Great, by an Indian about to die
on the funeral-pile. Hi& words are : ^ There are
certainly some traces of presentiment and divina-
tion even among barbarous nations ; as Calanus,
the Indian, proceeding to death, when he ascended
the burning pile, exclaimed : O excellent departure
from life ! when, as happened to Hercules, the soul
shall ascend into light from the ashes of the mor-
tal body. And when Alexander asked him whe-
ther he wished to say any thing more, he answer-
ed : It is well — / shall see you soon. In fact, in the
course of a £bw days afterwards, Alexander died at
Babylon.'*

* A somewhat analogous and very singular storj is told by
the late Mr M. 6. Lewis, in his Journal qf a West India Pro^
prietor. The story relates to Plato— not the celebrated philoso-
pher of that name, but — the runaway negro, and captain of a
troop of banditti in Jamaica— a man of daring courage, and a


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 38

^' As to the poets, Homer transmits this popular
notion — Sophocles adopts it — ^Virgil copies Homer
— ^and our own Shakspeare records it in various
passages.'^

professor of Obi, or the Indian magic. This man was, at length,
apprehended and executed. " He died,*' says Mr Lewis, ** most
heroically ; kept up the terror of his imposture to the last mo-
ment ; told the magistrates who condemned him, that his death
would be revenged by a storm which would lay waste the whole
island that year ; and when his negro jailor was binding him to
the stake at which he was destined to suffer, he assured him that
he should not live long to triumph in his death, for that he had
taken good care to Obeah him before his quitting the prison. It
certainly did happen,** continues Mr Lewis, '* strangely enough,
that before the year was over, the most violent storm took place
ever known in Jamaica ; and as to the jailor, his imagination,'*
as Mr Lewis has it, '^ was so forcibly struck by the threats of
the dying man, that, although every care was taken of him, the
power of medicine exhausted, and even a voyage to America
undertaken, in hopes that a change of scene might change the
course of his ideas, still, from the moment of Plato's death, he
gradually pined and withered away, and finally expired before
the completion of the twelvemonth."

Urban Grandier predicted the death of one of his persecutors.
Father Lactantiua, within a month of his own, and the predic.
tion was verifi^. A similar story is told of Molay, grand master
of the order of Templars, in respect to King Philip of France
and Pope Clement V,


( 34 )


CHAPTER XXra.

At the oonelosiosi of tbe preceding chapter, I
took the liberty of making a pretty long quotation
from an elegant treatise by Sir Henry Halford, in
order to make the reader fully aware of the uni-
versality of the belief, prevalent from the most re-
mote times, in the exercise of prophetic powers
under certain organic conditions ; a belief which,
however occasionally associated with prejadice»
superstition, and error, assuredly was not entirely
destitute of a natural foundation. Sir Henry's own
opinion on the subject is not very clearly or deci-
dedly expressed ; but, perhaps, like many other
learned and intelligent individuals, his attention
had not been attracted to the evidence by which
the belief in question is supported. I shall now
proceed to adduce my other authorities for the

fact

The following passages, which are well worthy
of attention, are extracted from a learned treatise
written by the celebrated Dr Frederick Hoffmann,


physidan to the king of Prussia— entitled, De op-
tima PkHoeqphandi ruiume.

^' In what manner the soul confilied by th^
chaina of the body may be disturbed in its aetieBS»
has nol hitherto been satisfactorily ascertained, but
is still a moot point in philosophy. In my opinion^
it appears very probable, that the intellect, origi-
nally pure^ luminous^ and inoi^nic, infused by the
Almighty into a Hving body at its first creation^
has a connejti<m and commerce with a vert^ subHk
Cereal fltridj which is separated from die blood
and lymph in the minute fabric of the brain, and
that the purer this fluid is, the functions of the
mind are performed with so much the more alacri-
ty ; whilst, on the contrary, the more impure it is,
and the more it is imbued with sulphurous, va-
porous, and terrestrial particles, men are found to
be more dull and stupid."*

*^ From what has been said, too, ite may find the

* Quomodo ftutem anlina corporis TincuHs inhserens in ac-
tionibus suis turbari posstt, nondum aatis evict«m, ted adhuc
sub philosophis Ik est. Meam quod attinet sententiam, ea
mSA Tidetur voro slmUu^ quodlntellectus insitua, purus, luxni.
nosus, <»igmaliter inorganicua, a Deo in prima creatione corpori
Ti^o infusus, cum sobtilissimo aethereo fluido, quod in cerebri
fiibrica tenuisrtma a sanguine et lym{^ separatur^ habeat Tin«
culum et cbmmercium, quod fluidum^ quopurlusest, eoalacriua
flinctiones sunt anlmi, quo v^ro impurius, et quo magis multia
particulis sulphureis, vaporosis, et terrestribus imbutum est, eo
bebetiores et obtusi homines inyeniimtur.


36 AKIMAL MAGNETISM.

reason why those, individuals who are weak in
body, who take little food and drink, and rather
indulge in fasting, have a much readier and purer
power of intellect ; which we have not unfrequent-
ly observed, especially in pious persons, upon the
near approach of death. For they, returning to
themselves during a period of quiet, speak of the
wonderful joys they experience, and glory in the
society of God and the angels ; which joy and ala-
crity of the dying, Cicero (De Consotat.) ascribes
to the gods, when he says that we ought not to de-
spair of the benignity of the gods, since they soothe
and lighten the minds of those departing from life.
Undoubted signs of this are very frequently ob-
served in the dying, when, as if roused from si eep,
at the time they are in extremities, they appear so
sprightly and joyful, that we might imagine they
departed this life with the greatest pleasure."*

* £x his quoque adductis repetenda erit ratio, quod iis Iio-
minibus, quorum corpora infirma, parum cibis et potu onerantur,
magisquejejuniis indulgent, longe promptior et purior intelli-
gendi vis insit ; quod etiam in morti proximis, prsesertim piis,
non raro observamus. Hi enim ad tempus quieti ad se redeun-
tes, mira enarrant gaudia, et de Dei angelorumque consortio glo-
riantur ; quam morientium laetitiam et alacritatem Cicero {De
ConsolaL) diis ascribit : cum ait : non desperandum de deorum be-
nignitate, quin eo tempore e vita properantem discedere foveant
atque allevent. Cujus rei in morientibus signa sspissime mi.
nime dubia cemuntur, cum velut e somno exciti, quo tempore
extxemum spiritum edituri sunt, ita gaudentes et abicres adspi-
ciunt, ut libentissUne e vita judices proficisci.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 37

^* Daily experience teaches us that, during sleep,
the body is at- rest, and the mind is not distracted
by external objects: hence, therefore, the latter
can more readily and more successfully execute its
operations. In dreaming, it not unfrequently hap-
pens that many things become to us clear and eoc*
posed which were previously concealedj things long
forgotten occur to the memory, and powers which na^
ture often seemed to have denied to us, are developed
during sleep, when the mind is re-instated in its rights.
Thus, it has frequently happened to myself, who
possess no natural genius for poetry, to have com-
posed and recited very elegant Latin verses, in
proper order and series, of which I could still re-
member some when awake. And who is so igno^
rani of sacred literature as not to know, that God has
revealed the most important matters in dreams, for no
other reason than that the mind, during deq?, is mare
attentive, and more capable of apprehending those
things which are revealed.

" SCHOLION.

^^ The most ancient Father of physicians, Hip-
pocrates, already in his time diligently noted this
in his book De Insomniis, where be says, near the
commencement : When the body is awake, the
thinking faculty of the mind is not in complete
possession of its powers, but distributes some part
of them to the different parts of the body, or the


S8 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

senses — of bearing, siglit» touch, mnseular action
-*^and to all the corporeal £acultie8. . Bmiwhen the
bod^ is ut restj tite soul is in motiQ9kj andpervading
wery part of this body^ governs Us hous^oldy and^ of
Uself^ pefforms aU the actions of the body. For the
body^ when asleep, perceives nothing ; while ifte soul,
etiB awahe, Jmows^ ^sees^ hearsy moves about, touches,
manifests joy or sorrow, ^c* In fine, all the corpo-
real and intellectual ojfices aare eeeouted by the soul
during sleep. And Cicero (De DivinaL lib. \.)
says : When 4he mind is separated by deep from ^
society and contagion of the body, it then remembers
the past, perceives the present, and foresees Aefutmre.
For the body of a sleeper lies like ithat of one dead,
■fcifit.the fnind lives and is yigorons. How much
more so after death, wbea it^ahall have altogether
HBeparated from the body ! For this reason, upon
the •approach of death, it becomes much more ca-
pable of divination.'^

* Tandem experientia constat quotidiana, in somno corpus in
quiete esse, neque animum ab objectis extends distrahi : hinc
etiam operationes suas felicius et promptius exsequi potest.
In insomniis baud raro multa nobis clara fiunt et detecta, quae
antea noMs fitere abscondita, diu oblita in memoriam reniunt, et
quicquid saepe natura den^gasse videtur, id anima in somno,
8ui juris reddita, prsestat. Sic saepe milii, cui nullum unquam
a natura datum est ingenium poc^ticum, aliquoties obtigit, ut
^legant^ssimos latinos Tersus condnno ordine et serie confioerim
f6t redtaverim, quorum aliquot vigilans de scmmo adbuc recen-
sere potui. £t quis in sacris litteris tam hospes est qui nesdat,
D6um ill iilsomxiiiB maxinm xevehsse : non aliam ob causam,


^


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 69


€C


AdcI wbo has not observed that Aisk persons,
especially liysterieal females, of tFtiom I have seen
several, attadcedwith cataleptic and ecstatic affec-
tions, 'cdtlier dciring or after the paroxysm, have
predicted fojture events^ and have spoken m hmguages
vs/hich they themselves had never learnt^ although
their parents knewthem/'f

quam quia mens tunc sit attentior ad ea capienda, quse reve-
lantur.

SOBOLIOK.

Antiquissimus medicorum parens, Hippocrates, id suo jam
tempore observavit sollertissime in lib. de iTuomniis^ ubi inter
initia scribit: Corpus cum vigilat, animse cogitatio non sui
juris est, sed partem aliquam singuli corporis partibus, sive
seixsibusi distribuit, auditui, visui, tactui, gressui, acti<mi ac
omni corporis &cultati. Cum autem corpus quiescit, anima in
motu est, et corporis partes perreptans, domum suam gubemat,
etx>mne8 corporis actiones ipsa perficit. Nam corpus dcnrmiens
non sendtf ^>sa veto vigilans cognoscit, ac visibilia videt, et au-
dibilia audit, vadit, tangit, tristatur, animadvertit. In summa,
Qusecunque corporis aut animse munia, ea otainia anima ipso in
8omno^obit.-*Et CiCBaOy De pkrintU, Ub. L Cum tomno sevo-
catus, aity animusa sodetate et contagione €c^sporia, tumimemi.
nit piseteritoFum, prsesentia cemit, futura .ptsevid^t. Jacet
enim corpus^ dcMrmientis ut mortui, viget autem et vi^t animus,
quod multo magis fadet post mortem, cum omninoe corpore
excess^t ; itaque appropinquante morte multo est divinior.

'f^Stquem fUgit segrotantes, imprimis mulieres hyistericas,
qms pliires vidi, adfectione cataleptica, quam pro ecstasi habue-
rintj-teiltkitasjprseBente paroxysmo aut finite, futura prsedijdsse,
eft 'MjD^^uis, qiias ipsse nunquam, parentes vero, didlcerunt, lo-
cutas.

The c^brated Cheralier Folard, who, in his old age, became
diibeedittgly 'devout, frequently fell into paroxysms of ecstasis.
Upon these occasions, he suddenly fell down, and became mo-


40 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

The same distinguished physician farther ob->
serves, in the same treatise, that cachetic or phthy-
sical patients, when their bodily strength is ex-
hausted, often exhibit a much greater and truly
wonderful alacrity in explaining divine things, than
when in health ; and that in valetudinary and in-
firm persons of more advanced age, the corporeal
powers — the memory and the imagination — de-
crease, while the vigour of the intellect and the
judgment is augmented. This, it will be observed,
is coincident with the opinion of Valesius, former-
ly quoted.

tionless; afterwards he sung, then wept, and, at length, suddenly
b^an to speak in monosyllables — a sort of jargon which some
took to be Slavonic, but which nobody could understand. When
his eyes were open he declared that he could see nothing, but
was in total darkness ; when they were shut, he said he was sur-
rounded by brilliant light, and in a most agreeable state. At
these times he is also said to have prciphesied. — See a curious
work, entitled, HisUnre cTun Voycige LiUeraire fait en 1733 ; also
the Bibiioth, du MagneHsme Animal^ for December 1818.

The author of the forgoing narrative notices a parallel case,
mentioned in Jurien*s Pastortd Letters^ of Isabella Vincent, a
shepherdess, between sixteen and seventeen years of age, who
fell into fits of ecstasis, which resembled a profound sleep, out
of which it was impossible to awaken her. She was entirely de-
prived of sensibility. In her accesses, she spoke and said most,
extraordinary things, although she could neither read nor write.
Her voice was clear and distinct ; and she had no violent or con-
vulsive motions. She prophesied future events, and promised
a speedy deliverance to the persecuted church. When the pa-
roxysm was over, she recollected nothing of what had occurred,
or what she had said.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 41

The opinions of a philosophical physician of sach
eminence as Dr'Frederick Hoffmann upon a sub-
ject of this nature, originating in a sound, discri-
minating judgment, and founded upon an exten-
sive practical experience, I should be disposed to
consider as of very great value. Nor do I attach
less importance to those of another professional
gentleman, well known and esteemed in the scien-
tific world, whom I believe to have been, in his
^y* perhaps the most learned physician in Europe,
and who, moreover, had the advantage of being in-
timately acquainted with the discoveries of Animal
Magnetism : I allude to the late Dr Sprengel.
This very learned individual published many ex-
cellent works upon medical and other scientific
subjects ; amongst others, one in five volumes, en-
titled the Institutions of Medicine ; from the second
volume of which I shall take the liberty of making
one or two quotations, which are exceedingly ap-
plicable to the subject I am now discussing. The
work is written in Latin ; but it is easily accessi-
ble ; and I shall translate those passages to which
I wish to call the attention of the reader.

Speaking of the magnetic Somnambulist, Dr
Sprengel observes (p. 303), ^* Hence also that in-
stinct revives, by means of which the patient ac-
quires a knowledge of his own state qf healthy and of

VOL. II. D


42 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

that of any other person who is placed en rapport
wUh him — and is also enabled to predict the duraiioH
of the crisis and its termination^ and to prescribe the
appropriate remedies^ These remedies are general-
ly vulgar and domestic, when recommended by the
rustic ; or officinal preparations, when prescribed
by the better educated man. They are frequently
such as a physician woidd scarcely think of pre-
scribing— Hsuch as culinary salt, a pepper-bath, &c.
— ^but in most cases they do good, and Dr Wien-
holt does not recollect a single instance in which
they Were administered without beneficial effects.^
In another passage (p. 305)^ the learned Doctor
admits that '^ the Somnambulists predict the crisis of
their complaints^ and determine their duration and
end. I hiive myself,'^ says he, ** seen a young man^
a relation of my own, who had, never been treated
in this artificial manner," vie. by Magnetism — ^who
was therefore, I presume, a natural Somnambulist
— r?^^ who, in the very crises themselves, precKc^^
with the utmost certainty ^ the repetitions of the ac-^
cesJs^s^ prescribed the appropriate remedies, and for e^
told the period when the disease should terminate.***

* Dr Descottes, in the year 1760, attended, at Ai^nton, two
young li3rBterical women, who were much attached to each other,
and who knew eiifih other's situation, although living separately
in distant houses ; and who, moreover, always predicted their
own state of health, and that of the other, three or four days in
advance. (See f'r, Brotiier de Sauvages, Noaohgia MeAodicoy


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 43

The volume from which I have quoted appears
to have been pabli3hed so long ago as the year
1810, sinqe which period) th^ f^ets to which tb^
learned Doctor alludes have been abundantly con-
firmed afkd elucidated by a variety of additional
instances* I may adds bowQver, that the testimo-
ny of Dr Sprengel in favour of the authenticity of
these facts is so much the more valuable, because,
like most other learned men, be wa^ originally an
opponent of Animal Magnetism, and wrote against

t. ill p* i. p. 398, &C,) lung-Stilling mentions a amllar case
{Theorie d, Geisterkunde, p. 151) ; and Wienholt notices two cases
of a like description {HeUkr. d, Thierisch. Magnet, ToL iii. Jbfft.
3, u. 3).

According to the Romish ritual, the speaking various strange
and unknown languages, and giving proper answers in each lan>
guage, is an undoubted mark of possession ; as also, having an
insight into what is transacted in distant countries, a^d a faculty
of discovering secrets, without any means of information from
without. These circumstances, then, must have been known to
have occasionally occurred, however erroneous and absurd the
cause to which they were ascribed.

To the opinions already noticed, in regard to the possibility
of the dccasional manifestation of a prophetic &culty, I may add
that of the late Mr Coleridge. '^ It is impossible,** says he,
'^ to say whether an inner sense does not really exist in the
mind, seldom developed, indeed, but which may have a power
of presentiment. All the external senses have their correspon-
dents in the mind ; the ey^ can see an object before it is dis.i
tinctly apprehended ; — why may there not be a corresponding
power in the soul ? The power of prophecy might have been
merely a spiritual excitation of this dormant faculty.*'— 7a6fo-
Talk^ voL i pp. 36, 37.


44 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

its doctrines and treatment ; — until he appears, at
length, to have satisfied himself of their truth and
utility by investigation, observation, and experi-
ment, when he manfully threw gS his previous pre-
judices. But I am not aware that he ever was a
professed practical magnetizer, or that he looked
upon the subject in any other light than as a mat-
ter of science.

Dr Brandis, physician to the King of Denmark at
Copenhagen, a gentleman of great professional emi-
nence, and who, by those who are acquainted with
him or his writings, will not be accused of an enthu-
siastic or undue bias towards the doctrine of Animal
Magnetism, since he declares himself disposed to
view, with the utmost suspicion and scepticism^
every phenomenon which has not fallen under his
own observation — Dr Brandis, I say, amply and
unequivocally coniSrms this fact of the prevision of
somnambulists. ^^ The magnetised person," says
he, '^ predicts most exactly the progress of his dis-
ease, and especially the individual incidents — at-
tacks of convulsions, syncope, evacuations, &c. —
with all their concomitant circumstances; and,
with the same precision, he points out the period
T)f his cure. I confess," continues the Doctor,
'^ that the exactness with which all such predic-
tions of four clairvopantesy whom I myself have


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 45

hitherto had an opportunity of observing, were ve-
rified, greatly astonished me." *

The celebrated French physiologist Dr Georget
has, upon various occasions, and in the most decided
manner, recorded his perfect conviction, founded
upon experience, of all the remarkable facts of Ani-
mal Magnetism. " During forty years,'* says he —
now more than half a century — '^ magnetism has
been studied, practised, propagated in France, and in
a great part of Europe, by a multitude of enlighten-
ed and disinterested men, who proclaim its truth
in defiance of all the ridicule with which it is vain-
ly attempted to overwhelm them. It is a very as-
tonishing thing, that Animal Magnetism is not even
known by name among the ignorant classes : it is
among the enlightened ranks that it finds support.
It is men who have received some education who
have taken its cause in hand : it is partly learned
men, naturalists, physicians, philosophers, who
have composed the numerous volumes in which
the facts are accumulated which may now be ad-
duced in its favour."

In another passage, the same enlightened physi-
cian pronounces the following peremptory opinion
in regard to the utility of the magnetic practice :
^' I believe that no perfect medicine can exist but
that of the somnambulists in every thing which

*' Brakdis, p. 102.


46 ANIMAL. MAGNETISM.

conceros themselves ; and that it is possible to de-
rive advantage from their admirable instinct in the
case of other patients.'^

But it is not only in the works of the advocates
of Animal Magnetism, or of the candid and inde-
pendent inquirer, that we may look for an approval
of its principal doctrines, and a confirmation of its
more remarkable facts. Even the writings of its
professed opponents supply us with abundant tes-
timony in its favour; insomuch, that it is often ex-
ceedingly difficult to discover to what particular
points their opposition is directed. Their eontro<
versial tactics resemble those eccentric operations
in actual warfiire, which are generally a great deal
more showy than effective, and are never of any real
advantage against an antagonist who cautiously
keeps his forces concentrated, and stands firmly pre-
pared to resist every assault. They may send up a few
brilliant but harmless rockets into the air, amidst
the obscurity previously produced by their own ar-
tificial contrivances; but when these have once
exploded, and the atmosphere has again become
clear, no actual injury is found to have been in-
flicted, and the relative situation of the combatants
continues the same as before.*

* I am not in the habit of regularly perusing all the Reviews
which are published in this country, and consequently, it is pos-
sible that the opinions which some of them may have been


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 47

In the following chapter, I shall produce some
instances of the inconsistency of the opponents of
Animal Magnetism, in attempting to deny the
reality of facts which they either directly or indi-
rectly, admit.— JFVitf est ab hoste doceri.

pleased to express on the subject of Animal Magnetism may
have escaped my notice. This I can hardly regret, as those I
have happened to see have appeared to me to be the pure off-
spiiog of Ignorance and prejudice. I understand that a critique
of the former edition of this work appeared some time ago in
one of the numbers of the Foreign Quarterly Review. I have
not myself seen the article, but the sample I have received of
its logic has not tempted me to take the trouble of looking into
it. The reviewer, I am informed by a friend, attempts to re-
fute the truth of Animal Magnetism by means of the follow-
ing Sorties: What is believed in bp quacks is quackery; Gaily SpW'
zheim^ and Hahnemann are believers in Animal MagneHsm ; but
GaU, Spurzheim, and Hahnemann are quacks; ergo Animal Mag-
netism is quackery.

Now, without objecting that as neither I nor any other writer
on the subject have ever alleged the authority of any of these
gentlemen in favour of Animal Magnetism, it is surely incom-
petent to discredit that doctrine by an attempt to discredit a
testimony on which it was never sought to be established; with-
out objecting, also, that their quackery cannot be reasonably as-
sumed upon the ipse diait of an individual, who has not even evin-
ced^his title, either from privilege or from intellectual and moral
capacity, to hold so decided an opinion on their merits; — ad-
mitting, I say, all this, what is the nature of the reasoning it-
self? Let us test it by another amplication. What is believed
in by quacks is quackery ; G. S, and H are believers in ChrisiianUy ;
but G, S, and H, are quacks ; ergo ChrtsOanity is quackery.

There are few, I think, who would give much weight to the
opinion of any such logician as this Reviewer, upon any scien-
tific subject.


( 48 )


CHAPTER XXIV.

In a previous part of this work, I shewed that
the first French Commissioners who were appoint-
ed to investigate the reality of the pretensions of
Animal Magnetism, in the infancy of the discovery,
with the very imperfect knowledge they possessed
of the treatment, and with all their avowed scepti-
cism and hostility to the system, nevertheless were
forced to acknowledge that certain effects had been
produced by the processes they employed, and that
they even ventured to propound a theory of their
own, in order to enable them to account for the
phenomena. I have also shewn that Dr Stieglitz
of Hanover, another opponent, has been compelled
to admit the whole of the facts, and that he actual-
ly ridicules the theories by means of which these
French Commissioners and others attempted to
explain them. I am now about to take some more
particular notice of another more recent and more
formidable assailant, and to point out, from an exa-
mination of his own works, what are his real and
unprejudiced opinions upon the subject.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 49

The article Magnetisme Animal, in the Die-
tionnaire des Sciences MedicaleSy was written by M.
Virey, a medical gentleman of considerable learn-
ing and talent. It was composed with great care
and ability, and. every possible objection to the sys-
tem was urged with much force and ingenuity.
In short, the article was all that the most violent
and obstinate opponents could have desired ; and
it will probably be handed down to posterity, in
the learned work of which it forms a part, as one
of the most splendid monuments of perverted in-
genuity and scientific prejudice. These opponents,
however, were not long permitted to enjoy their
imaginary triumph over the obnoxious doctrine.
The article received a most elaborate and satisfac-
tory answer from the venerable M. Deleuze, in
which the whole of the objections urged by M.
Virey were effectually met and obviated, with all
that calmness, philosophy, dignity, and decision,
which so eminently distinguish the veteran histo-
rian of Animal Magnetism.*

But I wish to have nothing to do, at present,
with M. Yirey's reftUatum of Animal Magnetism.
My object, in the mean time, is to shew that, in his

* See Defense du MagneHtme Animal centre ies attaquet dont il
eit Vebjet done le DicHonnaire des Sciences Medicates, Par M. J.
P. F. DxLEUZE. Paris, iai9.

VOL. II. E


50 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

other writings, when free from the fetters of pre-
judice, and not engi^ed in performing the ta6k of
41 ^ofeseed advocate or special ^pleader, this inge-
nious gentleman has;aotaally adopted all the most
e8sential;opinions of the philosophers whose dog-
.mas he attempts to controvert— that he is, in fact,
an Animal iMi^etist in every thing but the name.
If I amiable to. satisfy my readers upon this point,
fthey 4»nnot,(I think, look upon the article in ques-
tion iaany other light than that of a clever Jeu

M. Virey speaks of Animal Magnetism, as of an
influence which may be felt at a. distance. Now,
imthe articlcc Influence of the DicHonnairedes
Sciences Medicaleg, the author (M. Virey himself)
endeavours to establish the principle that, when
two beings are in syippathetic connexion with each
other (onientre eux des rapports )y when their con-
stitutions, are in harmony, when two individuals
have lived together, and are united by the most
tender affection and by similar habits ; there tken
taksSiphee between them a transmission of the vital
prkmpkyiand one- of tiiem is capabk of acting upon
ike other 0t a distance,

^^ As there is only, as it were, one / between
th^e two beings, their ^ouls will correspond ; the

* For the following references I am indebted to the volume
of M. Deleuze, inentioned in the last note.


\

\


ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

brother in France will haye a presentime^i tsYtnr
ill kiB dreams, of what his brother may be doing
in America, in. a given situation. What stronger
proof can we require of the reality of sympathetic
influences?*

^^ If there existed between these individuals only
a simple imitation, without any transmission of
the vital influence from the one to the other, these
bodies, thus assimilated, would resemble clocks
which strike the same hours at the same moment,

* One of the most remarkable instances upon record, of the
exercise of this feeultj of sympathetic or magnetic presentiment
or ylB^ii at a distance, Is to. be found in the MmoweM de Mar-
guerite de ValoiSf Reine de Navqrrgy a lady who has never been
accused of superstition ; and the narrative bears all the marks
of authenticity. Moreover, &om the period it took place and
was recorded, it is obvious that it could have no r^eference to
any of the modern doctrines of Animal Magnetism. I shall
give the story in the onginal language.

Ija r^ne, xs^ t|i^e,.et^ a Metz» dangereusement malade de
la fievre. £lle revant, et etant assist^e autour de son lit du Roi
Charles, mon frere, et de ma soeur et mon frere de Lorraine,
de plii^sieurs Messieurs du Conseil et de force dames et prin-
cesses, qui la tenant hors d'^^rance ne Tabbandonnolent point,
s'ecria, continuant ses reveries, comme si elle eut vu donner la
battaiUe de Jarnac : Voy6s comme lis ^yent ; mon fils a la vic-
toire; he. Mon Dieul relevfts mon fils, il est par terre: Voy^s
vous dans pette haye le Prince de Conde mort ? Tous ceux qui
etoient la croyoient qu*elle revolt. Mais la nuit apr^s M. de
Lopez hii en ayant apport^ la nouvelle : Je le savois bien, dii
eUe ; no I'avois' je pas vu oviapt^hier. X>Qrs on reconnut que e
n'etoit point reverie do fievre, jmais un avertissement que Dieu
donne aux personnes illustres. — ^Many instances of the same phe-
nomenon, will be found in the various cases of the natural and
magnetic sonmambulism adduced in this work.


52 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

but there would be no union between them, nei-
ther would act upon its neighbour. Let us prove,
on the contrary, that there evidently exists a kind
of transfusion of the sensitive principle between
living bodies."

After having adduced his proofs, the author an-
nounces the conclusion in the following terms:
'^ There exists then, in all probability, an invisible
and transmissible vital fluid ; there are real influ-
ences in operation."

In the article Homme in the same Dictionary,
written also by M. Virey, the author pronounces
the following severe censure against the philoso-
phers and philosophy of the present times :

^^ It is scarcely to be imagined with what an un-
pardonable degree of presumption, and in what a
peremptory and decided tone, the dogmatists esta-
blish their at least very problematical opinions,
and contemptuously treat as absurd, as ridiculous,
as impossible, or even as ignorance and folly, all

that is opposed to their sentiments

Now, is it not manifest, if we will only reflect,
that man does not constitute the absolute measure
of all things ? that there may exist, and that there
really do ^xist, powers or principles imperceptible
by our senses, and whose existence is only revealed
by certain indications ? Take, for example, Mag-
netism — ^attraction at a distance. Our age, which


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 58

boasts SO mach of its superior lights, shews as
much horror for spirits, as Nature formerly did,
according to Aristotle, for a vacuum. We are in-
disposed to acknowledge any thing but matter and
no matter ; we should deny the motion emanating
from living forces, if a thousand proofs did not at-
test it every hour in man and other animals. We
thus voluntarily deprive ourselves of the most won-
derful facts, of th^ highest and most incomparable
truths, in order to attach ourselves to the uncer-
tain reports of the senses, to only the most brute
and material consequences ; we do not even inves-
tigate upon what foundations the nature of man
reposes, whose sense and reasoning are taken for
supreme arbiters, as the universal rules.''

In the article Instinct in the Dictionary above
named, likewise by M. Virey, we are told that it
is wrong to deny that man is endowed with in-
stinct, like the other animals ; and that this /acuity ^
unexercised in our ordinary state^ is developed in cer^
tain circumstances^ and gives us more certain infor-
mation than that which we can acquire by the senses
and experience.

^* Nature^ acting then cdone, and without being op-
posed or deranged by the intellectual faculties or the
willf manifests those astonishing acts of salutary con^
servationor direction for the cure of diseases.^''

^' For the same reason, we frequently experience^


54 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

during sleep^ the annunciation or indication of ike
^ate of the body^ which is the manifest voice of the
instinct"

M. Virey continues : ^* We will not be accused
of giving credit to the illusions of the pretended
Animal Magnetism; hut Us disciples support their
doctrine by well known caaeSf in which the iiMi9U!t
comes into play^ in consequence of the inactivity of the
external senses. Let a delicate or nervous female
abandon herself to that state of half-sleep called the
magnetic somnambulism^ let her shut up her senses^
or the doors of external impressions, the inteftial
impressions becoming predominant, she unll then
feel in a mor^ lively manner ; she will see, according
to her own kmguagey all the interior of her economy^

..•/^ is natural^ and conformable to the laws

of the organism^ that she should spontaneously desire
and demand those kinds of remedies which are most
appropriate to her ailments."

NoWf although the facts here are not vety fairly
stated,^ yet, taking M. Virejr's own view of the

• " We do not know why one individual is more susce|)tible
of somnambulism than another, why the same person is sus-
ceptible df somnambulism in dne disease, and not in another,
&Q. ; but we are certain that men of a robust temperament
and an apathetic character &11 into somnambulism as easily
as delicate and nenrbus women. The best somnambulists wte
not those who, In the|r waking state, appear to have an irritable
and delicate nenrous system. Wienholt even became assured
that magnetism produces very little effect in inveterate nervoua


ANIMAI. MAGNETISM. 55

matter, what great diflference does there exist be^
tweeh the opinion he has expressed and that which
is held, upon experimental evidence, by the Ani-
mal Magnetists ? Does notM. Virey acknowledge
the reality and the utility of the magnetic som*
nambuliam ? . He does not, indeed, appear to have
a very accanite notion of the niatUre of the affac^
tion in question, which he improperly denominates>
a half-sleep; but he admits the essential pheno-
mena. M. Virey, however, denies that a somnam-
bulist can ^ contemplate the interior of tiw econe^
my of another individual, prescribe remedies for
him,'' &c. But here the author seems to have for-
gotten what he had previously said in the article
Influence, in which he acknowledged that suek
a sympathetic conneaon might be ertablkhed be-
tween two individuals, as that the one sltt>uld feel
all the complaints of the other.

It is rather remarkable, that M.' Virey expfauns
the phenomena of the Instinct upon the sameprin*
ciple to which Kluge and others attribute thoseof
Somnambulism. According to his view, the diflfe'*
rence that exists between the instinct and the in*
tellect results from the distinction of the two ner-


diflea8e% especially when the patient has made vute of stimulanti c
and I believe that the most of those who have practised mag-
netism have acknowledged the truth of this observation.*' — ^De-
ixvzi^ lk(fen»0y &c. p. 67*


56 ANIMAL MAGNETISM*

vods. systems : ^^ The interiar or gangliouic sys-
teifi/' says he, ^^ is the exelasive seat of the instinct.
From thence emanate the spontaneous impulsions.
It watches continually over the conserva-
tion of the individual, even during sleep, in deli^
rium, in disease." M. Virey had previously said
nearly the same things in the article Forces Me*
DiCATRiCES : ^^ When a sensible organization ob-
serves itself internally, the instinct speaks ; it in-
spires and instructs the individual on the subject
of his peculiar complaints, and frequently in a
more luminoas manner than the most skafal^phy-
sician is capable of doing. This internal voice is
independent of the intellect : the most simple per-
sons, idiots, individuals half-asleep, are even more
capable of hearing it, because they are less distract-
ed by external sensations.'^

Now, the phenomena described by M. Virey are
precisely of the same class with those produced by
Animal Magnetism. M. Virey, indeed, is conti-
nually protesting against the idea of his being
thought to give any countenance to what he is
pleased to call the *^ extravagances" of Animal
Magnetism. But he fully admits thiat nature some-
times, and under certain conditions, produces ex-
traordinary and most important changes on the
animal organism ; and all the extravagance of the
magnetizers consists in having discovered and de»


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 57

termined one of the causes by which these changes
may be developed, and in having given to this
cause a particdlar name.

Independently of the articles inserted in the
Dictionnaire des Sciences Medicates^ M. Virey is the
author of a metaphysical and physiological work,
in two volumes, published in 1808, under the title
of 12 Art de Perfectionner T Homme. At the period
when this work was published, M. Virey was per-
haps entirely ignorant of Animal Magnetism ; at
least he does* not appear to have then had any idea
that he should one day be engaged as the redoubt-
ed antagonist of that doctrine, for he makes not
the slightest allusion to the subject. In this work,
the author propounds opinions in all respects coin-
cident with those already noticed ; and of these I
shall quote a few, for the purpose of shewing with
what consistency he can attempt to controvert the
doctrines which he undertook to refute.

M. Virey recognises in man " a soul — a peculiar
force which animates him." (Vol. i. p. 2). " This
force has particular faculties, independent of the

orgiuiization of the body It is by means

of this invisible agent that we acquire all our

knowledge; it alone constitutes our true

being." (Ibid. pp. 4, 5).

^^ Man is composed of three kinds of principles ;
1. Of an immaterial or intellectual soul; 2. Of a


58 AHJMAL MAGNETISM.

sensitive faculty, or life; and^ B. Of material ele*
ments.'^ — (P. 7)i *^ In order to aet upon the body,
the soul makes use of a vital principle, or of a ner-
vous fluid, which is capable of impressing motion
and sensation uponour organs/'*— (Ibidi)

^^ Although this principle- is perhaps more sub-
tile than light, it appears to be a material sub*
stance, capable of aooumulatiiig^ and ev^ of pass*
ing from one body t» aabtlier/'-ff-(P; 8^

^^ If there exist in the intervals of the stars an
exeeedingly rare and subtile fluid, which has been
called etter, it must possess the most penetrating
qualitiiBs. It must even be capable of producing
the moiat. wonderful effects (as Newton and Euler
imagined). This ethereal substance being able^ to
insinuate itself into the most compact, matters^
must produce in them different effects, aooording
to the nature of the bodies, the modifioationsiof
which it is susceptible," &c.--(Pp. 15, 16.) ♦

^* The soul may sometimes acquire a supernatu-
ral develQptoent,^d receive from Ood an increase
of knowledge and of energy.^ — (P. 59,)

^' Our soul perceives without reasoning, and by
a sedret action of its faculties, harmonious rela-
tions with other souls, such as sounds have amongst
each other. We do not acquire this instinct by

* See Appendix, No. iii.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 50

science, aUhoagh it may be rendered more perfect
by study."— (P. 172.)

^< The sensitive element is not of the same na-
ture with thought: it is secreted in the brain; it
descends'into the nerves ; it exhausts itself and is
renewed. .•••••An animal is a fountain of life: it
loses somo part every day, and it extracts a fresh
portion from the surrounding bodies. We never
live more energetically dian when effusing the vital
principle outwards." — (Pp. 317-320.) •

The author then speaks of the sympal^y that
exists betweep all human beings by the mutual
transmission of their vital heat, and quotes the
dictum of Hippocrates : Si quis animam aninuB
miscerefum credit. Hie decipii,^' — (P. 321.)

*^ There may exist objects which transcend oar
senses, and if we perceive all that is necessary for
us, we do not perpeive all that exists. We: only
know the magnetic fluid by its effects upon iron,
and its polarity. Electricity wae for a long period
unknown^ We may suspect that there are in the
world several subtile fluids, and certain concealed
properties, of which we have yet no notion ; and
this is the reason why we find many phenomena
inexplicable."— (P. 362.)

" The presence, the touch, or the words of a very

eminent man, have a very singular influence on vn/k-

fervor minds, and are capable of curing bodily die-


60 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

ease. Hence fascinations, enchantments," &c. —
(Vol. ii. p. 22.)

^^ If, even in delirium^ the soul preserves clear and
lively ideas; \f it perceives what is suitable to the
mcdady, and discaversthe aj^fnvpriate remedies; if it
foresees the accesses of the crises, the cure, or death —
it is a proof that it is not changed in its essence. This
delirium, in fact, only changes the state of the body,
the pure spirit being an incorruptible principled* —
(P. 209.) .

^* Our soul is susceptible of three principal states :
1. That of ordinary life, which employs the soul
and the body ; 2. That of dreaming or delirium,
which chiefly occupies the sensitive faculties of the
body ; 3. The state of ecstatic meditation, in which
the soul acts almost alone." — (P. 212.) In a sub-
sequent passage, the author observes, that, in this
last state, ^^ the soul can contemplate events from a
Idgher point of view, and its dreams have something
of a prophetic character ; for being prodigidu8||r se-
parated from the body by meditation, it seems to
have diffused itself throughout universal nature,
where it can remark many effects in their source."
—(P. 237.)

^^ The habit of directing his nervous energies,

gives to him who contracts it a marked superiority

over other men. ••••••Experience proves that the will

sends the vital spirits into the nerves." — (P. 267. ) ^


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 61

^^ Our soul has spontaneous motions. ••••It

acts alone, without the concurrence of the body : it
directs the vital spirits to where they are required
to go It organises the foetus •••• In dis-
eases, it constitutes that naJtwra medicatrixy whicli,
taking care to direct the humours in a salutary
manner, points out to the physician what he ought to
do. It is not an acquired science, but an in-
nate faculty. Instructed by the Author of all be-
ing Himself, the soul has no need of acquired know-
ledge, which is only relative to external objects."
—(Pp. 324, 225.)

^^ When the equilibrium of health has been dis-
turbedf the motion of the soul mechanically aspires to

restore it. Every disease frequently discovers its

remedy, if we will only listen to its determinations,
...••• Medicine is in ourselves; we do not creatCj we
develope it, when, consulting in silence the impulse of
nature, we favour its direction, according to the axiom
of Hippocrates : Quo natura vergit eo ducendum
est Nature may produce in every being the de-
sire of an unknown object, and cause an individual
to divine a remedy, of which, perhaps, all the science
of the physician would never have dreamtP — (Pp.
340, 341.)

" Without doubt, we owe to a certain ability of
mind those predictions which result from expe-
rience and prudence; but nature. replaces this ad-


62 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

vantage, in animals, and the most simple of man-*
kind, by very delicate instincts. Our souls have
naturally a ^ocf which gives them a presentiment
of seasons, and sometimes of events. .•••••The more
the mind is oceupted with science, the less is it
moved by internal impressions. Ignorance, too,
hty leavii^ the soul in its natural condition, is more
susceptible of instinctive impressions, than the lo-
^cal and liiAited march of the reasoning power."
— (Pp. 34i5-^348.)

^* Amongst doubtful events, when we cannot
form a conjecture as to what may be the issue, if
we take them so much to heart as to^beoome heat-
ed, the soul is enlightened, and sometimes pene-
trates into the future. • A prophet does not know

the cause of his propbecying : he feels himself
moved by a power which exceeds his natural ener-
gies; he does not divine all things, but only that
which comes into his thoughts." — (P. 352.)

<* This species of divination Arises, and is lost
naturally, and is with difficulty retained. When
the mind nuinifksts it^ dU the senses are in a state of
temporary suspension^ and nothing external dis-
tracts them."— (P.854.)

<< Our soul may be placed in such harmony with
that of another, as to divine many accidents which
may befid him, although the bodies'maybe distant
from each othet."— (P. d59.)


ANIMAll MAGNETISM. 63

Sach are some of the deliberate and unpreju-
diced opinions of M. Virey. I do not feel myself
called upon either to defend or to controvert them.
But I cannot help expressing my astonishment that
the individual professing them should affect to be
so decidedly hostile to Animal Magnetism— -a stu-
dy which supplies the only experimental data by
which they are capable of being supported.*

* M. Fournier, the author of the article Effltjve in the
Diciionnaire des Sciences Medicales, mentions the following cu-
rious &ct. '^ For ourselves, who have witnessed several effects
of magnetism, but who are not yet sufficiently enlightened to
have a fixed opinion upon its causes, its advantages, or even the
extent of its power, and who in our observations are alwajs guided
by the spirit of philosophical scepticism, we attest that many
persons have vainly attempted to make us experience magnetic
effects ; a single physician succeeds in producing upon us their
manifestations. Scarcely have we subjected ourselves to his
'tUiouchemeru, when we experience, without being able to pre-
vent it, a somnolency, a numbness, more agreeable than pain-
ful, which chains down our will and our thought ; and if in these
circumstances we feel any spasmodic pain, an attack of megrim,
it almost suddenly disappears. T^ phj^sician qf whom we speak
is one of the eoniributors to tfUs Dictionary f and has distinguished
himself as one of the most eloquent adversaries qf magnetismJ"
Can the physician here alluded to be M. Virey.


( 64 )


CHAPTER XXV.

Having noticed the almost universally prevalent
belief in the occasional development of some most
extraordinary powers and faculties in certain states
of the human organism ; having produced various
instances in which the remarkable phenomena in
question were conspicuously manifested in the na-
tural somnambulism ; having quoted the opinions
of many ingenious and impartial physicians and
philosophers, who have borne distinct and ample
testimony not only to the possibility but to the ac-
tual occurrence of the facts, and having, moreover,
shewn, that the most celebrated antagonists of Ani-
mal Magnetism fully admit the essential data upon
which that doctrine is founded ; I trust that my in-
telligent readers are now prepared to follow me to
the consideration of certain cases, which, without
such preparation, they would unquestionably have
been disposed to regard with the utmost scepticism,
notwithstanding the undoubted competency and re-
spectability of the reporters. The phenomena I


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 65

am now about to illustrate by a few examples, are
those which have been found to occur in the Mag-
netic Somnambulism ; and I think these examples
will suflSciently shew that the opinions I recently
referred to have been abundantly confirmed by di-
rect experiment. .

I shall pass over the works of the Marquis de
Puysegur, and those of M. Tardy de Montravel, —
whose cases, although of the highest importance to
the study of this interesting subject, are generally
too minutely reported for convenient abridgment,'
— and commence with a case of which the details
will be found in the works of one of the earliest
patrons of the magnetic treatment after Mesmer,
and one of the most sober, honest, and intelligent
writers upon the doctrines and practice of Animal
Magnetism — Dr Wienholt. The case itself is
otherwise interesting, as having first given occasion
to the introduction of this branch of medical prac-
tice into Bremen.'i'

In consequence of a complete failure of all the
ordinary means of cure, in the case of one of his
female patients, Dr Wienholt resolved to resort to
Magnetism. This resolution was approved of by
his colleague, Dr Olbers — the celebrated astrono-
mer, — who, however, had, at that time, little confi-

* Wienholt, Heilkr. d, Tfueritch. Magnet vol. i.
VOL. II. F


» •


66 AHIMAL MAGNETISM.

dence in the efficacy of the treatment. The lady
^bjS magnetized, for the first time, on the 6th of
Jaly ; and for some weeks there was little percep-
tible change in her state, excepting^ that her com-
plaints gradually became less frequent and less vio-
lent. After about three weeks, the Doctor por-
ed ved that, when he manipulated her during a ca-
taleptic attack, especially towards the pit of thie
stom&ch, she occasionally became more restless,
her limbs appeared less ri^d, and. the fit more
nearly resembled a natural sleep. I heed not fol-
low the progress of this successful treatment farther
tfattn just to point out the remarkable phenomena
which occurred. Upon the 4th of. September, the
lady appears to have become somnambulist for
the first time, and the doctor now heard her speak
in her sleep. She told seVeraL stories in a oheeirftd
tone, mingled with some strokes of good-natured
satire— her expressions were dignified andappro^
priate, and perfectly coherent — her voice was more
melodious than usual, and she spoke in a superior
dialect. At this time she answered no questions,
but proceeded with the narrative in whkh she hap-
pened to be engaged* When the doctor visited her
in the evening of the same day, she immediately
began to speak, and mentioned, amongst other
thingS) ihatacertain physiciaui otherwiseastranger
to her, wished her to take rhubarb. The <loctor


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 67

then asked her whether she would not take rhubarb,
as it might perhaps do her good. She answered^
^' No ! it is impossible for me to take it." She was
then asked whether an emetic would be of service
to her. She answered, " No." "Whether she
would drink some Pyrmont water ?" ^* Not yet,^
was the answer. To other questions she gave no
answer at all. After having been again inagneti»«d
for some time, the doctor began to ask questions,
and received precise answers. She Was asked if
she would ^at a particular kind of soup ? She an-*
swered, << No."— <« Why ?'— " Because I am sick."
— ^* Oh ! you are not sick-^you look so cheerful
and pleased — ^get up and walk about.'' — ^* How can
I do so?— my limbs wont carry me.'' — " When
will your sickness terminate ?' — " I do not know."
— " Will you resume your bathing y'-^No answer.
— " WiH you drink Pyrmont water ?'—" No."'—
" Why ?' — " Because it ^ould be of no use to me
at present." On a sudden, she turned round and
began to question the doctor. " Did not you tell
your wife that you conversed with fne during my
sleep ?" The doctor denied this. " Now," said
she, " you are not telling the truth." Here, Dr
Wienholt observes that neither he nor his wife
were upon any footing of friendly intercourse with
this lady or her relations, and, therefore, she had
no means of knowing any confidential communica-


68 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

tiou he migbt have made to his wife. . ^^ Yes." said
the doctor^ ^^ I confess I told her so.^'
. Upon another occasion, the doctor again asked
her. whether she would not resume her bathing.
She answered in the affirmative. ^V Should the
bath be cold, as formerly ?' — " No, rather warmer."
T— " Will you be able to bear it now ?" — '* I believe
I shall." — ^' Do you think that steel would be of
use to you '?'* This question was also answered in
the affirmative. ^^ Shall I give it you in drops or
in powder« ?' — " In drops.": — ** Would not some
glasses of Pyrmont water, taken early in the morn*
ing, be of advantage to you ?" — " O, yes." Wlien
asked whether Magnetism ought to be continued
in the same way as hitherto, she answered in the
affirmative, and added that it would be sufficient
to administer it once a-day. This lady repeatedly
answered many similar questions in her sleep, and
also pointed out the particular treatment which
would be of most benefit to her.

At another time, Dr Wienholt happened to ask
her whether she had lately received any letters
from her brother in Riga. She answered, " No-
he has been sick, very sick.^ — ^' How do you know
this ?"— No answer.—" Who told you so ?'— " No-
body." — " Have you dreamt it then ?" — ^A serious
and uneasy look, but no answer. The doctor again
asked her how she had come to entertain such


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 69

thoughts. She answered that certainly nobody had
told her, but, nevertheless, she knew that he had
been extremely ill. Her mother knew nothing of
this illness, and so little did she herself suspect it
in her waking state, that she expressed great sur-
prise when accounts arrived, some days afterwards,
that her brother had been seriously indisposed, but
was getting better.

Upon one occasion, Dr Olbers came into the
house, and the patient, without being told of it,
knew that he was in the ante-chamber. Next
morning, the mother said that she had spoken to
her daughter, when awake, upon this subject, and
that she recollected nothing of the circumstance.
The Doctor asked the patient, when asleep, how
she came to know yesterday that Dr Olbers was
in the ante-chamber. She answered, because she
had seen him; and being again asked how she
could possibly see him when her eyes were shut,
and the wall and the door were between them —
she could give no satisfactory explanation of the
phenomenon.

At another time, this patient, during her mag-
netic sleep, predicted two fainting-fits which were
to take place the next day, and which took place
accordingly.

This case presents a variety of other instances
of the magnetic clairvoyance, which are related


70 ANIMAL MAGNEtlSM.

with great miDateness by Dr Wienholt himself, in
his principal work on Animal Magnetism; but I
am unwilling to enter any farther into the detail
of these particulars, and must therefore refer the
reader to the work itself : being anxious to proceed
to notice other cases, in which phenomena of a si-
milar description were manifested.

In the first volume of the Bibliotheque du Mtig*-
netisme AnimcU, there is a short account of the
magnetic treatment of a Madame 6. by M. de Fa-
lieriBs. This lady was much contused and injured
by an accident, and was magnetized by the gentle*
man above named. At the very first sitting, dhe
became somnambulist, described her own com-
plaints, prescribed the appropriate remedies, and
predicted the period of her recoveiry, with great
exactness.

In the same volume, the following case is re-
ported by M. Lamy Senlart: — ^A M. Baron was
magnetized by thiis gentleman, and placed in a state
of somnambulism. At the third sitting, the patient
alluded, by signs and gestures, to a journey which
the operator was obliged to make, and at which he
expressed great concern. M. Senart assured him
that he should return in the course of eight days.
Upon this, the patient held up first his ten fingers j
and then a single one, by which the operator un-
derstood him to intimate that he should be absent


ANIMAL MAONETISBf. 71

eleven days. The question was put to him, and
he answered, by a motion of his head, that such
was his meanings M. Senart renewed his promise
of being back in eight days ; but the patient per-
sisted in holding up eleven fingers. M. Senart was
a good deal struck by this prediction ; but) in point
of fact, although he persevered, in his original in-
tention, he met with an accident which detained
him on the road, and he did not return till the
eleventh day, thus verifying the prediction of M.
Baron.

This patient also saw and described his own
complaint, predicted a severe fit of convulsioiis,
and, at the request of the operator, pointed out the
mean&4>f averting it. He was likewise consulted
upon the complaints of others, and, in the words
of the reporter, such was his lucidity, that he was
never once mistaken with regard to the diseases of
the patients who consulted him, who all went away
satisfied and astonished at the isagacity and acciv*
racy of his decisions. M. Senart has appended an
account of some of these consultations to his report
of this case. I may add, that this patient predict-
ed, with great accuracy, the period of his recovery.

One of the consultations alluded to is rather cu-
rious and amusing. A certain physician, having
heard of the extraordinary faculties manifested by
M. Baron, came from a distance of fifteen leagues.


72 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

for the purpose of seeing and examining him. M.
Senart set the patient asleep by magnetism. His
sleep appeared to the physician to be so natural,
that he could not be persuaded that he was in a
state of somnambulism. He was then placed en
rapport with the patient, and requested to ask him
some questions respecting his complaint. The phy-
sician, in his examination, made use of medical
terms : the Somnambulist answered him correctly,
but without employing the same phraseology. The
inquisitive observer pressed the patient with ques-
tions, in hopes of leading him into some mistake.
They conversed about half an hour, at the termi-
nation of which period the physician declared : '^ I
can now make no objection to him — ^in fact, he
knows more than I do myself."

But the experiments were not yet at an end.
^^ Am I in bad health ?" asked the physician.
" No," answered the patient. *' Have I been in-
disposed ?" " No.'' « What is the reason of this ?"
^^ Thoughtless persons, like you, are seldom indis-
posed." The physician asked no more questions.
His brother, M. Cambronne, merchant at Saint-
Quentin, then ^aid to him : " Well, brother ! he
never saw you before, but you must acknowledge
that he knows you pretty well."

In an article upon the VitcU Fluid, in the second
volume of the same Journal, an extract is commu-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 73

cated from a letter, dated from Cadenet, in the de-
partment of Vaueluse, in the month of October
1802, giving an account of two young Magnetizers
— the one Anthony Tronchon, a lad of twenty-one
years of age, and the other a girl of twenty, called
Virginia. The following is the method in which
Tronchon is described as proceeding to his consul-
tations. He sits down in an arm-chair ; his bro-
ther then magnetizes him, and he falls asleep
speedily and profoundly. The patients are then
brought near him, and, in his somnambulism, he
describes with great exactness all their complaints,
and the symptoms which preceded and which ac-
company them, without passing over even the most
minute particular. The complaints once known,
he prescribes the appropriate remedies, recom-
mending only simples. He points out to the pa-
tients the mountains where they grow ; and cer-
tunly, without having studied Linneeus, he de-
scribes them in such a manner, that they may be
recognised at the first glance. The girl, Virginia,
operates in a similar manner, and with equal suc-
cess. I may here observe, that the cures alleged
to have been performed of old in the Greek tem-
ples, are supposed to have been effected according
to some method analogous to that now described ;

VOL. II. G


74 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

and upon this supposition we might be enabled to
explain many of the mysteries of the ancient priests,
without having recourse to the agency of supersti-
tion and delusion. My limited space will not per-
mit me to enlarge upon this subject at present ; but
I am not the first who has had occasion to remark
that such is often the fate of human knowledge.
*^ It is found and lost, and found again ; like one
of those rivers which, after flowing visibly over a
certain space, sink into the ground, and are lost
for a time, but afterwards return to the surface of
the earth, and again roll along in day-light."*

In the same article from which I have extracted
the preceding account of the two young Magneti-
zers, the author mentions that, at Landau, he once
magnetized a lady of about thirty years of age, who
had been fatuous from her birth. She belonged to
an opulent and distinguished family, who had used
every possible means to endeavour to restore her
intellect, but without success. When placed in a
state of somnambulism, she conversed upon vari-
ous matters with great propriety ; she was no longer
the same being ; a person who saw her then for
the first time would never have suspected that she
was deficient in mental energy. Her parents, who
were present, were astonished, wept for joy, and

* Edinburgh Annual Register, for 1810, p. 520.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 75

exclaimed : ^^ Ah ! why is she not always a Som-
nambulist ?"*

In the same volume of the work referred to,
thei*e is a letter from a lady to M. Deleuze, the ce-
lebrated writer on Animal Magnetism, containing
an account of a very curious case. The lady was
afflicted with a very serious complaint, and, despair-
ing of relief from the ordinary resources of medi-
cine, she applied to a Magnetizer, who agreed to
undertake her treatment. He accordingly did
magnetize her during three or four months, when,

* The author of the article from which I have made the above
extracts, makes the following observations upon this subject.

'' I have often had occasion to remark, that persons affected
with mama, or labouring under some mental irregularity which
caused them to be taxed with slight insanity, are, in the state
of somnambulism, generally more clairvoyants than others, and
that, at such times, they exhibit no indication of the defects of
mind with which they are charged. I have remarked the same
thing in cases where the intellectual faculties were absent, or
manifestly infirm.

" These phenomena are sufficiently explained by the observa-
tions of old and experienced physicians. They know that par-
tial insanity, different kinds of mania, symptoms of an habitual
aberration of mind, have most frequently their principal seat in
some deeply affected viscus of the epigastrium ; and, in that case,
the irregularity of the cerebral functions is only sympathetic
Now, somnambulism, has the effect of insulating the latter, of
rendering them, for the time, independent of their usual rela-
tions, of withdrawing the brain from its morbid affections ; and
it is by such means that this organ instantaneously acquires this
freedom, this fecility, this great latitude of operatmg, which it
enjoys in this state."


76 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

visiting her one day, he said. he was afraid that he
should not be able to magnetize her, as he was
himself very much indisposed. The lady then pro-
posed to magnetize him — he consented — and in a
quarter of an hour he became somnambulist He
requested that his eyes might be bandaged, as he
thought he should then be able to see better. The
lady then requested that he would examine him-
self, and endeavour to discover how his sufferings
might be relieved. He answered : *^ I have too
little fortitude, and am easily affected. My com-
plaint is trifling, and I shall be well to-morrow.
It is you that I must examine. But how fortunate
it is that you have made me somnambulist ! Hence-
forth, we shall always commence our magnetic
treatment in this manner, and I assure you that
you will be well attended to."

From that period, the lady constantly set her
magnetizer asleep every day, and in consequence
of following his prescriptions, while in a state of
somnambulism, her complaint (a scirrhus) was re-
moved. While in this state, too, he predicted that
she should be attacked, some time afterwards, by
a complaint of a different nature. This prediction
was fulfilled, and she was again cured in precisely
the same manner as before. The veracity of this
account is vouched by M. Deleuze himself, who
knew the parties.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 77

At the end of the same volume, there are Re-
ports of the magnetic treatment of four females,
amongst others, by M. Oermon, Curate of Saint-
Aubin-le-Cloux. All of these four became lucid
somnambulists, and, in that state, prescribed the
proper remedies for their different complaints.
They were all cured but one, whose complaint,
however, was much alleviated, and hopes were en-
tertained of her complete recovery. These Reports
are certified by the authorities of the place, and by
other respectable persons.

In the fourth volume of the Bibliotheque du Mag-
netisme Aninud^ M. de Puysegur gives some account
of a woman, Agnes Burguet, called La femme
Marechal de Buzancy, of whom he had made men-
tion in some of his previous writings. This wo-
man had for many years been subject to irregular
and periodical fits of convulsions, accompanied with
other symptoms, which, if left to themselves, would
inevitably have terminated her existence. She had
been treated magnetically by M. de Puysegur,
whom she always apprised, in due time, of the day
and the hour when a fit was to come on. When
in a state of somnambulism, she not only saw her
own complaints and prescribed for them, but also,
after careful examination, saw and prescribed for
the complaints of others with whom she was placed
en rapport; of which remarkable faculty several


78 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

instances are given in the volume referred to. M.
de Paysegur observes, that it was always necessary,
upon these occasions, to submit implicitly to the
dictates, and to execute punctually the directions,
of the Somnambulist ; and this observation is con-
firmed by the experience of every other practical
magnetizer. The prescriptions of Somliainbulists
are invariably found to be efficacious — a deviation
from them frequently proves dangerous.

In the same volume of the BtUiotheque, there is
an extract of a letter written by the Countess de C.
Her son, who had been under magnetic treatment
fifteen years before, had predicted, in his last crisis
of somnambulism, that he should enjoy good health
for fourteen years, but that, at the termination of
that period, he should again become seriously in-
disposed. This prediction was fulfilled, and the
patient was again relieved by the same mode of
treatment.

There is also, in the same volume, an account by
M. Thiriat, Doctor of Medicine and Physician at
the mineral waters of Plombieres, of a patient
who was sent to consult him and to drink the wa-
ters, on account of some complaints, or^nating, in
a great measure, from previous injudicious treat-
ment. This lady having been magnetized by M.
Thiriat, she became somnambulist, and gradually
more and more dairvoyante. In a short time, she


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 79

conversed with the Doctor about her sitaation with
a precision which astonished him. She pointed out
the cause of her complaints, and prescribed the
treatment necessary to restore her to health. The
thermal waters did her good by strengthening her ;
but the grand remedy, says Dr Thiriat, was the
magnetic sleep, during which she pointed out the
manipulations which ought to be used, and the
other medical means which ought to be employed.
^^ My knowledge of medicine," says the Doctor,
'^ never placed me for an instant in contradiction
with her indications. I may even assert, that she
sometimes rectified my own ideas." This lady even
discovered one day, by accident, that the Doctor
himself was indisposed, and she pointed out the na-
ture of his complaints, and the remedies he ought
to employ. We have the Doctor'^s own assurance
that the mode of treatment she prescribed was ex-
ceedingly appropriate and completely successful.
He also consulted her in the case of some of his
other patients, and was perfectly satisfied with the
reflections she made upon them.

Madame Hugaut had a weakly child, upon whose
case Dr Thiriat thought it advisable to consult
some of his somnambulists. The husband of this
lady was very incredulous, and although he had
witnessed some very extraordinary magnetic phe-
nomena, he could never be convinced of their rea-


80 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

lity, until this consultation about his own child.
Madame Chevalier, another patient of the doctor's,
was exceedingly clairvayante in her somnambulism,
and transported herself mentally to the house of
this gentleman, whom she did not know, and of
whose place of residence she was ignorant in her
waking state. She there saw his son, a boy of
twenty-seyen months, described his situation and
the nature of his complaints, and predicted some
other symptoms which were to occur. Mademoi-
selle S., another somnambulist, was consulted next
day upon the case of the same child, and repeated
precisely the same things, only that she entered
more into detail; but although in other respects
quite as clairvoyante as Madame Chevalier, Made-
moiselle S. could not transport herself mentally
into a house she did not know : it was necessary
that she should touch the persons about whom she
was consulted.

The following case occurred at Paris,, in the
chambers of Dr Fouquier, in the year 1830^ and
was witnessed by a great many persons.

Petronilla Leclerc, aged twenty-six, was admit-
ted into the Hospital de la Charite^ afflicted with a
cerebral, spasmodic, epileptiform affection. M.
Sebire, who had charge of her, applied magnetism
to her several times, when some very remarkable
phenomena were manifested*


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 81

In the first sitting, the somnambulist gave seve-
ral marks of laeidity. The person who had mag-
netized her, presented to her some objects, such as
a bottle filled with vinegar, sugar, bread, &c. which
she recognised perfectly well without seeing them.
Besides, she had a bandage over her eyes. In or-
der to answer questions which were put to her, she
turned to the opposite side, and plunged her face
into the pillow. Without being asked, she said to
the person who was holding her hand, ^^ You have
got a headach." The fact was true; but to try
her, M. Sebire answered that she was mistaken.
^^ That is singular," she replied, ** I touched some
person who had a headach, for I felt it." She dis-
tinguished several persons who were present at the
experiments by some peculiarities of their dress.

One of the most remarkable circumstances was
the following. The magnetizer had retired, after
promising to return at half-past five o'clock, in or-
der to awaken her. He arrived before the time.
The somnambulist made him observe that it was
not yet half-past five. The latter answered that
he had just received a letter which obliged him to
return sooner. ^^ O yes !" she immediately replied,
^^ it is that letter which you have in your portfolio
between a blue and yellow card." The fact was
strictly true. M. Sebire, without saying any thing,
placed a watch behind the occiput, and then asked


82 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

her what o'clock it was. She answered, " Six mi-
nutes past four ;" and she was right*

I conceive it quite unnecessary to bring forward
any more instances, than those already adduced, of
that phenomenon of lucid vision^ which consists of
the faculty of seeing through intervening obstacles,
and of intuitioHj that is to say, that condition of the
organism, in which, as formerly described, the par
lient obtains a clear knowledge of his own internal
mental and bodily state, is enabled to calculate,
with accuracy, the phenomena of disease which will
naturally and inevitably occur, and to determine
what are their most appropriate and effectual re-
medies ; as also to exercise the same power of in-
ternal inspection with regard to other persons who
have been previously placed in magnetic connexion
with him. M. Ghardel, the ingenious author of an
essay on Physiological Psychology^ assures us — and
I have no doubt of the fact — that he could adduce
hundreds of examples of these phenomena, which
occur in almost every magnetic treatment ; but that
it appears to him quite superfluous to be continually
recurring to the reality of facts which have been
already so amply established. I shall, therefore,
now proceed, in the progress of my induction, to
give a few instances of those phenomena which oc-

* GauiU d€ Sanity 1830, No. 26.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 83

cur in Dr Kluge's sixth degi'ee, and which have
heen thus described in a former part of this work :
" In the sixth degree, the lucid vision (clairvoy-
ance)^ which the patient possessed in the former
degree, extends to all objects, near and at a dis-
tance, in space and in time ; hence it has been de-
nominated the degree of universal lucidity,^^


( 84 )


CHAPTER XXVI.

The first two or three instances of the pheno-
mena in question, I shall extract from the work of
M. Chardel, already referred to, who treats of Ani-
mal Magnetism incidentally, as connected with
psychological science, and who, moreover, speaks
from personal knowledge of the facts he relates.

M. Ghardel had two sisters as his patients, who
were both magnetic somnambulists, and in the
most intimate rapport with each other. M. Chardel
proposed to bleed the elder of these two sisters in
the foot. In the mean time, the younger sister,
after being magnetized, felt somewhat indisposed,
and went to bed in another room. The father and
mother remained to assist the operator. At the
first attempt to insert the lancet, a piercing cry
was heard to proceed from the bed-room of the
younger sister, who, on entering it, was found to
be in a swoon, in the position in which she had
gone to sleep. M. Chardel recovered her, and en-
quired the cause of her fainting. She then related
the details of all his movements in the projected


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 85

operatioD. She said that she had constantly fol-
lowed him with her eyes, and that, at the moment
he was going to insert the lancet, an emotion, which
she could not control, had entirely deprived her of
sense. In the case of ordinary life, this would have
been impossible, considering the distance and the
intervening walls.

The same author mentions the following anec-
dote, upon the authority of a gentleman of distinc-
tion and credit.

The wife of this gentleman had a femme de
chambre in a very weak state of health. She mag-
netized her, and placed her in a state of somnambu-
lism. The lady was assisted by her husband. One
day, when the magnetic sitting was accompanied
with some considerable pains, the patient asked
for some old wine. The husband took a candle,
and went down to the cellar in search of it. He
descended the first flight of steps without any ac-
cident; but the cellar being situated pretty far un-
der ground, the steps in the lower part were wet.
He slipped upon the stair, and fell backwards, but
without hurting himself, and even without extin-
guishing the light which he held in his hand.
When he returned with the wine, he found that
his wife was informed of his fall, and of all the
particulars of his subterranean journey — the som-
nambulist having related them to her exactly as


86 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

they happened. M. Chardel says that he could ad-
duce several other instances, within his personal
knowledge, of a similar degree of clairvoyance ha-
ying been manifested at much greater distances.

The same respectable author mentions that he
knew the wife of a Colonel of a cavalry regiment,
who was magnetized by her husband, and became
somnambulist. Having himself become indisposed,
he was obliged to call in to his assistance, for eight
or ten days, an officer of the same regiment. At
a magnetic sitting subsequent to this, the husband
having placed his wife in a state of somnambulism,
called her attention to this officer. ^^ Ah ! the
wretched man f' she exclaimed, ^^ I see him — he is
at , he is going to kill himself— he has a pis-
tol in his hand — run, run !" The place was about
a league distant — the husband mounted his horse,
and made all the haste he could ; but he arrived
too late — the suicide had been already perpetrated.

My readers may perhaps recollect the case of
Madame P., which is recorded by the late Com-
mittee of the French Royal Academy of Medicine,
in their celebrated Report, a translation of which
was formerly published, and which will now be
found in the Appendix. It will probably be re-
membered that this lady was placed, by means of
Magnetism, in a state of complete corporeal insen-
sibility, and, while in this situation, bad a serious


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 87

and painful operation performed upon her by AL
Cloquet. M. Chardel has preserved several addi-
tional particulars relative to this case, which are
well worthy of notice.

This lady, whose name was Madame Plantin,
had a married daughter, Madame Lagandr6, who
resided in the country, and was unable to repair
to Paris until some days after the operation had
been performed upon her mother. Madame La-
gandre, having been magnetized, became somnam«
bulist, and manifested a very remarkable degree of
lucidity. It was proposed to consult her upon the
state of her mother, and for this purpose Dr Cha-
pelain magnetized her on the 26th of April, and
questioned her on the subject. She answered by
giving a circumstantial and accurate description of
her mother's complaints, and predicting her death in
, the course of two days, in spite of all that could be
done for her. On the following day, Dr Chapelain,
upon visiting his patient, Madame Plantin, found
that the melancholy prediction of the Somnambu-
list was about to be verified. She was evidently
much worse. M. Cloquet requested Dr Chapelain
to place Madame Lagandr6 in a state of somnam-
bulism, and put several questions to her relative to
Madame Plantin. She answered that her mother
had become very weak during the last few days—
that her life was only artificially prolonged by


88 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

magnetism — and that, notwithstanding every effort,
she should die next morning early, without pain.
When asked what were the parts diseased, she
gave, as will be afterwards seen, a correct descrip-
tion of them. M. Chapelain magnetized Madame
Plantin several times, with great energy, during
the course of the day, and could scarcely succeed
in setting her asleep. When he returned next
morning about seven o'clock, the patient had just
expired.

The two Doctors were very naturally anxious to
verify the declarations of the Somnambulist rela-
tive to the internal state of the body, and obtained
the consent of the family to examine it. M. Mo-
reau, secretary to the surgical section of the Aca-
demy, and Dr Dronsart, were requested to attend
as witnesses, and it was resolved that the exami-
nation should take place next day in their presence.
It was conducted by M. Cloquet and his assistant,
M. Pailloux. Dr Chapelain was also present. The
latter set Madame Lagandr6 asleep, a short time
before the hour fixed upon for the operation. The
medical gentlemen then requested to know, from
her own mouth, what she had previously said she
had seen in the interior of the body of Madame
Plantin ; when the Somnambulist repeated, in a
firm tone of voice, and without hesitation, what
she had formerly announced to MM. Cloquet and


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 89

Chapelain. The latter then conducted her to the
room adjoining that in which the operation was to
be performed, and of which the door was exactly
shut. Madame Lagandr6 was still in a state of
somnambulism, and, in spite of the barriers which
separated, her from these gentlemen, she followed
the bistoury in the hands of the operator, and said
to the persons around her : *^ Why do thiey make
the incision in the middle of the breast, seeing that
the effusion is in the right side ?'^

The indications given by the somnambulist were
found to be quite correct. The proces-verbcU of
the examination was drawn up by Dr Dronsart,
attested and signed by all the persons present, and
inserted at length in the work of M. Chardel.

In the German ^^ Annals of Medicine" (Jahr'
bucher der Medidnjf the celebrated philosopher
Schelling, relates the following case, which oc-
curred under his own observation.

*^ In a crisis of clairvoyance^ Miss M. having pre-
viously been quite cheerful, began, all at once, to
assume an appearance of anxiety and sorrow, and,
at last, fell a-weeping. When I asked her what
was the matter, she answered, that she had just
then become aware that a death had recently taken
place in the family, at the distance of more than
one hundred and fifty leagues. I endeavoured to

VOL. II. H


90 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

dissuade her from entertaining such thoughts, but
in vain ; she insisted that she was quite certain of
the fiict) and continued to weep. Wishing to as-
certain how she had come by this intelligence, she
said she herself did not well know, but that she
had at once become quite certain of it. I asked
her whether she could name the person who had
died: She said she could not at that time, but
should be able to do so in a future crisis. She add-
edy that the letter containing the intelligence was
then upon its way. She conjured me to say no-
thing about this presentiment after the crisis, other-
wise it would give her mortal anxiety.

*< It is well known," says the Professor, *^ that
somnambulists, when they awake out of the mag-
netic sleep, have not the slightest recollection of
what may have taken place in it. When she a-
woke out of her sleep, Miss M. was as cheerful as
ever, and had not the most distant idea of her vi-
sion. The expression of pain she exhibited du-
ring the crisis, which seemed to proceed so entire-
ly from an internal conviction of the reality of
the fact, and the obstinacy with which she ad-
hered to her assertion of its truth, induced me to
give her credit. I mentioned the case to Professor
Schmidty in order that he might be a witness to
the fSftct I awaited with great anxiety the hour
when I could again set my somnambulist asleep, in


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 91

order to ascertain whether she would again have
the same vision. For a considerable period during
the crisis, nothing of the kind appeared. She was
as usual quite cheerful, and spoke a great deal, un-
til, all at once, marks of sorrow were exhibited in
her countenance. She turned away her face, and
hid it on her arm, which she had placed on the arm
of her chair, and wept in silence. At length, I
asked her what ailed her. ^ The same as yester-
day,' she answered ; * a death has taken place in
our family — 1 know it for certain.' She thought
it fortunate for her that she knew nothing of this
when awake, because it would occasion her so much
grief. I again asked her whether she did not also
know the individual who was dead ; and she re-
peated that she would be able to tell me in a fu-
ture crisis, provided I put the question to her. In
the following crisis, as soon as she was set asleep,
she i^in began to weep. She requested me to
use every means of diverting her attention from
this circumstance during her sleep, and I endea-
voured to do so by introducing other subjects of
conversation; yet she frequently reverted to it.
Had I foreseen the circumstances which subse-
quently made it impossible for me to place her
more frequently in a state of crisis, I shoul^y upon
the last occasion, instead of diverting her thoughts
from the subject in question, rather have endea-


92 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

voured to ascertain whether she could give any far-
ther particulars of the event. But I neglected the
opportunity, and reserved my questions for future
crises, which could no longer take place. Four or
five days after the last sitting, upon entering her
apartment, I found Miss M. much downcast, with
appearances on her countenance indicating that
she had been weeping. On inquiring into the rea-
son of this, she pointed to a letter which lay upon
the table, and said it contained intelligence of the
death of a near relative and particular friend. I
asked her whether she had received any previous
accounts of the indisposition of this individual. She
answered, *No — none at all; the intelligence came
upon me quite unexpectedly.' Nor was she at all
aware of any presentiment she had of the event."

Dr Amdt, an eminent German physician, re-
lates, that being one day seated near the bed of
one of his somnambulists, on a sudden she became
agitated, uttered sighs, and, as if tormented by
some vision, exclaimed, '^ O heavens ! my father !
he is dying !" A few moments afterwards, she
awoke, seemed quite cheerful, and recollected no-
thing of the anxiety she had so recently manifest-
ed. She again relapsed twice into the same state
of magnetic sleeps and each time she was torment-
ed by the same vision. Being asked what had hap-
pened to her father, she answered, " He is bathed


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 93

in blood — he is dying." Soon afterwards she
awoke, became composed, and the scene finished.
Some weeks afterwards, Dr Arndt found this lady
pensive and sorrowful*. She had just received
from her father, who was at a distance of some
hundred miles — an account of a serious accident
which had befallen him. In ascending the stair of
his cellar, the door had fallen upon his breast — a
considerable hemorrhage ensued, and the physi-
cians despaired of his life. Dr Arndt, who had
marked the precise time of the preceding scene
of the somnambulism of this lady, found that it
was exactly on the day and at the hour when the
accident happened to her father. '^ This,^ ob-
serves the Doctor, '^ could not have been the mere
effect of chance ; and, assuredly, there was no con-
cert nor deceit on the part of the observer.'"

The next case I shall adduce is still more re-
markable than any of the preceding.

Mademoiselle W., whose disease and its treat-
ment have been minutely reported by Dr Klein,
her physician, appears to have been one of the most
extraordinary natural somnambulists and clairvoy-
antes upon record. The following facts concerning
her, which Dr Klein has slightly alluded to from
motives of delicacy towards the family, are related
in the third volume of the Bibliotheqne du Magne-


94 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

tisme Animal^ by an eye-witness who is worthy of
all credit.

After Mademoisslle W. had arrived at the house

of M. St 9 a respectable and opulent man,

whose family is one of the most distinguished in
the country, this gentleman, who had previously
heard of the accidental somnambulism of this young
lady, looked upon her as a very extraordinary per-
son, and requested her to give him, as she had al-
ready done on several former occasions, some proofs
of the accuracy and extent of her magnetic telescope^
and to direct it towards his son, an officer in the
army, at that time serving in Russia. From that
moment. Mademoiselle W. directed her thoughts
to this young man, and in all her paroxysms, al-
though she had never seen him, she drew his por-
trait exactly as if she had him before her eyes.
She said that he was constantly present to her
mind — she accompanied him in all his military
movements, and observed that, naturally brave, he
exposed himself too inconsiderately to danger. She
frequently asked the sister of this youug officer,
whether she did not see him in a corner of the
room ; and, one day, upon receiving a negative an-
swer, she said, ^* Well, then ! ask him any questions
you please, and I shall return his answers." The
sister, having consented, asked all sorts of questions


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 05

relative to family matters, which were unknown to
the somnambulist, who answered them all in a
manner so precise and so accnrate, that the inter-
rogator afterwards declared that she felt herself
seized with a cold perspiration, and was several
times on the point of fainting with fright, during
what she called the dialogue of the Spirits.

In another scen«, the somnambulist declared to
the father, that she saw his son at the hospital, with
a piece of white linen wra^t round his chin — ^that
he was wounded in the face — that he was unable
to eat, but, at the same time, that he was in no
danger. Some days later, she said that he was now
able to eat, and that he was much better.

The family soon ceased to pay much attention to
these visions, probably putting little faith in them,
when, some weeks afterwards, a courier arrived
from the army. M. St. immediately went to Count
Th. to inquire what news he had received. The
latter, at once, set his mind completely at ease, by
informing him that his son's name was not in the
list of the wounded, &c. Transported with joy,
he returned home, and said to Mademoiselle W.,
who was, at that time, in her somnambulic sleep,
that, for once, she had not divined accurately, and
that, fortunately for his son and himself, she had
been completely deceived. At these words — di-
vined^ deceived — the young lady felt much offended,


96 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

and, in an angry and energetic tone, assured the
father that she was quite certain of the truth of
what she had said — that, at the very moment, she
saw bis son at the hospital with his chin wrapt in
white linen, and that, in the state in which she
then was, it was quite impossible she could be de-
ceived. Soon afterwards, there came a note from
Count Tb.; which, after some expressions of polite-
ness and condolence, contained the following in-
telligence. That a second list of the wounded had
arrived, in which was the name of his son, who
bad been struck by a musket-ball on the chin, and
was under medical treatment in the hospital, &c.

According to my information, the veracity of
the persons, upon whose authority the preceding
narrative has been given, lies under no suspicion.

With one other case I shall close this evidence
with regard to the extraordinary phenomena of the
magnetic somnambulism. It is a case which ex-
cited a great deal of sensation in Germany some
years ago, and which is considered as one of the
most remarkable and best authenticated of any that
has occurred in the annals of Magnetism.

It is now well known that two patients, in the
highest degree of somnambulism, predicted the
death of an illustrious personage — the late King of
Wirtemberg. The prediction of the first somnam-
bulist, in which the year and the month were an-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 97

uounced, took place four years before the event.
The circumstance was, for obvious reasons, kept
secret amongst a few friends, and, from the length
of time that elapsed, had been nearly forgotten,
when it was unexpectedly confirmed by a second
somnambulist, who announced not only the year
and month, but the precise day. From the period
of the second prediction, the report became more
widely circulated, and those in the knowledge of
the circumstance were naturally exceedingly an-
xious to watch the result. Bets to a considerable
amount were even offered upon the fulfilment of
the prediction.

The first prediction was made by the same som-
nambulist, Mademoiselle W., of whose extraordi-
nary clairvoyance some account has been given in
the preceding case. It took place in the year 1812,
in presence of Dr Klein, and several other respec-
table persons, and was to the following efiect : —
^^ His Majesty will die, in an unusual manner, be-
tween the 18th and 20th of April 1816." When
questioned, in some of her subsequent crises, re-
specting the accuracy of this announcement, she
said that she was quite certain as to the year, but
might be mistaken as to the particular month. At
a subsequent period, she fixed upon the month of
October, without specifying any particular day.

VOL. II. 1


98 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

M. St., in whose lH>ase9 probably, these scenes took
place, had, from former experience, such confidence
in the dairvoyaance of this somnambulist, that he
was induced to offer a large bet upon the event.

The second prediction was made by a somnam-
bulist, Kr., a patient of Dr N., upon the 17th of
April 1816, in presence of Dr Klein, Dr N., and

Professor L t, and was to the following effect.

*^ His Majesty will die this year in the month of
October.** When asked whether the event would
take place in the beginning, the middle, or the end
of the month, she answered, ^^ The end.*' ^^ Can
you determine the precise day? Will it be the
26th?" «No.*' "The 28th?" « On that day he
will be struck with apoplexy."**

The King was actually struck with apoplexy on
the day predicted, and died in the course of a day
or two thereafter.

The Report from which I have extracted the
preceding abridged account was drawn up by Pro-
fessor Eschenmayer, and inserted in the first vo-
lume of the German Archives of Animal Magnetism,
It is attested by the names of nine well known in-
dividuals — medical men, and other persons of re-
spectability ; and the Professor declares that, if
necessary, he could adduce two hundred witnesses
to prove the truth of the facts.

For numeroos additional instances of the mag-


ANIMA^ IklAGNpTIfilf. 99

Tietic Bomnambuli^ui, and its highly int^esting
phjenomena, I must refer tb^ rationally inquiisitive
reader to the works of the^ Marquis de Puys^guri
to those of M. Tardy de Moji;itravel, to the BMi-
otheque du Magnetisme Animal^ to the German
Archives of Animal Magnetism^ edited by the Pro-
fessors Eschenmayer, Kieser, Niffise^ and iNeea ¥on
E^enbeck — ^and to all the other publications I have
noticed throughout this work.* I could not have

* The celebrated Dr Georget, a member of the Institute, who,
from being an obstinate sceptic, afterwards became convinced of
the reality of the phenomena of Animal Magnetism by nume-
rous experiments, gives the following general result of his ob-
servations : — ^' My somnambulists are so totally deprived of the
sense of hearing, that the loudest noise most unexpectedly pro-
duced does not cause in them the slightest alarm. Thus a pis-
tol-shot, a noisy bell, do not produce the smallest motion, or
prevent them from continuing without interruption a conver-
sation already commenced. But the magnetizer is always heard.*'
Georget also tells us, that his own conviction, as well as that of
many other eminent physicians, was acquired from a number of
experiments, guarded by the most rigorous precautions.

Dr llostan, another distinguished physician, affirms that he
has witnessed all that Dr Georget has published. He, too, was
originally a sceptic, and during ten years spoke and wrote of
Animal Magnetism as a system of jugglery and imposture, and
of the magnetizers as a set of rogues and dupes. But he also
became convinced by the unambiguous results of a number
of cautious experiments. — See DicHonnaire de Medicine^ Art.
Magnetisme Animal,

M. Dupotet informs us, that, at his famous experiments, per-
formed a few years ago, at the Hotel Dieu, more than fifty per-
sons were present, chiefly physicians and students of medicine.
M. Dupotet published an account of these experiments^ which


100 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

gone more at large into the evidence in favour of
these extraordinary facts at present, without great
inconvenience. The cases on record would them-
selves fill many volumes.

passed through three editions ; and although this account has
been several years in possession of the public, no objection has
ever been made to any of its details. Yet these experiments
confirm all the more remarkable phenomena of Animal Mag-
netism.


- - • •.

* _ • •

( 101 ) •■ /;:...


• »


■J • •


• •• •

• 9 *


CHAPTER XXVII.

In the two preceding chapters, I addaced seve-
ral instances — instaantuB ogtensivtBj according to Ba-
con—of the manifestation of some of the more re*
markable phenomena which have been found to
occur in the magnetic somnambulism — the exer-
cise of the faculties without the use of their appro-
priate organs, corporeal insensibility, the exalta-*
tion of the intellectual powera^intuition, prevision,
prophecy, &c.* These, it will be perceived, are


* All of these phenomena are fully admitted bj an anonymous
author, to whom I formerly referred, who, so &r as I can see,
does not appear to be a practical magnetizer, but who seems to
have an intimate knowledge of the subject, treats it with much
philosophical acumen, and loudly condemns the abuses and ex-
travagances of the practice. *^ In somnambulism, the sensitive
power, no longer attached to the usual organs, but appropriated
by the soul itself now operates certainly in a wonderful man-
ner, according to other than the ordinary laws, has a clear view
of objects through a series of untransparent bodies, and perceives
things at a distance which no ordinary human power could pe-
netrate. The somnambulist sometimes knows what is occurring
at very distant places; nay, he not unfirequently possesses also
the fiusulty of producing so powerful aU effect upon distant per-
sons, who are en rapport with him, that his image presents itsdf


• «


• • ;


• • •


• •


102 -*- '. ANIMAL MAGNEl'ISM.

•" V * -

• • • -

exftct]y*8miilar in kind to those which occur in the
^-natgi^l crisis; which latter originates spontaneous-
*'. *\ '*}y, probably in consequence of some constitutional
idiosyncrasy ; whereas, in the former, that peculiar
state of the organism and the intellect is produced
by artificial means.

Individuals have been known to manifest some
symptoms of thi^ constitutional affection in their
conduct and behaviour duHng the whole course of
their lives. Joan of Arc, the Maid of Orleans^ is
supposed to have been in a state of habitual crisis.
Swedenborg appears to have been a natural dair-
voyani, as is pretty evident from several passages
of his life. Jacob Bechmen seems to have been in
a somewhat similar state. It is not unfrequently
engendered by religious enthusiasm, exaltation,
mysticism, and an excessive devotion. Indeed, a

to their involuntary imagination. But not aaXy is the sfibere
of their sensitive power so remarkably extended ; their mental
powers also frequently acquire an exttaordinary augmentation,
and to them it becomes mere child's ]^y to solve questions^

which they never could have answered when awake.

But their power of operating at a distance is not merely

confined to the unusual p^ietration of a large space — ^it even
extends to the future. They not only know what is occurring
at the moment in places from which they are often many miles
distant ; but they also know and predict what will happen to
others or to themsdves," ftc-^See Dda Vertehleiert^ BUd mi SaUy
formerly referred to, p. 7fi> 76- The author also admits the
other remarkable phenomena^^intuition, the instinct of reme*
dies, ftc.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 103

certain degree of ibis affection is probably more
common tban is generally imagined, and its mani-
festations may frequently be ascribed to eccentri-
city of character, or to partial or slight insanity.

The celebrated German poet Goethe tells us, in
the first volume of his autobiography, that his
grandfather possessed the gift of prophecy, espe-
cially in regard to mattera relating to himself and
his destiny, of which he gives some examples ; and
he mentions it as something still moire remarkable,
that persons, who had never upon any other ocea*
sion discovered any traces of this power, in the
presence of his grandfather (en rapport with him)
acquired that faculty for the moment^ and had a
presentiment of events which were, at the same
time, occurring at a distance.

I have now brought under the view of my readers
a variety of instances, both of the natural and of
the magnetic somnambulism, for the purpose of
demonstrating the reality of the more remarkable
phenomena which are manifested in these extraor-.
dinary states of the organism. I request it may be
considered, however, that all I have laid before
them is but an inconsiderable fragment of the real
evidence in the case, although sufficient, I should
think, to give perfect credibility to the facts. To
have adduced every case upon record — ^to have
treated the subject in its fullest details, by dwelling


104 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

minutely upon the phenomena presented in each
individual instance, would have spun out this work
to a size which I never contemplated, and rendered
it more tedious than instructive. Besides, a few
well-authenticated cases are as good as a thousand
to those capable of weighing evidence. It has been
my object, in short, to present my readers with a
general view of this interesting subject ; and I trust
I have done enough, if not to secure their complete
conviction, at least to awaken their interest and
their curiosity, to dispel their prejudices, and in-
duce them to pause, and inquire, and reflecjb, be-
fore they proceed to form any unfavourable con-
clusion.* Let them not permit the extraordinary

* I regret that I am unable to give any better and more par-
ticular account of the following recent and very remarkable
case, than what I have derived from a newspaper paragraph,
evidently written by a person equally ignorant and incredulous^
(See the London Weekly Dispaich, 15th March 1835.)

'^ The Belgian journals contahi the account of a case of som-
nambulism or catalepsy, of a nature so extraordinary as to merit
the attention of physiologists, and, if the assertions of those me-
dical men who have seen her be true, must shake the scepticism
of the most incredulous. The patient is Sophia Laroche, a
peasant girl of Virieu, in the French department of the Is^re,
aged fourteen ; and the most ridiculously romantic circumstances
respecting her are offered to the gullibility of the public.
Amongst others, Dr Eymard has published an account of his
visit to her during the last month. This is not a place for en-
tering into details ; suffice it to say, that the girl in question,
in a complete state of aomnam^uliem^ vfiA her eyet bandaffedy or in
total darkness^ oafK read^ and diittnguish ky tceni^ voice anfl touchy


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 105

character of the facts to confound their judgment,
or tempt them to reject them at once, without due
investigation, and an attentive consideration of the
evidence by which they are supported. Let them
remember, that if many of those higher phenome-
na, to which I lately presumed to direct their at-
tention, be extraordinary and apparently unacconnt-

persons near or at a distance ; ffuU tehiist labouring under the aceess^
wMoh lasts several hoursy and sometimes dapsy she makes the mast ev-
traordinary revelations^ discovers hidthn and lost objects, find» her
wap about the toum, understands Greek, Latin, penetrates people's
thoughts, and answers questions upon subjects which, during her no-
tural state, she is wholly ignorant of. Her body, during some qf
these periods, appears to be endowed with a peculiar Ughtness ami

t

elasticity, so that she may be lifted up as though she only weighed a
few ounces, or as if the mere approach of the hand served to render
her buoyant. These, together with many other marvels, are re-
counted bj hundreds of persons who have attentively watched
her. It appears, however, that the accesses of catalepsy are
gradually diminishing as she grows older, and that there is every
prospect of their becoming totally extinct as her body gains
strength. In the mean time, Sophie Laroche is the wonder and
admiration of the whole department of the Isere, and has fur-
nished fresh arguments for the speculations of the disciples of
Animal Magnetism."

The above is all I know of the case in question. It will be
seen that the phenomena described are precisely the same as
those which have been found to occur in other instances, except-
ing the circumstance stated of the lightness, elasticity and buoy-
ancy of the body, of which, however, I believe other examples
may be found. If the &ct were once demonstrated, it might
serve, perhaps, to explain some of the extraordinary powers at->
tributed to witches, such as flying in the air, &c The subject,
therefore^ deserves attention.

The following case, mentioned by Dr Abercrombie, appears


106 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

able in themselves, the remarkable organic state
out of which they arise, or in which they are
manifested, is no less so. Somnambulism, as a
fact, like that of the fall of meteoric stones, has
been known and observed for ages, and many cu-
rious instances of its occurrence have been wit-
nessed and recorded. Until lately, however, the
nature of that peculiar affection appears to have
been little understood, and its most remarkable
characteristic features seem to have long escaped
the attention of physicians and philosophers, al-
though of immense interest to physiological science.
It was generally considered as a diseased, or, at
least, as an anomalous state of the system, from
which no important general inferences could be
deduced ; and it is only of late — since the intro-
duction of the magnetic practice, and the conse-
quent discovery of the possibility of its artificial
production, for which last we are principally in-
debted to the careful and meritorious experimental
investigations of the enlightened Marquis de Puy-
segur — that its peculiar character and conditions

to have some analogy to the present. ^* At times, the patient,**
says he, ^ after lying for a considerable time quiet, would, in an
instant, throw her whole body into a kind of convulsive spring,
by which she was thrown entirely out of bed ; and in the same
manner, while sitting or lying on the floor, she would throw
herself into bed, or leap on the top of a wardrobe five feet high.*'
— Abxrckombie On A» Brmn, 3d edit. p. 407*


ANIMAL MAGN£TiaM. 107


have been more correctly ascertained, and its
riou8 and interesting phenomena more accurately
observed and more j ustly appreciated. It is a state,
as my readers must now be aware, totally different
from that of ordinary life— a state in which the
animal sensibility undergoes an essential change —
a state in which the ordinary activity of the corpo-
real faculties is suspended for a time, and the in-
ternal instinct — the immaterial principle — perhaps
the soul itself — displays its unfettered energies, in-
dependently of the material organs;* '—a state of
existence which has been atmosft prophetically, al-
though unintentionally, described, in Uie following

* ^' The phenomena of Animal Magnetism are facts, which
can no more be doubted, than can the reality of those meteoric
stones which occasionally fall from the heavens. If there be
anj bridge, any connexion, between this and the other worlds
any transition from the temporary life of the soul to the eternal
life of the spirit, these phenomena must be capable of giving us
some insight into the subject. They deserve, therefore, in des-
pite of all danger of deception, our most serious attention ; as
it would be equally foolish, in the face of such amply attested
experience, to deliver ourselves over to an all-denying scepti-
cism, as to resign ourselves to a blind feith, in the case of every
alleged phenomenon.

"^ Sonmambulism affords us at least, in its already admitted
^ts, the incontestible proof that higher powers reside in man,
which stretch beyond the narrow sphere of the rude sensual
existence, and transcend the horizon of the human understand-
ing entangled in its abstractions.'* — C J. Eiseklohr (Privy
Councillor to the Grand Duke of Baden, &c), Irene^ &c. Cark-
ruhe, 1831. Pp. 226-22a


108 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

beautiful lines of one of the most philosophical of
our living poets ; — ^a state,

<' In which the burthen of the mystery
In which the heavy and the weary weight
Of all this unintelligible world
Is lighten*d : that serene and blessed state
In which the affections gently lead us on, —
Until} ihe breath of this corporeal framef
And even the motum ofow human blood
Almost suspended, we are laid asleep
Ik bodt, akd become a living soul :
While with an eye made quiet by the power
Of harmony, and the deep power of joy.
We see into the life or thikos.*'*

It cannot fail, I think, to be perceived, with
what remarkable, what wonderfully minute accu-
racy, this poetical description tallies with the phe-
nomena which actually occur in the magnetic som-
nambulism. In that state, we appear to forget all
knowledge of our previous existence —

^ the burthen of the mystery,
the heavy and the weary weight
Of all this unintelligible world
Is lightened ;*'

the ordinary functions of the animal organization

are suspended —

^ we are laid asleep

In body ;"

the mind becomes divested of the ordinary cares

* Wordsworth ; lAnes on revisiting the Banks of the Wye ; in
xpy humble opinion one of the finest pieces of blank verse in
the English lapguage.


ANIMAL MAGNETISMT. 109

and anxieties of the world, and is unusaally com-
posed, serene and cheerful ; while the intellectual
faculties, free and unfettered, are exercised with
an extraordinary degree of vigour and acuteness.

" We become a living soul."

At the same time, the eye of the mind, the inter-
nal power of vision, is wonderfully strengthened
and enlarged, and seems unconfined within the
narrow limits of space and time; — we do not see
objects in a merely superficial manner — we pene-
trate beyond external nature —

<' We see into the life of things.** *

It must be quite evident, that the phenomena
of such a state of existence as that described can-

* Dr Jung-Stilling, in his Theory of PneumtUoiogy^ discrimi-
nates and contrasts the natural and the magnetic states in the
foUowing manner :

^ The human soul is present in every |)art of its bodj : H is
conscious of itself in every part, according as the organs of the
body give occasion ; it sees with the eyes, hears with the ears,
smells with the nose, tastes with the tongue and palate, and
feeb with the whole skin, or the whole superficies of the body.
All this it has in common with the animal soul ; but there is
something more superadded, which gives it a rank fiir difierent
and more elevated than the brutes ; it is an intelligent being,**
&&—.'' The human soul is directed, in the natural state, by the
nerves, wherever feeling, consciousness, and motion are neces-
sary. It appears to have the principal seat in the brain ; but,
by magnetising^ it is more or less detached from the brain and
nerves, and consequently, becomes, more or less, a free agent ;


1 10 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

not be explained by the laws and conditions of or«
dinarylife — the physiolc^cal principles which are
applicable in the one case, are totally inapplicable

for, as the dear-seeing somnambulist does not see with the eyes,
but out of the region of the pit of the heart, and as this is al-
ways the case, without exception, it is clear from hence, that
the human soul of itself can not only see without the aid of
the body, but also so much clearer than in its fleshly prison,
nor does it stand in need of our material light ; for magnetic
sleepers read what is laid on the pit of the heart, and the con-
tents of closed letters. Nay, they can read at a distance, when
the book or writing is separated from them by dense and opaque
bodies, as soon as that which is to be read is held by a person
with whom the somnambulist stands in psychical contact or con-
nexion.** — *^ The human soul, in this state, not only sees but
also feels every thing more acutely than in its natural waking
state, without requiring for this purpose any one of the bodily
tenses ; but it is very remarkable, that it is not susceptible of
the smallest thing belonging to the visible world, except when
brought into a psychical contact, connexion, or rapport,** &c. ;
^ the somnambulist can then, particularly when he is in a very
exalted and clear-sighted state, perceive every thing that the
person thinks, suffers, feels, and enjoys, who stands in connexion
with him."

^ The magnetic facts and experiments above stated prove^ to
a demonstration, the existence of this spiritual, luminous body;
they further prove, that this human soul has need of its gross
and animal body, solely with reference to its earthly life, in
which man must necessarily stand in reciprocal operation with
the sensible or material world; but that it is able without it
to think and feel, and to act upon others, both near and at a
distance^ in a much more perfect manner, and is also more sus-
oapUble of suffering and ei\joyment. This conclusion must un-
questioiiably arise in the mind of the impartial observer, when
he aaeemblei all the various exhibitions which magnetism pro-
cbicei^ and then calmly and rationally reflects upon them."


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. Ill

in the other.* Yet every system of human phy-
siology which decliiies to investigate these facts
upon their own appropriate principles, must neces-
sarily be imperfect. Indeed, an impartial and at<
tentive study of the phenomena of somnambulism
cannot fail to lead us to conclusions highly inte-
resting to the philosophy of man. A good deal
has been lately done for this psychological branch
of physiology upon the Continent : in this country
it is still little more than a blank — a sheet of
white paper; and even the study of it is most
unaccountably discouraged. The sun of Animal
Magnetism, as an enlightened foreigner remarks,
has not yet arisen in the British dominions. May
his animating beams speedily dispel the darkness
that envelopes those recondite but most important
truths, to which our eyes have hitherto been blind,
or which, at present, we only see dimly reflected
by a remote mirror ! f

* Ml Deleuze has very justly observed, that the antagonists
of Animal Magnetism wish to explain a peculiar class of pheno-
mena by the same theory they employ to explain phenomena
of a totally different class. By pursuing such a method they
Aever can succeed.

f It is a rather remarkable but an indisputable fiict, that, in
modem times, and especially in this country, the term Science
has become totally perverted 'from its original and genuine sig-
nification, and that it is now limited almost exclusively to Phy-
sics. All our Royal and Philosophical Academies and Societies
are entirely occupied with objects of mathematical and physical
research : Mental and moral philosophy are utterly neglected.


112 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

I formerly mentioned, that, whatever differences
of opinion may exist in regard to theory, the reality

Were it proposed to read before any of the Societies alluded to
a paper on ADimal Magnetism, the proposition would probably
be almost universally scouted, and the proposer laughed to scorn
as an iffnoramus or a visionary, although upon the Continent
the most eminently learned bodies have not hesitated to encou-
rage the investigation of the subject, without any loss of cha-
racter, or feeling of degradation. With us, the apophth^m of
the poet, —

** Homo Bam, nihil humani a me alieoum puto,**

is quite out of fiuhion — our philosophers no longer admit that

** The proper study of mankind is man" —

all research is directed towards external nature — and mind is
considered altogether subordinate to matter. In an article in
the Edinburgh Review, formerly noticed, '^ the follies of Animal
MagneHtm" are actually placed in marked contrast with the prin-
ciples o£ science — meaning Physics, I presume; and no term of
contempt is sufficiently strong to designate the absurdity of all
investigations into the phenomena of mind.

Now, there is no man more willing than myself to acknow-
ledge the immense advantages which society has derived from
the appUcation of the principles and discoveries of physical
science to the arts of life — to the physical wants of the spe-
cies; but I cannot, I never will, admit that Physics consti-
tute the whole of science, or that they are best calculated to
promote the great ends of our being. I cannot consent to
abandon mental physiology and philosophy — to relinquish the
study of the spiritual and moral nature of man — to sacrifice
mind to matter and mechanism. Nor can I allow that such
pursuits are subordinate to those of the mathematician, the che-
miflt, the astronomer, the botanist, or the geologist I am quite
aware that the study of Animal Magnetism is not calculated to
assist us in discovering the longitude at sea, to enable us to
apply and to regulate the action of steam, or to be of service
to us in the building of bridges, or the construction of rail-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 1 18

of the phenomena of Animal Magnetism is now uni-
versally admitted by all impartial, competent, and
intelligent inquirers upon the Continent. There^
indeed, there can hardly be said to be two opinions
upon the subject amongst those enlightened men
who have bestowed any attention upon it. Even
those professional gentlemen who, from some vague
notion of imaginary dangers, have manifested a
spirit of hostility to the practice— as in the case of
Dr Stieglitz and others — not only do not dispute,
but, on the contrary, fully admit the facts. Indeed,
it would be strange were they to attempt to deny the
existence of things which they have almost a daily
opportunity of witnessing. I have no doubt that
the same will be the case in this country, as soon

roads. But if it be true that this doctrine involves the disco-
very of new therapeutic principles;— if it has developed agen-
cies and susceptibilities in the human constitution hitherto un-
known or disregarded ; — if it has already opened up many new
and interesting views of the physical and moral nature of man,
their connexion and reciprocal action upon each other; — if it
has given us a clearer insight into the motions of the immate-
rial principle which animates and actuates the material orga-
nism ; —if it has already done all this, I say, and if it promises
still fiuther to enlarge our knowledge, and to render us *^ wiser,
happier, and better,*' by what just right shall it be arbitrarily
excluded from the circle of the sciences ?

See some excellent observations on the study of physical and
moral science, in Dr Hampden's second Lecture on the study
of Moral Philosophy, recently published.

VOL. II. K


114 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

as the subject becomes better kuown and appre-
eiftted — as soon as our professional gentlemen and
men of science shall have recovered from the sur-
prise occasioned by the apparent novelty and the
extraordinary character of the phenomena — as soon
as they shall be induced to abandon their prepos-
sesrions, to examine the matter with philosophical
impartiality, to look the phenomena boldly and ho-
nestly in the face, and submit to be taught the se-
crets of nature by patient investigation, careful
experiment, and accurate observation.


( 115 )


CHAPTER XXVIII.

When we have ouce obtained possession of a
new and important series of facts, and become pen*
fectly assured of their reality, it is an unquestion-
ably useful task to endeavour to ascertain in what
degree they may be considered as extending or
modifying our previously acquired knowledge, by
tracing the results to which they directly and 1^^
timately conduct us. This proceeding, indeed, is
absolutely necessary, in order to arrange and sys-
tematize our scientific acquirements.

Although hostile, as may have been observed, to
all vague and premature theories upon scientific
eubjects^ — which more frequently tend to retard
than to advance our progress in knowledge — and
still more to all monopolising and exclusive sys<»
tems of science ; I would by no means be under-
stood to dissuade the philosophical inquirer from
attempting that cautious method of induction and
generalization introduced and recommended by
Lord Bacon, and since prosecuted with such re-<


116 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

markable success in several of the departments of
Natural Philosophy ; — that method which consists
in collecting kindred facts, comparing them with
each other, remarking their analogies, discriminat-
ing their differences, and grouping them together,
with a view to discover the common nexus that ex-
iste between them, the principle apon which they
jointly depend, or, at least, the general law or laws
under which they may be all comprehended. On
the contrary, I consider it exceedingly useful and
praiseworthy to endeavour to extend and systema-
tize our knowledge in this way ; for, as Burke long
since observed, " by looking into physical"— he
might have added moral — ^^ causes, our minds are
opened and enlarged ; and in this pursuit, whether
we take or whether we lose the game, the chase is
certainly of sei'viee." This method I consider
equally applicable to moral as to physical science ;
not indeed to that metaphysical philosophy which
delights in airy and empty visions, and spurns the
support of facts ; but to those well-regulated intel-
lectual speculations which are founded upon an
accurate observation of the actual phenomenal
nature. I am also of opinion, that the time has
now arrived, when we may safely, and perhaps
successfully, apply this method to the phenomena
of Animal Magnetism — since the industry of the
pioneers of that doctrine has already supplied U6


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 117

with an abundant store of well-attested facts ; and
I shall now take the liberty of pointing out to my
readers the way in which, as it appears to me, the
merely philosophical part of the investigation might
be conducted with the best prospect of success.

I formerly alluded to a theory by which most of
the ordinary phenomena of Animal Magnetism
might be, in some measure, accounted for, upon
the supposition of a certain transference of vital
power from one subject to another, through the
medium of the nervous system.* This theory,
however, besides being founded upon an hypothec
sis which, however probable, may be considered as
not yet satisfactorily demonstrated, appears quite
incapable of explaining the higher magnetic phe-
nomena. Indeed, it seems utterly impossible to
assign any satisfactory reason why sleep and som-
nambulism should be, as they certainly are, pro-
duced by the processes employed. We only know

* It would constitute one of the most remarkable incidents
in the whole history of science, should it be ultimately demon-
strated and admitted, that an universal ethereal fluid pervades
all nature, producing, in its different modifications, and in its
various combinations with matter, the phenomena of Light,
Heat, Motion, Magnetism, Electricity, &c. To this point,
however, although there is yet no sufficient demonstration of
the fact, recent physical investigation seems rapidly tending ;
and it may ultimatdy realize one of the boldest and apparently
most fanciful hypotheids of a certain class of philosophers, who
have been perhaps too rashly condemned as mere visionaries
and mysti ci i ■ ■ S ec Appendix, No. III.


118 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

that, in many instances, the one has been found to
follow the other, without the presence of any other
perceptible cause ; and this circumstance, however
unaccountable it may be, is sufficient to justify us
here,^ as in other sciences, in assuming that there
must be some connexion between them ; and this
assumption, provided we are assured of the facts,
cannot be invalidated by any ai^ument whatever
founded upon the alleged insufficiency of the
cause to produce the effects.^ As in this oase,
however, we are incapable of diseoveriAg and pfcnnt-
ing out the precise operative principle, it only re'-
main» for us to classify the phenomena, by ascer-
taining the particulars in which they agree, and
the anal(^ that exists between them and other
constitutional affections, in order to enable us to
comprehend the nature of these affections, and, if
possible, the cause upon which these phenomena
necessarily depend.

We have already seen that, independently of
their sanative efficacy, the usual effects of the mag-

* I do not conceiye that we are entitled to consider that, in
these cases, the effects must be dependent solely upon the ma-
nipulations employed, or to reject, without adequate investiga-
tion, those other elements which are held by the Animal Mag-
netists to be operative in the magnetic processes. For example,
it is maintained that the will has a powerful influence in deter-
mining the magnetic phenomena. This is an alleged fiict which
is capable of being demonstrated bj experience ; and my own is
entirely coincident with the results noticed by others,


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 119

netic processes are the production of sleep and
somnambulism, the latter state being obviously a
more profound degree of the former. The pheno-
mena invariably observed in somnambulism, when
the crisis is perfect, are — insensibility of the cor-
poreal organs, exaltation of the intellectual facul-
ties, a transference of the sensitive powers to other
than the usual parts of the nervous system, intui-
tion, prevision, prediction, and the total oblivion,
when restored to the natural state, of all that oc-
curred during the continuance of the affection.
Let us, then, endeavour to trace the analogy be-
tween these phenomena and those of another state,,
which is much more familiar to us.

The philosophy of Sleep and Dreams, which is
calculated to throw considerable light upon this
branch of inquiry, has, at various times, engaged
a good deal of attention, and been the fruitful
source of much ingenious speculation ; but I think
it may be doubted whether any generally satisfac-*
tory theory has been hitherto propounded upon
this subject, to guide us in our attempts to account
for the phenomena upon intelligihle and correct
principles.* One reason, and indeed the principal

* '* Aristotle^ who bath written a singular tract on sleep, bath
not, metbinks, thoroughly defined it ; nor yei Galen, though he
seems to have corrected.it ; for those noctambuloes and night-
walkers, though itt their sleep, do yet eojoj the action of their
senses ; we must, therefore, say that there is something in i|s


120 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

one, for this failure, appears to me to be, that phi-
losophers have not sufficiently generalized their
views, but have founded their speculations upon
far too limited an induction of facts, and then at-
tempted to explain these facts upon the principles
of some preconceived hypothesis. Some part of
their errors, too, may probably be ascribed to that
material tendency which, as I formerly observed,
has long been conspicuous in all our philosophical

that is not in the jurisdiction of Morpheus ; and that those ab-
stracted and ecstatic souls do walk about in their own bodies, as
spirits with the bodies they assume, wherein thej seem to hear,
see, and feel, though indeed the organs are destitute of sense, and
their natures of those Acuities that should inform them. Thus, it
is observed, that men sometimes upon the hour of their departure,
do speak and reason above themselves. For then the soul being
near fi'eed from the ligaments of the body, b^ns to reason
like herself, and to discourse in a strain above mortality." — Sir
Thomas Brown, Religio Medid,

The latest English work I have seen upon this subject is the
second edition of the " Philosophy of Sleep," by Mr Macnish,
a most ingenious and entertaining volume, in the perusal of
n^hich it is impossible not to admire the industrious research
apd talent of the author. But I cannot agree with this learned
gentleman in his attempt to account for the phenomena upon
phrenological principles. Phrenology itself after long attention
to the speculations of its votaries, I never could view in any
other lig^t than as a mere hypothesis, founded upon postulates
and assumptions, built up with fanciful observations, and ter-
minating at length in a peHHo principiL It always appeared to
me to be entirely destitute of the support of any positive and
unambiguous &cts, and to owe its temporary reception to the
introduction of a new and imposing nomenclature, and to the
ingenious sophistry of its advocates. Every attempt to apply


ANIMAL MAGNETISM; 121

systems. In the following few observations, I
shall endeavour to avoid both of these errors, by
adapting my explanations as strictly as possible to
the character of the phenomena.

Sleep appears to be the natural state of repose of
the corporeal organism. I say, of the corporeal or-
ganism^ because it cannot be conceived that the
Roul itself — the immaterial principle — ever sleeps,
otherwise, it were not sleep, but death. In dream-
ing^ we occasionally perceive the soul — the imma-
terial and inorganic principle— struggling, as it
were, to manifest its independent activity without
the co-operation of the bodily organs. It is pro-
bable, if not certain, that all sleep is accompanied
with dreaming, that is, with the exercise of spiri-
tual energy ; but in the case of the soundest sleep,
these dreams — the manifestations of this spiritual
activity — are not remembered ; there has been no
co-operation of the corporeal organs, and, therefore,
no adequate impression has been made upon the
material part of our constitution ; in like manner,

this tcience to the explanation of phenomena seems to consist
merely of a translation of one language into another, leaving
the enquirer just as wise as he was before. I am surprised that
an individual so acute as Mr Macnish should not have perceived
that, in resorting to Phrenology for elucidating the phenome-
na of Sleep and Dreams, he was only giving an example of the
obaourum per obscuritu,

VOL. II, L


122 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

as we have seen that the operations performed, and
the conversations held, in the state of perfect som-
nambulism, when the sensibility of the corporeal
organs is altogether suspended, are entirely forgot-
ten when the individual awakes, and is restored to
his natural state. In sleep, the corporeal organs
are merely more or less profoundly dormant, but
still sensible to external impressions, when suffi-
ciently strong to affect them ; in somnambulism,
on the other hand, they are in general entirely de-
prived of their sensibility for a time ; as has be^i
seen in the case of the Breslau rope-maker, in that
of Madame Plantin, and^ indeed, in almost every
case both of the natural and of the magnetic som-
nambulism. It appears to be only when the natu-
ral sleep is unsound, or disturbed, that the dream»
are remembered, and that they recur to the recol-
lection with more or less distinctness, in proportion
to the degree in which the material organs have
been affected. The sound sleeper declares that he
never dreams ; that is to say, he has no recollection
of having dreamt, his sleep having been so pro-
found. On the other hand, the unsound sleeper
continually dreams, and he has also a distinct re-
collection of his nocturnal reveries when awake.
This circupastance proves that the corporeal organs
have only been in a state of partial or imperfect
repose.


ANIMAL BiAGVETISM. 188

Upon tbis subject of the oonstant activity and
restlessness of the soul, during the temporary re-
pose of the corporeal sensibility) I find the follow-
ing coincident observations i|i the works of that
eminent divine, Bishop Hall. ^^ I do not more
wonder," says that distinguished prelate, '* at any
man's art, than at his who professes to think of
nothing ; and I do not a little marvel at that man
who says he can sleep without a dream ; for the
mind of man is a restless thing ; and though it
give tiie body leave to repose itself, as knowing it
is a mortal and earthly piece, yet itself being a
spirit, and therefore active and indefatigable, is
ever in motion. Give me a sea tiiat moves not, a
sun that shines not, an open eye that sees not, and
I shall yield there may be a reasonable soul that
works not It is possible that through a natural
or accidental stupidity, a man may not perceive
his own thoughts (as sometimes the eye or ear may
be distracted not to discern his own objects) ; but,
in the mean time, he thinks that whereof he cannot
give an account ; like as we many times dream,
when we cannot report our fancy. Since my mind,'^
adds the Bishop, ^^ will needs be ever working, it
shall be my care that it may always be well em-
ployed.'*

Upon the same principles, too, we may exfdain
the frequendy fantastic, absurd, and incoherent


124 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

nature of our dreams. The union and harmony
between the soul and the liody, although not ac-
tually dissolved, is partially interrupted by sleep ;
the latter is no longer capable of co-operating ef-
fectually with the former. Hence^ in imperfect
sleep, when the sensibility is enfeebled but not an-
nihilated, the soul is still encumbered by the partial
wakefulness of the body, and, at the same time, and
for the same reason, it is incapable of freely exerting
its own independent energies. On the other hand,
when the sleep is profound, when the corporeal
sensibility is completely dormant, the energies of
the soul are set at liberty and freely exercised,
without any co-operation or control of the body,
but of this exercise there can be no recollection in
the waking state, because, as formerly observed,
no adequate impression has been made upon any
material organ.

Moreover, the mi^netic sleep di£fers from the
natural in this, that, in the former, the organic re-
pose is generally more sound, the corporeal organs
are in a state of greater inactivity. So far as I am
aware, there is no instance of dreaming during the
magnetic sleep ; that is to say, there is no distinct
recollection of any thoughts that may have oc-
curred to the mind during its continuance. All
that a patient, when awakened out of this state,
can remember of having experienced, is a mere


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 125

vague feeling of certain pleasurable sensations. It
appears, therefore, to constitute the transition-state
from one mode of existence to another ; and this
transition is completed in somnambulism, by the
total suspension or temporary annihilation of the
corporeal sensibility — ^in a far greater degree than
that which takes place in the ordinary sleep— the
undisturbed activity of the soul, and consequently
the manifestation of a life purely spiritual and in-
organic*

In following out this investigation and compari-
son of the phenomena of the natural and the mag-
netic sleep, and of sleep and somnambulism, I have
little doubt that we should be enabled to trace, al-


* The subject of sleep and dreams, omeas, sympathetic fore-
bodings, second sight, &c are intimately connected with the
doctrines of Animal Magnetism ; but my limits will not permit
me to enter fully into it at present. There are various well-
authenticated phenomena which prove the reality of these oc-
currences, and justify the assertion of the poet, that

m

•< Dreams full oft are found of real events
** The forms and sbadoira."

The same may be said of omens, presentiments, &c. It is dif-
ficult to reject the whole of the evidence upon this subject, and
absolutely to deny that, upon some occasions, and in certain
circumstances,

«• Coming events cast their shadows before.**

Animal Magnetism affords us the means of gplving a natural ex-
planation of these phenomena ; and the whole subject deserves
to be philosophically investigated, with a view to dispel super-
stition on the one hand, and scepticism on the other.


126 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

though in a more faint degree, in the former, as in
the lattery the distinction between the material or-
ganisiti and the vital or spiritual principle which
animates it ; and thus succeed, at length, in with-
drawing a portion, at least, of that veil, hitherto
deemed im^netrable, which has so long enveloped
some of the most important secrets of nature, and
concealed from our view the noUeist and most in*
teresting element in the constitution of man.


( 127 )


CHAPTER XXDL

After the whole materials for this work had
been collected and arranged, my attention was di-
rected to a series of physiological lectures deliver-
ed in the University of Paris by M. Andral, in some
of which the author discosses the subject of Ani*
mal Magnetism. The particular lectures to which
I allude are the 13th, 14th, and 15th of the series,
and they were translated and published iii the
Lancet for 1882-^3, vol. iii. pp. 769, &c. The
opinions of a professional gentleman of such emi-
nence as M. Andral upon such a subject as this,
when given with candour and sincerity after due
investigation, would of themselves be very valu-
able; but I consider them as still more important
when indicating the great change which has lately
taken place in the sentiments of those medical men
who had previously viewed the phenomena with
deep suspicion and inveterate scepticism.

In his 13th lecture, M» Andral admits that the
state of ecstasy^ or somnambulism, may either be
spontaneous, or it may he produced in one individual^


128 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

in consequence of an infltience exercised on him by an-
other. ^^ In entering," he says, '^ on the conside-
ration of this much-debated and, I must say, deep-
ly-interesting topic, I have to recommend you to
follow my example, in determining to separate
Jacts from the explanation of facts, in endeavouring
to ascertain, in the first place, what it is that is
proved, and theti sieeking to unravel whatever
mysteries that presents ; and in remembering that
a thing may not be the less true, because it is not
included in the category of circumstances which
the state of human science, or the extent of the li-
mits of the human intellect, enables us to compre-
hend, and compels us to recognize/'

^^ Many facts,'' he states, ^'are on record, which
permit no one to entertain the least doubt as to the
possibility of the spontaneous occurrence of this
state" (ecstasy); and he relies exclusively upon
the one instance which occurred at the Clinic of
Bologna, published in the Gazette Medicate of
Paris, of the 24th of November 1832 ;* ** as it con-
tains all the elements of authenticity, and has been
observed by medical men of high skill and reputa-
tion."

M. Andral then asks, <' Can the state thus de-
scribed be produced in one individual by any influ-

* This case will be found, along with a variety of others, in
the Appendix, Ko. II.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 129

ence exercised by another V* This question the
author also answers in the affirmative, relying sole-
ly upon the following evidence. ^^ In the inaugu-
ral thesis of M. Fillazzi (Fillassier), defended be-
fore our Faculty of Medicine, there is the narrative
of an occurrence bearing irresistible proofs of its
authenticity, and which seems to me sufficient to
decide the question. The facts are particularly
curious. The author, then an interne at the Hotel
Dieu, and totally sceptical regarding the powers
ascribed to this mysterious essence, this asserted
magnetic fluid, formed, for amusement, the plan,
with a brother interne equally incredulous, of sub-
mitting this friend to the manoeuvres of the mag-
netizers, in the manner M. Rostan describes. The
passes were continued for about twenty minutes
without any remarkable effect, but at the expira-
tion of that time, the young man began to yawn,
his eyelids grew heavy, and closed involuntarily ;
he attempted to shake off the torpor in vain ; his
respiration next became accelerated, his head fell
on his shoulders, and he uttered a sardonic laugh
of indescribable expression. ^ We thought,' says
the narrator, ^ that he was amusing himself at our
expense ; but in a little, what was my horror when
I saw his fingers turn blue, his head fall powerless
forward, when I heard his respiration rattling like
a dying man's, and felt his skin as cold as death


130 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

itself ! I caonot find words to describe my suffer*
ings. I knew not what to do. Meanwhile, all
these horrid phenomena increased in intensity. I
tremble at the recollection of what I saw ; — there
lay my friend, my victim, devoid of the aspect of
]|ife, in a state of complete and terrible collapse.
With his hand clasped in mine, in a state of agony
no tongue could tell of, I laid him on a bed, and
waited the result in a state of mind I can never
ibi^et. In a quarter of an hour he recovered, and,
exclaiming that in the ecstasy he had experienced
sensations of extreme delight, begged me to re*
commence the passes. I did so with less appre-
hension, and again the somnolency proceeded. The
collapse, however, was less profound and terrific,
and in some minutes he suddenly awoke with the^
exclamation : * What happiness is this I' ^
. Upon the strength of these two solitary instances,
M. Andral decides in favour of the spontaneous
development of this ecstatic state, and of the possi-
bility of its production by the influence exercised
by one individual on another. ^^ As to their au*
thenticity,^' he remarks, ^^ it is beyond dispute.
The statements are entitled to as much credence
as any thing can be which we have not ourselves
seen.^ M. Andral then alludes to the theory of
touchinffj imitation^ and imagination^ which he just-
ly considers inadequate to explain the phenomena.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM^ 181

The last case, he confesses, is ^< an embarrassing
one, at any rate, for the imagination hypothesis —
both the operator and the patient being medical
men, both sceptics, and both persuaded that no>*
thing peculiar could happen.^

^^ So far, then, as we have gone,^ continues M.
Andral, ^^we find that the operation of known
causes and influences is by no means adequate to
explain the phenomena which are proved to have
been induced in persons thiis treated. We must,
consequently, either not attempt this kind of ex*
planation, or else we must admit the existence of
SLjbrcej a power, which has been called magnetic.
The name is of no consequence whatever.**

After alluding to the earlier history of the mag-
netic practices, M. Andral proceeds: *^ Again,
however, I must press upon you, gentlemen, that
there are numerous facts which prove that this
subject deserves your serious attention. So strong
are they, that many men of high information and
discernment have not hesitated to profess their
faith in the existence of the asserted principle. At
Berlin, they have even established a magnetic cliniCf
for the purpose of investigating the matter experi-
mentally, and applying it successfully to the treat-
ment of diseaise. Now, is all this delusion ?"

After arguing the matter for some time /vo an4
cof}, M. Andral seems to think that the truth tanj


132 ANIMAL MAGN£TISM.

probably lie between the two extremes of plenary
belief and absolute scepticism. But although M.
Andral occasionally speaks of evidence, he is ma-
nifestly ignorant of almost the whole of the proofs
by which the magnetic doctrines have been incon-
trovertibly established, and generally supports his
belief of a particular fact upon one solitary in-
stance, when additional and ea^y research might
have supplied him with hundreds.

Some of his general observations upon the sub*
ject, however, are exceedingly just and apposite.
<< We are apt,'' says he, ** for example, to start
with the idea that a thing is impossible. This is
wrong, it is irrational, it is unwise; it leads us to re-
ject /7/Y>q^ of these facts, because these proofs do not
agree with our own previous notions. We must not
be so proud of our own powers as to fancy that ana-
logy, that induction, are omnipotent in the discri-
mination of truth, neither must we measure possi-
bility by the standard of our own restricted no-
tions. How many are the things which we now
readily admit, and which but fifty years since were
denied ? How many things do we see daily done
which we but lately deemed impracticable ?" The
learned lecturer then cautions his pupils, on the
other hand, against an excess of credulity. *" Too
great a facility in belief is as great an evil as too
rigid a tendency to distrust. We most therefore


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 133

subject the asserted facts to a rigorous scrutiny,"
&c. But in proceeding to such a scrutiny, it is
absolutely necessary that we have all, or, at least,
a great part of the evidence before us, in order to
enable us to arrive at a satisfactory conclusion ;
whereas M. Andral, with the utmost honesty of in-
tention, no doubt, seems to be possessed of only
one or two recent instances of certain magnetic
phenomena, and these by no means the most im-
portant. Upon such a scanty and very partial view
of the evidence, however, it is manifestly unjust
to found any general conclusion. It is somewhat
singular that M. Andral should not even once al-
lude to the excellent work of his countryman M.
Deleuze. Of the other numerous French and Ger-
man writings upon this subject, by medical authors
and others, he seems to be totally ignorant.

In considering the phienomena of Animal Mag-
netism, M. Andral admits, in the magnetic som-
nambulism, Istf The fact of ^^ the abolition of all
sensibility by the ordinary organs of perception ;"
and, 2(%, ^* The obliteration from the memory of
all circumstances occurring during the ecstasy;''
while he considers the asserted connexion between
the magnetizer and the magnetised as not proved.
The admissions of M. Andral, however, are of great
importance, as evincing his conviction of the in-
fluence of the treatment.


184 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

In his 14th Lecture, M. Andral proceeds with
his strictures on the alleged phenomena of Animal
Magnetism. He admits that one person is capable
of producing certain symptoms upon another ^^ by
peculiar touches, passes, or manual mancBuvres ;"
but he ^^ sees no fact sufficiently decisive and au-
thenticated, to establish the intermediate agency;''
that is to say, the effects allied to be produced
through the intervention of other persons and
things. Here, I am sorry to observe, M. Andral
discovers a very imperfect knowledge of the nature
of the magnetic processes, which do not consist al-
together of ^* pecuUar touches^ passe^y or manual ma-
wzwsrtsP The advocates of that practice ascribe
much efficacy to the will and intention of the ope-
rator, and of this M. Andral says nothing. Here,
too, as elsewhere, the lecturer betrays great igno-
rance of the facts, as well as of the overpowering
evidence by which their existence has been demon-
strated ; but the reality of the facts can only be es-
tablished or refuted by a due consideration of the
whole evidence, thoroughly sifted and weighed.

In treating of the alleged cure of various dis-
eases by means of magnetism, M. Andral alludes
to some curious facts. ^* Now. all this I think
Tery probable. A vast number of diseases, espe-
cially those strictly nervous, disappear completely,
when the mind is powerfully excited.*^ In mag-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 135

netism, however^ as at present practised (whatever
may have been the case in the days of Mesmer and
his immediate followers), there is absolutely no*
thing that can be supposed capable of producing
any such powerful mental excitement at all; and
it is a great mistake to: suppose that the treatment
is peculiarly or exclusively adapted to nervous dis-
eases. Tbe best and most experienced practical
magnetizers, indeed^.hold an opinion precisely the
reverse of this. M* Andral proceeds : ^* Intermit-
tent £BVer even has thus been cured ; and it is no
less whimsical than true, tbat^ at one time, the re^
petition of the uncouth and unmeaning. word —
abracadabra — accompanied with various gestures
and imposing parade, wais deemed a sovereign cure,
amd I beheve it was so^ for a great number of ner»-
vous disorders. Nay, it is certain^ even that not a
Jew diseases (^ the circtUationy and of the organs of
secretion' amd ntitrition, were thus either perfecOy
curedj or at any rate matericdly modified.'^ *

Now, the sceptical opponents of Animal Magne-
tism have always appeared anxious to bring for-
ward cases of cures effected in the manner de-
scribed above, as if these afforded any solid grounds

* The learned T. Bartholinus said, ^^ Why shall I condemn
the cures effected by gestures, characters, w(»ds, and other na-
tural' actions, without the aid of superstition, although our lieeble
reason comprehends not how these cures are produced, for iheif
are demonstrated by esperience.


136 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

for iavalidating the doctrine they opposed. But
because diseases may have been cured by one mode
of treatment, that circumstance, of itself, can af-
ford no argument against the possibility of their
being also cured by another mode of treatment ;
in either case, we must just be content to fall back
upon the evidence. Besides, it is by no means clear,
that the two methods are not analogous to each
other, and may not depend upon the same prin-
ciple. The advocates of the doctrine in question,
indeed, have neither any desire nor any interest to
deny the authenticity of such facts, when brought
forward by their opponents ; on the contrary, they
rely upon these very facts as evidence in favour of
the opinions they maintain. M. Andral fully ad-
mits that cures have been e£Pected in the manner
he describes ; but is he quite certain that the cures
to which he alludes were not produced in conse-
quence of some more or less perfect modification
of the magnetic treatment?

M. Andral continues : *^ But what seems special
to this state" — that of the magnetic ecstasy or
4aomnambulism — ^' is, that the magnetised person
.18. asserted to be capable of maintaining a certain
kind of connexion with the external worU, while
otherwise completely insensible. Thus, he has
been known to hear and answer connectedly va-
rious questions and observations proposed to him


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 137

by one individual, while he remains insensible to
the loudest noises, the most exciting remarks of
all the other persons about him. It is difficult not
to admit that this has happened in several cases.
I have not seen the fact myself, but I have, in the
course of reading, met with several instances of it
so well authenticated, that I should not be justified
in refusing to believe it." Thid admission does not
seem very consistent with the author's previous de-
nial or disbelief of the alleged connexion, or rap*
portj between the operator and the patient. After
noticing some other remarkable features of the
ecstatic crisis — such as the occasional exaltation
of the sensibility, hallucinations, an extraordinary
development of intelligence, increased muscular
energy, &c. ; M. Andral proceeds to consider the
instinct of remedies^ with which the magnetic 8om<>
nambulists and others are said to be endowed.
Upon this subject, M. Andral is unusually decided
and peremptory, but, unfortunately, his opinion is
directly in the teeth of the evidence. " Now,"
says he, ^' in the whole of the statements on this
point, I must confess that I can again see nothing
but the acme of imposition, juggling, and quack-
ery."

This, I am aware, is a point upon which medical
gentlemen, who have not sufficiently studied the

YOU II. M


I^ ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

subject, are peculiarly sensitive; yet here I do not
hesitate to avow, that, although not a member of
the profession, I am directly at issue with M. An*
dral; and as this is a fact which, like all others,
mtist be ultimately decided by proof, I would re-
fer this gentleman, and the public who are to
judge between us, to the evidence adduced in this
work.* Does M. Andral really mean to include
the Doctors Hoffmann, Wlenholt, Hufeland, Oh
bers, Brandis, Nasse, Sprengel, Cabanis, Georget,
Virey, with a large proportion of the most eminent
physicians in Paris, among his impostors, jugglers,
and quacks ? For my own part, I do not hesitate
to declare, that, eitplain it as we may, I am ac-
quainted with no fact in physics which has been
more satisfactorily demonstrated than the one he
thus questions, f

* Whatever maj be said for or against it, the instinct of re-
msdies is no longer mere matter of opinion, but a &ct which
rests upon the most ample and incontrovertible evidence. It
is manifested more frequently in somnambulism, than in other
states of the organism ; and even Cabanis, with all his philoso-
phical scepticism, bears his testimony, as an eye-witness, to the
fact, that some patients have been known to point out, with
wonderful sagacity, the remedies most appropriate to their re-
spective complaints.

t '^ In general, almost all somnambulists possess, during their
critical sleep, th6 fiunilty of recognizing their own complaints^
and those of others, of dete^ining their nature, their duration^
and their accidents ; of declaring whether they are curable or
not ; of predicting of what nature the crises shall b^, the man-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 189

At tlie coDclusion of the 14tfa, and commence-:
ment of the 15th Lecture, M. Andral expresses his
doubts with regard to the reality of other alleged
phenomena of the magnetic somnambulism, espe-
cially that of vision, without the assistance of the
eyes. Upon this point I need say nothing here,
having already placed the evidence upon it so fully
before the public, as to enable every intelligent
individual to judge for himself.*

I regret to find, that, in his 15th Lecture, M.
Andral has, I trust unintentionally, entirely mis-
represented the interesting experiments made by
Dr Petetin of Lyons. He alludes to only one case,
of which, however, he admits that ^^ the narrative
in itself bears all the characters of good faith in:
the narrator, and truth in the details." But he.
afterwards remarks, that *^ Petetin's testimony is
corroborated only by the evidence of the husband,
sister, and sister-in-law, of the cataleptic female.
No strangers were present, the observations were
not repeated with sufficient frequency, and, above

ner in which they will take place, the precise moment of their
appearance ; of pointing out how they may be best promoted,
seconded, sustained ; finally, of prescribing all the means pro-
per to be employed in order to eSeciUBte & cure "^-^Memoire sur
le Fluide Vital, &c in the Biblioth. du Magnetime Animal, t. iL
See also the opinions of Brandis and others, formerly quoted,^
and the numerous instances I have adduced.

* See Appendix No. II., and almost every case of somnam-
bulism.


140 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

all, by different individuals." Now, in the paper
referred to in the last Note, the reader will find'
that Petetin's experiments were made upon seve-
ral patients, and that they were witnessed and re-
peated by all the professional and learned gentle-
men in Lyons and the neighbourhood, who were
perfectly satisfied of the reality and correctness of
the results. Moreover, it will be seen that these
results were confirmed, in all essential points, in a
number of subsequent experiments.

M. Andral afterwards refers to some other eases,
to which, as it appears to me, he makes some radier
quibbling and evasive objections. These I shall
pass over, as I consider the fact in question, viz.
the transference of the faculties — to have been sa»
tisfactorily demonstrated by the most ample and
unimpeachable evidence.* I must, however, take

* This, indeed (the transference of the Acuities), is a pheno-
menon which is now considered by all who have investigated
the subject as having been placed far bejond the reach of scep-
ticism. Professor Biunde of Treves, in all other respects an
opponent of Animal Magnetism, speaks of the phenomenon in
question in the following terms :

^* If we pay particular attention onlj to those narratives
which maj be considered most authentic, thus much only can
with probability be deduced from them, that, in the state of
magnetic sleep, the senses (the inferior spiritual nature in man),
in the exercise of their functions, are not necessarily bound
down to the mediation of tliose organs, which are necessary to
them in the waking and normal state. Such a transference of
sensation to other parts of the nervous system must always ap-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 141

some notice of the two last eases referred to by M.
Andral, as even be, witb all bis scepticism upon
tbis point, appears to attacb considerable importance
to tbem, and they have not yet been laid before
my readers. They are not at all necessary to my
demonstration, but perhaps they may make a si*
milar impression upon other sceptics as they appear
to have done upon the ingenious lecturer.

^^ The sixth case,'^ says M. Andral, <^ is the most
serious of all. It is described by M. Rostan — a
high authority — in his Systeme Medicak. M. Fe-
russ was present at the experiment. A watch was
held behind the individual's head. ^I see,' said he,
' something that shines !' ^ What is it T — ^ A

pear very remarkable and extraordinary ; but the extraordinary
and remaiisable may be perceived in many other phenomena.
Thus, magnetized persons have read perfectly well folded letters
placed on the pit of the stomach. In this, however, there is
nothing wonderful. For the soul of man is a power which, in
the normal state of health, can only exercise its functions through
the medium of the sensitive organs, but manifestly only because
it stands in as determined relations to the body as to its organs.
Should this relation be changed in an abnormal state^ which we
must conceive to be possible ; then, seeing, hearing, smelling,
tasting, &c. as energies of the soul, may be manifested in other
ways and by other means, in a manner with which we can never
become sufficiently acquainted, because, in such states, the in.,
dividual is incapable of reflecting upon them, and mere external
experience cannot lead us sufficiently into the depth of the
matter.**-.- F. X. Biunde, Vernuh einer sjftiemat Behandi, der
empiriseh* Ptychologiey L b. p. 430.

The author is a complete sceptic in regard to all the other
extraordinary magnetic phenomena.


143 AHIMAL MAGNETISM*

watch.' He was asked the hoar, and replied ex-*
actly. Two diflRerenit watches were tried. He was
equally precise. The watches were taken oat of
the rooiD) and the hands altered. He still told the
honrs apd minutes expressed on the dials. (Marks
f^: attention,) Gentlemen, this is a remarkable
fiM^t I wish I had seen it. (A laughs) Had I
seen it, I certainly would have believed it; but as
it is, tiie experiment demands repetition.'^
. *^ The last case I siKdl mention is recorded by
M. Fillazzi, in the thesis I quoted in the first of
the lectures on this subject. The subject of the
experiment was a female. She told the hour on a
watch held to the back of her head. Nay, more,
the watch having been taken into a dark apart-
ment, and the hands altered, she again described
the time they indicated, with exact precision, and
this experiment was repeated innumerable times,
the operator himself not knowing the changes of
the hands until the answer was given. (Surprise.)
Gentlemen, with respect to this narrative, I am far
from considering it very decisive. I want to know
who took the watch from one apartment to the
other. (Some murmurs among the auditors,) Gen-
tlemen, this precision is very necessary. Remem-
ber, we are investigating a very serious subject,
respecting which nothing must be admitted, if it
be susceptible of rational doubt."


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 143

The above is all that I deem of importance in the
lectures of M. Andral. The author, I understand,
enjoys great, and, I have no doubt, deserved repu*
tation in his profession ; and I believe him to be a
perfectly honest and honourable man. But, as I
formerly observed, it is manifest that he is not ac^
quainted with the greater part of the evidence on
the subject he has undertaken to investigate, and
that he cannot entirely divest himself of his pro-
fessional prejudices. Indeed, a continual conflict
appears to be going on in his mind, between those
prejudices and the impression made upon him by
the weight of even that small part of the evidence
which he knows. A little more profound, mor^
extensive^ and more impartial enquiry would pro*
bably produce entire conviction of the truth. In
the mean time, his admissions, forced, as it were,
from him, are very valuable ; and it is extremely
gratifying to find, that even the adversaries of the
system are now beginning to pay much more se-
rious attention to a very interesting class of facts,
and that the old and absurd theory of attouchementy
imagination^ and imitation^ once deemed so satisfac-
tory, is now abandoned by almost every intelligent
opponent of the magnetic doctrine.

With regard to the theory of the magnetic or vital
fluid* and its transmissibility, I fully admit that

* A most intelligent medidd eotrespondent, who is disposed


144 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

the onus probandi lies, if any where, upon the mag-
netizers ; and I am well aware of the difficulty of
that proof. But our opponents must not require
of us impossibilities. Where, I would ask, is the
exact demonstration to be found of the actual exists
ence of the ordinary magnetic, electric, and gal-
vanic fluids ? Have they not been in a great mea-
sure assumed from the necessity of explaining <;er-
tain series of physical phenomena ? In my humble
opinion, the professors of Animal Magnetism have,
at least, rendered it extremely probable that such
a fluid does exist, that it may be communicated
under the direction of the will, and that it is ca-
pable of producing very extraordinary phenomena ;
although it would be in vain to expect a complete
demonstration of this fact, at least until physiolo-
gists shall have more profoundly investigated the
economy of the living animal frame, and the ope-
rations of the vital functions. In the mean time,
we cannot do better than proceed with the collec-
tion and classification of authentic facts, for of
these our adversaries cannot deprive us : Fadum
mfictum fieri neqidtn

It will probably be long, indeed, before the me-
dical profession generally, especially in this conn-
to admit the existence of such a fluid, ingeniously suggests that,
for the sake of distinction, it mi^^t be denominated the Wlaefro-
nerving fluid. This iuggestion deserves conaideration.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 145

try, are brought to acknowledge even the facts of
Animal Magnetism, however irresistible the evi-
dence by which they are supported. Their pride
is compromised, the is^init du corps is tremblingly
alive, and it is quite natural that they should en-
deavour to maintain a long aod obstinate struggle
against the humiliation of admitting the truth of
doctrines which, hitherto, they have persecuted,
ridiculed, or neglected. Some of these learned
gentlemen, I am told, have magnanimously de-
clared that they vnll neither investigate nor even
listen to the subject. It is to the philosophical
public, therefore, that the appeal must now be
made ; they are more likely to be impartial, and
they are equally capable of pronouncing a satisfac-
tory verdict in a matter depending upon evidence.
The gentlemen of the profession will unquestionably
be forced to give way, as soon as they are made to
perceive the ludicrous nature of their position, in
continuing to close their eyes to generally acknow-
ledged truths, and attempting to oppose their wil-
ful ignorance to the lights which every where sur-
round them.

^^ There are few things more disgusting to an
enlightened mind, than to see a number of men —
a mob — whether learned or illiterate, who have
never scrutinized the foundation of their opinions,

VOL. II. N


146 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

assailing with contumely an individual who, after
the labour of research and reflection, has adopted
different sentiments irom theirs, and pluming them-
selves on the notion of superior * knowledge,' be-
cause their understandings have been tenacious of
prejudice/'* But ^* the true conquests, the only
ones which do not cost a tear, are those which are
gained over ignorance. The most honourable, as
well as the most useful, occupation of man is — ^to
contribute to the extension of ideas.^-f-

Many even of the most sublime and most im-
portant truths have been left to work out their
establishment through many long years of doubt
and discredit ; they have been rejected from preju-
dice, or obscured by theory and speculation, until
forced, at length, upon unwilling minds by the ir-
resistible strength of the evidence by which their
reality was ultimately demonstrated.

In his Defense du Magnetisme AninudsLgainst the
attacks of M. Virey, M. Deleuze mentions, that he
had received a number of letters from various in-
dividuals, who had been previously hostile to Ani-
mal Magnetism, declaring their conviction of its
reality ; and that one of these was from one of the
gentlemen who had subscribed the Report of the

• Bailey.

"t* Napoleon Buonaparte. — See Alison's History cif Eu-
rope during the French Revolution^ vol. iii. p. 379.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 147

Academicians in 1784. The same author also states
that many physicians are as much convinced as him-
self, although they dare not publicly avow their
sentiments ; and that several of them, in this state
of matters, have privately recommended experi-
ments to their patients. Surely this is not as it
ought to be. Why should we be ashamed of the
truth ?


( 148 }


CHAPTER XXX.

I HAVE now concluded all the practical details
which I originally proposed to submit to the pub-
lic on the subject of Animal Magnetism. I have
endeavoured to unveil the apparently miraculous
features of its peculiar phenomena, and to exhibit
them as merely the effects of natural agencies. It
has been shewn to be exceedingly probable, that,
if not exactly by name, at least in theory and in
practice, the influences it developes were known,
in a greater or less degree, in ancient times, and
among various nations. I have pointed out many
curious and coincident opinions, observations, and
allusions, in the writings of ancient and of modern
authors. I have noticed the analogous practices
of several individuals, previous to the introduction
of the more systematic treatment in recent times.
I have dwelt at some length upon the modern dis-
covery of Mesmer, and followed its progress and
improvement among his disciples and successors in
the magnetic art. Both the ordinary and the ex-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 149

traordinary phenomena resulting from the treat-
ment have, I think, been sufficiently brought into
notice; and I have taken the liberty of drawing the
particular attention of my readers to the very re-
markable appearances manifested in the natural and
in the magnetic somnambulism, to their analogy with
each other, and to the additional light they seem
capable of throwing on the subject of Sleep and
Dreams, as well as on the manifestaticms of the
spiritual principle in general. In the course of the
work, I have likewise had occasion to consider and
to obviate nearly all the objections, so far as I am
aWare, which have been urged against the system,
both by ignorant and by learned individuals. . To
the former, I have ventured to recommend inve*-
tigation. The hostility of the latter, I trusty I have
shewn is less in reality than in name.

It only remains for me, in this concluding chap-
ter, to make a few additional observations npon
the theoretical views which have been taken of the
subject, and to endeavour to dispel some serious
misapprehensions, by pointing out more particu-
larly the general tendency of the doctrine.

Limited as is my knowledge of the medical
sciences, it may be thought highly presumptuous
in me to propound any theory upon a subject so
very obscure as this; yet, considering the extreme
ignorance that prevails with respect to the nature


150 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

of the spiritual principle in mani and of the laws
wbich regulate its manifestations, I may, perhaps,
be permitted shortly to advert to certain hypo-
theses which have been framed by more learned
and more competent persons, with the view of en-
abling us to account for some of the more extra-
ordinary phenomena.

Although it has long been customary to ascribe
the operations of sense, as well as of intellect, in
the normal state, to the cerebral organs, yet I be-
lieve it has never been altogether denied that these
operations may be influenced, in a considerable de-
gree, by the peculiar condition of other parts of
the organism, and especially of the nervous system
in general. *

The late profound and interesting researches of
those eminent physiologists, Reil, Autenrieth, and
Humboldt, have gone far, not only to demonstrate
the existence of a nervous circulation, but even to
render probable the external expansion of this cir-
culating fluid — an expansion which is supposed to
take place with such energy, as to form an atmo-
sphere, or sphere of activity, similar to that of
electrical bodies. Of this theory I have given

* Even the Phrenologists— the greatest sticklers for the om-
nipotence of the cerebral organs— • were at length compiled to
modify their hypothesis, bj the adoption of a peculiar theory of
the temperaments, and by the convenient postulate of oaterit
foribui.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 151

some accoant in a previous part of this work.
Were we, then, to admit the existence of this ner-
vous fluid, of its sensible atmosphere, and its ana-
logy in other respects to electricity, it does not
seem to be a very violent or unphilosophical hypo-
thesis to presume, that, in certain circumstances,
and under certain conditions, it may be capable of
being directed outwards, by the volition of one in-
dividual, with such energy as to produce a pecu-
liar effect upon the organization of another. This
hypothesis, too, appears to be supported by the
fact, that individuals possessing sound health, and
great nervous energy, operate in general most ef-
fectually in the magnetic treatment; and that weak
and diseased persons are most susceptible of the
magnetic influence, and manifest the most extra-
ordinary phenomena.

Almost all the practitioners of Animal Magne-
tism, indeed, seem to agree in this, that the mag-
netic treatment operates principally, if not entirely,
upon the nervous system, and particularly upon
those nerves which are situated in the abdominal
region.* Now, in this region, we find the great

* The principal effect of the magnetic treatment upon the
brain, appears to consist in the temporary suspension of the
sensibility and activity of its organs. But, in proportion as the
activity of the cerebral organs is depressed, that of the gan-
glionic system is exalted. Is not this analogous to polariza-
tion?


152 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

ganglion, or concatenation of sympathetic nerves,
called the plexus Solaris^ which appears to be the
centre of the ganglionic system — a system of ner-
vous influence opposed, as is now well known, to
that of the brain.* So important in the human
economy has the region of this great ganglion been
considered, that some of the elder philosophers
conceived it to be the seat of the sentient soul. In

* The gangtionic system does not spring, as was formerly
believed, from the fifth and sixth cerebral pairs, but only com-
municates with them, as with many others, and with all the
nerves of the spinal cord. It constitutes of itself a separate
and independent whole. A series of ganglions, lying on both
sides of the spinal cord, linked together by means of connect^
ing branches, formed into a circle by the rump below and the
brain above, constitutes the definite boundary of both systems.
Within this boundary the ganglionic system expands, and commu-
nicates outwards with the brain by means of connecting branches.
The ganglionic system contained within this elliptical boundary
consists of a contexture of apparently irregular plexus of nerves^
sometimes more loose, and, where the principal vessels lie, more
closely pressed together, and occasionally provided with nervous
knots. In this labyrinthic contexture, one particular group pre«
ponderates in respect to mass, separation, and influence, which,
in consequence of its form* has been denominated the pleoftu so^
hms.

The nerves of the cerebral and ganglionic systems difier in
respect to their internal structure; those of the cerebral system
being more strongly oxidized, whiter, and harder ; those of the
ganglionic system softer, more jelly-like, and of a greyish-yellow •
colour. These and other difierences in structure and appear^
ance induced Soemmering and other physiologists to believe
that the functions of the two systems are essentially different—,
the cerebral system being appropriated to the purposes of tho
animal life, and that of the ganglions to the vegetative*


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 153

diseased states of the organism, this ganglion ap-
pears to stand in very peculiar relations towards
the cerebral system; and it has sometimes been,
perhaps not unreasonably, denominated the cere-
brum abdominale.

Now, it is a singular fact, that, in many cases of
catalepsy and somnambulism, the usual organs of
the senses have been found to be entirely dormant,
and the seat of general sensibility transferred from
the brain to the region of this ganglion, or cere-
brum abdominale.* Does not this circumstance
suggest some distinction, hitherto not sufficiently
investigated, between the intellect and the sensibi-
lity — between the cerebral and the ganglionic sys-

terns of nervous energy ?t

There seems little reason to doubt, that this im-
portant ganglion, with its appendages, was desig-
nated by Paracelsus and Van Helmont, in what

* This fact was long ago demonstrated by the experiments
of Dr Petetin at Lyons, and has since been abundantly con-
firmed.

-)* Although we have good reason to believe that the brain is
the seat or centre of the operations of the intellect, we have
equally good reason to hold that the ganglionic system — the
nerves and plexus of the chest and abdomen — is the primary
seat of the passions and affections of the mind. Love^ hate,
jealousy, joy, sorrow, anger, surprise, terror, &c alter the func-
tions, and even the structure of these last organs. Any effect
produced by these passions and emotions upon the brain, ap-
pears to be merely secondary or sympathetic.


154 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

they have said respecting the existence and func-
tions of the ArcheuSy which they considered as a
sort of demon, presiding over the stomach, acting
constantly by means of the vital spirits, performing
the most important offices in the animal economy,
producing all the organic changes which take place
in the corporeal frame, curing diseases, &c. Van
Helmont even held, that, by virtue of the Archeus^
man was approximated to the realm of spirits; mean-
ing, I presume, that, in cases of ecstasy, catalepsy,
and somnambulism, the excited sensibility of the
Archetis (or plexus Solaris ?) predominates over the
cerebral energy, supplies its functions with in-
creased activity, and, in the absence of the ordi-
nary organic influence, seems to transport us into
another world. Taking into view the whole of
the facts connected with this subject, the ideas of
Paracelsus and Van Helmont, when divested of
their obscurity and mysticism, may be found not
quite so extravagant and chimerical as has been
hitherto supposed.

In consequence of his minute and most ingenious
investigations into the nervous system, Reil con-
ceived himself entitled to assume two poles of ner-
vous sensibility in the human organism — the one,
the pneumatic pole, being situated in the brain —
the other, the somatic pole, in the ganglionic sys-
tem. The late ingenious Dr Spurzheim, without


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 155

any reference to the subject we are now invest!-
gating, has made the following judicious remark :
^^ Sometimes it would appear as if the vital power
were concentrated in one system, to the detrindent
of all the others. The muscular or athletic con-
stitution is often possessed of very little nervous
sensibility ; and, on the other hand, great activity
of the brain seems frequently to check muscular
development." * This observation is quite consist-
ent with the opinions of Reil. If we admit the
relationship, or perhaps rather the antagonism al-
ready pointed out, between the intellect and the
sensibility, between the cerebral arid the nenron.
or ganglionic systems, and could we conceive it
possible, either by means of the manipulations,
&c. employed in the magnetic treatment, or by
any other accidental or undiscoverable means, to
withdraw a considerable portion of the nervous
or vital energy from the cerebral region, and con-
centrate it at the epigastrium in the plexus solaris^f
or distribute it throughout the ganglionic system ;
should we not thus be enabled to account, in some
degree, for many of the extraordinary phenomena

* Phrenology in connexion with the Study of Physiognomj,
p. 15.

t In &ct, this is just what appears to take place in the natu-
ral and in the magnetic somnambulism. The cerebral organs
are rendered dormant, and the sensibility seems frequently to
be transferred to the epigastrium.


156 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

•

of Animal Magnetism, occasioned, it would appear,
by the suspension of activity in the cerebral or-
gans, and the exalted sensibility of the abdominal
ganglions ? And might not the same phenomena
be manifested in certain diseased or disturbed states
of the organism, such as catalepsy and somnam-
bulism, in consequence, perhaps, of some unequal
and irregular distribution of the nervous energy,
or vital forces, or of some other causes hitherto
undiscovered. Many physical analogies might be
pointed out in the phenomena of Electro-Magne-
tism, shewing the influence of electric currents
upon the magnetic needle. At Paris, a sensible
variation of the needle is produced by AurartB bo-
recUes occurring in the northern regions, at a dis-
tance of thousands of miles. A stroke of lightning
has been known to reverse the poles of the mari-
ner's compass.*

* I am no great lover of theories, and feel little interest in
defending them, a task which frequently generates a greater love
of controversial display than of truth, which last ought always
to be our ultimate end. Yet it is impossible for the reflecting
miud to avoid being struck with the numerous analogies of Na-
ture, and with the simplicity and uniformity of the means by
which she accomplishes the greater part if not the whole of her
most wonderful effects. But if little inclined to attach much
value to theories, I would give still less weight, in the present
state of physico-psychological science, to the mere authorita-
tive dicta of philosophers, especially when I find men of such
eminence as Dr Roget and Sir Charles Bell denying, upon spe-
culative grounds, the possibility of phenomena which have been


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 157

Other ingenious inquirers have endeavoured to
explain the magnetic phenomena upon similar
principles^ indeed, although upon a still more sim-
ple theory than the preceding. The brain they
consider analogous to a galvanic battery, habitual-
ly charged with a neutral or natural fluid, having
need of isolated fluids, positive and negative, sent
to the animal and organic life by an act of the will,
through the medium of the nerves, as conductors.
Without going farther than the mere simple state-
ment of this theory, which, I trust, will be suffi-
ciently intelligible to my readers, I shall proceed
to shew in what manner a late intelligent writer
attempts to account for the peculiar phenomena of
the artificial somnambulism upon its principles.

. Every man, it is said, has the faculty of causing
the magnetic fluid to radiate from his brain, by the
sole act of his will. This fluid is in a neutral or
natural state. Now, suppose this fluid directed by
the mi^etizer towards the brain of another indi-
vidual, the consequence will be this : If the fluid
of the magnetised person is equally natural, no ef-
fect will be produced, because two neutral fluids
do not act upon each other ; and this is what ge-
nerally takes place when we attempt to magnetise

observed to occur in thousands of instances, and whose actual
existence has been demonstrated by the most ample, the most
unexceptionable, and irrefragable evidence — fiicts which are all
but universally notorious.


158 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

a person in health. Bqt if the fluids are isolated,
as is usually the case in sick persons, each of these
two fluids will tend to decompose the neutral fluid
of the magnetizeri and to combine with its oppo*
site.

It is a remarkable fact, that the combination of
the fluids of one individual with those of another
has the efiect of producing sleep. This combina-
tion causes the brain to pass into a sort ot ercMi*
9ttU8f which, gradually increased by the continua-
tion of the magnetic action, determines, in iJie
brain of the magnetised person, a considerable dis-
engagement of fluid. It is this excess of fluid
whose subtilty, traversing the sides of the crani-
um, irradiates the surrounding objects, and occa-
sions the wonderful phenomena of lucidity. In
such circumstances, the brain is enabled to dis-
pense with the instruments of the senses, and the
individual can see virithout the eyes, and hear with-
out the ears. In the ordinary state, the oi^;ans of
the senses are a kind of conductors, which bring
OS the impressions of external objects ; but in som-
nambulism, the fluid comes into immediate con-
tact with these objects, so that the natural conduc-
tors of sensation become useless.

We have seen that, in somnambulism, the sen-
sibility of the animal life is entirely abolished.
This phenomenon, in our opinion, is susceptible of


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 159

a rigorous explanation. We feel nothing, because
the brain, completely absorbed by the activity of
this new order of perceptions, entirely abandoned
to this ecstatic life, no longer perceives any other
impressions. We may form some idea of this in-
capability of perceiving in the brain, from what
daily takes place, when a strong sensation annihi-
lates within us a weaker one. It is thus that an
individual, profoundly pre-occupied with some great
idea, or struck with the sight of a very interesting
object, sees and hears nothing of what is going on
around him. It is thus, too, that in a contest em-
bittered by wrath or vengeance, the two adversaries
scarcely feel the blows which they mutually inflict
upon each other.

After a magnetic sleep, why does the somnam-
bulist recollect nothing of what passed in this state ?
He remembers nothing, because every thing has
taken place out of his brain, since we have seen
that the fluid goes in search of the objects. We
can conceive that dreams should leave some recoL
lection behind; in fact, every thing then takes
place in the brain, and although the impression
may have been slight, yet it may be retained until
awaking, and leave some trace in our memory.

Why is the magnetizer not always capable of
acting eiFectively? Because his will, at the g^ven
moment, may be incapable of directing^ the fluid ;


160 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

•

because he is distracted or indisposed, and his fluid
no longer possesses the requisite conditions; be-
cause he acts upon a healthy person, and th^eir neu-
tral fluids are incapable of acting upon each other ;
because he operates upon a sick person, whose
fluid, at the moment, is in a natural state ; finally,
because some third party exerts a contradictory
action, with or without intention.

Why ought the magnetised person to have con-
fidence in Magnetism ? Because it is necessary
that the brain should be in certain moral condi-
tions, in order to produce certain moral eflbcts.*

I repeat, that I have not presumed to bring for-
ward any of the foregoing hypotheses, with the
hope that any one of them will be found to afford
a complete and satisfactory theory to account for
the phenomena in question, but merely as hints or
queries addressed to those persons who, with supe-
rior qualifications for the task, may feel inclined
to prosecute the inquiry. Much, indeed, still re-
mains to be done in the investigation of this dark
and difficult subject ; but a patient and judicious
perseverance in the path of experimental research,
and especially a more attentive observation and
classification of the psychical manifestations, as

. * See M AGKETisME, son hiatoire, sa theories $(m appiieaHon au
traUement det maladies : Memoire envoyi h VAcademie de Berlin.
Par le Docteur Leokard. Paris, 1834.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 161

contra-distinguished from the mere acts of the sen-
sitive organism, may ultimately lead to a success-
ful solution of some, at least, of the many difficul-
ties with which it is now beset. Nay, the fortu-
nate evolution of some single, and perhaps simple,
principle may at length dispel the darkness which
now envelopes this most interesting physiological
question; and a more enlightened posterity may
even wonder that we should have been impeded,
by apparently insuperable obstacles, in an investi-
gation, in which every thing has to them become
comparatively smooth and easy.^

But whatever speculative notions we may be
pleased to entertain, in the mean time, upon this
abstruse but fascinating subject, I should conceive
that even a superficial consideration of the facts
brought forward in this work, independently of all

* Veniet tempus, quo ipsa quae nunc latent, dies extrahet, et
longioris aevi diligentia. Ad inquisitionem tantorum aetas non
una sufficit. Veniet tempus, quo poster! nostri tarn aperta nos
nescivisse mirabuntur — Seneca.

It is, perhaps, unfortunate, that Physiology is almost exclu-
sively cultivated by medical men, and f9r medical purposes,
without any sufficient attention to its bearings upon the science
of mind. Hence, probably, the material tendency of the views
it presents. Could a physician and philosopher, like Dr Aber-
crombie of Edinburgh, be induced to devote a portion of his
time and attention to a systematic work upon this interesting
subject, I have no doubt it would be made to assume a very dif.
ferent aspect.

VOL. II. O


160 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

•

because he is distracted or indisposed, and his fluid
no longer possesses the requisite conditions; be-
cause he acts upon a healthy person, and th^ir neu-
tral fluids are incapable of acting upon each other ;
because he operates upon a sick person, whose
fluid, at the moment, is in a natural state ; finally,
because some third party exerts a contradictory
action, with or without intention.

Why ought the magnetised person to have con-
fidence in Magnetism ? Because it is necessary
that the brain should be in certain moral condi-
tions, in order to produce certain moral efl^cts.*

I repeat, that I have not presumed to bring for-
ward any of the foregoing hypotheses, with the
hope that any one of them will be found to aflbrd
a complete and satisfactory theory to account for
the phenomena in question, but merely as hints or
queries addressed to those persons who, with supe-
rior qualifications for the task, may feel inclined
to prosecute the inquiry. Much, indeed, still re-
mains to be done in the investigation of this dark
and difficult subject ; but a patient and judicious
perseverance in the path of experimental research,
and especially a more attentive observation and
classification of the psychical manifestations, as

. * See M AGKETisM£» son hiatoire, sa theories son appiicaHan au
traUement des maladies : Memoire envoyi h VAcademie de Berlin.
Par le Docteur Leokard. Paris, 1834.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 161

contra-distinguisbed from the mere acts of the sen-
sitive organism, may ultimately lead to a success-
ful solution of some, at least, of the many difficul-
ties with which it is now beset. Nay, the fortu-
nate evolution of some single, and perhaps simple,
principle may at length dispel the darkness which
now envelopes this most interesting physiological
question; and a more enlightened posterity may
even wonder that we should have been impeded,
by apparently insuperable obstacles, in an investi-
gation, in which every thing has to them become
comparatively smooth and easy.^

But whatever speculative notions we may be
pleased to entertain, in the mean time, upon this
abstruse but fascinating subject, I should conceive
that even a superficial consideration of the facts
brought forward in this work, independently of all

* Veniet tempus, quo ipsa quae nunc latent, dies extrahet, et
longioris aevi diligentia. Ad inquisitionem tantorum aetas non
una sufficit. Veniet tempus, quo posteri noatri tarn aperta noi
nescivisse mirabuntur. — Seneca.

It is, perhaps, unfortunate, that Physiology is almost exclu-
sively cultivated by medical men, and f9r medical purposes,
without any sufficient attention to its bearings upon the science
of mind. Hence, probably, the material tendency of the views
it presents. Could a physician and philosopher, like Dr Aber-
crombie of Edinburgh, be induced to devote a portion of his
time and attention to a systematic work upon this interesting
subject, I have no doubt it would be made to assume a very di^
ferent aspect.

VOL. II. O


160 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

•

because he is distracted or indisposed, and his fluid
no longer possesses the requisite conditions ; be-
cause he acts upon a healthy person, and th^ir neu-
tral fluids are incapable of acting upon each other ;
because he operates upon a sick person, whose
fluid, at the moment, is in a natural state ; finally,
because some third party exerts a contradictory
action, with or without intention.

Why ought the magnetised person to have con-
fidence in Magnetism ? Because it is necessary
that the brain should be in certain moral condi-
tions, in order to produce certain moral efl^ects.*

I repeat, that I have not presumed to bring for-
ward any of the foregoing hypotheses, with the
hope that any one of them will be found to aflbrd
a complete and satisfactory theory to account for
the phenomena in question, but merely as hints or
queries addressed to those persons who, with supe-
rior qualifications for the task, may feel inclined
to prosecute the inquiry. Much, indeed, still re-
mains to be done in the investigation of this dark
and difficult subject ; but a patient and judicious
perseverance in the path of experimental research,
and especially a more attentive observation and
classification of the psychical manifestations, as

. * See M AGKETisME, son hiatoire, sa theoriey son applieatMn au
traiiemeni des maladies : Memoire envoyi h VAcademie de Berlin*
Par le Docteur Leokard. Paris, 1834.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 161

contra-distinguisbed from the mere acts of the sen-
sitive organism, may ultimately lead to a success-
ful solution of some, at least, of the many difficul-
ties with which it is now beset. Nay, the fortu-
nate evolution of some single, and perhaps simple,
principle may at length dispel the darkness which
now envelopes this most interesting physiological
question ; and a more enlightened posterity may
even wonder that we should have been impeded,
by apparently insuperable obstacles, in an investi-
gation, in which every thing has to them become
comparatively smooth and easy.^

But whatever speculative notions we may be
pleased to entertain, in the mean time, upon this
abstruse but fascinating subject, I should conceive
that even a superficial consideration of the facts
brought forward in this work, independently of all

* Veniet tempus, quo ipsa quae nunc latent, dies extrahet, et
longioris aevi diligentia. Ad inquisitionem tantorum aetas non
una sufficit. Veniet tempus, quo poster! noatri tarn aperta noi
nescivisse mirabuntur — Seneca.

It is, perhaps, unfortunate, that Physiology is almost exclu-
sivelj cultivated by medical men, and f9r medical purposes,
without any sufficient attention to its bearings upon the science
of mind. Hence, probably, the material tendency of the views
it presents. Could a physician and philosopher, like Dr Aber-
crombie of Edinburgh, be induced to devote a portion of his
time and attention to a systematic work upon this interesting
subject, I have no doubt it would be made to assume a very dif.
ferent aspect.

VOL. II. O


162 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

theory, must be sufficient to enable my readers to
perceive that the phenomena of Animal Magnetism
come into direct collision with the opinions and
doctrines of the mere physiological materialist —
the advocate of the organic origin and nature of
the mind, or spiritual principle — ^and expose, in all
their nakedness and deformity, the scantiness, in-
sufficiency, and utter absurdity of his creed. In-
deed, the very material character of the predomi-
nant systems of philosophy, in this unphilosophical
age and nation, has probably opposed the strongest
barrier, in this country, to the general recognition
of the facts adduced, and the doctrines maintained
in this work.* But the more diligently, the more

* I had conceived that Materialism, in its more gross and of-
fensive form, had been long since exploded ; but I was mistaken.
I find that it has been recently reintroduced into Physiology,
not by any philosopher, indeed, but by a physician. Dr Elliot-
son of London, in his work on Physiology, asserts that ^^ Mind
is the functional power of the living brain,'* and that <^ the brain
thinks, and feels, and wilb, as clearly as the liver produces
bile.*^ These assertions are probably results of the science of
Phrenology, of which I have already ventured to give an opi-
nion, and in which, I understand, Dr Elliotson is an adept. I
might have been induced to make some remarks on the mon-
strous absurdity of all such opinions, had not this been already
done to my hand by Mr Roberton of Manchester, in two ad-
mirable communications inserted in two recent numbers of the
London Medical Gazette. What would Dr Elliotson think if
I, who am no physiologist, should assert, in opposition to him
who is, that Mind—soul, spirit^ ^ immaterial principle — produces^
forms, creates the bram 9 Yet I might perhaps be able t6 adduce


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 163

intimately, tbe more profoundly, we examine into
the human constitution, and the more attentively
we observe its most interesting phenomena, the
more firmly must we be convinced that there are
many important springs and operations, many re-
markable actions and reactions in the vital econo-
my, which never can be satisfactorily explained
upon the pure principles of Materialism. The Ma^
terialists themselves, indeed, seem to be perfectly
aware of the deficiencies of their own systems ;
and in order to supply a remedy, they are com-
as many and as good facts, arguments, and authorities, in favour
of my assertion, as he could in support of his. But, in the
words of a former quotation, Medicoy qua Medicua^ ignoia est anima.
The materialists, indeed, affect to consider this question, re-
specting the nature of the soul, as of little or no consequence.
But here also I differ from them.

I beg leave to call the attention of my readers to an excellent
work lately published, entitled Natural Evidence qf a Future lAfe,
by F. C BakeweU ; a truly philosophical production, containing
one of the most beautifiil and convincing specimens of analogi-
cal reasoning I ever happened to meet with. I wish I had seen
it sooner.

Sir Kenelm Digby says it cannot be *'* expected that an ex-
cellent physician, whose fiincy is always fraught with the mate-
rial drugs that he prescribeth his apothecary to compound his
medicines of, and whose hands are inured to the cutting up,
and eyes to the inspection of anatomized bodies, should easily,
and with success, flie his thoughts at so towering a game as a
pure intellect, a separated and unembodied souV^—ObservatUms
on Sir T, Browns Reliffio Medici. An anonymous commentator
on the same work alludes to a common saying : Ubi tres Medici,
duo AAeL


164 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

petled to call in to their aid the auxiliary assistance
of two foreign principles : With their matter they
associate mechanism, which implies design, and
must therefore be a product of mind or intelligence,
and postulate motion, the nature of which is direct-
ly opposite to that of matter ; and they afterwards
resort to a variety of gratuitous hypotheses, in or-
der to enable them to explain the reciprocal action
of these elements, in a manner corresponding with
the phenomena of the vital functions. They might
truly exclaim with the sacred writer : Ambidavi-
mtis vias difficiles, et erravimus a via veritatis. For,
after all their expenditure of labour and ingenuity,
they find it wholly impossible to account for intel-
lect and the moral manifestations upon their fa-
vourite principles; and, at last, they only exhibit
to view a fanciful, fantastic, and frightful monster
— ^like the Caliban-creature of the modem Prome-
theus — whose uncouth form and awkward move-
ments are calculated to excite the disgust, or the
risibility, of the rational philosopher.

The Animal Magnetist, on the other hand, takes
a more simple, a more discriminating, and, at the
same time, a more comprehensive view of nature.
He distinguishes, as authorised by the facts pre-
sented to his notice, between the materiality and
the motion of bodies, and the spiritual principle
which animates and actuates organised beings ; and


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 165

be considers the phenomena manifested by tbe lat-
ter as infinitely more important to the philosophy
of man, than those of tbe former. He is not con-
tent to examine the flesbless skeleton, in order to
acquire a knowledge of the principles of life and
action ; or to pore over the sapless trunk, with a
view to discover the causes of the germination of
the bud, or of the gradual growth and ultimate
maturity of the fruit. His business does not lie
among the tombs and the charnel-houses — the
abodes of decay and corruption. In the true spi-
rit of the inductive philosophy, he cautiously in-
terrogates living nature, receives her answers with
humility, and treasures them up with faith and
confidence, as infinitely more edifying and useful
than the most profuse ingenuity of perverse specu-
lation ; and he is so much the more assured of the
reality and the solidity of the knowledge he has
thus acquired, because it ultimately rests upon a
firm and insubvertible foundation of facts present-
ed by nature herself, and discards the feeble, pre-
carious, and unsatisfactory support of unsubstantial
and unstable hypotheses. He is thus enabled to
give a simple and sufficient philosophical reason
for the faith which is in him; while his whole
doctrine is calculated to elevate humanity, and to
dignify, by spiritualising, science.

In short, — ^in the phenomena manifested in the


166 ANIMAL MA6N£T1SM;

higher d^rees of Animal Magnetism, we may find
a complete practical refutation of all the material
theories of the human mind, a most distinct, co«
gent, and impressive proof of the independent ex-
istence of the soul of man, and, consequently, the
strongest philosophical grounds for presuming its
immortality ; since it has now been demonstrated
beyond the possibility of rational doubt, that, in
its manifestations, it is not necessarily chained
down to any particular part of the sensible and
mortal body ; but that it is capable of exercising
its various functions, in peculiar circumstances,
without the assistance or co-operation of any of
those material organs, by means of which it usual,
ly maintains a correspondence with the external
world.*

* In eo tamen Wienholto adsentior, et his phaenomenis all
immortalitatis spem ac augeri ; cum nullum supersit dubium,
posse nos sentire ac percipere sine ullo orga.nomm extemorum
commercio.— Sp&enoel, Inst, Med, p. 31 1, § 401.

Dr Greorget, to whom I have already referred, a young and
most promising physician, and also a Member of the Institute
or Royal Academy of Sciences at Paris, published a work of
great merit, in 1821, underthe title of Physiologie du Systeme
Nerveuxy in which he broadly professed the principles of mate,
rialism ; but afterwards, on becoming acquainted with the phe-
nomena of the magnetic somnambulism, he found reason to
change his opinions, and in his last will and testament, dated 1st
March 1826, he earnestly requested that the utmost publicity
might be given to his recantation.

Dr Georget is said to have been engaged in a work upon this
subject at the time of his death, in 1888.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 167

With the greatest deference to the opinions of
those more competent than myself to such inquiries,
it does appear to me, that the only possible method
of explaining how this correspondence is carried
on, in the circumstances alluded to, is by assuming
the existence of a very subtile and attenuated
ethereal fluid, probably secreted in the brain, or
modified by that organ, acting under the command
of the will, and conducted to all parts of the cor-
poreal frame by means of the various ramifications
of the nerves. This opinion was formerly enter-
tained, as we have seen, by the celebrated Hofl^-
man, and by many other learned men, long before
the modern discovery of Animal Magnetism;* and

* In consequence of my ignorance of medical literature, I was
not, until lately, aware, that similar opinions had been adopted,
and maintained with great knowledge and acuteness, by those
eminent practical enquirers, Mr Hunter and Mr Abemethy.
The latter, in illustrating the theory of his predecessor, considers
lAfe^ or the vital principle, as a sort of connecting medium be-
tween mind and matter — each, however, being independent of
the other ; and that mind is added to life, as life has been added
to organization. ^^ I am visionary enough,'* he observes, *' to
imagine, that if these opinions should become so established as
to be generally admitted by philosophers, that if they once saw
reason to believe that life was something of an invisible and ac*
tive nature, superadded to organization, they would then see
equal reason to believe that mind might be superadded to life,
as life is to structure. They would then, indeed, still further
perceive how mind and matter might reciprocally operate on each
other by means of an intervening substance. Thus even would
philqiophicfd researches enforce the belief which, I may say, is


168 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

there are various facts and observations, indepen-
dently of the analogous phenomena of Magnetism,
Electricity, and Electro-Magnetism, which almost
seem to take this assumption out of the category of
a mere hypothesis. Roullier observes, that. In
Magnetism, the physical processes elicit a fluid,
which reasoning and analogy would compel us, as
it were, to admit, even if all somnambulists had
not besides invariably attested its existence. The
somnambulists see this fluid white as light, and

natural to man, that, in addition to his bodily frame, he possesses
a sentient, intelligent, and independent mind ; an opinion which
tends, in an eminent degree, to produce virtuous, useful and
honourable actions." Mr Abemethy is also fiivourable to the
hypothesis of an universal attenuated ethereal fluid or substance,
pervading all nature, and constituting the life of the world ; and
he thinks that a similar principle may pervade oiganized struc-
tures, and have like effects on them. — See Abeanethy's Phy-
nologioal Lectures. I believe that these rational opinions of Mr
Abemethy encountered virulent opposition from the materialistic
tendency of the age.

The late Mr Coleridge thought that <* it is a great error in
physiology not to distinguish between what may be called the
general or fundamental life — the prineipium vUm, and the func-
tional life — the life in the functions. Organization must pre-
suppose life as anterior to it ; without life there could not be or
remain any organization ; but then there is also a life in the
oigans,'or functions, distinct from theother."^ra^-ra/Ar, vol. i.
pp. 144-145.

I do not precisely see the necessity of Mr Coleridge's distinc-
tion between the fundamental and the ^nctional life ; the latter
may be considered as merely a portion of the former, destined,
or directed, to a particular purpose. But I conceive that Cole-
ridge is quite correct in ajing that oiganizstion presupposes


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 169

sprinkled with brilliant sparks, when the magneti-
zer operates, with more or less energy, with the
points of his fingers ; and among these somnambu-
lists, there have been children, persons without
any knowledge of physics, and even some who, in
their natural state, had no confidence in Magnet-
ism.""* And Puysegur makes the following curi-
ous comparison between the magnetic processes
and the action of the electric machine : ^^ The elec-
tric machine, set in motion by the handle, which
causes the glass-plate to revolve between two cu-

life as anterior to it, and that without Hfe there could be no or-
ganization. Life, embracing the nisusformaHims of Blumenbach ,
is, unquestionably, the secondary cause of all oi^ganization, as
well as of all functional manifestations.

The following are some of the general conclusions deduced by
Mr Bakewell, in his interesting work on the Natwrtd Evidence
of a Fftture L\fe, •

The vegetative principle exists prior to the organization of
the plant, unless we could suppose that the effect of vegetation '
is produced without any cause. In organized beings, the living
principle must exist prior to, and is not consequent upon, animal
organization. The sentient principle, and the intellectual
powers, are distinct from material substance, and independent
of the material agents by which they are developed. The brain
is merely the apparatus for developing the powers of the mind ;
and any deficiency in the proper development, occasioned by
injury, or by the decay of the apparatus, is no more indicative
of the decay of mental power, than any derangement in the
machinery of the steam engine, which impedes its action, is to
be considered indicative of the loss of the expansive power of
heat, by which it was previously set in motion.

* See Bibhoiheque du Magnetiame Animal, torn. iii. ^ *
VOL. II. P


170 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

shions, is the image of the human magnetizer. Let
this motion stop, then all communications cease,
all the sparks disappear, in short, all kinds of elec-
trical manifestations are at an end. In the same
manner, the manifestations of Animal Magnetism
cease, from the moment that our will, the handle
of our thought, no longer acts magnetically, with
the intention of producing them."*

But although we may find ourselves compelled,
either by the necessity of the case, or by the result
of experiment and observation, to admit that some-
thing of attenuated, invisible, and imponderable
materiality, analogous to Electricity, exists in the
living body ; in doing so, we in no degree infringe
upon the important doctrine of the immateriality
and indestructibility of the soul itself. The ner-
vous, vital, or magnetic energy, or by whatever
other name it may be called, may be considered as
an actual fluid, supplied from the blood, elaborated
by the brain and nerves, pervading the whole sys-
tem, and forming an admirable gradation, a beau-
tiful and most appropriate connecting link between
the more gross material parts and the immaterial
soul. Such a theory — vie%ving it merely as a
theory — might elucidate many obscure points in
physiology; such as the evolution of animal heat,
the operation of the senses, the separation of the

* See BUdkfthegue du MagneHsme Animal^ p. 211.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 171

blood drawn during inflammatory diseases, irrita-
bility and contractility, the dependent action of the
heart, lungs, and arteries, the reciprocal influence
of the body and mind upon each other ; in short,
many of the most wonderful, and apparently inex-
plicable, phenomena of the animal economy. Such
a theory, too, seems far more analogically consist-
ent with that beautiful regularity, that harmonious
and almost imperceptible gradation, which is so
admirably manifested in all the works of Divine
Power and Wisdom, than to conceive the immate-
rial and immortal soul to be immediately united to
the gross and perishable body. Moreover, this vi-
tal energy may be considered either as a peculiar
fluid sui generis^ or as a particular modiflcation of
an universal fluid, pervading all nature, as the ve-
hicle or medium through which are produced all
the most remarkable phenomena that occur in the
physical and the moral world.^

The preceding views are powerfully corroborated
by the speculations of some of the most eminent
metaphysicians.

A certain class of philosophers, deeply impressed
with the mysterious intimations and manifestations
of our spiritual nature, in contradistinction to
those of the mere sensible organization, have been

* See some speculations upon this subject in the Appendix,
No. III.


172 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

led, independently of Revelation, to assume a two-
fold world — a sensible and a supersensible, a two-
fold life in man — the phenomenal and the noumencU ;
the one adapted to our condition, and the circum-
stances by which we are surrounded, in the pre-
sent state of our existence — the other manifesting
within us a more spiritual character, and render-
ing us capable of anticipating and enjoying the
prospect of a future. The poets, too, yielding to
the impulse of these lofty aspirations, have fre-
quently appealed, with rapt inspiration, to the
higher principles of our being, in their glowing
ideal representations of the dignity of that spiri-
tual nature which was infused into man at the
creation. The discoveries of Animal Magnetism
have at length demonstrated that, in all this, there
is something more than mere metaphysical hypo-
thesis, or poetical rhapsody. They have experi-
mentally proved that there is something more ele-
vated in the nature of man, than appears to com-
mon observation in the ordinary state of our exist-
ence; and, from the interesting and consolatory
truths they have unfolded, there has been deve-
loped, as the flower from the bud, that delightful
faith in the expansive and imperishable character
of our spiritual being, which, while it exalts us
beyond the narrow limits of time and space, and
teaches us to aspire to a brighter, a purer, and a


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 173

loftier destiny, seems calculated ultimately to pro-
duce an eternal reconciliation and harmonious con-
cord between Religion and Philosophy.*

* I have heard with concern that certain clerical personages
— of what denomination I know not .—were disposed to take
violent offence at mj former publication, conceiving it, I pre-
sume, to be hostile to some of their religious principles. I have
not seen their animadversions, nor do I wish to see them ; being
naturally averse to all such controversy, and not particularly
anxious to expose myself to the proverbial odium theohgicum.

An anonymous annotator on Sir Thomas Brown's Religto Me-
<fici|observes, that '' the author's behaviour, and general method
of reasdning as to matters of religion, was always inclining to
moderation. Upon that account he easily foresaw, and perhaps
had undergone the imputation of atheism from the narrow,
minded bigots, who are so overswayed by a preposterous zeal,
that they hate all moderation in discoursing of religion : they
are the men, forsooth, — ^t solos credant hdbendos esse Deos quos
ipsi ooiunt.** At one time, indeed, all those philosophers who
applied themselves to the study of the operations of nature,
were accounted irreligious; and there is scarcely any one science
which has not, in its turn, been denounced as impious.

But I would just entreat the reverend gentlemen, to whom I
have alluded, to consider, that the whole of my offence consists
in having brought prominently forward some natural facts, hi-
therto overlooked or n^lected. Now, I hold that, to use the
language of Lord Bacon, ^ there is no enmity between God's
word and his works." If these alleged facts be false, let them
be disproved or invalidated. If they be true — How can truth
i]\jure religion ? How can our knowledge of these things di-
minish our reverence for that Being who is the author of the
one, and the object of the other ? Nothing but gross ignorance,
and an ill regulated devotion, indeed, could suggest any such
views ; and their prevalence would only prove that, in spite of
the boasted intelligence of the present age, the day has not yet
arrived, when, as anticipated by the great Kepler, ^* pious


174 ANIMAL MAGNETISM*

I have thus humbly endeavoured to make my
readers acquainted, not only with the interesting
facts disclosed by the processes of Animal Magnet-
ism, but also with the nature and tendency of the
doctrines necessarily embraced by its advocates*
If they believe, as firmly as I do, in the truth of
the facts which have been submitted to their con-


sdmplkity will become ashamed of its blind superstition^ when
men will recognise truth in the book of nature, as well as in the
Holj Scriptures, and rejoice in the two reTelations."

The doctrines of Animal Magnetism, I apprehend, are emi-
nently calculated to promote the true interests of spiritual re-
ligion, bj associating with it a spiritual philosophy. And where
shall we find a more admirable demonstration of the Power,
Wisdom, and Goodness of God, than is presented to us in the
phenomena detailed in this work ? Where a more sublime and
ennobling subject of contemplation, than the manifestations of
the inunaterial soul of man, breathed into him by the Creator,
independently of the material organism ? When engaged in
such contemplation, who would not feel disposed to exclaim with
the poet :


" How poor — ^how rich— -how abject — ^how august —

** How complicate — ^how wonderful is man!

" How passing wonder He who made him such I

" Who center 'd in our make such strange extremes ;

** From different natures marvellottily mix*d;

*' Connexion exquisite (^distant worlds I**

I have always had considerable doubts whether any contem-
plation of the merely material universe can produce, in our
minds, such lofty thoughts of the wisdom and goodness of God,
or of the nature and destinies of man, as a just and comprehen-
sive Tiew of his spiritual, intellectual, and moral constitution.
In contemplating the phenomena of the external world, the


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 175

sideration — and this, I presume, must depend upon
the attention they have bestowed upon the evidence
— they cannot fail, I think, to be convinced, that
the discovery of the agency in question is of great
value to medical science, and of almost infinite im-
portance to philosophy. For my own part, I do

feelings naturally excited in the mind are those of admiration
and awe ; but I much doubt the propriety of any finite being
presuming to sit in judgment over the works of infinite power
and wisdom, and attempting to explain them according to his
own narrow notions of fitness, adaptation and design ; and I am
therefore exceedingly sceptical with regard to the sptritual edi-
fication to be derived from a perusal of the late Bridgewater
Treatises, excellent as they are in other respects. It appears
to me, that, in the following truly sublime passage, the immortal
Kant has justly discriminated between the feelings produced
by the two species of contemplation alluded to :

^ There are,*' says he, ^< two things which fill the mind with
ever new and increasing admiration and awe, the longer and the
more frequently we reflect upon them. The starry heavens
above, and the moral law within me. Neither of these may I
consider as involved in obscurity, or as placed infinitely beyond
my sphere of contemplation. I see them both before me, and
connect them immediately with the consciousness of my exist-
ence. The first commences at the place I occupy in the exter-
nal world of sense, and extends into the immeasurably great the
connexion in which I stand towards worlds upon worlds, and
systems upon systems, with their boundless periodical motions,
their commencement and duration. The second commences
with my invisible self, my personality, and represents itself as
in a world of real infinitude, although comprehensible only by
the understanding, and with which (as, at the same time, with
all visible worlds), I find myself placed, not, as in the former
case, in merely accidental, but in an universal and necessary
connexion. The first aspect of an innumerable multitude of


176 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

not hesitate to avow my sincere and honest eon-
viction, that the results to which this discovery
has conducted us, are destined, sooner or later, to
operate a most essential change upon the aspect
and constitution of several of those sciences which
have obviously been founded upon too narrow an
induction, and which yet pretend to exclusiveness,
although their professors are compelled to have
recourse to empty speculation, in order to sup-

worlds annihilates, as it were, my importance, as an animal be-
ii^, which must again restore to the planet it inhabits — a mere
point in the universe^-^the matter out of which it was originally
created, after it had been, for a short time, we know not how,
endowed with vital energy. The second, on the other hand,
infinitely exalts my value, by reason of my personality, in which
the moral law reveals to me a life independent of the mere ani-
mal existence, and even of the whole sensible world, at least so
far as we can judge from the appropriate destination of our being
through this law, seeing that it is not restricted to the conditions
and limits of this life> but reaches into eternity." — Crit. der
Pract. Vem,

The contemplation of the external universe is calculated to
make the deepest impression upon the rude.mind of the savage ;
that of the moral world, upon the more refined intellect of the
civilized man.

I have already mentioned the case of Dr Georget ; and I am
informed that the study of the phenomena of Animal Magnetism
has lately done wonders in France, by weaning many from the
deadly errors of materialism and infidelity, and giving birth to
a sound spiritual and religious &ith.

Notwithstanding some recent phrenological manifestations, I
trust that our Scottish clergy are not yet indissolubly attached
to the principles of materialism, and prepared, like Priestley, ta
attempt to reconcile them with religion.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 177

ply their acknowledged want of a solid basis of
facts.*

If, unfortunately, I have been unsuccessful in
my endeavours to impress upon the minds of my
readers a complete conviction of the reality and

* ^^ That which distinguishes this from all previous discove-
ries, is, that not only have the physical sciences become enriched
by a fact until then unknown or misunderstood, but that meta-
physics will inevitably derive from it lights &vourable to the
development and future progress of that sciencef. This first
cause, this eternal principle of things, this spirit which vivifies
matter — ^the freedom of man, the incorporeal nature of thought,
its immaterial origin, and the immeasurable sphere of its action
— all these great questions, which metaphysics hitherto could
only resolve by the help of speculation, seem now to be analy-
tically and experimentally demonstrated by the magnetism of
the will.*' — Biblwiheque du MagtteHsme Animaly tom. ii pp. 145,
146.

The following are some of the important inferences which Dr
Jung-Stelling justly deduces from the phenomena of Animal
Magnetism. My readers may compare them with the facts ad-
duced in this work.

'^ In our present natural state, we cannot attain lo any know-
ledge of created things, in any other way, than through the
medium of our ^ve organs of sense.

'* If any change be made in our organs of sense, or their in-
ternal arrangement be altered, our ideas of things, and, with
them, our knowledge becomes di£Perent ; for instance, if our eye
were otherwise formed, all colours, forms, figures, dimensions
and distances would also be different, and the same is the case
with all the five senses.

*< Beings that are differently organized from ourselves, form
an entirely different idea of our world, from what we do. Hence
it follows, incontestihly, that the ideas we form of the creation,
and all the science and knowledge resulting from them, depend
upon our organization.


178 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

importance of the phenomena of Animal Magne-
tism — a circumstance which I should be disposed

''God views every thing as it is in itself, and in reality, out
of time and space,** &c — ^ No space exists out of us in Nature,
but our ideas of it arise solely from our organization.** — ^ Time
is also a mode of thinking peculiar to finite capacities, and not
any thing true or reaL**

'^ Animal Magnetism undeniably proves that we have an in-
ward man, a soul," &c

^ light, electric, magnetic, galvanic matter, and ether, ap-
pear to be all one and the same body, under different modifica-
tions. This light, or ether, is the element which connects soul
and body and the spiritual and material world together.

'' When the inward man, the human soul, forsakes the in-
ward sphere, where the senses operate, and merely continues
the vital fimctions, the body falls into an entranced state, or a
profound sleep, during which the soul acts much more freely
and powerAilly, all its Acuities being elevated.

^ The more the soul is divested of the body, the more ex-
tensive, free and powerful is its inward sphere of operation.
It has, therefore, no need whatever of the body, in order to
live and exist : the latter is rather an hinderance to it,** &c.

^ The forgoing inferences are drawn from experiments in
Animal Magnetism. These most important experiments unde-
niably shew, that the soul does not necessarily require the or-
gans of sense in order to be able to see, hear, smell, taste, and
feel, in a much more perfect state.** — ^ The soul in this state
has no perception whatever of the visible world ; but if it be
brought into reciprocal connexion (rapport) with some one who
is in his natural state, and acts through the medium of his cor-
poreal senses it becomes conscious of the visible world

through him, and in him is sensible of it.'*

<* Space is merely the operation of the material organs of
sense ; out of them it has no existence ; therefore, as soon as
the aoul forsakes the latter, all proximity and distance cease.
Henc^ if it stand in rapport with a person who is many thou-
sand miles distant from, it, it can impart knowledge, by an in-


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 179

to ascribe to the inability or unskilfulness of the
advocate, rather than to the weakness of the cause
— I trust that I have, at least, ^been enabled to dis-
pel many unjust prejudices which they had been
previously induced, by ignorant or interested per-
sons, to entertain in regard to its facts and its doc-
trines, and to stimulate their curiosity to become
better acquainted with this highly interesting sub-
ject of investigation. Even in this view, I should
not conceive my time and labour to have been un-
profitably spent. Although myself unable to give
an effective blow to the materialism and scepticism,
the sensuality and libertinism of the age, I may
yet have succeeded in giving a favourable impetus
to public discussion, and furnished arms and argu-
ments which may be wielded with greater force

temal communication, and receive it from such an one, and all
this as rapidly as thoughts follow each other." — *' When the
soul is separated from the body, it is wherever it thinks to be ;
for as space is only its mode of thinking, but does not exist ex-
cept in its idea, it is always at the place which it represents to
itself, if it may be there.

^' Time being also, in &ct, a mere mode of thinking, and not
existing in reality, the departed soul may be susceptible of fu-
ture things, &c.

'' By magnetism, nervous disorders, long continued efforts
of the soul, and by other secret means, a person who has a na«
tural predisposition for it, may^ in the present life, detach his
soul, in a greater or less d^preo, from its corporeal organiza-
tion," &c. See Dr Jung-SUlling^s Theory of Pneumatology-^
work containing many curious and important facts, and much
ingenious reasoning, mixed up with some mysticism.


180 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

and effect by more powerful hands and mightier
minds than my own.

With regard to the bygone fortunes of Animal
Magnetism, the first report of the French Acade-
micians in 1784 threw a degree of doubt and ri-
dicule over the whole inquiry, which the subse-
quent efforts of many learned men, eager to re-
fute, or to condemn, yet unwilling to investigate,
naturally tended to augment, rather than to dis-
pel. They would not grant the new doctrine even
the privilege of a fair hearing. It has been ob-
served by Lord Bacon, that ^^ when a doubt is once
received, men labour rather how to keep it a doubt

still, and accordingly bend their wits." " But,"

says his Lordship, ^' that use of wit and knowledge
is to be allowed, which laboureth to make doubtful
things certain, and not those which labour to make
certain things doubtful."

More than half a century has now elapsed since
the report in question was drawn up and presented
to the public, and, during that period, many learn-
ed and eminent individuals have, by experimental
investigation, fully demonstrated the reality of the
disputed facts, and thrown much light on the prin-
ciples upon which they probably depend. The
truth of the doctrines of Animal Magnetism, there-
fore, must be determined, not by the points of
view in which they presented themselves to the


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 181

French Commissioners in 1784, but according to
the more matured form they have since been made
to assume by the assiduous labours of subsequent
inquirers. For my own part — a humble labourer
in the vineyard of science — I should be happy
to think that I had been, in any degree, instru-
mental in diffusing a knowledge of these import-
ant but neglected truths, or, at least in promoting
and facilitating the investigation. I desire not a
blind belief, but an impartial examination, and a
rational conviction. In short, all that 1 now ask,
or have ever asked, for Animal Magnetism, is, what
I presume no person of intelligence and candour
can refuse me — a fair fields and no favour. Hoc
unum gestit : ne ignorata damnetur. *

It may be, with truth asserted, that the merits
of the controversy between the Animal Magnetists
and their opponents of all descriptions, must be
considered as having been long since determined
in the eyes of all enlightened and rational men.
On the one side, we have a vast number of curious
and incontrovertible facts, abundantly attested by
competent and credible witnesses, and supported
by many natural analogies : On the other, we meet
with nothing but ignorant ridicule, wilfully blind,
perverse and invincible prejudices, or with inge-
nious but empty opinions, arguments and specula-

* Tebtullian, Apotogetieumy c. 1.


182 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

tions, inconsistent with these ifacts and analogies.
The contest lies entirely between fact and theory
or preconception ; and no rational mind can hesi-
tate for a moment, after adequate inquiry, to de-
termine on which side the truth is to be found.
Indeed, it may happen here, as. in other cases, that,
in the words of Bacon, " the voice of Nature will
consent, whether the voice of man do or not."

By those, indeed, who have thoroughly investi-
gated the subject with attention, discrimination,
and impartiality, the doctrine of Animal Magne-
tism is now considered as a real, an important,
and an imperishable acquisition. There are few
truths which have been ultimately evolved under
more unfavourable circumstances. It has already
withstood the severest trials — time, scientific op-
position in an enlightened age, persecution, misre-
presentation, sophistry, contempt, ridicule — even
the desolating tempests of political revolution. If
the victory has been at length achieved upon the
Continent, we owe a debt of gratitude to those ho-
nest, those persevering and indefatigable men, wlio,
having once been fortunate enough to seize upon
the truth, held it fast for a time, until at last they
were enabled to carry it triumphantly into the very
camp of the scorn er.*

• See the late Report of the French Royal Academy of Me-
dicine, Appendix, No. I.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 183

But, in order to render the ultimate triumph of
truth fully available to humanity, it is necessary
that philosophers and enlightened physicians should
at length abandon that irrational state of opposi-
tion or indifference in which they have hitherto
sought to entrench themscflves — that they should
restrain that supercilious scepticism with which
they have long been accustomed to regard the phe-
nomena — that they should condescend to investi-
gate the facts carefully, rigorously, and impartially
— that, when their researches have produced con-
viction, they should endeavour to wrest the mag-
netic treatment out of the hands of the unskilful
empiric, take it into their own management, and
exercise it for the benefit of mankind. Should me-
dical men spurn this advice, I do not hesitate to
maintain, that they wilfully neglect one of the
most important duties of their profession, deprive
themselves of a large sphere of usefulness, and ren-
der themselves guilty of no slight offence against the
interests of society. Let them remember, as Lord
Bacon has justly observed, that ^^ the science of
medicine, if it be destituted and forsaken by natu-
ral philosophy, is not much better than an empiri-
cal practice."

To the philosopher, I would repeat the sugges-
tion of the venerable M. Deleuze, in his admirable
Defense of this doctrine against the attacks of M.


184 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

Virey. Animal Magnetism is a natural cause,
which explains all the effects formerly attributed
to magic and witchcraft, as electricity explains the
thunder, as astronomy explains the appearance of
comets, as a knowledge of the different laws of na-
ture explains all those phenomena which, in times
of ignorance, were ascribed to supernatural agents.
The opinion that an emanation from one person,
directed by his will, may act upon another indivi.
dual — as an emanation from the brain acts upon
the fingers — does not conduct us to the belief of
the action of devils : on the contrary, it annihilates
this superstition, by teaching us to see in ourselves
the cause of many effects, which were formerly as-
cribed to strange and chimerical powers.*

To the Divine I would humbly submit, that the
doctrine of Animal Magnetism does, in no degree,
interfere with our belief in real miracles^ because
it does not prevent us from believing that the om-
nipotent Author of nature may, if and when he
pleases, interrupt or suspend the ordinary laws of
nature. But this doctrine does tend to prevent us
from believing in false and pretended miracles, by

* In this view, Animal Magnetism might, perhaps, be not
inaptly considered as the Philosophy of Superstition ; its object
being to investigate the natural causes of many of those pheno-
mena which have hitherto been entirely disbelieved against po-
sitive evidence of their reality, or held to be the effects of su-
pematural agency.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 185

demonstrating that the facts, which appeared mira-
culous before Magnetism became known, are only
the effects of a faculty natural to man.* The real

* The Roman Catholics have a curious, and rather ingenious,
method of accounting for the extraordinary phenomena of Ani-
mal Magnetism. When they are produced by a priest or saint
of their own church, they are the work of God ; when by a pro-
estant, or a member of any other persuasion, they are the work
of the deviL

I have now before me a work, entitled, La Religion coiatatde
unwerseliement, &c. by M. de la Mame, published at Paris in
1833. The author is a bigoted Roman Catholic In the course
of his work, he has occasion to investigate the subject of Animal
Magnetism ; and the most zealous disciple of Mesmer could not
be more anxious, than he is, to establish the reality of the phe-
nomena. But, then, he ascribes them all to the devil, or to
diabolical i^ncies. Every Protestant writer — every writer who
is not a blind devotee to the Romish church — he uniformly stig-
matizes as na ecrivain impie or irreliffieus ; and I verily believe
that if our own venerable and venerated Dr Chalmers should
happen to come across the path of this zealot, even he would
not escape the fiery anathema.

But this Jesuitical author is not content wiUi anathematizing
Christian authors. He attacks the Bible itself, as in duty
bound ; and is not &r from designating it as an impious book.
The thing is scarcely credible, but it is really so. After telling
us, in the text, that ^* there are no means more easy or more
efficacious, for becoming acquainted with religion in all its ple-
nitude, than to listen with respect to the instructions of the
Church ; he proceeds, in the following manner, in a note : —

*' The Protestant sects" — ^but I must decline to translate such
irreverent matter, and give it in the author's own language—
" Les sectes protestantes disent que la Bible, qu'elles appellent
superstitieuseunt la parole de Dieu^ est encore un meilleur moyen.
Conjecture deraisonable ! Car d*abord qui vous a dit que ce
recueil d'ecrits, r^dig^s tant bien que mal^ etait la parole de Dieu $

VOL. II. . Q


186 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

tendency of Animal Magnetism, therefore, is to
^ve a powerful, although an indirect, support to

De qui tenez-vous cette etrange assertion ? Ob. sont vos
preuves, vos garanties, vos raisons ? Helas I la superstition
vous etourdiU Vous crojez puerilement sans ombre de preuve.
Yous ne vojez pas meme que votre credulity attribue k Dieu
de grossieres erreurs, une ignorance choquante, toutes les mi*
seres mentales des ecrivains de la Judte. £t ensuite d*ob savez
vous que toutes les doctrines sacr^s se trouvent ecrites dans la
Bible 9 £lle-meme le dit-elle ? NuUe part Jesus-Christ l*a
t-il revels ? Jamais ; la Bible d*ailleurs n'etait qu*a moiti^ &ite
de son temps. L'Eglise enseigne-t-elle ce point capital ? Loin
de la, elle assure le contralre. Encore une fois done, oti avez-
vous trouv^ cette mjsterieuse nouveUe ? Sectes bibliolaires t ici,
vous le comprenez, il fiiut vous taire. Mais au moins r^ardez-
la done de pr^s, cette Bible que vous divinisez. Remarquez-en
les nombfeux de&uts. Considerez aussi combien eUe est loin
d'avoir la moindre apparence d'un recueil complet des Veritas re-
ligieuses. Que sont en efiet les livres qui la composent ? Des
relations historiques, des discours sur quelques doctrines parti-
culieres, des allegories morales, des predictions, et des lettres.
Est-il un seul de ces ecrits qui ait Taspect d'un traits de la Re-
ligion ? £n est-il un seul qui paraisse le moins du monde avoir
et6 fidt pour Texposer toute enti^re ? £t I'ensemble ne re-
pousse-t-il pas avec force cette vaine coiyecture ?**

After this, the reader will scarcely be surprised to find this
worthy disciple of Ignatius, Loyola and Peter Dens exalting the
Fathers of the Church above the Bible and its fidthfiil exposi-
tors, and devoting the impious protestant bHiiokOres to the wrath
and vengeance of God.

'' Mais viendra le jour des vengeances. Alors malheur k Tin-
gratitude ; malheur, malheur, a Timpiet^ ! Car TEtemal compte
les crimes des hommes, le glaive de sa justice est etendu sur
leurs tetes, le feu des chatiments brule dejk, nul coupable n*^
chappera. // Va dit, le supreme Arbitre dee existences ; eises paroles
ne passerU point'^-^^ee torn. ii. pp. 451, &c

(This, by-the^by, is rather inconsistent Where are these


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 187

true religion, by overthrowing one prevalent species
of superstition : For, as St Cyprian has said, supers-
sHtUmibus fcdsis religio vera suJbvertitur,

To the philosopher, the physician, and the di-
vine, I would strongly recommend the study of
the proofs, afforded by Animal Magnetism, of the
immateriality, independence, and immortality of
the human soul.

Before I conclude, I must beg leave to be per-
mitted to add a few words of solemn warning. In
attempting to produce the magnetic phenomena, I
would earnestly caution individuals against all ex-
periments of mere curiosity. Whatever ludicrous
ideas many persons may have been hitherto in the
habit of associating with this subject, I can serious^
ly assure them that experience has proved Mag-
netism to be no trifling matter. Even the oppo-
nents of the system acknowledge, whilst its advo-
cates admit, that the injudicious practice of it may

words of Gkxl to be found if not in the Bible ? But the author,
as we have seen, does not admit that the Bible is the Word of
God.)

The theology of this writer can impose upon no person of
sense and education. The reason of his hostility to Animal
Magnetism is also clear. The discoveries of the professors of
that doctrine have revealed the secret of the pretended Roman
Catholic miracles ; thej have unveiled and exposed their diabo*
lical exorcisms ; and thus threaten to deprive the priesthood of
that church of one of the main pillars of their establishment,
of one of the moft luciative bcaadies of their trade.


188 ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

be attended with dangeroas consequences. We
must not recklessly attempt to handle the thunder-
bolt, or to play with the lightning of heaven, lest
we be consumed to ashes. Like every higher gift
conferred upon us by the Creator, the magnetic
faculty ought to be exerted with judgment, pru-
dence, and discretion, and only for benevolent pur-
poses. " We do not know," says the great Dr
Hufeland (in his Journal der HeUkunde) — " we do
not know either the essence or the limits of this
astonishing power ; but every thing proves that it
penetrates the depths of the organism, and the in-
ternal life of the nervous system ; that it may even
affect the mind itself, and disturb its ordinary re-
lations. Whoever, then, undertakes to govern and
direct this mysterious power, attempts a very bold
task. Let him consider well that he is probably
penetrating, as far a« is possible, into the most
elevated laws of nature. Never let him enter this
sanctuary without reverential fear, and without
the most profound respect For the principle which
he endeavours to set in operation. Above all, let
him beware of magnetizing in sport. In medicine,
the most indifferent remedy is injurious to persons
in health ; still more so an agent which is perhaps
the most active and energetic of all remedies."

For these reasons, while the unquestionable phe-
nomena of Animal Magnetism suggest to the phi.


ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 189

losopher the most interesting topics of scientific in-
vestigation, it has always been the wish of every
intelligent Magnetist, that the remedial practice of
the art should be consigned entirely into the hands
of the professional physician. Upon the Continent,
this object seems to have been already nearly ac-
complished. In this country, on the contrary, the
profession, in genera], appear to look upon the
whole subject with the most profound apathetic in-
difference, out of which, it is probable, they will
only be eventually aroused, in self defence, by the
superior intelligence of the public.

In this work, I have merely touched upon some
of the more important consequences which are like-
ly to result from the magnetic discovery. There
are many other subordinate topics, connected with
the subject, which may probably suggest them-
selves to the mind of the philosophical inquirer ;
and these may afford matter for farther discussion,
upon some future occasion.


APPENDIX.


( 198 )


No. I.
REPORT

ON THE

MAGNETIC EXPERIMENTS,

MADE BY A COMMITTEE OF THE ROYAL ACADEMY OF

MEDICINE, AT PARIS.


Gentlemen, — More thaa five years have elapsed
since a young physician, M. Foissac, whose zeal and ta-
lent for ohservation we have had frequent opportunities
of remarking, thought it his duty to draw the attention
of the Medical Section to the phenomena of Animal
Magnetism. With regard to the Report made hy the
Royal Society of Medicine in 1 784, he recalled to our
recollection, that, amongst the conunissioners charged
with conducting the experiments, there was one con-
scientious and enlightened man, who had published a
Report in contradiction to that of his colleagues ; that
since the period in question,' Magnetism had been the
object of new experiments and of new investigations ;
and, with the consent of the section, he proposed to

VOL. ri. B


194 APP£NDI^, NO. I.

submit to their examination a somnambulist who ap-
peared to him to be capable of throwing light upon a
question, which several of the most intelligent men in
France and Germany considered as far from being re-
solved, although, in 1784, the Academy of Sciences
and the Royal Society of Medicine had pronounced an
unfavourable judgment.

A committee, composed of MM. Adelon, Burdin the
elder, Marc, Pariset, and myself (M. Husson), were
appointed by you to report upon the proposition of M.
Foissac.

The Report, which was presented to the Section of
Medicine at its meeting of the 13th December 1825,
concluded that Magnetism ought to be subjected to a
new investigation. This condusion gave rise to i^
aninialied discussion, which was prolonged during three
meetings — ^the 10th and 24th of January, and the 14th
of F^riiary, 1826. At this last meeting, the commit-
tee replied to all th^ objections which had been mac|e
to their Report ; and at the same meeting, after ma-
ture deliberation, after adopting the mode hitherto un-
usual in niat^rs of science, of an iiidividual scrutiny,
thp Siectipn dedded that i^ specif committee should be
appoint^fii in order to investigate anew the phenomena
of Apiinal Magne^sm.

This new coijunittee, consisting of MM. Bourdois,
DouUq, I^d, Gueneau de Hussy, Guersent, Fouquier,
Laennec, Leroux, Magendie, Marc, and Thillaye, was


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAQNETISM. 195

appointed at the meeting of the 28th of February 189^
Some time afterwards, M. Laennec, having been ob-
liged to leave Paris on account of his health, I was
named to replace him ; and the committee, thus consti-
tuted, proceeded to discharge the duty with which it
had been entrusted.

Their first care, previous to the retirement of M.
Laennec, was fo examine the somnambulist who had
been offered to them by M. Foissac.

Vsurious experiments were made upon her within
the premises of the Academy ; but we must confess
that our inexperience, our impatience, our distrust, per-
haps too strongly manifested, permitted us only to ob-
serve certain physiological phei^omena suffiqjently dm-
rious, which we shall communicate to you in the seqiiel
of our Report, b^t in which we did not recognise any
peculiar phenomenf^ of sonrnambulism. This soinniun-
bulist, fatigued, no doubt, with our importunities, ce^f^
at this time, to be pieced at our (lisposal ; and we were
oblig€(d to search the hospitals for the means of prose-
cuting our ei^periments.

M. Parisety physician to the Salpetriere^ wi^ n^ore
oapuble thap imy other of assisting us in our search.
He set about the task with an ardour, which, unfoirtu-
nately, led to no result. The committee, who founded
a g^eat part of their hopes upon the resources which
this hospital might he c|ipah]e of furnishing, whether
in regard to the individuals who might be subjected to


196 APPENDIX, NO. I.

experiment, or to tbe presence of M. Magendie, who
had requested to accompany them as one of the com-
mittee ; the committee, we say, seeing itself deprived
of those means of instruction which it had expected to
find, had recourse to the zeal of each of its individual
members.

M. Guersent promised us his assistance in the hos-
pital des JSnfans, M. Fouquier in the' hospital de la
CharUe^ MM. Gueneau and the Reporter in the Hotd"
IHeuy M. Itard in the Institution for the Deaf and
Dumb ; and thenceforward, each prepared to make ex-
periments, which were subsequently to be witnessed by
the other members of the committee. Other and more
powerful obstacles soon arrested our labours ; the causes
from which these obstacles proceeded are unknown to
us ; but, in virtue of a decree of the General Council
of the Hospitals, of date the 19th of October 1825,
which prohibited the use of every new remedy which
had not previously been approved of by a committee
appointed by the Council, the magnetic experiments
could not be continued at the hospital de la Charite,

Reduced to their own resources, to those which the
particular relations of each of its individual members
might present, the committee made an appeal to all
the physicians who were known to make Animal Mag-
netism the object of their researches. We requested
them to allow us to witness their experiments, to ac-
company them during their progress, and to confirm


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 197

the results. We are bound to declare that we have
been most effectually assisted in our investigations by
several of our brethren, and especially by the gentle-
man who first suggested the inquiry, M. Foissac. , We
do not hesitate to declare, that it is to his constant 9nd
persevering intervention, and to the active zeal of M.
Dupotet, that we are indebted for the greater part of
the ibaterials embodied in the Report which we now
present to you. Nevertheless, gentlemen, do not be-
lieve that your committee, in any circumstance, intrust-
ed to others than its own members the task of direct-
ing the experiments which we witnessed, that any
others than the Reporter held the pen, at any instant,
for the purpose of compiling the minutes of procedure,
and of commemorating the succession of the phenomena
which presented themselves, and exactly as they pre-
sented themselves. The committee proceeded to fulfil
their duties with the most scrupulous exactness ; and
if we render justice to those who assisted us with their
kind co-operation, we must, at the same time, destroy
even the slightest suspicion which might arise in your
minds with regard to the share, gi*eater or less, which
others than ourselves may be supposed to have had in
the investigation of this question. Your committee al-
ways suggested the di£Ferent modes of experimenting,
traced the plan of inquiry, directed the course to be
pursued, followed and described its progress. Finally,
in avfuling ourselves of the services of auxiliaries moro


198 APPENDIX, NO. 1.

or less zealons and enlightened, we have always been
present, and always impressed our own direction npon
every thing that has been done.

Thus you will see that we admit no experiment made
wiAoQt the presence of the committed, even by mem-
bers of the Acfkdemy. Whatever confidence the spirit
of confraternity, and the reciprocal esteem with which
we are all animated, ought to establish amongst us, we
felt that in the investigation of a question of Which the
solution is so delicate, we should trust none but our-
selves, and tliat yon could trust only to our guarantee.
From this rigorous exdusion, however, we have thought
proper to except a very curious phenomenon observed
by M. Cloquet, which we have admitted, because it was
already, in a manner, the property of the Academy,
the Section of Surgery having been occupied in its in-
vestigation at two of its meetings.

This reserve, gentlemen, wJiich the committee im-
posed upon itself, in regard to the use of various facte
relative to the question which we studied with so much
care and impartiality, would give us the right to de-
maud a return of confidence, if any persons who had
not witnessed our experiments should be inclined to
raise discussions in regard to their authenticity. For
the same reason that we only demand your confidence
in respect of what we ourselves have seen and done,
we caiinot admit that those who, at the same time as
ourselves and along with us, had nether seen nor done,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 199

cto attack ol* cAll in question that which we allege to
have (dbsei^vdcl. And, moreover, as we always enter-
tained th^ gi*eatest distrust of the antoounceihents which
#ei*e iliade to us of wonders to come, and as this feel-
ing (Constantly predominated during ail oiif researches,
we think we have some right to require thsit, although
you may skispend your belief, you will, at least, raise
no doubt in regard to the moral and {Physical disposi-
tions with which we always proceeded to the observa-
tions of the various phenomena of which we were wit-
nesses.

Thus, gentlemen, this Report, which we are foi: from
presentiiig to you with the view of fixing yoni* opinion
upon the question of Magnetism, cannot and ought not
to be considered in atiy other light than as the cbinbi-
nation and classification of the fikcts which we have hi-
therto observed : We offer it to you as a proof that we
have endeavoured to justify your confidence ; and while
we regret that it is not founded upon a greater num-
ber of eicperiments, we trust that you will receive \i
with indulgence, and that you will hear it read with
some interest. At the same time, we think ourselves
bound to midce you aware, that what we have seen in
the cotirse of our experiments bears no sort of resem-
blance to what the Report of 1784 relates with regard
to the roagnetizers of that period. We neither adroit
nor reject the existence of a fluid, because we have not
verified the fact ; we do not speak of the baquet, — of


200 APPENDIX, NO. I.

the bagu^te, — of the chain established by the medium
of a communication of the hands of all the magnetised
patients, — of the application of means prolonged, some-
times during several hours, to the hypochondriac region
and the stomach, — of the vocal and instrumental music
which accompanied the magnetic operations, — nor of
the assemblage of a great number of people together,
who were magnetised in the presence of a crowd of
witnesses ; because all our experiments were made in
the most complete stillness, in the most absolute silence,
without any accessory means, never by immediate con-
tact, and always upon a single person at a time.

We do not speak of that which, in the time of Mes-
mer, was so improperly called the crisisy and which
consisted of convulsions, of laughter, sometimes irre-
pressible, of immoderate weeping, or of piercing cries,
because we have never met with these different pheno-
mena.

In all these respects, we do not hesitate to declare,
that there exists a very great difPerence between the
facts observed and decided upon in 1784, and those
which we have collected in the work which we have
the honour to present to you ; that this difference es-
tablishes a most glaring line of demarcation between
the one and the other ; and that, if reason has done
justice in regard to a great proportion of the former,
the spirit of observation and research should endeavour
to multiply and appreciate the latter.


.**


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 201

It .18 with Magnetism, gentlemen, as with many of
the other operations of nature ; that is to say, a certain
combination of conditions is required in. order to the
production of such and such effects. This is an incon-
trovertible principle, which, if it required any proof,
might be confirmed by that which takes place in divers
physical phenomena. Thus, without a certain dryness
of the atmosphere, electricity would be but feebly de-
veloped — without heat, we should never obtun that
combination of lead with tin, which constitutes the com-
mon solder of the plumbers — without the light of the
sun, we should not witness the spontaneous combustion
of a mixture of equal parts of chlorine and hydrogen,
&c. &e. Whether these conditions be external or phy-
sical, as in those cases to which we have just referred ;
whether they be internal or moral, such as the mag-
netiasers allege to be indispensable to the development
of the magnetic phenomena — it is enough that they ex-
ist, and that they should be exacted by them, to make
it incumbent upon your committee to endeavour to
unite them, and to make it their duty to submit to them.
It was, however, neither our duty nor our inclination
to divest ourselves of that indefatigable curiosity which
induced us, at the same time, to vary our experiments,
and, if we could, to set at fault the practices and the
promises of the magnetizers. For this double reason,
we conceived ourselves bound to disburthen ourselves
of the obligation they would impose of having a strong


202 APPENDIX, KO. I.

ftiihf ci being animated solely by benevolent motives.
We sought only to be inquisitive, mistmstfal, and ex-
act observers.

N«ther did we think it our duty to endeavour to
explain these conditi(His. This Would have been a ques-
tion of pure controversy, fot the solution df which we
had no hotter meahs than in attempting to eitplain th6
condition^ of other physiblogical phenomena. Such as
those thki regulate the action of different medicines.
These are questions of the same kind, Upon whidi
science has yet pronounced no judgment.

In all the experiments which we tnade, we invariably
observe the most rigorous silence, because we Con-
ceived that, in the development of phenomena so deli-
cate, the attention of the magnetizer and of the mag-
netised ought not to be distracted by any thing foreign.
Besides, we did not wish to incur the reproach of hav-
ing injured the success of the experiment by conversa-
tion or by other distracting causes; and we always
took care that the expressioii of our countenances should
neither operiate as a constraint upon the magpietiser,
nor inspire doubt into the mind of the person mag-
netised. Oui^ position — we are anxious to repeat it —
was constantly that of inquisitive atid impartial ob-
serveirs. These different conditioiis, several of which
had been recommended in the works of the t*espectable
M. DeleUzlB, having been well established, we proceed
to state what we observed.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 208

The parson to be magnetised was placed in a sitting
postare, either in a convenient elbow-chair^ or on a
couch — sometimes even in a common diain

The magneiizer, seated on a chaii* a little more de-
vatedy o|>posite, and at the distance of about a foot fnan
the patietiti seemed to collect himself for some nioments,
duHng which he took the thumbs of the patient between
hk tw<6 fingeirs, so that the inteHor parts of the thumbi
were in contact with each ot^er. He fixed his eyes
upon the patient, and remained in this position lintil he
felt that an eqnal degree of heat was establtshed he*
tween the thumbs of the magnetiser and the magf-
netised. He then withdrew his hands, taming them
outward, placed them on the shoulders, whei^e he al-^
lowed them to remain about a minute, and conducted
them slowly, by a sort of very slight frictioii, idofog the
arms to the extremity of the fingers. This operation
he performed five or six times, which the magnetisers
call a pia8B ; he then placed hii hands above the head,
held them there a moment, drew them downwards in
front of the face, at the distance of one or two inchei^
to the epi^itfium (pit of the stomach), resting his fin-
gers upon this part of the body; and he descended
slowly along the body to the feet. These passes were
repeated during the greater ^art of the sitting ; atid
when he wished to terminate it, he prolonged them be-
yond the extremity of the hands and feet, shaking his
fingers each time. Finally, he made transverse panes


204 APPENDIX, NO. I.

before the face and the breast, at the distance of from
three to four inches, presenting his two hands approxi-
mated to each other, and separating them abruptly.

At other times, he approximated the fingers of each
hand, and presented them at the distance of three or
four inches from the head or the stomach, leaving them
in this position during one or two minutes ; then, with-
drawing imd approximating them alternately with more
or less rapidity, he imitated the very natural movement
which is performed when we wish to shake off a liquid
which has moistened the extremity of our fingers.
These di£Eerent modes of operation have been adopted
in all our experiments, without any preference of the one
to the other. Frequently we employed only one, some-
times two, and in the choice we made, we were never
guided by the idea that one method would produce an
effect more readily and more conspicuously than the
other.

In enumerating the facts observed, your committee
shall not follow precisely the order of time in which
they were collected; it has appeared to them to be
much more convenient, and, above all, much more ra-
tional, to present them to you classified according to
the more or less conspicuous degree of the magnetic
action recognised in each.

We have, therefore, established the following four
divisions :


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAaNETISM. 205

I. Magnetism has no effect upon persons in a state
of sound health, nor upon some diseased persons.

II. In others, its effects are slight.

III. These effects are sometimes produced by ennuiy
by monotony, by the imagination.

IV. We have seen them developed independently
of these last causes, most probably as the effect of Mag-
netism alone.

I. Magnetisjn without effect. — The Reporter of the
Committee has several times submitted to the operation
of Magnetism. Once, amongst others, while in the
enjoyment of perfect health, he had the patience to re-
main seated in the same position for a period of three
quarters of an hour, with his eyes closed, in complete
immobility ; and he declares, that, during the operation,
he experienced no kind of effect, although the ennui of
his position, and the absolute silence which he had re-
commended to be observed, might have been very ca-
pable of producing sleep. M. Demussy submitted to
the same experiment with the same result. At another
time, when the reporter was tormented with very vio-
lent and very obstinate rheumatic pains, he allowed
himself to be repeatedly magnetized, and he never ob-
tained by this means the slightest mitigation, although
the acuteness of his sufferings made him vehemently
desire to have them removed, or at least alleviated.

On the II th of November 1826, our respectable


806 APP£NDIX, NO. I. -

ceUeagae, M. Bonrdois, had ezpertenoed, diuiiig two
monthsy an indisposition which required particular at-
tention, upon his party to his habitual mode of liTing.
This indisposition, he told us, was not his ordinary or
normal state, he knew the cause of it, and could indi*
oate the point from which it proceeded. In these cir-
cumstances, whidi, as M. Dnpotet affirmed, were fa-
vourable to the development of the magnetic pheno-
mena, M. Bourdois was magnetised by M. Dupotet, in
presence of MM. Itard, Marc, DouUe, Gueneau, and
the Reporter. The experiment commenced at tiitrty-
thi'ee minutes past three o'dock ; the pulse was then at
84, which M. Double and M. Bourdois declared to be
the normal state. At forty-one minutes past three the
experiment terminated, and M. Bourdois experienced
absolutely no effect. We only observed that the pulse
had fallen to 72, that is to say 12 less than before the
operation.

At the same meeting, our colleague, M. Itard, who
had been afflicted for eight years with chronic rheu-
matism, the seat of which was then in the stomach, and
who was suffering at the time from a recurrent crisis
of the disease (crise hdbUueUe attaehie h sa nuikuUe —
these are his own expressions), caused himself to be
magnetized by M. Dupotet. At fifty minutes past three
o'clock, his pulse was at 60 ; at fifty-seven minutes past
three he closed his eyes ; at three minutes past four
the operation terminated. He told us that, during the


REPORT QN AmUAh l^AQNETISM. 201

time he had his eyes opeD, he thought that he felt the
impression made upon his organs hy the passage of the
fingers, a¥ if they had been tstruok by a blast of warm
i^r ; but that, after haying, closed them, and the expe-
riment ooptinuing, he had nq longer the wne sensation.
He addedy that, at the end of fiye minntes, he fdt a
headachy which affected all the forehead and the base
of the prbitSy with a seqsatipn of dryness in the tongue,
although wh^n observed by us» the tongue was very
moist* Finally, he said that the pain which he felt
previous to the operation, and which he had described
as depending upon the affo<$tion of which he complained,
had disappeared) but that it was, in general, very va-
riable. We reniiarked that the pnUe had risen to 74,
that is to say, 14 more than before the operation.

We might certainly have reported other observations
in which magnetism manifested no sort of actifity ; but
besides the inconvenience of referring to facts unat-
tended with a9y result) we conceived it sufficient for
you to b^ made acquainted with the experiments which
three of yo9r commU^e made upojn themselves, in order
to have a 9iore complete assurance of the truth of our
investigations.

II. SUghi ^ectfi cf Magnetism. — It cannot have
escaped y<Mi» gentlemeui that the last case in the pr^
ceding aeries presented a commencement of the Dcaag«
netic action. We have, accordingly, placed it at the


908 At»t»£NDl^ NO. t.

end of the section, in otder to serve as a link to con-
nect those which are to follow.

M. Ma^ien, doctor of medicine, aged 54 years, re*

siding in the street St Denis, No. , walked with

great difficulty, in consequence of a &U he had some
years before upon the left knee, and very probably,
also, in consequence of the growth of an aneurism of
the heart, which carried him off in the month of Sep-
tember last. He was magnetized by the reporter upon
the 18th, 19th, 20th, 21st, 22d, and 23d of August
1826. The number of pulsations was less- at the end
of five sittings, than at the commencement, the pulse
falling from 96 to 90, from 96 to 86, from 76 to 71,
from 82 to 79, from 80 to 78, and at the sisDh sitting,
the number was the same at the commencement and at
the termination, viz. 83. The inspirations were equal,
excepting upon one occasion, when they were 20 at the
beginning, and 26 at the end. M. Magnien constantly
experienced a sensation of coolness in all those parts of
his body to which the fingers of the magnetizer were
directed, and kept for a long time in the same direc-
tion. This phenomenon never once failed to present
itself.

Our colleague, M. Roux, who complained of a chro-
nic affection of the stomach, was magnetized six times
by M. Foissac, on the 27th and 29th of September, and
ou the Ist, dd, 5th, and 7th of October, 1827. He
experienced, at first, a sensible diminution in the num-


R£PORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 209

ber of inspirations and pulsations, afterwards, a slight
degree of heat in the stomach, a great degree of cool-
ness in the face; the sensation of a vaporization of
ether, even when no manipulations were practised be-
fore him, and, finally, a decided disposition to sleep.

Anne Bourdin, aged twenty-five years, residing in
the street Du Paon, No, 15, was magnetized on the
17th, 20th, and 21st of July, 1826, at the Hotel-Dien,
by M. Foissac, in presence of the reporter. This wo-
man said she complained of headach (cephalalgia)^ and
of a nervous pain {neuralgia)^ which had its seat in the
led: eye. During the three magnetic sittings, we per-
ceived the inspirations increase from 16 to 39, from 14
to 20, and the pidsations from 69 to 79, from 60 to 68,
from 76 to 95. The head grew heavy during these
three experiments, — the woman fell asleep for some
minutes, — ^no change was effected in the nervous pain
of the eye, but the headach was alleviated.

Theresa Tierlin was magnetized on the 22d, 23d,
24th, 29th, and 30th of July, 1826. She had been
admitted into the Hotel-Dieu, complaining of pains in
the belly and in the lumbar region. During the mag-
netic operations, we observed the inspirations increase
from 15 to 17, from 18 to 19, from 20 to 25, and de-
crease from 27 to 24 ; and the pulsations increased from
118 to 125, from 100 to 120, from 100 to 113» from
95 to 98, and from 117 to 120. We remarked that

VOL. II. s


210 APPENDIX, NO. I.

this woman seemed to be afraid of the motions oi the
fingers and hands of the magnetizer, ^- that ihe at-
tempted to avoid them by drawing back her head, — that
she followed them with her eyes in order that she might
not lose sight of them, as if she dreaded that they would
do her some injury. She was evidently teased and an-
noyed daring the five sitting^.

We observed in her frequent and long-drawn sighs,
sometimes interrupted, winking and depression of the
eyelids, rubbing the eyes, repeated deglutition of the
saliva, a motion which, in the case of other magnetised
persons, has constantly preceded sleep, and, finally, the
disappearance of the pain in the lumbar region.

Your Committee, in arranging these different facts,
has only wished to fix your attention upon the series
of physiological phenomena which are developed in the
two last cases. We can attach no importance what-
ever to the partial amelioration in the morbid symptoms
of the very insignificant disorders of these two women.
If these disorders existed, time and repose may have
triumphed over them. If they did not exist, as is too
frequently the case, the feigned malady might have dis-
appeared as well without Magnetism as with it. Thus,
gentlemen, we have only presented them to you as the
first elements, as it were, of the magnetic action, which
you will see more decidedly manifested in the sequel
of this report.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MA<^NETISM. 211

III. The effbeil^ dlMened af^Jhquendpph)duoed ^
mdf by monoUmy^ and by the imaytncUian* — Your Com-
mittee has remi^ked upon several occasions, that the
monotony of the gestures emplojred, the religions si-
lence observed during the operations, the ennui occa-
sioned by remiuning long in the sa^he position, have
produced sleep in several individuals who were not
subjected to the magnetic influence, but who were in
th^ same physical and moral circumst&nces in which
they had been previously set asleep. " In these cases,
it was impossible for us not to recognise the influence
of the imagination ; an influence by the force of which
these individuals, believing that they were magnetized,
experienced the same effects as if they really had been
so. We shall adduce, in particular, the following ob-
servations.

Mademoiselle Lemaitre, twenty-flve years of age,
had been for three yemrs afflicted with an aflection of
the sight (amaurosis)^ when she was admitted into the
HotelrJMeu* She was magnetized upon the 7th, 13th,
14th, 151&, 16th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 20th, 2l8t, and 22d
of July, 1826. We shall not here repeat the different
phenomena which marked the comniencement of the
magnetic action, and which we have already detailed in
the preceding section, — such as the winking, the de-
pression of the eyelids, the rubbing of the eyes as if to
get rid of a disagreeable sensation, the sudden inclina-
tion of the head and the swallowing of the saliva. These,


212 APPEIIDIZ, NO. I.


as we luiTe already said, are signs wliicli we have oon-
stanlly obserredy and to which, therefore, we shidl not
revert. We shall only obsenre, diat we remarked a
commencement of drowsiness at the end of the third
sitting ; that this drowsiness increased until the eleventh ;
that, dating from the fonrth, diere were manifested con-
ynlsive motions of the muscles of the neck, of die face,
the bands and the shoulder ; and that, at the end of
each sitting, we found a greater acceleration of the
pulse than at the commencement. But what ought
most to ^x your attention is, that afier having been
magnetized ten times, and having appeared during the
eight last successively more and more susceptible of the
magnetic action, at the eleventh sitting, the 20th of
July, M. Dupotet, her magnetizer, upon the suggestion
of the reporter, seated himself behind her, without
making any gesture, without having any intention of
magnetising her, and that she experienced a more de-
cided tendency to sleep, than upon any of the preced-
ing days, accompanied, however, with less of agitation
and convulsive motions. There was no perceptible im-
provement of her sight since the commencement of the
operations, and she left the Hotel-Dieu in the same state
as when she had been admitted.

Louisa Ganot, a servant, residing in the street Du
BaUoiTf No. 19, was admitted into the Hotet-Dieu upon
the 18th of July 1826, in order to be treated for a
Uucorrhoeay and was magnetised by M. Dupotet on the


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. S18

2 J St, 22d, 23d, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, and 28th of July,
1826. She told us that she was subject to nervous
attacks, and, in. reality, convulsive motions of an hyste-
rical character were constantly manifested during all the
magnetic sittings. Thus, the plaintive cries, the stifP'-
ness and contortion of the superior members, the direc-
tion of the hand towards the pit of the stomach, the
bending of the whole body back wards j so as to form
an arch of which the concavity was in the back, some
minutes of sleep which terminated this scene, — all de-
noted in this woman hysterical attacks, occasioned, it
might have been believed, by the magnetic influence.
We wished to ascertain how far the imagination might
act upon her, and at the 6th sitting, upon the 26th of
July, M. Dupotet, who had hitherto magnetized her,-
placed himself in fronts at the distance of two feet,
without touching her, without practising any manipula-
tion or external act, but having an energetic intention
of produmng in her some of the magnetic phenomena.
The agitation, the convulsive motions, the long and in-
terrupted sighs, the stifPhess of the arms, did not fail
to manifest themselves as at the preceding sittings. On
the day after, the 27th, we placed M. Dnpotet behind
her, and she was seated in the great elbow-chair which
she had used in the preceding operations. The niag-
netizer merely directed his fingers opposite the middle
part of her back; consequently^ the back of the chair was
interposed between the magnetizer and the magnetised.


214 APPENDIX, NO. 1.

In a short time, the convulsiye motions of the pre-
ceding days were displayed with greater violence, and
she frequently turned round her head. She told ns
when she awoke, that she had executed this motion, be-
cause it appeared to her that she was annoyed by some-
thing which acted upon her from behind. Finally,
after haying observed, upon the 26th and 27th of July,
the development of the magnetic phenomena, although
in the one case there were no manipulations at all, but
only ^e intention, while, in the other, these vwy simple
external acts (the direction of the fingers) were exe-
cuted behind her back, and without her knowledge ;
we were desirous of ascertaining whether the same
phenomena could be reproduced in the absence of the
magnetizer. The experiment was made upon the 28th
of July. She was placed in precisely the same circum-
stances as in the former experiments, — the same hour
of the day (half-^past five in the morning), — the same
locality, the same silence, the same elbow-chair, the
same persons present, the same preparations ; all, in
short, exactly the same as on the preceding days, with
the exception of the magnetizer, who remained at home.
The same convulsive motions were evinced, perhaps
with a little less promptitude and violence, but always
with the same character.

A man aged 27, subject, since his Idth year, to at-
tacks of epilepsy, was magnetised fifteen times at the
HoieUDieu; from the 27th of June to the 17th of Joly,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 215

1826, by the reporter. Sleep began to appear at the
4th sitting (1st of Jaly)) and became stronger at the
5th (2d of the same month). In the following, it was
rather slight and easily interrupted, either by noise, or
by qaestions put to him. In the Idth and 14th, the
reporter took the precaution to place himself behind
the elbow-chair in which he was seated, and there to
perform his manipulations. At the 15th sitting, upon
the 17th of July, he continued to place the patient, as
in the ease of the woman Ganot, in the same situation
in whidi he had been placed since the commencement
of the treatment: he also placed himself behind the
elbow-chair, and the same phenomena of drowsiness
were manifested, although he did not magnetise him.
From this series of experiments we found ourselves
necessarily bound to conclude, that these two women
and this epileptic patient experienced the same effects
when they were actually magnetised, and when they
only believed themselves to be so, and that, conse-
quently, the imagination was sufficient to produce in
them phenotaena which, with little attention, or with
a prejudiced mind, might have been attributed to mag-
netism.

But we are anxious to declare, that tliere are seve-
ral other cases, not less rigorously observed, in whii^
it would have b^en difficult for us not to admit magne-
tism as the cause of the phenomena* These we place
in our 4th das?.


216 APPENDIX, NO. I.

JV. Thus, a child of 28 months, subject, like its la-
ther, of whom we shall have occasion to speak in the
sequel, to attacks of epilepsy, was magpnetised in the
house of M. Bourdois, by M. Foissac, upon the 6th of
October 1827. Almost inmiediately after the com-
mencement of the treatment, the child rubbed its eyes,
bent its head to one side, supported it upon one of the
cushions of the sofa where we had placed it, yawned,
appeared agitated, scratched its head and its ears, seem-
ed to contend against the approach of sleep, and soon
rose, if we may be allowed the expression, grumbling ;
it was seized with the desire of making water, and,
after being satisfied in this respect, it appeared very
sprightly. We magnetised it again ; but as there ap-
peared, this time, no symptom of drowsiness, we ter-
minated the experiment.

There occurred to us a similar case of a deaf and
dumb lad, eighteen years of age, who had long been
subject to very frequent attacks of epilepsy, and upon
whom M. Itard wished to try the e£Pects of magnetism.
This young man was magnetised fifteen times by M.
Foissac We need scarcely say here, that the epilep-
tic attacks were entirely suspended during the sittings, .
and that they did not return until eight months after-
wards — a circumstance unprecedented in the history
of his disease ; but we shall observe, that the appre-
ciable phenomena exhibited by this young man during
the treatment were a heaviness of the eyelids, a ge-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 217

neral numbness, a desire to sleep, and sometimes ver-
tigo.

A still more decided effect was observed in a mem-
ber of the committee, M. Itard, who, as we have al-
ready observed, had submitted to the magnetic treat-
ment on the 11th of November 1826, without having
experienced any effect. When magnetised by M. Du-
potet on the 27th of October 1827, he experienced a
heaviness without sleep, a decided sensation of a pecu-
liar nature — a setting on edge (agacement) in the
nerves of the face, convulsive motions in the nostrils,
in the muscles of the face and jaws, and a flow of sa-
liva of a metallic taste — a sensation analogous to that
which he had experienced from galvanism. The two
first sittings produced headach, which lasted several
hours, and, at the same time, his habitual pains were
connderably diminished. A year afterwards, M. Itard,
who had pains in the head, was magnetised eighteen
times by M. Foissac The treatment almost constantly
produced a flow of saliva, twice with a metallic flavour.
We observed little motion and muscular contraction,
excepting some twitchings fsaubresautSy substtUusJ of
the tendons Of the muscles of the fore-arms and the
legs. M. Itard told us that his headach ceased each
time, afier a treatment of from 12 to 15 minutes, that
it entirely disappeared by the 9th sitting, when it was
recalled by an interruption of the magnetic operations

VOL. II. T


218 APPENDIX, NO. I.

•for three days, and again dissipated by the same means.
He experienced daring the treatment a sensation of
general health, an agreeable disposition to sleep, som-
•nolency accompanied with vague and pleasant revmea.
His complaint underwent^ as before, a soisible amelio-
ration, which, however, was not of long duration after
lie ceased to be magnetised.

These three cases appeared to your Committee to
-be altogether worthy of remark. The two individuals
who formed tho subject of the two first «— the one a
child of 28 months, the other a deaf and dumb lad —
were ign(H*ant of what was done to them. The one,
indeed, was not in a state capable of knowing it ; and
the other never had the dightest idea of maguHism.
Both, however, were sensible of its influence; and most
cortainly it is impossnble, in eitlier case, to attribnte
this sensibflity to the imagination. Still less is it attri-
butaUe to this prindple in ike case of M. Itard.

It is not over men of our years, and, like us, always
on Ih^r guard against mental error and sensible de-
lusion, that the imagination, snch as we view it, has
any sway. At this period of life, it is enlightened by
reason, and disengaged from those illusions by which
young persons are so easily seduced. At this age we
stand npon bur guard, and distrust, rather than confi-
dence, presides over tiie different operations of onr
minds. These circumstances were hi^pily united in
our colleague ; and the Academy knows him too well


REPORT ON ANiif AL MAGKETISM. ^^19

not to admit that he really experienced what hie de-
clares that he felt. His Veracity was the sain^ iip<m
the llt^ of October 1826, when he dedared tiiat he
felt nothing, and npon the 27th of October 1827, when
he affirmed to us that he was sensible of the magnetic
action.

The somnolency observed in the three cases which
we hare jnst reported aj^eared to ns t^be the transi-
tion from the waldng state to that which is called th^
magnetic sleep, ot somnambufism*^ Words which yoiB"
Committee have deemed improper, as they may gfw
rise to false ideas ; bnt which we have been forced to
adopts in conseqneikice of the impossibility of ehangfii^
them with advantage. -

When the individuiil subjected to the opemtion'bf
magnetism is^ in the state of sbmnambtilisni^ the ms^-
netisers attsfore us, tiiat, m genidral', he only hears those
persons who hsive been placed in magnetic connexi(hi
(en rapport J ym^ him, either theiperson who operatiM
upon him; ot those whom the operator has placed in
communication witli him, by means of joining hands,
or some species of immediate contact. According to
them^ the external organs of the senses become wholly,
or almost wholly, dormant (assoypUJ^ and, notwitii-
standing, he experiences sensations. They add, tJiat

• I .

there appears to be awakened in him an internal sense,
a species of instinct which explains to him, sometimes
the state of his own health, sometimes that of other


220 ▲PPENDIX^ NO. I.


penons with whom he is placed in magnetic eonnezion
fen rappoH). During the whole duration of this sin-
gular state, he is, say they, snhjected to the inflnenoe
of his magnetixer, and appears to obey him with an
nnreser^ed docility, without manifesting any strong'
exertion of internal volition, either by gestures or
words.*

This singular phenomenon, gentlemen, appeared to
your Committee to be an object the more worthy of
their attention and investigation, because, although M^
Bailly seems to have had a glimpse of it, it was still
unknown at the period when the subject of animal
magnetism was submitted to the examination of the
Commissioners, who presented their Report upon it in
1784 ; and, besides, it was for the purpose of studying
it that M. Foissac had, if we may use the expression,
disifUerred the question of magnetism. It was only in
1784, after the publication of the Report q£ the Com-
missioners, that this phenomenon was observed for the
first time at Bnzancy, near Soissons, by one of the
most zealous disciples and promoters of animal magne-
tism, M. de Pnysegur.

* ** MagnetiBed persons/' says the illustrious and unfortunate Bailly,
at tlie 7th page of his celebrated report presented to the Royal Acade-
my of Sciences in 1784, '* may appear to be plunged into a state of
total insensibility ; but the voice of the magnetizer, his look, a sign
revives them ; and we cannot hesitate to recognise in these invariable
effeets a great infliience wluch acts upon the patients, governs them,
and of which the' magnetixer appears to be the depositary."


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 221

Upon a subject which might so easily be got up by
quackery, and which appeared to us so remote from all
that was previously known, your Committee felt that
they were bound to be very rigid respecting the kind
of evidence admitted to prove the phenomenon, and, at
the same time, thiit they ought to keep themselves
continually upon their guard agunst that illusion and
imposture of which they might dread being made the
dupes.

The Committee request your attention to the follow-
ing cases ; in the arrangement of which it has been
their object, that the development of this singular
state, and the manifestation of the phenomena which
characterize it, might be presented to you in a regu-
larly increasing progpression, so as to become more and
more evident.

Mademoiselle Louisa Delaplane, aged 16 years, re-
siding in the street Tirechape, No. 9, had a catamenial
suppression, accompanied with pains, and with tension
and swelling in the lower part of the abdomen, when
she was admitted into th^ Hotd-Dieuy on the 13th of
June 1826. Leeches applied to the labia vulvtBy baths,
and, in general, an appropriate treatment, producing no
relief, she was magnetised by M. Foissac on the 22d,
2dd, 24th, 25th, 26th, 27th, and 2dth of June 1826.
She fell asleep at the first sitting, at the end of eight
minutes. She was spoken to, but made no answer ; a
white iron screen was thrown down near her — she


222 APPENDIX) NO. I.

oontiiiiied in a state of complete insensibility ; a glass
bottle was forcibly broken — she awoke with a start.
At the second sitting, she answered by aflinnative
and negative motions of the head to the questioiis
which were addressed to her. At the third» she gave
ns to understand, that, in two days, she would speik
and point out the nature and seat of her oomiAunt.
She was pinched very strongly, so as to prodpee
a livid mark — she gave no sign of sennlnlity. A
bottlsliil of ammoniac was opened under her nose.
She was insensible to the first inspiration — at the se-
cond, she carried her hand to .her nose. When she
awoke, she complained of pain in the part which had
been pinched, as also of the fumes of the ammoniac,
and she drew back her head hurriedly. The parents
of this girl resolved to remove her from the Hotel-
Dieu on the dOth of the same month, because they
heard that she was subjected to the magnetic treatment.
She was still, however, magnetised three or four times.
In the course of these experiments she never once
spoke, and answered only by signs to the different ques-
tions addressed to her. We shall add that, insensible
to the tickling of a feather introduced into her nostrils,
moved along her lips and the sides of her nose, and to
the noise of a board tlirown suddenly upon a table, she
was awakened by the noise of a copper basin thrown
against the floor, and at the noise of a bag of crowns
which was emptied from above into the same basin.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 223

At another time, upon the 9tk of December 1826,
M. Dnpotet, in presence of the Committee, magnetised
Baptiste Chamet, carman at Charonne, whom he had
magnetised two or three years before. At the end of
eight minates, repeatedly interrupted in order to as-
certain from him whether he was asleep, be suddenly
made an affirmative motion of the bead.' Several ques-
tions were put to him witbout obtmning an answer.
As be seemed to ^ufFer pain, be was asked what ailed
him, when be pointed with bis hand to bis breast. He
was agun asked what part that wad. He answered
that it was the Hver, still pointing to his breast. M.
Guersent pinched him severely on the left wrist, tod
be manifested no sense of pain. We opened his eye-*
lid, whicb, with difficulty, yielded to our attemj^s^ knd
we found the ball of the eye turned, as if conviilsivdy,
towards tbe top of the orbit, and the pupil perceptibly
contracted.

In these two last cases^ your Committee witnessed
the first appearance g£ somnambulism — of that faculty
by means of which die magnetisers say, that, in the
dormant state of the external organs of sense, there is
developed in the persons magnetised an internal sense,'
and a species of instinct capable of manifesting them-
selves by rational external actiotis. In each of the
oases above reported, your Committee perceived —
whether in the answer given to questions put sillier by
signs or by words^ or in the prognostications, always


224t APPENDIX, NO. I.

deoeitfoly indeed, of eveDts which never took place —
the first traces of the expression of a commencement
of intelligence.

The three following cases will prove to yon with
what distrust we ought to regfard the promises of cer-
tain pretended senmambulists.

Mademoiselle Josephine Martineau, aged 19 years^
residing in the street St Nicolas, No. 37,' had been af-
fected for three months with a chronic inflammation of
the bowels (gattntisjy when she was admitted into the
Hotel-Dieu, upon the 5th of August 1826. She was
magnetised by M. Dupotet, in presence of the reporter,
fifteen days consecutively, from the 7th to the 2l8t of
the same month, twice between four and five in the
afternoon, and thirteen times from six to seven in the
morning. She begfan to sleep at the second sitting,
and at the fourth, to answer the questions which were
addressed to her. We need not repeat to you, that at
the end of each sitting, the pulse was more frequent
than at the commencement, and that she preserved no
recollection of any thing that took place during her
sleep. These are ordinary phenomena, which have
been previously well established by other magnetizers.
Our business here is with somnambulism, and it is this
phenomenon which we endeavoured to observe in Ma-
demoiselle Martineau. In her sleep, she said that she
did not see the persons present, but that she heard
them ; and no person was speaking. When cross-in-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 225

terrogated about this matter, she answer^ that she
heard them when a noise was made. She said that
she would not recover until she was purged ; and for
this she prescribed three ounces of manna, and English
piUs to be taken two hours after the manna. The next
and following days, the reporter gave her no manna,
but administered four pills of the crumb of bread in
two days. During these two days she had four stools.
She said that she would soon awake after five or ten
minutes' sleep, and she did not awake until after se-
venteen and sixteen. She announced that, upon a cer-
tain day, she would give us a detailed account of the
nature of her complaint; and when the day arrived,
she told us nothing. In short, she was at fault every
time.

M. de Geslin, residing in the street de GreneUe St
ffonorSf No. 37, wrote to inform the Committee, on the
8th of July 1 826, that he had at his disposal a som-
nambulist. Mademoiselle Couturier, lace-maker, aged
30 years, residing in the same house with himself, who,
amongst other faculties, possessed that of being able to
read the thoughts of her magnetizer, and to execute
the orders which he communicated to her mentally.
The proposal of M. de Greslin was too important not
to be accepted with eagerness. M. Gueneau and the
reporter waited upon M. de Geslin, who repeated the
assurances which he had given us in his letter relative
to the surprising £siculties of his somnambulist ; and


226 APPENDIX, NO. I.

titter having set her asleep by the process we have al-
ready, described, he requested them to iaform him what
they w^ed him to require^ opientally, of his somnam-
l^iilist*

One of ns — the reporter — placed himself at a desk,
for the purpose of writing down with the utmost ex«
actness every thing that might occur ; and the other,
M« Guenef^Uy undertook to write upcm slips of paper,
ifrhich he communicated to his colleague, the orders
whidi.we both wished to be communicated to the pa-
tient. .

Upon the first slip of paper, M. Gueneau wrote the
following words : Go and sit dawn upon the stool m
Jront (^ the piano* M. de Oeslin having conceived this
mentally, told the somnambulist to do that which he
required of her. She rose from her place, and going ,
up to the dock, she said it was twenty minutes past
nine. M. de Geslin told her that was not what he re-
quired her to do ; she then went into the next room.
She was informed that she was still mistaken when she
resumed her place. She was mentally. bid to scratch
her forehead. She stretched out her hand, but did not
execute the motion required. The magnetizer com-
plained that she did not do what he desired her : She
rose and changed her seat. We requested that, when
M. de Geslin held up his hand, she should hold up hers,
and keep it suspended until that of the magnetizer fell.
She raised her hand, which remained immoveable, and


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 227

and did not fall until five minutes after that of Mide
Gredin. The back of a watch was presented .to her-~
she said it was thirty •'five minutes past nine, and the
hand pointed at seyen o'clock. She said there were
three bandsi and ther^ were only two. A walch with
three hands was imbstituted, and die said there were
twci— >ihat' h was forty minutes past nine ; while the
watch indicated twenty-^ve minutes past nine. She
was ^^Haced en rapport mt\i M. Gnenean, and told him
a number of things #ith r^;ard to the state 6f his own
health which were altogether erroneous, and in direct
contradiction to what our coUeagne had written upon
this subject before the experiment* To. sum up all, this
lady did not fulfil any of the promises whidi had been
made to us ; and we thought ourselves authorized to
believe, that M. de Oeslin had not taken all the prop^
precautions to prevent being led into error, and that
this was the cause of his belief in the extraordinary
fiiculties he attributed , to his patient — faculties which
we could in no degree recognise.

M.€lhiq[»dain, doctor of medicine, residing in the
Cour Baitavey No. 3^ informed the Committee, upon
the 14th of Mardi 1828, that a woman of 24 years of
age, residing in his hcmse, and who had been recom*^
mended to him by our colleague M. Caille, had an-
nounced, when set asleep by the magnetic process, that
next day, at fifteen miniites from eleven in the even-
ing, «0 Uadam produethrem bradiio t^wtyram este. Your


228 APPENDIX, NO. I.

Committee had too great a desire to witness the result
of this amiuDciation, to Delect the opportonity thus
presented. Accordingly, MM. Itard, Thillaye, and the
reporter, accompanied by two members of the Acade-
my, MM. Caille and Virey, as also Doctor Dance, at
present physician to the hospital Cochin, repaired next
day, at fifty-five minutes past ten in the evening,
to the house of this woman. She was immediately
nuignetised by M. .Chapelain, and set asleep at eleven
o'clock. (Here are omitted some indeUcate detaUs^ rf Uale
or no importxmoe in themselveSf and onfy shewing the /U'
tiUty of the patient^s prognosis. J Here, then, are three
cases, well established, and we might quote otliers, in
which there evidently was error, or an attempt to de-
ceive, on the part of the somnambulists, either in what
they promised to do, or in their annunciations of what
was to happen.

In these circumstances, we ardently desired to eluci-
date the question, and we thought that it was essential,
as well to the interest of the investigations in which we
were engaged, as to withdraw ourselves from the de-
ceptions of quackery, to ascertain whether there was
any sign by which we could be assured of the real ex-
istence of somnambulism ; that is to say, whether the
magnetised person, when asleep, was — ^permit us the
expression-*more than asleep, whether he had arrived
at the state of somnambulism^

M. Dupotet, whom we have already mentioned se-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 229

veral times, proposed, on the 14th of November 1826,
to make your committee witnesses of certain experi-
ments, in which he shoald reduce the question with re-
gard to the magnetic somnambulism to an absolute cer-
tainty. He undertook, and we have his promise to
this eflPect under his own hand, to produce at pleasure,
and out of sight of those indiriduals whom he had
placed in a state of somnambulism, convulsive motions
in any part of their bodies, by merely directing his fin«
ger towards that part. These convulsions he regarded
as an unequivocal sign of the existence of somnambu-
lism. Your committee took advantage of the presence
of^Baptiste Chamet, already mentioned (page 223), to
make experiments upon him, for the purpose of eluci-
dating this question. Accordingly, M. Dupotet having
placed this person in a state of soipnambulism, directed
the point of one of his fingers towards those of Chamet,
or approximated them with a metallic rod : No convul-
sive effect was produced. A finger of the magnetizer
was again, directed towards those of the patient, and
there, was perceived, in the fore and middle fingers of
both, hands, a slight motion, similar to that produced
by the galvanic pile. Six minutes afterwards, the fin-
ger of the magnetizer, directed towards the left wrist
of the patient, impressed upon it a complete convulsive
motion ; and the magnetizer then informed us, that in
five minutes he should do all that he pleased with this man.
M. Marc then, placing himself behind the patient, indi-


230 APPENDIX, NO. I.

cated that the magnetizer should endeavour to act upon
the fore-finger of the right hand : He directed his own
fore-finger towards this part, and the convnlsions took
phice in the left, and in the thigh of the same side. At
a later period, the fingers were directed towards tlie
toes, but no effect was prodaced. Some anterior ma*
nipnlations were performed. MM. Bonrdcns, Oner-
sent, and Gnenean de Massy, snocessively directed their
fingers towards those of the patient, which became con-
tracted at their approach. At a later period, motions
were perceived in the left hand, towards which, bow-
ever^ no finger was directed. Finally, wo suspended
all onr experiments, in order to ascertain whether the
convulsive motions did not take place when the patient
was not magnetised ; and these motions were renewed^
but more feebly. Hence your committee concluded^
that the approximation of the fiilgers of the magnetiier
was not necessary for the production of the convulsions,
although M. Dupotet added, that, when they have onoe
commenced, they may be reproduced of themselves.

Mademoiselle Lemaitre, of whom we have ali^eady
spoken (page 211), niien treating of the inflnenoeof
the imagination in producing the magnetic phmiomena,
also presented an instance of this ccmvulsive mobility,
but sometimes these motions, pretty nmilar in quick-
ness to those experienced £nHn the approach of an elec-
tric sparky took place in a particular part, in conseqti ence
of die approximation of the fingers, sometimes, idso, in-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 281

dq^endently of this conditkm* Sometime^ too^ we
perceived them tuike place at a greater or less-distanoe
of ^me after the attempt made to exdte them. Some*
timoR this phenomenon took place several times at mm
sitting ; sometilnes it did not once make its appearance ;
and sometimes the approximation of the fingers towards
one part was followed by convulsions' in another.

M. Ohalesy French Consnl at Odessa, fbrnided m
with another example of this phenomenon. M. Dnpo^
tet magnetised him in our presence, im the 17tk of -No*
vember 1^6. He cBreeted 'hiiai finger towards the left
ear, imd immediately we perceived a^ motion inthehair
behind the ear, which was ascribed to a contraction of
the ttnttdes ct that region. The manipulations were
rmiewed with a single hand, withont directing^ tho fo*
gw towards the ear, and we perceived in tJie ear a ge^
neral and livoly ascending motion; The finger' was
then directed towards the same ear, and no eflhct was
produced.

It was 'principally in tbe ease of M. Peti^ tutor
fituHMmrJ at Athis, aged S2 years, that the convul-
sive motioni wore developed with the greatest precision
by approaching the fingers of the magnetizer. M« Du-
poti!>t flresented him to the committee i^n the 10th of
Augittt V8S6, informing: 'them tiiatthis M; Petit waa
ver^ susceptible of somnambuliMn, ttnd that,' wiien in
this' states M, M. Dapotel^ieould at^^iasare^ and with-
out spoaldDg, by the m«re approximation of his fingers^


S32 APP£KDIS:, KO. t.

produce risible convulsive motions in those parts which
the committee should point out by writing. The pa-
tient was very speedily set asleep, and then the com-
mittee, in order to prevent all suspicion of collusion,
handed over to M. Dupotet a note written at the mo^
ment in silence, in which they pointed out the particu-
lar parts which they wished to be convulsed. Provid-
ed with these instructions, he first directed his hand to-
wards the left wrist, which became convulsed ; he then
placed himself behind the patient, and directed his fin-
ger first towards the left thigh, then towards the left
elbow, and, at last, towards the head. These three
parts almost immediately became convulsed. M. Du-
potet directed his left leg towards that of the patient,
which became so much agitated that he was upon the
point of falling. M. Dupotet then directed his foot to-
wards M. Petit's right elbow, which became agitated ;
he afterwards carried his foot towards the elbow and
the left hand, and very strong convulsive motions were
developed in the whole upper part of the body. One
of the committee, M. Marc, in order still farther to pre-
vent every kind of deception, put a bandage upon the
eyes of the patient, and the same experiments were re-
peated with a slight difPerence in the result. Aft;er an
instantaneous mimic signal from one or two of us, M.
Dupotet directed his foot towards the left hand : at its
approach both hands became agitated. We desired
that the action should be carried at once to the two in-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 233

ferior members. At first, the fingers were approxi-
mated without any resalt. Soon afterwards, the som-
nambulist first moved his hands, then drew back, then
moved his feet. A few moments later, the finger ap-
proximated to the hand, made it draw back, and pro-
duced a general agitation. MM. Thillaye and Marc
directed their fingers towards several parts of the body,
and excited some convulsive motions. Thus, M. Petit
was always affected with these convulsive motions, up-
on the approximation of the fingers, whether he had or
had not a bandage upon his eyes ; and these motions
were more decided when there was directed towards
the parts subjected to experiment a piece of metal, such
as a key, or the branch of a pair of spectacles. To sum
up the whole, your committee, although they have wit-
nessed several cases m which this contractile faculty
has been put in play by the approximation of the fingers

or pieces of metal, have need of new facts in order to

«

enable, them to appreciate this phenomenon, upon the
constancy and importance of which they do not con-
ceive themselves sufficiently informed to entitle them
to pronounce a decided opinion.

Reduced, in consequence, to the necessity of relying
upon our own unceasing watchfolness, we pursued our
researches, and multiplied our observations, with re-
doubled care, attention, and distrust.

Perhaps, gentlemen, you may remember the experi-

VOL. II. u


284 APPENDIX, NO. I.

ments which were made in 1820, al the Hoid-Dku^ in
presence of a great number of phyiidassy some of wh<nn
are members of this Acadeny, and under the c^yes of
the Reporter, who alone conceived the plpn of them»
directed the details, and consigned them, minute isfter
minute, to a /wp^-oerSo^ which was subscribed by eaeh
of the assistants. Perhaps we should hare abstained
from aUuding to them upon the pi^ent oooasion, h^d
it not been for a particular drcnn^stanee, w;hich reoderi^
it imperative upon us to break silence^ You may re*
collect that, in the midst of the discus^ns which were;
excited in the bosom of the Academy, in consequence
of the proposal to submit Animal Magnetism to ^ ne^:
investigation, a member, who, however, did. not deny
the reality of the magnetic phenomena, affirmed thaty
while the magnetixers proclaimed the cure of Made-,
moiselle Sanson, she requested of him to be again ad*
mitted into the Hotd^Dieuy where, he added, she died
in consequence of .an organic lesion which the physi*.
cians deemed incurable.

Neverdieless, this luime MademeiseUe Sanson re-ap-
peared, six years after her pretended death, and your
committee, assembled on the 29th of. Decexaber 1826,
for the purpose of making experiipents upon her, were*
desirous of ascertaining, first of all, whether the indi-
vidual presented to th^m. by M. Diiipotet, whose good
faith was, moreover, perfectly well kno^vn to them, was
the identical person, who, nine years before, had been


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 235

magnetised at the Hotel'Dieu. MM. Bricheteaa and
Patistter, who had been present at these first experi-
mentSy had the goodness to comply with the request of
the committee, and^ conjointly with the Reporter, they
certified by a writings which they signed, that it was the
same person who had been the subject of the experi-
ments made in the Hotd^Dieu in 1820, and that they
percaved no other change in her than' that which indi-
cated a sensible amelioration of her health.

The identity baring been thus verified, Mademoiselle
Sanson was magnetised by M. Dupotet in presence of
the committee. Hie manipulations had scarcely com-<
menced, when Mademoiselle Sanson became restless,
rubbed her eyes, expressed impatience, complained,
coughed with a hoarse voice, which recalled to the re-
collection of MM* Bricheteau, Patissier, and the Re-
porter, the same sound of vosce which had irtx^uck them
in 1820, and which then, as upon the present occasion,
pointed out to Ihem the commencement of the magnetic
actiouv Soon after, she stamped with, her foot, support-
ed her head upon her righfe hand, which rested upon
the eibowHchair^ and appeared to fiedl asleep. We raised
her eyelid, and perceived, as in 1820, the ball of the
eye turned oenvulsivdy upwards. Several questions
were adchressed to her, and remained unanswered ; then,
when new ones were put^ she exhibited signs of impa-^
tience, and said with ill humour that we ought not tu
annoy her. At length, without having intimated his


236 APPENDIX, NO. I.

intention to any one, the Reporter threw down npon
the floor a table and a billet of wood which he liad
placed npon it. Some of those present nttered a cry
of terror,-»Mademoi8elle Sanson alone heard nothing,
made no sort of motion, and continued to sleep after as
before the sudden and violent noise. She was awakened
four minutes afterwards, by rubbing her eyes in a cir-
cular manner with the thumbs. The same billet was
then suddenly thrown upon the floor ; the noise made
her start now that she was awake, and she complained
bitterly of the fright that had been given her, although
six minutes before she had been insensible to a much
greater noise.

You have all likewise heard of a case, which, at the
time, attracted the attention of the Surgical Section, and
which was communicated to it at the meeting of the 16th
of April 1829, by M. Jules Cloquet. Your committee
have thought it their duty to notice it here, as afford-
ing one of the most unequivocal proofs of the power of

the magnetic sleep. The case is that of a lady, P ,

aged sixty-four years, residing in the street of St Denis,
No. 151, who consulted M. Cloquet, upon the 8th of
April 1829, on account of an ulcerated cancer on the
right breast, of several years' standing, which was com-
bined with a considerable swelling (engorgement) of
the corresponding axillary ganglions. M. Chapelain,
the ordinary physician attending this lady, who had
magnetized her for some months, with the intention,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 237

as he said, of dissolving the swelling (engorffemenlj of
the breast, had obtained no other result than that of
prodndng a most profound sleep, during which all sen-
sibility appeared to be annihilated, while the ideas re-
tained all their clearness.' He proposed to M. Cloquet
to operate upon her while she was plunged in this mag-
netic sleep. The latter having deemed the operation
indispensable, consented. The two previous evenings,
this lady was magnetized several times by M. Chape-
lain, who, in her somnambulism, disposed her to sub-
mit to the operation, — who had even led her to con-
verse about it with calmness, although, when awake,
she rejected the idea with horror.

Upon the day fixed on for the: operation, M. Clo-
quet arri?ing at half-past ten in the morning, found the
patient dressed and seated on an elbow-chair, in the at-
titude of a person enjoying a quiet natural sleep. She
had returned about an hour before from mass, which
she attended regularly at the same hour. Since her
return, M. Chapelain had placed her in a state of mag-
netic sleep, and she talked with great calmness of the
operation to which she was about to submit. Every
thing having been arranged for the operation, she un-
dressed herself, and sat down upon a' chair.

M. Chapelain supported the right arm, the left was
permitted to hang down at the side of the body. M.
Pailloux, house pupil of the Hospital of St Louis, was
employed to present the instruments, and to make the
ligatures. A first incision, commencing at the arm-pit


288 APPENDIX, NO. I.

was oontiniied beyond the tnmoar as flur as the internal
surface of the breast. The second commenced at the
same point, separated the tumonr from beneath, and
was continned until it met the first. The swelled
ganglions (gangliom engorgi$) wete dissected with
precaution on account of their vidnity to the axiUary
artery, and the tumonr was extirpated. The operation
last^ from ten to twelve minutes.
. During all this time, the patient continued to con-
verse quietly with the operator, and did not exhibit the
slightest sig^ of sensibility. There was no motion of
the limbs or of the features, no change in the respira-
tion nor in the voice, no emotion even in the pulse.
The patient continued in the same state of automatic
indifference and impassibility, in which she was some
minutes before the operation. There was no occasion^
to hold, but only to support her. A ligature was ap-
plied to the lateral thoracic artery, which was open
daring the extraction of the ganglions. The wound
was united by means of adhesive plasty, and dressed.>
The patient was put to bed while still in a state of som*:
nambulism, in which she was left for forty-eight hours»
An hour after the operation, there appeared a slight
hemorrhage, which was attended with no consequence.
The first dressing was taken off on the following Tues-
day, the 14th, — ^the wound was cleaned and dressed
anew — the patient exhibited no sensibility nor pain-^
the pulse preserved its usual rate.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 239

After this dressing, M. Chapelain awakened the pa-
tient, whose somnambulic sleep had continued, from an
hoar previous to the operation, that b to say, for two
daj^s. This lady did not appear to haVe any idea, any
feelings of what had passed in the interyal ; hot upon
being informed of the operation, and seeiiig her children
around her, she experienced a very lively emotion,
which the magnetizer checked by immediately setting
her asleep.

In these two cases, your committee perceived the
most evident proof of the annihilation of sensibility
daring somnambulism ; and we declare, that, although
we did not witness the last, we yet>find it impressed
with such a character of truths it has been attested and
repeated, to us by so good an observer, who had com<-
municated it to the Surgical Section, that we have no
fear in presenting it to you as the most incontestable
evidence of that state of torpor and insensibility which
is produced by Magnetism.*

* In M. Chardel's Estai de Psychologie Phytiologique, to which
Um reader is referred, there will be found a xnimber of additional curi-
OU8 particulars respecting this very extraordinary case. In a note
(p. 261), M. Chardel also gives a short account of another case, in
which a sni^ical operation was performed upon a somnambulist, in a'
similar state of insensibility.

John , feirmer, had an abscess in the internal and upper part

of the thigh *, the operation required prudence, as the crural artery
crossed the tumour. Count B placed the patient in a state of

magnetic somnambulism, and produced complete insensibility. The
operation was performed in die house of the Juge de Paix of die Can-
ton of Condom, department of Gers, in the presence of several distin-


240 APPENDIX, NO. I.

In the midst of the experimeots io which your com-
mittee sought to i^preciate the faculty of setting in
motioni without contact, the contractility of the muscles
of M. Petit of Athis (page 146), other attempts wjBre
made upon him with the view of observing the lucidity
(cUsirvoycmce)y that is, the power of seeing through the
closed eyelids, which he was said to possess during
somnambulism.

The magnetizer informed us that his sonmambulist
would recognise, among twelve pieces of coin, that
which he M. Dupotet had held in his hand, llie re-
porter placed there a crown of five francs, of the coin-
age of 1813, and afterwards mixed it with twelve others,
which he arranged in a circle upon a table. M. Petit
pointed out one of these pieces, but it was of the coin-
age of 1812. Afterwards, we presented to him a
watch, the hands of which we had deranged, in order
that they might not point out the actual hour of the
day; and twice, consecutively, M. Petit was mistaken
in attempting to point out their direction. An attempt
was made to explain these mistakes, by telling us that
M. Petit had lost some of his luciditt/ since he had been
less frequently magnetized ; however, at the same sit-
ting, the reporter engaged with him in a game of pi-
quet, and frequently attempted to deceive him by an-
nouncing one card or one colour instead of another ;

guished persons, by Dr Lar..., and is reported in the Journal of Tou-
louse.— iVbte by the Translator,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 241

but the bad faith of the reporter did not prevent M.
Petit from playing correctly, or from ascertaining the
colour of his adversary's point. We should add, that
each time that we interposed a body — a sheet of paper
or pasteboard — ^between the eyes and the object to be
perceived, M. Petit could distinguish nothing.

If these experiments had been the only ones in which
we had sought to recognise the faculty of lucidity
fclatrvoyqm^Jy we should have been led to conclude
that this somnambulist did not possess it. But this
faculty appeared in all its clearness in the following
experiment; and upon this occasion, the success en-
tirely justified the expectations held out to us by M.
Dnpotet.

M. Petit was magnetised on the 15th of March 1826,
at half-past eight in the evening, and set asleep in about
one minute. The president of the committee, M. Bour-
dois, ascertained that the number of pulsations, since he
was set asleep, diminished at the rate of 22 in a minute,
and that there was even some irregularity in the pulse.
M. Dupotet, after having put a bandage upon the eyes
of the somnambulist, repeatedly directed towards him
the pointy of his fingers, at the distance of about two
feet. Immediately a violent contraction was perceived
in the hands and arms towards which the action was
directed. M. Dupotet having, in a similar maimer, ap-
proximated his feet to those of M. Petit, always with-

VOL. II. X


242 APPEHon, NO. I.

out coBtact, the lalter qnickl j wididcew Us. He com-
plained of great pain and a hmnumg keaC in the MiahB,
toirardewliieh the aetioif had been difedttd. M. Boor-
doit endearoored to prodnoe the same effecta ; and he
succeeded, bnt lem prompUj, and in a mere fiMble de«
gree.

This point being estaUiahed, we proceeded to ascer-
tain the lucidity feiairvoyanee) of die somnaBibnlist* Ifc
haring dedared that he conld not see with the bandage,
it was taken off ; but then we detemined to assure oor-
aehres diat the eyelids were exactly dosed. For this
purpose^ a candle was almost constant held, during
the experimetttiB, before the eyesi of M. ^etit^ at a dis-
tance of one or two inches ; and several persode had
their eyes continually fixed npeif his* None of as oenld
perceive llie slightest separation of the eyelidsi Mr
Ribes, indeed, remarified that their edges were super-
imposed so that the eye-lashes crossed each other.

We also examined the state of the eyes, which were
forcibly opened without awakening the somnambnlist ;
and we remarked that the pupil was turned down-
wards, and directed towards the great angle of the
eye.

After these preliminary observations, we proceeded
to verify the phenomena o£ vbion with the eyes dosed.

Mr Ribes, member of the Academy,, presented a cata-
logue which he took from his poeket» The somnam-
bulist, after some efforts which seemed to fatigue bim,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 243

read very disfltiietly the words, LmBotsr* Ileathim dif-
ficUede caimcnitte hs hemmes. The last words were pfkited
id very smtdl eharaeMrs. A passport was placed undbr
his eyes ; h« reeognised il, amd called it a pam^'hommi^
Some moments- afterwards, a pijrt darmes wall substt-
tnted, whicb we aSl know lo be in almost all respects
similar to a passport, and tbe Uaiik side of it wm pre-
sented to him. M. Petit, at first, could only reoo|piise
that it "vi^as of a parHicular fignr^ and very like the for-
mer. A fsw moments afterwards, he told us what it
wa% and reaid distmeily the words^ Dt par h rbt, amd
imi^9\d%ipartdearfM9* Again^ he wft» shewn* aii open
letter; he declared that he could not read H, as'he- Ad
not andepstond Bi^lishi la fact it was an EagHsh
letter.

M. Bourdois took from his poeket a- snui^box, npov
iHacfa there m^as a cameo set in geld. At irst the
somnambidisl coold not see it distinctly ; he said that
the gold setting dazzled him. When the settin^f was
covered with die fingers, he said- that he saw the em-
blem of fidelity. When pressed to t^ what this em<-
Uero was> he added, << I see a dog, he is as if on his
himi legs before an altar." Thvij in fact, was what was
represented*

A dosed letter was presented to htm. He cenld not
discover any of its contents. He only followed the di-'
rection of tlie fines witfr his finger ; but he eAsily read
the addressj although itcontained a pretty difllcak name :
To BL 4# RodEOBstroh.


244 APPENDIX, NO. I.

All these escperiments were exceedingly fiitigaing to
M. Petit. He was allowed to repose for an instant.
Then, as he was very fond of play, a game at cards
was proposed for his relaxation. As much as the ex-
periments of pare cariosity seemed to annoy him, with
so much the more ease and dexterity did he perform
whatever gave him pleasure, and this he entered into
of his own accord.

One of the gentlemen present, M. Raynal, formerly
inspector of the university, played a game at piquet
with M. Petit and lost it. The latter handled his cards
with the gpreatest dexterity, and without making any
mistake. We attempted several times in vain to set
him at fault, by taking away or changing some of his
'cards. He counted with surprising facility the points
marked upon his adversary's marking card.

Daring all this time, we never ceased to examine the
eyes, and to hold a candle near them ; and we always
found them exactly closed. We remarked, however,
that the ball of the eye seemed to move under the eye-
lids, and to follow the different motions of the hands.
Finally, M. Bourdois declared, that, according to all
human probability, and as far as it was possible to judge
by the senses, the eyelids were exactly closed.

While M. Petit was engaged in a second g^ame at
piquet, M. Dupotet, upon the suggestion of M. Ribes,
directed his hand, from behind, towards the patient's
elbow, and the contraction previously observed again
took place. Afterwards, apon the suggestion Of M.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 245

Bonrdois, he magnetised him from behind, and always
at the distance of more than a foot, with the intention
of awakening him. The keenness with which the som-*
nambnlist engaged in play resisted this action, which,
without awakening, seemed to annoy and disconccnrt
him. He carried his hand several times to the back of
his head, as if he suffered pain in that part. At length
he fell into a state of somnolency, which seemed like a
slight natural sleep ; and some one having spoken to
him when in this state, he awoke as if with a start.
A few moments afterwards, M. Dupotet, altrays placed
near him, but at a certain distance, set him again asleep,
and we recommenced our experiments. M. Dupotet
being desirous that not the slightest shadow of doubt
should remain with regard to the nature of the physical
influence exerted at will upon the somnambulist, pro-^
posed to place upon M. Petit as many bandages at we
might think proper, and to operate upon him while in
this state. In fact, we covered his fskce down to the
nostrils with several neckcloths ; we stopped up with
gloves the cavity formed by the prominence of the nose,
and we covered the whole with a black handkerchief,
which descended, in tlie form of a veil, as far as the
neck. The attempts to excite the magnetic susceptibi-
lity, by operating at a distance in every way, were then
renewed ; and, invariably, the same motions were per-t
ceived in the parts towards which the hand or the foot
were directed.


246 APPENDIX, NO. I.

After tke9(9 new experiinenti^ Bf* Diiqpotet haying
t$km ^he haadnfes off M. Petit, played a game at
emmti with Un, jn order to divert kiiii. He played
wMb Ihe «eoie faoUity as befoisi^ aad eoatinaed emcoefM-
fcL JBe becaime ao<eeger at to gaiye, thatfce nunalaad
ifli0fpiible to the iiiiaeiiee«f M* Boiir4m» whe> while
he was engafod in pby> vaialy atteiafited Ito epflre t e
npon him from lidiind, ei9fd to make bim perfmm a
comsiaiid intmaled merdy hy lihe a^jyL

After JUs game, tthe aeianambnUit rose, walked acvMH
Ae room, fmttiiig -aside lihe 'Chaire, whieh he fomed m
his way, aad "went to ait down apart, ia oi^er t^ tabs
seme repose at a distaace from ik» inqaisitiye 'Ovpfoni-
■MBitaliets, who had btiguei him. These M- Dufeltet
awakened him at the distenee of aoFeral feel; bat it
seemed that he iwas not completely awake* for emie
moments afterwards he agaim fell asJeep, aad it wa^ ne-
cessary to make fresh efforts, in order to roose him
elfoctaally.

When awake, he said he had no necotteetiosi of any
thing that took place during his deep.

It is asoet certain, that if, as M. Bonrdots has re«
corded apait in the prooes^verbdl of this sitting, '' the
constant immobiUty of the eyelids and their edges an*
perimposed eo as that the eye-lariies appeared tp >crpas
eadi other, ane eui&cient guarantees of the kieitftf
(dmrnoyoMe) of this somnambulist, ^it was impossible
to withhold, if not our belief, at least our astonishmeaty


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 241

at all tJbat took place at this sitting, and «ot to be de*-
8ii«0QS "Of witifcessiiig new exfterimeots, in order to en*
aUe «s to fix our opinion in regard to the existence and
the Talne of Animel Magnetism.^

The wVk expressed upon this subject by our presi-
dent was not long i^t being gratified by diree somnain--
bnlitttit who, besides this ckdrvo^tmefif observed in the
preceding cese, presented proofs pf an intnitioa^ and of
a preyisinn very remarkaMe, whether for themselves
or for others.

Here the sphere seems to enlarge ; we no longer
want to satisfy a simple curiosity, — no longer endea-
vour to ascertain whether or not there exists any crite-
rion which may enable iw to decide whether somnMn^
bnlisw has or has not taken plaoe,-^whether a som-
uanbulist can read with hi^ eyes closed,-^whether«
during his sleep^ he can form scowbinaticHjis at play mw»
or less compiAcujtedt-^euriotts ^nd interesting questions,
the solution of whichy espeoiallyof the last, is, considered
as a mere speetiMde, a moat extcaordiniury phenomenon ;
but wiiich, in poiiNt <x£ real interest, and in the hope of
benefiting the science of medldine, a«'e infinitely beneath
these widi which y'Our committee Are now about to
make you acquainted.

There is not one amongst you, gentlemen, who,
amidst all that ho has been told about magnetism, has
not henrd of that faculty, which certain somnambulists
haroi not only of discovering the species of disease


248 APPENDIX, NO. 1.

with which thef themselves are aflPected — the endanmce
and the issue of these diseases ; bat even the speeiesy
the endurance and the issue of the diseases of others
with whom they are placed en rapport The three fol-
lowing cases have appeared to us so important, that we
have thought it our duty to make you acquainted with
them at large, as affording most remarkable examples
of this intuition and of this prevision ; at the same time»
you will find in them a combination of various pheno-
mena which were not observed in the other magnetised
persons.

Paul Villagrand, student of law, bom at Magnac
Laval (Upper Vienne), on the 18th of May 1803, suf-
fered a stroke of apoplexy on the 25th of December
1825, which was followed by a paralysis of the whole
left side of the body. After seventeen months of dif-
ferent modes of treatment, by acupuncture, a seton in
the nape of the neck, twelve applications of maxa along
the vertebral column — modes of treatment which he
followed at home, at the Maiaon de SanU^ and at the
Hospice de Perfectwnnementy and in the course of which
he had two fresh attacks — he was admitted into the
HopUal de la Charite, on the 8th of April 1827. Al-
though he had experienced perceptible relief from the
means employed before he entered this hospital, he still
walked with crutches, being unable to support himself
upon the left foot. The arm of the same side, indeed,
could perform several motions ; but Paul could not lift


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 1349

It to his head. He scarcely saw with his right eye^
and was rery hard of hearing with both ears. In this
state he was entrusted to the care of onr coUeagne,
M. Fouqnier, who, besides the very evident paralysis^
discovered in him the symptoms of hypertrophy of th^
heart.

Daring five months, he administered to him the al^-
coholic extract of nux vomieay bled him from time to
time, purged him, and applied blisters. The left arm
recovered a little streng^ ; the headachs, to which he
was subject, disappeared ; and his health continued sta**
tionary until the 29th of August 1827, when he was
magnetised for the first time by M. Foissae, by order
and under the direction of M. Fouqnier. At this first
sitting, he experienced a sensation of general heat, then
twitchings (sovbresauts) of the tendons. He was asto^-
nished to find himself overcome by the desire of sletep-
itfg; he rubbed his eyes in order to get rid of it, made
visible and ine£Fectual efforts to keep his eyelids open,
and, at length, his head fell down upon his breast, and
he fell asleep. From this period, his deafness and
headachs disappeared. It was not until the ninth sit-
ting that his sleep became profound ; and at the tenths
he answered, by inarticulate sounds, the questions which
were addressed to him. At a later period, he an^
nounced that he could not be cured but by means of
magnetism, and he prescribed for himself a continuatioii
of the pills composed of the extract of nux v&mied^


268 APP^Vi»%, >JO. J.

twi»pHWW, md jbatfis <if Bumiget. Upwi ilie t5A of
£fptaiitHNr« your CM^nitlee jr^aired ip tlite HopMi de
Jm Hkmti^y made tha patmt he midrfiiMed, and a««er-
laiiiad Ishat tUw iaferior left lunb irae mepifeidf tUoiier
4iHm tliiej%ht-<«ithat thie rigkl htmA doeed iii«ch mone
strongly than the left — ^that the tongue, when drftWM
out «f the oMutky i«»s eaavied towuidi the right iBom-
mimmtti wnA dwt the rif^ diedc was inose etmwmx
HhantheMi.

Paal-was then magnetbed* and soon placed in aetata
•of aomnaahulisnL He recapitulated what related ta
Jms treatn^eut, and prasorihed that, 4>n that same di^, a
sinapum siMmld be apf4ied to aadi ef his legs for au
hour and a half; -that next day he should take a batii
lof Bane^es ; and that, upon eoming <«Drt €it the bath, si-
uapisBis should be again applied during twebre hours
without iuterruption, souaetinies to one place, and some-
timas to another ; that, upon Uie following jday^ after
haviug taken a second bath of Bareges, bloe^l i^oald
ha ^drawn fvom his riglM; arm to the extent of a paletU
and a ba]£ Finally, •he added, thai;, by foUowing this
tveatfanent, be would be onabled, upon the 28tii, i. e.
Aree days afterwacds, to -walk witAiout crutches on
ieatring the sitting, at whidi, he aaid, it would still be
necessary to magnetise him. The tseatmeut whieh he
had prescribed was followed ; and upon the day named*
the 28th of September, the committee ropMred to the
BofMt de la ChanU. Paul «ame, aupported an his


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 251

erntolMs, in]bo the )e«iiABltiii[g«4meBi> irhera Ihe was ma^
Mjiacied as wual, and plaeed in m state ^ef aMoeamlMiliBm.
I« ttUs •state, lie asdw^Ckd us ^liat lie di<mld netnrB to lied
mMie«tlteiise<of lw«nttdM0,^rhh(^^ Upon

avduBip, be asked t»r bis .€niitelmBy«<i«)e iold lUn that
he had «io iengier !aB|r Ji«ed /if thsn* In £mi^ 1» dra«a»
siflKjrted jkuaself <m die paralysed ik^, passed tliiiai^^
the ^reard who foHpwed luiii> descended tlM etep jsf tha
cha$nbre d^experiences^ enaesed liie eeeond eourt de Jm
Ctmiiif aaoeaMhed Iwo steps^ and wihen lie larmed at
the l>0!t|;om ef the rsimry ^e eat idoim* After nsstfaii^
tare mnntes, he^Kendisd, sriith tke As^stanee ef ransKn
and Ae hatnttaade, tbe it wentf'^&iB* steps of tine ntair
irtiidk led jte tihe Doom wd^pe lie eieptt, mua$ fte had
vitheni eoppart, aat -down again for a ffwment, ani
tlsen took another ^walk in the i^eeasy to the great aefea^
niihwpnt lof .aU the <eitber patients, srfae, until then, hud
seen btm constantly confined to hed. From itUs ^hiy*
Kan) i#^r fissmwed Ms ^rntcfaes.

YimrteovMniiteis aasemUed agsni, on Ae 11th <rf Oo^
teller Avowing, jit the BcfM de la Chm^. Paid
19m Magnetised, and be annesMseed to ns that he shonid
he eenpletely eured 9i, the end of the year« if a aetai
wnne pkoed imo incbes bdlow the region of the heait.
At ^% sitting, he was nepeatedlf tpindied, prinked ivMb
a fin, to she deptb of n line, in ihe eyebrow and in Ae
wrist, vritboMt |MMNdncniig any ajfonptom ef nensibilily,

l^n th9 ii6di ef «OfllelMr, ftf • Fonfiifir jrecdnsd a


2d2 APP£NDIX, NO. I.

letter firom the Conseil General dee Hoepkee^ reqnestiiBg
him to snspend the experiments which he had com-
menced at the Hopital de la Chariii. We weare ob-
liged, therefore, to intennpt this magnetic treatmenty
the efficacy of which our paralytic patient said he could
not sufficiently praise. M. Foissac procured his dis-
missal from the hospital, and placed him in the Bae
dee peiUs Augustins^ No. 18, in a private apartment,
where he continued the treatment.

Upon the 29th of the same month, your committee
met at the apartment of the patient, in order te
mine into the progress of his cure ; but before he
magnetised, they ascertained that he walked ^prithout
crutches, and more firmly, to all appearance, than at
the preceding sitting. We then made him try his
strength upon the dynamom^er. When pressed by the
right hand, the hand of the instrument indicated thirty
kUogrammes, and by the left, twelve. The two hands
united caused it to mount to thirty-one. He was mag-
netised. In four minutes somnambulism was manifest-
ed, and Paul assured us that he should be completely
cured upon the 1st of January, We tried his strength :
the right hand carried the hand of the dynamomMr to
twenty*nine kilogrammes (one less than before his sleep),
the left hand (the paralysed one) to twenty-six (fonr*
teen more than before his sleep), and the two hands
united, to forty-five (fourteen more than before).

While still in the state of somnambulism, he rose to


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 253

walk, and got over tbe ground cleverly. He hopped
upon the left foot. He knelt down on the right knee ;
then rose up, supporting himself with the left hand up-
on one of the assistants, and resting the whole weight
of his body upon the left knee. He took and lifted up
M. Thillaye, turned him round, and sat down with him
on his knees. He drew the dt^namometer with all his
strength, and made the scale of traction (echelle de trac^
Hon) mount to sixteen myriagrammes. At our request
that he would go down stairs, he rose quickly from his
elbow-chair, took the arm of M. Foissac, which he quit-
ted at the door, descended and ascended the stairs, two
or three at a time, with a convulsive rapidity, which,
however, he moderated when he was bid to take them
one by one. As soon as he awoke, he lost this asto*
nishing augmentation of strength ; in fact, the dynamo-
meter then indicated no more than 3| myriagrammes^
t. 6. 12^ less than when asleep. His walk was slow,
but sure ; he could not sustain the weight of his body
on the left leg (the paralysed one), and he made an in-
effectual attempt to lift up M. Foissac.

We ought to remark, gentlemen, that, a few days
before this last experiment, the patient had lost two
pounds and a half of blood, that he had still two blisters
on his leg^, a seton in the nape of the neck, and ano-
ther on the breast; consequently, you will perceive
along with us what a prodigious increase of strength
Magnetism had produced in the diseased organs, that


tM AmWBIX, NO. I.


<hniB|^ Ike whole tow ike ooaHBmlialitBfll ooBtiMied»
tko fold itoeagdi of the body woo Moro tliOB qvod-
foplod*

AHMr tfab, Ptal renowwed all modied trtOtMOm,
wkboig to bo magneCiBed oriy; and, towoidi tlie end
of tl» year, ao ho OTprooood a wnh to be pla i tod and
k«^ in a state of oonmambalinB, in order to oomploto
hia core by the Ist of January, ho was maynot ia ed upoo
the 25lk ^ Dooenibery Obd oontinnod in a state of sool-
Baaib«£sni until the Ist of January.

During this period, he was awakened about twelve
hours, at unoqua] interrals ; and in these short moments
he was made to beUeve that he had been only a lew
hours asleep* During the whole of his sleep, his digea-
trre Antetions were performed with an inereased aeti^
vity.

He had been asleep three days, when, ia company
with M. Foissac, he set out on foot, on the 28th of De-
cember, from the Rue Mondovi, and went in soaroh
of M. Foaquier at the Hbpitai de la Ckariiey where he
arriyed at nine o'clock. He recognised there the pa-
tients near whom he had slept before his discharge, the
pupils who were! npon duty in the room, and he read
with his eyes closed, a finger haying been applied to
each eyelid, some words which were presented to hian
by M. Fouqoier. AH that we had witnessed appear^
to* as «o astonishii^r that your commitlee, b«ng dosi-


REPORT ON ANiMi&L IfiAaNETISM. 2S5

rou» of following out Ike history of tMi^ sonfaitflibiilidt'
to the endy again met, upon the Ist of Jamoury^ in the
house of JVi» Foiesaci where We found Fftdi a6lei^«in<$ef
the 25th of Decemherir Fifteem darys beHbwe^ htf httd
tahen out the setone m the Dedt and the hveatfl^ Mii
had estaUtthedy on the hft amn^ a- euUetfr i^^eb he
trae to continue all fait life* jtioreorery ho dedared
that he was now cured, that, unless guilty ef some lath
prudence,, he should live^ to an advanced age^ ahid that
he shoiild die aft last o£ an atl»tck of apO{^eity. White
stiU asleep, he went out of ^ houM of M« Foiisac,
and walked and ran along the street wkh a fbnMr aiidf
assured step. Upon his= retimi, he ettvrled, wMi thef
greatest fiicility, one of the peirsotte present^ wheitt ^
could scatcely have lifted belbre he wt» set adeepir

Upon the 12th of January, your oottttflttee met
again at the house el M. Foissac, where there* werte fftt^
tetA M. £. Lascase, deputy, M. De -^^^'--^ akk^-'iJmHp
to'the Irang, and M. Segalas, memb«r of the Acadcftty*
M. Foissec told us that he was going to set Paul asleep,
that, in tM» stioite of somnamb«disiay a finger should be
applied to each of his closed eyes, and that, fit spite of
this Gomji^ete occlusion of the eyelids, he should dis-*
tinguiehf live coienr of cards, thai he should read the
title of a work, and even some words or lines pointed
out at random in the body of the woi^. At the end of
two minutes of magnetic manipulations,^ Paul fell asleep.
The eyelids being kept closed, constantly and aitemate*


256 APPENDIX, NO. I.

\y bf MM. Fouqaier^ Itard, Marc» and the Reporter,
there was presented to him a pack of new cards, from
which the paper covering bearing the government stamp
was torn ofiF. The cards were shuffled, and Paul easily
and snccessively recognised the King of Spades, the
Ace of Oubs, the Queen of Spades, the Nine of Clubs,
the Seven of Diamonds, and Queen of Diamonds, and
the Eight of Diamonds.

While his eyelids were kept closed by M. Segalas,
there was presented to him a volume which the Report-
er had brought along with him. He read upon the
title-page: Histoire de France,* He could not read
the two intermediate lines, and upon the fifth he read
only the name, Anquetil, which is preceded by the pre-
position par. The book was opened at the 89th page,
and he read in the first line — le nombre de see — ^he passed
over the word troupes, and continued : Au moment a^
on le cToyait occupe des plaisirs du camavaL He also
read the running-title Louis^ but could not read the
Roman cypher which follows it. A piece of paper was
presented to him, upon which were written the words,
AgglutmatwH and Magnetisme Animal. He spelt the
first, and pronounced the two others. Finally, the
proces-verbal of this sitting was presented to him, and

* Histoire de France depuis lea Gaulois j tuques a la mort de Louii
XVI. par Anquetil. 13 vols. 8vo. Paris, 1817.
- The passage read by Paul is to be found upon the 89th page of the
7th volume.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 257

he read very distinctly the date, and some words which
were more legihly written than the others. In all these
experiments, the fingers were applied to the whole of
the commissure of both eyes, by pressing down the np^
per upon the under eyelid, and we remarked that the
baU of the eye was in a constant rotatory motion, and
seemed directed towards the object presented to his
vision.

Upon the 2d of February, Paul was placed in a state
of somnambulism in the house of Messrs Scribe and
Bremard, merchants. Rue St Honore. The Report-
er of the committee was the only member present 4^%
this experiment. The eyelids were closed as bef0re,
and Paul read, in the work entitled The- Thousand ar^i
One NighiSf the title-page, the word Preface, and the
first line of the preface, with the exception of the word
peu. There was also presented to him a volume en-
titled, Letires de deux amieSf par Madame Campan* He
distinguished on a print the figure of Napoleon ; he
pointed out the boots, and said that he also saw two fe-
male figures. He then read currently the four first
lines of the third page, with the exception of the word
ravwer* Finally, he recognised, without touching them,
four cards, which were successively presented to him
two and two,-^the8e were the King of Spades and thie^
£ight of Hearts, the King and Queen of dubs.

At another sittings which took place upon the 13th

VOL. II. y


268 A<rPEVBiXy BO. f .

of Mufbh follMnng, Fcal •ttemptod in vain to iistni-
guiflh 4iflereut emtia mhuAk wew applied to IIm pit ^f
tbe stoiaadi ; but lie nead, witk ki% eyes stiM <Aoted, io
a ho9k epeiMd at randeniy and, at tiiie tinie> it wtm ML
Jedes Ooqiiet wlie kept ins eyes shot. The RqMiter
alae .mote npon a dip of paper the irards, Maxmnkem
Rtbmpimmm^ wluch ke read equatiy well.

The conclusions to be drawn from this lon|^ and
omiew caM ane -easy. They iovr natorally freai the
sia^iie expoeilioii of the facts which we have veperted
te ypn, aad we estabfish them In Mm fottewing mail-
Her: —

1. A patient, whoaa a nUaonal aoedicai trealH|«Bt ky
one of ibe most 4isttiig;iiished praotilioners of tiie 'Ca^
tal ceidd not core of a paralysis, found his care from
the administrallQ& of Magnetism, and in cense^enee
ef foHowiag exactly the treatment which he prescribed
for hiatacif whea in a state of somnambnlism. 2. In
this atate, bis stnei^ptii was renaarkably increased* 3.
He gave «s Ae most nndoubted proofs thirt he read
wilii bis eyes cUised. 4. lie piiedicted the pfsriod «f
bis eaise, and this eare took place.

ia the IbHowiag case, we eball see this foresiglit atiH
mere Iblly deveifltped ia a man bdonging to ike fowiar
dass, ^oite ignorant, and who, ^Msnredly, bad never
heard of Anknal Magnetism,

Pienw Gasjot, aged M years, by trade a hatter, born
of an epileptic mother, had been subject for ten years


REPORT ON ANIMAJL Jf A&KETISM. 959

to attacks pf epitef»«y, w:bicli4icciirred jSre or nx limas
a- week, when he was admittfid into the MopUal de ki
Ciarite^ about tiie t»€i|^iiiAg of the moDth of August
l^$7. He was iujwediately sjobjeeted to Ae magni^tie
tr^satmeiit, was s^t adaep at JJie Sd sittiag* and beoame
sofnaairohnfat at the 10th, wl^ took place upon the
Ifftb of AxtgmU It was then^ at 9 o*)dock m the woni-
iug9 liuit he aQBoiuiced to as that at four o'teLaek of the
aftornooii of iImS <lay> he sbotdd hare aa alAack of epi-
lepsy, l>iM: that it might he ppevented by nagnetiaiag
him a Utde preVioosiy. W^ preferred veniySqf the
^xactaess of Ms predictiiMi, aad no preeaotioK wn la-
Isen to pre¥eiit its iolfilment. We eastented ouraelves
witili ^obsenrmg hkp, without exeitiDg in him any siMipi-
eion. .M one o<dock» he was isesaad (with a violent
headaob. At fbree, be was oUiged to go to had* and
puecisely at four the St «wae oo. It ksted fiirie wA-
mites. Op lJi# seiMmd4ay following, ^JaaolboUig ma

state nf somoambidism, M« Fomfs&er aaddei^y thmst
a pm .of an ineh in Img^ hetwss^ the.lbre^fini^ and
thumb ^ his .right hands with the same pin he pi^need
the lobe of his esr ; his eyalids were eefamHtad, aad the
oo^i^fncMsa^nidkseYieral times with thehead«f afwi,
hut the patient did iM»t manifest ihe slightest sign of
sansl^ty«

Your iJiammtiiee mpflirad Im» Ihe HofiM de la Ckn-
niii upon the 24A of August, at nine o'ckck in the
moKQiag, in iirder to witness Ihe ex|«nBieats wbieh


2d0 APPENDIX, MO. I.

M. Fonquier, one of its members, proposed to continue
to make upon this patient.

M. Foissac, who had already magnetised him, placed
himself opposite, and at the distance of six feet- iProm
Cazot ; he looked steadily at him, made use of no ma^
nipulations, preserved absolute silence, and Cazot fell
asleep in eight minutes. Three times there was placed
under his nose a bottle filled with ammoniac : his face
coloured, his respiration increased, but he did not a*
wake. M. Fouquier thrust into his fore-arm a pin of
an inch in length. Another was introdaced to the
depth of two lines obliquely under the breast-boioe
f sternum J ; a third, also obliquely, at the pit of the
stomach ; a fourth perpendicularly into the sole of the
foot. M. Guersent pinched him in the fore-arm, so as
to produce a livid spot in the skin : M. Itard leant up-
on his thigh with the whole weight of his body* We
endeavoured to produce ti^^kling^ by Inringing a small
piece of paper under the nose, and conducting it along
the lips, the eyelids, the eye-lashes, the neck, and .the
sole of the foot. Nothing could awaken him. We
pressed him with questions. How long will your fits
eoptinue? For a year. — Do you know whether they
wiU follow close upon each other? No. — Will you
have any this month ? I shall have one on Monday
the 27th, at twenty minutes from three o'clock. — Will
they be severe ? Not half so severe as the one I had
last. — Upon what other day will you have another at-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 261

teek? After exhibiting some symptoms of impatience,
iie answered : Fifteen days hence, t. e. on the 7th of
September.— At what hour ? At ten minutes before
six in the morning. — The indispositioiSi of one of Ca-
sot's children obliged him to leave the hospital this
rery day, the 24th of August. Maison agreed to tnake
him return on the morning of Monday the 27th, i(i or-
der that we might have an opportunity of observing
the fit, which he told us was to take place that day at
twenty minutes to three. The keeper having refused
to admit him when he presented himself, Cazot went
to the house of M« Foissac to complain of this refusal.
The latter told us that he preferred putting a stop to
this fit by magnetism^ than to be the sole witness of it :
Consequently, we could not ascertain the exactness of
this prevision. But we had still to observe the fit
which he had announced for the 7th of September, and
M. Fouquier, who procured for Cazot admission into
the hospital upon the 6th, under the pretext of sub-
jecting him to some treatment which could not take
place out of the establishment, made him bemagnetised
in the course of the di^y, by M» Foissac, who set him
asleep by the mere influence of his Tolition, and his
fixed Iqck. In this sleep, Cazot repeated that he
should have an attack next day at ten minutes to six,
and that it might be prevented by magpaetising him a
little before.

Upon a signal agreed upon and given by M. Fou-


262 APPENDIX, VO. I.

Mjflkier, M. Foissac, mf wbrnm pneteace Casot was igamr
rant, awakened him, as he had set him Asleep, hj the
mere imAueaee of his volition, in ^nte of the ^ueilama
we addrieseed to the sanniunhuliat, the only object mi
winch wrtM to conceal from him the aaomeiit when ha
wm$tQ haAwakevied. In order to waCaeas the aeeoBd
6U fow Committee met, at a qnarter before aix 4>f iihe
mtnrii^ of 4;he .7ith of September, in the Salk St 3&-
tM 0f the JBopital de la CharUL There we laanil,
that, iq>oii the preTions evening, at ^ht o'ciaek, Oaaot
inA heoa aeiied with a pain in his head, which had ter^
mMfted him all night; that this pain had oansed the
aenaatioti jof the ringhig of bells, and that he had ex-
perienced shooting pains in the ^ars. At ten minutes
to mx, we witnessed the epileptic fit, characterised by
rigidity «nd contraction of the limbs, the repeated funo-
jectien and jerking back of the head, the arched eur-
▼«ture 4)f ithe body backwards, the convnlsiFe closing
ef the eyelids, the retraction of the ball of the eye to-
wards the «pper part of the orbit, aighs, screams, in-
senrifaility te fyinching, aqoeezing of the tongae bet^ween
the teeth. All these symptoms condnaed fi^e mtnates,
daring which there were two short intervals of remis-
rion, each of eeme aeconds ; and afiterwards there en-
sned A s)elaxation {brisementj of the Umbs, and geniaral
laantude.

Upon the 1 0th of September, at seven o'idock in the
evening, yoi«r Qaminittee i«et At the honse of i/L Jtard»


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM.

m#eier to oontiiHie itheir iexperimcMts open OaMt. The
loiter vas im the parlonry where we tntoved iato eon-
verMrtaen with hui> and kept it up iMitfl hai£"paet se-
Fen-fo'liie fieriad At wliidi M- Fewaac, whp had anriFed
after v^ and Kenained in the aateohanber, which was
iifNMitod from the parlour hf two 4sloied doora, and at
a idiniiMimi ef twd^e feet, begau te magnetise him.
Three WDules after, €aaet said : '^ I bsUeve M* Fois-
sae is tbens, £mr i leel myaelf stopefied {^AoBOwrdi?)
h% iAe end pf eight minutes he was sett eoi]^)letd3r
aalisp. We quesiiened him, and h» a^aia assmed us,
Ihat fu three weeks *irom 4h«t day, Lm, upon ^e 1st of
October, ks ahoaU hnFO ay ejaleptk ^fit at two minutes
before sioon*

We aaade ft our husiness ao ohsenne, wfeh aa much
€are m^ we had duie npwi the 7ih <ef ^Beptemfaer, the
epilef^ie U wUsh ke had prodictad ifor the l$t of Oc
tahar. iB^ tfcte i^iwpoiA, the Oommiltee repaired at
ka)£npaat elar«i npim thai; day to the bouse of M.
^^aorgefk fcat aa a w tf a<^rer^ Afe die Mmiaarwn^ No. 17,
wh^ne -Caapt «eaided> wA followed his employment.
W^ Utinit frAai {(tus M. (S«9prg>aa» that Caaot was ja
very «leady workwiaii ; that Ms ^^ovdapt was exoeSksit,
ami that, wk^tkfir #Qi» /simplifjity ofdwraoter^ or from
JBianal firki«iiiid^9 he was mi^«Uo of lending himself to
enjr kind 4if /imd.; that lOaaoti leeling himself iodia*-
^aaad> had r^^naiped in hia jRoom, and was net at work;
that :bp h%A ei;pariQ»cad «» afKaak of jupHmr «iMe


264/ APP£NJ)IX, NO. I.

that which the Committee had witnessed at the Hcpi"
tal de la ChariU; that there was now in company with
Cazot an intelligent man, whose veracity and discretion
might he depended upon, and that this man had not
annoonced to Cazot that he had predicted an attack
upon this day; that it appeared certain, that, since the
10th of September, JVJ. Foissac had communication with
Cazot, but from this no inference could be drawn that
he had reminded him of his prediction ; on the con*
trary, M. Foissac appeared to attach very great import-
ance to its being concealed from Cazot. M. Georges,
at five minutes before noon, went up to a room situated
under that inhabitated by Cazot ; and a minute after-
wards, he came to inform us that the fit had com-
menced. We all went up in haste, MM. Guersent,
Thillaye, Marc, Gueneau, de Mussy, Itard, and the
reporter, to the sixth story, where, upon our arrivaH
the watch of one of the Committee indicated a minute
before noon, true time. Assembled round the bed of
Cazot, we found the epileptic fit, characterized by the
following symptoms: — Tetanic rigidity of the trunk
and limbs, the head and sometimes the trunk bent back-
wards, a convulsive drawing upwards of the balls of
the eyes, of which nothing was to be seen but the
white, a very decided suffusion of the face and ne^^
contraction of the jaws, partial fibrillary conrulsiona ill
the muscles of the fore-arm and of the right arm:
Soon afterwards cpisthoUmos so decided that the tnink


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 265

was bent back into the arc of a circle, the body resting
only on the head and feet, which motions were termi-
nated by an abmpt relaxation. A few moments after
this attack, i. e. after a minute's respite, another fit came
on similar to the preceding. There were inarticulate
sounds, the respiration was stifled and tremulous, the
larynx being rapidly depressed and elevated, and the
pulse beating from 132 to 160. There was no foam at
the mouth, nor contraction of the thumb towards the
palm. At the end of six minutes, the fit terminated
with sighs, sinking down of the limbs, opening of the
eyelids, which allowed him to look upon the bystanders
with an air of astonishment, and he told us that he was
lamed (courhatur4)y especially in the right arm.

Although the Committee could entertain no doubt
as to the very decided effects which magnetism pro-
duced upon Cazot, even without his knowledge, and at
a certain distance, we wished to have still another proof
of its influence. And as it had been proved at the last
sitting that M. Foissac had had communications with
him, and might have reminded him of his having pre-
dicted the attack which was to take place on the 1st of
October, the Committee, in making new experiments
upon Cazot, wished to lead M. Foissac into an error
with regard to the day which the patient should pre-
dict as that of his next attack. In this way we should
prevent every species of collusion, even if it could be

VOL II. z


266 APPENDIX, NO. I.

supposed that a man whom we had always found to be
upright and conscientious would enter into a compact
with another, destitute of education and knowledge, in
order to deceive us. We confess that we could never
entertain an idea so injurious to the one and the other;
and we must render the same justice to MM. Dupotet
and Chapelain, of whom we have repeatedly had occa-
sion to speak in this report.

Your Committee, then, met in the cabinet of M.
Bourdois, upon the 6th of October at noon, at which
hour Cazot arrived there with his child. Here M.
Foissac had been invited to meet us at half-past tw:elve ;
he. arrived unknown to Cazot, and remained in the
drawing-room, without having any communication with
us. A person, however, was sent by a concealed door
to tell him that Cazot was seated on a sofa, about ten
feet distant from a closed door, and that the Committee
requested that he might be set asleep and awakened
at this distance, he remaining in the cabinet, and M.
Foissac in the drawing-room.

.At thirty- seven minutes past twelve, while Cazot
was engaged in conversation with us, and in examining
the pictures which hungrround the cabinet, M. Foissac
cpmmenced his magnetic operations in the next room,
and we remarked, that, at the end of four minutes, Ca-
zot winked slightly, appeared restless, and at lengthy in
nine minutes, fell asleep. M. Guersent, who had att-
tended him at the HopUal des Enfatu for his epileptic


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 267

attacks, asked him if he recognised him. He answer-
ed in the affirmative. M. Itard asked him when he
shoold have another fit. He answered that he shonld
have one in foar weeks from that day (the 8d of No-
vember), at five minutes past fonr in the afternoon.
He was then asked when he should have another. He
answered, after collecting himself, and hesitating, tliat
it would be five weeks after the preceding, npon< the
9th of December, at half-past nine in the morning.

The proees'verbal of this meeting having been read
over in presence of M. Foissae, in order that he might
sign it along with as, we wished, as we have said above,
to lead him into an error; and in reading it over to
him before getting it signed by the m^nbers of the
Committee, the reporter read, that Gazot's first fit
should take place upon Sunday the 4th of November,
instead of Saturday the Sd, as predicted by the ipatient.
He was equally deceived in-aregard to the second fit,
and M. Foissae took a note of these false indications
as if they had been correct ; but'«ome days afterwards,
having placed Cazot in a state of somnambulism, as he
was accustomed to do, in order to free him from his
headacbs, he learnt from him that the fit should take
place upon the 3d, and not the 4th, and of this he in-
formed M. Itard, b^eving that an error had crept into
our proe^'Verbal,

In order to observe the fit of the Sd of November,
the committee took the same precautions as in. examin-


268 APPENDIX, NO. I.

ing that of the 1st of October. At four oclock in the
afternoon, we repaired to the house of M. Georges,
where we learnt from him, from his wife, and from one
of the workmen, that Cazot had wrought, as usual, all
the morning until two o'clock, and that, at dinner, he
had felt a headach; that, nevertheless, he had come
down for the purpose of resuming his work ; but that
the headach had increased, and having experienced a
stupor, he had returned to his room, lain down in his
bed, and fallen asleep. MM. Bourdois, Fouquier, and
the reporter, then went up, preceded by M. Georges,
to Cazot's room. M. Georges entered alone, and found
him in a profound sleep, which he made us observe by
the door upon the stair being left a-jar. M. Georges
spoke loud to him, moved him, shook him by the arms,
without being able to awaken him, and at six minutes
past four, in the midst of these attempts to awaken him,
Cazot was seized with the principal symptoms which
characterise a fit of epilepsy^ and in all respects simUar
to those which we have previously observed.

The second fit, announced at the sitting of the 6th
of October to take place upon the 9th of December, i.e.
two months before, occurred at a quarter from ten, in-
stead of half-past nine (a quarter of an hour later than
had been predicted), and was characterised by the same
precursory phenomena, and by the same symptoms as
those of the 7th of September, Ist of October, and Sd
of November.


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 269

Finally, apon the 11th of February, Cazot foretold
the period of another fit, which was to take place upoA
Sunday the 2 2d of April, five minntes after noon ; and
this annunciation was verified, like the preceding^ within
about five minutes ; that is to say, the fit took place
ten minutes after noon. This fit, remarkable for its
violence, for the fury with which Cazot bit his hand
and his fore-arm, by the abrupt and repeated starts
with which he lifted himself up, lasted thirty-five mi-
nutes, when M. Foissac, who was present, magnetised
him. The convulsive state soon ceased, and gave way
to the magnetic somnambulism, during which Cazot
rose, sat down upon a chair, and said that he was much
fatigued, that he should still have two fits — one in nine
weeks from to-morrow (25th of June), at three minutes
past six o'clock. He did not wish to speak of the se-
cond fit, because it would be necessary for him to think
of what was to happen previously — (at this moment he
sent away his wife, who was present) — and he added
that, about three weeks after the fit of the 25th of
June, he should become insane, that his insanity should
last three days, during which he should be so wicked
as to fight with every body, that he should even mal-
treat his wife and his child, that he ought not to be left;
alone with them, and that he did not know but he
might kill some person whom he did not name. He
ought then to be bled successively in the two feet.
Finidly, be added ; << I shall be cured in the month of


270 APP£NDIX, NO. I.

August ; and when once cuied, the disease will never
attack me again under any circumstances.'*

It was upon the 22d of April that all these predic-
tions were made ; and two days afterwards, the 24th,
Cazot, attempting to stop a spirited horse who had
taken the bit in his teeth, Was thrown against the wheel
of a cabriolet, which shattered the arch of the left or-
bit, and bruised him shockingly. He was taken to 'the
hospital Beatufon^ and died there upon the 15th of May.
Upon opening his skull, there were found a recent in-
flammation of the cerebral membranes (meniiigUU)^ a
collection of purulent matter under the integuments t>f
the cranium, and, at the extremity of the plexus ehond"
de9y a substance yellow within and white on the outside,
oontuning small hydatides.

In this case, we see a young man, subject during ten
years to attacks of epilepsy, for whick he was under
medical treatment at the Hcpital des Enfans and that
of St Louis successively, and also exempted from mili-
tary service. Magnetism acts upon him, although he
is completely ignorant of what is done. There is an
amelioration in the symptoms of his disease ; the fits
diminish in frequency ; his oppression and headachs dis-
appear under the influence of Magnetism ; he prescribes
a mode of treatment adapted to the nature of his com-
plaint, and from which he predicts a cure. When mag^
netised without his knowledge, and at a distance, he
falls into somnambulism, and is withdrawn from it as


REPORT ON ANIMAl'mAGNETISM. 271

promptly as when he was magnetised near. Finally,
he pointed out, with singular precision, one or two
months before, the very day and hour when he was to
have an access of epilepsy. However, although gifted
with the faculty of foreseeing the fits which were so-
distant, nay, those which were nerer to take place, he
could not foresee that, in two days, he should meet with
a fatal accident.

Without attempting to reconcile all that may, at first
sight, appear contradictory in such a case, the commit-
tee would request you to observe, that the prevision of
CasBOt related only to his fits ; that it was restricted to
the consciousness of the organic modifications which
were preparing, and which took place in him, as the
necessary result of the internal functions ; that this pre-
vision, although more extensive, is quite similu* to that
of some epileptic patients, who recognise the approAeh*
of a fit by certain precursory symptoms, such as head--
ach, giddiness, moroseness, the aura epikpHca. Is it
surprising, then, that the somnambulists, whose send-'
bility, as yoti have seen, is extremely lively, should be
capable 4>f foreseeing their fits a long time beforle, hi
consequence of sonde symptoms or internal impressioiis,
which escape the waking man ? It is in this manner,
gentlemen, that we might explain the prevision attest-^
ed by Ai^eteeus in two passages of his immortal works ;
by Sauvage, who relates an instance of it, and by da-
banis. We may add, that the prevision of Cas6t was


272 APPENDIX, NO. I. .

not rigorous and absolute, but conditional, inasmuch as,
when predicting a fit, he announced that it would not
take place provided he were magnetised, and, in reali-
ty, it did not take place ; it was altogether organic and
internal. Thus we can conceive how he did not fore*/
see an event altogether external, viz. that he should
acci4entaU7 meet a restive horse, that he should have
the imprudence to attempt to stop it, and that he should
receive a mortnl wound. He might, then, have fore-
seen a fit which was never to take place. It is the
hand of a watch, which, in a given time, ought to tra-
verse a certain portion of the circle of the dial-plate,
and which does not describe it, because the watch hap-
pens to be broken.

In the two preceding cases, we have presented you
with two very remarkable instances of intuition^ of that
faculty which is developed during somnambulism, and
by virtue of which two magnetised individuals perceived
the diseases with which they were affected, pointed out
the treatment requisite for their cure, announcing the
term, and foreseeing the crises. The case of which we
are now about to present you wilh an analysis, awa-
kened in us a new species of interest* Here the mag-
netised person, plunged into somnambulism, determines
the diseases of others, with whom she is placed in mag-
netic connexion, describes their nature, and points out
the proper remedies.

Mademoiselle Celine Sauvage was placed in a state


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 273

of soninambalism, in presence of the committee, on the
18th and 21st of April, the 17th of June, the 9th of
August, the 23d of December 1826, and ISth and 17th
of January, and 2l8t of February 1827.

In passing into the state of somnambulism, she ex*
perieaced a coolness of several degrees, appreciable by
the thermometer, her tongue, from being moist and
flexible, became dry and wrinkled, her breath, until
then sweet, became fetid and repulsive. : .

The sensibility was almost entirely annihilated dn«
ring the continuance of her sleep, for she made six in«
spirations, having a bottle filled with hydrochloric acid
under her nostrils, without manifesting any emotion.
M. Marc pinched her wrist ; a needle used in acupunc-
ture was thrust to the depth of three lines into her left
thigh ; another, to the depth of two lines, into her left
wrist. These two needles were united by means of a
galvanic conductor ; very perceptible convulsive mo-
tions were produced in the hand ; and Mademoiselle
Celine seemed quite unconscious of all that was done
to her. She heard the voices of persons who spoke
close t-o her and touched her ; but she did not remark
the noise of two plates which were broken beside her.

It was while she was sunk in this state of somnam-
bulism, that the committee recognised in her three
times the faculty of discoursing upon the diseases of
other persons whom nhe touched, and of pointing out
the appropriate remedies.


274 APPENDIXj-NO. I.

The committee foand, amongst its own members, one
wlio was willing to submit to the investigationg of this
somnambulist. This was M. Marc. Mademoiselle
Celine was requested to examine attentively our col-
league's state of health. She applied her hand to his
forehead* and to the region of the heart, and in the
course of. three minutes, she said that the blood had a
tendency to. the head ; that, at that moment, M. 'Mmtt
had pain on the left-eide of this canity; that he oIlMiia
felt an oppression, especially after having eaten ; tkat
he must often have a slight cough ; that the lower part
of the breast was gorged with blood; that sometiiliig
impeded the alimentary passage ; that this part (poiii^
ing to the region of the xiphoid cartilage) was contract-
ed ; lliat to cure M. Marc, it was necessary that he
should be copiously bled ; that cataplasms of hemkMsk
should be applied, and that the lower part of the breast
should be rubbed with laudanum ; that he should drink
gummed lemonade ; that he should eat little and fre^-
quently, and that he should not take exerdse imntie-
diately after having made a meal.

We were anxious to learn from M. Marc whether he
experienced all that this somnambulist had announeod.
He told us that, in reality, he felt an oppression when
he walked upon leaving the table; that, as she an-
nounced) he frequently had a cough ; and that, before
this experiment, he had felt pain in the left side of the


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 275

head> but that he was not sensible of any impediittettt
in the alimentary passage.

We were struck with this analogy between' the feeh
ings of M. Marc and the announcement of the somiiam*
bulist ; we noted it with care, and awaited another op^
poFtunity. of procuring a new confirmatidh of the eidst-
ence of this singular faculty. This opportunity was
presented to the reporter, without his having song^
it^ hy the mother of a yoiing lady, whom he had at^
tended for a veiy. short time.

The patient was from twenty-three to 'twBfttipfiT^
years of age, and had been afflicted, for about two
years, with dropsy of the abdomen f ascites J ^ accoiiljpa-
nied with a number of obstructions, some of the size of
an egg, some of the size of the fist, others as Ida^eas
a child's head, which were situated principally on the
leftside of the belly. The belly extemalty was nri^
equal and corrugated ; and these inequalities corres^
ponded to the obstructions which had their seat with^-
in the abdomen. M. Dupuytren had already pmic^
tured this patient ten or twelve times, and had always
withdrawn a large quantity of clear, limpid albuirien,
without smell, and without any mixture. An Idlevia*
tion: of the symptoms always followed this operation.

The reporter was once present at this operation)
and it was easy for M. Dupuytren and him to aseerf
tain the size and the hardpess of these tumour^, and^
consequently, to become sensible of their inability to


276 APPENDIX, NO. I.

cure this patient. Nevertheless, they prescribed diffe^
rent remedies, and they attached some importance to
the putting Mademoiselle — ^~.— upon a regimen of
goat's milk, the goat having been previously subjected
to mercurial frictions.

Upon the 21st of February 1827, the reporter went
in search of M. Foissac and Mademoiselle Celine, and
conducted them to a house in the Rue Faubourg
du JRoule, without mentioning the name, or the resi-
dence, or the nature of the disease, of the person whom
he wished to submit to the examination of the som-
nambulist.

The patient did not appear in the room where the
experiment was made until M. Foissac had set Made-
moiselle Celine asleep, and then, after having placed a
hand of the one in that of the other, she examined her
during eight minutes, not as a physician would do, by
pressing the abdomen, by percussion, by scrutinising it
in every way ; but merely by applying her hand re-
peatedly to the stomach, the heart, the back, and the
head.

Being interrogated as to what she observed in Made-
moiselle — — , she answered that the whole belly was
diseased, that there was in it a scirrhus.and a large
quantity of water on the side of the spleen; that the
intestines were very much pu£Fed up ; that there were
pouches contiaining worms ; that there were swellings
of the size of an egg, containing a purifonn matter,


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 277

and that these swelling^ must be painful ; that at the
bottom of the stomach, there was an obstructed gland
(glande engorgeej^ of the thickness of three of her
fingers ; that this gland was in the interior of the sto^
machy and must injure tlie digestion ; that the disease
• was of old standing; and, finally, that Mademoiselle
must have headachs. She prescribed the use of a diet-
drink of borage and nitrated Peruvian bark (?) (chiena
ennitr^J, five ounces of the juice of parietary taken
every morning, and a very little mercury taken in milk.
She added, that the milk of a goat, which had been
rubbed with mercurial ointment half an hour before
drawing it o£P, would be the most proper.* Besides,
she prescribed cataplasms of flowers of elder constantly
applied to the belly, frictions of this cavity with oil of
laurel, or, instead of it, with the juice of this shrub
combined with the oil of sweet almonds, a clyster com-
posed of a decoction of Peruvian bark (kina\ mixed
with an emollient decoction. The diet should consist
of white meats, milk and flour, and no lemon. She al-
lowed very little wine, a little orange-flower rum, or
the liqueur of spiced mint. This treatment was not

* Without attaching much importance to this singular agreement
between the prescription made by the somnambulist of the milk of a
goat rubbed with mercurial ointment, and the same prescription recom-
mended to the patient by M. Dupuytren and the reporter, the com-
mittee were bound to notice this coincidence in their report. It is
presented as a fact, of which the reporter guarantees the authenticity,
but of which no explanation can be given.


278 APP£NDIX, NO. I.

followed ; and if it had, it could not have saved the pa-
tient. She died a year afterwards. As the hody was
not opened, we could not verify what had heen said by
the somnambulist.

Upon an occasion of great delicacy, when very able
physicians, several of whom are members of the Aca- *
demy, had prescribed a mercurial treatment for an ob-
struction (engorgement) of the glands of the neck,
which they attributed to a syphilitic .taint, the fkmUy
of the patient under this treatment, alarmed at the ap-
pearance of some serious consequences, wished to have
the advice oif a somnambulist. The reporter was called
in to assist at a consultation ; and he did not neglect to
take advantage of this new opportunity of adding to
what the committee had already seen. He found a

young married woman, Madame La € , having the

whole right side of the neck deeply obstructed by a
great congeries of glands close upon each other. One
of them was opened, and emitted a yellowish purulent
matter.

Mademoiselle Celine, whom M. Foissac magnetised
in presence of the reporter, placed herself in connexion
with this patient, and affirmed that the stomach had
been attacked by a substance like poison ; that there was
a slight inflammation of the intestines ; that, in the up-
per part of the neck, on the right side, there was a
scrofulous complaint, which ought to have been more
considerable than it was at present ; that, by following


REPORT ON ANI]M(Alr MAGNETISM. 279

a soothing treatment, which she prescribed, the disease
would be mitigated in the course of fifteen days or three
weeks. This treatment consisted of some grains of
magnesia, ^ight leeches applied to the pit of the sto-
madiyVater-griiel, a saline cathartic every week, two
clysters each day— one of a decoqtiop of Peruvian bark
(kina), and, immediately after, aiiother of the roots of
the naarsh-mallow, — -friction, of the limbs with ether, a
bath every week ; food made of milk (/attope), light
meatSy and abstinence from wine. This treatment was
followed for some time, and there was a peroeptibLB
amelioration of the symptoms. But the inipatieDce of
the patient, who did not think her recovery proceeding
with suJQEicient rapidity, determined the family to call
another consultation, of physicians, who decided that she
should again be placed under mercurial treatment*
From this period, the reporter ceased to attend the
patient ; and he learnt that the administration of the
mercury had produced very serious a£Fections of the
stomach, which terminated her existence, after two
months of acute suffering. A proces-verbal upon open-
ing the body, »gned by MM. Fouquier, Marjolin, Cru*
veillier and Foissac, verified the existence of a scrofu-
lous .or tubercular obstruction of the glands of the neck,
two small cavities full of pus, proceeding from the tu-
bercles at the top of each of the lungs ; the mucous
laembrane of the. great dtl'dB'Sac of the stomach was
almost entirely destroyed. These . gentlemien ascer-


280 APPENDIX, NO. I.

tained, besides, that there was no indication of the pre-
sence of any syphilitic disease, whether old or recent.

From the preceding observations it follows, 1, That
in the state of somnambulism, MademouHelle Ce/tne point-
ed oat the diseases of three individuals, with whom
she was placed in magnetic connexion. 2, That the
declaration of the first, the examination which was made
of the other after three punctures, and the post mortem
examination of the third, were found to correspond with
the annunciations of the somnambulist. 3, That the
di£Ferent modes of treatment which she prescribed do
not exceed the limits of that circle of remedies with
which she might have been acquainted, nor the order
of the things which she might reasonably recommend ;
and, 4, That she applied them with a species of dis-
cernment.


- To all these facts which we have so laboriously col-
lected, which we have observed with so much distrust
and attention, which we have endeavoured to classify in
such a manner as might best enable you to foUow the
development of the phenomena which we witnessed,
which we have, above all, exerted ourselves to present
to you disengaged from all those accessory circum-
stances which might have embarrassed or perplexed


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 281

the narrative ; we might add those which ancient^ and
even modern history have recorded on the subject of
previsions which have frequently been realized, on the
cures effectuated by the imposition of the hands, on ec-
stasies, on the convulsionaries, on oracles, on hallucina-
tions ; in short, on all that, remote from those physical
phenomena which may be explained upon the principle
of the action of one body upon another, enters into the
domain of physiology, and may be considered as an ef-
fect depending upon a moral influence not appreciable
by the senses. But the committee was appointed for
the purpose of investigating somnambulism, for the
purpose of making experiments relative to this phe-
nomenon, which had not been studied by the commis-
sioners of 1784, and of reporting to you. We should,
then, have exceeded the limits prescribed to our inqui-
ries, if, in attempting to support that which we ourselves
had seen by the authority of others who had observed
analogous, phenomena, we had swelled out our report
with facts which were foreign to it. We have related
with impartiality what we have seen with distrust ; we
have exposed in order what we have observed in diffe-
rent circumstances, — what we have prosecuted with the
most anxious, minute, and unremitted attention. We
are conscious that the report which we present to you
is the faithful exposition of all we have observed. The
obstacles which we have encountered in our progress
VOL. If. A a


282 APP£NDIX| NO. I.

are known to yon. They are, in some measure, the!
caitee of the delay which has taken place in presenting
our report, although the materials have been for a long
time in our hands. Nerertheless, we are far from wish-
ing to excuse ourselves or to complain of this delay,
since it confers upon our observations a character of
maturity and of reserve, which ought to secure your
confidence in the facts which we relate, divested of that
prejudice and enthusiasm with which you might have
reproached us, had we collected them in haste. We
may add, that we are far from thinking that we have
seen all ; we do not, therefore, pretend to desire you to
admit, as an axiom, that there is nothing positive in
magnetism beyond what we have noticed in our report.
Far from setting limits to this part of physiological
science, we hope, on the contrary, that a new field has
been opened up to it ; and warranting the authenticity
of our own observations, presenting them with confi-
dence to those who, after us, may wish to engage in
the investigation of magnetism, we shall only deduce
from them the following


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 283


CONCLUSIONS.

The conclnsions of the report are the result of the
observations of which it is composed.

1. The contact of the thumbs or of the hands ; fric-
tions, or certain gestures which are made at a small
distance from t^e body, and are called Passes^ are the
means employed to place ourselves in magnetic con-
nexion, or, in other words, to transmit the magnetic
influence to the patients— -(Pp. 203, 204.)

2. The means which are external and visible are not
always necessary, since, on many occasions, the will,
the fixed look, have been found sufficient to produce
the magnetic phenomena, even without the knowledge
of the patient.— .(Pp. 260, &c, 263, 266.)

3. Magnetism has taken effect upon persons of dif-
ferent sexes and ages.

4. The time required for transmitting the magnetic
influence with effect, has varied from half an hour to a
minute.

5. In general, magnetism does not act upon persons
in a sound state of health.-^P. 205.)


284 APPENDIX, NO. I.

6. Neither does it act upon all sick persons. —
(P. 206.)

7. Sometimes, during the process of magnetisingy
there are manifested insignificant and evanescent effects,
which cannot be attributed to magnetism alone ; such as
a slight degree of oj>pression, of heat or of cold (p. 209),
and some other nervous phenomena, which can be ex-
plained without the intervention of a particular agent
(p. 210), — ^upon the principle of hope or of fear, preju-
dice and the novelty of the treatment, the ennui pro-
duced by the monotony of the gestures (p. 212), the
silence and repose in which the experiments are made ;
finally, by the imagination, which has so much influence
on some minds and on certain organizations. — (Pp. 212-
216.)

8. A certain number of the efiects observed appeared
to us to depend upon magnetism alone, and were never
produced without its application. These are well esta-
blished physiological and therapeutic phenomena. —
(Pp. 216-218, 249, &c.)

9. The real effects produced by magnetism are very
various. It agitates some, and soothes others. Most
commonly, it occasions a momentary acceleration of the
respiration and of the circulation (p. 209), fugitive fibril-
lary convulsive motions, resembling electric shocks


REPORT OK ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 285

(pp. 217-231), a numbness in a greater or less degree
(p. 216), heaviness, somnolency (ibid,), and in a small
number of cases, that which the magnetizers call som-
nambulism,

10. The existence of an uniform character, to enable
us to recognise, in every case, the reality of the state

■ of somnambulism, has not been established. — (Pp. 228,
232-233.)

11. However, we may conclude with certainty that
this state exists, when it gives rise to the development
of new faculties, which have been designated by the
names of clairv<n/ance (pp. 241-246, 255-258) \tfUuiiion
(p. 249); internal prevision (pp- 251, 259, 260); or
when it produces great changes in the physical econo-
my, such as insensibility (pp. 222, 223, 235-239, 251) ;
a sudden and considerable increase of strength (pp. 253,
260) ; and when these e£Pects cannot be referred to any
other cause.— (Pp. 235, 236, 237, 238.)

12. As among the eflPects attributed to somnambu-
lism there are some which may be feigned, somnambu-
lism itself may be feigned, and furnish to quackery the
means of deception.— ( Pp. 225, 226, 227.)

Thus, in the observation of those phenomena which
do not present themselves again but as insulated facts,
it is only by means of the most attentive scrutiny, the


286 APPENDIX, NO. I.

most rigid precantioiis, and miiDerous and varied expe-
rimentSy that we can escape illusion.

13. Sleep produced with more or less promptitade,
is a real, hut not a constant efiect of magnetism. —
(P. 249.)

14. We hold it as demonstrated that it has been pro-
duced in circumstances, in which the persons magne-
tised could not see or were ignorant of the means em-
ployed to occasion it. — (Pp. 216, 263.)

15. When a person has once been made to fall into
the magnetic sleep, it is not always 'necessary to have
recourse to contact, in order to magnetise him anew.
The look of the magnetiser, his vdition alone, possess
the same influence. — (P. 260.) We can not only act
upon the magnetised person, but even place him in a
complete state of somnambulism, and bring him out of
it without his knowledge, out of his sight, at a certain
distance, and with doors intervening. — (Pp. 262-264.)

16. In general, changes, more or less remarkable,
are produced upon the perception and other mental ftt-
culties of those individuals who fidl into somnambulism,
in consequence of magnetism.

a. Some persons^ amidst the noise of a confused con-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 287

yersation^ hear only the voice of their magnetizer; se-
yeral answer precisely the questions he puts to them,
or which are addressed to. them hy those individuals
with whom they have been placed in magnetic con-
nexion ; others carry on conversation with all the per-
sons around them.

Nevertheless, it is seldom that they hear what is
passing around them. During the greater part of the
time, they are completely strangers to the external and
unexpected noise which is made dose to their ears,
such as the sound of copper vessels struck briskly near
them, the fall of a piece of furniture, &c. — (P. 236.)

b. The eyes are closed, the eyelids yield with diffi-
culty to the efforts which are made to open them ; this
operation, which is not without pain, shows the ball
of the eye convulsed, and carried upwards, and some-
times towards the lower part of the orbit.— (P. 242.)

e. Sometimes the power of smelling appears to be
annihilated. They may be made to inhale muriatic
acid, or ammonia, without feeling any inconvenience,
nay, without perceiving it. — (P. 222.) The contrary
takes place in certain cases, and they retain the sense
ofsmelling*

d. The greater number of the somnambulists whom
we have seen, were completely insensible. We might
tickle their feet, their nostrils, and the angle of the
eyes, with a feather — we might pinch their skin, so as


288 APP£ND1X, NO. I.

to leave a mark, prick them with pins under the nails,
&c. witliout producing any pain, without even their
perceiving it. — (P. 261.) Finally, we saw one who
was insensible to one of the most painful operations in
surgery, and who did not manifest the slightest emo-
tion in her countenance, her pulse, or her respiration.
—( Pp. 237-238.)

17. Magnetism is as intense, and as speedily felt,
at a distance of six feet, as of six inches ; and the
phenomena developed are the same in both cases* —
(P. 263.)

18. The action at a distance does not appear capable
of being exerted with success, excepting upon indivi-
duals who have been already magnetised.

19. We only saw one person who fell into somnam-
bulism upon being magnetised for the first time. Some-
times somnambulism was not manifested until the 8th
or 10th sitting — (P. 249.)

20. We have invariably seen the ordinary sleep,
which is the repose of the organs of sense, of the intel-
lectual faculties, and the voluntary motions, precede
and terminate the state of somnambulism.

21. While in the state of somnambulism, the pa-


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 289

tients whom we have observed, retained the use of the
faculties which they possessed when awake. Even their
memory appeared to be more faithful and more exten-
sive, because they remembered every thing that passed
at the time, and every time they were placed in the
state of somnambulism.

22. Upon awaking, they said they had totally for-
gotten the circumstances which took place during the
somnambulism^ and never recollected them. For this
fact we can have no other authority than their own de-
clarations.

23. The muscular powers of somnambulists are some-
times benumbed and paralysed. At other times, their
motions are constrained, and the somnambulists walk
or totter about like drunken men, sometimes avoiding,
and sometimes not avoiding, the obstacles which may
happen to be in their way. — (P. 246.) There are some
sonmambulists who preserve entire the power of mo-
tion ; there are even some who display more strength
and agility than in their waking state. — (Pp. 252, 258,
255, 260.)

24. We have seen two somnambulists who distin-
guished, with their eyes closed, the objects which were
placed before them (p. 243); they mentioned the co-

YOL. II. B b


290 APPENDIX, MO. I.

lour and the ralue of cards, without tonching them
(p. 256) ; they read words traced with the hand (pp.
256-257), as also some lines of books opened at ran«
dom. This phenomenon took place ev^i when the
eyelids were kept exactly dosed with the fingers.^ —
(Ibid.)

25. In two somnambnlists we found the faculty of
foreseeing the acts of the organism more at less re-
mote, more or less complicated. One of them an-
nounced repeatedly, sereral months previouslyy the day,
the hour, the minute of the access, and of the return
of epileptic fits.— (Pp. 260-261, 267.) The other an-
nounced the period of his cure. — (P. 254.) Their pre-
visions were realized with remarkable exactness. They
appeared to us to apply only to acts or injuries of their
organism.

26. We found only a single somnambulist who point-
ed out the symptoms of the diseases of three persons
with whom she was placed in magnetic connexton.
We had, however, made expenments upon a consider-
aUe number.— (P. 276, &c)

27. In order to estabDsh, with tmy d^ee of exact-
ness, the connexion between magnetism and tJieft^cMih
tics, it would be necessary to have observed its effMfii
upon a great number of individuals, and to have made


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 291

experiments eveiy dftyi for a long time, upon the same
patients. As this did not take place with U8> your
Committee could only mention what they perceived in
too small a number of cases to enable them to pro-
nounce any jndgtn^Ut.

28. Some of the mi^;netis^ patients Mt no IMtiSt
froin the tredtfibeiit. Others ei^perietic^ a more Or
less decided rdi^f : rhi. due, thiei Mki^ensioii of ha(bitiial
pains (p. 217) ; ^oth^, the r^ttehk' of hhi streiig^ ; a
third, the tiStktiMsbii for several itiiMki of hi« ep9e]^-
tte fits (ibhl;); a:nd a fburth the comt^lete ctfre of tnh-
rions paralysis of I6n^ stan^g.— (P. 248, Sec.)

29. Considered tk a cause of cerMn phydolojotii^
phenomena, oi as a therapeutic remedy, Magu'eti8i&
ought to be iUbwed a pMce witMn the cird^df the me-
dt<^ sdenceisf; aind^ cbirseqnentljr, jAiysfeitof oUly dibidd
practise it, o^ si^frerihtend its uis^, as is the case in the
northern ^nlitiieii.

so: Your Conm^ee Mir^ not been Able t6 verify,
beeanie th^ had nb 0{>t)Ki»rl!tinily of ddiilg' cM, other ft-
culties whidi the ntagheCiiKTs had announced as exist-
iiug in sdmnicinbtdistft. But they haVe coinmnnicated
iti theb report fWets of sufficient impoHanee to Entitle
theim to thiA, that the^ Academy ongfct t6 eticote*a|j;e
the inredtigflttiotts into th^ subject of Attfanal Migne-


292 APPENDIX, NO« I.

tism, as a very curious branch of psychology and nr«ta-
ral history.


Arrived at the termination of our labours, before
closing this report, your Committee have asked them-
selves^ whether, in the precautions which we have mul-
tiplied around us, in order to avoid all surprise ; whether
in the feeling of continual distrust with which all our
proceedings were conducted; whether, in the examina^
tion of the phenomena observed, we have scrupulously
fulfilled our commission. What other course could we
have followed ? What means more certain could we
have adopted ? With what distrust more decided and
more discreet could we have been actuated? Our con-
science, gentlemen, proudly answers, that you could
expect nothing from us but what we have done. In
short, have we been honest, exact and faithful observers?
It is for you who have long been acqumnted with us,
for you who see us continually near you, whether in
the intercourse of the world, or at our frequent meet-
ings — it is for you to answer this question. Your an-
swer, gentlemen, we expect from the long friendship
of some of you, and from the esteem of all.

Indeed, we dare not flatter ourselves with the. hope
of making you participate entirely in our conviction of
the reality of the phenomena which we have observed,
and .whiofa you have neither seen, nor followed^ nor


REPORT ON ANIMAL MAGNETISM. 293

studied along with us. We do not, therefore, demand
of you a blind belief of all that we have reported. We
conceive that a great proportion of these facts are of a
nature so extraordinary, that you cannot accord them
such a credence. Perhaps we ourselves might have
dared to manifest a similar incredulity, if, in changing
characters, you came to announce them here to us,
who, like you, at present, had neither seen, nor ob-
served, nor studied, nor followed any thing of the
kind.

We only request that you would judge us, as we
should judge you — that is to say, that you be com-
pletely convinced, that neither the love of the marvel-
lous, nor the desire of celebrity, nor any views of in-
terest whatever, influenced us during our labours. We
were animated by higher motives and more worthy of
you — by the love of science, and by an anxiety to jus-
tify the expectations you had formed of our zeal, and
of our devotion.

Signed by Bourdois de la Motte, President;

FOUQUIBR, GUENEAU DE MUSSY, GUERSENT, HUSSON,

Itard, J. J. Leroux, Marc, Thillaye.

Note. MM. Double and Magendie did not consider
themselves entitled to sign the Report, as they had not
assisted in making the experiments.


( 295 )


No. 11.

ON THE SINGULAR PHENOMENON OF THE TRANSFERENCE
OF THE FACULTIES FROM THEIR USUAL AND APPRO-^
PBIATE ORGANS TO THE EPIGASTRIUM AND OTHER
FARTS OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM, WHICH HAS BEEN
OCCASIONALLY OBSERVED TO OCCUR IN CASES OF CA-
TALEPSY AND SOMNAMBULISM.


<( Omnia yerior interpretatio Naturae conficitur per instantias, et expe>
rimenta i'donea et i^posita ; ubi sensus de experimento tantum, ex-
perimentum de Natura, et re ipsa judicat." — Bacok, N, Orgaimm,

"Sovf »^ xat vovf axovu r&XX» x»Kpa xa) rv(pX,eL

Epicharmi,

Cemit animos, animos audit ; reliqua snrda et coeca sunt.

GroHL


In reviewing the history of knowledge, it is impos-
sible to withhold our assent from the observation made
by Bacon, and repeated by many of his most eminent
^.dkeiples, that there is nothing more detrimental to the
progress of philosophical discovery, than the formation
of exdiusive systmns of science. It is, no doubt, natu-
ral to reflecting minds, to endeavour to bring the dif-
ferent branches of their acquirements into systematic
arrsngem^t; and this method, under proper regula-


296 APPENDIX, NO. II.

tions, and with due precautions, can be productive of
no harm, but, on the contrary, may even facilitate their
own studies and those of others. The g^eat danger
lies — and this could be proved from the whole history
of philosophy — in setting arbitrary limits to science ; so
that, when we happen to stumble upon any new or un-
usual phenomena, which appear to be irrecondleable
with our preconceived opinions, instead of being in-
duced to suspect any imperfection in our system, we feel
inclined to overlook the incompatible facts, to resort to
immediate and unqualified rejection, and to make every
possible effort to exclude the obnoxious and unwelcome
intruders. Systematic pride engenders scientific blind-
ness.

To none of the sciences are these observations more
applicable than to physiology. Almost every writer on
the subject agrees in pointing out and lamenting its
barrenness in respect to carefully observed facts, and
the general propensity to speculate, within its territory,
upon ambiguous, erroneous, or insufficient data. The
sciences of physiology and psychology, indeed, have
many acquisitions yet to make ; we are still, confessedly,
ignorant of many of the functions and capabilities of cer-
tain portions of the corporeal organism, as well as of
the various modes in which they are liable to be af-
fected by the powers ^nd processes of nature. Of the
basis of the mental manifestations we know little, and
even that little is almost entirely hypothetical. We-


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 297

have yet to learn to distingaish between the intellect
and the sensibility in the human constitution, to observe
their different phenomena, and, if possible, to ascertain
and discriminate their respective sources. And yet, in
this avowedly imperfect science, as in others, the sys-
tem of exclusion has been unhappily permitted to pre-"
vail, and philosophers have exhibited a determined re-
luctance to admit any new facts, however well authen-
ticated, when they appeared to militate against prin-
ciples previously established upon a false or inadequate
induction.

In these circumstances, at the risk of incurring the
imputation of an irrational credulity, I am about to di-
rect the attention of scientific men to certain very sin-^
gular phenomena, occasionally occurring in cases of ca-
talepsy and somnambulism, which, as it appears to me,
have not, in this country at least, been hitherto suffi-
ciently known or' investigated, although they are un-
questionably calculated to open np many new and most
important views in physiological and psychological
science, if not to operate an entire change upon the
principles established in these departments of know-
ledge. I am aware, indeed, that the facts to be brought
under notice must appear, at first sight, so very extra-
ordinary, and so utterly unaccountable upon any known
philosophical principle, that they will probably be re-
jected by many at once, and, without farther inquiry,*
as absurd and altogether incredible. Some, perhaps.


298 APPJBNDIX, NO. II.

m^y feel disposed to claw them among those deceptions
which, for some selfish porpose, have been frequently
practised upon the credulity of the multitude by em-
pirics and impostors. But before adopting such a
hasty conclusion, it would undoubtedly be more philo-
sophical to consider the character and probable inotives
of the observers — ^to weigh, carefully and impartially,
the eyideiKce by which the facts in question a|*e sup*
p<irted.F9-to reflect attentively upon their connexion
mid analogy with each other — to ascertain the conda-
sions to which they naturally lead, and, if possible, iJie
eauses to which they may be rationally ascribed. Let
us satisfy ourselves, in short, of the credibility of the
authorities, the accuracy of the experiments, and the
reality and unambiguoui^ nature of the fiicts. Let na
rem^nber, too, at the same time, that it is no good
ground for rejecting a fact alleged to have been ob-
served by competent witnesses, that, in the present
state of our knowledge, we cannot immediately exphiin
its cause.

There are more things in Heaven and Earth, Horatio,
Than are dreamt of in our philosophy !

To bo assured, upon satisfactory evidence, that a
lact> however extraordinary it may appear, is true,
ought to be a suffici^it incentive to farther inquiry ;
aad it is only by means of accurate experiments, and a
i^antions inductive investigation, that we cain hope, at


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 299

lengthy to become acquainted with the causes of the
more mysterious plienomena of nature.*

Van Helmont informs us that, at one time, he enter-
tained an opinion, that many strong poisons might be
employed with advantage as remedies, if we only knew
how to regulate the doses, and to administer them at
tl^e prpper time. In order to enable him to ascertain
th^s fact, he resolved tq n^fd^e some e3q>erim^ts upon
himself with the napeUus; and, accordingly, having
rudely prepared a root, he tasted it with the point q|
his tongue. He swallowed none of it, afid spi^ 9)|| a.
good deal of saliva. At first, he felt as if his h^^^ MF9II
bound tightly with a bandage; and soon afterwa|9dji»
the following symptoms occurred :-— He perceived, with
^tpnishmpnt, (hat be i^oi longer heard, thought, knewi
qr imagined anything by mef^is qf the cerebral organs,
bat. tlmt ^ their ordinary ..d pec.]i« fimctio., »p.
pe(^ped ta be transferred to the ^p^Ms^iiiM, or pit of
ti^ stomach* This, he says, he percdved clearly and
distinc|ly, and he paid the greatest attention to it. J{IiB
head stUl retained motion and feeling ; but the reasof^-
ing faculty had passed to the epigtutrium^ as if his v^"
tellect had taken up its residence in that part of the
corporeal organism. Struck with surprise and wonder

* '* Quicqaid oritur, qualecunque est, causam habeat a natura ne*
cease est ; at etiam si praster consaetudinem ezstitent, pnetex natnraBi
tamen non poesit existere. Causam igitur inyestigato in re nova atqne
admirabili, si potes ; si nullam reperies, illud tamen ezploratum liabeto,
l^hii fieri potoisae aJbo^ causa, eu^<|ue terrorem, quern til^ rei i^oritas
^.ttuleiit, ratione natur^ dep^Uito."-r>Cic«^, ^e fHmjMifion^*


300 APPENDIX, NO. II.

at this unusual phenomenon, he studied himself care-
fully, observed all that he experienced, examined all
his ideas, and felt that, during* the whole continuance
of this extraordinary state, his intellect, thus apparently
transferred, possessed more than its usual energy and
acuteness. This state lasted two hours, after which he
experienced two attacks of vertigo. During the first,
he felt that a new change was going on within him ;
and after the. second, he found himself in his ordinary
state. Van Helmont adds, that he afterwards re-
peatedly tried the same experiment with the napellus,
but that he never succeeded in obtaining the same re-
sult.*

This case of Van Helmont may be considered by
some as little more than a common instance of deli-
rium ; and had it stood alone, it would scarcely have
deserved any particular notice. It appears to me, how-
ever, to present some features analogous to those which
have been observed to occur in other cases, to be after-
wards noticed, in which the phenomena were, with some
variations, more decidedly developed ; and I have,
therefore, thought proper to refer to it at the outset,
as probably belonging to the same class, although ex-
hibiting only the incipient stage of that very singular
organic state, of which I have undertaken to demon-
strate the occasional existence.t

* Van Helmont, Demens idea, sect 11, e^ seq,

t I am doubtful whether I ought to include under this description,
that species of ecstatic delirium produced by the respiration of tibe ni-


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 801

These carious observations of Van Helmont do not
appear to have attracted any attention, or given rise to
any experimental investigation, at the time. They
either passed entirely unnoticed, or seem to have been
considered by the learned as a merely fanciful conceit
of this extraordinary and eccentric genius.

About a century and a half after the time of Van
Helmont, however, the singular phenomena he observed
seemed to derive a decisive confirmation, while others
of a still more surprising character were elicited, by
the following experiments which were made in France.

M. Petetin, an eminent physician, and Honorary and
Perpetual President of the Medical Society of Lyons,
made a variety of experiments, with a view to verify
this fact of the transference of the faculties to the epi-

trous oxide gas. Sir Humphry Davy has given the following account
of his sensations, while under the influence of this intoxicating fluid :

<< By d^rees, as the pleasurable sensations increased, I lost all con-
nexion with external things ; trains of vivid visible images rapidly pass-
ed through my mind, and were connected with words in such a man-
ner, as to produce perceptions perfectly novel. I existed in a world
of newly modified ideas. I theorized ; 1 imagined that I made disco-
veries. When I was awakened from this semi-delirious trance, my
emotions were enthusiastic and sublime ; and for a minute I walked
round the room perfectly regardless of what was said to me. As I re-
covered my former state of mind, I felt an inclination to communicate
the discoveries I made during the experiment. I endeavoured to recal
the ideas ; they were feeble and indistinct ; one collection of terms,
however, presented itself; and with the most intense belief and pro-
phetic manner, I exclaimed, Nothing exists but thoughts ! the universe
is composed of impressions, ideas, pleasures, and pains I*'— >i2«««arcAe9,
jfc. London, 1800.


802 * APPENDIX, NO. II.

gastric region. These experimeBts arose from an ac-
cident. He had a cataleptic patient, who appeared to
be, for a long time, in a State of absolute insehsibiHfrf .
No stimulant had any effect upon her ; her eyes and
ears bad entirely lost the power of receiving sensatioiw.
M. Petetin, however, was greatly astonished by the ac-
cidental cKscovery, that she heard him perfectly when
he spoke upon her stomach. Having satisfied hims^
of this fact by repeated trials, he aft^rwai^s perceived
that the case was the same in r^ard to the s^ses of
sight and smell. The cataleptic patient read with tlie
stomach, eVen through an intervening opaque body.
At last, he found that it was not necessary for him to
speak immediately upon the stomach; but that it was
quite sufficient to speak at the extremity of a condnctd^,
of which the other extremity rested upon the stomach
of the patient.*

At the period when these experiments and discove-
ries were made, the doctrines of Animal MagneHsm
had begun to exdte considerable sensation, in conse-
quence of the exertions of Mesmer and his followers.
M. Petetin, however, was by no means an advocate for
the Mesmerian system, of which, at that time, he doles
not appear to have had any experimental knowledge.
On the contrary, his opinion with r^ard to that doe-
trine seems to have coindded pretty nearly with that

* yide Memoirs but la detouverte det plieiioinSiiiJi que pret^tii^l
lacatelepde et le Mnmambulisme, &c Par M. PeCetin, Sec. 1787.


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. • 80S

ooRtahied in the rdport of the^ firs€ French Commift-
8ioner8« The magnetic crises he considered as rery
dangerottS) and ascribed them principally to the in-
fluence of the imagination. He endeavoured to account
inr the singular phenomena evolved by his own expe-
riments^ upon a peculiar theory of animal electricity,
whidi, at a subsequent period, was sufficiently refitited
by M. Lullier WinslOw and others,* and of which,
therefore, it appears unnecessary to tiike any more par-
ticular notice*

Some years afler the puMication 6f the memoir, of
which some account has just been g^ven, M. Peteto
found other cataleptic and sofmnambtdic patients, who
exhibited precisely the same phenom^ia as the formed,
with thitf difference, that, in some of the cases, the fa-
culties were found to be transferred, not only to the
qrigadriwnf but ako to the extremities of die fingers
and toefs;

The fifctliy indeed, which- were brought to light in
the course of these experiments, are of a nature so
very extraordinary and surprising, that We should he-
sitate to admit them as well observed phenomena, with-
out die most clear, unsuspicious and incontrovertible
evidem^ of credible individuals, wdl qualified, in every
respect, for conducting the investigation. I'ortunate-
ly, in the present case, we have not only the advan-

* Fide M. Corvisart't Journal de Medecine, yoL 18tb, for October
1809.


304 , APPENDIX, MO. II.

tage of capable and attentive observers, bat abo the
Goncurrent testimony borne by a great variety of other
instances in which the same appearances were mani-
fested.

The experiments were tried by M. Petetin upon eiffke
di£Perent patients, all of whom exhibited the same plie-
nomenon of the transference of the faculties to the ^-
gastriuntf and to the extremities of the fingers and
toes ; with the addition, as in the case of Van Hel-
mont, of a prodigious development of the intellectual
powers, and a presentiment or foresight of their future
diseased symptoms.

The experiments were conducted in t^e following
manner :

M. Petetin secretly placed pieces of cake, biscuit,
tarts, &c. upon the stomach of one of these patients,
which was immediately followed by the taste of the
particular article in the mouth. When the substance
was enveloped in silk stu£P, no sensation was felt by
the patient ; but the taste was immediately perceived
on removing the covering. An egg was covered over
with varnish, and the patient felt no taste until the var-
nish was removed. One of the patients distinguished
a letter addressed to her, which was folded four times,
inclosed in a semi-transparent box, and held in M. Pe-
tetin's hand upon her stomach.*

* Plutarch relates, tliat a certain governor of Cilicia wished to try
whether the oracle of Mopsus could read, without opening it, a sealed
note, containing the following words : ** Shall I sacrifice to thee a


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. • 305'

A letter was placed npon the fingers of one of the
patients, who immediately said, << If I were not dis^
creet, I could tell you the contents ; bnt to prove that-
I have read it, there are jnst two lines and a half."
The same patient enumerated exactly the most remark-
able articles which were in the pockets of a whole com-
pany.

These phenomena are sufficiently wonderful ; but the
following experiments afforded still more surprising
results. . Another patient, Madame de St Paul, was in
a state of as perfect somnambulism as the preceding,
only that, during the crisis, she was incapable of speak-
ing. She carried on a conversation, however, by means
of signs, with the Chevalier Dolomieu, brother to the
celebrated naturalist, who interrogated her mentally.
" After placing the chain," says M. Petetin, ** upon
the epigastrium of the patient, I gave the ring to M.
Dolomieu. No sooner had this gentleman touched his
lips, than the features of Madame de St Paul expressed
attention. Every question addressed to her mentally
gave a new expression to her countenance, and pro-
duced a g^eat change upon that of the interrogator.
She ended by smiling, and making two approving signs
with her head. M. Dolomieu declared that this lady
had answered categorically to his thoughts."

white or a black ox ?" The oracle returned the note unopened, with
the answer, " black." — Plutarch, On the Cessation of Oracles.

VOL. II. CC


806 APPENDIX, MO. 11.

M. Dolomieu them i;^iie9Ud the p^tiani^ ta answer,
by affirmative or n^ative ugns^ to the questions whieh
he was about to put to her aloudL He succeeded in
makiiig her express that what 1^ had in his pocket was(
a silver sea}, with three sidesy and tjb^ oame of th^ am*
nud f ngraved on his arms*

Finally, it was found, in the course of these expari-
mentSy that if severajl persons ibnn a chain, the last
having his hand upon the stpmajch qI the p^tien^ and
the first, who is at the greatest distaufcei speaks in the
hollow of his hand, the patient will hear perfectly well ;
but will cease to hear even tbp loudest voice, if the
communication between the chain be interrupted by a
stick of sealing*wax.*

The work of M. P^tetin,t in which these remack-
able observations are recorded, was published after hia
death, and contain a variety of other singular facts,
which he still continued to explain upon his favourite
hypotheses of animal dedricUyy although be found rea-

* I am aware that the greater part of these phenomena are sufficient
to stagger all belief; and there may be, individuals who would have been
inclined to pass over the most wonderful of them unnoticed, in order
the more readily to obtain credence for the others. I was unwilling,
however, to exhibit the evidence in an imperfect or garbled state. All
the facts rest upon the same re^ctable testimony — ^^they are all ocn^-
neeted with each other, and have all been witnessed, and ctmsequently
confirmed by other observers ; as I trust I shall be able to prove in the
sequel, to the satisfeiction even of the most sceptical.

t Electricite animate prouvee par la decouverte des phenom^ts
physiques et moraux de la catalepsie hysterique, et de ses varietM, &c.
par M. Petetin. &c. 1806.


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 307

son to change his ofdnion with respect to Animal Mag-
neHsm, aher becoming better acquainted with the sab-
ject. The accuracy of the experiments made by this
aothor, and the truth of the results, have, so far as I
am aware, neyer been called in question. They were
witoiessed and attested by aji the physicians and learn^
ed men in- Lyon» and the ndghbonrhood — by MM.
Goladon, Ginet, Dominjon, Dolomieu, Ballanches, Jac-
quier, liftirtin de Saint-Genis, Eynard, Sec, all of whom
dodared that they had sepeated the experiments upon
Madame de St Paul, and were perfectly convinced of
the reality of the phenomena.

I. shall only add, upon the subject of these experi-
ments, that, in refuting the theory of Petetin, M. Lul-
lier Winslow, in the paper already referred to, admit-
ted the accuracy of the facts, and the identity of the
phenomena with those which occur in the magnetic
practice ; and he invited his brethren to make farther
experiments and observations with a view to confirm
them.

I am not aware that the recommendation of M. Lul-
lier Winslow was immediately attended to in France.
Catalepsy, I believe, is by no means a common disease,
and it is possible, therefore, that opportunities of making
farther experiments, similar to those of M^ Petetin, may
not have occurred to professional men. Some time af-
ter,, however, an account of a very ourious case was
published in Germany by the Baron de Strombeck —


308 APPENDIX, NO. 11.

a case of spontaneous somnambnlism, in which pheoo-'
mena equally remarkable with those recorded by Pe-
tetiu were observed, minuted, and attested, by three
eminent physicians besides the Baron himself.* Upon
first discovering the strange fact of the transference of
the faculties in this case, M. de Strombeck emphatically
observes, that ^^ he was as much horrified as if he had
seen a spectre."

Dr Bertrand, the very respectable author of a work
upon Animal Magnetism and other writings, has shewn
that the same phenomenon repeatedly appeared among
the Quakers (Trembleurs) of the Cevennes, the Nuns
of Loudun, and the Convulsionaries of St Medard.f

* Histoire de la guerisoa d*un jeune personne par le magnetitme ani-
mal produit par la Nature elle>ineme. Par un temoin oculaire.

t Du magnetisme animal en France, par IVI. Bertrand. Paru, 1826.

** L'exorciste Surin, parlant des religieuses de Loudun, dit qu*il
peut jurer devant Dieu et sur son eglise, que plus de deux cents fois
elles lui ont decouvert des cboses tres secretes cachees en sa pensee ou
en sa personne. Ainsi dans I'affaire de Marie Bucaille, cette meme
faculty est egalement mise en avant ; je copie textuellement les deux
passages du factum redige en sa fayeur.

** Le sieur cure de GoUeville rapporte que ladite Buccaille etant dans
une de ses extases, il lui mit une lettre dans la main au sujet de la femme
d'vQ de ses amis qui etait malade ; et qu*aussitot, sans avoir ouvert la
lettre ni entendu ce qu'en lui voulait, elle se mit a offrir II Dieu dM
prieres pour cette personne, qu* elle nomma.

<( Le meme cure rapporte que pendent une autre extase, ayant mis
un autre billet entre ses mains, plie et cachet^, ou un bomme deman-
dait eclaircissement sur plusieurs cboses, elle repondit pertinemment aqx
devandes qui lui etaient faites, sans ouvrir le billet."

Witb regard to tbe Convulsionaries of St Medard, M. Bertrand


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 309

The celebrated German physician and professor, Dr
Joseph Frank, in his very learned work, entitled Prax-
eas MediciB Universce Prcecepta, (Lipsise, 1817,) has
given a long account of a curious and highly interest-
ing case of this description, which occurred in his own
practice, and in which several of the most extraordi-
nary facts mentioned by Petetin were again witnessed
and confirmed by competent observers. From this ac-
count I shall extract such of the particulars as illus-
trate the subject we are now investigating.

Louisa Baerkmann, a married woman, twenty-two
years of age, was delivered of a child, which died soon
after birth. Some time after, the mother was seized
with a violent fever, accompanied with peculiar symp-
toms. She could not endure to be touched or moved,
lay continually upon her back, su£Pered excruciating
pain day and night, and scarcely slept. At first, she
submitted to medical treatment ; but afterwards lost all
confidence in it, and followed the advice of certain em-*
pirics and old women. In consequence of an acciden-
tal fright, in her state of extreme weakness, she he-
quotes the following passage from the work entitled Coup d*cdl sur Us
Contfulsions :

'* Un £ut indubitable, ceitifie par une foule de personnes de merite
et tr^s dignes de fol, qui I'ont vu et examine avec tout le soin et I'at-
tention possibles, est celui d'un convulsionnaire qui reconnait et dis-
tingue par Todorat, au point de lire ce qu'on lui presente, quoiqu'on
lui oouvre ezactement les yeux avec un bandeau tres epais, qui lui
derobe entierement la lumiere. La supercherie ne peut avoir ici de
lieu; nulle mahdie ne saurait poduire cet e£fiBt,"&c. — See Bertrand,
pp. 451y &e.


dtlO APP£NPIX» NO. I|.

came deIirioas» and afterwards exhibited some cataliep-
tic symptoms. The patient, worn to a skeleton, re-.
jected all human advice^ put her wlude trust ia God^
and prayed fervently day and night. After an iatev-
val of a week, her delirium returned, accompanied with
siagmg, and a renewal of the cataleptic symptoms. At
length, she. had two paroxysms every wedk regularly^
between four and. ^ve o'clock in the afternoon, in tiie-
course of whi^ she became first cataleptic, then eoelar
tic, and at last ended by singing, depk>ring her dreadr.
ful state, and praying aid from Heaven. Dr Frimk
was at leng^ called in, and found her in a most de-
plorable condition, almost as if life were extinct. In vain,
he called her by her name, and shook her by the arm.
She appeared to be quite insensible. This state lasted
a short time, and then she recovered^ and. had some
conversation with the Doctor, who consoled h&c as well
as he could, and took his departure. He returned m
the evening, and found h^ again immoveable, and ap-
parently insensible^ with the exception of a obtain slight
motion of the lips, as if she were praying and speak-
ing to herself. In a short time, she began to sing, at
first in a low, and afterwards in a loud and sonorous
voice. The Doctor moved her arms with difficulty,
and they always preserved the position in which he
placed them, howevor incommodious. When the Doc-
tor had witnessed this strange phenomenon fbr half an
hour, he endeavoured in vain to rouse h^, by repeat-


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 321

edly calling to her in a louder and louder tone. Her
eyes were open, but fixed ; the pupil immoveable ; the
eyelids did not wink even at the approach of the finger,
and there were no symptoms of vision. When pierced
with a needle, no sign of pain was obaerved. The ob-
servations of Petetin then occurred to the Doctor ; and
hftyiiig approximated his mouth to the epigastric re-
gion, he.b^an to sp^akin a very low tone of voice,, so
a» not to be heard by any of the bystanders. Imme-
diately, the patient, as if returning to h^r senses^ an-
sw;ei;ed the que^ions pu^t tp h^v^ iiei^rly i^ tihe follow-
ing manner :

Quest. A^e yoi). a^eep ? Am^ I was, bnlb not now.
— QuesL Do y/0|^ ^l any pain ? Ans, As^ usfial, in
the l^gs and loins^.r- Tb^ pidient being now aUowed
tQ,r^pfi|e, sh(^ agaii|,b^^Q]|])9e>cf^t^ptic, and, aft^ a few
n)iq]at^, \^^gm M> #g> .^^ befoi;^ T^e D.octpi? then
attempted tf^ ];o^s^ heripttf^iiSQaJ ma^er, bat qould
not appqfnpli^. hif . pgti^pse. Butt when he i^l^. QpfKi
th^. s^o^aphy ^^ rqciQ^cid, w im^edia^ ^swer. Thus,
the ^p^riment «^C|QQ94/^. twif^, th^ intiierv^s being
fiUei) up with ca|^|K9y an4 singing. The Doctor
4^<4#ri^ thi^ disease to be ecstasy combined with ca-
t^]^9ji;. and be desired to haye:Ui associate, and wit>
q^ i|i.a man ratt^^r^ incredulqiis, and not readily dis-
posf^ci to admit the reality of sti^ge phenomena, vi&
Andrew Sntadecki, professor of dietmistry, and, at the
same tiu^ a skjlfill pHyjieiwi. N/axt day, aboul five


312 APPENDIX, NO, II.

o'clock in the afternoon, the whole scene of the previous
day was repeated in his presence.

On the following day, she again answered when*
spoken to, in a very low tone, upon the stomach ; and she
also answered, when spoken to by M. Sniadecki in a low
tone, near the right ear; hot she did not seem to hear
when any one spoke npon the pillow on which her head
rested. She answered when an iron rod, a yard and a
half in length, was applied tocher right ear, M. Sniadecki
speaking, in a low tone, at the other extremity of it.
M. Niszkowski repeated the same experiment, with the
same success, applying the rod to the osfrontis.

Upon another occasion, when several physicians were
present, Dr Barankiewicz interrogated the patient, but
received no answer. Dr Frank then requested this
gentleman to give him his hand, he (Frank) keeping
his other hand constantly upon the epigastric region.
Dr Barankiewicz now asked her : '< Who am I ?" She
immediately answered : '* Dr Barankiewicz,'* although
she had not previously perceived him enter the room.
A cloth moistened with a solution of sugar in water*
was applied to the pit of the stomach, and she was ask-
ed what it was. She answered that it was sug^ared
water ; and being again asked how she came to know
this, she said that she felt a sensation of moist heat as-
cending from that region to the tongue, which imme-
diately became a£Pected with a feeling of sweetness.
The doth was removed, and she awoke. She was then:


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 313

asked what it wa8 that had been placed upon the epi-
gastric region, and she answered that it was something
moist, but she could not tell what.

At another time, the persons present formed a chain,
each holding a hand of the other, Dr Frank placing one
of his upon the epigastrium of the patient, and giving
the other to Sniadecki. She answered the questions
put to her by all, and named them in their order.
Wlien the Doctor's hand was removed from the epi-
gastrium, she could hear nothing ; but when it was re-
placed, she again heard and answered questions.

I must refer the reader to the work of Dr Frank for
many other particulars of this curious case, which is
altogether exceedingly interesting, recorded with great
minuteness of observation, and a£Pords a strong confir-
mation of the results of Petetin's experiments. We
find in it the transference of the faculties of hearing
and sight to the epigastric region, and other parts of
the body ; of that of taste to the epigastrium ; and the
experiment of the chain succeeded in this instance, as
in those mentioned by Petetin. The respectability of
the learned Doctor, and of the other medical gentlemen
who witnessed the phenomena, precludes all suspicion
of imposition or deception. I may add, that, in former
times, this case would probably have been considered as
one of d^noniacal possession. The patient was cured.*

* Jos. Frank, Praz. Med. Univ. Prtecepta, Part ii. vol. i. pp. 495, Sec
VOL. II. D d


314 APPENDIX, NO. II.

Some years ago, a very curious memoir upon this
snbjeet was read in the Philomathic Society, at Paris,
by M. Francoeur, the distinguished mathematidan, who
had recently returned from the waters of Aix, where
he had been in the habit of assodating with several re-
spectable physicians, and particuhurly with M. Deqiine>
prinoipal physician to the establishment. These gentle*
men mentioned to him that they had witnessed, during
several months^ the extraordinary phenomenon of the
transference of the senses, and M. Franoceur thought
himself bound to communicate their observations to the
Society.

The foUowing is the substance of the observations of
M. Despine : —

In the first case, the patient, who was the subject of
it, had the fiusulties of sight, hearing, and smelling'
transferred to the fingers and toes.

The second case is a g^at deal more curious. It is
that of the daughter of M. R., a man of education, and
miich respected by all the inhabitants of the town of
Grenoble, where be lived retired. He was much af-
fected by his daughter's indisposition, which he made
every effort to conceal, and dedined the visits of the
inquisitive.

Among the different phenomena successively mani-
fested by Mademoiselle A., and whidi Dr Despine has
desoribed at considerable length, he dwells particularly
upon that of somnambulism. M. Bertrand, in his work


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 315

already referred to, has transcribed the fbllowing pas-
sage, relative to the transference of the seat of the
senses of sight, of hearing, and of smelling.

** Not only did our patient liear with the palm of the
hand, but we saw her read without the assistance of
the eyes, by means of the extremities of ike fingers
alone, which she moved with rapidity above the page
she wished to read, ^d without touching it, as if to
multiply the sentient surfaces ; — she read, I say, a
whole page of Madame J!i|ontolieu'j3 romaincje, entitled
Les ChcOeauss en Sf/u^se. In the page there wc^^ three
proper names, of which she probitbly had never heatA.
and which she pronounced as conreetly as a reiider in
the Academy. At otjier times, we saw her seloist fr^m
amongst a packet of upwards of thirty letters? .ope wUch
had been preyipusly pointed out to her ;— -rei^ npKm
the dial-i^ate an4 through the glass tibe hour in^csivted
by a wa^h ;-^opeii the W4»tch, wind it up, and set it ;
—write several J[ettei?i (three pf them a^e in my pos-
session) ; — correct, up^n a reperusal, the errors which
had escaped her, always wiith the potints of her fingers ;
— ^re-copypne of her letters, word fpr word, reading
with her left elbow, while she wrote with her ri^t
hand. We heard her describe the smell (of which the
nostrils simulated the impression) and the species of
Slick and such a flower, the leaves of which were placed
in the palm of her hand. During all the experiments,
a screen of Ijhiick pasteboard intercepted, in the strict-


316 APPENDIX, NO. II.

est manner, every visual ray which might otherwise
have reached her eyes.

<< The same phenomena were manifested at the soles
of the feet, the epigastrium, and, indeed, all the diffe-
rent parts of the surface of the hody."*

Doctor Delptt, in a curious memoir on two nervous
affections, inserted in the Biblioiheque Medicale^ has re-
corded a case very similar to that observed by Dr De-
spine.

<< One of the patients,*' says this author, <^ read very
distinctly when her eyes were entirely closed to the
light, by conducting her fingers over the letters, I
made her read in this way, whether by day-light, or
in the most profound darkness^ printed characters, by
opening the first book which came to my hand ; and
sometimes written characters, by presenting to her notes
which I had prepared on purpose before I went to her.
Was it the sense of touch which supplied that of siglit ?
I know not ; but I affirm that she read quite fluently
by conducting her fingers along the letters. One day
she even pretended that, with a little more exertion
(I quote her own expressions), she should be able to
read with her toes."t


* Bertrand, p. 458, et seq.

•f* Bertrand, pp. 462, 463.—Upon tbe same aathority, I maj mea.
tion that, in the short reflections made by Dr Delpit upon these e:q>eri-
meats, a reference is made to several known authors, and particuUtrly
to Dumas. ** Five years ago,*' says this celebrated author, ** a young


TRANSFEUENCE OF SENSATION. 317

The case of Miss M'Avoy of Liverpool, which oc-
curred a good many years ago, and occasioned a great
deal of acrimonious discussion, presented phenomena
perfectly analogous to the two preceding.

This young lady was about fifteen years of age, and
became blind in the month of June 1816. In the mid-

iady of the department of Ardeche, who had come to Montpellier in
order to consult the physicians about an hysterical affection accompa-
nied with catalepsy, presented an instance of a strange phenomenon.
She experienced, during the whole continuance of her attacks, such a
concentration of the sensibility in the precordial region, that the organs
of the senses appeared to be entirely fixed there ; she referred to the
stomach all her sensations of sight, hearing, and smelling, which were
not, at these times, produced in the usual organs. This rare pheno-
menon, observed in a person so interesting, became an object of atten-
tion to medical men, and of curiosity to the public.'*

(Van Ghert, in his account of the magnetic treatment of the De •
moiselle B., mentions a similar circumstance. In that case he observed
the transference of the faculties to the pit of the stomach ; and the pa-
tient gave the following description of her feelings :— .** When you fix
your thoughts intensely upon me, I can see every thing ; at these
times, the eyes and the brain leave my head, and take up their resi-
dence beside the stomach. Wonderful as this may appear, I assure
you that it is true. . When I am startled, or you are disturbed, then
the eyes and the brain return to my head.'*— ^rcAto./ur den thierisch.
Magnet, vol. ii. No. I9 p. 70.)

** I do not dissemble,'* continues M. Delpit, ** that facts of this de-
scription, opposed to all the known laws of nature, should not easily
and without restriction obtain the assent of men of sober and experi-
enced minds. But if we multiply our observations of this kind, — if we
scmpuloady verify the most minute circumstance of each case, we shall
be forced to recognise the possibility of a phenomenon, which, perhaps,
only i^pears so marveUous in consequence of our want of a sufficient
number of analc^ous hct» to enable us to institute a comparison.*'-—
See BxBTBAND, pp. 436, fro.


318 APPENDIX, NO. II.

die of the month of Octoher of that year, she acciden-
tally discoyered, for the first time, that she was able
to read when she felt the letters of a book with her
fingers. The following experiments were made upon
her: —

Her eyes were bandaged in such a manner as to
exclude every ray of light. Six wafers of difFerent co-
lours, placed between two plates of glass, were present-
ed to her, and she named exactly the colour of eadi.
When she touched the surfieice of the glass abore die
red wafer, she was asked whether that which was be-
neath might not be a piece of red doth or paper ? She
answered, *< No, I think it is a wafer." She described
the colour and figure of a triangular or semi-circular
piece of wafer, placed, in a similar manner, between
two plates of glass. She named the seven prismatic
colours, which were painted upon a piece of paper, and
said that the perception of these prismatic colours af-
forded her the greatest pleasure she had experienced
since her blindness. The violet ray was the least
agreeable to her.

She read several lines of small print by touching the
letters ; and she afterwards read, by means of a convex
glass, at a distance of nine inches from the book. When
she read, she touched the surface of the glass gently
with the points of her fingers. A penknife was laid
upon the line she was reading, and she immediately
perceived and named it. She could distinguish cut-


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 819

glass from rock-crystal, and pronounced several pieces
of ornamdnty which had previously been considered as
crystal, to be glass, which was afterwards confirmed.
Several other experibients were made, in this case,
which it appears unnecessary to particularise. At cer-
tain times, she possessed this power of distinguishing
colours and objects more perfectly than at others*
Sometimes it disappeared entirely, and, indeed, sudden-
ly; and, upon these occasions, every thing appeared
to her to be black. This sudden change she compi(red
to that which she recollected to have experienced when
a candle was extinguished, and she was left in dark-
ness.

It does not appear that Miss M'Avoy could have
had any conceivable motive for deception, even admit-
ting that, with all the precautions that were taken du-
ring the experiments, any such deception had been pos-^
sible. Her health was very infirm, and her disposition
sensitive. The slightest noise was exceedingly disagree-
able to her ; and some of those persons whom curio-
sity brought to see her, did not always treat her with
that delicacy which was due to her sex and circum-
stances.

The case of Miss M^Avoy excited a good deal of sen-
sation among the physiologists ; and a keen controversy
arose between the believers and the sceptics. The phe-
nomenon was declared by the latter to be contrary to
all the known laws of nature and philosophy, — ^fact,


320 APPENDIX, NO. II.

therefore, must bend to theory and preconceived opi-
nion, — the thing was impossible and could not be tmey
— ^the whole business, in short, was pronoanced to be
mere deception, and the yoong lady herself an arrant
impostor. This reasoning, however, did not shake the
conviction of many of those individuals who had wit-
nessed the experiments, — investigated the whole cir-
cumstances, — and satisfied themselves of the reality of
the facts.*

Another case of catalepsy occurred very recently,
and appears to have presented phenomena in all re-
spects similar to those already described. I regret ex-
ceedingly to find myself under the necessity of giving
the particulars of this very curious case at third hand,
in consequence of having no access to the original
sources. The following account, therefore, is extract-
ed from the London Medical and Surgical Journal for
December 1832, which professes to have borrowed it
from the French Gazette MedUxde of the previous
month.

" In a late number of the Bulletin of Medical Sciences
of Bologna, there are details of the case of a young
man treated in the Hospital deUa Vita, in the month of
September last, to which, indeed, uo credence could
be given, were they not furnished by persons of cha-

* See the pamphlets published upon this occasion by Dr Renwick,
Mr Egerton Smith, and others. Also, Thomson's Annah of PhilO"
iophify and the PhUasophieal Magazine for February 1818.


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 321

racter, and Hkely to have taken due precautions against
probable imposition. This man, who was of short sta-
ture, but well organized, and born of healthy parent^,
laboured under mental anxiety for some time previous
to the 25th of July last, when, in affording aid to a per-
son attacked with convulsions, his arm was grasped by
the individual, and firmly held for a long time. From
the impression produced by this last event, his health
began to be affected, and he suffered particularly in the
lower extremities.

" On the 15th of August, the following symptoms
took place, which recurred, for the most part, in a ter-
tian type, and regularly at a particular hour. After a
most violent agitation of all the muscles, those of the
face excepted, intense coldness of the extremities, hurr
ried respiration, and other avant-^sowriersy the man be-
came insensible to surrounding objects ; ceased to reply
to questions, though put to him in a loud voice ; sus-
pension of vision, taste, and sense of smell ; the skin
insensible to pain when pinched, except at the epigas-
trium and palms of the hands, where feeling seemed to
remain in all its energy. These symptoms usually last-
ed for about an hour and twenty minutes, and the pa-
tient had no recollection afterwards of any thing that
occurred during the fit.

*< The most surprising part of the history, however,
is, that he answered questions, when put to him in a low
voice, provided the mouth of the speaker was placed


322 APPENDIX, NO. II.

Aear the epigastrium ; and during thSs trials great care
seems to have been taken, by plagging, baodagingy &c.
to block up the passages of the ears. He seems to have
been capable of indicating, during the access, the na-
ture of certain bodies when applied to the epig^trinm,
or palms of the hands. It is stated, that, when desired
(the voice of the speaker being directed to the part in-
dicated), he would open his hands, which were firmly
denched during the fit. By the latest accounts, die
disease seemed to have been mollified,** &c by medical
treatment.

£ven in the meagre details which are g^ven of this
case in the account referred to, we cannot fiul to reoog-
nise a striking resemblance between the facts observed,
and those which occurred in the experiments of Pete*
tin, as well as in all the other cases which have been
particularly noticed. In all of them, the functions of
the usual organs of sense appear to have been suspend-
ed, and transferred to the epigastrium and the extremi-
ties. There are, no doubt, pretty strong shades of
difference between some of these cases ; but in all, I
think, the facts present analogous features, sufficient to
entitle the phenomena to be arranged in the same class.

Here, then, perhaps I may be permitted to pause and
inquire, whether, in the curious observation of Van
Helmont, — in the phenomena exhibited by some of the
Quakers of the Cevennes, the nuns of Loudun, and the
convulsionaries of Saint Medard, — ^in the numerous,


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 823

minate, and careful experiments made by Dr Petetin,
— ^in the other eight cases to which I have referred
more or less at large ; — whether, I say, in the instances
and observations I have ab*eady brought forward, the
fact in question has not been folly and satisfactorily es-
tablished* The phenomena themselves were unambi-
guous and obtrusive. The cases in which they were
manifested, it may be remarked, occurred at different
periods, and in different countries, — ^in France, Ger-
many, EJngland, and Italy ; and they were all witness-
ed and recorded by the most competent observers, —
medical men of eminence in their profession, — without
any possible concert amongst each other ; many of them,
indeed, apparently ignorant of the observations of their
predecessors, and stumbling upon the astonishing dis-
covery, as it were, by mere accident.

But I have hitherto adduced scarcely one-half of the
evidence upon record, with which I am acquainted, in
support of the existence of this extraordinary pheno-
menon ; and, in the farther prosecution of this interest-
ing investigation, I shall not hesitate to avail myself of
the light thrown upon it by the professors of Animal
Magnetism ; because, whatever differences of opinion
may prevail in the views entertained upon this subject,
considered as matter of theory, or whatever doubts
may be expressed with rogard to the propriety or the
efficacy of the magnetic treatment, as a sanative pro-
cess, every intelligent and competent judge now admits


324 APPENDIX, NO. II.

that the most important facts, which are alleged to oc-
cur in the coarse of that practice, have been abundant*
ly confirmed by evidence of the most irresistible co-
gency.

M. Tardy de Montravel* found that, during the mag-
netic somnambulism, in some cases, the r^on of the
stomach was the seat of the sensitive faculties, and par-
ticularly of the sight. A somnambulist recognised the
hour upon a watch, which was pressed close to the pit
of his stomach. This species of perception was at first
imperfect, but gradually became more and more dis-
tinct.

Dr Gmelinf made some interesting experiments, in
order to verify this fact. He drew a card out of a
mixed pack, and pressed the coloured side of it dose
upon the pit of the stomach of a somnambulist, so that
no person could distinguish it. He then asked the som-
nambulist what card it was, and she answered that.it
was a pictured one. Some time after, she could dis-
tinguish whether it was a king, a queen, or a knave ;
she afterwards named the colour, and, at leng^ men-
tioned whether it was diamonds, clubs, &c. Upon look-
ing at the card, she was always found to be in the right ;
and the result was always the same, when, to satisfy
the sceptical, the eyes of the somnambulist were ban-
daged. M. Tardy abo mentions the case of a somuam-

* Traitement Magnet, de la Dem, N*, vol. i.
f Material, fur die Anthropol.y yol. ii.


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 325

bulist, who, with her eyes completely bandaged, so as
to exclude the light, could read writings which were
strange and unknown to her, provided they were placed
close to the pit of her stomach.* When the somnam-
bulists have cultivated this faculty by frequent exercise,
it is no longer necessary to bring the object to be re-
cognised into immediate contact with the patient ; it is
then quite sufficient if it is held, at some distance, op-
posite to the pit of the stomach.f When this faculty
becomes still more developed, somnambulists, it is said,
can even distinguish objects through other intervening
bodies, provided these be not electrical, such as sealing-
wax, sUk, &c.

The following case is very remarkable in many re-
spects ; and the rank and character of the party, upon
whose authority it rests, render it impossible for us to
entertain the slightest doubt with regard to the truth
of the facts related ; while the situation and known pro-
bity of the patient preclude all suspicion of deception.
It occurs in a letter addressed by his Excellency the
Russian Count Panin, formerly Imperial Ambassador
at the Court of Prussia, to a society in Paris.j: I pro-
pose to extract from this letter such passages only as
bear upon the point of the transference of the faculties.

James Macgill, a Scotsman, 46 years of age, and of
a phlegpnatic temperament, had been more than twelve

* Tardy, ut supra, t Gmelio, ut supra,

X See the Biblioih, du Magnet. Animal, voL iii. p. 126.


326 APPENDIX, NO. II.

years in the Count's service, in the capacity of g^de-
ner, and was much esteemed by his master. He was
always remarkable for his love of truths and his ab-
horrence of falsehood.

While in the serrice of the Count, Macgill had al-
ways enjoyed good health ; but in the month of May
1817, having gone upon a journey on some business of
his master's, the horses ran down a declivity, and over-
turned the chariot, one of the wheels of which passed
over his body. The fright and the shock occasioned
by the fall, together with some considerable contusions,
rendered bleeding advisable; but, unfortunately, no*
body thought of it, and Macgill had recourse only to
palliatives. No advice was to be had, and two months
elapsed before the patient had an opportunity of con-
sulting an Ejnglish physician, who resided in the neigh-
bouring town. Before the arrival of the Count, Mac-
gill had taken a great deal of medicine without e£Pect ;
and upon being questioned, the physician candidly con-
fessed that he could not tell the nature of the gardener^?
complunt. The latter derived no benefit from the
frictions, pills, and other remedies which were admi-
nistered to him. He was extremely emaciated, and
could not eat or drink without experiencing violent
pains in the intestines. In these circumstances, the
Count resolved to attempt a cure by means of Anmud
Magnetism. From this resolution he was not deterred
by the presence of one of the Bmperor's physicaani, a


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 827

man of high repatation, the English Dr Orichton, who
was then upon a visit to a relation of the Count's in the
neighhourhood.

AjBter a consultation with the two able physicians re-
ferred ]to, upon the nature of this disease, which ap-
peared to be both very serious and difficult to define,
they declared that the man's recovery was very doubt-
ful. The Count afterwards ascertained that Ihese two
medical gentlemen did not conceal that they considered
the case to be a desperate one.

Upon the Count's recommendation, the patient now
repounced all medical prescriptions ; and the following
are some of the results of the treatment to which he
was subjected, and which terminated successfully in a
complete cure.

At the thir4 sitting (28th September 1817), between
one and two o'clock in the afternoon, Macgill entered
into ^e Mate of somnambulism, after having been ma-
nipulatod about fifteen minutes ; apd soon after, he was
able to answer questions. HU first answers, however,
were rather incoherent. A gold ring having been
plac^ n|»on the pit of his stomach, he was asked what
it was. He answered that it was a ring ; bnt he could
not discover the colour of it, and took it for lead. Du*
ring all this time, the patient's eyos w:ere completely
doaed.

A^ Ae fourth sitting, a^ Eight (^ Hearts was applied
to the pit «f die patienf.i stomadi. He did not recognise


328 APPENDIX, NO. II.

it, but took it for a bound book. He saw a watch when
placed in the same sitnation. He perceived the silrer
dial-plate and the hands, but could not tell the hour.
Some moments afterwards, having been more effectually
magnetised, he recognised a card applied to his stomach,
called it first the Qtieen of Diamonds, but almost im-
mediately correcting himself, he said that it was the
King^ which was the fact.

At the fifth sitting, several cards were successively
applied to the pit of his stomach, and he recognised
them all with more facility, and less hesitation, than the
day before. At first, he mentioned the colour of the
cards and of the marks impressed upon them, then their
number, &c.

At the sixth sitting, a packet of calomel powdei:.was
applied to the pit of his stomach, and he was asked
what he saw. He answered, without hesitation, that
it was calomel, such as is prepared by the apothecaries ;
that it was divided into five small packets, and he de-
scribed precisely the colour of the powder.

At the seventh sitting, a mixed powder, which he
was to take as a medicine, was placed upon the pit of
his stomach, and he exactly described the colour of the
powder, although inclosed in paper.

Such are a few of the phenomena described by Count
Panin, in his very interesting letter. The characters
of the Count and of his patient, together with their
relative situation, preclude all suspicion of deception in


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 329

this case; the whole narrative contains only a plain
statement of facts, without any attempt at embellish-
ment ; and these facts are analogous to a number of
others, reported by different obserrers, all belonging
to the same class.

In proceeding to the next case, J would beg leave to
recal to the recollection of the reader, the particulars
related, not only by Petetin, but by the Doctors Des-
pine and Delpit, and others, who describe the faculties
as having been apparently transferred, not merely to
the epigcutriumy but also to the extremities, as well as to
other prominent parts of the body.

The celebrated Professor Kieser of Jena, an eminent
anatomist and physiologist, and, otherwise, a man of
extensive and varied acquirements, has given very
ample and minute details of a most remarkable case of
magnetic somnambulism, which occurred in the course
of his own practice. This account is much too long to
be given entire, besides that a g^eat part of it is irrele-
vant to our present purpose. I shall, therefore, extract
from it only such of the particulars as have a direct re-
ference to the subject I am now investigating.*

Anthony Arst, the son of a shoemaker in Jena, aged
eleven years and a half, was constitutionally subject to
frequent and severe attacks of epilepsy. The professor,
finding that the disease would not yield to the ordinary

* Archiv,fur dem tkieritehem MagnetumuSi vol. iii. No. 2.
VOL. II. E e


830 APPENDIX, NO. ii:

remedies, determined to subject the patient to the mag-
netic treatment. He was accordingly magnetised, and,
after a considerable period, placed in a state of somnaiii-*
buUsm. This appeared, at first, in the form of a aimple
sleep, accompanied with various other phenomena, —
such as convulsions, catalepsy, ietanuij risus tartbmicusy
St Vitus's dance, — ^until, at length, the somnambulism
became perfect. While in this state, the visual power
of the eye appeared to be completely annihilated, and
the faculty of vision transferred to the whole surfiMse of
the patient's body, but especially to Uie more promi-i
nent parts. He saw distinctly with the points of his
fingers, with the toes, the elbows, the shoulders, the
abdominal r^on, the point of his nose, the chin, and
the surface of the face. I^ was remarked, however,
that this somnambulist required light in order to enable
him to exercise this transferred faculty of vision, and
that he could not see in the dark. But it was perfectly
well ascertained that he did not see in the usual manner,
as his eyes were closely bandaged.

These facts must, unquestionably, excite great sur-
prise in the minds of all those who come, for the first
time, to the investigation of this curious subject. The
scientific reputation, however, and the honourdbie cha-
racter of the learned professor, afibrd a sufficient guar
rantee for his veracity ; and we have not the slightest
reason to suspect imposition or deception in the phe-
nomena which he so carefully observed. In a demon-


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 331

stration of this nature, too, ce fiest que h premier pas qui
eoute ; — if we have once satisfied ourselves of the pos-
sibility of the transference of a particular faculty from
its usual and appropriate organ to one part of the or-
ganism, we can have less difficulty in conceiving that,
in peculiar circumstances, it may be also transferred to
others. Besides, a vast variety of other instances of
'the same phenomena, which are more or less curious
and interesting, will be found in the works of Pete-
tin, Puyseg^r, CauUet de Veaumorel, MouiUesaux,
Gmelin, Heinecken, Wienliolt, and a number of other
authors.

I should be afraid of exceeding all reasonable bounds,
were I to proceed to enumerate all those particular in-
stances in which this phenomenon of the transference
of the faculties has been observed. Hitherto, I have
been careful to bring forward only such cases as have
been recorded by individuals of competent attainments,
and whose characters are, otherwise, above all suspicion.
I am perfectly aware that, in demonstrating the exist-
ence of a fact so extraordinary and incredible as this,
Ibe naaxim of the lawyers peculiarly applies, Testimonia
ponderanda nmi numeranda ; — the character of the wit-
nesses is a matter of much more importance than their
number ; and, therefore, I have been particularly care-
ful in the selection of my authorities. In the only two
other cases which I propose to adduce, I shall rigidly
adhere to the same rule. These two instances arc not


332 APPENDIX, NO. II.

only exceedingly remarkable in themselved^ but tbey
are supported by sucb evidence as even the most aoep-
tical, I should think, would hesitate to reject* Thej
are extracted from the late very able and impartial
Report, — already submitted to the reader, — of nine
French physicians of eminence, members of the Royal
Academy of Medicine, who were appointed a commit-
tee to investigate anew the reality of the phenomena of
Animal Magnetism. The extreme caution with which
these intelligent gentlemen conducted their experiments,
and observed the results, would, of itself, a£Ford an
ample security against any species of deception or im-
posture. I must quote the passages having reference
to the subject in question at full length ; lest, amidst
the various interesting matter contained in the Report,
they should not have been perused with that attention
which their importance deserves.

M. Petit was magnetised, in presence of the com-
mittee, upon the 15th of March 1826, at half-past eight
o'clock in the evening, and was set asleep in the space
of about one minute. The committee were determined
to assure themselves that the eyelids were exactly
closed. " For this purpose," in the words of the Re-
port, *< a candle was almost constantly held, during the
experiments, before the eyes of M. Petit, at a distance
of one or two inches ; and several persons had their
eyes continually fixed upon his. None of us could per-
ceive the slightest separation of the eyelids. M. Ribes,


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 388

indeed, remarked that tbeir edges were superimposed
so that the eye-lashes crossed each other.

« We also examined thestate of the eyes, which were
forcibly opened without awakening the somnambulist ;
and we remarked that the pupil was turned downwards,
and directed towards the great angle of the eye.

<' After these preliminary observations, we proceeded
to rerify the phenomena of vision with the eyes closed.

** M. Ribes, member of the Academy, presented a
catalogue which he took from his pocket. The som-
nambulist, after some efforts which seemed to fatigue
him, read very distinctly the words : Lavater. II est
bien difficile de connaitre ks hommes. The last words
were printed in very small characters. A passport
was placed under his eyes ; he recognised it, and called
it a passe-homme. Some moments afterwards, a port
d'armes was substituted, which we all know to be in
almost all respects similar to a passport, and the blank
side of it was presented to him. M. Petit, at first,
could only recognise that it was of a particular figure,
and very like the former. A few moments afterwards,
he told us what it was, and read distinctly the words :
De-par le roi, and on the left, port (Tarmes. Again, he
was shewn an open letter ; he declared that he could
not read it, as he did not understand English. In fact,
it was an English letter.

** M. Bourdois took from his pocket a snuff-box, up-
on which there was a cameo set in gold. At first the


334 APP£NDIX| NO. II.

somnambulist coald not see it distinctly ; he said that
the gold setting dazzled him. When the setting was
covered with the fingers, he said that he saw the em-
blem of Fidelity. When pressed to tell whal this em-
blem was, he added : * I see a dog — he is as if on hit
hind legs before an altar.' This, in fact, was what was
represented.

" A closed letter was presented to him : He could
not discover any of its contents. He only followed the
direction of the lines with his finger : But he easily
read the address, although it contained a pretty diffi-
cult name : To M. de Rockenstroh.

" All these experiments were extremely htigamg to
M. Petit. He was allowed to repose for an instant :
Then, as he was very fond of play, a game at cards
was proposed for his relaxation. As much as the ex-
periments of pure curiosity seemed to annoy him, with
so much the more ease and dexterity did he perform
whatever gave him pleasure, and this he entered into
of his own accord,

*< One of the gentlemen present, M. Raynal, former-
ly Inspector of the University, played a game at piquet
with M. Petit, and lost it. The latter handled his cards
with the greatest dexterity, and without making any
mistake. We attempted several times in vain to set
him at fault, by taking away or changing some of his
cards. He counted with surprising facility the points
marked upon his adversary's marking card.


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 335

*^ Daring all this time, we never ceased to examine
the eyes, and to hold a candle near them ; and we al-
ways found them exactly closed. We remarked, how-
ever, that the hall of the eye seemed to move under
the eyelids, and to follow the different motions of the
hands. Finally, M. Bourdois declared that, accord-
ing to all human probability, and as far as it was pos-
sible to judge by the senses, the eyelids were exactly
dosed/*

After some other experiments, M. Dnpotet played
a g^ame at ecarie with M. Petit, while still in a state of
soratiambulism, in order to divert hiin. The latter
played with the same facility and dexterity as before,
and with similar success.

The other case reported by. the Committee of the
Royal Academy of Sciences, is that of Paul ViUagp'and,
student of law, who had an attack of apoplexy, which
was followed by paralysis of the whole left side. In
this case, the magnetic treatment was pursued with
remarkable success. The following phenomena were
obserred with regard to his exercise of the faculty of
Tition.

*' Upon the 12th of January, your committee met
again at the house of M. Foissac, where there were
present M. El Lazcase, deputy, M. De , aide'de-

camp to the king, and M, Segalas, member of the Aca-
demy. M. Foissac told us, that he was going to set
Paul asleep, that in this state of somnambulism a finger


336 APPENDIX, NO. II.

should be applied to each of his closed eyes, and thai,
in spite of this complete occlusion, of the eyelids, he
should distinguish the colour of cards, that he should
read the title of a work, and even some words or lines
pointed out at random in the body of the work. At *
the end of two minutes of magnetic manipulations, Panl
fell asleep. The eyelids being kept closed, constantly
and alternately by MM. Fouquier, Itard, Marc, and the
reporter, there was presented to him a pack of new
cards, from which the paper covering bearing the go-
vernment stamp was torn o£F. The cards were shuffled,
and Paul easily and successively recognised the King
of Spades, the Ace of Clubs, the Queen of Spades, the
Nine of Clubs, the Seven of Diamonds, and. Queen of
Diamonds, and the E^ght of Diamonds.

<< While his eyelids were kept closed by M. S^^alas,
there was presented to him a volume which the report-
er had brought along with him. He read upon the
title-page : Histoire de Prance. He could not read the
two intermediate lines, and upon the fifth he read only
the name, Anquetil, which is preceded by the preposi-
tion par. The book was opened at the 89th page, and
he read in the first line — le nambre de ses — he passed
over the word traupes^ and continued : Au tncmeni au
on le croyait occupi desphmrs du camaval. He also
read the running title Louis, but could not read the
Roman cypher which follows it. A piece of paper was
presented to him, upon which were written the words,


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 337

Agglutination and Magnetisme Animal. He spelt the
first, and pronounced the two others. Finally, the
proceS'VerbcU of this sitting was presented to him, and
he read very distinctly the date and some words which
were more legihly written than the others. In all these
experiments the fingers were applied to the whole of
the commissure of hoth eyes, by pressing down the
upper iipon the under eyelid, and we remarked that the
ball of the eye was in a constant rotatory motion, and
seemed directed towards the object presented to his
vision.

<' Upon the 2d of February, Paul was placed in a
state of somnambulism in the house of Messrs Scribe
and Bremard, merchants, Rue St Honor6. The re-
porter of the committee was the only member present
at this experiment. The eyelids were closed as before,
and Paul read, in the work entitled The Thtmrnnd and
One Nights, the title-page, the word Preface and the
first line of the preface, with the exception of the word
peu* There was' also presented to him a volume en-
titled, Letires de deux amies, par Madame Campan, He
distinguished on a print the figure of Napoleon ; he
pointed out the boots, and said that he also saw two
female figures. He then read currently the four first
lines of the third page, with the exception of the word
raviver. Finally, he recognised, without touching them,
four cards, which were successively presented to him

VOL. II. F f


398 APPENDIX, n6. ii.

two and two, — ^these were the King of Spades and the
Erght of Hearts, -the King and Qneen of Clabs.

^* At another sitting, which took place npon the Idth
of March following, Paul attempted in rain to distinguish
different cards which were applied to the pit of the
stomach ; but he read, with his eyes still dosedv in a
hook opened at random, and, at thid time, it was M.
Jules Cloquet who kept his eyes shut. The reporter
also wrote upon a slip of paper these words, MctximUien
Robespierre^ which he read equally well."

The two cases last referred to, are assuredly very
remarkable, and they appear to hare been observed
with uncommon care and attention, and every possible
precaution. Nothing, indeed, is there said of that trans-
ference of the faculties which, as we have seen, is re*
ported to have been manifested in various other in-
stances : and, with the exception of one unsuccessful
attempt in the last case, no experiments seem to have
been made with the view of ascertaining the existence
of that phenomenon. But the circumstance of its not
having occurred or been observed in either of these
two cases, affords no good ground for suspecting its
reality in others. The phenomena occasionally de-
veloped in catalepsy and somnambulism, although, upon
the whole, of a pretty uniform character, and capable
of being arranged under one class, are exceedingly va-
riable in different individuals ; depending, probably, in
a great degree, upon the perfection or imperfection of


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 339

the crisis, as well as upon the particular idiosyncrasy
of the patient. M, Rostan, in his article Magnetisme
Animaly inserted in the new Dictionnaire de Medecine,
mentions that he observed a somnambulist, who told
him, exactly and repeatedly, the hour indicated by a
watch placed behind his head. The celebrated physio-
logist Dr Georget also affirmed, that he had observed
a somnambulist who presented the most astonishing
phenoniena of prevision and clairvoyance ; inson^nch,
he added, that in no work upon Magnetism, not even
that of Petetin, had he ever met with any thing -more
extraordinary, nor even in all the other instances which
he himself had witnessed. It is quite clear, indeed,
from the description given of the state of the eyes of
the patients, in the two cases reported by the French
Academicians, that they could not possibly have exer-
cised the faculty of vision in the usual manner ; and
this fact being once admitted, we can feel less difficulty
in assenting to the reality of the phenomena which have
been observed to occur in other instances.^

* The following curious particulars appeared in the Morning Chro-
nicle of the 28th March last, and in other newspapers.

** Bow Street, Second »^A<.-— Thomas M*Kean, the father of the
boy who has made so much impression by his gift of the second siffht,
was yesterday charged at this office, &c.

" Mr Bumaby, the derk, having mentioned that the youth gifted
with second sight was in the office, Mr Halls (the magistrate) express «
ed a wish to witness a little of his mysterious powers. His father then
blindfolded him ; and Mr Burnaby, taking out his watch, the feither
asked him of. what metal it was composed. He promptly answered.


340 APPENDIX, NO. II.

From the many well-aDthenticated cases I have been
enabled to adduce upon this interesting point (and
many more might have been brought forward, bad it
been thought necessary) — if there be any such thing
as a rational belief in human testimony of the most
cogent nature and unimpeachable character — any faith
to be reposed in the most complete demonstrative evi-
dence — I conceive myself fully entitled to conclude,
from this induction of facts, that individuals have been
known to exercise the faculty of vision without the or-
dinary use of the natural and appropriate organ of sight,
and that, in many cases of catalepsy and somnambulism,
this Acuity, along with others, has been observed to be
transferred to the epigcutrium^ and to other parts of the
organism. Indeed, in confirmation of this fietct, I might

* gold,' which was the fact. Mr B. then took out his purse, when the
father asked the boy (who was still blindfolded) of what material it was
made ? He answered, correctly, ' of silk ;* and in answer to fiirdier
questions, said there was gold at one end, and silver at the other ; and
even told the dates of the years when the shillings and sixpences had
been coined."

*-* The father stated that he had five children all gifted in the same
extraordinary way.**

I know nothing more of the history of this boy or of his family ; nor
am I aware whether any investigation into his case has been made by
professional men-— cu I would strongly recommend. That the pheno-
mena exhibited are of possible occurrence, I think I have sufficienfly
proved. At the same time, it is evident, that, in cases of tiiis descrip-
tion, there is much room for deception. — First EdiiUm.

I have heard nothing fardier of this case, and conseqnenfly, am not
aware whether my recommendation has been attended to.— -jSseofuf
Edition,


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 341

refer to almost every case of the natural and of the
magnetic somnambulism.

This phenomenon, indeed, is probably by no means
altogether of modern discovery. It seems to have oc-
curred in ancient times, and in all ages ; of which fact,
did it not lead to a tedious, and not very useful inquiry,
pretty strong evidence might easily be adduced. Pre-
viously, however, to the more general difiusion of know-
ledge, and to the recognition of that truly philosophi-
cal principle suggested by Lord Bacon, of carefully in-
terrogating Nature, and diligently treasuring up her
answers, the subject appears to have been considered
much too mysterious to l)e approached by the profane,
and, therefore, was not likely to be subjected to a sa-
tisfiictory scientific investigation. Nay, even within
these last fifty years, when the extraordinary fact was
again accidentally brought to light, carefully examined,
honestly submitted to the consideration of the learned,
and confirmed by numerous experiments in a variety of
instances, a g^eat deal of clamour was excited by the
systematic physiologists, who set about demonstrating,
by long theoretical reasonings, that the thing was ab-
solutely impossible — contrary to all the known laws
of nature, and inconsistent with all the acknowledged
principles of science. Their adversaries answered by
merely opposing the facts to the reasonings, and by
maintiuning that the laws of nature can only be legiti-
mately deduced from an attentive observation of the


342 APPENDIX) NO. 11.

phenomena of nature. They might have added, in the
words of Fernelios : DesipientU arrogantuB est^ arffumen^
taOdnis necessittUem sensuum audoriiaH anJtepofnere; and
here was a simple question of fact, which, laying all
the other eyidence aside, may he considered as having
heen completely set at rest hy the decisive experiments
made upon the cataleptic patients of Dr Petetin at
Lyons.

In ascertaining the actual existence of a natural phe-
nomenon, it is hy no means necessary that we should
be able to point out its cause. Hiere are many facts
in nature, of which, in the present state of our know-
ledge, we are unable to assi'gn the causey. In the
words of Vigneul de Marville, *' we are not acquainted
with the whole of man's constitution. Hjs body is a
delicate pneumatic, hydraulic and static machine, which
possesses a million of secret springs, producing a mil-
lion of e£Fect8 which we do not know, and upon which
we never reflect. When any strange phenomenon does
force itself upon our notice, in consequence of some
organic change ; not knowing to what cause we should
ascribe it, we immediately exclaim, '^ A miracle I" —
whereas, were we carefully to investigate the matter,
we might probably find something of every day's occur-
rence, when the secret has once been discovered, and
that our surprise has been excited by nothing in the
least degp'ee wonderful."

If these observations are just in reference to the


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 343

changes that occur in the corporeal organism, much;
more are they applicable to all our attempts to inves-
tigate and explain the operations of the vital principle
within US. *^ I admit,'' says a most- respectable writer
in the Bibliotheque du MagnetUme Animal^ *' L admit
that the phenomena produced by the vital Jiuid are xerj
strange ; some of them, indeed, wte so extraordinary,
that we can scarcely believe our own eyes : I admit that
they cannot be reconciled with the physical results hi-
therto collected, and that they are often apparently an
manifest contradiction to the general laws of nature ;
so that the. more learned .we are, the less are we dis-
posed to believe them. Tn short, it is more difficult to
obitorve and become acquainted with the phenomena of
tlie living world, although they take place within us,:
than with the phenomena of those physical worlds^of
which the Keplersand the Newtons have discovered the
laws : they have no resemblance to any thing we see
elsewhere; and this made BufPbn say that they were in-
comprehensible, because they were incomparable/'*

I do. not, therefore, conceive myself bound, as. I un-
qnestionably do not feel myself competency qualified,
to offer any thing in the shape of a regular theory,: as
an attempt to account for the very extraordinary phe-
nomena which I have thought proper to bring nnder
notice. Indeed, in an investigation like the present,

* Biblioth. du Magnet. Animal, vol. l — Memoire sur le flnide vital,
par M. le Docteur Ch. Profesaeur.


344 APPENDIX, NO. II.

the uoprofessional inquirer, at least, might he permitted
to take shelter under the principle, Ubi experieniia eon^
siaiy ratio peH non debet At the same time, I trust I
shall be excused for taking the liberty of referring the
intelligent reader to the few hints I hare rentnred to
throw out at the conclusion of the introduction to this
work. If not considered as entirely unphilosophical
and inadmissible, they may perhaps be found to lead to'
a scientific explanation of other singular facts, besides
those which almost daily present themselves in the
practice of Animal Magnetism,

I shall conclude this paper with the following obser-
vations: — For some time past, our physiological theo-
ries have manifested a decided tendency towards mate-
rialism. Of late, indeed, we seem to have got so much
into the habit of speaking of the mental functions as
being performed by certain organs, that we would ap-
pear to have entirely forgotten that every organism re-
quires to be vivified by an active principle — that the
employment of an instrument presupposes the existence
of an intelligent agent. In our speculations upon these
matters, we become so much interested in the play of
the puppets, that we totally overlook the moving power;
while contemplating the conditions of intelligence, we-
become blind to the principle.

But sensation and thought, as has been frequently
remarked) are neither the properties, nor any of the
necessary effects of matter; material structure alone


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION. 345

cannot be the cause of the vital phenomena ; it may
supply the organs or tools, through the medium oi
which these are ostensibly manifested, but these mani-
festations cannot take place without the operation of
an intelligent cause. *' That there is some invisible
agent in every living organized system, seems to be
an inference to which we are led almost irresistibly.
When we see an animal starting from its sleep, con-
trary to the known laws of gravitation, without an ex-
ternal or elastic impulse, without the appearance of
electricity, galvanism, magnetism, or chemical attrac-
tion ; when we see it afterwards^ moving its limbs in
various directions, with different degrees of force and
velocity, sometimes suspending and sometimes renew-
ing the same motions, at the sound of a word or th^
sight of a shadow, can we relrain a moment from think-
ing that the cause of these phenomena is internal, that
it is something different froDn the body, and that the
several bodily organs are nothing more than the mere
instruments which it employs in its operations?"*

In the human economy, this invisible agent — this
intelligent principle, which operates through the me-
dium of certain corporeal organs — is called the soul.
In the normal state of the organism, we know that our
faculties of sensation and perception, at least, are ex-
ercised through the instrumentality of certain material
organs, and hence physiologists have been led to con-

* Barclay On Life and Organization, p. 370.


34f6 APPENDIX, NO. II.

sider these instruments as the necessm^y conditions of
the exercise of these iaccdties. But are we prepared
to maintain, that, in any. circumstances, the soul is in-
capable of exerting its energies in a diffweat manner ?
D6 we hold that it is the eye alone that sees, the ear
alone that hears, &c. ; or shall we admit that there is an
internal sense to which the impressions of sight, hear-
ing, &c are couyeyed, and to which the material or-
gans are merdy sdhsenrient? And if we are disposed
to make this adotiission, can we deny the possibility oi
impressions being communicated to this internal sense,
in some extraordinary manner, without the necessary
interyention of the usual organs ? This is a question
whidi is capable of being solved by experience ; and if
the eases I have adduced in this paper have been accu-
rately observed and faithfully reported, of which there
seems no reason to doubt, the question maybe considered
as having been satisfactortty decided in the affirmative.
In the words of Epicharmus, quoted in the motto to this
paper, << The mind sees, and the mind hears; every thing
else is deaf and blind"* If the phenomena observed are
calculated to excite our wonder, and to call forth our
scepticism, if they appear to be inexplicable and irre-
concilable with any of our previous notions, let us re-
member that the cause of this may be found in the nar-
rowness and imperfection of our preconceived systems;
and this consideration should lead us to a careful re-
view of the principles of our knowledge, rather than to


TRANSFERENCE OF SENSATION: 347

an obstinate and irrational denial of the facts presented
to us by experience.


Nil adeo magnum, nee tam mirabile quidquam.
Quod non paulatim minuant mirarier omnes.
Desine quapropter, novitate exterritus ipsa
Expuere ex animo rationem ; sad magis acri
Judicio perpende : et, si tibi vera videntur,
Dede manus ; aut, si falsum est, adcingere oontra.

LUCRITIVS.


( 349 )


No. III.

ON THE COMMON CAUSE OF THE PHENOMENA OF LIGHT,
HEAT, MOTION, LIFE, ELASTICITY, SONOROUSNESS,
MAONETISM, ELECTRICITY, GALVANISM, ELECTRO-
MAGNETISM, &C. BEING THE FOUNDATION OF A NEW
THEORY OF PHYSICS.


The great object of all philosophy is the intuition of unity in varie-
ty, and of variety in unity. Plato,

Audendum est, et Veritas investiganda ; quam etiamsi non assequa-
mur, omnino tamen propius, quam nunc sumus, ad earn perveniemus.

Galen.


It sometimes happens that philosophers even of the
most profound and penetrating genius, when on the
very verge of the most important discoveries, are acci-
dentally diverted from the straight-forward path of le-
gitimate investigation, and unaccountably permit them-
selves to be seduced into some of the by-ways of con-
jecture and hypothesis. Of this truth we have, I think,
a very striking example in the case of the illustrious
Sir Isaac Newton. To many persons, no doubt, it will
appear to be the very neplus ultra of arrogance and
presumption to attempt to impeach the accuracy of any


350 APPENDIX, NO. III.

of the speculations or conclusions of this prince of Na-
tural Philosophers. But he who sets out honestly in
search of truth, must not allow himself to be appalled
by the splendour of names and authorities, however
great and imposing : The paramount interests of scieHee
demand that we should boldly endeavour to beat down
all those barriers by which her progress might other-
wise be impeded. Besides, it will be observed that,
upon the present occasion, no attempt, equally absurd
and impotent, is contemplated to deprive Sir Isaac of
his just, and fair, and honourable fame ; the object is
not to impeach what he has done, but to point out what
he has left undone — to shew that this truly great man
was actually upon the very verge of one of the most
brilliant and most interesting discoveries that ever re-
warded the investigations of science ; but that, instead
of trusting to his own natural sagacity, and steadily fix-
ing his eye upon the simplicity of nature, he suddenly
stopt short, and permitted himself to be drawn luiide
into the unfruitful regions of doubt and conjecture.

The preceding observations apply to Newton's in*-
quiries into the nature of Light and Heat. Admitting,
in its fullest extent, the vast merit to which posterity
have justly found him entitled on account of his pro-
found and accurate investigations into the properties
and the phenomena of these elements, we may, never-
theless, be permitted to express some astonishment
that the same acute and penetrating genius, which dis-


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 35 1

covered and demonstrated the principle of grayitation
and the laws of material motion, should not have made
an equally su^^cessfnl inquiry into their nature and
source ; and that it should have heen reserved for far
inferior philosophical talent, in an after age, to accom-
plish thb development of principles which appisar to
have been almost within his mighty grasp, and thus to
perform a task which would have added no small ac-
cession of splendour to that which already encircles his
illustrious name.

In a supplementary letter to the 11th chapter of the
2d part of Voltaire's Elements af ike Philosophy of
Newton, there occurs a passage relative to this subject
which merits some attention, as it appears to indicate
the point at which this great philosopher was induced
to stop short in his inquiries, and assigns the most pro-
bable reasons for this termination of his interesting in-
vestigations. ^* You say," observes Voltaire, in answer
to a correspondent, '^ you say it is to be regretted that
he (Newton) did not more clearly explain himself con-
cerning the reason which often occasions the attractive
force to become repulsive, and concerning the force by
which the rays of light are darted forth with such a
prodigious velocity; to which I may venture to add,
that it is to be reigretted that he could not know the
catise of these phenomena. Newton, the first of men,*
was ' nevertheless but a man ; and the first springs
which nature employs are not within our reach, when


352 APPENDIX, NO. III.

tkey cannot be subjected to calcnlatioD. It is easy to
compute the force of the masdes, but all the mathema-
tics are insufficient to inform us why they act at the
command of the will. All the knowledge we have of
the planets can never inform us why they turn from
west to east, rather than in the contrary direction.
Newton, though he anatomised the light, has not dis-
covered its intimate nature. He knew well that the
elementary fire is endued with properties which the
other elements have not.

'^ It passes through an hundred and thirty millions
of leagues in a quarter of an hour. It does not appear
to tend towards a centre, like body ; bat expands itself
uniformly and equally in every direction, contrary to
the other elements. Its attraction towards the body
it touches, and from whose body it rebounds, has no
common ratio with the universal gravity of matter.

<< It is not even proved that the rays of elementary
fire do not penetrate each other. Newton, therefore,
struck with all these singularities, seems always to
doubt whether light be a body or not. For my part,
if I durst risk my doubts, I must confess to you that I
do not think it impossible that the demenJtary fire may
he a being apart^ which animates nature^ and possesses the
intermediate step between body and some other being we
are unacquainted with ; in the same manner as certain
organized plants serve as a passage or gradation be-
tween the vegetable and animal kingdoms.'*


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 353

In the foregoing passage there are three things re-
markable. In the first place, the idea thrown out by
the author, or at least implied in. his observations, that
no element of nature is ascertainable, unless it is capa-
ble of being subjected to mathematical calculation — an
idea which seems to have misled almost all natural phi-
losophers since the days of Newton ; secondly, the
doubts which Newton himself appears to have always
entertained respecting the peculiar nature of light ; and,
thirdly, the suggestion of the author that the elemen-
tary fire may be a substance sui generis, which animates
nature, and possesses the intermediate step between
body and some other unknown being — a suggestion
which, it is hoped, will be confirmed and elucidated in
the sequel of this paper.

Originally, Sir Isaac appears to have been disposed
to adopt the principle of solar emanations or emissions
as the primary cause of light ; but he afterwards wa-
vered in his opinion, probably in consequence of the
difficulty or impossibility of subjecting these emissions
to mathematical calculation, and also, perhaps, influ-
enced by a similar objection to that which subsequently
occurred to Euler, viz. that the sun must necessarily
become exhausted by this continual loss of a portion of
its substance. Thereafter, following the example of
Huygens and some other natural philosophers, Newton,
abandoning his wonted caution, ultimately advanced a

VOL. II. G g


354r APPENDIX, NO. III.

very bold physical h3rpothe8is, from which he endea-
Toored to deduce the nature of light and heat, and the
explanation of all the phenomena of combination or mo-
tion which appear to result from certain intangible and
imponderable principles. For this purpose, he assumed
the existence of a highly elastic fluid (ethereal medium
or ether) imperceptible to our senses, which extends
every where in space, and penetrates all bodies with
di£Ferent degrees of density. The disturbance or agi-
tation of this ether, by any cause whaterer, produdng
a vibratory motion, he thought would occasion undula-
tions, which must transmit this vibratory motion through
all the rest of the medium, in the same way that sound
is transmitted through air, but much more rapidly, hy
reason of the greater elasticity of the fluid. Newton,
however, held that light itself consists of a peculiar sub-
stance difierent from this ether, and that their particles
were independent, but that they mutually acted and re-
acted upon each other ; so that this hypothetical appa-
ratus of ether, vibrations, and undulations, was only
created for the purpose of facilitating the explanation
of the transmission of the substance of light, without
attempting to trace the source whence the substance it-
self is derived. This hypothesis, indeed, is entirely
gratuitous, unsatisfactory, and unnecessary ; and its il-
lustrious author himself never appears to have placed
any confidence in it.
Since the days of Newton, << two different hypotheses


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 335

have been proposed respecting the nature of faeat. In
the first, it is regarded as a material substance sui .ge-
nerisy which pervades all nature, and is capable of com-
bination with other bodies." ^^ In the other, heat is
r^^ded not as a material substance, but as a quality
of matter.'* A body is said to manifest heat when *\\U
constituent molecules, jor the molecules of some subtle
fluid which pervades it, are put into a state of vibra-
tion.'* This vibratory theory seems just a modification
of the hypothesis of Newton, and afibrds no adequate
solution of the questi(m.

Two similar theories — the corpuscular and the undu-
latory — have been proposed with a view to explain the
phenomena of light. Both have been supported by
great authorities, and the question regarding their su -
perior merit still continues unsettled. It can be shown
that they are equally gratuitous, unsatisfactory, and
unfounded.

The great progress which has been made in the ex-
perimental sciences during the last half century, and
the many important discoveries whicih have rewarded
the industry and the ingenuity of their votaries, appear
to have now brought the question respecting the nature
and causes of light and heat much nearer to a satisfac-
tory solution. Indeed, even previous to the period al-
luded to, the unity of the cause of these and other ele-
ments was strongly suspected from the analogy of their
phenomena.


356 APPENDIX, NO. III.

The celebrated German metaphysiciaiiy Kant, in one
of those early treatises in which he displayed the same
penetrating sagacity and subtlety of genius in the phy-
sical as he subsequently manifested in the moral staences,
has expressed himself, upon this subject, in the follow-
ing terms of prophetic anticipation. *' In general, the
magnetic powers, Electricity and Heat, appear to be
manifested through one and the same medium. They
can all be produced by friction, and I suspect that the
difference of polarity, and the opposition of the positive
and negative influence, might, by means of suitable ex-
periments, be as clearly observed in the phenomena of
heat. The inclined plane of Galileo^ the perpendicular
of Huygensy the quicksilver tubes of TorriceUiy the air-
pump of Otto Gueriekey and the glass pri^n of Newton^
have given us the key to great natural secrets. The
positive and negative influence of substances, especially
in the case of electricity, to all appearance stiU conceals
important scientific results ; and a more fortunate pos-
terity, whose happy days we may anticipate in pros-
pect, will, it is hoped, recognise the general laws of
those phenomena which, at present, we perceive only
in an ambiguous connexion."*

• See Versuch den Begriffder negativen Grossen in die fFeltweis'
heit einzufuhreH, originally published in 1763, and inserted in Tlef*
trunk's Collection of Kant's miscellaneous writings. Considering the
state of the physical sciences at the period when this treatise was writ-
ten, — ^the science of Electricity was yet in its infiincy,^the phenome-
na of Galvanism had not yet been brought to Iight,.»£lectro-Magnet-


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 357

I believe it is now the general opinion of the most
eminent natural philosophers that light and heat are,
in substance, identical — that they manifest similar pro-
perties — that they are probably derived from the same
source, and, in ail likelihood, depend upon the same
principle. Radiation, for example, is well known to be
a common property of light and of heat. Dr Lardner
observes that *^ a hot body, such as a ball of iron, raised
to the temperature of 400% placed in the middle of a
chantber^ will transmit heat in every direction around it.
Now, this heat may easily be proved not to be trans-
mitted merely by means of the surrounding air; for
in that case the effect would be an upward current of
hot air, which would ascend by reason of its comparative
lightness. On the other hand, the heat which proceeds
from the ball is found to be transmitted downwards,
horizontally, and obliquely, and in every possible direc-
tion. It is likewise transmitted almost instantaneously,
at least the time of its transmission is utterly inappre-
ciable. A delicate thermometer, placed at any distance
below the ball, will be immediately affected by it ; and
the proof that this is true radiation, is found in the fact
that the rays may be intercepted by a screen composed


ism WM unknown,*— >the above anticipation, so consistent with the re-
sults of subsequent investigation, appears truly wonderful, and worthy
of that genius which led the same eminent philosopher, from a profound
consideration of the harmonious laws of the universe, to predict the ex-
istence of the planet Herschel many years before its actual discovery.


358 APPENDIX, NO. III.

of a material not pervioiis to heat. The rays may be
proved to be transmitted in straight lines' in eixacdj
the same manner, and by the same reasoning, as is ap-
plied to rays of light.

^ But the radiation of heat, independently of any
power of transmission which may reside in the air, is
pat beyond dispute by the fact, that a thermometer sus-
pended in the receiver of an air-pnrop, when it is ex-
hausted, is affected by the solar rays directed nj^oii it;*'
The same philosopher i^erwards remarks, that ** the
calorific property which constantly accompanies thd so-
lar rays, as well as the rays proceeding from flame,
would indicate that heat is a necessary concomitant ot
property of light." Moreover, " if rays of heat be re-
ceived on a concave reflector, they will be reflected to a
focus in exactly the same manner as rays of light ; and
in a word, all the phenomena explained in optics con-
cerning the reflection of light by surfaces, whether plane
or curved, are found to accompany the reflection of the
non-luminous calorific rays.'' Fin^y, this identity is
farther confirmed by the experiments of Berard, and
others, on the polarization of light and heat.

In his treatise upon EHectricity, in the valuable col-
lection published by the Society for the Diffusion of
Useful Knowledge, Dr Roget observes, that, *' besides
the well-known mechanical forces which belong to ordi-
nary ponderable matter, the phenomena of nature exbi-
hibit to our view another class of powers, the presence


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 359

of which, although sufficiently characterised hy certain
effects, is not attended with any appreciable change in
the weight of the bodies with which they are connect-
ed. To this class belong heat^ lights electricity ^ and mag-
netism: each of which, respectively, produces certain
changes on material bodies, either of a mechanical or a
chemical nature, which it is natural to regard as the ef-
fects of motion communicated by the impulse of mate-
rial agents, of so subtile and attenuated a kind, as to
elude all detection when we apply to them the tests of
gravity or inertia. If we admit heat and light to be
material, analogy will lead us to ascribe the same cha-
racter to electricity and to magnetism, notwithstaiiding
their being imponderable." And in the preface and
postscript to these treatises on the phenomena of elec-
tricity and magnetism, the same distinguished author
farther observes, that those phenomena which were
formerly regarded as the effects of two perfectly dis-
tinct agents, are now discovered to have an intimate
relation to one another, and, in all probability, to be
dependent on one and the same principle.''

It will be observed, that Dr Roget considers it natu-
ral to regard the changes produced on material bodies
by the action of heat, light, electricity, and magnetism,
as the effects of communicated motion. Now, Sir Hum-
phrey Davy argues, that the immediate cause of heat
is motion ; and '^ that the laws of its communication are
precisely the same as the laws of motion.*' This opi-


360 APPENDIX, NO. III.

nion of Sir Humphrey is entirely coinddent with that
to be maintained in this paper ; and if we are entitled
to assume, as warranted by correct induction firom
experiment and observation, that light, heat, electri-
dty, and magnetism are all dependent upon one com-
mon principle, and are, in fact, the results of commu-
nicated motion ; the question then comes to be. Whence
is motion itself derived? And if we are able to disoo-
ver the ultimate natural cause of any one or more of
these classes of phenomena, it is highly probable that
the same principle will afibrd an adequate explanation
of the whole. It is the object of this paper to demon-
strate, that motion and heat are both the product of
one common cause ; and that electricity and galvanism
are referable to the same source, -and are, in £Mst, pro-
duced by the agency of the former prindples. This
demonstration, it is hoped, will conduct us to the source
of the elementary motion.^

* I have lately obtained poflsessioii of a small pamphlet, entided,
*( Outlinea of a Course of Lectures on Chemical Philosophy : or of a
Theory which considers Attraction, Repulsion, Electricily, Caloric,
Light, &c. as the diversified phenomena and effects of one Power.
By Matthew Allen, Lecturer, &c." Published at London in 1819.—
This small publication, I presume, is no rarity. The anihor con-
siders all the phenomena of Nature to be dependent upon one sole
principle or power, which he denominates the Grand Agent. He very
ingeniously refers to the yarious phenomena of Attraction, Repulsion,
Light, Heat, Electricity, Galvanism, Magnetism, &e. and shews that,
they are the different products of one cause, the undoubted effects of
the Grand Agent of Nature, in some of its diversified combinatioDa.
But, however ingenious and sublime this synthetic view of Nature nay^


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 361

With reg^ftrd to light and heat, it seems strange that
any doubt should ever have been ent^tained respect-
ing the source whence they are derived. Nature, at
once, and without the necessity of any philosophical
hypothesis, compels us to refer the efiects of light and
heat to the influence of the solar rays ; and as we can
ascend no higher in our search after a natural cause of
these phenomena, and we know that motion is neces-
sary to their production, we are warranted in con-
cluding that the sun is the source of the elementary
motion. Light, heat, and motion, tlien, being all cen-
tered in the day-star, a little reflection will probably
convince us that the same influence is active in pro-
ducing the analogous phenomena of electricity and mag-
netism. It is well known, that, when the electrical
equilibrium of two bodies has been destroyed, its sud-
den restoration is attended with an exhibition of light,
and an intense heat ; and a similar effect is observed to
take place in the Voltaic electricity. The reason of
this phenomenon will be explained in the sequel.

The influence of the sun, as an important secondary
eaose or agent in the economy of the universe, has been
more than suspected by many ingenious philosophical
writers. Sir Charles Bell, in the Introductory Chap-
be, the author does not pretend to point out what this Grand Agent
is in itself, although, in other respects, his theory seenis to coincide
entirely with that which I have undertaken to elucidate in this paper.

VOL. II. Hh


362 APPENDIX, MO. III.

ter to his Bridgewater Treatise, observeSf that ** we
perhaps presume too mnch, when we say that it^i has
been created for the purpose of vision. We are hardly
entitled to pass over its properties as a ch^viical agent ;
— ^its inflaence on the gases, and, in all prohability, on
the abnosphere ; — its importance to vegetatioiif to the
formation of the aromatic and volatile principles, and
to fructification ;— -its influence on the animal surface^
by invigorating the circulation, and imparling health,"
&c«

'< It seems more rational to consider light as seooiid
only to attraction, in respect to its importaiKce in Nar
ture, and as a link connecting systems of infinite re-
moteness."

The theory which nuuntaiBs the identity of the cause
of the phenomena of light, heat, motion, eleotrinnty',
magnetism, &;c. smd refers the whole to a single and
simple principle— the ever-active influence of the rays
of the sun -<-is, at once, so natural and satisfactory, and
so fertile in its explanations of Nature, that it appears
almost wonderful how it should so long have escaped the
perspicacity of philosophical inquiry. The wfiH liimwin
German philosopher Oke^ propounded a theory, in
which he deduced the phenomenon of light from the
action and re-action of the solar and planetary systems
upon each other. According to this hypothesis, the
sun abae is incapable of producing light, wluchi is oaly
generated by the conflict between the sun ui4 tha pla-


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 36S

nets. Light, therefore, is produced by the activity of
the BUD, modified by the re-action of the planets. This
theory, originally, I believe, suggested by Oken, has
been systematically expounded and applied to the ex-
planation of other phenomena, by another ingenious
philosopher, Dr Rnnge, in an essay entitled, << Die Gene-
sis des mensluJien Magnetismusy in Professor Kieser's At'^
Mvfiir den tkierischen MaffneHsmuSf vols. 8. and 10.

A similar theory has been lately brought forward by
a very inteUig^nt French author, in an Esscti de Psy-
(^oioffie physieiogiqtief and he has explained and illus-
trated it with a Gt^ioosness, a clearness, and a cogency
well calculated to rivet the attention, at least, if not to
ensure a general conviction of its truth. I shall there-
fore take the liberty of entering at some length into
the demonstradon of this theory, as given by M. Char-
del.

Hitherto, according to this author, philosophers have
generally proceeded to the iiwestigation of Nature by
the methods of analysis and decomposition — they have
attempted to advance from the compound to the simple
— they have carefully examined effects, and, af);er im-
mense labour, have declared that first principles are
undiseoverable, and that we ought to abandon the search
afler eaoses. They observed the elasticity of solids and
flufds) the formation of undulations, the phenomena of
flOiHid, and its mode of propagation, and arrived at last
at ^e examination of those of light, which, guided by


364 APPENDIX, MO. III.

a supposed analogy, they attributed to the elasticity of
a fluid difiiised throughout space, thus tenninating
their inquiries by the assumption of a gratnitous hypo-
thesis.

A question, however, may still arise, whether thk
elasticity, which plays so great a part in phy^ics^ be
really a cause, or merely an e£Fect. By iayestiga-
ting Nature according to a method more analc^ns
to that which »he follows in her operations, might
we not be led to recognise the properties of the ' solar
rays as producing, in the formation of compounds, the
sonorous quality of the gases, tlie elasticity of fluids,
and that of solids ? This method is simple, easy to
follow, and conducts us to none of those brilliant hy-
potheses, the very errors of which shed a lustre on the
genius of their authors. By pursuing it, we shall find
it unnecessary to invent any subsidiary hypotheses.
We have only to observe Nature, and endeavour to
ascertain the distinctive properties of her elements. A
single principle being once demonstrated, all the conse-
quences immediately flow from it in an easy and nata-
ral order.

The cause of motion and of life appears to be the
same with that of light, heat, and elastidty. The sys-
tem we are about to expound, recognises two physical
elements — the terrestrial and the solar — matter and
motion. Matter is that which constitutes the oon-
sistence of bodies. The rays of the sun anite with


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 365

matter, and are the sole and ever-active principle of
motion. It is they which constitute the life of beings ;
for life is the cause of organic motion in vegetables and
animals. It will be easily perceived how fruitful this
discovery must prove in its application to the sciences.
Hitherto, the science of Physics has been unable to
find the element of motion, and abandons the research.
Physiology is ignorant of what life is, and yet pretends
to explain its phenomena ; and Psychology, not know-
ing in what manner the spiritual faculties are united to
the organization, is compelled to investigate the opera-
tions of the intellect, as if they were performed inde-
pendently of the body ; whereas, they are only mani-
fested through the intermediate agency of the corpo-
real organs, and Nature nowhere exhibits to us a soul
acting without a body.

Several philosophers have deservedly obtained g^eat
reputation in consequence of the discoveries they have
made in the domain of experimental science, and a
number of most important facts have been elicited by
their genius and industry. But it may be doubted
how far it is advisable to restrict ourselves entirely to
the investigation of effects, systematically to abandon
the examination of causes, even when they obtrude
themselves upon our notice, and to exhaust the genius
of man in the accurate observation of the most minute
insulated details, which can never lead us to a general
and satisfactory theory.


866 . APPENDIX, NO« III.

All our knowledge ought to rett upon Physios, a
science which emhraces all Nature ; but at presents our
physical the<Hrieg are merely ingenious methods, of no
other utility than to facilitate the calculation of results.
The science rests upon no solid foundatioD. It is di-
vided into two compartments-— the oollecting of obser-
vations, and the explanation of phenomena.

The utility of the first compartment is unquestion-
able, and it has been conducted with admirable care
and precision; but the second, consisting of systons
produced by so much honourable labour, presents only
hypotheses so unsatisfactory, that even those who make
use of them in their demonstrations seem to place little
confidence in them.

The system about to be unfolded, besides its simpli-
city, has the additional advantage of explaining every
thing upon a single principle, and of afibrding a foun-
dation for the sciences of Physics, Physiology, and
Psychology.

When for ages- men of genius have exhausted them-
selves in fruitless e£Ports to ascertain the prindples of
things, it is probable, either that success was impos-
sible, or that they had followed a wrpng path. It is
necessary, therefore, either to abandon all research^ or
to re-commence our investigations in another method.*

* This is quite in accordance with the opinion of Lord Bacon :
*< Inaanum quiddam esset, et in se contrartum, eziitimaTt, ea, tput
adhuc nunquam facta sunt, fieri posse, nisi per modoa adhuc nunquam
tentatOB.'* — Nov. Organ, i. 6. Again : *< Fiustra magnum •zpeista-


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 367

The latter is generally viewed by philosophers with
displeasure and disgust ; for it is painfii], after a career
of imagined glory, to be forced back to the point from
which we set out.

Hie study of Nature comm^ced with the examina-
tion of bodies, because they were easily apprehended ;
and first were observed their consistence, their weight,
and their form. These bodies, however, are composed
of different materials, and it was soon perceived that
several of them had a common basis : it ¥ras thought
possible, by decomposing them, to arrive at first prin-
ciples. Nature forms aggregations, by means of ele-
mentary substances, and attempts were made by philo-
sophers to discover these elements, by undoing her
work. She begins at the beginning — they began at
the end, proceeding from the compound to the simple.

Such was the direction given to the first labours of
philosophers : their object was to discover the secret
of Nature in the decomposition of bodies. This me-
thod, which has been constantly followed since, has led
to the verification of a great number of efi«cts in Phy-
sics ; but it has rendered the discovery of causes al-
most impossible, and g^ven occasion to the substitution
of hypotbeses necessarily chimerical. To convince us

tur augmentom in tcientiis ex superinductione et insitione novorum
super Vetera; ted instauratio jBucienda est ab imis fimdamentis, nisi li.
beat perpetuo drcumvolvi in.orbexn, cam esdli et quasi eontemnendo
progressu." — Ibid, 31.


368 APPENDIX, NO. III.

of this, it will be sufficient to give a brief outline of
the progress of science.

The first Natural Philosophers called nuUier the sub-
stance upon which nature impresses all forms ; they
supposed that it was hoinogeneons, and designated by the
same word the paste or mould common to the genera-
lity of things. They gave no name to the moving prin-
ciple, although it is still more universal, because it was
intangible, and their investigations were limited to that
which fell under their hands. Experience demonstrated
that bodies resist impulse in a ratio corresponding to
their mass ; and from thence were deduced the inertia
of matter, and the calculation of the laws of motion.
These ideas of inertia and motion, then led the phy-
sical philosophers, who had decided that all was inert
matter, to recognise in nature a principle of attraction
and a principle of repulsion. At a subsequent period,
they attempted to explain motion and rest by declaring
that they were modes of being in bodies — as if these
modes of being had not a cause. These contradictions
were the consequence of that confusion of language
which, under the name of matter, designated the union
of two di£Perent elements, one of which remained un-
perceived. We owe the idea of rest to that substance
which constitutes the consistence of things ; and if this
material element is essentially immoveable, it is evident
that some other principle must agitate nature, because
every part of it is in motion.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 369

Moreover, rest is the negation of motion, as darkness
is the privation of light ; and we may consider it as de-
monstrated that matter is essentially immoveable, since
the difficulty of setting it in motion increases in the
ratio of its mass. Originally, tangible substance was
considered as the sole element in nature, and this was
called matter. The word acquired a more extended
signification in the progress of discovery, and, at pre-
sent, it designates the unknown cause of all known ef-
fects. In order to give more precision and exactness
to the expression, it is necessary to bring it back to its
original meaning, and to give the name of matter only
to that substance which constitutes the consistence of
bodies.

Heat produces a particular sensation, and it was thought
to have a special principle, fh^perience subsequently
established the fact that caloric was the cause of the
elasticity of fluids ; but the same thing could not be
said of the elasticity of solids, the vibrations of which
were confounded with the sonorous quality, which, to
speak properly, belongs only to the gaseous combina-
tions.

The motion of liquid undulations served to explain
the propagation of sound and of light. It was at first
supposed that undulations were formed in the air, and
there propagated sounds ; but when arrived at light, it
was found necessary to create a substance adapted to
invest the undulating forms ; for, in this respect, nature


370 APPENDIX, NO. Ill,

prefiented nothiug. It was imagined, therefore^ that
an imperceptible ether was diffused thronghoat space,
which transmitted to us the yibratiens supposed to exist
in luminous bodies.

Such was the progress of science, advancing firom the
compound to the simple.

The human mind, in g^ieral, only makes new acqui*
sitions in order to connect them with the old. Sdence,
in undoing the works of nature, had at first only met
with compound properties, and when arrived at the
simplicity of light, it was attempted to explain the phe-
nomena according to the analogies previously obseired,
that is to say, the Unknown element which now pre-
sented itself was examined along with the known pro-
pities it had exhibited in combining with bodies.

This absurdity in Physics is one of the consequences
of the method of investigation adopted. When from
the compound we advance to the simple, the compound
properties are necessarily investigated first; they be-
come the basis of our subsequent knowledge, and when
the elements afterwards present themselves, our sys-
tems are already completed, and, with their aid, we at-
tempt to explain the inexplicable simplicity of first
principles.

Philosophers, in advancing from elastidty to sonor-
ousness, and from the latter to light, arrived, at length,
at an elementary substance ; and as elements cannot be
explained, the explanation they attempted must neoes-


A N£W THEORY OF PHYSICS. 371

sarily have been chimericaL I shall prove that it is so
in reality, and that all elasticity is produced by the com-
^binatbns of the solar rays with matter. I shall begin
by examining what confidence is dne to that ether, with
which the natural philosophers attempt to account for
the phenomena of light.

When sn hypothesis takes place of an element of na-
ture, it ong^t to be everywhere recognised. Thus the
undulations of the ethereal fluid had this fate ; to them
were attributed the production of light, of colours, of
heat, and of the chemical combinations. Their sub-
stance was declared to be homogeneous ; but in order
to produce so many different e£Fects, they were sup*
posed to be of various extent, and philosophers even
went so far as to calculate the size of every undulation,
yellow, green, or blue.

It wonld appear that, in creating the hypothesis of an
ethereal fluid, the origin of the properties ascribed to
it had been forgotten. In point of fact, we know that
caloric is the productive cause of all fluidity ; and it has
been demonstrated to be the cause of the elasticity of
fluids. If, then, the undulations of the ethereal fluid
were the source of heat, we might ask— whence does
this ether itself derive its fluidity and its elasticity.
This question could only be answered by supposing it
to possess an inherent fluidity and elasticity, which
would be to make it an element ; but, in that case, why
create an ether, without any evidence of its existence.


372 APPENDIX, NO. III.

when it were more natural and more simple to recog-
nise immediately the same properties in the rays of the
sun? Science woold undoubtedly have adopted this*
idea, if it had not already investigated the elasticity of
compounds, their fluidity and their undulations ; the ob-
ject was to connect the phenomena of light with those
previously observed, and, thenceforward, there was
imagined in space a peculiar elasticity, which may be
supposed to exist in vibration.

Such is the origin of the ethereal fluid, and the ques-
tion to be solved might be reduced to this, Is it the
light which produces the elasticity, or the elasticity
which produces the light?* The answer would not
long continue doubtful for him who should consult only
his instinct, and nobody would ever have thought of
creating an ether and undulations in place of the solar
rays, if an erroneous direction had not been previously
given to the study of nature.

The method of reversing the order of formation, by
ascending from compounds to their elements, has led
to materialism ; for as soon as the human intellect
had first laid hold of the tangibility of bodies, it was
forced to make this the resting point of all certainty,
and the basis of all future knowledge. If, on the con-

* The elasticity of bodies is a compound property which doet not
manifest itself spontaneously ; an action is necessary to set it in plaj :
therefore, in order to complete the explanation of light by means of an
ether, it was necessary to create vibrations in laminous bodies.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 373

trary, philosophers had commenced by ascertuning the
properties of light, they would have become convinced
that nature contains two principles, and they would
then have investigated their different combinations.*

This method was simple, and in all probability it
would have been followed had it presented itself first ;
bat now it is opposed to that which has been adopted ;
and the prejudices over which reason triumphs with
most difficulty, are always those of science ; they have
exerted the most troublesome influence in aU depart-
ments. Physics owe to them their ignorance of first
motions^ ; Physiology, that of the vital principle ; and
Metaphysics, the impossibility of explaining the con-
nexion between the will and the acts of the organism.

Moreover, the elasticity of the ethereal fluid was not
sufficient for the explanations of the physical philoso-
phers, and in order to set it in play, they imagined the
vibrations of luminous bodies. Thus, there was a se-
cond hypothesis brought forward in support of the first.
A third would have been required in order to explain
the formation of the vibratory apparatus, and then a
fourth, to inform us how they begin to vibrate in com-
bustion ; but philosophers had the prudence to stop. Tt
is no less certain that the continuation of these explana-
tions led to the necessity of creating first principles,

* The element of tangibility is aho that of inunobilitj, for that
which eonstitutes the consistencj of bodies also constitntes their re-
pose ; so that we may consider the universe as containing two general
principles— that of rest, and that of motion.


374 APPENDIX, NO. III.

which, without the aid of so many hypotheses, migiit
have been recognised, at once, in the solar rays.

In truth, when we ask natural philosophers the cause
of the solar vibrations, they abandon their suppodtioiis,
and answer that principles are not capable of exj^ana-
tion. But here there is no question about a prindple^
for the vibrations are accid^its whidi science ought to
account for.

We can conceive, that if light be aa element of ila*
tnre, it should escape from bodies which are destroyed
by combustion ; but we cannot so easily conceive how
philosophers have admitted into every combustible mo-
lecule an invisible vibratory apparatus formed in imita-
tion of that which they suppose to exist in the sun.*
Besides, the rays of the day-star change their direction,
and become inflected in order to reach us. Light, then,
is a substance ; for attraction would not exert any par-
ticular influence on the undulations of a fluid, which, in
rest as in motion, always equally occupied space.

The rapidity of the vibratory propagations depends
upon the. power of aggregation in the bodies which re-
ceive them.f We know, for example, that they ad-

* We might add, that the combustion of bodies would deftroy the
vibratory apparatus by setting it in motion, while in the bod it would
be indestructible and in perpetual activity.

t The mode of aggregation in the gases should be more intense than
that in the ether, if we judge from the resistance which they jHresent :
how comes it, ^n, that the propagation of sound in th* air is so alow
when we compare it with that of light, wliieh is attribated to the an.
dulations of the ethereal fluid ?


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 875

vance more rapidly in certain solids than sounds in the
air ;* and we ask how it happens that they should he
so rapid in an ether, of which the parts have no cohe-
sion among themselves.

The necessity of explaining the diversity of colours
has alone led to the supposition of the inequality of the
luminous undulations, for the rings of the liquid undu-
lations have always the same thickness ; but this ine^-
qnality should be destroyed in their rencounter, and
produce new undulations necessarily uniform. Neyer-
theless, the experiment of the prism recalls aU the co-
lours, and makes them reappear.

Shall we suppose that the luminous undulations meet
and mingle, and that each preserves its peculiar form ?
This is conceivable, if light be the elementary motion ;
for it may be composed of motions of several natures ;
but this phenomenon is impossible in the case of com-
municated motions.

Finally, the luminous rays seem to model themselves
upon bodies, because they present us with their forms,
a httit wliidh 91 agrees with the determinate form of
ethereal undulations.

These observations appear sufficient to demonstrate
the non-existence of the edier and its undulations. All
these hypotheses, we cannot too often repeat, owe their

* A blow lias been struck upon pipes of cast-metal of the length of
900 metres, and w» are assured that the vibrations are propagated more
rapidly in the metal ihan sounds in the air.


376 APPENDIX, NO. IIl4

origin to the method of decomposition, which, advanc-
ing from the compound to the simple, has giTen an er-
roneous direction to the investigation of nature.

The luminous emissions are a fact attested by our
senses. Euler was the first to doubt them, because he
thought they would exhaust the day-star. But Nature
every where reproduces herself by reconmiendng the
circle ; and it is probable that light is conducted back
to its source by an unknown route,* as the rains restore
to the ocean the waters it has lost by evaporation.

The direct testimony of the senses has lost its autho-
rity, and philosophers go in search of truth by more in-
direct methods, ever since Gralileo discovered that they
had deceived us in respect to the inunobility of the

* The earth receives the greater number of solar rays— the elemen-
tary motion — ^between the tropics, and, after having made use oi them,
parts with them at the poles. This, perhaps, is the cause of the
aurora borealiSf and of the accumulation of electricity which is ob-
served in these regions. This maj also be the cause of the motion of
the globe on its axis, for all the motions of the earth are produced by
the rays of the sun. The impulse which they occasion gives it, and
the internal agitation they produce may explain its diurnal rotation,
and its annual revolution.

Attraction manifests in bodies an active power which matter, essen-
tially inert, could not communicate to them. Attraction it perhaps
produced by the elective affinity which is observed between motion and
matter. This affinity acquires a material action in bodies ; conse-
quently, it tends to re-unite them, and increases in a ratio composed of
their mass and their distance. Moreover, we know that the magnet
and the electric fluid attract iron and several other substances ; and
magnetism, galvanism, and electricity, are only modifications of the
motion of the earth, which has been already explained.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 377

earth. In that case^ however, reasoning was more to
blame than they in leading us into error, by transfer-
ring to the relations of the heavenly bodies a proposi-
tion which was unquestionably true in reference to our-
selves.

Science had discovered that light contains the colours.
From this it was a necessary inference that it fixed it-
self in bodies, because they were coloured. This would
have been simple as nature. On the contrary, it was
supposed that the colour of bodies was only a pheno-
menon of reflection, of which an explanation was at-
tempted by saying that they appeared white when they
reflect equally the luminous undulations, and black when
they extinguish them, and that the other colours are
the result of intermediate e£Pects. This ingenious hy-
pothesis is by no means satisfactory, for by throwing
red rays upon a yellow body, it is made to appear
orange ; that is to say, of its own colour compounded
with that of the light thrown upon it : therefore,
the colours exist simultaneously in the light and in
bodies.

It is remarkable that the creation of false systems
almost always requires a greater efibrt of ingenuity
than the discovery of simple truth. By a fatality not
easy to explain, men of science are generally disposed
to keep at a distance from the easy route : it appears,
that, in order to attract their attention, some reasoning

VOL. II. J i


378 AFPENDIX, NO. III.

is necessary, safficiently ingenious to be inconprehen-
sible by the common sense of the unlearned. If, with
less labour, philosophers had convinced th^nselFes that
the colouring of bodies depended upon the solar rays
which became fixed in them, it would have followed
that it was they which, in combustion, {Hrodnoed, in es-
caping, light and heat. *

This discovery led to that of elementary motions ;

* We should the more readily admit that comboation is nothing else
than a disengagement of the solar rays, because diis eiq>lanation fn-
sents, in the case of all artificial lights, an unity of cause and a lim-
plicity of means entirely conformable to the march of Nature ( CA.)
I take the liberty of adding the foUowing passage from Dr Roget's
Treatise on Electricity : ** The particles of air electrified by a pmotid
conductor are repelled by that conductor, and repel it also ; and, more*
over, repel one another : and the same effect takes place whether their
electric state be of the positive or negative kind. Hence the stream
of air which proceeds from any electrified point is very naturally ac-
counted for. If the quantity of electricity which is transferred is con-
siderable, it excites a more violent commotion among the particles
which it influences in its passage. The intense energy of its repul-
sive action produces the most sudden and forcible expansion of that
portion of the air which occupies this line ; this air, thus expanding,
must be expelled laterally against the surrounding particles, and must
occasion their sudden compression. The evolution of heat and Hgkt**
~-of the solar rays, according to M. Chardel — *' is the necessary con.
sequence of this violent compression,**

Atmospheric air, when suddenly condensed, produces such a consi-
derable extrication of caloric, that cotton, and even heated charcoal,
have been set on fire by it. Instances of this will be found in the air-
gun, in compressing pumps for kindling tinder by means of violent
compression from a single smart stroke of the pistcm, in percussion -
locks for fowling-pieces, &c.

The cause of this phenomenon is easily explained upon the principles
laid down by M. Chardel.«--(J^ C C)


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 879

for communicated motions cease as soon as tkey meet
with adequate resistance ; while light, retained in com-
ponnd bodies, preserves its intrinsic activity, and es-
capes from them with its original Telocity.

The Inminous emanations suffice for all explanations ;
buil they were examined after the impulsions, and
the mind, pre^oceupied with the calculation of mate-
rial displacements, did not recognise motion in itself,
because it is intangible. This was another conse-
quence of the method of study. When the inrestiga-
taon of Nature has once commenced with the consist-
once of bodies, we endeavour to make every thing
hinge upon it. Thus, as soon as there is a want of
materiality, the field of hypotheses opens, and it is then
that philosophers proceed to create an ethereal fluids
sonorous or luminous undulations, and vibratory f^pa-
ratus, in order to set them in motion.*

All these fictions were difficult to invent, and re-
quired learning, and even genius i while the mere ob-
servation of that which exists, would have been alone
sufficient to enable us to recognise the truth* f

* The system of solar emissions adopted by Newton, is anterior to
that of luminous undulations ; bttt it was found insufficient, because it
was conceiyed after the observation of the material emissions, in ad-
-vandng from the compound to the simple — a method from which science
has never departed, and which must lead it astray from the nature of
principles. The motion of light is not the result of an impulsion, but
of the motility inherent in itself ; for it is the elementary motion, and
all impulsions depend upon it more or less immediately.

t One might be tempted to apply to the present method of physical


380 APPENDIX, NO. III.

The san is the sole souroe of motion ; his rays ani-
mate, nature by combining with it ; and combustion af-
terwards does nothing else than reproduce them to our
eyes. They are the principle of vitality, and it is they
which, absorbed by the earth, constitute the latent beat
of Dr Black ; for heat is nothing more than a name
given to the agitation they produce in matter. I
shall by-and-by explain this phenomenon, but I must
first say a word or two with regard to the sonorous
undulations, and their progress.

The idea of hypothetical undulations is borrowed from
liquids. They owe the property of forming them to
the special mode of agglomeration which places them
between solids and fluids, by giving to their parts too
much union to permit them to separate without efibrt,
and not enough to produce yibrations. It is not the
same either with the gases or with solid bodies, which,
consequently, can never produce real undulations. Phi-
losophers, howeyer, without being arrested by this dif-
ficulty, which they do not appear to have perceived,
have determined that undulations are formed in the air,
and that sonorousness is merely an application of the
elasticity of bodies to a particular use. By this means,
they confound vibrations and sounds, which it is neces-
sary to distinguish, if these two phenomena of elasti-
city be produced, as I think they are, by combinations

investigation these words of the sacred writer, Ambulavimus viaa cUffi^
dies, et erravimus a via veritatis.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 381

in which motion acts in an opposite manner. It ap*
pears to me, in reality, that, in solids, matter absorbs
motion and retains it in the bodies ; hence their consist-
ency and the immobility of their forms ; whereas, in
fluids, on the contrary, it is motion which holds matter
in solution ; hence an internal circulation, and the con-
tinual expansion of the molecules, which does not per-
mit them to stop at any determinate form.

The vibrations of solids are the result of accidental
impulsions communicated at short distances following
the continuity of their aggregations ;* whilst in fluids
there exists no material aggregation — it is motion
which in them is found in a state of continuity, and the
vibratory accidents only impress upon it an agitation
of a peculiar nature, which, in certain cases, produces
sonnds.f

It is astonishing that philosophers, who consider the
propagation of sounds in the air as a phenomenon of
elasticity, should have borrowed, in order to explain
it, the idea of undulations in liquids ; for these last are

* Strike a beam at one extremity, the vibration is immediately com-
municated to the other ; but it ceases if you strike it transversely : thus
it follows the direction of the fibres.

f The uniformity of the internal motion of ihe air explains much
more simply the equality of the propagatiion of sounds, than all the hy-
potkeaes which have been so laboriously excogitated upon tlus subject.
When the vibrations of the sonorous bodies bear principally upon the
motion of the gaseous combinations, the sound produced is of great pu-
rity ; and, on the contrary, the more they act upon the material part,
the more noise is the result.


382 APPENDIX, NO. III.

nothing but air diyested of the caloric which rendered
it elastic.

In truth, the principle of heat is no better known
than that of elasticity ; but let any one examine the
nature of the solar rays, and he will be convinced that
they are motion in themselyes, and that heat is nothing
else than the agitation they produce in bodies.

The solar rays, or, if you please, caloric communicates
to fluid combinations an internal action which resists
compression, being always at work to extend thw ma-
terial part ; this is called their elasticity.*

Solids present an opposite combination ; in them the
tangible part predominates ; it exists in a state of con-
tinuity, and motion, confined within the forms, confers
upon them the power of returning to themselves when
opposed : Such is the cause of the phenomena of elasti-
city by flexion and by extension.

These explanations, which are belieyed to be as tme
as they are simple, may be applied to Physiol(^. In
^Eict, muscular contractility and excitability are pheno-
mena of elasticity produced by the vital element in ani-
mals, which form it by individualising motion. It is

* In ihe gaseous combinations, motion constantly labours to expand
matter, whicb confers upon them an internal action to resist compres.
sion ; but if tiie latter is more powerful, it draws off the material part
of the gas, and tiie light is disengaged : this is what takes place in ihe
experiment of the briquet pneumatique, where the material part of the
air being suddenly withdrawn, leases the elementary motion at liberty,
that is to say, the solar rays, which immediately escape.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 383

always an internal power, generated by the union of
the solar rays with matter ; for life is nothing else than
tliis ; everywhere, by combining, they confer upon com-
pound bodies their appropriate action. This is the se-
cret of nature ; and if the cause has remained so long
concealed imder its effects, it is because science has
been confined to the observation of the latter.

It has been supposed that there exists in the universe
an attractive and a repulsive principle ; and the elasti-
city of solids has been ascribed to the former, and that
of fluids to the latter. This error is another conse-
quence of the method of investigation. When the exa-
mination of nature commences with compound bodies,
opposite effects give rise to the supposition of contrary
causes, although it is evident that the accidents of elas-
ticity are all phenomena of motion.

From the period when Newton discovered that the
elasticity of fluids was owing to the caloric lodged in
the interstices of their molecules, it was experimentally
demonstrated that that of solids had the same cause.
In fact, it was enough to place water on the fire to be
convinced that the gaseous elasticity was produced by
the caloric which disengaged itself from the solid when
in a state of combustion. The principle of elasticity,
then, only makes solids pass into fluids by changing the
mode of combination.*

* The operation of this principle may be exemplified by a very sim-
ple experiment. '* Let a small quantity of water be placed in a gla»»-


384 APPENDIX, NO. III.

Natural philosophy constantly speaks of fluids with'
oat properly defining what fluidity is. It is unques-
tionable, however, that liquefaction, yaporization, and
electro-magnetism present a series of phenomena in


flask of considerable size, and then closed so as to preyent the escape
of any vapour. Let this vessel be now placed over the flame of a spi*
rit-Iamp, so as to cause the water it contains to boil. For a consider-
able time the water will be observed to boil, and i^iparentiy to diminish
in quantity, until at length all Ae water disappears, and the veasel is
apparently empty. If the vessel be now removed from the lamp, and
suspended in a cool atmosphere, the whole of the interior pf its surfiice
will presently appear to be covered with a dewy moisture ; and at lei^h
a quantity of water will collect in the bottom of it, equal to that which
had been in it at Ae commencement of the process. That no water
has at any period of the experiment escaped from it, may be easily de-
termined, by peiforming the experiment with the glass flask suspended
from the arm of a balance counterpoised by a sufficient weight suspend-
ed from the other arm. The equilibrium will be preserved through-
out, and the vessel will be found to have the same weight, when to all
appearance it is empty, as when it contains the liquid water. It is evi-
dent, therefore, that the water exists in Ae vessel in every stage of the
process, but that it becomes invisible when the process of boiling has
continued for a certain length of time, and it may be shewn that it will
continue to be invisible, provided the flask be exposed to a temperature
considerably elevated. Thus, for example, if it be suspended in a ves-
sel of boiling water, the water it contains will continue to be invisible ;
but the moment it is withdrawn from the boiling water, and exposed to
the cold air, the water will again become visible, forming a dew on the
inner surface, and finally collecting in the bottom, as in the conunence-
ment of the experiment.

*'* In fact, the liquid has, by the process of boiling, been converted in-
to vapour or steam, which is a body similar in its leading prc^erties to
common air, and, like it, is invisible. It likewise possesses the pro^
perty of elasticity, and other mechanical qualities enjoyed by gaus in
general,'* — Labdnxr, On Heat* (J. C. C.)


A N£W THEORY OF PHYSICS. 365

which motion goes on increasing until it attains to
light, where it stops as at its source.*

It is of consequence, in inyestig^ting the formation
of sonorousness, to examine the transition from the
elasticity of solids to that of fluids. Liquids, placed
in the intermediate state, show how l^e change is ef-
fected, and the proof of their small share of sonorous-
ness results from the ehstacle they oppose to the pro-
pagation of sounds, f We know, for instance, that a
thick mist stops them at a short distance, and that the
most scNDorous bodies cease to produce sound when
plunged into a liquid. Again, in the muteness of fishes
we find a proof of the insonorous nature of water. The
percussions of a bell placed under the esilausted re-
ceiver of an air-pump, prove that sound is extinguished
in a vacuum, and that it revives upon the readmission
of air ; hence the conclusion that it (the air) was the
only really sonorous body. It has been since believed
that sonorousness is a property of all vibrations, because
they crei^ sound upon reaching our ears.:|: But these

* Heat liquefies, and ends by reducing to yapour the greater part of
solids, and we haye seen tliat caloric is only a name given to the solar
rays combined in bodies. ]M(6reover, it is well known that Electro-
Magnetism abounds in luminous phenomena.

f The cUminution of sound follows the pr(^es8 of the solidification
of ihe gases, and the contrary is observed in the vaporisation of solids.
: We may conclude from this, that sonorousness is a propertjr peculiar to
die nature of the gaseous elasticity.

:|: The sounds produced in the air contained in our ears do not pro?«

VOL. II. K k


386 APPENDIX^ NO. III.

contain «ir, and aotwithstaQding the experiments to the
contrary, it seems. to be rigoronsly danonstratod that
vibrations are not sounds, because deafness allows those
to feel ribrations who are insensible to soonds. Be-
sides, we hare just seen that the former reach iia in
consequence of a series of material shocks, which are
communicated at small distances* while the latter are
transmitted to us by the intomal motion of the air,
which does not permit matter to conglomerate.*

In facty it is to the continuity of the solid combina-
tions that they owe the property of forming Yihration^,
whilst, on the contrary, it is. die dissolutien of matter
in the motion of the gases w^Mi constitutes their so-
norousness. Thus, in the translti(m of ice to the state of
vapour, aonorousaess is manifested after the mbraeihf
has disi^peared, and we may be assured that the con-
trary takes place in the opposite transition. Liquids,
of which the consistoice is intermediate, are remarkable
for the struggle which their ephemeral and ambiguous
state presents ; for in them motion labours to dissolTe

that the vibrationB wlucl;^ cause them are- sounda, but that &e conti-
naity of the molecules transmits the vibrsitiQiuii

* The touch in^ires as wi^ so mui^ eonfideaee, tihat aMenqpta faav«
been made to assimilate all our other senssticms to ^MMe we derive
from it. The sensation of touch, however, resoUs from immediate
material contact, and that oi sight, on the contrary, k owing to the
impreeaions we receive frmn somothing immaterial and intennedinte :
the one addresses itself principally to the aaatenaHty of tlM c»rgaaa, Ae
ether to the li£s which aniaataa them. The ot h er twm all paitici-
pate, in different proportions, in these two modes of bein|p affected.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 387


matter, whkdi last, on the other hand, has a constant
tendency to congloaierate ; so that the sounds therein
formed are immediately arrested, and the vibrations
become changed into ^ndnlfitions.

Make water pass into I he state of congelation— it
becomes si^id ; its molecoles conglomeratey and elasticity
by flexibility is manifetted« Expose, it to heat — ^it be-
c<mies liquid, its motion is increased, its parts have almost
no coherence, and the elasticity by flexibility disappears.
Finally, rednee the water to steam — its volume then
augments predigioualyf the continuity of motion takes
{dace of that of matter, elasticity by compresdbility is
manilisted, and soooroiisness along with it.

Caloric predominates in tlie gases, whilst it is im-
prisoiled in the forms of solid bodies ; .hence the so-
norousness of the one, and the vibrcfcUf of the other.

What has been said of the diversity of size in the
luminous undjdationi is, in all respects, applicable to
the sonorous. It is asserted that the extent of the
latter varies from the infinitely small to thirty-two feet ;
and to give some consistency to this supposition, it is
sought to be supported by calculations which are inap-
plicable to it.

It is certain that, in the formation of sounds, the ra-
pidity of the vibrations increases in the ratio of the
shortening of the sonorous body, so that the diminution
of leng^ is exactly compensated by the increased ra-
pidity. The pipe of an organ, for example, which be-


388 APPENDIX, NO. III.

ing thirty-two feet long, vibrates thirty-two times in a
second, would vibrate sixty-four times, if it were only
sixteen feet long. This applies to all lengths, and to
all degrees of Telocity, when compared.* . Proceeding
jfrom this observation, it has been supposed that ana-
logous undulations propagated sounds in the air, and
their size has been measured by establishing a propor-
tion between the time employed and the space tra-
versed ; but the exactness of this calculation, which
rests upon the examination of vibrations, proves no-
thing in reg^d to the supposed existence of g^aseous
undulations, and, in tJiis respect, the question remains
entire. It has been already demonstrated that the na-
ture of the gaseous combinations does not pemiit the
formation of undulations ; and it can be shewn that all
the accidents which affect the rapidity of the vibrations,
such as shortening the size and tension of the sonorous
body, partake of the nature of the solid aggregations,
and are inapplicable to those of g^ses, so that nothing
analogous can be prodnced.f

Philosophers do hot clearly explain how sonorous un-

* The relation between tlie length of the sonorous body and the ra-
pidity of its vibrations, upon which, it would appear, ihe sise of the
sonorous undulations is made to depend, is not i^iplicaUe to stringed
instruments ; for tension increases the r^idity of their yibratioAs,
without altering the length of the vibrating body.

•f* Fluids are not susceptible either of tension or of shortening. All
these changes are accidents which affect the form of bodies, and fluids
have none.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 389

diilations are formed, and still less how, with an extent
of thirty-two feet, they are enabled to advance un-
broken. Besides, we know that sounds, when expiring
in the air, produce the 12th and 17th sharp, and make
their octaves resdaod ; whence it would follow that a
single undulation could produce others of every size.' -

The -phenomena of sound have a great analogy to
those of light, for the latter contains the colours nearly-
as the motion of the air contains sounds. An accident
of refraction displays the one — an accident of vibration
causes the others to be heard ; and it is remarkable that
the minor gamut presents the sounds in the same order
as the colount are presented in the successive bands of the'
rainbow. Moreover, these phenomena have a common'
origin, for we are indebted for. light to the free expan-
sion of the solar rays, and for sound to the continual
motion they maintain in the gaseous combinations. ;

Light, heat, and elasticity are produced by the ele-
mentary motion ; we call light t^e cause of the impres-
sions which our eyes receive from it; heal^ the sensa-
tion which it makes us experience when it penetrates'
our org^ism ; and elasticity, the action it communicates
to compound bodies by combining with them.

The solar rays enlighten us so long as they continue
to expand aronnd us ; but light ceases as soon as they
are arrested in a combination. They warm the atmo-
sphere by uniting with the vapours exhaled by the
earth ; and if we examine the processes of nature, we


390 APPENDIX, NO. III.

may easily assure oaraelTes that they cmter into the
formatioii of att vegetables.

In iact, a tree, when g^whig, daily abeorba and oon-
founds with its substance a certain fuaofity of a^ar
rays ; but they may be separated again by fonming H,
and then light is reprodooed ; for combustion dteanHes
the element^ which its vegetation had collected to-
gether.*

The solar rays agitate the molecules of bodiei» in pe-
netrating them. This agitation is what we call heat ;
it is the operation which precedes the fommtion, or
which accompanies the destruction of compound bodies ;
it places itself in equilibrium and commnnicales itself,
for motion engaged in matter extends itself mittl it
either becomes fixed or escapes.

All combustion disengages motion, and, consequently,
produces heat ; but the cause of the latter does not be-
come luminous until it entirely abandons matter, and
reproduces itself at liberty ; until then, the effects of
heat approximate those of light in proportion as its in-
tensity increases.f

To the rays of the sun we are indebted for light and
heat ; but the one is the effect of the expansion of mo-
tion uncombined with matter, and the other is only a
name given to the agitation wMeh it carries into matter

* Friction produces heat, because it destroys the bodies, and re-
places in expanMon the motion wht^ was eombmed in them.

•f* An intense heat traverses crystal nearly in the same way as light,
whilst it obstructs a moderate heat.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 391

upon entering it. Thence it happens that, in propor-
tion as we recede from the earth, the light of day in-
creases, while heat diminishes. It is certain that at a
great elevation, even nnder the tropics, the snow never
mehs.

Thus, in order to separate the solar rays from the
heat they produce, it is sufficient to insulate them from
the terrestrial emanations ; this effect is obtained arti-
ficially under the receiver of the air-pump, and the
same thing occurs naturally beyond the atmospheric
air.*

The sun and the earth are the sources of motion and
of the consistence of bodies, and we are only surrounded
by different coniMnations formed by their union.

These maybe arranged in three principal classes, re-
latively to the decrease of motion — Fluids, Liquids, and
Solids. The earth famishes the basis of the consistence
of bodies ; it is this substance which we call matter. It
is impossible, in the present state, to disengage it en-
tirely from motion ; but experience proves that the den-
sity and fixUy of bodies diminish as motion increases,
and augment, on the contrary, when it Is withdrawn.

* AlthoAgli th« rayi df the tua first reaoh the heights, before they
descend into the valleys, nevertheless heat is always formed in the
plains; and exjperienee proves that eombustaon diffuses lets heat in
very elevattd situations, as has been observed in Thibet. Moreover, -
we 31 i^preciate the heat <^ the sun when we judge of it by the effects
which his rays produce upon the earth ; for heat results from the mix
ture : The aelar rays are the elemoitary motion, and heat is the agita-
tion which they carry inlo inatler when they penetrttiB it.


392 APPENDIX, NO. III.

We know, for eouunple, that the ang^entattOD of heat
conTerls water into steam, and that its subtraction
makes it pass into the state of ice. In solids, matter
predominates, giving as the idea of rest. Iiiqiiids^
placed in an intermediate state, preserve a donbtfal
character; a little more motion converts them into
steam, a little less renders them solid. With regard to
fluids, and especially the electric flaid, they present u»
with motion almost withfwt restraint ; and it may be
proper to say a word or two of this last, before pro-
ceeding to discus!^ the formation of individual life, with
which it has the greatest analogy.

At present, wc designate, under the name of EHectro-
Magnetism^ the cause of the magfuetic, galvanic, and
electric phenomena. The electro-magnetic fluid is a
mixt substance, iii which the solar rays exist in super-
abundatice. It is in some sort the life of the earth, for
it is that portion of the elementary motion of which it
forms its own particular motion.* Its rapidity has not
yet been calculated, but it is far from being equal to
that of light, because it only makes our planet traverse
about 2-3,000 leagues in an hour, t

* This explaiiM the influence of the sun upon the magnetic pheno-
mena, its connexion with the variations of the magnetic needle, and the
difference of the galvanic states in bodies^ produced by change of tern,
perature. It appears that we have succeeded, by insulating the violet
rays of light, and causing them to &11 upon steel needles, in rendering
the latter magnetic ; which presupposes a strong analogy, if not a com-
plete identity, between them and the electric fluid.

•f Light requires no more than eight minutes to travel about thirty-
four millions of leagues, which separate us from the sun.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 393

The imioB of the two dements in electricity gives ta
its action a charactw of Tiolence which is capable of
breaking in pieces the most 'solid bocUes, whereas^ light
does not allow us to perceiye the possibility of a col-
lision. In the latteiS all is motioii — it agitates matter,
and can separate its mc^e^cnles ; but it noYer clashes
with the consistency of substances.*
. Tlfe phenomena of th^ electro-magnetic fluid havei an
analogy with those of the individual life ; it is produced
by the solar rays^ of which the earth, receives the greater
part between the tropics^ and exhales, probably, at the
poles, f From this there results a circulation and an
internal process, by. means of which the atmospheric air
escapes around our globe as a sort of transpiration.

Such is an abstract of the theory {Nropounded by M.
Chardel — a theory which appears to be completely
borne out, and firmly supported by aU the phenomena
of'Nature hitherto discovered and investigated, to con-
firm the anticipations of preceding philosophers^ and to

* The electric fluid breaks bo^es in pieces, because matter enters
into its formation ; tbat u to say, something of the constituent prin-
ciple of the consistency of things.

t This is believed to be the cause of the aurora boeealis, and of the.
accumulation of electricity which is found at the poles. The heat pro-,
duced by the earth in forming its life, that is to say, its vis motrix,
must be greater internally than externaHy, and this seems to be con-
firmed by observation ; but it does not follov that the planets are ex-
tinct suns, for their nature, their functions, and the relations of ths
stars &nong themselves, place them in an order so different, that hypo-
thebis ought never to have confounded them«


394 APPENDIX, NO. lit.

place, as it were, the ke3rfttaiie opon the mrdi of physi-
cal science. It sets out from the shnple {Hrinciple, that
there are just two elements in Nature, nuUter and moHan
— ^the one having a terrestrial, the other a solar origin ;
and by the peculiar ccnnlnnatioBs of these two elemonts,
which have an elective affinity towards eadi oth^, all
physical phenomena are produced. Light, heat, mag-
netism, electricity, galvttnisni, electro-magnetism^ &c.
result from the combination of the elementaty motion
with matter. The solar rays are the source of th^ ele-
mentary motion, which, again, confers upon certain
substances their elastic and sonorous qualities.

I^iould any persons be disposed to dedine the inves-
tigation of this theory, on the ground that they do not
find it surrounded by a sufficient number of experi-
ments, it may be observed, that no new experiments
were necessary, and that it relies for its support Vipota
all those which have been already made. It is only re-
quisite that we change the mode of inyestigation— ^that
we descend from the elements to the compounds, in-
stead of attempting, as has been hitherto done, to as-
cend from the compounds to the elements. It is not
necessary that we should al>andon the knowledge al-
ready acquired, but only that we should give a more
rational direction to the method of investigation, and
then we shall probably soon perceive, that the ana-
logy which led philosophers to create an elastic fluid,
in order to enable them to explain the phenomena of


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 395

light) is the most complete proof that light contains in
itself th^ principle of elasticity. The question^ then,
comes to be, whether the solar rays are the effect or
the cause ; and, assuredly, the solntien would not be
long doubtful, if we only consulted eontmon sense.

The present method of investigation is opposed to
the order of Nature. To attempt, by destit)yhig h^
works, to ascend from the compound tiD the simple, is
to investigate in an erroneous directioti : it isb^dning
at the end, and it were inueh better fo biegili at the be-
ginning. In following the old method, the eofUpe^oiid
properties, by presenting themselres ifarst to our notice^
take the place of elements, and are employed to ex'
plain the latter when we examine tliem at a lateir pe-
riod ; and it is thus, thatj in oi'der to explahi the {^^^
nomena of light, philosophers hate endtMl by creating
a chimerical elastic! ty^ iit an imi^nary fhiid, whilst it
would have been more natural lind mor^ eaiy to irites-
tigate first the properties of the solar ray».

After expounding the principles of his new physical
theory, M. Chardel proceeds to explain their applica-
tion to physiological and psychological science. But
into this branch of his inqtiiries I do not propose to en-
ter at present ; because it appears to me that the prin-
(aple themselres which constitute the foundation of the
whole system, should first be recognised as true, beA>re
we attempt to extend them to other departments of
philosophy.


396 APPENDIX, NO. III.

I have already observed, that the theory here deve-
loped 18 remarkably distiDg^hed for its extreme sim-
plioity, as well as for the satisfactory manner in which
it enables us to account for the most important pheno-
mena of Nature upon one common principle, and with-
out the necessity of having recoui«e to any subsidiary
hypothesis. That the day-star is the great dispenser
of light and heat throughout the whole solar system, is
a fact obvious to our senses and common observation.
We see our sun continually engaged in darting forth
his brilliant emanations, communicating light, heat, mo-
tion, and animation to all objects within the sphere of
their influence ; and the same constant mottHfy is mani-
fested in the. incessant scintillations of the fixed stars>
which apparently preside, as other suns, over other pla-
netary systems. We find that, in proportion as this
luminary recedes, and withdraws his enlivening beams
from the earth, all nature droops, and languishes and
dies, or, at least, becomes dormant, and is only resus-
citated after a time, by the influence of his returning
light and heat. We cannot wonder, therefore, that, in
the infancy of the world, and among nations which
had not been generally illuminated by the superior
lights of Divine Revelation, this great second cause
should have become the principal object of religious
worship, and that the devotional gratitude of mankind
should have prompted them to pay the highest adora-
tion to that vast luminous body " which looks from his


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 397

sole dominion like the god of this world." The ra-
tional devotee, indeed, was too enlightened to regard
this luminary as the supreme object of his worship ; he
considered it only as the visible emblem of that invi-
sible Snn — that Eternal Spirit — which is the sole au-
thor of all material existence, and the sole object of all
intelligent adoration.

*^ Let us,'' says the Hindoo in the Gayatri, or holiest
verse of the Vedas, **. let us adore the supremacy of
that Divine Snn (opposed to the visible luminary), the
godhead who illuminates all, who recreates all, from
whom all proceed, to whom all must return, whom we
invoke to direct our understandings aright in our pro-
gress towards his holy seat. What the sun and light
are to this visible world, that are the supretne good and
truth to the intellectual and invisible universe; and, as
our corporeal eyes have a distinct perception of objects
enlightened by the sun, thus our souls acquire certain
knowledge, by meditating on the light of truth which
emanates from the Being of Beings."

We know that organic vigour, and redundancy of
life, increase as the genial warmth augments, from the
poles to the equator. In earthquakes and volcanoes,
which appear to have one common origin, we may wit-
ness the tremendous efforts of the elementary motion
which has been absorbed by the earth, to disengage it-
self from matter. In the thunder and lightning, we
perceive several of the effects of the primary element


398 APPENDIX, MO. III.

placed in awful aetmif — pmotion» Hgkty heat, and sound.
The same process of diset^^agemeiiiis observed to take
place, in a less learfiil de|^ree,and less destructive form,
in the aufora iurpaHi^ and the oth«r electric phenooMna
If hich Qoonr at the poles.

Philosophers seem now to be almost piMmmonsly of
opinion, that light, heat, magnetisiQ, and electricity, are
aU the modified prodacts of one GO«inM>n princ^rie, and
if they are right in their interpretatioii oi Nature^ it
only remains for ns to. disooyer what tfiat prine^Ie
is. Now, with regard to light and heat, this priaeiple
can hardly adnut of a serious question ; and in respect
to the others, if we are compelled to attribute them to
the same cause, we cannot do otherwise than reler them
to the influence of the solar ray% niodified by their
combination with matter. The whole of the pheno-
mena to which I haye alluded, may be produced, as
Kant long ago observed, by friction. Light and heat
escape without intermission from the sun, and «re con-
tinually emanating from the earth* They are both evi-
dently evolved by the compression of fluids, and by
the destruction of the particles of solids. *

* Mr Lyell observes, that < ' the heat and cold which surround the
globe are ia a state of constant and universal flux and reflux. The
heated and ratified Mr is always rising atid flowing from the aqaat«r to.
wards the poles in the higher regions of the atmosphere ; and, in die
lower, the colder air is flowing back to restore the equilibrium/' —
Crtol, vol. i. p. 174. Mr Lyell further remarks, that a corresponcKng
inlerdMiBge takts place in the was. Don not a similar interrliwgii


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 399

By concentraliDg the solar rays, and causing them to
converge into a focas, we can prodace intense heat,
light, and combustion. By insulating the violet rays
of the solar spectrum, and making them fidl upon steel
needles, the latter may be rendered magnetic, as has
been demonstrated by the experimenls of Monohini,
Mr Christie, and Mrs Somenrille. We know that the
needle of the compass dees not «ODti«iie stable dnring
the whole length of the day. In proportion as the sun
becomes elevated in the horison, the needle advfmoes
towards the west nntU towards one o'clock in the after-
noon : it then approximates its primitive position until
sunset ; and when the sun has set, it continues at rest
until next morning. The extent of these dinrnal varia-
tions varies from day to day, and the variations are much
greater in different latitudes ; * and, which is still more

of electricity take place throughout the universe, for the purpose of
maintaining the equilibrium ?

The following singular fact was elicited dating the •xamination of
Obtain Fitzroy of the Beagle surveying ship, upon a nav^l court-mar-
tial lately held at Portsmouth. — (Cass of the ship Challenger, 1885.)
He stated, that the late earthquakes on the western coast of South
America have had the extraordinary effect of transforming what was
once a current of two miles an hour to the northward, into a cuzrent
of five miles an hour to the southward, and that the soundings along
the whole coast have been materially <^iaQged.

* At Paris, in the month of June, the extent of tlie variations is
lburt6«B minutes, and in the month of December, only nine. At St
Helena and Sumatra, the diurnal variations are considerably less.

It had been at out tiuM amiounced that the magnetic needle expe-
rienced no diurnal variations in Russia; but it seemed probable thMt


400 APPENDIX, NO. III.

remarkable, the amount of these variations is greater
in sommer thui in winter, and during the day than in
the night.

The foregoing observations seem to place beyond all
doubt the decided influence of the solar rays in deter-
mining the magnetic phenomena. With regard to elec-
tricity, Sir Humphrey Davy has observed, that " its
silent and slow operation in the economy of Nature is
much more important than its grand and impressive
operation in lightning and thunder. It may be consi-
dered,** he adds, <' not only as directly producing an in-

this extraordinary and altogether inexplicable exception was entirely
owing to the imperfection of the instruments employed by the Russian
obseryers. This conjecture was fully verified by M. Kopffer, as ap-
pears from certain observations communicated to IL Arago in 1826.

M. Kupffer had carefully provided himself with very delicate instru-
ments at Paris, and proceeding to Kasan, on the confines which sepa-
rate Europe from Asia, he established experimentally that the diurnal
variation is not less there than at Paris. The only difference was, that
under this longitude, the declination being towards the east, whilst in
our climates it is towards the west, the diurnal variations take place
there in a contrary sense from those which are observed at Paris.

M. Kupffer not only established at Kasan the existence of the diur-
nal variations in the sense of declination, but tliought he even remark-
ed that the magnetic intennty of the eartii varied according to the
hours of the day, and also according to the seasons of the year. M.
Arago thinks, that, in the present state of our knowledge, we cannot
accord entire confidence to such results. We are still in a state of un-
certainty relative to the diurnal variations which may take place in the
inclination of the needle ; and it is only when this last element ahall
have been demonstrated in a rigorous manner, that we shall be able to
form a judgment on the question which M, Kupffer thought himself
entided to decide.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 401

finite variety of changes, but as influencing almost all
which take place : it would seem, indeed, that chemir
cal attraction itself is only a peculiar form of the ex-
hibition of electrical attraction." — ConsoUxt in Travel,
p. 271. '

Electricity has been considered as a source of vol-
canic heat. This is probably a mistake of the effect
for the cause. According to the principles of the theory
I am now illustrating, it would be more philosophical
to consider electricity as the product of a peculiar com-
bination of heat (the calorific rays of the sun) with
matter. -

It has now been demonstrated by the discoveries in
EUectro-Magnetism, that magnetism and electricity are
always associated, and are probably only^ different con-
ditions or modifications of the same power. Soon after
the great discovery of Oersted, it was suggested by M.
Ampere in France, and by Mr Fox in this country,
that all the phenomena of the magnetic needle might
be explained by supposing currents of electricity to cir-
culate constantly in the shell of the globe, in directions
parallel to the magnetic equator. Some philosophers
were disposed to ascribe these currents to the chemical
action going on in the superficial parts of the globe to
which air and water have the readiest access ; while
others, with greater probability, referred them to ther-
mo-electricity, excited by the action of the solar rays
on the surface of the earth during its rotation. This

VOL. II. L 1


402 AFPfiiTBlXy HO. III.

lint hjffoAeAMi fndeedy ie^mi to be tomAMiMed bf the
ftiets I lately stated, l^ritttire te the eomeispofideiice of
the diurnal Tariations of the raf^eturHh the af^Mffent
motion of ihe ran ; and by the reoent experhnents of
Professor Seebeck, proving that electric carrentb inay
be produced and muntilitted in eitmits formed exdn-
sirely of solid conductor* by th(9 purtial application of
heat.

Professor Camming r#ftiarks, that Magnetism, to a
considerable extent, is excited by the nneqnal distrlbn-
tiott of heat among metallic, and peSsibly amongst oilier,
bodies. ** Is it improbable," he asks, ^' that the dior-
nal varisition of the needle, which follows the coarse of
the sua, and therefbre seems to depend npon heat, may
resnlt from the metals, and other snbstanciHi which
compose the surface of the earth, being unequally lift-
ed, «nd consequently suffering a changfe in their mag-
netic influence ?" Dr Traill considers « that the dis-
turbance of the equilibrium of temperature of our pla-
net, by the continual action of the sun's rays on its in-
tertropical regions, and of the polar ices, must convert
the earth into a vast thermo-magnetic apparatus ;** and
<* that the disturbance of the equilibrium of tempera-
ture, even in stony strata, may elicit s&oae iabgtee of
magtietrsro." Mr Christie found that, when diierent
metals had their surfaces symmetrically united throagb-
out, electric currents wefe still excited on the applica-
tion of heat, the phenomena corresponding to magnetic


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 408

polarisation in a particular direction with reference to
tlie place of greatest heat. Captain Foster's observa'*
tions at Cape Horn, Sonth Shetland, and the Cape of
€k>od Hope, shew most decidedly that, in tJie southern
hemisphere, the diomal deviatiofn of the mH^ end of
the needle correspond rery precisely with these of the
narih in the northern hemisphere. Mr Christie con*
eludes that, upon the whole, there can be *< no donht
that the diurnal yiu*i8tion of the needle is due to elec-
tric currents excited by the heat of the sun."

In another passage, the same gentleman observes)
that, '* if electrical currents are exdted in the earth in
consequence of its rotation, we must look to some body
exterior to the earth for the indacing cause. Hie mag-
netic influence attributed by Morichini and Mrs Somer-
ville to the violet ray, and the effect which I found to
be produced on a magnetised needle when vibrated in
sunshine, and which appeared not to admit of explana-
tion without attributing such influence to the sun's rays,
might appear to point to the sun as the inducing body ;"
and he i^erwards remarks, that even Mr Harris's re-
sults, which were different upon a repetition of the
same experiments, may possibly be considered to indi-
cate that the effects observed -were due solely to cur-
rents of air excited by the sun's rays. Captain Foster,
in perfect aeeordanee with the eondnsions previously
drawn by Mr Christie from his experimentSi considers
that the times of the day when the diurnal changes of


404 APPENDIX, NO. III.

magnetic influence are the greatest and least, point
clearly to the sun as the primary agent in the produc-
tion of them ; and that this agency is such as to pro-
duce a constant inflection of the pole towards the son
during the twenty*foar hours.

<< Upon a review of all the phenomena of toreatrial
magnetism, and considering the intimate relation which
has been established between magnetism and elec^-
dty» by which it appears that, if not identical, they are
only different modifications of the same principle, there
can be little doubt that they are due to electric currents
circulating round the earth ;*' and we have every rea-
son to presume that these currents are produced by the
ever active influence of the solar rays. '' It has been
said,*' continues Mr Christie, '^ that, if we refer the
magnetism of the earth to another body, we only re-
move the difficulty, and gain little by the supposition.
It, however, appears to me, that, if we could shew that
the magnetism of the earth is due to the action of the
sun, independent of its heat — which, however, I think
the more probable cause — the problem would be re-
duced to^ the same class as that of accounting for the
light of the sun, the heating and chemical properties of
its rays : we only know the facts, and are not likely to
know more J'*

See Chriftie's Repont on the Magnetism ef the Earthy in Report
of the Third Meeting of the British AaaocicUion for the Advancement
of Science, Lond. 1834.

Tbia fact of the dependence of Magnetiem- and Electricity upon the


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 405

Lightning is decidedly an electrical phenomenon ; and,
as Dr Roget observes, it has been known, in number-
less instances, to destroy ,^ and sometimes to reverse^ the
polarity of the compass- ; and he adds, that many disas-
trous accidents happening to ships, in consequence of
mistaking their course, may very probably have been
owing to this cause. A ship, in latitude 48% encount-
ered a violent thunder-storm. ; the mast was struck~hy
Kghtiitng, which also reversed the poles of all the com-
passes, in the ship» It is stated, that in one of the cora<-
passes^ the end which had before poiuted to^ the north
now pointed to the west. In another instance, a stroke
of lightning passed through a box containing knives
and forks, melting some, and scattering the rest about
the room. Ail those not melted had been rendered strongly/
magnetic. In this last instance, we may clearly per-
ceive the connexion between motion, light,, heat, elec-
tricity, and magnetism.

The appearance of the Aurora borecdis is also consi-
dered as a phenomenon of electricity. Now, this me-
teoric phenomenon has- been frequently observed to be
accompanied by s disturbance in the position of the
compass ; and a delicately suspended magnetic needle
has generally exhibited, upon these occasions, very fre-

infliLeiice o£ tlie solar rays^ seems deducible not only from &e researches
of British philosophers, but also from the inquiries, experiments, and
observations of our Continental neighbours, as is evident from the re*
cent interesting labours of Alexander von Humboldt, Professor Gauss
of Goettingen, &c;


406 APPENDIX, NO. III.

quent oscillations.* The following singular intstance
of this influence is mentionfed by M. Kapffer, whose ob-
servations on the diurnal variations of the magnetic
needle have been already referred to. It appears that,

* ** The magnetic property of the Aurora borealis— -or its power of
agitating the magnetic needle — ^had long been suspected by philoso-
phers ; and, though still doubted by some, and not confirmed by the
obserratioiis of Captains Parry and Foster, seems now sufficnendy esta-
blished by the observations of Captain Franklin, Lieut. Hood,''mnd Dr
Richardson. At present, however, little more than the fact seems to
have been ascertained ; as great obscurity still hangs over the cause
from which this effect proceeds, and the mode of its operation ; and it
sometimes happens that one observation has a tendency to neutralise
the conclusion to which another would lead. The Aurora sometimes
approached the senidi without producing the usual •ffeet on the posi-
tion of Uie needle. It is generally most active where it seems to have
emerged from behind a cloud ; and the oscillations appear only to take
place when beams or fringes of the meteor are on the same plane with
the dip of the needle. Captain Franklin was led to consider that the
effect of the Aurora on the needle varied with its height above the
earth. That it did not depend on the brilliancy of the meteor was
manifest from the fact, that, in hazy, cloudy nights, the needle deviated
considerably, thoi:^h no Aurora was Uien visible ; and he felt unable
to determine whether this proceeded from a concealed Aurora behind
the clouds, or entirely from the state of the atmosphere. Clouds some-
times during the day aisamed the forms of the Aurora^ and he was in-
clined to connect wiUi their appearance the deviation of the needle
which was occasionally observed at such times." — Penny Magazine,
21 St December 1833.

These observaticms are- perfectly eonsistent with our hypodieais.
Presuming that the phenomenon of the Aurora is occasioned by the
exhalation of light from the earth in the polar regions, the electrical
influence would not depend upon the apparent brilliaoey of the meteor,
but upon the combination of this light with the other terrestrial exha-
lations contained in th« atmosphere ; and, consequently, this infhience
would be greater in the lower regions.


A NEW THEORY OF PHYSICS. 407

on the Idth of November 1825, the magnetic needle
experienced at Kasan unusual and tery sensible varia-
tions. The same phenomenon was obseihred at PariiB
on the same cfay, and at a^ hour which ieotYesponded
exactly with that in which it was obserted by M.
Kapfier, at the eastern extremity of the Russian em-
pire. M. Arago had already noticed this fact in th^
Annaki de Chtmie ef de Physique. Other observations
attest the fact that, at the same time, an Aurora b&reaUs
was visiUe in the north of Scotland. Moreover, it is
a very retbarkable fact, that althoogfa at present no
Aurora: boreales are seeti at Paris, yet the magnetic
needle there is nevertheless very seHftibljr deranged by
all those which appear ih the polar regions. The ob-
servation of M. Knpfier shears that the inflnenee of the
one which i^peared oit th^ 13th of Novembcnr 1S25,
wan equally felt at Kasan and at l^ris.

From all the facts axfd observations now brought for-
ward, it appears abundantly evident that the pheno-
mena of light, heat, motion, electricity and magnetism
are intimately connected with each other, and in all
probability have a common origin. Nature compels us
to consider the solar rays as the source of light and
heat; and these must necessarily possess an original
and inherent motility^ in order to permit their elements
to expand. The phenomena of electricity and magne-
tism, we have every reason to believe, are produced by
the combination of these primary elements with terres-^
trial matter.


408 APPENDIX, NO. III.

If there exist aay serious objections to this hypo-
thesis, I must confess that, at present^ I am unable to
perceive them. I think it unquestionably entitled, at
least, to the candid attention of philosophers, because,
whether we consider its extreme simplicity,' its confor-
mity to nature, or it>s capability of afibrding an adequate
and satisfactory explanation of the most important phe-
nomena of the universe upon one common principle, it
must certainly be allowed that it possesses a decided
superiority over any other of a more complicated
structure, which is not only forced and insufficient, but
can only maintain itself by the feeble, unsatisfactory,
and ephemeral support of a variety of subsidiary and
still more gratuitous assumptions. I trust, therefore,
that the subject will be minutely and impartially exa-
mined by others more conversant with physical inqui-
ries, and, consequently, more competent to the investi-
gation ; and who, at the same time, feel an equal inte-
rest in the discovery and dissemination of scientific
truth.


( 409 )


"J


No. IV.


LITERATURE.


In addition to tlie opinions incidentally expressed by
many learned and eminent men, in ^vour of the rea-
lity of the action and of the phenomena of Animal
Magnetisms-some of which have been noticed in this
work — I subjoin a list, for the benefit of the student,
of works written exdurively apo. the subject.

Mesmer, Memoire snr la decouyerte du Magnetisme
Animal. Paris, 1779. — Precis histori^ue de faits rela-
tifis an Magnetisme Animal, &c. Londres, 1781. —
Memoiro snr ses decouvertes. Paris, an yii.

D'EsLON, Observations snr le Malgnetisme AnimaL
Paris, 1780.^Lettre k M. Philip, &c. La Haye,
1782.

Bergasse, Lettre d*un Medecin de la Facult6 de
Paris k nn Medecin du College de Londres, &c La
Haye, 1781.

VOL. II. M m


410 APPENDIX, NO. IV.

Court de Gebelin, Lettre de rauteur du Monde
Primitif a MM. ses Souscripteurs. Paris, 1783.

Caullet de Veaumorel, Aphorismes de Mesmer.
Paris, 1784.

Mesmer jnstifie. 1 784.

L'Antimagnetisme, &c. Londres, 1784.

Thouret, Recherches et doutes snr le Magoetisme
Animal. Paris, 1784.

Rapport des Commissaires de la Faculte de Medecine
et de TAcademie des Sciences, &c. Par M. Bailly.
Paris, 1784.

Rapport des Commissaires de la Societe Royale de
Medecine, &c. Paris, 1784.

Rapport de Tnn des Commissaires (M. de Jossiea).
Paris, 1784.

Rapport secret snr le Mesn^erisme, &c. This Report
was not published by the Commissioners themselves,
but it will be found in the Conservateur^ vol. i.

Observations sur les deux rapports, &c. Par M.
d'Eslon, 1784.

Galard de Montjoye, Lettre sur le Magnetisme
Animal, &c. Paris, 1784.

Doutes d'un provincial, &c. 1784.

J. Bonnefoi, Analyse raisonnee des rapports des
Commissaires, &c. Lyon, 1784.

Reflexions impartiales sur le Magnetisme Animal,
&c. 1784.

Observations adress6es ^ MM. les Commissaires^,
&c. 1784.


LIT£UATUR£« 411

Sapplement anx deux rapports, &c. 1784.

Bergasse, Considerations sur le Magnetisme Ani-
mal. La Haye, 1784.

Le Colosse aux pieds d'argile. Par M. Devillers.
1784.

Traite theorique et pratique du Magnetisme Animal.
Par M. Doppet. 1784.

Extrait de la correspondance de la Societe Royale de
Medecine relativement au Magnetisme Animal. Par
M. Thouret. 1785.

Lettre k M. Thouret, pour servir de refutation, &c.
Par M. de la Boissiere. 1785.

Examen du compte rendu par M. Thouret, &c. Par
J. Bonnefoy. 1785.

Lettre de M. d'Eslon h Messieurs les auteuts du
Journal de Paris, &c. 1785. This letter was refused
insertion in the journal to which it was addressed.

Rapport au puhlic de quelques abus en Medecine,
&c. Par M. L. F. Thomas d'Onglee, &c. 1786.

Memoire pour M. Charles-Louis Vamier, Docteur
Regent de la Faculte de Medecine de Paris, et Membre
de la Societe Royale de Medecine, &c. 1785. Vamier
was one of those doctors who were expelled from the
Faculty of Medicine, in consequence of hit adherence
to Animal Magnetism. He was a man of talent, and
of a noble character. The Memoir, or Case, is exceed-
ingly curious.

Examen serienx et impartial du Magnetisme Animal.
Paris, 1784.


412 APPENDIX! NO. IV.

Essai sar les probabilites da Somnambulisme Mag*-
netique, par M. Foumel. 1785.

Procedes da Magaetisme Animal. 1785.

Systeme raisonne da Magaetisme aaiyereel, &c« Par
la Societe de rHarmonie d'Osteade. 1786.

Da flaide nniyersel, &c Paris, 1806.

Prospectas d'an noaveaa cours theoriqoe et pratique
du Magaetisme Animal, &c* Par M. Wortz, Doctenr
ea Mededne, &€* Slmshoargy 1787. :

Le Magnetisear amoareax ; par M. V. (Charles
Villers). Geneve, 1787.

Coasideratioas sar Torigine, la cause et.les efiets.de
la fievre, &c. Par M. Jadd» Docteur en Mededne, &c.
Paris, 1808.

De la Nature de THomme, &c. Par M. P* J. Badie-
lierd'Ages. Paris, an Vill.

Appel an public siur le Magaetisme Animal, &c.
1787.

Lettre de M. le C, CD. P. (le Comte CShastenet de
Puysegur) I M. le P. B. D. S. 1788*

Detail des cures oper6es h Busanicy, &c. 1784^

Rapport de&r cures operees a Balonne par le Magae-
tisme Auimal, &c. Par M. le Comte Maximo de Puy^
segor* 1784.

Reoueil d*observations et de faits relatifi au Magne'^
tisme Animal, &€• Par la Societe de Guienne. Paris,
1785.

Nouvelles cures op&rees par le Magnetisme Animal.
1784.


LITERATURE. 413

Detail des cures operees a Lyon par le Magnetisme
Animal, &c. Par M. Orelnt. Lyon, 1784.

Lettre de M. V. de la Boissiere, Medecin k Berge-
rac a M. Thoaret, &c. 1 785.

Da Magnetisme Animal et de ses partisans, par M.
de Montegre, &c. Paris, 1812.

Tardy de Montravel, Essai sur U. tbeorie dn Som-
nanabolisme Magnetique. 1785, — Lettres pour tervir
de suite a eette essu. 1787. — Journal du traitement
magnetique de Mademoiselle N. — Journal dn traite-
ment magnetique de Madame B.

Journal magnetique du traitement de Mademoiselle
D., et de Madame N. Par M. C. de Lyon. 1789.

Extrait dn journal d'une cure magnetique, traduit de
TAUemand. Bastadt, 1787.

Annales de la Sodete harmontqiie des amis reunis de
Strasbourg, &c. 1789.

Extrait des jotirneaux d'un magnetiseur attache k la
^ociete des amis reunis de Strasbourg. 1786.

Nouveau3t extraits des journeanx d'nn magnetiseur,
&c. 1788.

M. PB PoYSBGUR, Meihoires pour servir h Fhistoire
du Magnetisme Animal, &c. 2d Edition. 1809. — Du
Magnetisme Animal, &c. 2d Edit. 1809. — Rechercbes,
experiences et observations physiologiques sur rhomnte
dans Tetat de Somnambulisme, &c. Paris, 1811.

Deleuze, Histoire critique dn Magnetisme Animid,
&c. Paris, 1813. — ^Defense du Magnetisme Animal,
&c. Paris, 1819.


414 APPENDIX, NO. IV.

M. F1LLA88IER, Qaelqnes faits et considerations pour
servir h Thistoire da Magnetisme Animal.

DuPOTET, Eixperiences pnbliqnes faites a THotel-
Dieu en 1820.

M. P. FoissAC, Rapports et Discussions de PAcade-
mie Royale de Medecine sur le Magnetisme Animal,
&e. Paris, 1833.

Leonard fDocteurJ^ Magnetisme ; son Histoire, sa
Hieorie, son Application an traitement des Maladies,
&c. Paris, 1834.


Wienholt, Beitrag zu den Er&hrungen uber den
Thierischen Magnetismus. Hamb. 1787. — Heilkraft
des Thierischen Magnetismus, &c 1802-3.

E. Gmelin, Ueber den Thierischen Magnetismus, &c.
Tubingen, 1787. — Neue Untersuchungen ilber den
Thierischen Magnetismus. 1789^— Materialien fiir die
Anthropologic. 1791-1798.

C. W. Hufeland, Gremeinnlitzige Aufssatze.

C. L. Treviranus, Versuch die haupsachlichsten
Phanomene des Thierischen Magnetismus zu ^rklaren.
Gottingen, 1803.

J. Heinecken, Ideen und Beobachtungen den Thier-
ischen Magnetismus, &c. betre£Pend. Bremen, 1800.

BocKMANN, Archiv fur Magnetismus und Somnam-
bulismus. Strasb. 1787,


LITERATURE. 415

C. A. F. Kluge, Versuch einer Darstellang des Ani-
malischen Magnetismus, &c. Berlin, 1815.

J. D. Brandis, Ueber psychische Heilmittel und
Magoetismus. Kopenh. 1818.

J. EInnemosek, Der Magnetismus, &c. Leipzic, 1819.

J. R. LiCHTEKSTAEDT, Erfahrungen in dem Gebiete
des Lebens-'Magnetismns. Berlin, 1819.

Stieglitz, Ideen iiber den Thierischen Magnetismns.

J. C. L. ZiERMANN, Stieglitz*s Ideen iiber den Thier-
ischen Magnetismns beleuchtet. Hannover, 1820. —
Geschichtliche Darstellung des Thierischen Magnetis-
mns, &c. Berlin, 1824.

J. C. Passavant, Untersuchangen iiber den Lebens-
Magnetismus und das Hellsehen. Frankf. a M. 1821.

D. G. KiESER, System des Tellurismus oder Thier-
ischen Magnetismns. 2 vols. 8vo. Leipz. 1822.

P. J. Hensler, Ueber die verschiedenen Arten des
Thierischen Magnetismns, &c. Wiirzburg, 1833.

J. F. Siemers, Erfahrungen iiber den Lebens-Mag-
netismns und Somnambulismus. Hamb. 1835.


The above are but a few of the numerous works which
have been published on the Continent, on the subject
of Animal Magnetism ; and I request it may be noted,
that they have all been written by gentlemen of edu-


416 LITERATURE.

cAtion and inl«lUgeiice, and bf ftx the grwtter part ofl
liiem hy respectable, learned, and eminent phyiieiai
Betides the magnetic Joamats referred to in this woi
a raat rariety of interesting articles npon the pbmo-l
mena anil doctrines in question will be found in
medical and philosophical periodicals of the ttmei
well as in Other publications in which the subject ii
cidentally treated or alluded to.


3 tlOS 005 ttS 315


28D MWl^T
JUiU 2004
